[[John Cournos]]

CATEGORIES: 1881 births, 1966 deaths, British essayists, British novelists, British poets, British short story writers, British translators, British anti-communists, 20th-century British writers, Imagists, Imperial Russian emigrants to the United Kingdom, British expatriates in the United States, Russian–English translators, Russian anti-communists, Ukrainian Jews

John Cournos, born Ivan Grigorievich Korshun ([tpl]lang|ru|Иван Григорьевич Коршун[/tpl]; he himself used the form Johann Gregorevich for his original nameMarilyn Schwinn Smith, "Aleksei Remizov's English-language Translators: New Material," in Anthony Cross (ed.), A People Passing Rude: British Responses to Russian Culture (Open Book Publishers, 2012; ISBN 190925410X), p. 190.) (6 March 1881 – 27 August 1966), was a writer and translator of Russian-Jewish background who spent his later life in exile.
Cournos was born in Zhitomir, Russian Empire, and his first language was Yiddish; he studied Russian, German, and Hebrew with a tutor at home.Smith, "Aleksei Remizov's English-language Translators," p. 190. His family emigrated to Philadelphia when he was ten years old, and his primary language became English. In June 1912, he moved to London, where he freelanced as an interviewer and critic for both UK and US publications and began his literary career as a poet and, later, novelist. He later emigrated to the USA, where he spent the rest of his life.
He was one of the Imagist poets, but is better known for his novels, short stories, essays and criticism, and as a translator of Russian literature. He used the pseudonym John Courtney. He also wrote for The Philadelphia Record under the pseudonym "Gorky."
Later in life he married Helen Kestner (1893–1960), who was also an author, under the pseudonym Sybil Norton. However, he is probably best known for his unhappy affair with Dorothy L. Sayers, fictionalized by Sayers in the detective book Strong Poison (1930) and by Cournos himself in The Devil Is an English Gentleman (1932).

==Anti-communist propaganda==

In the aftermath of the October Revolution Cournos was involved with a London-based anti-Communist organization named The Russian Liberation Committee. On its behalf he wrote in 1919 a propaganda pamphlet named London under the Bolsheviks: A Londoner's Dream on Returning from Petrograd, based largely on what he saw during his 1917-18 visit to Aleksey Remizov in Petrograd, whose Chasy he was then translating as The Clock.Smith, "Aleksei Remizov's English-language Translators," pp. 191-92.
In Cournos' lurid but humorous future history, a British revolutionary regime introduces a new currency named "The MacDonald" for Ramsay MacDonald; MacDonald is, however, soon shoved aside by the Bolshevik leaders MacLenin and Trotsman (sic). A counter-revolutionary drive by General Haig is defeated at St Albans. Lloyd George is imprisoned in the Tower of London. H.G. Wells, too, is imprisoned by the Bolsheviks, despite his left-leaning book Love and Mr Lewisham. London is portrayed as plagued by poverty, with  black market cigarettes and broken lifts, and the narrator wanders round the Strand exclaiming at the filth of the streets, the idlers and the jealous envy displayed towards his new boots.

==Death==

Cournos died on 27 August 1966 in New York City.

==Bibliography==

==External links==

==References==


