[[Ron Carter]]

CATEGORIES: African-American musicians, American jazz double-bassists, American jazz cellists, Cass Technical High School alumni, City College of New York faculty, Eastman School of Music alumni, Grammy Award-winning artists, Hard bop double-bassists, Mainstream jazz double-bassists, Manhattan School of Music alumni, Miles Davis, Musicians from Detroit, Michigan, New York Jazz Quartet members, Orchestral jazz double-bassists, People from Oakland County, Michigan, Post-bop double-bassists, Third Stream double-bassists, 1937 births, Living people, Blue Note Records artists, Verve Records artists, Prestige Records artists, Milestone Records artists, RSO Records artists

Ron Carter (born May 4, 1937) is an American jazz double-bassist. His appearances on over 2,500 albums make him one of the most-recorded bassists in jazz history. Carter is also an acclaimed cellist who has recorded numerous times on that instrument.Allmusic biography He was elected to the Down Beat Jazz Hall of Fame in 2012.DownBeat Announces 2012

==Biography==

Carter was born in Ferndale, Michigan. He started to play cello at the age of 10, but when his family moved to Detroit, he ran into difficulties regarding the racial stereotyping of classical musicians and instead moved to bass.  He attended the historic Cass Technical High School in Detroit, and, later, the Eastman School of Music in Rochester, New York, where he played in its Philharmonic Orchestra. He gained his bachelor's degree at Eastman in 1959, and in 1961 a master's degree in double bass performance from the Manhattan School of Music in New York City.
His first jobs as a jazz musician were with Jaki Byard and Chico Hamilton.  His first records were made with Eric Dolphy (another former member of Hamilton's group) and Don Ellis, in 1960. His own first date as leader, Where?, with Dolphy and Mal Waldron and a date also with Dolphy called Out There with George Duvivier and Roy Haynes and Carter on cello; its advanced harmonies and concepts were in step with the third stream movement.
Carter came to fame via the second great Miles Davis Quintet in the early 1960s, which also included Herbie Hancock, Wayne Shorter and Tony Williams. Carter joined Davis's group in 1963, appearing on the album Seven Steps to Heaven and the follow-up E.S.P.,  the latter being the first album to feature only the full quintet. It also featured three of Carter's compositions (the only time he contributed compositions to Davis's group). He stayed with Davis until 1968 (when he was replaced by Dave Holland), and participated in a couple of studio sessions with Davis in 1969 and 1970.  Although he played electric bass occasionally during this period, he has subsequently eschewed that instrument entirely, and now plays only acoustic bass. 
Carter also performed on some of Hancock, Williams and Shorter's recordings during the sixties for Blue Note Records.  He was a sideman on many Blue Note recordings of the era, playing with Sam Rivers, Freddie Hubbard, Duke Pearson, Lee Morgan, McCoy Tyner, Andrew Hill, Horace Silver and others.
After leaving Davis, Carter was for several years a mainstay of CTI Records, making albums under his own name and also appearing on many of the label's records with a diverse range of other musicians.  Notable musical partnerships in the '70s and '80s included Joe Henderson, Houston Person, Hank Jones, and Cedar Walton.  During the 1970s he was a member of the New York Jazz Quartet.
He appears on the alternative hip-hop group A Tribe Called Quest's influential album The Low End Theory on a track called "Verses from the Abstract".  He also appears as a member of the jazz combo the Classical Jazz Quartet.
In 1994, Carter appeared on the Red Hot Organization's compilation album, Stolen Moments: Red Hot + Cool.  The album, meant to raise awareness and funds in support of the AIDS epidemic in relation to the African American community, was heralded as "Album of the Year" by TIME.  In 2001, Carter collaborated with Black Star and John Patton to record "Money Jungle" for the Red Hot Organization's compilation album, Red Hot + Indigo, a tribute to Duke Ellington.
Carter was Distinguished Professor Emeritus of the Music Department of The City College of New York, having taught there for twenty years,Ron Carter Official Website and received an honorary Doctorate from the Berklee College of Music, in Spring 2005.http://www.berklee.edu/about/honorary.html He joined the faculty of the Juilliard School in New York City in 2008, teaching bass in the school's Jazz Studies program.
Carter made a notable appearance in Robert Altman's 1996 film, Kansas City.  The end credits feature him and fellow bassist Christian McBride duetting on "Solitude".
Ron Carter sits on the Advisory Committee of the Board of Directors of The Jazz Foundation of America as well as the Honorary Founder's Committee.jerryjazzmusician.com. 2009-13-10. URL: http://www.jerryjazzmusician.com/mainHTML.cfm?page=storfer.html. Accessed: 2009-13-10. (Archived by jerryjazzmusician.com at http://www.jerryjazzmusician.com/mainHTML.cfm?page=storfer.html) Carter has worked with the Jazz Foundation since its inception to save the homes and the lives of America's elderly jazz and blues musicians including musicians that survived Hurricane Katrina.ireport.com. 2009-13-10. URL: http://www.ireport.com/docs/DOC-337150. Accessed: 2009-13-10. (Archived by ireport.com at http://www.ireport.com/docs/DOC-337150)
Carter appeared as himself in an episode of the HBO series Treme entitled "What Is New Orleans."
Carter's authorized biography, Ron Carter: Finding the Right Notes, by Dan Ouellette was published by ArtistShare in 2008.
In 2013, Carter was one of four judges at Jazz at Lincoln Center's 18th Annual Essentially Ellington competition and festival.

==Discography==

===As leader===

===As sideman===

With Antonio Carlos Jobim
With Chet Baker
With Pepper Adams
With Toshiko Akiyoshi
With Gene Ammons
With Gato Barbieri
With George Benson
With Bob Brookmeyer
With Kenny Burrell
With Henry Butler
With Jaki Byard
With Donald Byrd
With Billy Cobham
With Alice Coltrane
With Harry Connick, Jr.
With Chick Corea
With Tadd Dameron
With Miles Davis
With Eli Degibri
With Paul Desmond
With Eric Dolphy
With Lou Donaldson
With Charles Earland
With Don Ellis
With Art Farmer
With Roberta Flack
With Bill Frisell
With Johnny Frigo
With Red Garland
With Stan Getz
With Astrud Gilberto
With Giorgio
With Benny Golson
With Johnny Griffin
With Jim Hall
With Chico Hamilton
With Johnny Hammond
With Herbie Hancock
With Barry Harris
With Eddie Harris
With Gene Harris
With Coleman Hawkins
With Joe Henderson
With Andrew Hill
With Freddie Hubbard
With Bobby Hutcherson
With Jackie and Roy
With Milt Jackson
With Ivan "Boogaloo Joe" Jones
With Quincy Jones
With Sam Jones
With Steve Kuhn and Gary McFarland
With Yusef Lateef
With Hubert Laws
With Junior Mance
With Herbie Mann
With Arif Mardin
With Charles McPherson
With Helen Merrill
With Wes Montgomery
With Airto Moreira
With Idris Muhammad
With Oliver Nelson
With David "Fathead" Newman
With the New York Jazz Quartet
With Hermeto Pascoal
With Rosa Passos
With Duke Pearson
With Houston Person
With Austin Peralta
With Sam Rivers
With Shirley Scott
With Gil Scott-Heron
With Don Sebesky
With Marlena Shaw
With Woody Shaw
With Wayne Shorter
With Horace Silver
With Paul Simon
With Grace Slick
With Jimmy Smith
With Phoebe Snow
With Sonny Stitt
With Ed Summerlin
With Gábor Szabó
With Livingston Taylor
With Ed Thigpen
With Bobby Timmons
With Charles Tolliver
With A Tribe Called Quest
With McCoy Tyner
With Mal Waldron
With Grover Washington Jr.
With Randy Weston
With Kai Winding

==Filmography==

==References==

==External links==


