[[Cleopatra Selene II]]

CATEGORIES: 40 BC births, 6 deaths, Cleopatra, Ptolemaic dynasty, Antonii, 1st-century BC women, 1st-century women, History of Numidia, Hellenistic Egyptians, Twin people from Egypt, Roman client rulers, Queens consort, Roman-era Egyptians, Ancient Egyptian princesses

Cleopatra Selene II (Greek:η Κλεοπάτρα Σελήνη, late 40 BC – ?Roller, The World of Juba II and Kleopatra Selene p. 77), also known as Cleopatra VIII of Egypt or Cleopatra VIII  was a Ptolemaic Princess and was the only daughter to Greek Ptolemaic queen Cleopatra VII of Egypt and Roman triumvir Mark Antony. She was the fraternal twin of Ptolemaic prince Alexander Helios. Her second name in ancient Greek means "moon", being the counterpart of her twin brother‘s second name Helios, meaning "sun". She was of Greek and Roman heritage. Cleopatra was born, raised and educated in Alexandria, Egypt. In late 34 BC, during the Donations of Alexandria, she was made ruler of Cyrenaica and Libya.Roller, The World of Juba II and Kleopatra Selene p. 76–81

==Early life==

Her parents, Mark Antony and Cleopatra VII, were defeated by Octavian (future Roman Emperor Caesar Augustus), during a naval battle at Actium, Greece in 31 BC. In 30 BC, her parents committed suicide as Octavian and his army invaded Egypt. Octavian captured Cleopatra and her brothers and took them from Egypt to Italy. Octavian celebrated his military triumph in Rome by parading the three orphans in heavy golden chains in the streets. The chains were so heavy that they could not walk. Octavian gave the siblings to Octavia Minor to be raised in her household in Rome. Octavia Minor, who became their guardian, was Octavian's second eldest sister and was their father's former wife. She was a very good mother.

==Marriage==

Between 26-20 BC, Augustus arranged for Cleopatra to marry King Juba II of Numidia in Rome. The Emperor Augustus gave to Cleopatra as a wedding present a huge dowry and she became an ally to Rome. By then her brothers, Alexander Helios and Ptolemy Philadelphus are presumed to have died, possibly from illness or assassination. When Cleopatra married Juba, she was the only surviving member of the Ptolemaic dynasty.Roller, The World of Juba II and Kleopatra Selene p. 84–89
Juba and Cleopatra could not return to Numidia as it had been provincialized in 46 BC.  The couple were sent to Mauretania, an unorganized territory that needed Roman supervision.  They renamed their new capital Caesarea (modern Cherchell, Algeria), in honor of the Emperor.Roller, The World of Juba II and Kleopatra Selene p. 98–100 Cleopatra is said to have exercised great influence on policies that Juba created. Through her influence, the Mauretanian Kingdom flourished. Mauretania exported and traded well throughout the Mediterranean. The construction and sculptural projects at Caesarea and at another city Volubilis, were built and display a rich mixture of Ancient Egyptian, Greek and Roman architectural styles.Roller, The World of Juba II and Kleopatra Selene p. 91–162 
The children of Cleopatra and Juba were:
Zenobia of Palmyra, Queen of Syria, claimed descent from Cleopatra, although this is unlikely.Roller, The World of Juba II and Kleopatra Selene p. 244–56

==Death==

Controversy surrounds Cleopatra's exact date of death. A discovered hoard of the Cleopatra's coins were dated at 17 AD.  It has traditionally been believed that Cleopatra was alive to mint them; however, this would mean that Juba married the Cappadocian Princess, Glaphyra during Cleopatra's lifetime. To explain this strange marital problem, historians have supposed some sort of rift between Cleopatra and Juba that was eventually mended after Juba's divorce from Glaphyra. Modern historians[tpl]who|date=February 2014[/tpl] dispute the idea that Juba, a thoroughly Romanized king, would have taken a second wife. The argument goes that if Juba married Glaphyra before 4 AD then his first wife, Cleopatra, must have already been dead. (The counterargument can be made that even contemporary client kings with Roman citizenship, like Herod the Great, took multiple wives, and that Juba's father had more than one.)
The following epigram by Greek Epigrammatist Crinagoras of Mytilene is considered to be Cleopatra’s eulogy.Roller, The World of Juba II and Kleopatra Selene p. 249–51
If this poem is not simply literary license, then astronomical correlation can be used to help pinpoint the date of Cleopatra's death. Lunar eclipses occurred in 9, 8, 5 and 1 BC and 3, 7, 10, 11 and 14. The event in 5 BC most closely resembles the description given in the eulogy, but the date of her death is simply not ascertainable with any certainty.  Zahi Hawass former Director of Egyptian Antiquities, believes Cleopatra died in 8 AD.Roller, The World of Juba II and Kleopatra Selene, p. 250 
When Cleopatra died, she was placed in the Royal Mausoleum of Mauretania in modern Algeria east of Caesarea that was built by her and Juba, which is still visible. A fragmentary inscription was dedicated to Juba and Cleopatra, as the King and Queen of Mauretania.

==In fiction==

==Ancestry==

 
  Ancestors of Cleopatra Selene II 
 
 
 

==Sources==

The primary modern source, which includes all the ancient material, is D. W. Roller, The World of Juba II and Kleopatra Selene (London 2003).

==External links==

==References==


