[[Laurie Scott (politician)]]

CATEGORIES: Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario MPPs, Living people, Women MPPs in Ontario, Year of birth missing (living people), People from Kawartha Lakes

Laurie Scott is a politician in Ontario, Canada, who represents the riding of Haliburton—Kawartha Lakes—Brock for the Progressive Conservative Party.
She was a member of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario from 2003 to 2009, when she resigned to allow party leader John Tory to contest the seat in a by-election, which Tory lost to Liberal opponent Rick Johnson. Scott was subsequently re-elected to the legislature, defeating Johnson, in 2011.  

==Background==

Her father, the late Bill Scott, was a federal Progressive Conservative MP from 1965 to 1993.
Scott is a registered nurse, with a degree from Loyalist College in Belleville.  She has worked at Toronto General Hospital and Ross Memorial Hospital in Lindsay, and has also served on various committees in Kawartha Lakes. Scott is generally regarded as being on the moderate wing of her party.

==Political career==

In the Canadian general election of 2000, she ran in Haliburton—Victoria—Brock for the federal Progressive Conservative party, but finished behind Liberal John O'Reilly and Canadian Alliance candidate Pat Dunn in a close, three-way race.  From 2000 to 2003, she worked as an assistant to Progressive Conservative Senator Consiglio Di Nino.
Scott was elected to the Ontario parliament in the 2003 provincial election, defeating Liberal candidate Jason Ward by over 7000 votes. Earl Manners of the NDP finished third. The Conservatives won only 24 seats out of 103 in this election, and Scott was appointed opposition critic for training, colleges and universities.
In the 2007 provincial election, Scott ran against Rick Johnson of the Ontario Liberal Party, and Joan Corrigan of the Ontario NDP. She defeated the Liberal candidate by almost 10,000 votes with 49.9% of the total vote. She was subsequently appointed as the official opposition critic for research and innovation and health promotion.
On January 8, 2009, it was announced that Scott would resign as MPP to allow PC leader John Tory to seek a seat in the legislature."PC Leader John Tory to announce seat bid", ctv.ca, January 8, 2009. In exchange for agreeing to resign, Scott would serve as chair of the party's election preparedness committee until the 2011 election."Tory gets a chance at last", Toronto Star, January 9, 2009. However, Tory was defeated by Johnson in the by-election."John Tory loses bid for seat in by-election". Toronto Star, March 5, 2009.

==References==

==External links==


