[[Alexandre Deulofeu]]

CATEGORIES: 1903 births, 1978 deaths, Spanish historians, Spanish pacifists, Historiographers, Historians of Europe

Alexandre Deulofeu Torres (20 September 1903, in L'Armentera – 27 December 1978, in Figueres) was a Catalan politician and philosopher of history. He wrote about what he called the Mathematics of History, a cyclical theory on the evolution of civilizations.

==Biography==

Deulofeu was born at L'Armentera in the province of Girona, Catalonia (Spain), where his father was a pharmacist. When he was three years old, his family moved to Sant Pere Pescador and nine years later to Figueres. 
He attended high school in the Institut Ramon Muntaner of Barcelona. Later he studied pharmacy and chemistry in Madrid, finishing the latter in Barcelona. Once back in Figueres, he won a chair in a competitive examination and started teaching in the Institute of Figueres. At the same time, he also got strongly involved in politics. First he was a leader of the Republican Nationalist Youth in Empordà and afterwards he became a town councilor of the independentist party ERC (Esquerra Republicana de Catalunya). During the Spanish Civil War, he was a chance mayor at Figueres, where he avoided fights, looting and pursuits. He was mobilized to the war as a military health officer. 
On 5 February 1939, Deulofeu went into exile when the republicans withdrew. During exile, he carried out several trades, was a teacher of different matters and played the violin and the saxophone in various music groups both for fun and classical. In addition, he was an experimental farmer creating plantations without soil with liquid solutions he invented, a worker in a factory, bricklayer, writer and poet. It was during this time, when he became friends with Francesc Pujols and Salvador Dalí. 
He came back from exile on 22 January 1947, dedicated himself to pharmacy, carried out his researches and went on writing. He died without finishing the extended version of his main work, Mathematics of History.

==Thought==

Deulofeu declared that civilizations and empires go through cycles which correspond to the natural cycles of living beings. Each civilization may fulfill a minimum of three 1700 years cycles each. Included within civilizations, empires have a medium length of 550 years. He also declared that, by knowing the nature of cycles, wars may be avoided, being unnecessary, causing the processes to be violent instead of peaceful. He also affirmed that mankind will be able to modify the cycles and that it must strive towards an organization as a universal confederation of free peoples.
The wording of the mathematic law which, in his opinion, determines the evolution of the peoples, can be epitomized under the following items (Chapter III of Mathematics of History in Catalan, 1967 edition):
His thought is related to the ideas of Oswald Spengler and Arnold J. Toynbee, who also stated theories on the cyclical character of civilizations, but without reaching the more exact, mathematical measure expounded by Deulofeu.
During his exile and also later, Deulofeu visited several museums, temples and monuments in different countries. There he thought he had found the origin of Romanesque art during the 9th century, in an area between Empordà and Roussillon, which was what he called the second cycle of western European civilization.

==References==

==Sources==

==External links==


