[[Le Mans Academy]]

CATEGORIES: Defunct United States military academies, Educational institutions established in 1955, Defunct schools in Indiana, Defunct schools in Wisconsin, 1955 establishments in Wisconsin

Founded in 1955 as Sacred Heart Military Academy in Watertown, WI, LeMans Academy was a private boarding middle school (grades 5-9) for boys located 90 minutes east of Chicago, Illinois near La Porte, Indiana on 700 acres (2.8 km²) of land. It was sponsored by the Brothers of Holy Cross from the University of Notre Dame.

==History==

Sacred Heart Military Academy (called SHMA by the students) operated in Watertown Wisconsin until the summer of 1968.  After graduating its last class the school was moved to Rolling Prairie, Indiana.  The name was changed, in part, because the brothers in Watertown kept receiving applications from the parents of girls.  
The last class consisted mostly of boys from the Milwaukee and Chicago areas with a few from Mexico.  Student activities included military drills, a rifle range, a large gym, soccer, track, baseball and other sports.  The school also had a slot car track and recreation room.  The students wore military uniforms every day and a special dress uniform on Sunday.  Boys held different ranks and received demerits for bad behavior.  Demerits had to be worked off with calisthenics and stress positions like bending at the waist with hands clasped behind the head. Offenses like fighting earned the use of "the paddle".  Students were not allowed to carry money or to leave the campus.  Study halls were held every evening but Sunday for two hours.  Daily life was very regimented, classes were held Monday through Friday as well as Saturday morning, and students had only about two hours to themselves every day.  Brother John Driscal was headmaster for many years and was later replaced by Brother Carroll Posey.  On May 26, 1968, SHMA graduated its last class of 35 eighth grade students.  About 700 people attended.  James Lukas of Milton was the salutatorian and Brian Fitzgerald of Janesville was the valedictorian.  In the summer of 1968 the school was moved to Indiana.http://www.watertownhistory.org/Articles/SacredHeart.htm  SHMA had only grades 5-8.  The Watertown campus is now Maranatha Baptist Bible College.http://www.watertownhistory.org/Articles/SacredHeart.htm

==LeMans Academy==

With its highest enrollment in years--more than 115 boarding students from across the U.S., Mexico, South Korea, and other nations--Le Mans Academy closed its doors in the spring of 2003 because the Catholic religious order which founded and sponsored the school--the Brothers of Holy Cross, Midwest Province--needed to liquidate an available asset (the Academy's campus was sold and its endowment claimed) to help meet the rising cost of health care for its aging population of religious Brothers. The first lay Headmaster in the Academy's history--Mr. Steven Cash--was also the last Headmaster.
The Campus was purchased by the Legionaries of Christ to open an apostolic school."Catholic order with school in N.H. opens one in Indiana". (September 12, 2005) Boston Globe

==Famous alumni==

==References==


