[[Hyperbolic angle]]

CATEGORIES: Angle, Differential calculus, Integral calculus

In mathematics, a hyperbolic angle is a geometric figure that divides a hyperbola. The science of hyperbolic angle parallels the relation of an ordinary angle to a circle. The hyperbolic angle is first defined for a "standard position", and subsequently as a measure of an interval on a branch of a hyperbola.
A hyperbolic angle in standard position is the angle at (0, 0) between the ray to (1, 1) and the ray to (x, 1/x) where  x > 1.
The magnitude of the hyperbolic angle is the area of the corresponding hyperbolic sector which is ln x.
Note that unlike circular angle, hyperbolic angle is unbounded, as is the function ln x, a fact related to the unbounded nature of the harmonic series.
The hyperbolic angle in standard position is considered to be negative when 0 Suppose ab = 1 and cd = 1 with c > a > 1 so that (a, b) and (c, d) determine an interval on the hyperbola xy = 1. Then the squeeze mapping with diagonal elements b and a maps this interval to the standard position hyperbolic angle that runs from (1, 1) to (bc, ad). By the result of Gregoire de Saint-Vincent, the hyperbolic sector determined by (a, b) and (c, d) has the same area as this standard position angle, and the magnitude of the hyperbolic angle is taken to be this area.
The hyperbolic functions sinh, cosh, and tanh use the hyperbolic angle as their independent variable because their values may be premised on analogies to circular trigonometric functions when the hyperbolic angle defines a hyperbolic triangle.
Thus this parameter becomes one of the most useful in the calculus of a real variable.

==Comparison with circular angle==

In terms of area, one can consider a circle of radius √2 for which the area of a circular sector of u radians is u. (The area of the whole circle is 2π.) As the hyperbola x y = 1, associated with the hyperbolic angle, has shortest diameter between (−1, −1) and (1, 1),  it too has semidiameter √2. As shown in the diagram, a ray of slope less than one determines an angle u which is a circular angle of magnitude equal to a circular sector, or a hyperbolic angle. The circular and hyperbolic trigonometric function magnitudes are all √2 times the legs of right triangles determined by the ray, circle, and hyperbola.
There is also a projective resolution between circular and hyperbolic cases: both curves are conic sections, and hence are treated as projective ranges in projective geometry. Given an origin point on one of these ranges, other points correspond to angles. The idea of addition of angles, basic to science, corresponds to addition of points on one of these ranges as follows:
Circular angles can be characterised geometrically by the property that the if two chords P0P1 and P0P2 subtend angles L1 and L2 at the centre of a circle, their sum L1 + L2 is the angle subtended by a chord PQ, where PQ is required to be parallel to P1P2.
The same construction can also be applied to the hyperbola.  If P0 is taken to be the point (1,1), P1 the point (x1,1/x1), and P2 the point (x2,1/x2), then the parallel condition requires that Q be the point (x1x2,1/x11/x2).  It thus makes sense to define the hyperbolic angle from P0 to an arbitrary point on the curve as a logarithmic function of the point's value of x.Bjørn Felsager, Through the Looking Glass - A glimpse of Euclid’s twin geometry, the Minkowski geometry, ICME-10 Copenhagen 2004; p.14.  See also example sheets http://www.dynamicgeometry.com/documents/advancedSketchGallery/minkowski/Minkowski_Workshop_1.pdf http://www.dynamicgeometry.com/documents/advancedSketchGallery/minkowski/Minkowski_Workshop_2.pdf exploring Minkowskian parallels of some standard Euclidean resultsViktor Prasolov and Yuri Solovyev (1997) Elliptic Functions and Elliptic Integrals, page 1, Translations of Mathematical Monographs volume 170, American Mathematical Society
