[[Vineland, Florida]]

CATEGORIES: Unincorporated communities in Orange County, Florida, Greater Orlando, Unincorporated communities in Florida

Vineland is an unincorporated community in southwest Orange County, Florida, United States.  It is just north of Interstate 4 along State Road 535 and continues along County Road 435 which is South Apopka Vineland Rd .  The name is not used much any more, since the City of Lake Buena Vista lies just to the south and west and is a more well-known name.  Orange County officially calls the area Buena Vista North or Orange Center, its original name.  Mailing addresses for residents in the area is Orlando, Florida except many businesses in the area use Lake Buena Vista, Florida as their address.  The area is most famous because the name appears on a large number of major Orange County roads including Apopka-Vineland Road, Winter Garden-Vineland Road, Kissimmee-Vineland Road and Taft-Vineland Road. There was also a small town which was abandoned in the 1960s called Vineland. An ACL Railway Depot, Housing, a schoolhouse, a church, the Vineland Cemetery, and many more community facilities were a part of the original town. These roads begin/terminate in the area known as Vineland and Lake Buena Vista, Florida.
Vineland is mainly residential, with a mosque Jama Masjid of Orlando, 11543 Ruby Lake Rd, a synagogue Southwest Orlando Jewish 11200 S Apopka Vineland Rd and 4  shopping center areas with 15 plus restaurants and several hotels and time share resorts, and the eastern entrance to Walt Disney World on Hotel Plaza Blvd. being other land uses. There are about 50 houses in the neighborhood, apartment complex, Mobile Home park (55 yr,+) . It is part of the Orlando–Kissimmee Metropolitan Statistical Area.
The area was given the name Orange Center when it was platted in 1911. Previously it had the name Englewood, probably given to it by the Florida Midland Railroad. The name was changed to Vineland in 1924, supposedly due to confusion with Orange City, Florida.

==References==


