[[Bruce Peebles & Co. Ltd.]]

CATEGORIES: Manufacturing companies of Scotland, Engineering companies of the United Kingdom, Electrical engineering companies of the United Kingdom

Bruce Peebles & Co. Ltd. was an Edinburgh industrial electrical engineering company founded as D. Bruce Peebles & Co. by Scottish engineer David Bruce Peebles (1826–1899) in Edinburgh in 1866. 
The company initially specialised in gas engineering but later expanded to include electrical engineering as well. It continued to trade after Peebles' death and, in 1902, the name was changed to Bruce Peebles & Co. Ltd. The company held the British manufacturing rights for the Cascade converter and a license to manufacture three phase electrical equipment designed by Ganz of Budapest. 
In 1903, Peebles expanded into Canada. Along with other investors, it formed the Canadian Electric Traction Company
and supplied the three-phase equipment, car motors and generatorshttp://www.trainweb.org/swtractionco/equipment/swtroster.html for theSouth Western Traction Company of London, Ontario. 
The mainline ran 28-miles between London and Port Stanley, a resort town on Lake Erie. It was the only three-phase traction line in Canada, and was closed in 1918.http://www.trainweb.org/swtractionco/swthistory.html
In 1904 the company opened a new factory at a site in East Pilton, Edinburgh, employing 3,000 at its peak in the 1950s. The works had its own internal railway system, which was electrified and used electric shunting locomotives built by Peebles themselves. This was the first electric line in Edinburgh (main line electrification did not reach Edinburgh until the early 1990s). In 1905 the company was exhibiting at the Third International Electric Tramway and Railway Exhibition.
During both World Wars, the works produced shells, submarine and aircraft parts, tank and electrical equipment such as mobile search lights and minesweeping units.It also manufactured at least one (from an order of ten) electric locomotives for the Portmadoc, Beddgelert & South Snowdon Railway.
It was the main sub contractor for the electrification of the Woodhead Line between Manchester and Sheffield from 1947–1954, a major engineering achievement. Throughout this period it specialised in large scale transformers for power stations, including the world's largest 400kV 'quadrature booster' for the UK national grid. It also produced heavy electrical motors for various uses, including railway locomotives.
In 1969 the company became part of the Reyrolle and Parsons Group and by the late 1990s it was owned by Rolls-Royce plc and the Austrian company VA Tech.
Many young electrical engineers were taken on by this company, with a special course in electrical engineering being run at the nearby Telford College. They gained skills in highly specialised work, and Peebles' products were exported all over the world. The late Ron Brown, MP for Leith, was employed by the company, as was the late Sir Duncan McDonald who was the chief transformer designer.1
In 1998 Rolls Royce sold the transformer part of the Parsons Peebles Motor & Generators and the Reyrolle switchgear to VA TECH of Austria who traded as VA TECH Peebles initially in East Pilton. 
The April 1999 fire destroyed the main transformer works in East Pilton and the transformer company decided that a replacement factory should be relocated to Leith and the Pilton site vacated. Peebles electrical machines then relocated to Wood Road in the nearby Rosyth royal dockyard. VA TECH closed the Leith factory during 2005 and continued service work only. The entire VA TECH company later became part of Siemens.
In 1999 Rolls Royce sold the Electrical Machines business which was later named Peebles Electrical Machines Limited in May 1999. The BDG Group then purchased Peebles electrical machines in 2002 and ran the company until 2005 when Paterson Quarries took control. 
Today Parson Peebles Motor & Generators is part of Clyde Blowers Capital having been acquired in January 2013. CBC owner Jim McColl told the Scotsman newspaper on 22 January 2013 it was a “fantastic opportunity” to acquire a Scottish engineering firm with global growth potential. The company is still located in the Royal dockyard Rosyth and continues to manufacture and service specialised motors and generators

==References==

Scotsman newspaper, 22/1/2013, http://www.scotsman.com/the-scotsman/business/tycoon-jim-mccoll-aims-to-expand-after-acquiring-parsons-peebles-1-2749993  
BBC news, 22/1/2013, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-business-21120928

