[[Somerfield]]

CATEGORIES: Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange, Supermarkets of the United Kingdom, Privately held companies of the United Kingdom, Defunct retail companies of the United Kingdom

Somerfield (originally Gateway)  was a chain of small to medium sized supermarkets operating in the United Kingdom. The company also previously owned the Kwik Save chain of discount food stores.  The company was taken over by the Co-operative Group on 2 March 2009 in a £1.57 billion deal,Co-op completes Somerfield deal creating the UK's fifth largest food retailer. The name was phased out and replaced by the Co-operative Food brand in a rolling programme of store conversions ending in summer 2011.Co-op supermarket chain enjoys Somerfield boost BBC News Online. 11 December 2009Daily Telegraph, 14 January 2011: Co-operative and Somerfield blame snow for 3pc sales fallCo-operative brand boosts Somerfield integration

==Gateway history==

===The early years===

The Company has its origins in a Bristol-based grocer known as J H Mills which was founded in 1875 and which developed a self-service supermarket chain named Gateway Foodmarkets in 1950. Gateway Foodmarkets was taken over by the Linfood Holdings, which already owned the Frank Dee wholesaler business and a chain of 70 supermarkets, in 1977. In 1983 Linfood Holdings was renamed the Dee Corporation.

===Acquisitions===

Alec Monk, Chief Executive at the Dee Corporation, having escaped a takeover bid from Argyll Foods in 1981,The Grocers by Andrew Seth, p.103 decided to create his own supermarket empire. Two of the biggest acquisitions were of International Stores, bought from British American Tobacco in 1984, and Fine Fare, bought from Associated British Foods in the following year. The company also purchased the UK arm of the French retailer, Carrefour. By this time the Dee Corporation had over 1,100 stores, and it had nearly 12% of the market, not far behind Sainsbury's and Tesco.Corporate Strategy in UK Food Retailing 1980-2002 by Geoffrey Owen, Page 9[tpl]Dead link|date=January 2010[/tpl] Most of the Dee Corporation’s outlets were small, high-street stores. Monk argued that there was a future for well-run conventional supermarkets as well as the large out-of-town stores.
However, by 1987 the Dee Corporation ran into problems, mainly because of the difficulty of integrating so many disparate businesses. Some disposals were made in that year, including the Linfood wholesaling operation. In 1988, the Dee Corporation changed its name to the Gateway Corporation,Archives - University of Exeter Library and Information Service and a new retailing chief was recruited from the US. Investors remained sceptical, and in 1989 the Company was the subject of a £2bn takeover bid from a newly formed company, Isosceles; the deal was partly financed by a pre arranged sale of ninety Gateway stores to Asda.
Gateway also took over some of the former Carrefour hypermarkets when the French retailer exited Britain in the late 1980s, notably the store at the Merry Hill Shopping Centre in the West Midlands in 1988 - although this lasted just two years before the store was sold on to Asda.

===Isosceles era===

When Isosceles, a newly created financial group led by David Smith and backed by several big investing institutions, bid successfully for Gateway in 1989 and took the company private, the plan was to restructure the business and refocus it on what were called “middle ground” outlets, falling between the larger out of town superstores and smaller, inner city neighbourhood shops; the average size of the stores was between [tpl]convert|5000|sqft|m2|abbr=on[/tpl] and [tpl]convert|10000|sqft|m2|abbr=on[/tpl]. The promoters of the Isosceles bid believed that, after this disposal and extensive restructuring of the rest of the portfolio, Gateway could become a viable competitor; the intention was to re-float the company on the stock market within three to five years. However, the bid was highly leveraged, and it was not clear that the new company would be able to fund the necessary modernisation of the business.Corporate Stategy in UK Food Retailing 1980-2002 by Geoffrey Owen, Page 20[tpl]Dead link|date=January 2010[/tpl]
Some of the planned disposals of non-core businesses took longer than expected to complete. Financial strains led to the enforced departure of David Smith and other executives in 1991.

==Somerfield history==

In the following year, a new chief executive, Bob Willett, was appointed and a decision was taken to rebrand the company's operations as Somerfield after a successful pilot scheme in 1990 with a new store and the first Somerfield store in the country being built in Burnham on Sea, Somerset, and the company then built its success upon the new brand alongside the existing Gateway and Food Giant chains. A small number of stores were also relaunched under a new Food Giant discount brand, with the first store opening in Nottingham in 1991.
Two years later, yet another chief executive, David Simons, was in command. In May 1994 the Company changed its name to Somerfield plc.
According to The Guardian, the holding company almost collapsed in the 1990s under a “mountain of debt”. In 1996, Somerfield plc was floated on the stock market in an initial public offering, after the recovery had reached the point where flotation became feasible with a market value of around £600m, and the proceeds were used to repay banks that had lent to Isosceles. At the time of the flotation the company’s market share had fallen to 5.3%, its lowest level for two years, but Simons claimed that the company was now clearly positioned in the market, and that the business would benefit from what he saw as the trend back towards high-street shopping. The aim was to become the UK’s strongest neighbourhood food retailer.
Questions remained about whether, at a time of intense competition both from discounters and from the bigger chains, Somerfield could generate adequate growth in sales and profits.

===Kwik Save purchase===

In 1998 the company took over the rival Kwik Save in a £473 million transaction. Although the deal was billed as a merger of equals, Somerfield investors owned 62.5% of the enlarged group.Somerfield to acquire British Food Retailer
Observers questioned whether putting together two very different businesses would solve either’s problems. The initial plan was to convert most of the Kwik Save stores to the Somerfield fascia, but the group continued to suffer from a disparate store portfolio, the result of numerous ill digested acquisitions by Kwik Save prior to the Somerfield takeover.Corporate Stategy in UK Food Retailing 1980-2002 by Geoffrey Owen, p.21[tpl]dead link|date=January 2010[/tpl] At the end of 1999 Simons, facing strong criticism from the City, announced plans to sell a third of the company’s 1,400 stores. He admitted that the group had underestimated the difference between Somerfield and Kwik Save, and had failed to support and maintain the Kwik-Save brand.
The original plan to transfer all Kwik Save stores to the Somerfield fascia was quickly abandoned after it became clear that many outlets were not suitable for conversion, either due to size or location. Also, the downmarket wooden shelving and poor quality fittings used by Kwik Save meant that every conversion required a full refurbishment of the store - simply changing the signage and uniforms would have risked dragging the carefully developed Somerfield brand downmarket. Instead, the larger Kwik Save stores were converted, some were sold or closed and the chain became a trading division of Somerfield Stores Ltd, sharing its supply chain and back office systems with Somerfield. For some years, the own brand products in Kwik Save stores were Somerfield, although this policy was reversed once it was decided to keep the brand.
It was clear that more than a hundred Somerfield and Kwik-Save stores were within a mile of each other and directly competing: also customers were switching from high street to out of town shopping.Overlap handicap: new Somerfield/Kwik Save company

===John von Spreckelsen===

A few months later Simons resigned, and John von Spreckelsen, formerly chief executive of Budgens, the convenience food retailer, was brought in as chairman. The new strategy was to keep Somerfield and Kwik Save as separate businesses, while sharing common services in such areas as information technology and corporate finance. By mid-2002 – half way through what was seen as a five-year recovery programme – the company announced a return to the black, and dividends were resumed after a two-year break, although the positioning issues remained unsolved.
Somerfield was the product of opportunistic acquisitions, driven more by financial engineering than by any conception of where the company should be positioned. The focus on medium sized High Street supermarkets was largely a matter of making the best of a very difficult job; the main problem, which had not been solved by the end of the 1980s, was to make some sense of the heterogeneous collection of stores which it had acquired through its numerous takeovers[tpl]Citation needed|date=February 2010[/tpl].

===New formats===

Somerfield changed its logo from a rectangular shape to a more contemporary design and opened a number of store formats, including Somerfield Essentials and Somerfield Market Fresh. It further changed its brand image by introducing newer own-brand lines including the premium 'So Good' range, the low fat 'Good Intentions', and a new advertising strapline: "Giving you what you want". A low-price own brand label called 'Makes Sense' was introduced to compete with rival low cost brands, such as Tesco Value.simply value | Product range | Whats in store | Somerfield

===Safeway Compact===

In October 2004, Somerfield acquired 114 Safeway Compact stores from Morrisons, which were subsequently re branded under the Somerfield name.Somerfield takes on 114 Safeway stores This deal was referred to the Competition Commission. After completing its investigation, the Commission instructed Somerfield to sell twelve stores.Somerfield v. Competition Commission In September 2005, Somerfield announced its intention to appeal against the decision, a process delayed by a takeover bid for the chain. The Competition Appeal Tribunal upheld the Commission's decision in February 2006. Somerfield therefore had to proceed with sale of the twelve stores.  However, the sale of Kwik Save in February 2006 is likely to have removed the potential clashes between some of the offending stores.

===Acquired by private equity===

Retail entrepreneurs John Lovering and Bob Mackenzie made two failed bids to take over the Company in 2003.Somerfield in £1bn takeover bid Then in 2005, Icelandic venture capital group Baugur made an approach, while United Co-operatives and London & Regional Properties also expressed an interest, but both groups dropped out of the running.
Then on 21 December 2005 Somerfield plc was acquired by a consortium consisting of Apax Partners, Barclays Capital and the Tchenguiz Family Trust, at which time the name of the group changed to Somerfield Ltd.Somerfield accepts £1.1 billion Apax offer
The aim of the new owners was to simplify the business and attract new customers. The first move was the end of the SaverCard loyalty scheme in May 2006 with promotional deals becoming available to all customers. A new point of sale was introduced to make promotions and price cuts more visible to customers. Somerfield's three own-label brands have also been overhauled; the budget 'Makes Sense' range became 'Simply Value', the low calories 'Good Intentions' range became 'Healthy Choice', and the premium 'So Good' range became 'Best Ever!'.What's in store | Somerfield

===Kwik Save sale===

In 2005, Somerfield closed 22 of its 51 Scottish Kwik Save stores and re-branded the remainder under its own name, thus removing the Kwik Save brand from the marketplace north of the border.Somerfield snaps up small Safeway
After the group was taken over, it was reported that the new owners found the Kwik Save chain was losing £40m per year, effectively cancelling out around 40% of the profits generated by the Somerfield division. As a result, it sped up the conversion of stores from Kwik Save to Somerfield. On 27 February 2006, Somerfield Stores Ltd sold the Kwik Save brand and 171 stores to BTTF, an investment vehicle headed by Paul Niklas, for an undisclosed sum.Somerfield sells Kwik Save stores Somerfield re-branded the 102 Kwik Save sites it had retained under its own name and a further 77 stores were sold to other retailers, thought to include Netto and Aldi, leaving the company to focus solely on the Somerfield brand.
Subsequent to the initial sale, a further 19 Kwik Save stores were acquired by BTTF, including some of those included in the Competition Commission investigation ruling into the Safeway Compact takeover.

===Store rationalisation===

In August 2006 a series of store closures was announced as Somerfield's new owners continued their restructuring activity. Some of these were poorly performing Somerfield stores and some were former Kwik Save sites that had not proved successful after being converted to Somerfield stores in 2006.Town to lose second supermarket
Some stores were sold to other groups, including Sainsbury's, which bought 5 stores, while others were closed completely.Sainsbury's buys 5 Somerfield stores
In October 2006, it was revealed that 40 Somerfield stores, including many retained Kwik Save branches, had been sold. These stores were mainly under-performing converted Kwik Save stores.The Appointment magazine is now online
In November 2006, the company also sold a further 12 stores to Marks & Spencer to trade under the M&S Simply Food brand. This deal included stores in Blackheath in S.E. London, Broughty Ferry in Dundee, and Petersfield and Alton in Hampshire.M&S to roll out Simply Food with BP
Having  bought 140 Texaco petrol stations in 2007, Somerfield tripled the size of some of their shops, using a similar format to its convenience stores. Signage was replaced with the Somerfield brand.Somerfield buys string of Texaco petrol stations with Shops

===Takeover by the Co-operative Group===

On 16 July 2008, it was announced that Somerfield would be acquired by the Co-operative Group for £1.57 billion, subject to approval from the Office of Fair Trading.
The build-up to this announcement began in late 2007, when the parent private equity consortium, that had acquired Somerfield in December 2005, put the chain up for sale. News reports valued the chain at over £1.5 billion.
Somerfield appointed Citigroup to manage the sale, and a preference to sell as a going concern rather than on a piecemeal basis was reported. It emerged that four provisional bids were made. Only the Co-operative Group, the UK's largest co-operative, publicly announced purchase talks, aiming to complete due diligence for the entire estate of 900 Somerfield stores in the third quarter, but would be expected to sell a minority of stores. On 24 June, a Thomson Reuters newswire reported sources indicating that the Co-operative Group's acquisition of Somerfield could be finalised at the start of July, in a final deal worth £1.7 billion. Earlier in June, Morrisons confirmed that it was not bidding for Somerfield, but would consider the purchase of any stores that are sold after the acquisition. Newspaper sources said that other major supermarket chains are also interested in such purchases. In July 2008, the Co-operative Group announced a deal to purchase Somerfield for £1.57 billion, creating the fifth largest supermarket chain in the UK. It was confirmed on 20 October 2008 that the Office of Fair Trading had approved the sale of Somerfield under the condition that 133 stores must be sold. This process continued into 2009 with many stores changing ownership, for example to Lidl.OFT greenlights Co-op’s Somerfield deal but 126 stores must be sold
In February 2009, it was announced that The Co-operative Group planned to close the Somerfield head office in Bristol and relocate all operations to their existing head office in Manchester. The Co-operative said that they will try to relocate as many staff as possible to other areas of the business or to their head office in Manchester, to try to avoid redundancies. The takeover was officially completed on 2 March 2009.[ref]
</ref>

==Operations==

As an independent entity, Somerfield was the sixth largest food retailer in the UK, according to TNS Worldpanel,BBC NEWS | Business | Sainsbury's basks in summer sales following the sale of the Kwik Save unit and the closure or sale of unprofitable stores, with 977 stores (as of January 2007).  Also the fifth largest private company in the UK, Somerfield had a 3.8% share of the UK grocery market in 2007, down from 4.5% in 2006.
The five larger retailers (in descending order of size) were Tesco, Asda, Sainsbury's, Morrisons and The Co-operative Group. The top four have specialities in larger superstores, while the Co-op has become the largest community retailer, with specialities in convenience stores and smaller supermarkets. At one point in early 2007, Somerfield was also briefly surpassed in size by Waitrose, and the independent grocers' distributor, Nisa-Today's, is comparable in size.

==References in popular culture==

The branch of Somerfield in Wells, Somerset, England had featured prominently in the film Hot Fuzz and Somerfield branding was clearly visible. In the film the manager of the supermarket Simon Skinner, played by Timothy Dalton, is a charming but sinister individual. The role the supermarket plays in the film includes a gun battle scene between police and staff members in full Somerfield uniforms, and a scene involving hand to hand combat. The Somerfield shop also appeared on BBC's Top Gear, during an interview between actor Simon Pegg and host Jeremy Clarkson. The reason the store was chosen was due to the director of the film Edgar Wright having formerly worked at the store.Filming Locations for Hot Fuzz

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


