[[Division of Hindmarsh]]

CATEGORIES: Electoral divisions of Australia, Constituencies established in 1903, 1903 establishments in Australia

The Division of Hindmarsh is an Australian Electoral Division in South Australia covering the western gulfside suburbs of Adelaide. The division was one of the seven established when the former Division of South Australia was split on 2 October 1903 and is named after Sir John Hindmarsh, who was Governor of South Australia 1836-38.  Before 1949, Hindmarsh included most of what is now Port Adelaide.
The seat has one of the highest proportions of citizens over the age of 65 in Australia. It has long been dominated by working-class families and aged pensioners, but it is now attracting new wealth to its seaside suburbs.   For many years, it was one of the safest Labor seats in the country; it was in Labor hands for all but three years from 1903 to 1993.  However, a 1984 redistribution made it somewhat less safe for Labor, and it became even more marginal when it absorbed most of the seaside suburbs that had previously been in nearby Hawker.   Christine Gallus, the former member for Hawker, followed most of her constituents into Hindmarsh for the 1993 election and became only the second non-Labor MP to win it. She held the seat for 11 years before Steve Georganas regained it for Labor on her 2004 retirement after nearly defeating her in 1998 and 2001.  Georgeanas held the seat until 2013. when Matt Williams became only its third non-Labor member, and the first to oust a Labor incumbent.
The Adelaide Airport is located in the electorate, and noise pollution is a prominent local issue, besides the aged care needs of the relatively elderly population. 
Prominent sitting members have included Norman Makin, who was Speaker in the Scullin Government and a cabinet minister in the Curtin and Chifley governments, and Clyde Cameron, who was a cabinet minister in the Whitlam Government.

==Members==

==Election results==

==Notes==

==References==


