[[Pattani Kingdom]]

CATEGORIES: 1771 disestablishments, States and territories established in 1516, Former countries in Thai history, Former sultanates, History of Islam, Muslim dynasties, Malay folklore

Pattani (Patani) or the Sultanate of Pattani was a Malay sultanate that covered approximately the area of the modern Thai provinces of Pattani, Yala, Narathiwat and much of the northern part of modern Malaysia. The 6–7th century Hindu state of Pan Pan may or may not be related.

==Early history==

Langkasuka was a Hindu-Buddhist kingdom, founded in the region as early as the 2nd century CE, which appeared in many accounts by Chinese travelers, the most famous of whom was the Buddhist pilgrim I-Ching. The kingdom drew trade from Chinese, Indian, and local traders as a stopping place for ships bound for, or just arrived from, the Gulf of Thailand. Langkasuka reached its greatest economic success in the 6th and 7th centuries and afterward declined as a major trade center. Political circumstances suggest that by the 11th century Chola invasion, Langkasuka was no longer a major port visited by merchants.  However, much of the decline may be due to the silting up of its harbor, shown most poignantly today because the most substantial Langkasukan ruins lie approximately 15 kilometers from the sea.
Pattani became part of the Hindu-Buddhist Empire of Srivijaya, a maritime confederation based in Palembang. Srivijaya dominated trade in the South China Sea and exacted tolls on all traffic through the Straits of Malacca. Malay culture had substantial influence on the Khmer Empire, and the ancient city of Nakhon Pathom.
The founding of the Islamic kingdom of Patani is thought to have been around the mid-13th century CE, with folklore suggesting it was named after an exclamation made by Sultan Ismail Shah, “Pantai Ini!” ("This beach" in the local Malay language).History of the Malay Kingdom of Patani, Ibrahim Syukri, ISBN 0-89680-123-3 However, some think it was the same country known to the Chinese as Pan Pan. Despite claims that the origins of the name Pattani means "this beach", it may be the same country known to the Chinese as Pan Pan.
An alternative theory is that the Patani kingdom was founded in the 14th century. Local stories tell of a fisherman named Paktani, who was sent by a king from the interior to survey the coast, to find a place for an appropriate settlement. After he established a successful fishing outpost, other people moved to join him. The town soon grew into a prosperous trading center that continued to bear his name.  The authors of the Hikayat Patani chronicle claim this story is untrue, and support the claim that the kingdom was founded by the Sultan.
The Pattani kingdom's golden age was during the reign of its four successive queens from 1584, known as Ratu Hijau (The Green Queen), Ratu Biru (The Blue Queen), Ratu Ungu (The Purple Queen) and Ratu Kuning (The Yellow Queen), during which the kingdom's economic and military strength was greatly increased to the point that it was able to fight off four major Siamese invasions, with the help of the eastern Malay kingdom of Pahang and the southern Malay Sultanate of Johore.

==Patani and the Siamese Kingdom==

===Sukhothai===

In the 14th century CE, King Ram Khamhaeng the Great (c.1239 – 1317) of Sukhothai (also known as Pho Khun Ramkhamhaeng,  [tpl]lang-th|พ่อขุนรามคำแหงมหาราช[/tpl]), occupied Nakhon Si Thammarat and its vassal states – including Pattani.

===Ayutthaya===

The Thai Ayutthaya kingdom conquered the isthmus during the 14th Century CE, bringing it into a single unified state, with Ayutthaya as a capital, and many smaller vassal states under its control. This consisted of a self-governing system in which the vassal states and tributary provinces owed allegiance to the king of Ayutthaya, but otherwise ran their own affairs. 
A sheikh named Sa'id or Shafi'uddin from Kampong Pasai (presumably a small community of traders from Pasai who lived on the outskirts of Patani), reportedly healed the king of a rare skin disease and after much negotiation (and recurrence of the disease), the king agreed to convert to Islam, adopting the name Sultan Ismail Shah. All of the sultan's officials also agreed to convert. However, there is fragmentary evidence that some local people had begun to convert to Islam prior to this. The existence of a diasporic Pasai community near Patani shows the local people had regular contact with Muslims. There are also travel reports, such as that of Ibn Battuta, and early Portuguese accounts that claimed Patani had an established Muslim community even before Melaka (which officially converted in 1413), which would suggest that merchants who had contact with other emerging Muslims centers were the first to convert to the region.
During much of the 15th century Ayutthaya's energies were directed toward the Malay Peninsula, especially the trading port of Malacca, which fell under the rule of the Malacca Sultanate. Ayutthaya's sovereignty extended over Malacca and the Malay states south of Tambralinga (Nakorn Sri Thammarat). Ayutthaya helped develop and stabilize the region, opening the way for lucrative trade on the isthmus. This attracted Chinese merchants seeking specialty goods for the Chinese market. 

====The Rise of Burma====

The 16th century witnessed the rise of Burma, which under an aggressive dynasty had overrun Chiang Mai and Laos and made war on Ayutthaya. In 1569 Burmese forces, joined by Siamese rebels, captured and looted the city of Ayutthaya, carrying the royal family into captivity in Burma. Dhammaraja (reigned 1569–90), a Siamese provincial governor who had aided the Burmese invaders, was installed as a vassal king in Ayutthaya. Thai independence was later restored by his son, King Naresuan the Great (reigned 1590–1605), who rebelled against the Burmese and by 1600 had driven them from the kingdom. 
Determined to prevent another act of treason like his father's, King Naresuan set about unifying the country's administration directly under the royal court at Ayutthaya. He ended the practice of nominating royal princes to govern Ayutthaya's provinces, instead assigning court officials who were expected to adhere the policies handed of the king. The royal princes were confined to the capital city. Their power struggles continued, but they were at court under the king's watchful eye. Even with King Naresuan's reforms, however, the power of the royal government during the next 150 years should not be overestimated. When Ayutthaya fell to the Burmese in 1569, Patani became virtually independent.

====Chinese merchants====

Chinese merchants, beginning with Cheng Ho in the period 1406–1433 CE, played a major role in the rise of Patani as a regional trade center. They were joined by others including the Portuguese in 1516, Japanese in 1592, Dutch in 1602, English in 1612, and Malay and Siamese merchants who traded throughout the area. In 1603 the United East India Company established warehouses in Patani, followed by the English East India Company in 1612, both carring out intense trading. Patani was seen by European traders as a way to access the Chinese market. After 1620, the Dutch and English both closed their warehouses, but a prosperous trade was continued by the Chinese, Japanese, and Portuguese for most of the 17th century. Following a 1688 invasion by Ayudhya, political disorder continued for five decades, during which the local rulers were helpless to end the lawlessness in the region. Most foreign merchants abandoned trade with Patani.

====Death of the Yellow Queen====

In the mid-17th century Ratu Kuning (the Yellow Queen) died. She is believed to be the last of four successive female rulers of Pattani, which then went through decades of political chaos and conflict, experiencing a gradual decline. 
One hundred years later, Ayutthaya under King Ekatat (Boromaraja V) was faced with another the Burmese invasion. This culminated in the fall and destruction of the city of Ayutthaya in 1767, and the death of the king. Siam was shattered, and as rivals fought for the now vacant throne, Patani declared its complete independence.
King Taksin finally defeated the Burmese and reunified the country, opening the way for the establishment of the Chakri dynasty by his successor, King Rama I. In 1785, a resurgent Siam sent an army led by Prince Surasi (Viceroy Boworn Maha Surasinghanat), younger brother of King Rama I, to seek the submission of Pattani.

==Patani in the Bangkok Period==

Pattani was easily defeated by Siam and resumed its tributary status. However, a series of attempted rebellions prompted Bangkok to divide Pattani into seven smaller Puppet kingdoms during the reign of King Rama II. Britain recognized the Thai ownership of Pattani by treaty in 1909. Yala and Narathiwat remain separate provinces to this day.

==Chronology of Rulers==

Inland Dynasty (Sri Wangsa)
First Kelantanese Dynasty
Second Kelantanese Dynasty 

==See also==

==References==

==Further reading==


