[[Iain Crichton Smith]]

CATEGORIES: Scottish poets, 1928 births, 1998 deaths, Scottish Gaelic-speaking people, Officers of the Order of the British Empire, Scottish atheists, Gaelic poets, 20th-century Scottish writers, People from Lewis, Outer Hebrides, Scottish novelists, Scottish Gaelic poets, Alumni of the University of Aberdeen, Cholmondeley Award winners, Scottish Gaelic novelists

Iain Crichton Smith (Iain Mac a' Ghobhainn) (1 January 1928 – 15 October 1998) was a Scottish man of letters, writing in both English and Scottish Gaelic, and a prolific author in both languages. He is known for poetry, short stories and novels.
He was born in Glasgow, but moved to the isle of Lewis at the age of two, where he and his two brothers were brought up by their widowed mother in the small crofting town of Bayble, which also produced Derick Thomson.  Educated at the University of Aberdeen, Crichton Smith took a degree in English, and after serving in the National Service Army Education Corps, went on to become a teacher. He taught in Clydebank, Dumbarton and Oban from 1952, retiring to become a full-time writer in 1977, although he already had many novels and poems published. He was awarded an OBE in 1980.

==Overview of work==

Crichton Smith was brought up in a Scottish Gaelic speaking community, learning English as a second language once he attended school. Friend and poet Edwin Morgan notes that unlike his contemporaries (such as Sorley Maclean and Derick Thomson), Crichton Smith was more prolific in English than in Gaelic, perhaps viewing his writing in what, from Crichton Smith's view, was an imposed non-native language as a challenge to English and American poets.  However, Crichton Smith also produced much Gaelic poetry and prose, and also translated some of the work of Sorley Maclean from Gaelic to English, as well as some of his own poems originally composed in Gaelic. It should also be noted that much of his English language work is actually directly related to, or translated from, Gaelic equivalents.
Crichton Smith's work also reflects his dislike of dogma and authority, influenced by his upbringing in a close-knit, island presbyterian community, as well as his political and emotional thoughts and views of Scotland and the Scottish Highlands. Despite his upbringing, Crichton Smith was an atheist.  A number of his poems explore the subject of the Highland Clearances, and his best-known novel Consider the Lilies (1968) is an account of the eviction of an elderly woman during such times.
Elderly women and alienated individuals are common themes in his work.

==Poetry==

Crichton Smith's poetry quite often had a character perhaps based on his mother. He also typically used natural images to convey emotion.
His poetry includes:

==Bibliography==

==External links==


