[[Frodesley]]

CATEGORIES: Civil parishes in Shropshire, Villages in Shropshire

Frodesley is a tiny village and civil parish in the English county of Shropshire, and is situated partly within the Shropshire Hills Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. 
The name probably derives from an Anglo-Saxon chief "Frod" who was the founder,and leah or clearing. It is mentioned in the Domesday Book: one hide paying tax,land for two ploughs, woodland for 30 pigs, valued at eight shillings. Most of Frodesley extends perpendicular to the south-west extension the Roman road Watling Street, running from Wroxeter (Viroconium) to Leintwardine (Bravonium or Branogenium) - Iter XII of the Antonine Itinerary. An important route built in the 1st century AD, the stretch here has been in continuous use. 
The parish has an area of about 900 hectares and lies between two hills, one at 145 metres on arable land, the other Lodge Hill rising to 304 metres and forested. The latter consists of Hoar Edge Grit, a tough Ordovician sandstone quarried for the construction of Viroconium. The forest is also known as Causeway Wood, possibly on account of a Roman track used to convey stone to the main road. There is a conjecture that this causeway corresponds to a bridleway running from the north-east edge of the forest.
On the edge of the hill lies an imposing mansion built in 1591, Frodesley Lodge, home of the then local landowning Scriven family. A document from 1848 mentions the discovery there of a Roman votive altar dedicated to the goddesses of Britain and bearing the name L Caractacus. Formerly isolated, the Lodge now lies amongst recent barn conversion dwellings. Adjacent to the Lodge is the venerable and frail Frodesley oak, more than 700 years old.
Dating from 1809 on much earlier foundations, the church of St Mark's is one of the smallest in Shropshire. 
In recent years the population has increased to around 100; until July 2006 there was a public house, the Swan.
Sir Herbert Edwardes, the 19th century soldier-administrator in India, known as the "Hero of Multan", was born at Frodesley when his father was local Rector.  The Rectory later became 'Hobsley House'.
The area is agricultural, predominantly livestock 
with some arable. 
Nearby villages are Acton Burnell and Longnor.

==External links==


