[[Kate Morgan]]

CATEGORIES: 1865 births, 1892 deaths, People from Fremont County, Iowa, American ghosts

Kate Morgan (1865–1892) was an American woman who died under mysterious circumstances, and is thought by locals to be a ghost at the Hotel del Coronado in Coronado, California. She was buried at nearby Mount Hope Cemetery in Division 5 Section 1.

==Background==

Kate Farmer was born in Fremont County, Iowa about 1864. Her mother died September 23, 1865,Gravestone, Mt. Olive Cemetery, Hamburg, Iowa and at the age of two, she was sent to live with her maternal grandfather, Joe Chandler.Affidavit of Joseph Chandler, August 12, 1879, in the matter of the Estate of George W. Farmer
November 9, 1870, Kate's father, George Washington Farmer, was appointed to be the Postmaster of Hamburg, Iowa.National Archives, Old Military and Civil Records He remarried in 1871, fathered two more daughters and then moved to Texas,Biography of Henry Eubank, "Wheatheart of the Plains - An Early History of Ochiltree County, 1969 where he died in 1876.Affidavit of B.M. Burke, County Clerk, McCullouch County, Texas, July 7, 1880, in the matter of the Estate of George W. Farmer
On December 30, 1885 Kate married Thomas Edwin MorganMarriage Certificate and they had one child, a boy, born on October 31, 1886; he lived only two days.Gravestone, Utterback Cemetery, Riverton, Iowa
Around 1890 Kate ran off with Albert Allen, a stepson of Tom's stepmother, Emily Dennison Allen Morgan.Written statement by Tom Morgan's daughter
Kate was hired as a housemaid by the Grant family in Los Angeles and told her co-workers she was married to a gambler. From this statement, Tom Morgan was assumed to be the gambler in question, but in fact, he was a rural mail carrier in Burchard, NebraskaTom Morgan's obituary at the time of Kate's death on November 28, 1892.

==Death==

She was found dead on November 29, 1892 on the exterior staircase leading to the beach, of what was believed to be a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head.  This was five days after checking into the Hotel del Coronado in Coronado.  A San Francisco lawyer, the late Alan May, speculated in the 1980s that her death involved foul play. Evidence for the alleged homicide was a passing statement (or misstatement), during the coroner's inquest, that the bullet found in her head did not match that of her own gun.Alan M. May. The Legend of Kate Morgan: The Search for the Ghost of the Hotel del Coronado.  ISBN 1-122-26574-3 Nevertheless, whatever the merits of his book, he did revive interest in the subject by causing a stir with his murder theory. Officials who reviewed his speculations chose not to reopen the case.

==Haunting==

There have been many putative ghost sightings, and other potential paranormal events at Hotel del Coronado since then. The official Hotel del Coronado website Official website, Hotel del Coronado, History mentions the ghost.
The hotel's Heritage Department has published an official book on this subject, written by the hotel's professional historian, titled The Beautiful Stranger: The Ghost of Kate Morgan and The Hotel del Coronado.Official Heritage Dept. Book, The Beautiful Stranger: The Ghost of Kate Morgan and The Hotel del Coronado ISBN 978-0-916251-73-4 It avoids speculation in its research of historical documents available in local public libraries, historical societies, and university libraries as well as city hall and police files. The Heritage Department's book leans toward the official suicide verdict.
There are three other books available now.  John T. Cullen has written two: his first, updated in 2008 is Dead Move: Kate Morgan and the Haunting Mystery of Coronado, Second Edition, is a non-fiction account of the mystery. His second is Lethal Journey, a novel published in August 2009.
The third book is The Ghost of the Hotel del Coronado, The TRUE Story of Kate Morgan, by Terry Girardot. Kate's husband, Tom Morgan, was the half-brother of his maternal grandmother, and his book contains full versions of all articles from the San Diego, Los Angeles and San Francisco newspapers from that period, along with documents from his genealogy research including the original telegram sent to Tom advising him of Kate's suicide. Tom's granddaughter provided him with the photograph of Kate seen on this page.

==References==


