[[Pac-Man World]]

CATEGORIES: 1999 video games, 3D platform games, Game Boy Advance games, Pac-Man, PlayStation games, PlayStation Network games, Cancelled Nintendo 64 games, Cancelled Windows games, Video games composed by Tommy Tallarico, Video games developed in the United States

[tpl]nihongo|Pac-Man World 20th Anniversary|パックマンワールド 20th アニバーサリー[/tpl] is a 1999 3D-based free roaming platform game for the PlayStation. As the name indicates, the game was released to coincide with the 20th anniversary of the Pac-Man character.
A Game Boy Advance version would be released in 2004, with many features removed.
The original PlayStation version was released on the PlayStation Store in Japan on June 26, 2013 and in North America on February 11, 2014. Nintendo 64 and Microsoft Windows versions were planned, but were later cancelled for unknown reasons.

==Plot==

Pac-Man arrives home on his 20th birthday (the game was released to coincide with the 20th anniversary of the original Pac-Man in arcades) only to discover that his friends and family—Ms. Pac-Man, Baby Pac, Jr. Pac, Professor Pac, Chomp Chomp the doe, and Pooka have been kidnapped by the evil Toc-Man, a giant robot Pac-Man impersonator that was created by Orson, who is bent on stealing Pac-Man's identity. Pac-Man sets off to Ghost Island and works to free them.

==Gameplay==

The game is a standard 3D platformer that plays heavily into the history of the character; every non-boss level features a maze that plays by the rules of the original game (though the Pac-Symbol still shows, letting the player survive being touched by ghosts up to four times). Every level is littered with Pac-Dots, fruits and ghosts, much of the music is modified from early entries into the series (one of the common themes in all the levels is the intermission music from Pac-Man modified according to the theme of the level) and the original Pac-Man arcade game was available for play from the menu screen.
In addition, Pac-Man is given a handful of standard platform maneuvers, including a "butt-bounce", reminiscent of Mario's ground pound and the Rev-Roll, reminiscent of Sonic the Hedgehog's spin dash. Also, he'd gained the ability to use the dots offensively, throwing them at non-ghost enemies. Like in the original game, Pac-Man can collect Power Pellets allowing him to eat ghosts for a short amount of time.
The level format is fairly straightforward; each world consists of three or four levels. The first level in a world would introduce a new technique or enemy type. The second and third would require use of that technique to complete, and couldn't be completed without it. The fourth level of each world is a boss battle requiring unique gameplay or puzzle-solving to defeat.
The second levels also include a key that, while not essential to complete the game, is required to free whichever of Pac-Man's friends held prisoner in the third level. Every freed character would then appear to aid Pac-Man in the final battle against Toc-Man. However, there are a couple of exceptions to this, most notably the Ruins, Factory, and Space levels.

==Port and sequels==

Pac-Man World is part of a "duo" with Ms. Pac-Man Maze Madness, somewhat similar to the later Pac-Man: Adventures in Time and Ms. Pac-Man: Quest for the Golden Maze.
A Game Boy Advance version came in 2004. Due to hardware limitations, many features were left out of the game, such as Maze Mode, the original Pac-Man and many levels cut out. This version was later included in a 2-in-1 cartridge with the GBA version of Ms. Pac-Man Maze Madness.
A proper sequel, Pac-Man World 2, came on February 24, 2002. It is available on the PC, PlayStation 2, Nintendo GameCube, Xbox and Game Boy Advance.
Pac-Man World 3 was released in 2005. This game introduced new moves and powers to Pac-Man and gave him a full voice. It was not developed by the team behind the other games.

==Reception==

Pac-Man World has been given mainly positive reviews since its release. GameSpot rated this game 7.6/10, saying that "Pac-Man World is a fun little game that goes beyond mere regurgitation." IGN rated the game 7.8/10, while saying "A fitting, albeit sometimes patchy, tribute to the man that started it all.".
Marc Nix from IGN, who reviewed the game on November 15, 1999, stated that the gameplay is "more the cousin of Super Mario World rather than Super Mario 64. His comment on the Presentation is "An 80's flair that proves just how creative designers were back then."

==External links==


