[[Memorex]]

CATEGORIES: Companies established in 1961, Electronics companies of the United States, Computer companies of the United States, Computer storage companies, RadioShack

Memorex began as a computer tape producer and expanded to become a major IBM plug compatible peripheral supplier. It is now a consumer electronics brand of Imation specializing in disk recordable media for CD and DVD drives, flash memory, computer accessories and other electronics.

==History and evolution==

Established in 1961 in Silicon Valley, Memorex started by selling computer tapes, then added other media such as disk packs.  The company then expanded into disk drives and other peripheral equipment for IBM mainframes. During the 1970s and into the early 1980s Memorex was worldwide one of the largest independent suppliers of disk drives and communications controllers to users of IBM-compatible mainframes, as well as media for computer uses and consumers.
Memorex entered the consumer media business in 1971 first with its "shattering glass" advertisements and then with a series of famous television commercials featuring Ella Fitzgerald. In the commercials she would sing a note that shattered a glass while being recorded to a Memorex audio cassette. The tape was played back and the recording also broke the glass, asking "Is it live, or is it Memorex?"
In 1982 Memorex was bought by Burroughs. Over the next six years, Burroughs and its successor Unisys shut down, sold off or spun out the various parts of Memorex.
The computer media, communications and IBM end user sales and service organization were spun out as Memorex International. In 1988 Memorex acquired the Telex Corporation becoming Memorex Telex NV, a corporation based in the Netherlands, which survived as an entity until the middle 1990s."SEC Filing for MEMOREX TELEX N.V. (1996)" The company evolved into a provider of information technology solutions including the distribution and integration of data network and storage products and the provision of related services in 18 countries worldwide. As late as 2006, several pieces existed as subsidiaries of other companies, see e.g., Memorex Telex Japan LtdMemorex Telex Japan Homepage a subsidiary of KanematsuKanematsu 2008 Annual Report or Memorex Telex (UK) Ltd. a subsidiary of EDS Global Field Services.http://www.memorex-telex.com/aboutus/
Today, Memorex is an Imation brand for consumer electronics and accessories such as portable audio players, iPod accessories, flat panel TVs, Blu-ray Disc players, flash drives, CDs and DVDs.Memorex Website Few if any of these products are actually manufactured by Memorex or Imation; for example, CD-Rs are made by CMC Magnetics Corp of Taiwan, Ritek of Taiwan and Moser Baer of India. CD-Rs were formerly made by Daxon of Malaysia and Prodisc Technology of Taiwan.

==Timeline==

==References==

==External links==


