[[Manila Tytana Colleges]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 1975, Universities and colleges in the Philippines, Nursing schools in the Philippines, Schools in the Philippines, Educational institutions in Pasay, Universities and colleges in Metro Manila

The Manila Tytana Colleges (MTC) (formerly Manila Doctors College) is a privately owned and operated educational institution that offers academic degrees and certificate courses related to allied medical services, business, liberal arts and sciences. 
Tytana was founded in 1975 as the School of Nursing for the Manila Doctors Hospital. The college is operated by the Metrobank Foundation. In 2004 MDC's campus was transferred from the City of Manila to Pasay City. As of 2004, its nursing program ranks 46th in the Philippines. It has a Level II accreditation by Phil. Accrediting Associations of Schools, Colleges, and Universities (PAASCU). Its BS Psychology program also attain the same Level II accreditation from the The Philippine Accrediting Association of Schools, Colleges and Universities (PAASCU)in 2013.
In 2011, Manila Tytana Colleges has opened new business courses - Accountancy, Entrepreneurship, Business Administration with major studies in Business Economics, Financial Management, Marketing Management, Operations Management, Human Resources and Legal Management.
As it sets it eyes to become a leading educational institution, it complemented its expansion within the framework of Academe-Industry Partnership anchored on its close link with the Metrobank Group. The scheme gives due advantage to its students in shaping their skills through actual job application in many of the Tytana's partners. "Tytana your Edge", the new school catchphrase perfectly sums up this positive aspect of enrolling in the College.

==History==

Founded and formally inaugurated during the 19th anniversary celebration of Manila Doctors Hospital (MDH) in 1975 and first known as the Manila Doctors Hospital School of Nursing, the College was originally located at the fourth floor of the Manila Doctors Hospital along United Nations Avenue in Manila. Its founding members include Dr. Ambrosio Tangco, Dr. Gonzalo F. Austria, Dr. Fidel Estrada, Dr. Jose Villanueva and then members of the Board of Directors of MDH. Mrs. Cristeta T. Patajo was the first principal.
The College initially offered a three-year graduate nursing course. In 1978, a permit to offer the four-year Bachelor of Science in Nursing and Bachelor of Science in Liberal Arts courses was granted by the then Department of Education, Culture and Sports (DECS).
A major milestone was marked in the School’s history when the Metrobank Foundation Inc. acquired control of the Manila Medical Services, Inc. in February 1979. With the takeover, a new set of hospital directors was elected, headed by Dr. George S.K. Ty as Chairman and Mr. Edgardo Espiritu as President.
In February 14, 1980, the School was renamed Manila Doctors College as the status college was granted as a reflection of its varied course offerings, which included Bachelor of Science in Nursing, Bachelor of Science in Psychology, Bachelor of Science in Zoology, and a two-year certificate course in Pulmonary Therapy.
In October of 1993, the College was registered as a non-stock corporation with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Two years later, the Nursing program was accorded Level I Accreditation by the Federation of Accrediting Agencies of the Philippines by virtue of the authority granted by the then DECS, having satisfactorily met the standards and fulfilled the requirements of the Philippine Accrediting Association of School, Colleges, and Universities (PAASCU). In April 2002, the College formally earned the Level II Accreditation from PAASCU.
The boom in nursing education paved the way for the expansion of the College. As a newly organized management prepared for the influx of students, efforts were conscientiously taken to maintain the quality of education. As enrollment steadily grew, the College adhered to academic standards imposed by both private accrediting bodies and concerned government agencies. As a result, the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) granted full Deregulated Status to the College in October 2003.
In 2004, the College inaugurated its new campus along President Diosdado Macapagal Boulevard in Pasay City. A year later, the Doña Tytana Tower was built. The new seven-storey facility was inaugurated during the College’s 30th anniversary celebration.
Having carved its niche in the nursing education producing topnotchers and consistently posting an above average performance in the Nursing Licensure Examination (NLE), the College now positions itself as a provider of high quality education in the Philippines. In addition to Nursing, the College also offers Psychology and certificate courses in caregiving, and short courses in foreign language and culinary arts. In 2008, the College opened the Bachelor of Science in Holistic Nutrition with Culinary Arts program, the first of its kind in the Philippines. The Nursing program, on the other hand, was granted Level II Reaccreditation by the PAASCU. A year after, recognizing the demand of the industry and high school students, the College welcomed its first batch of Bachelor of Science in Hotel and Restaurant Management students, and in 2010, the first batch of Bachelor of Science in Information Technology. The same year, the Holistic Nutrition with Culinary Arts and Hotel and Restaurant Management programs were granted full recognition by the CHED, while the Psychology program was accorded Level I Accreditation by the Philippine Association of Colleges and Universities Commission on Accreditation (PACUCOA). The following year, the College opened new business courses – Accountancy, Entrepreneurship and Business Administration with major studies in Business Economics, Financial Management, Operations Management, Marketing Management, and Human Resource Development Management.
In 2010, as a critical part of the thrust of breaking new grounds, Manila Doctors College transformed into Manila Tytana Colleges in pursuit of its vision of the school. The College’s Honorary Chairman and Metrobank Group of Companies Chairman Dr. George S.K. Ty dedicates the institution to his late mother, Doña Victoria Ty-Tan as part of his legacy to the Filipino people and in the best tradition of the Filipino’s highest regard and respect for motherhood. In October 2010, the new name was registered with the SEC, while the operative date of use was set to June 1, 2011. The College of Nursing, retaining the name of the College, is now called Manila Doctors College of Nursing.

==References==


