[[NWEAMO]]

CATEGORIES: Electronic music festivals, Music festivals in the United States, 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizations, 1998 establishments in the United States

New West Electronic Arts & Music Organization (NWEAMO), founded by composer Joseph Waters in Portland, Oregon, U.S. in 1998, is a nonprofit organization based in San Diego, California that produces the annual international festival of electro-acoustic music.
NWEAMO is dedicated to forging connections between the composers, performers and lovers of avant garde classical music with the DJ’s, MC’s, guitar-gods, troubadours and gourmets of experimental popular music. The organization promotes music that involves the creative use of computers and electronics mixed with acoustics. Today, NWEAMO has showcased artists in prime venues across the world.
In a healthy cultural milieu NWEAMO celebrates both classical and popular music. The idea behind this seemingly controversial connection is that without any connection, both genres suffer. When classical music does not connect with popular culture, it becomes a music of experts, unable to reflect and contribute meaningfully in the broad marketplace of developing ideas and cultural experimentation. Popular music on the other hand, becomes naïve and superficial, untethered to its historical roots and broad cultural underpinnings, without connection and communication with classical music. NWEAMO attempts to generate a synthesis that reveals new possibilities for both.

==Festivals==

NWEAMO concerts typically feature a variety of electro-acoustic styles and genres, ranging from Intelligent dance music to the abstract avant garde. 
In 2002 the festival added San Diego, California to its locations. In 2005 the festival expanded further, with an additional night added in Mexico City. New York City and Venice, Italy were added 2006. The 2007 festival included a summer component in Europe (Berlin, May 18–19; and Venice, May 25–26) in addition to the main autumn festival: San Diego (Oct 5 & 6, 2007); Boulder, Colorado (Oct. 13, 2007); Morelia, Mexico (Oct. 19, 2007) & New York City (Oct. 26 & 27, 2007).
Each year the festival supports the work of approximately 30 composers/performers.
Each year the festival focuses on a theme:

==External links==


