[[Nicola Black]]

CATEGORIES: Scottish women film directors, Alumni of the University of Glasgow, 1965 births, Living people, Scottish television producers, Scottish television directors, Scottish film producers, People from Glasgow

Nicola Jane Black  (born in Glasgow) is a Scottish film and television producer and director. Her work includes documentaries Designer Vaginas, Bone Breakers, When Freddie Mercury Met Kenny Everett, Tribal Cop, White Jazz, Jenny Saville - Flesh & Blood and the series Mirrorball and Banned in the UK which featured in the Channel 4 Banned season.
Black is also the producer of Channel 4's Mesh animation scheme, producing digital animations including Covert, Daddy, Killing Time At Home and Watermelon Love.

==Biography==

Born in Glasgow, Black began her career as a trainee editor working on Derek Jarman's Caravaggio, before moving on to television with Halfway to Paradise.
Black set up her own production company, Blackwatch Media in 1995, and her first production was the documentary on crime writer James Ellroy's search for his mother's murderer, White Jazz. From this, she went on to produce and direct the series Post Mortem, about genius and illness, examining the lives and works of Beethoven, Virginia Woolf, Nijinsky, Montgomery Clift and Francis Bacon.
In the late 1990s, she produced and directed the pop-promo series Mirrorball, featuring profiles on Spike Jonze, Mike Mills, Roman Coppola, Michel Gondry and Dawn Shadforth.
Black then went on to direct and produce a series of documentaries for Channel 4, including Designer Vaginas (2002), Bone Breakers (2002), When Freddie Met Kenny (2002), Snorting Coke With The BBC  (2003), Banned in the UK and Banned Films, the latter presented by Tim Roth (2005), both were shown as part of the Channel 4 Banned season - which Black co-devised.
Since 2001, Black ran and produced Channel 4's digital animation scheme Mesh, producing four digital animations a year.
In 2007, Black produced Potapych: The Bear Who Loved Vodka, which won a BAFTA Scotland Award for Best Animated Film.

==References==

==External links==


