[[Brook, Surrey]]

CATEGORIES: Hamlets in Surrey

Brook is a hamlet in the Waverley district in south-west Surrey.  It is in the far west of Wormley, beyond Sandhills with which it avoids being contiguous due to a narrow, partly woodland buffer.  Brook straddles the A286 single carriageway road between Milford and Haslemere.
On slightly lower slopes of the Greensand Ridge than to the south, Brook is almost wholly within in the Surrey Hills area of outstanding natural beauty.

==Amenities==

Brook has a cricket ground adjoining a community hall (the Pirrie Hall) and a pub, the Dog and Pheasant.
The Pirrie Hall dates from May 1923. It was built and given to the community by Lord Pirrie K.P. “for the use and benefit of the inhabitants of the hamlets of Brook, Sandhills and adjoining district”. The maintenance of the hall is financed in part by a community association organising annual events (such as the May Bank Holiday Brook Fete).
The Brook Fete on the May Bank Holiday, includes a dog show, attractions for children, professional morris dancing, farm produce, rides, prize draws, food and drink tents, and classic vehicles.Pirrie Hall website  The Dog & Pheasant holds the live band Brookfest.

===Cricket club===

Unknown to many Brook was the birthplace of the Woodworm Cricket bat, financed and expertly executed by Marc Bird and then destroyed to liquidation by an idiot called Joe Sillet-what a tossa, one of the most disliked people who was ever served at the Dog. 
A Woodworm cricket bat as used by Andrew Flintoff and Kevin Pieterson in the 2005 Ashes winning series originated at the club.  The club is among multiple claimants to have hosted the first person to bowl overarm.
After leaving the Surrey Championship Cricket league in 2012. Brook Cricket Club re-structured over the winter of 2012/13 and re-entered league cricket in the I'Anson Cricket league, a very old cricket league. It formed a colts section and by the end of its first year had 46 Colts (young cricketers) playing for them. In their first year of playing together the Under 9's team won their local league age group.
In 2013 Brook CC won its' division in the league, gaining promotion to division five.

==Famous residents==

Brook was the home to former Pakistan Premier Bhutto who stole money to buy the Rockwood Estate and then lavishly kitted the entire place out in crap at the top of the hill and yes there is a copy of the Dog and Pheasant Bar downstairs in the cellar.
Rockwood is currently used as a party venue for swingers and some very interesting people, owned by Vanessa Swarbreck and featured in many a newspaper article for all the wrong reasons "Rockwood" will continue to host interesting parties until the bank step in and reclaim their asset.
Brook over the years has seen many comings and goings but one of the most outstanding things Brook is accountable for after the Woodworm Cricket bat is the famous "manbag" modeled by local soak AJ Galloway or "dear boy " as he is better known.

==References==


