[[Franz Karl Ginzkey]]

CATEGORIES: 1871 births, 1963 deaths, People from Pula, Austrian dramatists and playwrights, Austrian novelists, Austrian poets, Austrian children's writers, German Bohemian people, Recipients of the Grand Austrian State Prize, Recipients of the Austrian Decoration for Science and Art

Franz Karl Ginzkey (September 8, 1871, Pola, Austrian Littoral, Austria-Hungary (now Pula, Croatia) - April 11, 1963, Seewalchen am Attersee, Upper Austria, Austria) was an austro-Hungarian (then Austrian) officer, poet and writer. His arguably most famous book Hatschi Bratschis Luftballon (Hatschi Bratschis balloon) captivated generations of children.

==Life==

Franz Karl Ginzkey, son of a Bohemian German professional officer of the Austrian Navy, was in the imperial army until 1897. During that period he was intermittently also commander of the as barracks used (Rainer-infantry regiment) Fortress Hohensalzburg. From 1897 to 1914 he worked as a cartographer at the Militärgeographischen Institute (Militarygeographic institute) in Vienna, afterwards in the war archive. Since 1920, he was a retired military member and then worked as a freelance writer. At the time of the Austro-Fascism, he was (for the professional group of artists) from 1934 to 1938 Member of the Council of State and after 1938 came to terms with the leaders of National Socialism. He was friends with Max Mell and Stefan Zweig, and furthermore with Faistauer Anton and Carl Zuckmayer. Moreover, Ginzkey participated in the founding of the Salzburg Festival and for decades was a member of its board of trustees. Since 1944 he lived in Seewalchen at Lake Attersee.
After the end of war Ginzkeys Die Front in Tirol (The front in Tyrol) (Fischer, Berlin, 1916) was blacklisted in the Soviet zone of occupation. 1
On his 100th birthday a Franz-Karl-Ginzkey monument was erected in Seewalchen at Lake Attersee.
He rests in a grave of honor at the Vienna Central Cemetery (Group 32 C, Number 25).
Ginzkey is numbered among the circle of newromantic poets and novelists. One of his literary discoverers was Peter Rosegger. A part of his work shows great connection to Salzburg. This witness the following works:
In 1968 the square between Alpenstraße (Alpine street) and Adolf-Schemel-Straße (Adolf-Schemel street) in the Salzburg district of Salzburg-Süd (Salzburg-South) (Alpinsiedlung) was named in his honor Ginzkeyplatz.

==Literary works (a selection)==

==Decorations and awards==

In 1968, Ginzkeyplatz was named in his honour in the Salzburg district of Salzburg-Süd (Alpensiedlung) between Alpenstrasse und Adolf-Schemel-Strasse. Ginzkey's 100th birthday in 1971 was marked by a Franz-Karl Ginzkey monument on the Attersee Seewalchen.

==External links==


