[[WCW SuperBrawl Wrestling]]

CATEGORIES: 1994 video games, North America-exclusive video games, Super Nintendo Entertainment System-only games, Video games with isometric graphics, World Championship Wrestling video games

WCW SuperBrawl Wrestling is a video game released for the SNES in 1994. The third World Championship Wrestling (WCW) video game, it is named after the pay-per-view, SuperBrawl. It was the only WCW game to be released on the Super Nintendo, and the last to be produced by FCI.

==Gameplay==

The gameplay takes place from a ¾ overhead perspective.WCW SuperBrawl Wrestling at MobyGames Each wrestler shares a moveset in the game, with the exception of their signature moves. Every character performs a variety of suplexes, a backbreaker, a tombstone piledriver, an atomic drop, various diving attacks, and a variety of kicks, punches, elbow, and forearm shots. Sound effects utilized throughout the game have the quality of a playback from a keychain's portable digital sound recorder. Several finishing moves have a similar appearance to "weak" moves that are done in the beginning of a wrestling match; like Dustin Rhodes' Bulldog and Johnny B. Badd's basic left hook.
Modes of play include singles, tag team, an eight-man singles tournament, a tag team tournament between four teams, and the "Ultimate Challenge," where a player must defeat every other wrestler in the game. Different stipulations can be selected for matches; bouts can either be contested under one fall, first to three falls, or a time limit of differing lengths where the most falls within the time limit wins the match.During the course of a match, boxes pop up showing the referee counting, Tony Schiavone providing minimal commentary, and wrestlers saying a catchphrase after performing their signature move. The wrestlers will also pop out and say their catchphrase on the wrestler select menu.

==Reception==

GamePro gave WCW SuperBrawl Wrestling an overall rating of 3.5 out of 5. Allgame gave the game a score of 2 stars out of a possible 5.Rating of WCW SuperBrawl Wrestling at allgame The Allgame website noted the similarity of WCW SuperBrawl Wrestling to its rival games WWF Raw and WWF Royal Rumble; which dealt with performers from WCW's main rival, the WWF.

==References==


