[[STIX Fonts project]]

CATEGORIES: Symbol typefaces, Unicode typefaces, Mathematical OpenType typefaces, Typesetting software, 2008 introductions

The STIX Fonts project is a project sponsored by several leading scientific and technical publishers to provide, under royalty-free license, a comprehensive font set of mathematical symbols and alphabets, intended to serve the scientific and engineering community for electronic and print publication. The STIX fonts are available as fully hinted OpenType/CFF fonts. There is currently no TrueType version of the STIX fonts available, but the STIX Mission Statement includes the intention to create one in the future.STIX Fonts - Mission Statement However there exists an unofficial conversion of STIX Fonts (from the beta version release) to TrueType, suitable for use with software without OpenType support.STIX Fonts - TTF (True Type)
STIX fonts also includeBarbara Beeton, “STIX fonts and Unicode”, talk at TUG 2007 video natural language glyphs for Latin, Greek and Cyrillic.

==Development process==

Among the glyphs in STIX, 32.9% have been contributed by the project members. The commercial TeX vendor and TeX font foundry MicroPress has been contracted to create the additional glyphs. The STIX project will also create a TeX implementation. Goals also include incorporating the characters into Unicode, and ensuring that browsers can use them.
Members of the STIX (Scientific and Technical Information Exchange) Fonts project, known collectively as the STI Pub consortium, include the American Institute of Physics, the American Chemical Society, the American Mathematical Society, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, the American Physical Society, and Elsevier.

A beta version of the fonts was released on October 31, 2007. This version does not include enough of the OpenType mathematical layout features present in Cambria Math, so it is not usable to the fullest extent in Microsoft Office 2007.Murray Sargent, (Nov. 6, 2007) STIX Beta Fonts The Latin glyph set included in the beta version does not yet cover all the characters required to typeset in Eastern European languages.
“Final design changes” were declared “complete” at the project website on 9 June 2008. A release by end of May 2009 for the “initial production release” was announced, still without the support for OpenType layout features of Office 2007 or TeX. In September 2009, the fonts went to the final packaging stage. However in October, missing glyphs were discovered, adding a delay. The fonts were scheduled to be released in April 2010, and released on 2010-05-28.
The project has taken considerably longer than forecast.  The website has been updated only intermittently, and thus has regularly been out-of-date, with forecast milestones often being overshot.  For example, on 20 July 2011 the main page on the official siteSTIX Fonts Project Website, archived on 2011-09-15. stated, "Version 1.1, which will include fonts packaged for use with Microsoft Office applications, is scheduled for release by the end of 2010. ...  This site was last updated on 1 November ."  Version 1.1.0 was released February 24, 2012. This version facilitates equation editing in recent versions of Microsoft Word.STIX Fonts Project Website accessed 2012-03-05. The current forecast for the next version that will include support for LaTeX is "no later than July 2012".STIX Fonts Project Website accessed 2012-04-14. Currently STIX fonts may be used in LaTeX via unicode-math package, although the community maintained derivative, XITS, has better support.
The STIX Fonts are included in Mac OS X Lion (10.7).
The javascript framework MathJax uses the STIX fonts for including mathematics in web pages. Installing the fonts on the local computer improves MathJax’s typesetting speed.MathJax Font Help accessed 2012-08-14.
The Math Editor equation editor uses STIX fonts as its primary font.

==ESSTIX==

A precursor to the STIX project is the ESSTIX (Elsevier Science STIX) font, developed and later donated by Elsevier. It is currently available from the World Wide Web Consortium as part of the Amaya web browser (http://www.w3.org/Amaya/User/FAQ.html#XFonts).

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


