[[Tom Paris]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional aviators, Fictional ensigns, Fictional lieutenants, Star Trek: Voyager characters, Fictional medical personnel, Fictional nurses, Starfleet officers, Starfleet nurses, Starfleet ensigns, Starfleet lieutenants, Fictional characters introduced in 1995

Thomas Eugene "Tom" Paris, played by Robert Duncan McNeill, is a character in the American science fiction television series Star Trek: Voyager. Paris serves as the chief helmsman and an auxiliary medic aboard the USS Voyager. The character's middle name, "Eugene", is a tribute to Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry.[tpl]citation needed|date=July 2012[/tpl]

==Biography==

Tom Paris is the son of Starfleet Admiral Owen Paris and a scion of a family with a long history of illustrious service in Starfleet. Following in his family's tradition, Paris attended Starfleet Academy sometime in the 2350s and majored in astrophysics. A gifted pilot, Paris earned an assignment to the Academy's honor squadron.
His relationship with his father was not a good one; while Tom wanted to join the Federation Naval Patrol, Owen wanted him to enlist at Starfleet Academy. Admiral Paris often disapproved of his son's tendency to get into fights and often end up in prison.
Soon after his graduation from Starfleet Academy, Tom crashed a shuttle he was piloting near Caldik Prime, killing three other Starfleet officers. Afraid he would lose his commission, Paris falsified records that would later reveal the cause of the accident as pilot error. His efforts to cover up the error succeeded, yet still, overwhelmed by guilt and regret, he confessed. He was court-martialed for his actions and was dishonorably discharged from Starfleet. This caused a major rift in the relationship between Paris and his father.
Following his discharge, Paris left San Francisco for Marseille, where he started spending his time drinking and playing pool in Sandrine's, a waterfront bar. There, Chakotay, a former Starfleet officer now serving with the Maquis, discovered Paris and recruited him to serve as a mercenary pilot for the Maquis Rebellion against the Federation. This adventure went no better than his earlier stint in Starfleet as Paris was soon captured by Starfleet while piloting his first mission for the Maquis.
Tried and convicted of treason for aiding the Maquis Rebellion, Paris was sentenced to serve time in the Federation Penal Settlement near Auckland, New Zealand. Kathryn Janeway, captain of the starship USS Voyager, obtained Paris' temporary release from the penal colony. Janeway, charged with finding and capturing the Maquis ship commanded by Chakotay, offered Paris early parole in exchange for serving as her informant on Chakotay and the Maquis.
Janeway and the crew of Voyager, while searching for the Maquis ship, were thrown into the Delta Quadrant by a massive energy wave created by an alien known as the Caretaker. Once there, they successfully located the Maquis ship docked at the Caretaker's array. The survivors of the incident became stranded about 70,000 light-years away from Earth. The Maquis ship was destroyed, and its crew joined the Federation crew on Voyager.
The marooning of Voyager in the Delta Quadrant provided Paris with a new beginning. Janeway gave Paris a field commission as a Starfleet lieutenant and made him chief helmsman of Voyager. He had a rough start, however, as Starfleet and Maquis alike viewed Paris with suspicion. Paris worked hard to earn his crewmates' respect. During this time, he became best friends with Ensign Harry Kim, a young officer on his first mission who defied his crewmates to befriend Paris. Eventually, Paris was accepted by the crew and became one of Janeway's valued officers.
Paris' duties were not limited to piloting Voyager. On Janeway's orders, he trained as a field medic and assisted The Doctor until the Doctor recruited Kes as his primary assistant. Following Kes' departure ("The Gift") Paris once again served regular duty shifts in sickbay.
In the episode "Thirty Days", while disobeying direct orders in order to do what he felt was morally right, he was reduced to ensign and thrown in Voyager[tpl]'[/tpl]s brig for a period of 30 days. About a year later, after working diligently at his duties, he regained his former rank. This occurred just before the events of "Unimatrix Zero", during which it is revealed that he is fourth in the chain of command.
While serving on Voyager, Paris nurtured a long-hidden talent for holo-programming, devising several programs for the entertainment of his fellow crewmembers. His most popular programs included a re-creation of Sandrine's bar, an Irish town called Fair Haven, and a 1930s-era sci-fi movie serial entitled Captain Proton.
Tom Paris married Lieutenant B'Elanna Torres, Voyager[tpl]'[/tpl]s half-Klingon chief engineer, in 2377. Torres gave birth to their daughter Miral Paris during the events that led to Voyager[tpl]'[/tpl]s return to the Alpha Quadrant and Earth.

==Personality==

Tom Paris at times displayed resentment toward his father, Owen Paris. This situation improved substantially over the course of the journey, due to Janeway's willingness to offer him redemption, and later to his relationship with B'Elanna Torres.
Paris also has a deep interest in 20th-century Earth pop-culture, often utilizing such in his holo-programs. The knowledge helped the crew during time-travel incidents.
He became good friends with Harry Kim from the start and at times displayed protectiveness in the face of Harry's customary naiveté. In the first episode he rescues the ensign from Quark, a manipulative Ferengi. The only member of the crew with whom Paris initially had a somewhat difficult relationship was Chakotay because of their history in the Maquis. However, throughout Voyager[tpl]'[/tpl]s seven-year journey home, Paris and Chakotay reconciled (in part due to Paris having earned Chakotay's trust) and became good friends.
Tom was a full lieutenant at the very beginning of the series, then a lieutenant junior grade in the first-season episode "Faces".

==Character background==

The character Tom Paris has two backstories. The original backstory, and the only one acknowledged onscreen, cast Paris as a disgraced officer dishonorably discharged from Starfleet for covering up pilot error following a shuttle accident on Caldik Prime. In her published novel, Pathways, Voyager producer Jeri Taylor provided an alternative story much more similar to the events in the Star Trek: The Next Generation episode "The First Duty" by moving the accident to Paris' Starfleet Academy years and making his fellow cadets the victims of his recklessness.
"The First Duty" character Nicolas Locarno (also played by McNeill) was the template for Tom Paris. Originally Locarno himself was to have been rehabilitated. Using Locarno, though, would have been cost prohibitive for the Voyager production staff, as they would have to pay royalties to "The First Duty" writers Ronald Moore and Naren Shankar for each episode in which Locarno appeared. As a result, Voyager[tpl]'[/tpl]s writers created an entirely new character, though Paris still had many of Locarno's attributes.

==Voyager relaunch novels==

In the non-canonical Voyager relaunch novels, written by Christie Golden, Tom was promoted (two steps in rank, like many of the Voyager crew) and is now a lieutenant commander. He serves as First Officer of Voyager, under the command of now-Captain Chakotay.

==See also==

==External links==


