[[Jamesburg Public Schools]]

CATEGORIES: New Jersey District Factor Group DE, School districts in Middlesex County, New Jersey

The Jamesburg Public Schools are a community public school district that serves students in kindergarten through eighth grade from Jamesburg, in Middlesex County, New Jersey, United States. 
As of the 2009-10 school year, the district's two schools had an enrollment of 668 students and 52 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 12.85.District information for the Jamesburg School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed July 18, 2011.
The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "DE", the fifth highest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed October 27, 2009.
Jamesburg High School, founded in 1905, graduated its last class in June 1979. Jamesburg's high school students now attend Monroe Township High School in Monroe Township, as part of a sending/receiving relationship with the Monroe Township School District.Cheslow, Jerry. "A Townful of Empty Nesters", The New York Times, October 14, 2007. Accessed August 8, 2008. "In addition to the four elementary schools, the Applegarth Middle School teaches Grades 7 and 8, and the 1,400-student Monroe Township High School covers Grades 9 through 12. It is shared with the borough of Jamesburg, the “hole in the doughnut” municipality in the center of the township." With tuition costs at Monroe Township High School rising past $16,000 as the Monroe district has added debt service costs into their tuition charges, the Jamesburg Public Schools is looking for an alternate high school in the area to send students at lower cost, which would start with the freshman class in 2012-13, though students already enrolled at Monroe Township High School would continue their attendance there until they graduate. The Jamesburg district contacted 18 districts and received interest from high schools in the Freehold Regional High School District, Matawan-Aberdeen Regional School District, Old Bridge Township Public Schools, South Amboy Public Schools and the West Windsor-Plainsboro Regional School District, which have been sent demographic information in July 2011 about the Jamesburg high school population as part of their review process.Haberstroh, Christina. "Five High Schools Consider taking Jamesburg Students, The Sentinel, July 7, 2011. Accessed July 18, 2011.

==Schools==

Schools in the district (with 2009-10 enrollment data from the National Center for Education StatisticsData for the Jamesburg Public Schools, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed July 18, 2011.) are: 

==Administration==

Core members of the district's administration are:Middlesex County School Directory, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed November 5, 2009.

==References==

==External links==


