[[Ightfield]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Shropshire

Ightfield is a small village and civil parish in Shropshire, England.
Within the parish boundaries is another small village - Calverhall.
Ightfield is situated in one of the most rural areas one could expect to find, with many of its roots being in farming. In fact, the name could indeed be derived from Old English 'Ihtfeld' collocated from 'iht'= creature + 'feld'= field. This would be plausible considering the area's long agricultural history. Over the years, the number of farmers in the area has declined, with only a handful remaining.  Due to the reduced amount of agricultural activity, the village expanded slightly, with the addition of two new housing estates, built on previously agricultural land.
Many years ago, Ightfield had a local public house for travelers to break up their long journeys by horse and cart.  It is now long gone, and was converted into a private home some years ago.
It was mentioned as ISTEFELT in the Domesday Book and though not as important as some parishes in the area, it had its own priest which implies an established community which had its own church.  
The beautiful church of St John the Baptist which, though partly rebuilt in the 19th century, has 15th-century origins.  It stands on the northern edge of the village on a small rise, as if overlooking the village in a spiritual way.
The magnificent gargoyles seem to hang out from the tower as if determined to get a closer look at those who come to admire or worship here.  
The tower contains a peal of six bells, and the father of Shropshire novelist Mary Webb is buried in the churchyard, George Meredith, next to his father Rev. Edward Meredith sometime rector of the Parish. 
The church forms a focal point in the village, with its fantastic outlook over the surrounding countryside, it is a real place of beauty.
Ightfield Church is part of a network of five local churches (Ash, Moreton Say, Ightfield, Calverhall, Adderley - abbr. AMICA) which are within a 6 mile diameter of each other and are served mainly by the Reverend Roger Anders who resides in the rectory of nearby Moreton Say. The Amica Centre is the central administrative hub and a community centre for the AMICA Benefice, and is located in Ightfield, next to the church. The website is located at http://www.AmicaCentre.co.uk.
The loss of the Post Office in 2002 left the villagers in fear over the economic and structural growth of the village with many now having to buy groceries in the nearby Whitchurch, Shropshire.  Fortunately, this didn't hinder the development of multiple new housing estates.
The vet Tom Leonard, appearing on Vets in Practice (a BBC television programme from the late 90's) was raised 4 miles outside the village. Despite Tom moving away, the family still reside there. He has a veterinary practice in the local town of Whitchurch.

==External links==


