[[Destination Moon (story)]]

CATEGORIES: Short stories by Robert A. Heinlein, 1950 short stories, Moon in fiction, Works originally published in American magazines, Works originally published in pulp magazines

"Destination Moon" is a novella by science fiction author Robert A. Heinlein, first published in the September 1950 issue of Short Stories magazine; it is an adaptation of Heinlein's own screenplay for the 1950 feature film Destination Moon.

==Plot summary==

It begins with Doctor Robert Corley, Rear Admiral "Red" Bowles, and Jim Barnes contemplating the success of their project to build a spacecraft for flying to the Moon. The craft is powered by a nuclear rocket engine, and the government has declined permission for it to be tested in place, suggesting a remote Pacific island facility instead. Corley, believing that the delay is unreasonable and a simple delaying tactic, decides to launch their spaceship anyway just as soon as the next launch window arrives in just a few hours; he rushes final flight preparation under the guise of a launch dress rehearsal. A court order arrives at their base at the last minute to prevent any lunar flight, but the crew manage to avoid having it served and slip aboard their spaceship. They avoid a further attempt to stop them by "test firing" the nuclear engine, flooding the launch pad around the space ship with propulsion exhaust flame.
The spaceship launches on time, although a major course correction along the way must be performed because of the fuel wasted on their engine's "test firing." They photograph the lunar surface as they begin to land on the Moon, but more fuel is wasted when they try to avoid a large, deep canyon on their final landing approach. The ship lands out of direct line-of-sight of the Earth, so they are unable to report back via radio. The estimates of their remaining fuel supply indicates they lack enough fuel to return home safely. Admiral Bowles takes the view that their safe return is irrelevant: All that matters is to claim the Moon in the name of the United States of America and make radio contact with Earth to report this fact. He suggests using their remaining fuel to make a brief flight into direct sight of the Earth to report their claim, sacrificing themselves in the process for the greater good. The other crew members, however, prefer to try to return to Earth, if at all possible.
Although Earth briefly rises above the horizon thanks to the Moon's libration, the Pacific Ocean is facing towards the lunar surface and so contact with North America cannot be established. The crew set themselves to lightening their spaceship as much as possible to improve their chances of returning to Earth safely. During this process, they review their film of the lunar surface and discover a small base has been established on the Moon. They wonder whether this base possibly might be Soviet or even alien in origin. Admiral Bowles immediately changes his previous position, saying they must now return to Earth and provide this important information to U. S. military intelligence. They proceed to further lighten their spaceship of all possible unnecessary weight and finally launch for Earth. The story leaves the conclusion uncertain whether they will be able to make it back safely; Corley observes "probably not, but we're sure going to give it a try!"

==See also==


