[[Jason and Iyare]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing, British radio DJs, BBC Radio 1Xtra presenters

Jason and Iyare (born South London and North London respectively) were daytime DJs and presenters on BBC 1Xtra radio, presenting a breakfast show from 6-9am on weekday mornings.

==Jason==

Jason Mitchell is known in London's Hip Hop & R'n'B scene as a co-founder of the DJ team Twice Ez Nice in 1989 With DJ/Producer Ollie Twist. The Duo have DJed at parties for the likes of Destiny's Child and Eminem. Ollie Twist is currently organizing and running Fibre with Kiss FM's Manny Norte, Steve Feelgood and Hasangi at the White House in Clapham Common on the first Wednesday of the month. 

==Iyare==

Iyare Igiehon from Finsbury Park studied Pop Music Studies in Leeds and graduated with 1st class honours. Returning to London he worked as a recording engineer mixing house tunes for Studio 33 in West London. In 2000 he joined Darkerthanblue as online music editor and brand development working on compilation CDs, club tours, talent competitions and online and music editorial. He has also made 4 appearances on the Radio 5 Live show Fighting Talk. He was hilariously referred to as Iyare 'Iguana' during his introduction by host Colin Murray during a show broadcast on 31 January 2009.  He is a devoted fan of Arsenal Football Club.

==Radio==

Jason & Iyare started broadcasting together in 2001 a one hour show called ‘The Presence’ on Monday nights on the Student Broadcast Network, playing hip hop RnB, UK Garage and dancehall for nine months until the launch of BBC 1Xtra. 
The duo have broadcast the Breakfast show at 6am-9am every weekday since the station launched in August 2002. The show is a magazine / lifestyle show which covers everything from new black music, to current in news and entertainment.
In 2006, they set up a separate radio production company called ON IT INDUSTRIES, who produced original radio productions such as the Radio 1Xtra weekday M1X show, as well as various documentaries.

