[[Fred Harman]]

CATEGORIES: 1902 births, 1982 deaths, American comic strip cartoonists, Artists of the American West, People from Burbank, California, People from Archuleta County, Colorado

Fred Harman (February 9, 1902 - January 2, 1982) was an American artist, best known for his popular Red Ryder comic strip, which he drew for 25 years, reaching 40 million readers through 750 newspapers. Harman sometimes used the pseudonym Ted Horn.
Harman was two months old when his parents moved from St. Joseph, Missouri, to Pagosa Springs, Colorado, where he grew up familiar with horses and the ranching lifestyle. His father had previously homesteaded in Pagosa in 1891. Harman dropped out of school after seven years and never had any formal art training.

==Kansas City==

Born Leslie Fred Harman, he worked as a pressman’s helper at The Kansas City Star, he came in contact with the newspaper's art staff. When he was 20 years old, he was employed at the Kansas City Film Ad Company, working with Walt Disney as an animator. Harman and Disney partnered to form their own company but went broke within a year. Harman then went back to Colorado. Harman's brother, Hugh Harman, was also an animator at Disney's Kansas City studio.Reynolds, Moira Davison. Comic Strip Artists in American Newspapers, 1945-1980, McFarland, 2003.
Returning to St. Joseph, home of the Pony Express, Harman created promotional art, book illustrations and film costume designs commemorating the Pony Express, in addition to his work as a catalog illustrator. After he married musician Lola Andrews, the couple had a son in 1927. They moved to St. Paul, Minnesota, where he was a partner in an advertising agency for several years before it failed. He was employed in Iowa for a short time before moving his wife and son to Pagosa Springs where they built a log cabin. In 1933, he moved to Los Angeles where he edited, illustrated and published a Western magazine that collapsed after three issues. Although the Stendahl Art Gallery staged a show of his paintings, none sold.Taos and Santa Fe Painters

==Red Ryder==

Harman self-syndicated his Bronc Peeler strip from 1934 to 1938, finding few takers as he visited various West Coast newspaper offices. When he moved to New York in 1938, he met merchandising entrepreneur Stephen Slesinger and finally found success. He worked with Slesinger to develop Bronc Peeler into Red Ryder, which Slesinger sold to the Newspaper Enterprise Association. It was launched as a Sunday strip November 1938 with the daily strip following four months later. Promoting Red Ryder as "America's famous fighting cowboy", Slesinger began an intensive campaign of merchandising and licensing with a parade of comic books, Big Little Books, novels, serial chapters, radio programs and commercial products and apparel.
In March 1953, Harman embarked on a six-week USO tour, doing chalk talks at camps in England, France, Germany, Italy, Turkey and Africa.Western Treasures

==Cowboy Artists of America==

Harman lived in Albuquerque, New Mexico, while also maintaining his Pagosa Springs ranch. After he retired from the strip in 1964, he turned to painting at his Albuquerque studio. The strip was continued by his former assistant, Bob MacLeod, along with Jim Gary, John Wade Hampton and Edmond Good.
Harman was one of the original 1965 members of the Cowboy Artists of America, along with Joe Beeler, Charlie Dye, John Hampton, and George Phippen; and Harman's paintings were included in the first annual exhibition of the Cowboy Artists of America on September 9, 1966, at the National Cowboy Hall of Fame in Oklahoma City.
Harman died in Phoenix, Arizona, in 1982.

==Awards==

Among other honors, Harman was one of only 75 white men in history to be adopted into the Navajo Nation.Colorado Travel and Recreation Guide In 1958, he received the Sertoma Award as Colorado's Outstanding Citizen.National Cartoonists Society: Fred Harman
The Red Ryder Round-up is an annual July 4 weekend event in Pagosa Springs, home of the Fred Harman Art Museum.Pagosa Daily Post: "Business Spotlight: Fred Harman Art Museum", Pagosa Daily Post, May 1, 2009.

==References==

==External links==


