[[Susie Q (film)]]

CATEGORIES: Disney Channel original films, Teen comedy films, 1996 television films, Films set in 1955, Films set in 1995, American television films, Fantasy-comedy films, Romantic fantasy films, Ghost films, English-language films

Susie Q is a 1995 Super RTL Original movie that aired on Disney Channel frequently in the mid 1990s. Justin Whalin, Amy Jo Johnson and Shelley Long starred. The movie told the story of a teenager dying with her boyfriend on her way to their Winter Formal back in the mid-1950s and coming back to her old house about 40 years later in order to help her parents avoid being kicked out of their trailer park home. Later, Zach (Whalin) moves into Susie's (Johnson) old house, but he is the only one who is able to see Susie.
Disney Channel stopped showing the movie later in the new millennium. It was given a "TV-G" rating, and it was already cut for some profanity, but not all, when it primarily aired on the Disney Channel.Watch Susie Q - Disney Channel Movie Online | Trailer, Reviews, News | Movies | SideReel

==Cast==

==Plot==

In the fictional town of Willow Valley in Washington during the year 1955, teenager Susie Quinn prepares for her prom. She and her date Johnny Angel are oblivious to the fact that an inebriated motorist would soon force their car into a waterway where they subsequently drown. Forty years later, a teenager named Zach Sands moves into that very house with his widowed mother Penny who has a new job as a news reporter. Zach's father had died in a car accident on his way to Zach's basketball game -- and Zach feels so guilty he abandons basketball. Now a student at the local high school, Zach befriends the drama group but also makes enemies of the envious Ray Kovich whose father Roger is a banker.
While fishing with his younger sister Teri, Zach finds a bracelet that causes Susie's ghost to visibly manifest herself before Zach. Eventually, Zach researches Susie and finds that she died 40 years ago. That night, Susie visits Zach again, and proves to him that he is the only one who can see her. Later Susie arrives at Zach's school, where he's distracted by the other girls in school - Susie rips off part of the prom dress she's wearing to get his attention. Susie begs Zach to help her find out what happened to her parents, but while doing so causes a scene in Zach's class. She apologizes, but continues to cause trouble at school and home until Zach agrees to help. 
While visiting Susie's parents, Zach finds out they are facing homelessness at the hands of the local bank because of a missing title deed, and that the bank is demanding an unaffordable $25,000 balloon payment. However, this is only one part of a larger plan, led by Roger Kovich, that would eventually destroy the town. Heading back home, Susie confesses that before she died, her grandfather was looking for the deed for Willow Valley. She reveals to Zach that she still earthbound because of a mistake she had made in having her grandfather rest, rather than help him find the deed that could've secured her family. Teri discovers that much of the town's land legally belongs to the Quinn family, and it becomes a fierce race to the finish as Zach locates the requisite title deed. It draws the attention of the police; meanwhile Roger is warned and makes his own plans. After the police arrest Zach and Teri, Susie manages to save them by scaring the officer in letting them go free.
Finally, Zach and Teri makes it to the local news station in time to give their mother to read what they wrote about the Quinn family's story. The story is broadcast on live television, the bankers give up and apologizes to the Quinns, the Koviches leaves town as an attempt on Roger's part to avoid criminal prosecution, Zach returns to basketball in honor of his late father, and Susie departs to the afterworld from the bridge where she died. Before departing, she gives Zack her bracelet and bids him farewell. In the closing scene, Zach meets a girl who looks identical to Susie and who introduces herself as Maggie.

==Accuracy==

At the beginning of the film, which is based in 1955, a record player is playing Dale Hawkins' version of "Susie Q.". The song was actually not released on vinyl until 1957.Susie Q by Creedence Clearwater Revival Songfacts

==Footnotes==

==External links==


