[[Mark Rowlands]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, 1962 births, Animal rights advocates, British non-fiction writers, Moral philosophers, Philosophers of mind, Welsh philosophers

Mark Rowlands (born 1962) is a Welsh writer and philosopher. He is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Miami, and the author of several books on the philosophy of mind, the moral status of non-human animals, and cultural criticism. He is known within academic philosophy as one of the principal architects of the view known as vehicle externalism, or the extended mind. His works include Animal Rights (1998), The Body in Mind (1999), The Nature of Consciousness (2001), Animals Like Us (2002), and a personal memoir, The Philosopher and the Wolf (2008)."Faculty", Department of Philosophy, University of Miami, accessed 1 June 2012.
Rowlands was born in Newport, Wales and began his undergraduate degree in engineering at the University of Manchester before changing to philosophy. He took his doctorate in philosophy from the University of Oxford, and has held various academic positions in philosophy in Britain, Ireland and the United States."Mark Rowlands", markrowlandsauthor.com, accessed 1 June 2012.
His best known work is his international best-selling memoir, The Philosopher and the Wolf, about the decade he spent living and travelling with a wolf. As Jonathan Derbyshire wrote in his Guardian review, "it is perhaps best described as the autobiography of an idea, or rather a set of related ideas, about the relationship between human and non-human animals."Derbyshire, Jonathan. 'Wild about the wolf', The Guardian, 29 November 2008 Julian Baggini wrote in the Financial Times that it was "a remarkable portrait of the bond that can exist between a human being and a beast."Baggini, Julian. 'Stances with wolves', The Financial Times, 22 November 2008 Mark Vernon writing in The Times Literary Supplement added that it "could become a philosophical cult classic."Vernon, Mark. 'Mark Rowlands and his wild lessons in externalism', The Times Literary Supplement, 31 December 2008

==Bibliography==

==References==

==Further reading==


