[[Madeleine Bunting]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Alumni of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, British journalists, British women journalists, Critics of work and the work ethic, English people of Scottish descent, Harvard University staff, The Guardian journalists, Year of birth missing (living people)

Madeleine Bunting is an English journalist and writer who is an Associate Editor and has been a columnist on The Guardian.

==Life history==

Born in Oswaldkirk, North Yorkshire, Bunting was educated at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where she read History, and won a Knox postgraduate fellowship to study Politics and teach at Harvard. After a period working for Brook Productions (1988–89) she joined The Guardian taking up posts as a news reporter, leader writer, religious affairs editor, associate editor and regular columnist.
Bunting was appointed Director of the London based think tank Demos in June 2006 and took up her position at the beginning of September. The following month she resigned, owing to differences with the trustees over the direction of the organisation. Bunting returned to her old position at The Guardian and  wrote a history of an area where she grew up.Stephen Brook "Bunting returns to the Guardian", The Guardian website, 19 October 2006. Retrieved on 9 May 2007. The Plot was published by Granta in 2010.
Madeleine Bunting was formerly married to Patrick Wintour, political editor of The Guardian.

==Views==

Madeleine Bunting is noted for her advocacy of religious belief from a liberal position and her antipathy to atheism, claiming that new atheists' antipathy to religion makes it impossible for them to criticise religion effectively.Madeleine Bunting "The New Atheists loathe religion far too much to plausibly challenge it", The Guardian, 7 May 2007. Retrieved on 9 May 2007. Bunting has been accused of quoting Sam Harris misleadinglyMisquoting Harris and Austin Cline claims Bunting's real concern is that critics of religion might be correct and criticism of religion might cause religion to decline even more than has already happened.Madeleine Bunting: Atheists Shouldn't Criticize Religion, By Austin Cline
However, Madeleine Bunting has been very critical of abuse committed within the Catholic Church in IrelandAn abuse too far by the Catholic church and elsewhere in the world.  Bunting believes the moral authority of the Roman Catholic Church is irreversibly compromised.An inquiry is vital, but the church's moral authority is lost for ever

==Bibliography==

==References==

==External links==


