[[Michael Ingham (footballer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1980 births, Living people, People from Preston, Lancashire, English footballers, Association footballers from Northern Ireland, Northern Ireland youth international footballers, Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers, Northern Ireland international footballers, Association football goalkeepers, Cliftonville F.C. players, Sunderland A.F.C. players, Carlisle United F.C. players, Stoke City F.C. players, Stockport County F.C. players, Darlington F.C. players, York City F.C. players, Wrexham F.C. players, Doncaster Rovers F.C. players, Hereford United F.C. players, NIFL Premiership players, The Football League players, Football Conference players, People educated at St Malachy's College

Michael Gerard Ingham (born 9 July 1980) is a professional footballer who plays for York City as a goalkeeper.
Ingham started his career with Northern Irish side Cliftonville before moving to England with Sunderland in the FA Premier League in 1999. He was loaned out by the club on eight occasions before eventually joining former loan club Wrexham on a permanent deal in 2005. After leaving the club in 2007 he joined Hereford United, where he made one appearance, and subsequently dropped into non-League football with York City. He played for them in the 2009 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium and after gaining the captaincy in 2010 he returned to Wembley to play in the 2010 Conference Premier play-off Final. Ingham was victorious with York in the 2012 FA Trophy Final and the 2012 Conference Premier play-off Final at Wembley, the latter meaning the club was promoted to League Two.
Born in England, Ingham has represented Northern Ireland at international level. He was capped once by the under-18 team before winning four caps for the under-21s in 2001. He earned three caps for Northern Ireland, gaining his first against Germany in 2005. He was last capped against Wales in 2007.

==Club career==

===Early career===

Ingham was born in Preston, Lancashire to a Northern Irish family. Despite being born in England, he was educated in Northern Ireland and studied A-levels at St. Malachy's College. As a teenager, he lived near the ground of Irish League Premier Division side Cliftonville, and played for amateur sides Newington Youth Club and Malachians in the Northern Amateur Football League before starting his career with Cliftonville in 1998. He won the Irish FA Charity Shield and made 35 appearances during the 1998–99 season after replacing Paul Reece as the team's goalkeeper.

===Sunderland===

Having been watched by a number of clubs Ingham joined newly-promoted FA Premier League club Sunderland for a fee of £30,000 on 28 July 1999 following a trial in February.[ref]
