[[Bio Ritmo]]

CATEGORIES: Salsa music groups, Musicians from Virginia, Salsa musicians, Musical groups established in the 1990s

Bio Ritmo "Salsa Machine" is a salsa band based in Richmond, Virginia formed in 1991. The name Bio Ritmo is a Spanglish word play on the term Biorhythm, the hypothetical description for the rhythm of life.Batanga - Issues 7-10 -2004 -  Page 80 " Inside The Ellington is a different world as Bio Ritmo plays its sizzling salsa and the dance floor fills with cheerful dancers ... Formed in 1991, "just wanting to jam these rhythms," as lead singer and composer Rai Alvarez puts it, Bio Ritmo has ...
The eight to ten member ensemble is known for a classic Nuyorican salsa sound made famous by the Fania All Stars in the 1970s that combines African Caribbean rhythms from son, bomba, plena, and  samba with electronica and big band brass.
Founded in the early 1990s, they started out as a part of the Virginia college band scene that included other, then indie, acts like Dave Matthews Band and Fighting Gravity.
In November 2004, the Salsa Machine won the Disc Makers Independent Music World Series (IMWS) Northeast finals held at The Lion's Den in New York City and earned the title of "Top Independent Act in the Northeast." They were finalists in the 2004 Independent Music Awards – Latin Category.
Following their critically acclaimed 2003 self-titled release, Bio Ritmo released its EP, Salsa System, produced by legendary engineer/producer and 18-time Grammy Award winner, Jon Fausty.  In September 2008, Bio Ritmo  released their  LP "Bionico", recorded by Lance Koehler and mixed and mastered by Jon Fausty.
In September 2011, Bio Ritmo released their latest LP, "La Verdad" on CD and Vinyl, celebrating 20 years of original salsa music.

==The band==

==Discography==

==Performances==

Bio Ritmo has toured the United States extensively and has also performed in Canada, Puerto Rico, France, and the Republic of Georgia.
Bio Ritmo has shared the stage with Mambo King, Tito Puente, as well as Poncho Sanchez, Squirrel Nut Zippers, Timbalaye, Tambo, Ozomatli, Steel Pulse, Burning Spear, Morphine, G Love and Special Sauce, Wilco, Southern Culture on the Skids, Frankie Vazquez, La Familia Quintero, La Sonora Ponceña, Bloque 53, and Diabloson.
January 14, 2006, Bio Ritmo performed at the Inaugural Ball for Commonwealth of Virginia Governor Tim Kaine in Williamsburg, Virginia at the College of William & Mary.
August 2010 Bio Ritmo toured The Republic of Georgia and performed for President Saakashvili
September 2011 Bio Ritmo performed in Dax, France at the Toros y Salsa festival.
On September 23, 2011 Bio Ritmo celebrated its 20th anniversary.

==References==

==External links==


