[[Adriano Vieira Louzada]]

CATEGORIES: 1979 births, Living people, People from Rio Branco, Brazilian footballers, Association football forwards, Campeonato Brasileiro Série A footballers, Associação Portuguesa de Desportos players, Sociedade Esportiva Palmeiras players, Esporte Clube Vitória players, Cruzeiro Esporte Clube players, Sport Club do Recife players, Esporte Clube Santo André players, Grêmio Barueri Futebol players, Primeira Liga players, Segunda Liga players, C.D. Nacional players, F.C. Porto players, S.C. Braga players, U.D. Oliveirense players, Brazilian expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in Portugal, Brazilian expatriates in Portugal

Adriano Vieira Louzada, simply known as Adriano (born 3 January 1979), is a Brazilian professional footballer who plays for Rio Branco Football Club as a striker.
He spent most of his professional career in Portugal, amassing Primeira Liga totals of 145 games and 62 goals over the course of seven seasons in representation of Nacional, Porto and Braga, and winning five major titles with the second.

==Football career==

Adriano was born in Rio Branco, Acre. He started playing in 1998 for Associação Portuguesa de Desportos then went on to represent, in his country, Sociedade Esportiva Palmeiras. 
Switching to Portugal in 2002, Adriano began playing with Madeira's C.D. Nacional. After a quick return stint in Brazil with Cruzeiro Esporte Clube, he joined F.C. Porto in January 2006, and gradually made his way into the starting eleven, helping the northern club win the national league and also scoring the winning goal in that year's Portuguese Cup final.
After Lisandro López's conversion into the striker position, Adriano lost his starting job, but was often brought in from the bench. In August 2008 he was due for a transfer to fellow top-divisioner C.F. Os Belenenses; however, he refused, choosing to stay at Porto and fight for a place, but did not appear in a single competitive game throughout the 2008–09 season.
In late August 2009, with his chances to play for Porto virtually none, Adriano arranged for a release from his contract, and soon moved to fellow league side S.C. Braga. He appeared rarely for the second-placed team, being released in June 2010 and returning to his country.

==Honours==

==External links==


