[[Thomas Gardiner Corcoran]]

CATEGORIES: 1900 births, 1981 deaths, Franklin D. Roosevelt Administration personnel, People from Pawtucket, Rhode Island, Harvard Law School alumni, American people of Irish descent, Rhode Island lawyers, Law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States, United States presidential advisors, People associated with the New Deal

Thomas Gardiner Corcoran (1900–1981) was one of severalE.T. O'Donnell's "1001 Things Everyone Should Know About Irish American History" advisors in President Franklin D. Roosevelt's brain trust during the New Deal, and later, a close friend and advisor to President Lyndon B. Johnson. 

==Life and career==

Corcoran was born in Pawtucket, Rhode Island, and educated at Brown University (where he was class valedictorian)Brown Alumni Magazine - The Power Broker and Harvard Law School. He clerked for Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. at the United States Supreme Court in 1926-27. In 1932, after practicing corporate law in New York, Corcoran joined the Reconstruction Finance Corporation. When Roosevelt began to take notice of his efforts, Corcoran was given a wider range of responsibilities than his official position as assistant general counsel allowed. He organized administrative agencies for various New Deal programs and assisted in drafting such legislation as the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938. A protégé of Felix Frankfurter, Corcoran was considered the leader of the "New Dealers," a group of young lawyers that became prominent within the Roosevelt administration in the wake of the renewed economic recession of 1937.Alan Brinkley The End of Reform. Vintage Books. 1996. p. 51
Much of his work during the New Deal was in conjunction with Benjamin V. Cohen. Together Corcoran and Cohen were known as the "Gold Dust Twins" and were on the cover of Time Magazine's September 12, 1938 edition.Time magazine, September 12, 1938 Nicknamed "Tommy the Cork" by Roosevelt, Corcoran was the outgoing yang to Cohen's shy and retiring yin.  Eventually Corcoran, who as an Irish Catholic did not favor pro-British policies, had a falling out with Roosevelt.Robert Caro The Years of Lyndon Johnson: The Path to Power. Alfred A. Knopf 1982, p. 670.
After leaving the White House, Corcoran retained enormous influence in the administration, in part because of high appointees who owed their positions to him. Corcoran went into private practice as a lawyer along with former FCC chief counsel William J. Dempsey, whom Corcoran had installed in that job in 1938. Dempsey and Corcoran managed the take-over of New York radio station WMCA for Corcoran's friend, Undersecretary of Commerce Edward J. Noble. This resulted in an FCC and Congressional investigation.
Corcoran's work after leaving government service led him to be dubbed the first of the modern lobbyists.David Mckean, "Peddling Influence: Thomas "Tommy the Cork" Corcoran and the Birth of Modern Lobbying" From 1945 through 1947, President Harry S. Truman apparently ordered Corcoran's phones tapped.Allan J. Lichtman, "Tommy the Cork: the secret world of Washington's first modern lobbyist", Washington Monthly, February 1987 The transcripts of the wiretaps were deposited in the Truman Presidential library and released to researchers upon Corcoran's death in 1981. The evidence is that Truman's aide ordered the tap, but it was then rescinded by the president.Harry S. Truman Papers: President's Secretary's Files

==References==


