[[Magi in fantasy fiction and games]]

CATEGORIES: Fantasy tropes, Fantasy games, Fictional characters who use magic

A "Mage" is a character archetype commonly found in fantasy settings that entail the use of magic. Mage, rather than magus, is the spelling generally used to describe magic-wielding characters in role-playing games and fiction. In the English language, the term "mage" is used as a gender-neutral word for a character who can cast magic spells.

==Usage==

Mages are generally portrayed as people who have the ability to control or wield the forces of magic. The term is popularly used in fantasy settings that involve magic. In the paper role-playing games, magic-using individuals appear in Mage: The Ascension and Dungeons & Dragons. In the game Ars Magica, the main characters are known as magi. Mages are sometimes in role-playing video games as playable character classes and/or non-player characterss (NPCs) such as Ultima, Final Fantasy, Dragon Warrior, Diablo, World of Warcraft, Ragnarok Online, and Everquest. Sometimes, other classes in those games also use magic, though they are not habitually referred to as mages. Mages aren't always people who perform magic for entertainment. In some games, a mage may also be known as a wizard, sorceress, or witch, or they may advance to different positions on tiers. In many fantasy settings, the term relates to character that rely almost exclusively on their spells to solve problems.

==Fantasy books==

The British novelist John Fowles wrote two versions of a novel titled The Magus.

==Gaming==

Many references to the three magi can be found in various games and shows. 
In the dystopian future setting of Warhammer 40,000, the title Magos is applied to certain high-ranking members of the Adeptus Mechanicus, a mystical organization that has a monopoly on most forms of advanced technology within the Imperium of Man.
In the English translation of the video game Chrono Trigger, the three Gurus, of Life, Time, and Reason, are also named after the Magi and, through the course of the game, give key items to the player. Furthermore, one of the game's main characters is named Magus, and another Cyrus.

==Television==

In the Neon Genesis Evangelion anime/manga series, a supercomputer (called "MAGI") is divided in three distinct parts, all of which are named after the Magi. Mages are people who have the ability to control or wield the forces of magic. 
There is a Magus (called "Magus" or "The Magus") in early episodes of the television series Gargoyles.
The Manga series Negima! Magister Negi Magi is the story of a young wizard in training to become a Magister Magi.

==Comics==

Mage is also the title of a comic book series created and owned by Matt Wagner. The series' central character, Kevin Matchstick, is drawn into a world of magic and Arthurian legends whilst wielding a mystic baseball bat.

==Movies==

The character John Constantine from the Hellblazer graphic novels is sometimes referred to as a magus.
In the 1999 movie The Mummy, the people who guard Imhotep's burial site are often mistakenly referred to as Magi; however, the term actually used is Medjay, an unrelated word used in ancient Egypt to refer to the bodyguards of a Pharaoh. 
The book of novus lists magus as the imperial lord of dragons.

