[[Myron Magnet]]

CATEGORIES: 1944 births, Living people, American magazine editors, American political writers, Phillips Exeter Academy alumni, National Humanities Medal recipients, 20th-century American writers, 21st-century American writers, 20th-century historians, 21st-century historians

Myron James Magnet (b. 1944) is an American journalist and historian. He was the editor of City Journal from 1994 to 2007 and is now the magazine's Editor-at-Large. Manhattan Institute Scholar | Myron Magnet
His latest book, The Founders at Home: The Building of America, 1735-1817, has recently been published by W. W. Norton.The Founders at Home: The Building of America, 1735-1817, W. W. Norton & Company The richly illustrated book is a history of the American Founding told through a series of pithy biographies, which dramatize not only what these extraordinary men did but also what they believed and intended, as evidenced by their letters and other writings, as well as by the houses they built and often designed themselves, concrete embodiments of the vision of domestic life they wanted to ensure for all Americans. 

==Biography==

Myron Magnet served as editor of City Journal from 1994 to 2007, and is now its editor-at-large. Under his editorship, the magazine helped shape Rudy Giuliani's agenda as mayor of New York City. Fred Kaplan, "Conservatives plant a seed in NYC: Think tank helps Giuliani set his agenda", Boston Sunday Globe, February 22, 1998 Janny Scott, “Promoting Its Ideas, the Manhattan Institute Has Nudged New York Rightward", The New York Times, May 12, 1997 Magnet has also served as a member of the Board of Editors at Fortune magazine, a publication for which he wrote numerous articles on social policy, management, and finance after joining its staff in 1980, in addition to publishing essays or op-eds in Commentary, The Washington Monthly, The Wall Street Journal, and The New York Times, among other publications. 
The author of several books, he is well known for writing The Dream and the Nightmare: The Sixties' Legacy to the Underclass, which President George W. Bush has cited as a profound influence on his approach to public policy. Ken Ringle, "The Hard Heart Of Poverty; Bush's'Compassionate Conservative' Guru Sees Culture as Culprit", The Washington Post, April 3,2001 Jackie Calmes, "Bush Looks to Gain SupportOn the Trail in New Hampshire",The Wall Street Journal, January 5, 2000 The central premise of the book is that culture powerfully shapes economic and social outcomes, and the dramatic cultural transformation that the United States experienced during the 1960s unintentionally created an entrenched underclass, whose societal maladies are still with us.
In November, 2008, President Bush awarded Magnet the National Humanities Medal "for scholarship and visionary influence in renewing our national culture of compassion. He has combined literary and cultural history with a profound understanding of contemporary urban life to examine new ways of relieving poverty and renewing civic institutions."“President and Mrs. Bush Attend Presentation of the 2008 National Medals of Arts and National Humanities Medals”, The White House, November 17, 2008
Magnet graduated from Phillips Exeter Academy in 1962.  He holds bachelor's degrees from both Columbia University (1966) and the University of Cambridge, as well an M.A. from Cambridge and a Ph.D. in English Literature from Columbia University. He has taught at Columbia and at Middlebury College. Biography, MyronMagnet.com

==Bibliography==

Books Written
Books Edited

==External links==

==References==


