[[Ocean Township School District (Ocean County, New Jersey)]]

CATEGORIES: New Jersey District Factor Group CD, School districts in Ocean County, New Jersey

The Ocean Township School District is a community public school district that serves students from Ocean Township, in  Ocean County, New Jersey, United States which serves 536 students in Pre-Kindergarten through 6th grade (as of the 2008-09 school year). 
As of the 2008-09 school year, the district's two schools had an enrollment of 536 students and 55.0 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 9.7.District information for the Ocean Township School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed February 17, 2011.
The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "CD", the sixth highest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed October 27, 2009.
For grades 7 through 12, public school students attend the Southern Regional Middle School (grades 7 and 8) and Southern Regional High School (grades 9 - 12). These schools are part of the Southern Regional School District, which serves the five municipalities in the Long Beach Island Consolidated School District — Barnegat Light, Harvey Cedars, Long Beach Township, Ship Bottom and Surf City — along with students from Beach Haven and Stafford Township, together with the sending district of Ocean Township.Southern Regional High School 2010 Report Card Narrative, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed April 1, 2011. "Situated in Manahawkin, the Southern Regional School District draws from the constituent districts of Long Beach Township, Beach Haven, Surf City, Ship Bottom, Barnegat Light, Harvey Cedars and Stafford Township, as well as the tuition sending district of Ocean Township (Waretown)." Both schools are in Manahawkin.

==Schools==

Schools in the district (with 2008-09 enrollment data from the National Center for Education StatisticsData for the Ocean Township School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed February 16, 2011.) are:Contact, Ocean Township School District. Accessed April 6, 2011.

==Administration==

Core members of the district's administration are:Ocean County School Directory, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed November 5, 2009.

==References==

==External links==


