[[Australian Transport Safety Bureau]]

CATEGORIES: Organizations investigating aviation accidents and incidents, Commonwealth Government agencies of Australia, Rail accident investigators, Transport safety, 1999 establishments in Australia, Funding bodies of Australia, Organisations based in Canberra

The Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) is Australia’s national transport safety investigator. The ATSB is the federal government body responsible for investigating transport-related accidents and incidents within Australia.  It covers air, sea and rail travel. The Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) is an independent Commonwealth Government statutory Agency. The ATSB is governed by a Commission and is entirely separate from transport regulators, policy makers and service providers. Its headquarters are located in the 62 Northbourne Avenue building in Canberra, Australian Capital Territory."Contact Us." Australian Transport Safety Bureau. Retrieved January 2011. "Canberra (Central Office) Street address: 62 Northbourne Avenue Canberra ACT 2601" It has field offices in Adelaide, Brisbane, and Perth. It has about 110 employees, including about 60 investigators of aviation, marine, and rail accidents and incidents."Overview of the ATSB." (Archive) Australian Transport Safety Bureau. Consulté le 4 septémbre 2012.
The ATSB contributes to transport safety by independently investigating, analysing and openly reporting on transport safety matters. All ATSB investigations are "no blame" – the emphasis is on learning to improve future safety.
The ATSB is entirely separate from transport regulatory authorities such as the Civil Aviation Safety Authority (CASA), the Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA) and state and territory rail safety regulators, and also from service providers such as Airservices Australia and the Australian Rail Track Corporation (ARTC).
ATSB transport safety investigations exercise statutory powers delegated by the Chief Commissioner in accordance with the provisions of the Transport Safety Investigation Act 2003 (TSI Act). The TSI Act allows the ATSB to investigate transport safety matters in the aviation, marine and rail transport modes within the Australian Government's constitutional jurisdiction and to release transport safety information, including investigation reports that detail the findings and significant factors that led to a particular transport safety occurrence.
Under the provisions of the TSI Act, ATSB investigators may interview anyone involved directly or indirectly in a transport safety occurrence. A comprehensive regime of provisions within the TSI Act is in place to maintain the confidentiality of, and legal protection for, a range of sensitive safety information gathered by ATSB investigators.

==Other countries==

==References==

==External links==


