[[Xavier Institute of Social Service]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in Jharkhand, Business schools in Jharkhand, Education in Ranchi

Xavier Institute of Social Service ('XISS) is an educational institute in Ranchi, India. It was established as an extension department of St. Xavier's College, Ranchi, in 1955 with the objective of training young men and women in Rural Development, Personnel Management and Industrial Relations. In 1973 the institute was registered as a separate educational society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. In 1978, it moved to its present site. XISS was established with the mission to develop human resources for various sectors such as industries, business, rural development, health care etc. in the Chota Nagpur region.
In 1973, the Institute was registered as a Separate Educational Society under the Societies Registration Act. It is one of the premier management schools of India in the fields of Personnel Management, Rural Development, Information Management and lately even Marketing and Finance. It is now ranked among the top 50 Indian business schools, and is one of the top two in the state.
The institute is known in the corporate world for its Post Graduate program in Human Resource Management with leading multinationals and Indian companies coming for campus interviews. The alumni of the institute work in Global Holding Corporation, IBM, Punj Lloyd, Honda Motors, Ceat, Tata AIA Life, Jindal Steel, Kotak Life, GE, Pepsi, Coke, Cisco, TCS, Alstom, Kotak Mahindra Bank, ICICI Bank, ICICI Prudential Life, Ernst and Young, Nomura, Citibank, DELL, Infosys, Wipro etc.
XISS belongs to the same fraternity as  XIM Bhubneshwar.
XISS Post Graduate course in Rural Development(PGDRD)course is well known in the sector. 
Over fifty years, the alumni of XISS have spread their roots not only in India but across the globe. The alumni network, with its reach and power, make it one of the Institute’s valued assets.
XISS has a sprawling campus spread in [tpl]convert|14|acre|m2[/tpl] with a built-up area of approximately [tpl]convert|72000|sqft|m2[/tpl] in the heart of Ranchi. The Institute provides hostel facility to 100 female students. The Institute has quite spacious classrooms with all modern teaching aids. Moreover there are separate common rooms for boys and girls, cafeteria and refectory, staff room, seminar rooms, conference halls, staff lounge and a well furnished air-conditioned auditorium with a seating capacity of 300 persons.
The Institute has a very well stocked library containing over 34,000 volumes of books, journals, encyclopedias, almanacs and magazines. It subscribes to more than 150 periodicals and journals. The faculty and students can access over 150 online international journals which are available through institutional subscription.
The Institute has a state-of-the-art computer lab that hosts over 210 terminals with necessary hardware support in synchronization with the needs. The Wi-Fi enabled campus sets the tone for 24x7 global connectivity. From July 2006, Institute has allotted laptops to every faculty member and students of the 1st year of PM, RD, IM, Marketing and Finance. 
XISS is ranked 6th in East and 31st in all India according to Outlook MDRA B-Schools Ranking 2010 and Business Today 2010 ranked XISS on 36th position in India.

==External links==


