[[George Manross]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Year of birth missing (living people), University of Southern California alumni

George Gary Manross, Ph.D., is a behavioral scientist with more than 25 years experience in marketing and communications management, marketing consulting, political consulting, and in applied research (marketing research, policy research, and political research). He is the Chairman and CEO of the Strategy Research Institute located in Fullerton, California.  A leader in designing and conducting public opinion surveys, Dr. Manross is an influential figure in California politics.  He is somewhat controversial in his field, implementing innovative methods.  Despite the criticism, Dr. Manross' results are often astonishingly accurate.
Prior to founding SRI, Dr. Manross held executive-level positions with two Fortune 500 companies, as well as with the largest state trade association in America, the California Association of Realtors, and the largest public relations agency in the world, Hill & Knowlton, Inc. He began his career as Business Editor for a metropolitan daily newspaper.
Dr. Manross has taught at UCLA and at USC, and was Associate Professor of Communications in the California State University system, where he held a joint appointment in Advertising and Public Relations. He was the head of the Advertising Sequence when he left academe; during this period, he taught courses in applied research, integrated marketing communications (IMC), management, advertising, and public relations at both the undergraduate and graduate levels.
Dr. Manross' publishing record includes numerous refereed academic journals, including the top-ranked paper internationally in the Human Communications Technology Group of the International Communication Association (ICA), which was subsequently published as a chapter in Communication Yearbook 10.
His research is routinely cited in both the scholarly and popular press and in classic textbooks, such as Diffusion of Innovations (Everett M. Rogers, 1995, 4th ed., Free Press, N.Y.). Dr. Manross is senior author of a paper with Dr. Rogers that will soon be submitted to the Harvard Business Review. He also authored a book entitled: The Impact of Theory-driven Public Opinion Research in Strategic Planning for Winning Campaigns, Carlton Press, NY.
His academic credentials include a Ph.D. in Communication Research from the Annenberg School for Communication at the University of Southern California, in addition to two MA degrees (one in communication management and one in communication theory), and a BA degree in Public Relations from the University of Southern California
Dr. Manross recently conducted influential polls for the 2006 November election cycle in the State of California.  For example, his findings that predicted an overwhelming victory for Chuck Reed was scoffed at by the media until Reed defeated his opponent, Cindy Chavez, by 19 points to become the mayor of San Jose;  and, a $1.7 billion sales tax measure dedicated to public transportation and public transit in Fresno County, which was driven by the "findings" from two SRI voter surveys, received 77.7% voter support.

==External links==


