[[Milenka Peña]]

CATEGORIES: American television personalities, Year of birth missing (living people), Living people

Milenka Peña is a popular television and radio journalist and newscaster in the Chicago area, also well known in many Latin-American countries. She began her career in broadcasting communications, music and acting at a very early age in Bolivia, her native country, making her debut as an entertainer and performer on both national and international levels since she was only four years old.
Years later, while completing her professional studies in Broadcasting Communications and Journalism, Milenka continued her career as the producer, announcer and on-air host of several well-known radio and television programs, as well as hosting a variety of events and contributing as a writer to magazines and newspapers.
In 1997 Milenka became a member of the News Department of Telemundo Chicago, the Hispanic branch of the NBC Network.
She was the recipient of many important recognitions, among them, an EMMY AWARDS nomination for Outstanding Achievement for Individual Excellence in Camera as Best News Anchor, given by the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences and a First Place Silver Dome Award by the Illinois News Broadcasters Association. In addition, she has constantly participated as the official Mistress of Ceremony and host of numerous events and presentations, both live and broadcast, also performing as a singer and entertainer.
Milenka is also a proficient writer and conferencist, being invited to speak in different national and international events and conferences, and she is a member of the American Association of Christian Counselors. In her personal time, Milenka is an active member and leader of Calvary Church of Naperville, Illinois, where she belonged to the Music and Arts Ministry, and helps as a teacher and a liaison to support Hispanic missions and organizations.
She currently works as the Continental Media Director of Global Freedom Concepts and El Instituto para la Cultura Financiera, organizations founded by Dr. Andres Panasiuk, dedicated to equip people worldwide to learn, apply, and teach solid principles about wholesome financial administration.
Milenka also coordinates the Spanish Broadcasting of Moody Radio Chicago, as well as directing and hosting “Nuevo Pulso con Milenka Peña”, a weekly radio show that focuses on issues currently facing the Latino culture. The program also offers music, humor, contests and interviews with relevant guests, providing the Hispanic audience with a family-friendly alternative.
She is also one of the main guest hosts of the Spanish broadcasting of Focus on the Family, "Enfoque a la Familia", reaching an international audience of more than 50 million people; as well as the producer and host of international TV and radio projects with various networks, like CBN, the Christian Broadcasting Network, Genesis TV and others.
Milenka is married to Van DenHartog, Founder of Big Bounce Party Zone, Inc. They have two boys, Brandon and Dylan.

==External links and references==

Milenka Hosts "Nuevo Pulso"
Milenka joins Moody Radio Chicago
New Addition to GFC - Milenka Peña as Continental Media Director


