[[Stand Up and Cheer!]]

CATEGORIES: 1934 films, American films, Black-and-white films, Films directed by Hamilton MacFadden, 1930s musical films, 20th Century Fox films

Stand Up and Cheer! is a 1934 American musical film directed by Hamilton MacFadden.  The screenplay by Lew Brown and Ralph Spence was based upon a story idea by Will Rogers and Philip Klein.   The film is about efforts undertaken during the Great Depression to boost the morale of the country.  It is essentially a vehicle for a string of vaudeville acts and a few musical numbers. This film is best known for providing the first big breakthrough role for legendary child actress Shirley Temple. A little known bit player prior to this movie, by the end of the year, she would appear in 10 movies, including 4 starring roles in major feature length films. 

==Production==

During production the film was known as Fox Follies.Variety, February 22, 1934 Perhaps the most memorable scene in the movie was the song and dance number by Dunn and Temple titled Baby Take a Bow. Temple, who was signed to a $150/week contract initially guaranteed for just two weeks while the film was in full production, did not have enough time to learn the dance routine for the film and instead used a routine she learned from Meglin's. Dunn then learned the routine from her. In recording the sound track for the song, her voice accidentally cracked on the last note but the producers actually liked it and kept it in. Prior to filming the dance routine, she slipped and fell while walking in, cutting her head. To remedy this, her mother covered the cut with a spit curl. As filming of the dance number started, Temple's potential quickly became apparent. By the time she was finished, she was brought straight into Fox Film offices and had her contract extended to a year with a seven year option. The number became so popular, that it would serve as the title to a later Temple film of the same name. Shirley Temple Black, "Child Star: An Autobiography," (New York: McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, 1988), 32-36.

==Plot==

The President of the United States decides that the true cause of the Great Depression (raging when the film was released) is a loss of "optimism" as a result of a plot by financiers and bankers who are getting rich from the Depression. The President then appoints Lawrence Cromwell as secretary for the newly created Department of Amusement. Cromwell creates an army of entertainers and sends them out across the country. Much of the action centers around Cromwell auditioning acts in his office (with interruptions from janitor "George Bernard Shaw" played by Steppin Fetchit). At the end, as a musical production number breaks forth, Cromwell looks out of his office window and sees the Depression literally, instantaneously lift.

==Trivia==

Lew Brown who served as both producer and scriptwriter can also be heard in the film. Brown performs an impression of Jimmy Durante, his voice dubbed over footage of a penguin that interacts with Stepin Fetchit.

==Cast==

==Release==

===Critical response===

Upon release the film was given a strong endorsement by Variety, especially the work of "newcomer" Shirley Temple, whom they cited as the film's "unofficial star."Variety, April 24, 1934 Although modern scholars often point to the film as an example of typical Great Depression entertainment, Variety expressed reservations about its theme. "This musical is a hodge-podge principally handicapped by a national depression premise. Americans now like to think of themselves in the light of being on the upturn and having rounded that long-awaited corner, so Cheer's plot motivation is basically questionable and open to debate."Variety, April 24, 1934
The film had eleven minutes of footage deleted for modern home video release, most of it racial in nature. In 2009, the film was available on both videocassette and DVD in the original black-and-white version and a computer-colorized version of the original.  Some versions included theatrical trailers and other special features.

==Merchandise==

The polka dot dress worn by Shirley Temple in her song and dance number with Dunn served as the model of the dress used on the first Shirley Temple dolls made by toy manufacturer Ideal in 1934. In 1958, Temple's television show, Shirley Temple's Storybook went into production.  At that time, she persuaded various manufacturers to release ancillary merchandise including the Baby Take a Bow polka-dot dress (Edwards 233).

==References==

==External links==


