[[Earth Water]]

CATEGORIES: Beverage companies of Canada

Earth Water International is a bottled water company, started in Canada, which donates all of their net profits from the sale of Earth Water to the United Nations’ UNHCR.  The money raised goes to funding projects related to acquisition, transport, storage, and distribution of fresh clean water, focusing on both emergency provision and developing sustainable water sources for people living in poverty.
Earth Water was started by a young Kori Chilibek, fresh out of University.  His vision, if people are going to consume bottled water, why not use those monies to help provide clean drinking water for those who don't have access to it.
In 2006, Earth Water's donations went to the Darfur region with additional projects planned for Brazil, Thailand, India and New Orleans in the near future.
Earth Water is available in 500 ml (16oz) as well as 1 ltr (33oz) bottles.
In 2007, Earth Water International began testing both a Biodegradable bottle as well as other alternative packaging options in different markets around the world.
Earth Water International has also attempted to stay away from selling mass quantity packaging for rock bottom pricing, believing that packaged water should be consumed not as a convenience at home, but rather when on the move during a busy lifestyle.
In June 2007, Earth Water also began printing all of their marketing material on FSC paper, which avoids the use of old growth forests for pulp and paper production.
Earth Water is available in Europe, Canada and the United States.  A complete list of countries and stores are available on their website.
Earth Water has recently gained considerable attention from the food industry for their effective engagement of supporters in a campaign called "Join US".  The message revolves around their company's mantra "If you had the chance, would you change the world?"
The foundation of the "Join US" movement, revolves around the consumer directly asking retailers to cary the Earth Water brand.  The media has reported that both consumers and retailers have found this process to be extremely effective in helping to both raise the profile of Earth Water, but equally raise money for the less fortunate.

==References==

==External links==


