[[Scott Laird]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, 1988 births, People from Taunton, English footballers, English people of Scottish descent, England semi-pro international footballers, Scottish footballers, Scotland youth international footballers, Plymouth Argyle F.C. players, Tiverton Town F.C. players, Torquay United F.C. players, Stevenage F.C. players, Preston North End F.C. players, The Football League players, Football Conference players, Southern Football League players

Scott Benjamin Laird (born in 15 May 1988) is a defender who plays for League One side Preston North End. 
Laird began his football career as a trainee at Plymouth Argyle, progressing through the club's centre of excellence. He spent a total of eight years on the club's books, but only managed to make one first–team appearance for the club. In 2006, he was loaned out to Tiverton Town, playing a total of 20 games for the club, scoring four times. He was later loaned to Torquay United in September 2007, making two appearances for the side. Another loan spell followed, this time to Stevenage in late 2007. Laird impressed under manager Peter Taylor and signed on a permanent basis at the start of February 2008 for an undisclosed fee. 
He has been a first–team regular since his move, and was the club's Player of the Year for the 2009–10 season, a season in which the Hertfordshire side won promotion to the Football League for the first time in their history. His success as a Stevenage player continued the following season, as he played an integral role in the club's 2010–11 campaign, helping Stevenage earn promotion to League One. He left Stevenage when his contract expired in 2012, and joined Preston North End. Laird has also represented Scotland at youth level, captaining the Scotland U16 team. However, Laird was called up for the England C side in April 2009, starting in a game against the Belgium U21 team.

==Club career==

===Early career===

Laird began his football career as a trainee at Plymouth Argyle's centre of excellence. He made the hour journey to Plymouth from his Bridgwater home to train with the club every Tuesday and Thursday.[ref]
