[[Papa, Can You Hear Me?]]

CATEGORIES: 1983 songs, Songs from films, Barbra Streisand songs, Nina Simone songs, Songs with lyrics by Alan Bergman, Songs with lyrics by Marilyn Bergman, Songs with music by Michel Legrand

"Papa, Can You Hear Me?" is a 1983 song, performed by Barbra Streisand for the movie Yentl. The song was composed by Michel Legrand, with lyrics by Alan Bergman and Marilyn Bergman. 
For the 1984 Academy Awards presentation, the song was performed by Streisand's longtime friend Donna Summer.

==Covers==

Singer and pianist Nina Simone recorded the song in 1993 on her final album A Single Woman. Her father had died in the 1970s.
Charlotte Church recorded the song as the 5th track on her 2001 album Enchantment.
West End performer Meredith Braun recorded the song on her 2012 album "Someone Else's Story"
In 2010, Glee did a cover in their episode 'Grilled Cheesus', sung by Lea Michele.

==Popular culture==

A parody of the song is briefly sung near the end of the film Austin Powers in Goldmember when Goldmember is shocked by his tractor beam device and sings "Fahza can you hear me". 
The musical Spamalot features a song called "You Won't Succeed on Broadway (If You Don't Have Any Jews)" which refers greatly to Jewish influence on musicals. At a certain point during the song, the lead singer, Sir Robin calls out, "Papa, Can You Hear Me?!"
The song was referenced in the BBC comedy series Beautiful People in Episode 2 of the first series, "How I Got My Nose". A brief excerpt is sung by the character of Debbie Doonan, as played by Olivia Colman.
In the episode of The Simpsons "Sleeping with the Enemy", Bart overhears Nelson singing the song while Nelson is staying with the family, as an ode to Nelson's missing father.
In an episode of the show Will & Grace, Jack sings the song on separate occasions, as does Will in an earlier episode while visiting a therapist.
In the "Grilled Cheesus" episode of Glee, Rachel sings this song for Burt Hummel (who is in a coma as the song is being sung) and his son Kurt Hummel. Rachel sings the song outside as Yentl does in the movie, and later beside Burt's hospital bed, with Mercedes, Finn, Quinn and Finn's mother Carol with her. Kurt watches from outside the room, feeling emotional.
The instrumental version of the song is frequently used as background music in figure skating competitions.

==External links==


