[[Mantua Township School District]]

CATEGORIES: New Jersey District Factor Group FG, School districts in Gloucester County, New Jersey

The Mantua Township School District is a community public school district that serves students in kindergarten through sixth grade from Mantua Township, in Gloucester County, New Jersey, United States.
Students in grades 7 and 8 attend Clearview Regional Middle School and those in grades 9 through 12 attend the Clearview Regional High School, both located in Mullica Hill. The schools are part of the Clearview Regional High School District, which serves students from Harrison Township (1,022 students) and Mantua Township (1,147 students).Clearview Regional High School District 2007 Report Card Narrative, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed July 11, 2008. "Finally, on behalf of our Board of Education, students, staff, and administration, I thank the citizens of Harrison Township and Mantua Township for their continued support of and interest in our students and programs."
As of the 2007-08 school year, the district's three schools had an enrollment of 1,540 students and 89.0 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 17.3.District information for the Mantua Township School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed November 5, 2009.
The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "FG", the fourth highest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed October 27, 2009.

==Schools==

Schools in the district (with 2007-08 enrollment data from the National Center for Education StatisticsData for the Mantua Township School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed November 30, 2009.) are:
Once the children in Centre City School and Sewell School reach 5th grade they are then all moved into J. Mason Tomlin School.

==Administration==

Core members of the district's administration are:Gloucester County School Directory, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed November 5, 2009.

==References==

==External links==



