[[Embrun Cathedral]]

CATEGORIES: Former cathedrals in France, Churches in Hautes-Alpes

Embrun Cathedral (Cathédrale Notre-Dame du Réal d'Embrun) is a former Roman Catholic cathedral, and a national monument of France, located in the town of Embrun, Hautes-Alpes.
It was the seat of the former Archbishopric of Embrun, which was divided between the Bishopric of Gap and the Archbishopric of Aix in 1822. On its door were posted in 1489 the thirty-two propositions imputed to the Waldenses, that presaged the campaign to extirpate them as heretics, which resurfaced in the Dauphiné with intense savagery during the Wars of Religion in France: Lesdiguières pillaged Embrun cathedral in 1585.
In the fifth century relics of St Nazarius were translated to Embrun, which had supported a bishop since the fourth century; Embrun became a noted place of pilgrimage. Charlemagne erected the basilica that was visited by Pope Leo III.As well, at a later date by Henry II of France and Louis XVIII (The Catholic Encyclopedia, s.v. "Gap, diocese of").  The cathedral church, built on foundations that date to its founding in the ninth century, was constructed between 1170 and 1220; its Romanesque portal, columns supported on crouching lions in the north portal"On the south side or at the west end shafts rest sometimes on the backs of crouching lions (Embrun) as in Italy." (Marcel Aubert and  Simone Goubet, Romanesque cathedrals and abbeys of France1966, p. 483. and striped stonework courses in cream and gray stone express cultural links with Lombardy."The Lombardic lateral portal of the cathedral of Embrun" is noted by Kenneth John Conant, Carolingian and Romanesque architecture, 800 to 1200, 1993, p. 260. The interior has an elaborate Baroque high altar inlaid in colored marbles, recently rediscovered frescoes, an organ (the oldest working in FranceHoward Goodall, 2000, Big Bangs, p. 92.) donated by Louis XI of France, who habitually sported in his cap a leaden emblem of the Virgin of Embrun,The Catholic Encyclopedia, s.v. "Gap, diocese of". and whose last words were addressed to "Nôtre Dame d'Embrun, ma bonne maîtress, ayez pitié de moi".Reported, among others, by Augustus Hare, South-Eastern France, 1890, p. 486.

==Notes==

==External links==


