[[Peggy (musical)]]

CATEGORIES: 1911 musicals, West End musicals

Peggy is a musical comedy in two acts, written by British composer Leslie Stuart, with a book by George Grossmith, Jr. and lyrics by C. H. Bovill, based on Xanroff and Guérin's L'Amorçage.Culme, John. "Footlight Notes, no. 277". 4 January 2002, accessed 11 August 2010  It opened at the Gaiety Theatre under the management of George Edwardes, on 4 March 1911 and ran for 270 performances, starring Grossmith, Edmund Payne, Phyllis Dare and Gabrielle Ray in the title role.  Ray left the production early in the run, to be replaced by Gladys Guy.  When the popularity of the show began to wane, Edwardes had a new role written for Connie Ediss.  The show also had a run in New York."Peggy at Casino, Is Queer Mixture", The New York Times, 8 December 1911, accessed 29 May 2012
Songs included "Friville", "The Lass with the Lasso", "Three Little Pebbles" and "Ladies, Beware! (When the Lights are low)".  Critics praised Stuart's score but observed that the plot of the piece was thin.  But they concluded that this did not matter:

==Synopsis==

In a luxurious lounge at the New Hotel, London, the lovely Peggy Barrison heads a dainty band of manicurists, and Albert Umbles, a charming hairdresser, is an immense favourite with the ladies. Peggy finds herself hopelessly smitten with him, and he is also in love with her.  They are engaged to be married, much to the consternation of the frequenters of the hotel in general and of the Hon. Mr. James Bendoyle, M.P., M.F.H., in particular.  Bendoyle is the richest of all of Peggy's numerous admirers.  Determined to marry her himself, he hatches a plot to obtain her affections. Learning that Umbles has a rich Uncle in South America who has not been heard of for some years, but whose return is confidently expected, he bribes a former friend named Auberon Blow, who, having fallen on hard times is employed as a hawker, to impersonate "Uncle Monty" and to excite Peggy with a life of luxury to such an extent, that the supply cut off, she will turn to anyone who can afford her the means of continuing it.
This seems to be working splendidly, but the real uncle and his daughter arrive and realize immediately that there is an imposter.  Bendoyle invites everyone to Friville. Here everything is resolved: the gallant hairdresser forsakes Peggy for vaudeville artist Polly; Bendoyle marries Doris, the daughter of the real uncle, while "Uncle Monty" (actually Blow) and Peggy have become so fond of each other that they decide never to part.This synopis is based on the public domain synopsis by H.J. Vandenten in The Play Pictorial, 'The Count of Luxembourg' issue, no.108, vol.XVIII, London, 1911, p.vii

==Roles and original cast==

==References==

==External links==


