[[The Christy Miller series]]

CATEGORIES: Juvenile series, American Christian novels, American young adult novels

The Christy Miller Series by Robin Jones Gunn is a Christian book series for teenage girls. The book series centers on Christy Miller, a young lady from Wisconsin. In the first book of the series, young Christy visits her Aunt Marti and Uncle Bob in their California home where she meets surfer Todd Spencer. In the second book, Christy’s world changes abruptly when her parents decide to move to California. This 12 book series describes the roller coaster that is an average teenage girl’s life. Christy’s story continues in several of Robin Jones Gunn’s other books after this series. Her life with Todd continues in Christy And Todd: The College Series, and in her best friend’s (and maid of honor’s) series: The Katie Weldon Series, and Christy is also mentioned a few times in The Sierra Jensen Series (Sierra and Christy meet at a European mission trip, also mentioned in the 12th book of Christy’s series.)
The Christy Miller series:

http://search.barnesandnoble.com/Christy-Miller-Collection-Volume-1/Robin-Jones-Gunn/e/9781590525845/pwb=1&

1. Summer Promise:
Fourteen-year-old Christy Miller has the dream summer ahead of her in sun-kissed California, staying with her aunt and uncle at their beachfront home. Aunt Marti loves to shop, and those surfers are cute—especially Todd. Christy promised her parents she wouldn’t do anything she’d regret later, and some of her beach friends are a little wild. But Todd and his “God-Lover” friends are giving Christy a new image of all things eternal. Can this summer live up to its promise?

2. A Whisper and a Wish:
Christy’s family has moved to California just in time for her sophomore year of high school. But they’re not in Newport Beach, where she spent the summer. Instead they’re an hour and a half away and Christy has to start all over making friends. Despite an embarrassing escapade at a slumber party, things are going pretty well...until some midnight fun leads to a trip to the police station. Does God really hear every whisper? Does He know our every wish? Then why is it so hard to know who your friends really are? 

3. Yours Forever:
Christy is back at Aunt Marti and Uncle Bob’s house on the beach for the entire week between Christmas and New Year’s...and Todd  Spencer is in town, too! The cute surfer completely captured Christy’s heart last summer, and she’s eager to spend every possible minute with him. But soon Christy and her aunt are barely speaking, and it seems like all her friends are mad at her, too—including Todd! Is he hers or isn’t he? And why would God let things get so tangled? 
http://search.barnesandnoble.com/Christy-Miller-Collection-Volume-2/Robin-Jones-Gunn/e/9781590525852/pwb=1&

4. Surprise Endings:
Cheerleading tryouts are coming up, and Christy Miller is giving it all she’s got. The competition is tough and some of the girls are just rude, but Christy thinks she has a good chance to make the squad. Meanwhile prom is just around the corner, and Christy hopes her parents will make an exception to their “no dating until sixteen” rule. She’d love to go with Todd to his prom! But nothing turns out as Christy had planned. As the surprises keep coming, can Christy respond with grace...and maybe even spring a surprise of her own? 

5. Island Dreamer:
Christy Miller is spending her sixteenth birthday on Maui with her family, Todd, and Paula, her best friend from Wisconsin! What could be better? But Christy soon finds that she and Paula don’t have as much in common anymore. Paula’s obsessed with having a boyfriend...even if it means stealing Todd from Christy! Will he choose Paula over her? Or will the islands send Christy dreaming in new directions? 

6. A Heart Full of Hope:
Christy Miller is sixteen, and that means she can finally date! Rick has waited months for this, and he has a whole list of dates planned. He’s not happy about her early curfews and weekend job, but Christy knows her parents aren’t about to negotiate on those points. Really, she’s dazzled to be pursued by such a thoughtful guy. So why does she feel overwhelmed? Where does Todd fit into her life now? And can any guy really fulfill all her hopes? 
http://search.barnesandnoble.com/Christy-Miller-Collection-Volume-3/Robin-Jones-Gunn/e/9781590525869/pwb=1&

7. True Friends:
What is a true friend? Christy Miller knows she has two of them: Todd and Katie. To show how much she appreciates them, she writes to Todd, who’s off surfing in Hawaii, and she agrees to join the ski club with Katie…even though she’s scared of skiing! Fortunately, Christy and Katie can laugh as they bumble their way around the bunny slopes at Lake Tahoe. But Christy finds herself caught between new friends and her loyalty to Katie. Will Christy find a way to be a true friend when it counts most? And will she ever hear from Todd? 

8. Starry Night:
It’s Christmastime, and Christy Miller has so much going on: family time, work, and maybe, just maybe, going to the Rose Bowl Parade with a bunch of friends. If only she could answer Uncle Bob’s tough questions. Todd’s buddy Doug gives her some insight, and she starts to appreciate him in a whole new way. Rick Doyle shows up again...but is he pursuing Christy or the cutest elf at the mall? Through it all, will Christy find someone special to count the stars with? 

9. Seventeen Wishes:
It’s summer, and that means the beach and other adventures. And Christy Miller’s best friend, Katie, is always full of ideas. They’ll be camp counselors! But when Katie can’t go, Christy is bewildered and overwhelmed by her fifth-grade girls, who have boundless energy for anything except what Christy wants them to do. Do they even hear a word she says? Soon they’re playing matchmaker between Christy and Jaeson, a handsome counselor...and he doesn’t seem to mind. When Christy’s seventeenth birthday arrives later in the summer, just what will she be wishing for? 
http://search.barnesandnoble.com/Christy-Miller-Collection-Volume-4/Robin-Jones-Gunn/e/9781590525876/pwb=1&

10. A Time to Cherish:
For Labor Day weekend, Christy Miller is on a houseboat at Lake Shasta. What could be better? She’s about to find out! Before they know it, both Christy and her best friend, Katie, are receiving some unexpected male attention. But somehow these best friends are at odds just when they should be having the most fun together. Christy soon realizes that sometimes you have to stand back and let people make their own decisions, even when they’re headed for a fall. And although life is never perfect, this is definitely a time to cherish. 

11. Sweet Dreams:
Christy Miller’s senior year is delicious, especially the time she spends with Todd. But her best friend, Katie, is struggling—she’s realized she needs to break up with Michael. It’s not easy! Fortunately both Doug and Disneyland help Katie to cheer up. Christy is learning to let go and get out of the way so that her friends can become who they’re meant to be...even when it jeopardizes her own sweet dreams. 

12. A Promise is Forever:
Christy Miller’s going to Europe! It’s a three-week missions trip with Doug, Katie, and Tracy. First stop: London for some sightseeing, and then a castle in the English countryside for group training. Christy is so excited to be headed for Belfast with her friends—despite some tension among them. But when plans go topsy-turvy at the last minute, Christy must face her fears and realize that some things are more important than her own comfort...and that even when she can’t foresee the end result, a promise truly is forever. 

==Notes==


