[[The Immortal (TV series)]]

CATEGORIES: 1970s American television series, American Broadcasting Company network shows, American drama television series, Television series by CBS Paramount Television, 1970 American television series debuts, 1971 American television series endings, American science fiction television series, Television programs based on novels, English-language television programming

The Immortal is an American television series, which aired on ABC from September 1970 to January 1971. The series is based on a pilot movie of the same name, which aired in September 1969. The pilot is based on the science fiction novel The Immortals, by James Gunn. Although the series was canceled at midseason, episodes were rerun by ABC in the summer of 1971. It was later shown in reruns on the Sci Fi Channel.

==Series overview==

Ben Richards is a test car driver for a large corporation. He's 42 years old, but looks young enough to pass for 25 -- and he's never been sick a day in his life. Ben's life changes when he donates a pint of blood. When a dying billionaire is given a transfusion of his donated blood, and is brought back from the brink of death, Ben's phsyician determines that his O negative blood contains all known antibodies and immunities. This gives Ben immunity to every known disease and an estimated lifespan five to ten times that of other humans, making him, in the doctor's words, "virtually immortal". The billionaire decides that he has to control Richards' life so he can access his life-saving blood.
When Richards rejects all of the billionaire's offers to remain with him, the billionaire has him imprisoned, but he ultimately escapes. Richards is now on the run because although the billionaire dies, he is now being pursued by one of the billionaire's former employees, Fletcher, who is now employed by another billionaire, Arthur Maitland, who also wants access to Richards' blood.
The series' dramatic tension is based on the idea that Richards would probably never lose his life if he were to live quietly, since he would never succumb to any known diseases. But his flight from Fletcher puts his life at great risk, constantly engaging in dangerous efforts to avoid capture, and his "immortal" blood did not make him immune from losing his life from trauma.
The series primarily focuses on Richards' journeys and the people he meets while trying to avoid Fletcher. A secondary plot involved Richards' search for a brother he has never known, with the implication that that brother may share his gift and thus be at risk from the billionaire as well.
The plotline of The Immortal is quite different from that of the book on which it is based. Instead, The Immortal bears more than a superficial resemblance to the then recent, very popular (and in primary syndication) chase-an-with-interesting-plotline-encounters; TV series, The Fugitive.  That series had ended its four-season run three years beforeThe Immortal began.  And its final episode was (and still is), one of the most watched series endings in television history.

==Cast==

==See also==

==External links==


