[[My Favorite Duck]]

CATEGORIES: 1942 films, 1940s comedy films, Looney Tunes shorts, Films directed by Chuck Jones, American animated films, English-language films

My Favorite Duck is a 1942 color Looney Tunes cartoon featuring Porky Pig and Daffy Duck (both voiced by Mel Blanc). It was the second color entry in the Looney Tunes series, and the first pairing of Porky and Daffy produced in Technicolor. It was directed by Chuck Jones.
The title was presumably inspired by a film of that era, either My Favorite Wife or My Favorite Blonde. In this case the title is used ironically. This is one of several entries in a series where Daffy (during his "screwball" period) torments Porky in a variety of ways.

==Plot==

Porky is on a camping vacation beside a lake where Daffy happens to live. The duck quickly insinuates himself into Porky's attempts at relaxation, and every time the duck gets Porky riled enough to threaten violence, Daffy shows him a sign that says it is not duck hunting season, and that there is a hefty fine for even "molesting" (i.e. "bothering") a duck. When Porky calls Daffy screwy, Daffy makes eyes with Porky and responds "That, my little cherub, is strictly a matter of opinion".
Porky and Daffy both sing to different effect. Porky, who has trouble with words starting with M and B (among others), stammers and stutters his way through the old standard On Moonlight Bay, while Daffy periodically breaks into a somewhat-sultry version of a then-recent hit called "Blues in the Night", better known as "My Mama Done Tol' Me". At one point, Porky unconsciously starts to sing Daffy's number, then stops, looks into the camera with a "Harumph!" and returns to "Moonlight Bay".
Daffy is able to get away with a lot, "Hoo-hooing" after every gag, until near the end, when a new sign says duck hunting season is now open, and it even specifically invites shooting this duck. The tide has turned dramatically, and Porky gets his revenge. While Porky chases Daffy around a tree, the picture gets out of order and breaks, then Daffy appears saying "Ladies and gentlemen, due to circumstances beyond our control, we are unable to continue this picture. But don't worry, I'll tell  you how it came out.". The duck asides to the audience that he beat up Porky. A hook whisks Daffy offscreen and a loud smashing sound is heard. Porky then drags the dazed duck across the screen, his shotgun now bent in the form of Daffy's head.

==Availability==

The short occurs in its entirety in the documentary Bugs Bunny: Superstar, Part 2, which is available as a special feature on Disc 2 of the Looney Tunes Golden Collection: Volume 4. It is also available fully restored on Disc 1 of the Looney Tunes Golden Collection: Volume 6.

==See also==

==External links==


