[[Kallistos Ware]]

CATEGORIES: 1934 births, Living people, People from Bath, Somerset, People educated at Westminster School, London, Alumni of Magdalen College, Oxford, Eastern Orthodox bishops, 20th-century Eastern Orthodox clergy, English Eastern Orthodox Christians, Greek Orthodox Christians, English theologians, English philosophers, English writers, English religious writers, English non-fiction writers, Scholars in Eastern Orthodoxy, Christian mystics, Converts to Eastern Orthodoxy from Anglicanism, Fellows of Pembroke College, Oxford

Kallistos Ware (born Timothy Ware on 11 September 1934) is an English bishop within the Eastern Orthodox Church under the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople and one of the best-known contemporary Eastern Orthodox theologians.  From 1982 he has held the Titular Bishopric of Diokleia.  In 2007 the bishopric was made a titular metropolitan bishopric.
From 1966 to 2001, Ware was Spalding Lecturer of Eastern Orthodox Studies at the University of Oxford.  He has authored numerous books and articles pertaining to the Orthodox Christian faith.

==Early life and ordination==

Born Timothy Ware in Bath, Somerset, England, he was educated at Westminster School in London (to which he had won a King's Scholarship) and Magdalen College, Oxford, where he took a double first in classics as well as reading theology.  On 14 April 1958, at the age of 24, he embraced the Orthodox Christian faith (having been raised Anglican), travelling subsequently throughout Greece and spending a great deal of time at the Monastery of Saint John the Theologian in Patmos.  He also frequented other major centres of Orthodoxy such as Jerusalem and Mount Athos.  In 1966 he was ordained to the priesthood and was tonsured as a monk, receiving the name "Kállistos".
In the beginning of his encounter with Orthodoxy, Ware held a sympathy to the Russian Orthodox Church Abroad, although he decided to be part of the hierarchy of the Ecumenical Patriarchate. http://www.rocorstudies.org/articles/2009/03/06/metropolitan-kallistos-ware-of-diokleia-and-the-russian-church-abroad/

==Professional and academic life==

In 1966 Ware became a Spalding Lecturer at the University of Oxford in Eastern Orthodox studies, a position he held for 35 years until his retirement. In 1970 he was appointed to a Fellowship at Pembroke College, Oxford, and in 1982 he was consecrated to the episcopacy as an auxiliary bishop with the title Bishop of Diokleia, appointed to serve as the assistant to the bishop of the Ecumenical Patriarchate's Archdiocese of Thyateira and Great Britain. Despite his consecration, Ware remained in Oxford and carried on his duties both as the parish priest of the Greek Orthodox community and also as a lecturer at the university.
Since his retirement in 2001, Ware has continued to publish and to give lectures on Orthodox Christianity. He was previously the chairman of the board of directors of the Institute for Orthodox Christian Studies in Cambridge.  He is the chairman of the group Friends of Orthodoxy on Iona and of the Friends of Mount Athos.
On 30 March 2007 the Holy Synod of the Ecumenical Patriarchate elevated the Diocese of Diokleia to a metropolitan diocese and thus Ware became a titular metropolitan even though he has never had pastoral care of any diocese and is nominally an assistant bishop in the Archdiocese of Thyateira and Great Britain.

==Publications==

Ware is perhaps best known as the author of the book The Orthodox Church, published when he was a layman in 1963 and subsequently revised several times.  In 1979 he produced a companion volume, The Orthodox Way.  But his most substantial publications have emerged from his translation work.  Together with G. E. H. Palmer and Philip Sherrard he has undertaken to translate the Philokalia (four volumes of five published to date, but no progress has been made with the fifth volume for sixteen years now); and with Mother Mary he produced the Lenten Triodion and Festal Menaion.

==Partial bibliography==

He has also co-authored, edited and translated many other works.

==References==

==External links==


