[[ESCI]]

CATEGORIES: Model manufacturers, Toy soldier manufacturing companies, Model aircraft

ESCI was a well-known Italian scale model manufacturer, which is no longer in business.

==History==

The E.S.C.I. was an Italian company of scale model kits, active until 1991. It was founded in the '30s by an Italian merchant of Jewish origin, named Agiman and acronym of Ente Scambi Coloniali Italiani. The company started business, dealing with import / export between Italy and its African colonies. With the advent of the racial laws forced the owner to move to Switzerland with his family until the end of the conflict. Back to Italy, he continued its business activities undertaken previously and expand thanks to the economic boom of the 60's. In the mid-60s he entered the static model market with the first imports of kit from Japan. The business was expanding and at the end of the 60s next to the founder's son Daniel Agiman (succeeded his father) join two new members : Dino Coppola and Franco Baldrighi. The native E.S.C.I. transforms into "ESCI Modellistica snc." located in the industrial area of Via Torino in Cernusco sul Naviglio (MI).
Compared to other modeling companies, at the time ESCI was mainly just a sales office, able to weave contacts and develop business all over the world. For the production part of the company relies on third-party companies and technicians, who are commissioned masters, molds and sometimes the production and box packaging. The company production was very heterogeneous and can range from talented producers in the industry as Italaerei (today Italeri), Otaki, LS up to local artisans. Therefore, the production was very heterogeneous going from moulds of high-level kits in order to less detailed molds with positive panel lines.
The real production began in 1972 with the launch of additional decal sheets, which allowed the modellers, for the first time, to finish the kits in a different livery. Each decal sheet was placed in a plastic bag with a detailed instruction containing 8 different profiles colors and a third sheet with a detailed explanation of the history and origins of each badge. The product achieved considerable commercial success and the ESCI was able to invest its  new resources in motorcycle kits scaled to 1/9. The first plastic production kit was the BMW with sidecar, followed by the Harley Davidson, and the Zundapp, all hand-made crafted by the famous creator master modeller Manuel Olive Sans. For the realization of the molds, they made a cooperation with Italaerei, which, however, must not advertise this collaboration on the boxes, while maintaining a formal rivalry on the kit market. The relationship between ESCI and ITALERI started in the best way and in full friendship, even if later these deteriorated for obvious competitive reasons.
The growing of the modelling kit industry led the company to start a new armour series, using the atypical and new 1/72 scale, usually used for planes, in contrast to the standard scale 1/76. The dimensional relationship of the subject land with the aircraft rewards the choice made, thanks to a very high level of quality that allow ESCI to become one of the leading manufacturers in the kit market. The sales successes lead to a further acceleration towards the production of new molds and in 1977 launched a successful series of modern airplanes in 1/48 scale, followed by an equally successful series in 1/72 scale. Between 1977 and 1983 the production of molds is dizzying and inaugurated a practice followed widely used by all producers : several boxes of the same subject were characterized by new decal or variants and a brand new boxart. Together with models of aircraft, armored vehicles, and motorcycles, are also made models of trucks, cars, trains, ships and figures. The discerning choice of subjects was the basis of some commercial success of the company. A representative case was the mould of the Panavia Tornado in 1/48 scale, done in 1975 when the prototype of the real aircraft was carrying out the first flight tests. It was the most advanced European aircraft of the time. The model was although produced with a large lack of details, but remained the only model for this plane in this scale for 17 years becoming also the best-seller kit of the company's sales.
In 1984, ESCI introduced separated track links for AFV model kits. In the same year they also started an innovative product, the 1/12 scale cockpits of aircraft such as the F-104 and F-16. The 1985 catalogue, distributed by Ricordi in Milan, shows a redesign of the boxes, with the replacement of the predominant color white with red over boxarts. Impressive was the list of products offered, 350 kits of aircraft including 121 subjects (77 in 1/48 scale and 44 in 1/72).
In the mid-1980s, the first signs of market crisis took the modeling industry in a new direction characterized by an increasingly high level in quality of the moulds (mainly the use of emerging technology CAD / CAM) this, combined with advent of the first video games and electronic media which shift quickly the attention of young people. The economic strain and the impressive catalog require substantial investments that lead to the entrance of a new partner who can give new life to the company. In 1987, the three partners will give the majority to ERTL, until that time the American distributor of ESCI kits. The catalog of 1991 shows a radical downsizing of products, bringing to 290 the number of boxes, 100 of them were airplanes (only 22 in 1/48 scale and 75 in 1/72 scale)
At the end of 1991 CEO Dino Coppola left the company with some employees to found the CDC-Collector Armour Ltd, a company specializing in the production of die-cast cars, armored vehicles and aircraft that would be in business until 2001. In 1993, ESCI - ERTL SpA was finally liquidated. Some of the moulds were moved to Central America, and others ended up in areas which have become theaters of wars and therefore difficult to recover for future reissues.
ERTL moved some molds to the United States to be used by AMT. ERTL decided to release the best products under the AMT logo, leaving the logo ESCI as products of lower quality and intended for larger distribution. The production moved to Tijuana in Mexico and later in China and was characterized by the use of very soft plastic that penalized the assembly of AMT and ESCI kit reissued.
In the 1990s, AMT developed a series of new moldings to model aircraft of World War II. The last official catalogue was printed in 1999 by the local Italian distributor, and the few boxes that came to stores went almost completely unnoticed. The same year, the economic difficulties at ERTL also led to the sale to Racing Champions. In 2000 the final ESCI moulds were taken by Italeri which today is selling again the best of the old production.

==Product range==

The early Esci 1/72 scale aircraft offerings, notably the Mirage F-1, F-104, F-15, F-100, F-16 and F-5 and Sea Harrier kits, were extremely accurate at the time of their manufacture.[tpl]citation needed|date=June 2012[/tpl] The F-104 and F-15 Eagle kits were later superseded by other competitors like Hasegawa, but ESCI's line of 1/72 scale F-5, F-100D/F, and Sea Harrier remained, until today, arguably among the best scale replicas ever produced in injection moulded plastic. Esci's 1/72 Sea Harrier kit is quite exceptional because it has continued to be re-released under many other familiar model brands such as Italeri and Revell. Esci also produced 1/24 scale vehicles. BMW M1, Renault R5,Lamborgini Miura & Countach,Land Rover 109, Mercedes Benz 450 SLC 5.0, Mercedes 230G (G Wagon)including Rally version Paris Dakar, 190e Cosworth, Lancia Beta,Ferrari 250SWB & 512BB .Most were available in race/rally Guise. The Mk2 Ford Transit and Mk2 Ford escort were totally Unique to Esci in the scale and have not been manufactured by any other company  although Revell did reproduce the Esci escort ford with different rally liveries which eludes to Revell owning the moulds. Esci was also noted for releasing 1/72-scale models of Soviet supersonic bombers such as the (Tu-22 and the Tu-22M) during the height of the Cold War era, despite it being a difficult subject to find information and references about.
ESCI became noted for their 1/72 military vehicle line as they were one of the first manufacturers to release an extensive and accurate[tpl]citation needed|date=January 2014[/tpl] series in that scale.
ESCI's 1/48 aircraft line had below-average accuracy[tpl]citation needed|date=June 2012[/tpl] and detailing in spite of the interesting themes (Mig-23, Mig-27) and eyecatching box art. The exception to this are the two crisp models of the famous Henschel ground attack aircraft, the (Hs-123 and the Hs-129).
Their World War II line was limited to ground vehicle themes (in 1/72, 1/35, and 1/9 motorbikes).
Also several 1/24 cars (factory stock and motorsport) were available with high-finish details.[tpl]citation needed|date=January 2014[/tpl]

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


