[[Mitchel B. Wallerstein]]

CATEGORIES: American political scientists, Living people, Dartmouth College alumni, Syracuse University alumni, Massachusetts Institute of Technology alumni, Presidents of colleges of City University of New York

Mitchel Wallerstein is an American political scientist and the current President of Baruch College, a member of the City University of New York. From 2003 to 2010, he served as dean of the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs at Syracuse University.

==Biography==

===Early life===

Born in New York City, Wallerstein received his undergraduate degree at Dartmouth College in 1971. In 1972, he followed with a Master's degree in public administration from the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs. He received a Master's (1976) and PhD in political science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1978. 
For the next five years, he worked as an assistant professor at the College of the Holy Cross and MIT. From 1983 to 1993, he worked at the National Academy of Sciences, holding progressively more senior positions, including deputy executive officer of the National Research Council.  Also while at the National Research Council, Wallerstein directed a series of highly acclaimed studies on scientific communication, technology transfer and national security.

===Career===

From 1993 to 1997, he served as the first presidential appointee as deputy assistant secretary of defense for counterproliferation policy and was also the senior representative for trade security policy. While at the Department of Defense, Wallerstein helped to found and co-chaired NATO's Senior Defense Group on Proliferation. He received a Secretary of Defense Medal for Outstanding Public Service in January 1997, and was given the Bronze Palm to the award in April 1998. During his time in Washington, DC, he also served as an adjunct professor at the Program on Science, Technology and Policy at the George Washington University, the Walsh School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University, and the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University. Wallerstein was named a Distinguished Research Professor at the National Defense University in November 1997.
In 1998, Wallerstein joined the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, becoming a vice president for the Program on Global Security and Sustainability. In this capacity, he directed the Foundation's international grant-making in 86 countries around the world.  The Program made $75 million in grants each year focusing on international peace and security, population and reproductive health, biodiversity and sustainable development, human rights and the impacts of globalization.
In July 2003, Mitchel Wallerstein became dean of the Maxwell School, its eighth dean since the school's founding in 1924. Wallerstein has pushed for expanded internationalization of the school's programs and relationships with other elite schools of public affairs around the world; he secured an endowment for the School's Institute of Global Affairs in honor of the late Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who was twice a member of the Maxwell School faculty; and he initiated new academic programs in security studies (which included the establishment of the Institute for National Security and Counter-Terrorism), and supported new programs in public diplomacy, and history and documentary filmmaking.
Dr. Wallerstein began his tenure as President of Baruch College on August 2, 2010."Maxwell School Dean Mitchel B. Wallerstein Named President of Baruch College" CUNY Newswire, March 1, 2010.

==References==

==External links==


