[[Aftershock (comics)]]

CATEGORIES: Characters created by Sean McKeever, Comics characters introduced in 2002, Fictional beings from parallel universes, Fictional characters with electric abilities, Marvel Comics 2, Marvel Comics supervillains

Aftershock (Allison Dillon) is a fictional character who appeared in the Marvel Comics' Spider-Girl series. She is the daughter of Max Dillon (also known as Electro) in the MC2 timeline.

==Fictional character biography==

Max Dillon fell in love with a young woman named Marilyn, who never married Max because of his criminal history as Electro, but did have a child with him. Their daughter Allison inherits her father's electrical abilities, and due to slight differences in the polarities of Max and Allison's electrical fields, the slightest physical contact with each other burns them.
Max returns to his criminal ways as Electro and is sent to prison, and Marilyn dies of cancer. Young Allison is placed in foster care, where she is bounced from one home to another. In her teens, Allison designs a costume very similar to her father's Electro costume. Furthermore, she decides to use her powers to be a criminal like her father. She tries to rob a jewelry store at a mall, but is stopped by Spider-Girl. Later, using the codename "Aftershock", Allison attempts to rob some armored cars, but again she was stopped by Spider-Girl. This caused Allison to harbor a vendetta against Spider-Girl.
Electro found out about his daughter's criminal ways, and contacts Spider-Girl as well as her father, Spider-Man, so that the three could confront Aftershock. Electro convinces his daughter to return with him, and that they would find a way to overcome their inability to touch. She agrees and leaves with him. She has not returned to her criminal ways since.
Ironically, the cover to the story issue shows Aftershock and Spider-Girl in a boxing ring, with their fathers acting as corner men. In the story, Electro took up the cause of law and order, siding with Spider-Man and Spider-Girl in an attempt to thwart his daughter's wicked ways immediately.

==Powers and abilities==

Aftershock has the ability to manipulate electricity for a variety of effects. She can fire miniature lightning bolts at her opponents, surround herself in a protective shield of energy, or electrocute a person with a touch of her hands. She can absorb electricity from various sources to enhance her powers. She can fly via magnetic levitation, by surrounding herself in an electromagnetic field of equal polarity to the Earth's.

==Other versions==

===Earth-616===

During the Heroic Age storyline, Aftershock appears claiming to be the discarded and disavowed daughter of Electro. She is a member of the Bastards of Evil.Young Allies vol. 2 #1 When the Bastards kidnap Nomad and Araña in order to execute them, Afterhock removes the gag from Araña's mouth in order to let the heroine speak her last words. Taking advantage of the situation, Araña reveals to the Bastards that Aftershock is not really Electro's daughter, and even provides them with photographs to back up this claim causing Aftershock to remember her true identity of Danielle Blunt. When Aftershock claims the photos are fake, her teammate Singularity knocks her unconscious so that he can try and figure out her true parentage. The Young Allies managed to defeat the remaining Bastards of Evil and remand them to the Raft.Young Allies vol. 2. #5
During the Fear Itself storyline, Aftershock and Ember are among the villains that escape from the Raft after what Juggernaut in the form of Kuurth: Breaker of Stone did to it.Thunderbolts #159  Aftershock and Ember were later fighting against the students and the teachers from the Avengers Academy, only to be subdued by Jeremy Briggs.Avengers Academy #20

==References==

==External links==


