[[Cinematography Mailing List]]

CATEGORIES: Cinematography organizations

The Cinematography Mailing List is a website and collection of mailing lists founded by Geoffboyle/Geoff Boyle in November 1996. The CML is run on a volunteer basis by professional cinematographers "to promote the free exchange of ideas among fellow professionals, the cinematographer, their camera crew, manufacturers, rental houses and related businesses."
The Cinematography Mailing List maintains 21 separate mailing lists covering a variety of cinematography related topics, including lists for general film production, high definition cinematography, lighting, post-production, documentary work, etc. Membership for the lists is free for cinematographers and related industry professionals. A separate mailing list is available for film students (CML-basics).
The CML website holds an archive of all past discussions which is available only to registered members. A book version of the archive titled 'CML - The First Five Years' which includes all the discussions on the CML from 1997 to 2001, was released in 2005 and is used as a cinematography reference much like 'the ASC Manual' or David Samuelson's 'Hands-On Manual for Cinematographers'.
The CML has over 3500 members worldwide, including members of the American Society of Cinematographers, the British Society of Cinematographers, the Canadian Society of Cinematographers, etc. as well as representatives from most major equipment manufacturers, including Kodak, Fujifilm, Aaton, Arri, Panavision, Sony, Panasonic, etc. The volunteer cinematographers who oversee the mailing lists are called "listmums" instead of moderators.
In 2000, Geoff Boyle was presented an award by the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers for "his contributions to communication and education among cinematographers, through the Cinematography Mailing List (CML), which he founded." http://www.smpte.org/membership/kodak.cfm
In 2006, Geoff Boyle was awarded the British Society of Cinematographers Bert Easy Technical Award for his work with CML.

==External links==


