[[French Fort Cove]]

CATEGORIES: Miramichi, New Brunswick, Provincial parks of New Brunswick, Reportedly haunted locations in New Brunswick, Visitor attractions in Northumberland County, New Brunswick, Geography of Northumberland County, New Brunswick, Quarries in Canada

The French Fort Cove is a nature park located in Miramichi, New Brunswick, between Newcastle and Nordin-Miramichi, which contains regular and advanced walking trails, canoeing, kayaking, paddle-boats, a children's playground, ice-cream shop and holds many events and activities during the summer. It is the location of a former rock quarry which was used to build many local buildings and the Langevin Block of Parliament Hill, among others."Story Quarry", French Fort Cove Nature Park, retrieved August 21, 2006. 

==Pond Hockey==

The Miramichi Rotary Pond Hockey Tournament is an annual event that began in 2005 to celebrate the 100th anniversary of Rotary International. Profit from the tournament goes back into the community and helps to fund projects that are supported by the Rotary Club of Newcastle."Purpose", Miramichi Rotary Pond Hockey, retrieved August 24, 2006.
The tournament consists of teams of four competing in a number of different divisions including open competitive, over 35, women's, and family."Past Winners", Miramichi Rotary Pond Hockey, retrieved August 24, 2006.

==Eco-Centre==

Located  on Cove Road, the Eco-Center contains a 6-surface curling rink and is open year round to provide information about Miramichi's history and culture to tourists and to current residents looking to learn more about their city. "Sod Turned on French Fort Cove Eco-Centre", Bread 'n Molasses, March 2005, retrieved August 24, 2006. There are also plans to develop educational programs that will allow school children will be able to collect species in the near-by cove, and bring them back to study them under microscopes, for use in science projects."French Fort Cove Eco-centre", Jackie Fallon, retrieved August 24, 2006.

==Headless Nun Tour==

The Headless Nun Tour is a one hour guided tour of the French Fort Cove. It takes place after dark and involves costumed tour guides reciting the tale of the supposed headless nun that haunts the cove. The tour was featured on the nationally televised show Creepy Canada."DARE THE DARK for the Headless Nun Tour", French Fort Cove Nature Park, retrieved August 24, 2006.

==Biking Trails==

The Cove is home to many advanced mountain biking trails, which are located off of the advanced hiking trails. They are looked after by the Miramichi Mountain Bike Club.

==References==


