[[Singapore Turf Club]]

CATEGORIES: Horse racing organisations, 1842 establishments, Horse racing in Singapore, Venues of the 2010 Summer Youth Olympics

The Singapore Turf Club was founded in 1842 as the Singapore Sporting Club to operate the Serangoon Road Race Course at Farrer Park. 
It is today the only horse-racing club in Singapore and is part of the Malayan Racing Association, which also regulates the three Turf Clubs in Malaysia, the Selangor Turf Club, Penang Turf Club and Perak Turf Club
The Singapore Turf Club is the only authorised operator of horse racing, and totalisator (horse betting) services in Singapore. It is the agent and proprietary club of the Tote Board, Singapore, who manages and directs its donation of surplus funds for charitable purposes.
The first race was held on 23 February 1843 when prize money on offer was only $150. 
In 1924, the Club changed its name to the Singapore Turf Club. This was done to reflect its role as a horse racing club more accurately. 
The Club moved to Bukit Timah in 1933 before relocating to its present location at the Singapore Racecourse at Kranji in 1999. The racecourse is adjacent to Kranji MRT Station.
Racing is staged all-year round on almost every Fridays and Sundays.
Races from Australia, Hong Kong, South Africa and occasionally from UK, France and Japan are also shown live at the Turf Club and off-course betting centres and outlets.  The newest off-course betting centres are at China Square at Telok Ayer Street and at The Majestic in Chinatown.
A feature of the racing calendar is the S$3 million Group 1 Singapore Airlines International Cup (SAIC), which was first held in 2000 in conjunction with the opening of the Singapore Racecourse at Kranji. It is held in May, coupled with its sister sprint race, the S$1 million KrisFlyer International Sprint. Both events are part of the Singapore International Racing Festival (SIRF), which will be attended by some of the world's top owners, jockeys and trainers.YourSingapore.com - Singapore International Racing Festival
It is also the site of equestrian events of the 2010 Summer Youth Olympics.First youth Olympic Games: Singapore Turf Club

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


