[[St Patrick's College, Shorncliffe]]

CATEGORIES: Private schools in Queensland, High schools in Queensland, Christian Brother (Irish) schools, Christian Brother (Irish) secondary schools, Educational institutions established in 1952, Boys' schools in Australia, Roman Catholic schools in Australia, Schools in Brisbane

St. Patrick's College (SPC) is a private, Roman Catholic, day school for boys, situated on the waterfront in Shorncliffe, north of Brisbane, in Queensland, Australia.
Established by the Congregation of Christian Brothers in 1952, the college currently enrols approximately 1226 students across eight grades (Years 5 to 12). SPC is one of eight member schools a part of the Associated Independent Colleges (AIC) and also competes in the Combined Independent Colleges (CIC) in the junior school. 

==Sporting==

St Patrick’s is a member of the Associated Independent Colleges (AIC) and the Combined Independent Colleges (CIC) and participates in both associations’ sporting competitions and events. Students in Year 8 -12 compete in the AIC and Years 5 – 7 in the CIC. Both sporting competitions are conducted across the entire school year and consist of a wide range of sports. The school has had great success in the field of AIC Cross Country with 4 overall Aggregate Premierships (2010,2011,2012, 2013).   
2013 was a great year for SPC Football where the 1st XI team was successful in winning the AIC Football premiership. This achievement was a culmination of hard work and determination of a number of years, shown by coaches, teachers and players.

==Notable alumni==

==International Connections==

St. Patrick's has a student exchange program with two schools in North America; Vancouver College in Canada and Moeller High School in the United States. Each year the college sponsors two year 11 students to attend each institution.  The exchanges are set to coincide with the beginning of each school year, with the outgoing students studying in the tail end of the North American summer (end of term 3 in Brisbane). Incoming students attend St.Patrick's in late January and February. Past exchanges have been to the benefit of each school. On one occasion St. Patrick's students helped the implementation of a house system at Moeller. St. Joseph's College, Gregory Terrace students also travel to Moeller.
St. Patrick's students and staff also travel each year to South Africa as part of an Edmund Rice group. Each year the college helps support a fundraising dinner for the Mimiki Foundation,a charity the Paddies Van programs for the homeless and youth programs in South Africa. Guests at the Mimiki fundraisers have included Bernard Fanning and Pete Murray, among others.
Each year a service trip to Eastern India is led by the College Chaplain, Fr. Liam Horsfall, a former Provincial Superior of the Divine Word Missionaries in the region. At first of these trips were more informal, with students handpicked by Fr. Horsfall and little involvement with the school. Today students are also accompanied by other staff members and have extensive school-sponsored fundraising.

==Notable Incidents==

On 15 February 2010, twelve-year-old Elliot Fletcher was stabbed in the playground by a thirteen-year-old classmate before dying shortly upon arrival at hospital.St. Patricks College Press Information The two students found themselves in a quarrel in the playground of the Catholic school.Elliott Fletcher slain at St Patrick's College

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


