[[Maama Molitika]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, Living people, Cardiff Blues players, Tongan rugby union players, Harlequin F.C. players, Barbarian F.C. players, Bridgend RFC players, Tonga international rugby union players, Pacific Islanders rugby union players, Tongan  expatriate rugby union players, Expatriate rugby union players in Japan, Expatriate rugby union players in Wales, Expatriate rugby union players in England, Tongan expatriates in the United Kingdom, Tongan expatriates in Japan

Maama Molitika (26 August 1974) was a Tongan rugby union footballer. He is 6'5". He has played numerous times for the national Tongan team, making his debut in June 1997 against Fiji. He was also in the Pacific Islanders rugby union team squad that toured Europe in 2006. He played as a blind-side flanker.
In 2002–03 he was Bridgend's joint top try scorer of the season, and was a part of the team that went onto win the Welsh Premiership for the first time in the club's history. Following the regionalisation of Welsh rugby in 2003–04, he joined the now defunct Celtic Warriors, and played the one season that the region existed for, including playing for them in the Heineken Cup. After the Warriors were dissolved at the end of the 2003–04 season, he signed to play for Harlequin F.C. in the English premiership. He then moved to Welsh region the Cardiff Blues.
In 2006 he went to Japan and played for Japanese team IBM Big Blue. 
However, it was announced in 2007 that he would be returning to the Cardiff Blues to cover for players that would be absent due to Wales' World Cup campaign, as well as covering for any injured players.
On his return to the Cardiff Blues, Molitika dispelled previous concerns that his standard of play would have decreased from a year in the less-competitive Japanese League, with some outstanding performances for the Blues. Molitika had established himself as the Blues' first-choice flanker with his effective ball-carrying and his tireless work-rate winning much praise from coaches and fans alike.  
Maama in the 2012-13 season will be hired by the Rugby San Donà, a newly promoted Italian team that were excelling after winning the Serie A 2011-2012. Maama became a very important man for the Venetian team.
Maama also has a cousin, Haloti Molitika, who is currently playing for Worcester Rugby Club's Academy side.
Maama also coaches local rugby Team Sully Sports Rfc who play in the WRU Div 7 league.

==References==

==External links==


