[[Trinity College and Seminary]]

CATEGORIES: Seminaries and theological colleges in Indiana, Universities and colleges in Indiana, Unaccredited Christian universities and colleges in the United States, Educational institutions established in 1969, Nondenominational Christian universities and colleges, 1969 establishments in Indiana

Trinity College of the Bible and Theological Seminary, also known as Trinity College of the Bible, is an unaccredited nondenominational Bible college and seminary located in Newburgh, Indiana. Trinity offers distance education programs at undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral degree levels for self-directed adult learners. Programs include Certificate, Bachelor, Masters, Executive MBA, and Doctorate (DMin and Ed.D) studies.Trinity Degree Programs In 2006, Trinity claimed more than 7,000 active students worldwide.Susan Orr, Raising its sights: Newburgh's Trinity College of the Bible and Theological Seminary aiming higher, Evansville Courier & Press, July 1, 2006.

==History==

In April 1969, John D. Brooke founded Trinity College and Theological Seminary and in mid-1978, Trinity moved to Evansville, Indiana, and changed its focus from offering traditional on-campus degree programs to its current emphasis on distance education, providing undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate courses for self-directed adult learners. Trinity offers various distance education learning formats and delivery systems, such as self-paced independent study courses, online courses, webinars, and face-to-face seminars on-campus and at other locations in the United States.Trinity Delivery Systems  In 1981, the school relocated to Newburgh and current has a nine-building campus.Warrick County (Indiana) Assessor's Web Site
As of 2013, Trinity also lists about 70 faculty.Trinity Faculty

==Accreditation==

Trinity is not accredited by any accreditation association in the United States. 
In January 1992, Trinity achieved "accreditation" with the National Association of Private Nontraditional Schools and Colleges,[tpl]cite news | url=http://www.napnsc.org/Institutions.htm | title=Creationist speaker 'loose about the facts' | publisher=National Association of Private Nontraditional Schools and Colleges | date= November 2006| first= | last= | accessdate = 2013-03-02 | archiveurl= http://web.archive.org/web/*/http://www.napnsc.org/ | archivedate= 2006-03-25[/tpl] a now defunct organization that is not recognized as an accreditor by the United States Department of Education or the Council for Higher Education Accreditation.Bear, John and Mariah P. Bear. Bear’s Guide to Earning Degrees by Distance Learning, pg. 57. As such, its degrees and credits might not be acceptable to employers or other institutions, and use of degree titles may be restricted or illegal in some jurisdictions.ED.gov Accrediting Agencies Recognized by the US Department of Education Students who attend institutions of higher education that are accredited through associations not recognized by the US Department of Education do not qualify for Title IV funding (Pell Grants, Stafford Loans, etc.).College Accreditation in the United States - TOC
Prior to 2002, Trinity pursued endorsement of its courses with the University of Liverpool.Wales Spurns QAA Advice The university, however, did not endorse theological courses. In 2002, Liverpool decided to “transfer the accreditation role to a theologically orientated institution” after consultation with the QAA. In the United Kingdom, the QAA oversees the Academic Infrastructure of institutions, which includes frameworks for higher education qualifications, code of practice, subject benchmark statements, and programme specifications.QAA Academic Standards and Quality
In 2004, Trinity was granted candidacy status with the Higher Learning Commission of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools. The institution provided a self-study report, hosted a team of North Central Association evaluators for a site visit, and expected a second campus visit in autumn 2006. However, Trinity resigned from candidacy status effective October 20, 2006.Higher Learning Commission Institution Directory - Trinity This choice was made after the HLC continually went back and forth on Trinity, costing multiple thousands of dollars each year. Initially the reason for being denied accreditation was for course work that was "too challenging", but ultimately Trinity did not have enough "financial stability reserve."
From 2002 to 2007, Canterbury Christ Church University endorsed courses and programmes offered by Trinity. The endorsed courses and programmes were subject to the university’s “academic and quality-assurance processesCanterbury Collaborative Provision but students did not receive its degrees or awards.”
In August 2007, Trinity received support for set courses and programmes by the University of Wales. Validation with the university is awarded to an institution developing and delivering a programme of study equivalent to the quality and standard followed by the university.Information About Validation The validation made it possible for Trinity to offer degrees from the University of Wales—rather than from Trinity itself—up to the graduate level. To be awarded validation, Trinity was required to document and satisfy all quality assurance standards as outlined by the university, which includes QAA national standards related to the framework for higher education qualifications, programme specifications, subject benchmark statements, and code of practice. A validation site visit of Trinity by a panel of assessors appointed by the university was also required for Trinity to demonstrate evidence of the attainment of said standards.Validation Unit Quality Handbook - Contents
At the time of validation in 2007, there was no requirement for the university to work only with accredited institutions.BBC News | UK | Wales Uni’s US College Link Damaging 21 November 2008 However, in July 2008 the QAA advised U.K. institutions they should not form collaborative relationships with institutions not accredited in their home country. This prompted the university to begin to question their collaborative relationship with Trinity. Although Trinity successfully completed the validation process in order to achieve validation, in November 2008 the university cut ties with Trinity.
In 2008, Trinity applied for accreditation with the Distance Education Training Council (DETC), which is recognized by the CHEA and the USDE. On October 7, 2011, DETC denied initial accreditation to Trinity citing Trinity's "failure to demonstrate compliance with Standard IX (Financial Responsibility)" as the reason for DETC's denial.DETC Web Site: accessed November 9, 2011 Trinity did not appeal DETC's decision, but Trinity disagreed with the DETC commissioners' decision, noting the demonstrated confidence of Trinity's banking institution. Trinity's comments also noted that Trinity had complied with all other requirements, including all academic standards, for DETC accreditation and that Trinity would continue seeking accreditation.ibid.

==Notable faculty==

==Notable alumni==

==References==

==External links==


