[[David Jackman (minister)]]

CATEGORIES: English evangelicals, Christian writers, Christian religious leaders, Living people, Alumni of Trinity College, Bristol, 1942 births, Alumni of Downing College, Cambridge

David Jackman (born 10 July 1942) is a renowned British Evangelical Christian speaker, and former president of The Proclamation Trust.The Proclamation Trust :: The Leadership Team and Trustees  He founded the Cornhill Training Course in 1991 and was previously Minister of Above Bar Church, Southampton from 1976 - 1991.Oak Hill College: The faculty
Jackman attended Downing College, Cambridge, and completed his theological training at Trinity College, Bristol, where he studied under J. Alec Motyer and J. I. Packer. Jackman also served with the Universities and Colleges Christian Fellowship (UCCF).Ministry Matters Conference - Past MMs In 1974 he wrote his first short book, Starting as a Student: A Christian Approach, an 88-page pocketbook designed to prepare students for University or College life.
He moved to Southampton in 1976 to work as assistant minister of Above Bar Church under Leith Samuel, becoming the Senior Minister in 1980.
After 15 years at Above Bar Church, Jackman was recruited by Dick Lucas to found the Cornhill Training Course in London in 1991.  The course is a ministry of The Proclamation Trust, and is designed to train evangelical preachers in exegesis, exposition and communication skills.The Proclamation Trust - additional details of the Cornhill Course
In 2004 he became the president of The Proclamation Trust, and is now involved in Trust conferences for preachers and in producing distance learning materials and books.  He has also been a speaker at the Keswick ConventionWelcome to Keswick Ministries and Word Alive.99 Press Releases - Spring Harvest Web Site  His expository writing work includes commentaries on Judges & Ruth,Nelson Ministry Services Creator: 'Dr. David Jackman' the Letters of John and Let’s Study 1 Corinthians.
In addition to his role at The Proclamation Trust, Jackman is a visiting lecturer at Oak Hill Theological College in London as an expert in free church ministry. He is a former chairman of the 9:38 Committee, a national evangelical interdenominational organisation established to help people consider the possibilities of paid gospel ministry.9:38 - Gospel Workers For the 21st Century
Jackman is married to Heather, and together they have two grown children.

==Book titles==

==References==

==External links==


