[[National Cancer Research Institute]]

CATEGORIES: Cancer organizations, Non-profit organisations based in the United Kingdom, Cancer in the United Kingdom, 2001 establishments in the United Kingdom, Organizations established in 2001

The National Cancer Research Institute (NCRI) is a UK-wide partnership between government health departments, charities, research councils and industry, which exists to promote communication, coordination and collaboration in cancer research.  Rather than replace or duplicate any of the functions of its 22 member associations and agencies, it seeks to add value through joint planning, coordination and initiating projects for the benefit of cancer research and, ultimately, cancer patients.

==History==

In May 1997, the UK Prime Minister held a Downing Street Cancer Summit which led to the formation of the Cancer Research Funders Forum, bringing together the main government and charitable agencies that fund cancer research in the UK for the first time.
Ian Gibson MP, a former cancer researcher from the University of East Anglia, called for the creation of a UK National Cancer Institute in November 1998, modelled on the National Cancer Institute in the USA. He used his influence as a member of the British House of Commons Science and Technology Committee to promote the idea and, in early 2000 the committee held an enquiry into the funding of cancer research in the UK which reported in July 2000, recommending "the creation of a new National Cancer Research Institute to set national research priorities and to co-ordinate and fund cancer research in the UK." 
Soon afterwards, in September 2000, the Department of Health published their first NHS Cancer Plan which announced that the Department would work with the Cancer Research Funders Forum to create a National Cancer Research Institute which would take a more proactive role in the strategic co-ordination of cancer research.
The NCRI was formally launched on 1 April 2001.

==Activities==

Current activities of the NCRI include: 
The NCRI has also been responsible for:
The NCRI was, and remains, a leader in the introduction of patient/public involvement in clinical research. The NCRI Consumer Liaison Group was founded in 2000 and is administered by the National Cancer Research Network (NCRN).  In the NCRI's early years the Chair of the Consumer Liaison Group was an NCRI Board member ex-officio. Since 2007 two patient/public Board appointments have been made following open advertisement.

==NCRI member organisations==

==Sources==

==External links==


