[[Uttarpara Govt. High School]]

CATEGORIES: Schools in West Bengal, Educational institutions established in 1846

Uttarpara Government High School (also known as Uttarpara Rastriya Uchcha Vidyalaya(Bengali: উত্তরপাড়া রাষ্ট্রীয় উচ্চ বিদ্যালয় )) is a school situated in Uttarpara (Bengali: উত্তরপাড়া), a town of Hooghly District, West Bengal, India. The school is directly under the Government of West Bengal. The present Headmaster is Mr. Pradip Kumar Basu.

==History==

In 1835 Education Minutes, T.B. (later Lord) Macaulay as Law Member 
of the Supreme Council summarily rejected Indian languages as being obsolete 
for communication media to deserve consideration for the patronage of the 
colonial govt. Remarkably, no protest came against this policy of adopting 
English as the medium of instruction from the Indian literati. 
English education, therefore, became a valid passport for jobs 
to the middle and upper-middle-class people of the mid-19th century Bengal. 
Naturally, the demand for English High Schools became increasingly 
popular in and around Calcutta especially after the 40's of the last century.
Against this backdrop, a man like Babu Joy Krishna who had English education 
as well as the opportunities to interact closely with the English people 
for quite a long time, finally deciding to settle down in his birthplace, that is, 
at Uttarpara, found the conditions there not at all up to the mark 
of his satisfaction. This was more so because neither physically 
nor mentally was he ever confined to the four corners of his own locality. 
He, therefore, developed the idea of setting up one English High School in his locality. 
This noble idea of his got a strong support from his brother 
Babu Rajkrishna as well as the people of this locality.
At the end of 1845, both Joykrishna and Raj Krishna wrote an application 
to the then Magistrate of Howrah Mr. G.F. Cockburn 
for the opening of a good school in Uttarpara. To justify their demand, 
they cited the fact that the nearest Govt. school was in Howrah 
which was at least six miles away from Uttarpara and, therefore, 
not within the easy reach of the people of this locality.
In their application they also promised to pay Rs. 100/- per month from 
their landed property to the school. Morever, they also assured the Govt. 
that if the Govt. would accept the proposal for the school, 
then the people of this locality would give financial support 
(Rs. 5000/-) to the school. Strongly recommending the proposal of the 
Mukherjees Mr. Cockburn transmitted the application to the then Secretary of 
the Judicial Department Mr. F.J. Halliday who finally approved of the scheme.
As a result of this, the school at Uttarpara (Ooterparah School) was opened 
in March, 1846 in a few scattered hutments near Bally Khal originally meant 
to house the workers of Bally Tension Bridge. To start with, 
the school had Mr. Robert Hand as the Headmaster with only one 
assistant master named Mr. C. Grant and an enrolled student strength of 167.

==External links==


