[[Ron Suresha]]

CATEGORIES: American activists, Bisexual men, Bisexual rights activists, Bisexual writers, LGBT rights activists from the United States, LGBT writers from the United States, American non-fiction writers, Living people, Bear (gay culture)

Ron Jackson Suresha is an American author and anthologist of books centering on gay and bisexual men's subcultures, particularly the Bear community.

==Biography==

Suresha was born in Detroit, Michigan, and attended grade school in the northwest suburb of Oak Park.
Suresha and his husband (styled "husbear"), Rocco Russo, were legally married in Provincetown, Massachusetts, in October 2004, and received a Connecticut civil union one year later.  They lived until 2011 in New London, Connecticut and now live in New Milford, Connecticut.
Suresha's nonfiction anthology, Bears on Bears: Interviews & Discussions (2002), includes 25 dialogues with 57 bear-identified men and bear-lovers from around the world, such as comedian Bruce Vilanch, porn model Jack Radcliffe, and Survivor star Richard Hatch. In the introduction, Suresha asserts that Bears on Bears is "the first interview book ... compiled primarily from online interactions" using online chat technology.Bears on Bears, 2002, Introduction, p. xix  
A bisexual-identified man and bi rights advocate, Suresha edited, with Peter Chvany, the nonfiction book Bi Men : Coming Out Every Which Way (2006). Suresha's two bisexual men's anthologies were named finalists in the 2006 Lambda Literary Awards (Lammys) in Bisexual Literature.
In 2008, Suresha edited for Journal of Bisexuality a special issue commemorating the sexagennial (60th) anniversary of the publication of Sexual Behavior in the Human Male, commonly known as the Kinsey Report, as Bisexual Perspectives on the Life and Work of Alfred C. Kinsey, which was named a finalist in the 2008 Lambda Literary Awards in Bisexual Literature. 
That year, Suresha became acquisitions editor for Bear Bones Books, an imprint of LGBT publisher Lethe Press, which released a revised edition of his Bears on Bears, including five additional interviews. The imprint has also reissued several men's fiction anthologies he edited under the pseudonym R. Jackson.
Suresha published in 2011 a folklore collection of humorous tales about the character Nasreddin, The Uncommon Sense of the Immortal Mullah Nasruddin from Lethe Press, which was named a Storytelling World Honor Title in 2012 in the adult collections category, and which received a 2013 Anne Izard Storytellers' Choice Award.
With Scott McGillivray, Suresha compiled and wrote a 2012 photobook, Fur: The Love of Hair, for German publisher Bruno_Gmünder_Verlag, which received a Rainbow Book Award.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


