[[Central Middlesex Hospital]]

CATEGORIES: NHS hospitals in London

Central Middlesex hospital (CMH) is in the centre of the Park Royal business estate, on the border of two London boroughs, BrentLondon Borough of Brent Web page about the hospital and Ealing.

==Hospital role==

CMH is a teaching hospital of Imperial College School of Medicine and part of the North West London Hospitals NHS Trust. This trust incorporates Northwick Park and St Mark's Hospitals in Harrow, Central Middlesex Hospital in Park Royal and outreach services based close to the local communities in Wembley, Willesden, Edgware, Stanmore and Harlesden.
There are 214 beds on site in general medicine, general surgery, urology including orthopaedics, ENT, ophthalmology, oral surgery, obstetrics, gynaecology, cardiology and gastroenterology.  The hospital has particular experience in the care of patients with conditions aggravated by deprivation, specifically TB, diabetes and coronary heart disease, and is a leader in the research and treatment of sickle-cell disease.
CMH has recently been rebuilt, using the proceeds of land sales and a PFI project. The old buildings were demolished, to be replaced by modern and accessible new ones, including the ACAD Centre (1999) and main building (2006).  Much of the original site has been sold for complementary mixed-use redevelopment, including residential accommodation.
Keith Moon (The Who) and Nicky Hopkins, world famous session pianist, were born here as their families lived in the borough of Wembley at that time.  Peter Moss, a close friend of Vivian Stanshall and his musical director for years, was also born in this hospital.
The hospital featured in the film 28 Days Later, with the protagonist Jim waking up in a deserted ACAD Centre.[tpl]Citation needed|date=November 2007[/tpl]

==BECaD unit==

The £62.5 million Brent Emergency Care and Diagnostic Centre (BECaD) at Central Middlesex Hospital, Park Royal, London, was completed in March 2007. The scheme was designed by HLM Architects in association with Avanti Architects and constructed by Bouygues (UK) through the PFI form of procurement.
The BECaD project was developed in two phases. The first phase of the overall redevelopment of the site was completed in March 2006 with the opening of the BECaD building after a construction period of 28 months. This was followed by the demolition of the existing Victorian hospital buildings and subsequent landscaping of the southern sector of the site, completed during January 2007.
The major functional components in the new BECaD comprise an Acute and Critical Care Centre (ACCC) largely related to emergency services and an Expert Consulting Centre (ECC) which offers an innovative vision of outpatient functions and an operational base for all the clinicians involved in the acute services. The same clinical teams will work across both elements of the accommodation provided based on a new model of care developed for these key functions. The Acute & Critical Care facility is split into a Major Assessment Centre (MAC) for major or critical conditions, and an Urgent Treatment Centre (UTC) for the treatment of all minor injuries and illnesses which normally cause congestion in traditional A&E departments. A separately streamed emergency receiving facility for children has also been provided as part of this component.
BECaD delivers a non-institutional, therapeutic healthcare environment based on an innovative model of patient-focused care and the provision of flexible and adaptable accommodation. Its design incorporates a palette of natural materials, a positive wayfinding strategy utilising internal materials, colours, landscaping, artworks, and signage in a co-ordinated manner to be reassuring and welcoming.
From an urban design viewpoint, the new facility is conceived as a major catalyst in the regeneration of Park Royal. It is designed to maximise ease of access via a recognisable and welcoming main entrance atrium which faces southwards over a new elliptical civic space and bus station.

==Transport Links==

The closest London Underground stations to the hospital are, North Acton and Hanger Lane which are on the Central line, Park Royal which is on the Piccadilly line and Willesden Junction and Harlesden which are both on the London Overground and Bakerloo line.
The buses that serve Central Middlesex Hospital are:

==Development==

Despite the rail stations described above, public transport to the hospital has generally been felt to be poor, and road congestion, particularly at peak hours, has been an unattractive feature of the Park Royal estate.
A 'FastBus'Park Royal Partnership FastBus proposal limited-stop bus service has been proposed, calling at the hospital, and promoted by Brent, Ealing, and the Park Royal Partnership. Some bus lanes have been added to new roads at certain places, to facilitate this. However, as of mid-2009, Transport for London has not yet accepted the FastBus proposal.
In 2004, the multinational Diageo company agreed to build extra Central Line platforms at Park Royal tube station,alwaystouchout Park Royal Central line platformsLondon Borough of Brent: Central line agreement Audit trail for planning agreement not all on-line, but starts here as part of its First Central business park,First Central business park Map of  Park Royal Central line platforms built on the site of the (now demolished) Guinness brewery. This would improve bus services to the hospital. As of early 2012, this had not yet happened.
In early 2008, the London Group of the Campaign for Better Transport (UK) published a planLondon Campaign for Better Transport North and West London light railway (NWLLR) / Brent Cross Railway (BCR) plan for a North and West London Light railway service through the Park Royal estate to the hospital, and connecting to Wembley, Ealing Broadway, West Hampstead and Finchley Central. In April 2009, the Ealing voted unanimously at a full council meetingLondon Borough of Ealing full council meeting, April 2009 to support in principle the light railway. As of early 2012, there has been no progress.
Both transport proposals would improve staff and patient connections between CMH and Northwick Park Hospital, the other main site in the NHS Trust.

===Local housing===

In July 2009, Network Housing Group won planning permission from the London Borough of Brent for 145 keyworker flats next to Central Middlesex Hospital.propertyweek.com Park Royal flats proceed
CZWG Architects designed the complex to achieve level 4 in the government’s Code for Sustainable Homes. The scheme includes rental and shared-ownership flats and will be managed by Network’s London Strategic Housing.
Housing associations were recently criticised by the Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment (CABE), the design watchdog, for producing substandard affordable housing, but Network claimed the Brent project ‘will show that the sector does produce dynamic and well-designed properties’.

==References==


