[[GW approximation]]

CATEGORIES: Quantum field theory

can be truncated after the first term:
Another way to say the same thing is that that self-energy is expanded in a formal Taylor series in powers of the screened interaction W and the lowest order term is kept in the expansion in GWA.
The above formulae are schematic in nature and show the overall idea of the approximation.  More precisely, if we label an electron coordinate with its position, spin, and time and bundle all three into a composite index (the numbers 1, 2, etc.), we have
where the "+" superscript means the time index is shifted forward by an infinitesimal amount.  The GWA is then
To put this in context, if one replaces W by the bare Coulomb interaction (i.e. the usual 1/r interaction), one generates the standard perturbative series for the self-energy found in most many-body textbooks.  The GWA with W replaced by the bare Coulomb yields nothing other than the Hartree–Fock exchange potential (self-energy).  Therefore, loosely speaking, the GWA represents a type of dynamically screened Hartree–Fock self-energy.
In a solid state system, the series for the self-energy in terms of W should converge much faster than the traditional series in the bare Coulomb interaction.  This is because the screening of the medium reduces the effective strength of the Coulomb interaction:  for example, if one places an electron at some position in a material and asks what the potential is at some other position in the material, the value is smaller than given by the bare Coulomb interaction (inverse distance between the points) because the other electrons in the medium polarize (move or distort their electronic states) so as to screen the electric field.  Therefore, W is a smaller quantity than the bare Coulomb interaction so that a series in W should have higher hopes of converging quickly.
interaction is much weaker and is more likely to give a rapidly converging perturbative series.

==Software implementing the GW approximation==

==References==


