[[John Harrison (director)]]

CATEGORIES: American film producers, American film score composers, American television composers, American television directors, American television writers, Carnegie Mellon University alumni, Emerson College alumni, Living people, People from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Year of birth missing (living people)

John Harrison is a writer, director, producer and composer.
Harrison was born and raised in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. He graduated from Emerson College in Boston with a BS in Theater Arts. For several years after that, he performed on the road with his band Homebrew before moving back to Pittsburgh to take a master's degree in film and television from Carnegie Mellon University. At the same time, he joined legendary blues guitarist Roy Buchanan, with whom he toured across the US and internationally for four years. He was also featured on several of Buchanan's albums, including That's What I'm Here For (1974), Live Stock (1975), and A Street Called Straight (1976).
In 1973, Harrison and his friends, Dusty Nelson and Pasquale Buba formed a film production company eventually named The Image Works to produce commercials and industrials in the Pittsburgh area. This partnership eventually led to the production of the film Effects (1980) which Harrison produced and performed in as the character, Lacey Bickle. In 1974, Harrison began a long collaboration and friendship with filmmaker George A. Romero. Harrison performed as Sir Pelinore in Romero's "Knightriders", then became his 1st Assistant Director for both Romero films "Creepshow" (1982) and "Day of the Dead" (1985).
Harrison also composed the scores for the Creepshow (1982), Day of the Dead (1985) as well as playing the "Screwdriver Zombie" in Romero's classic Dawn of the Dead (1978). The music that was composed for the score of Creepshow was also featured in the fake trailer for Thanksgiving in the film Grindhouse (2007).
After Creepshow, Harrison moved to Los Angeles to continue his writing and directing career. He wrote, directed and composed the music for multiple episodes of "Tales from the Darkside" TV show. He was then tapped by producer Richard P. Rubinstein to direct "Tales from the Darkside: The Movie" (1990) for Paramount which won the Gran Prix du Festival at Avoriaz, France (1991). Harrison's collaboration with Rubinstein culminated in the Emmy winning TV miniseries, "Frank Herbert's Dune" (2000) which Harrison wrote and directed, and "Frank Herbert's Children of Dune" (2003) which Harrison wrote and Co-Executive Produced.
In the Fall of '06, Harrison reunited with mentor Romero to co-produce Romero's film "Diary of the Dead" (2007). His action suspense thriller, "Blank Slate", for producer Dean Devlin, which Harrison wrote and directed, aired as a twenty episode micro-series on TNT in the Fall of '08. In 2009, Harrison completed his adaptation of acclaimed horror novelist Clive Barker's "Book of Blood"  which Harrison co-wrote and directed.

==Filmography==

==Soundtracks==

==Books==

==References==

==External links==


