[[Paul MacKendrick]]

CATEGORIES: American academics, American historians, Historians of antiquity, University of Wisconsin–Madison faculty, Harvard University alumni, Alumni of Balliol College, Oxford, Fulbright Scholars, Guggenheim Fellows, American military personnel of World War II, Clan Henderson, People from Taunton, Massachusetts, Writers from Massachusetts, Writers from Wisconsin, 1914 births, 1998 deaths, Books about Dacia, Rome Prize winners

Paul Lachlan MacKendrick (1914 – 1998) was an American classicist, author and teacher.
He was born in Taunton, Massachusetts, but most of his productive years had been lived in Madison, Wisconsin.
MacKendrick was educated at Harvard University (1934 B.A., summa cum laude; 1937 M.A.; 1938 Ph.D.) and Balliol College, Oxford, after which he taught at Phillips Academy for some years. Future United States President George H.W. Bush was a student of MacKendrick's while he taught at Phillips Academy.Professor MacKendrick recounted this to a Latin course at the University of Wisconsin attended by the author of this note. He joined the U.S. Naval Reserve and served from 1941-45.
He taught at Harvard in 1946 and then moved to University of Wisconsin–Madison as Assistant Professor of Classics where he taught for six years. MacKendrick was named a Professor of Classics in 1952 and in 1975, the Lily Ross Taylor Professor of Classics. In all, he taught at the University of Wisconsin from 1946 to 1984.
In 1952, he worked with Herbert M. Howe on the publication of Classics in Translation, an anthology of selections by ancient Greek and Roman writers. In 1958, two books followed: The Ancient World, co-authored with Vincent M. Scramuzza and The Roman Mind At Work.
He is most widely known for a series of books that utilise the discoveries of archeology to reconstruct the histories of particular cultures or civilizations. The first of these, The Mute Stones Speak, surveys the cultures of the Italian peninsula from prehistoric times, with emphasis on the Romans, to the adoption of Christianity as the official religion of the empire in 324 A.D.
The Greek Stones Speak then followed in 1962. Starting with the Troy and Heinrich Schliemann's excavations, the reader is told of accounts of excavations of major centers of the Hellenic world, including the story of Michael Ventris' decipherment of Linear B.
Several additional titles appeared in this series, and by 1980 it had surveyed regions and cultures of alomost the entire area of the Roman Empire.
Professor MacKendrick had retired from teaching in 1984.

==Honors==

==Selected Books==

==Awards==

==Notes==


