[[Glenni William Scofield]]

CATEGORIES: 1817 births, 1891 deaths, Hamilton College (New York) alumni, Members of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives, Members of the United States House of Representatives from Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania lawyers, Pennsylvania state court judges, Pennsylvania State Senators, Judges of the United States Court of Claims, People from Chautauqua County, New York, People from Warren County, Pennsylvania, Disease-related deaths in Pennsylvania, United States Article I federal judges appointed by James A. Garfield, Pennsylvania Republicans, Burials in Pennsylvania

Glenni William Scofield (March 11, 1817 – August 30, 1891) was a Republican member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Pennsylvania.
Glenni W. Scofield was born in Dewittville, New York. He attended the common schools and learned the printing trade. He returned to classical study and graduated from Hamilton College in Clinton, New York in 1840.  He engaged in teaching, studied law, was admitted to the bar in 1842 and commenced practice in Warren, Pennsylvania. He served as district attorney from 1846-48. He was a member of the Pennsylvania State House of Representatives from 1849-51. An anti-slavery Democrat, he changed his affiliation to the Republican Party in 1856. He served in the Pennsylvania State Senate from 1857-59. He was appointed president judge of the eighteenth judicial district of Pennsylvania in 1861.
Scofield was elected as a Republican to the Thirty-eighth and to the five succeeding Congresses. He served as chairman of the United States House Committee on Revisal and Unfinished Business during the Thirty-ninth Congress and the United States House Committee on Naval Affairs during the Forty-first, Forty-second, and Forty-third Congresses. He was not a candidate for renomination in 1874. He resumed practising law in Warren. He was appointed Register of the Treasury by President Rutherford B. Hayes and served from 1878-81. President James A. Garfield appointed him associate justice of the United States Court of Claims, and he served from 1881-91.  
He died in Warren in 1891, and was interred in Oakland Cemetery in Pleasant Township, Pennsylvania, near Warren. 
==Sources== 


