[[Lleweni Hall]]

CATEGORIES: Houses in Denbighshire, Tremeirchion, Gardens by Lancelot "Capability" Brown

Lleweni Hall (Welsh: Plas Lleweni; sometimes also referred to as Llewenny Palace) was a stately home in Denbighshire, northeast Wales, around 2 miles or 3 km north-east of Denbigh on the banks of the River Clwyd. It was the principal seat of the Salusbury family and their descendants from 1066 until 1748, and the present territorial designation of the most senior branch of the family.

==Early history==

Lleweni was originally called Llysmarchweithian ("Marchweithian Court") and belonged to Marchweithian, Lord of Is Aled, a Welsh chieftain reputedly one of the founders of the Fifteen Tribes of Wales. It fell into the hands of the Salusbury family soon after the Norman Conquest when it was awarded to Adam de Salusbury for his service to William the Conqueror. Although there had been some sort of residence on the site since 720, Lleweni was first erected under the direction of the first Sir John Salusbury who had been granted new arms and a position at the court of Queen Elizabeth I in 1578.
Lleweni evolved into a leading seat of Welsh culture during the life of Sir John Salusbury, who established a court at Lleweni in the mid to late 16th century. He was Controller of North Wales under Henry VIII, and died in 1578. The house was huge, with three wings and dozens of windows. His grandson inscribed a list of festive songs in a book of Welsh poetry in the 1590s. The Salusburys were closely associated with Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester. Sir John Salusbury was the grandfather of the John Salusbury who was Catrin of Berain's second son. In 1586 he married Ursula, illegitimate daughter of the 4th Earl of Derby and half-sister of Ferdinando Stanley, 5th Earl of Derby.

==Later history==

Lleweni Hall had over 200 rooms, according to Hester Piozzi, who spent part of her childhood on the estate. After the death of her uncle, the hall was the seat of the Cotton baronets. However the upkeep of Lleweni was ruinously expensive, and finally Sir Robert Salusbury Cotton arranged for the sale of the estate at the time of his death. His son Stapleton Cotton, 1st Viscount Combermere had hoped to preserve Lleweni, but taxes later forced the sale of the estate to William Hughes, 1st Baron Dinorben in order to pay off the debts of his father. Cotton later regretted selling Lleweni Hall after having regained his fortune.
Hughes tore down part of Lleweni to build Kinmel Hall, which he did not live to see completed. Kinmel Hall, which was finally built in 1871 by descendents of Hughes, closely mimics the façade of Lleweni. 
St Mary's and St Michael's Church, Burleydam, Cheshire, formerly the Cotton family's private chapel, has gates and railings from the hall.Hartwell C, Hyde M, Hubbard E, Pevsner N. The Buildings of England: Cheshire (2nd edn), p. 196 (Yale University Press; 2011) (ISBN 978 0 300 17043 6)

==Owners of Lleweni Hall==

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


