[[Ron Hazelton]]

CATEGORIES: American television personalities, Living people, 1942 births

Ron Hazelton (born May 29, 1942) is the host of several popular home improvement television series, most recently Ron Hazelton's HouseCalls. 

==Early career==

The son of a building contractor, Ron began his journey into the world of home improvement when he left a successful marketing career to return to his roots and hone his woodworking skills. After founding Cow Hollow Woodworks, an antiques restoration workshop in San Francisco, California in 1978, he became recognized as a master craftsman and cabinetmaker. 

==The House Doctor==

In 1989, Ron's first television series, The House Doctor, built significantly upon the concept of reality-based home improvement television. The series would eventually feature over 600 televised "house calls." Ron created, co-produced and hosted this series for American Broadcasting Company affiliate KGO-TV in San Francisco. The program was distributed by Home and Garden Television (HGTV) across North America, until 2001.

==Current career==

Ron has been the Home Improvement Editor for ABC Television's Good Morning America (GMA) program since 1996. Ron reports regularly on a variety of topics related to home improvement, design, repair, health, and safety.
Ron has been featured as a home improvement expert on The Oprah Winfrey Show, Inside Edition, Discovery Channel's Popular Mechanics, Lifetime Television's Our Home and The History Channel's series Modern Marvels — History of Tools, Hands on History and Save our History: Frontier Homes.
On-site coaching for do-it-yourselfers is a hallmark of Ron's own television shows. His current series, Ron Hazelton's HouseCalls, which he also produces and hosts, is a cross-country adventure in which Ron travels by motor home to assist people with a wide-variety of "weekend" projects. A state-of-the-art mobile workshop, loaded with the latest home improvement tools and gadgets, accompanies Ron to each location. The show also features improvements Ron makes to his own home.  Ron Hazelton's HouseCalls is distributed nationally by Tribune Entertainment.

==Home Fire Sprinkler Coalition==

As a spokesperson for the nonprofit 501(c)(3) Home Fire Sprinkler Coalition (HFSC) www.homefiresprinkler.org since 1997, Ron is a strong supporter of fire safety and is a powerful advocate of residential fire sprinklers.  Ron received a special Appreciation Award from the National Fire Sprinkler Association (NFSA) www.nfsa.org  for his work on behalf of the organization.  In 2008, Ron was named Fire Sprinkler Advocate of the Year by the American Fire Sprinkler Association (AFSA) www.firesprinkler.org.  In 1996, HFSC was founded by the AFSA, NFSA and the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) www.nfpa.org.  2008 Fire Sprinkler Advocate of the Year

==Author==

Ron is the author of "Ron Hazelton's HouseCalls: America's Most Requested Home Improvement Projects," published by Time-Life Books in 1999.

==Personal life==

Ron lives in New York City with his wife, television producer Lynn Drasin, their daughter Danielle Elizabeth Drasin (born July 8, 2001) and their son Max Earl Hazelton (born January 7, 2004).

==External links==


