[[A Capitol Fourth]]

CATEGORIES: Concerts, Independence Day (United States) festivals, Annual television programs

A Capitol Fourth is a free annual concert performed on the west lawn of the United States Capitol Building in Washington, D.C., in celebration of the Independence Day. Broadcast live on PBS, NPR and the American Forces Network, the concert is viewed and heard by millions across The United States and the world, as well as attended by more than half a million people at the Capitol.  The concert traditionally features elements of the 3rd U.S. Infantry Regiment (The Old Guard), the U.S. Army Band (Pershing's Own), the National Symphony Orchestra and the Choral Arts Society of Washington, who provide much of the music during the show for various celebrity artists. A celebrity host and a variety of guests entertain and pay tribute to their country throughout the evening.A Capitol Fourth - The Concert, PBS, accessed July 12, 2013"Motown The Musical Cast Performs on PBS's A Capitol Fourth, Broadwayworld.com, July 8, 2013
One journalist described the event as "a mix of patriotism and pop culture ... as the National Symphony Orchestra launched into Tchaikovsky's 1812 Overture with accompaniment from an Army artillery squad, a spectacular fireworks display erupted over the Washington Monument. There was something special about being in the nation's capital on Independence Day, surrounded by a few hundred thousand of our fellow citizens.Eblen, Tom. "Tom Eblen: Being at A Capitol Fourth made me proud to be an American", Herald-Leader], July 9, 2013

==History==

The National Symphony Orchestra began performing Independence Day concerts on the west lawn in 1979.  Two years later, first concert telecast was hosted by E. G. Marshall, with conductor Mstislav Rostropovich and performer Pearl Bailey.  It is now the highest-rated show on PBS.Yahr, Emily. "'A Capitol Fourth's broadcast reflects the new Americana: A reality TV parade of stars", The Washington Post, July 3, 2013"Creation of a National Institution", A Capitol Fourth, PBS, accessed July 12, 2013

==Performers==

Barry Bostwick hosted during several consecutive years prior to 2006, when Jason Alexander hosted.  The following year, Tony Danza served as host, and Jimmy Smits hosted for the following four years.  Tom Bergeron has hosted since 2012.  Erich Kunzel was music director until 2009, when Jack Everly took over.  Performers over the years have included Roberta Flack and Marvin Hamlisch (1987); Lee Ann Womack and Ray Charles (2000); John Williams, Dolly Parton and Kristin Chenoweth (2003); Robin Gibb and Clay Aiken (2004); Stevie Wonder (2006); Hayden Panettiere, Little Richard and Bebe Neuwirth (2007); Huey Lewis and the News, Taylor Hicks, Jerry Lee Lewis (2008); Aretha Franklin; Barry Manilow and the cast of Jersey Boys (2009);  Gladys Knight, Lang Lang and Reba McEntire (2010); Jordin Sparks; Kelli O'Hara; Matthew Morrison; Steve Martin, Josh Groban, Little Richard and the cast of Million Dollar Quartet (2011); Megan Hilty, Phillip Phillips, Matthew Broderick, Kelli O’Hara, Javier Colón, Kool & the Gang, Apolo Ohno, John Williams (2012); and Williams, Hilty, Manilow, Neil Diamond, Jackie Evancho, Candice Glover, Scotty McCreery and the cast of Motown: The Musical (2013).Gioia, Michael and Andrew Gans. "The Screening Room: Darren Criss, Megan Hilty, Jackie Evancho Perform on A Capitol Fourth", Playbill, July 5, 2013

===Traditions===

The concert begins with the U.S. national anthem.  Its finale begins with a rendition of Tchaikovsky's 1812 Overture by the National Symphony Orchestra (complete with cannon fire from the United States Army Presidential Salute Guns Battery and the concluding verse sung by the Choral Arts Society) and the National Park Service's fireworks show above the Washington Monument. Following the 1812 Overture, a series of John Philip Sousa's best-known marches are played.Gans, Andrew. "Jimmy Smits Hosts A Capitol Fourth; Reba McEntire, David Archuleta Perform", Playbill, July 4, 2010, accessed July 12, 2013

==The National Artistic Achievement Award==

The National Artistic Achievement Award has been presented on five occasions during the program for the performer's "dedication to enriching the national legacy of the performing arts":

==References==

==External links==


