[[Perumalpattu]]

CATEGORIES: Cities and towns in Tiruvallur district

Perumalpattu is a rapidly growing small town in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu. It is situated between Chennai and Arakkonam near the Chennai–Arakkonam railway line. It is a fast growing town in the suburb of Chennai. The closest railway station is Veppampattu which is about 2 km from Perumalpattu and MTH Road serve as good transport from/to Chennai. Frequent electric train services are operated from Chennai.
Perumalpattu village is very popular for Sri Panduranga Swami Temple & OM Sri Kalahasthi Eashwarar Temple.
The name can be attributed to the existence of a famous old Perumal (Lord Vishu of Hindu Mythology) temple.
The town has good water bodies, and, further, this location can be approached by the Lucas - Thiruvallur high road or Poonamalle high road. This is a good place for peaceful living away from the congested Chennai City.
The development of Perumalpattu is based on the rapid development of its neighboring town Veppampattu.  Owing to the presence of engineering and arts colleges and the railway station with its name, Veppampattu is rapidly urbanizing. However, Permalpattu still retains its village touch and greenery and people prefer to stay in Perumalpattu and travel to Veppampattu occasionally for the purchase of any required commodities.
Tamil Nadu Government has provided bus facility travel from Veppampattu to nearest town Poonamalee and to the Chennai shopping hub T. Nagar.  
Recently City union bank has opened ATM opp to sriram engineering college.  New Railway Over Bridge (ROB) across the railway track near Vepampattu railway station to link the transport between two major roads Chennai-Tiruttani Highway (NH-205) and Thiruvallur-Poonamalee High road (SH-50) through Perumalpattu road and the project is expected to be finished within few months.
The Outer Ring Road constructions will bring in more development in these areas.there are many school have been built within a radius of 2 kilometers to give good education for the children (Raja National Mat.Hr.sec school, Sriram Vidya Manthir (CBSE & Matric), Gomathi vidhyalaya, Gnana Banu School and a few government schools are available).

