[[William R. Cotton]]

CATEGORIES: American meteorologists, Living people, Colorado State University faculty, Climatologists

William R. Cotton is an American cloud physicist and mesoscale meteorologist educator. He is a Professor in the Department of Atmospheric Science at the Colorado State University.

==Background==

Cotton earned a B.A. in mathematics at University at Albany, The State University of New York (SUNY) in 1964, a M.S. in meteorology at Suny in 1966, and a Ph.D. in meteorology at Pennsylvania State University in 1970. He was appointed to the academic faculty at Colorado State University, Department of Atmospheric Science in 1974. He assumed the position of an Assistant Professor in the Department where he is now a tenured full Professor. He has been actively involved in observation and computer simulation of cumulus clouds and thunderstorms as well as other intermediate-scale cloud systems. His current interests are largely in the area of observation and modeling of larger clusters of thunderstorms that occur preferentially at night over the central United States, the simulation of severe thunderstorms including tornadoes and the application of the RAMS cloud model to forecasting agriculture and aviation impact variables. He has held positions at the Experimental Meteorological Laboratory, ERL, NOAA, and the United States Department of Commerce, and served as the head of the Numerical Simulation Group from 1970 to 1974.

==Mesoscale modeling==

Together with his several students who provided coding expertise as well as original scientific insights (including Chaing Chen, Piotr J. Flatau, Michael D. Moran, Jerome Schmidt, Craig J. Tremback, Gregory Tripoli) he developed one of the first comprehensive mesoscale weather forecast models in the US - the Regional Atmospheric Modeling System. This modelling system was subsequently merged with a smaller subset of the code based on the mesoscale model developed independently by Roger A. Pielke for his Ph. D. research related to sea breeze studies and subsequently with his students at the Colorado State University.  The Regional Atmospheric Modeling System (RAMS) has been used as a basis for other weather forecast.Original RAMS paperGoogle Scholar Over 650 papers have referenced the original RAMS paper  He has indicated skepticism of the level of anthropogenic global warming, stating that it is an open question if human produced changes in climate are large enough to be detected from the noise of the natural variability of the climate system. Presentation on climate change

==Publications==

Professor Cotton is a highly cited author. He has published more than 120 papers in peer-reviewed journals, seven chapters in books, co-authored three books, and authored one book. Well known are:

==References==


