[[Steven C. Hackett]]

CATEGORIES: American economists, American academics, Texas A&M University alumni, Montana State University alumni, Indiana University faculty, Humboldt State University faculty, Living people, People from Arcata, California

Professor Steven C. Hackett began his career at the rank of Assistant Professor at Indiana University in Bloomington in 1989. He currently holds the rank of Professor of Economics at Humboldt State University (HSU).
Early on his research was focused on the economic performance of contractual relationships, such as the social dilemmas associated with common-pool resources like oil and gas fields, groundwater basins or marine fisheries. Self-interested or opportunistic behavior in these circumstances can result in inferior economic outcomes. This work began at Texas A&M and was further cultivated by his affiliation with Nobel Laureate Elinor Ostrom's Workshop in Political Theory and Policy Analysis while a member of the graduate faculty at Indiana University in Bloomington.Workshop publications. He was particularly interested in the challenges of structuring successful agreements capable of preventing opportunistic behavior when stakeholders are heterogeneous, or have made prior relationship-specific investments (research influenced by the work of Nobel Laureate Oliver Williamson).JLEO 10(2). Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization. His research approaches involved developing theoretical models and evaluating testable hypotheses through the use of laboratory experimental methods.Economic Inquiry 31(2). Economic Inquiry. Another line of his research involved the use of economic modeling approaches to understand the political economy of environmental regulation. In several papers Hackett and collaborators investigated how voluntary actions by firms to limit pollution can have strategic value relative to competitors, or as a way of shaping future regulatory policy. In another line of research Hackett and colleagues developed a model for the partial deregulation of critical energy markets, such as for natural gas, and identified some of the hazards associated with applying that model to electricity deregulation.Journal of Law and Economics 43(2). University of Chicago Journals -- Journal of Law and Economics. Hackett's curiosity about contracting problems also resulted in papers on diverse topics such as revenue-sharing problems in medical group practices, and factors that influence foreign direct investment decisions by multinational firms.
More recently Hackett has worked collaboratively on a number of projects addressing marine fishery economics and policy and renewable energy. In various projects he has analyzed California’s wetfish industry complex, California’s Dungeness crab fishery and associated processing sector, and the California and Oregon salmon fisheries.CSC wetfish report. California Seafood Council. URL accessed 06 December 2008.California Agriculture 58(4). California Agriculture.CDFG salmon report. California Department of Fish and Game. URL accessed 01 June 2009. In 2009 his research team released the COFHE model for assessing economic impact in each of California's commercial marine fisheries. Unique models were developed to function at county, regional, and statewide scales.COFHE economic impact model for California marine fisheries. California Department of Fish and Game. URL accessed 29 May 2009. Hackett has also returned to energy economics, with a focus on renewable energy and energy efficiency. He recently contributed a chapter to California's wave energy white paper.California's wave energy white paper California Energy CommissionHSU Marketing and Communications HSU Press Release 8 December 2008 He is collaborating with the Schatz Energy Research Center and the Redwood Coast Energy Authority on a California Energy Commission-funded project that will identify ways to create a renewable energy secure community by managing the Humboldt micro-grid with 75 to 100 percent of energy supplies derived from renewable sources.California Energy Commission. California Energy Commission PIER grants 2009. URL accessed 29 May 2009. In recognition of his research into regional economic issues, and what HSU President Rollin Richmond described as "the clarity and significance his work brings to global questions of environmental economics," Hackett was selected as Humboldt State University's Scholar of the Year for 2005.HSU Scholar of the Year Recipients. Academic Affairs, Humboldt State University. URL accessed 06 December 2008.

==Selected Literature==

==External links==

==See also==

==References==


