[[Hurstville FC]]

CATEGORIES: Croatian sports clubs in Australia, Soccer clubs in New South Wales, Soccer clubs in Sydney, Association football clubs established in 1970, 1970 establishments in Australia

Hurstville Football Club (formally Hurstville Zagreb Football Club) is a soccer club based in the suburb of Hurstville, Sydney, Australia. The club was founded in 1970, by Croatian Australians.

==History==

In November 1970 Hurstville Zagreb Soccer Club's humble beginnings began in the New South Wales Soccer Association playing out of the St George district. While playing in these surroundings the club won numerous minor premierships and grand finals.
In 1991 the club was promoted into the New South Wales Soccer Federation in Division Five. It has been in this league where Hurstville Zagreb SC has really shone through. In ten years the club has moved up through the divisions playing as high as the State Super League in the 2004 and 2005 seasons. The club proudly plays its soccer in Division One.
Over the years the club has been involved in the development of a number of Socceroos and professional footballers, such as, Ante Milicic, Ante Covic, Eddy Bosnar, Ante Moric, Joe Vrkic, Mark Rudan and Luka Glavas. These players only represent the tip of the iceberg of players who come through the ranks of Hurstville Zagreb SC.
Every year, Zagreb also hosts the Martin Knezevic Cup in memory of former player, coach and friend, Martin Knezevic.
Zagreb has become the second largest Croatian soccer club in Sydney, after Sydney United. The club currently competes in the New South Wales State League Division One, the third highest league in NSW. The club hosted the Australian-Croatian Soccer Tournament in 1999.
In 2010, Zagreb celebrated its 40th anniversary on 1 May. The club hosted a successful Gala Night at the Croatian Club Punchbowl which featured all the players from the original 1970 team as well as the 2010 team. 
Despite a disappointing season, Zagreb attended the 36th Australian-Croatian Soccer Tournament where they finished third, missing out on the grand final by a solitary goal and defeating Canberra Deakin and St Albans Saints respectively. 
At Football NSW's annual Silver Medal Dinner awards ceremony, captain Vjekoslav Steve Zoric was named as New South Wales State League Division One player of the season.

==Hurstville Oval==

Hurstville oval, located on Dora Street, Hurstville is where Zagreb host their home games. It is a picturesque and famous sporting venue. Situated in the St.George District, the ground has a small grandstand and the recently constructed Booth-Saunders Pavilion. Hurstville oval also hosted St.George District Rugby League Football Club, St.George Rugby Union, St.George Cricket  and the St.George Australian Rules.

==Current 1st Grade Squad==

Goalkeepers
Defenders
Midfielders
Strikers
Coach
Assistant Coach

==Current U/20's Squad==

Goalkeepers
Defenders
Midfielders
Strikers
Coach

==Notable players==

==See also==


