[[Black Cherry (Kumi Koda album)]]

CATEGORIES: Kumi Koda albums, 2006 albums, Avex Group albums, Albums certified million by the Recording Industry Association of Japan

Black Cherry is Kumi Koda's 5th studio album. Much like the two best collections before it, this album came in three editions; a CD only, a CD+DVD and a CD+2DVD version. The first DVD included all but one of Koda's post: second session solo PVs (Futari de…) and the second DVD featured a drama called Cherry Girl, which starred Koda in her first acting role as a main character. This drama was produced by the team who created the drama Busu no Hitomi ni Koishiteru (the drama for which Koi no Tsubomi was the themesong for). On top of all this, the first press versions of these albums featured three bonus tracks: "Twinkle" (from the "Amazing Nuts!" single), "GO WAY!!" (the theme song for the 2006 Crayon Shin-chan anime movie) and "Won't Be Long: Cherry Version" (a different version of the collaboration single "Won't Be Long" Kumi performed with Exile). The first press versions also included an access code to a special Koda website, the chance to win original Koda "Black Cherry" goods (only if purchased alongside the Cherry Girl / Unmei single) and a bonus making feature on the PV DVD. 'Milk Tea' (Track 14) was Koda's first composition that was released on a CD. The "Introduction" track was produced into a full length song and included as a bonus track on Koda's "Kingdom" album.
This album claimed the number one spot for the week the first day of its release and on its first week of release, the album sold 502,426 units. The album remained on the top spot for another three consecutive weeks for a total of four weeks at the number one position. To date, the album has sold 1,031,408 units and has charted on the Oricon Top 300 albums chart for 60 weeks. Black Cherry is Kumi's highest selling studio album and is her only studio album to be certified million.
In 2007, Avex reported that Black Cherry sold 1,460,000 copies in Japan.

==Track listing==

==Charts==

Oricon Sales Chart (Japan)

==References==


