[[Elementeo]]

CATEGORIES: Card games introduced in 2011, Collectible card games

In the Elementeo Chemistry Card Game, elements have their own personalities—Oxygen becomes Oxygen Life-Giver, Sodium becomes Sodium Dragon, and Iodine becomes Iodine Mermaid. Elements can combine to make compounds and interact with properties and oxidation states.  For example, Oxygen Life Giver rusts metals, Copper Cyclops shocks element cards around him, and Helium Genie airlifts element cards. The goal of the game is to capture your opponent’s electrons and reduce them to 0.
The Elementeo Chemistry Card Game includes elements, compounds, and alchemy cards (special cards that include black holes and nuclear fusion).  The first version of the Elementeo Chemistry Card Game (v1) sold out in the summer of 2011 and the newest game (v2), with new cards and updates, is set to release at the start of the summer of 2012.  An Elementeo App was launched on the Apple App Store on April 14, 2012.

==Overview==

There are three types of cards in The Elementeo Chemistry Card Game:
Elements: Each element has a personality, illustration, and story. Elements range from Sodium Dragon and Potassium Peasant to Chlorine Troll and Iodine Mermaid.  In The Elementeo Chemistry Card Game (v1), each element card includes the element's symbol, atomic mass, atomic number, oxidation state, state of matter, and family/type. Elements move across the battlefield based on their state of matter—gases can move in all directions, while solids can only move up one step at a time. The strength of the element in the game is based on one of its oxidation states.  In The Elementeo Chemistry Card Game (v2), the Lewis Dot Structures are also included, as are new element cards including Gallium Gorilla and Vanadium Viking.
Compounds: Compounds are made from elements (i.e. Sodium + Chlorine = Salt, NaCl) and range from Salt and Glucose to Ammonia and Carbon Dioxide. Compounds have more strength and can help you quickly win the game—and like elements, you can use their special properties. The Elementeo Chemistry Card Game (v2) includes new compounds such as Citric Acid and Sodium Hydroxide.
Alchemy: Alchemy cards in the game include "Black Hole," "Sizzling Supernova," and "Chemist Wizards." Alchemy cards take chemistry and physics concepts and bring them into the game. Black hole, for example, can use its gravity to take away your opponent's cards for a turn.  The Elementeo Chemistry Card Game (v2) includes new alchemy cards such as Newton's Laws.
The "battlefield" of the game is a 5x5 array of card spaces, in which the player is free to move their elements on their turn. Elements move across the battlefield using their movement arrows, shown on the bottom-right of a card.
Goal: Your goal in The Elementeo Chemistry Card Game (v1 and v2) is to reduce your opponent's electrons to zero.
Turns: During each turn, a player must do three of the below actions:
The Elementeo App: The Elementeo App on the App Store includes 36 elements (first four rows of the periodic table) and allow users to create their own Elementeo cards.

==Release==

Anshul Samar, the CEO of Alchemist Empire (and creator of Elementeo) officially released the game at the National Association of the Gifted Conference in Tampa, Florida on November 1, 2009.

==External links==


