[[Yathothkari Perumal Temple]]

CATEGORIES: Divya Desams, Hindu temples in Kanchipuram

The Tiruvekkaa or Yathothkari Perumal Temle is a Hindu temple dedicated to Lord Vishnu located in Kanchipuram, Tamil Nadu, India.  It is one of the Divya Desams, the 108 temples of Vishnu revered by the 12 poet saints, or alwars.108 Vaishnavite Divya Desams: Divya desams in Pandya Nadu. M. S. Ramesh, Tirumalai-Tirupati Devasthanam.

==The Temple==

The presiding deity of this temple is Sonnavannam seitha perumal, meaning the Perumal who does what is said. One of the alwars, poet saints of 7-10th century, Poigai Alvar was born at this temple.South Indian shrines: illustrated P.539. P. V. Jagadisa Ayyar  Lord Brahma and lord Saraswati worshipped the lord here at the temple.
The Legend of the temple goes as follows.Once Thirumalisai Alvar’s disciple KaniKannan was heard singing praise of the Lord. Pleased with his voice, the king ordered that KaniKannan sing praise of him too. KaniKannan refused stating that he would sing praise only of the Lord and not of others.
An upset king banished him from the kingdom. KanniKannan narrated the happening to his guru Thirumalisai Alvar who decided to accompany him out of the kingdom.Thirumazhisai Azhvaar went up to the Lord and requested him too to join them on their journey.Vishnu is said to have rolled up the snake Sesha like a mattress and left with him.
As the lord obeyed what the alvar said he is called as Sonnavannam seitha perumal.

==Gallery==

Manavala Mamuni the leader of the Tengalai sect learnt the sri Bhashya and gave an erudite discourse here. Nayanar exhibited his erudition and scholarship by grasping the intricacies of Sri Bhasya deftly and then simultaneously expounding it to other disciples. The discourse took place at Yathothkari temple at Tiruvekkaa, where his idol is seen showing the vyakhyana mudra (Symbolizing spread of Knowledge) to commemorate this event. 4
Image:thiruvekka - yathothkari2.jpg|Thiruvekka Temple

==References==


