[[Georgia State Route 8]]

CATEGORIES: State highways in Georgia (U.S. state), Transportation in Atlanta, Georgia, Transportation in Athens, Georgia, Transportation in Haralson County, Georgia, Transportation in Carroll County, Georgia, Transportation in Douglas County, Georgia, Transportation in Cobb County, Georgia, Transportation in Fulton County, Georgia, Transportation in DeKalb County, Georgia, Transportation in Gwinnett County, Georgia, Transportation in Barrow County, Georgia, Transportation in Clarke County, Georgia, Transportation in Oconee County, Georgia, Transportation in Madison County, Georgia, Transportation in Franklin County, Georgia, Transportation in Hart County, Georgia

State Route 8 (SR 8) is a state highway that runs west-to-east through portions of Haralson, Carroll, Douglas, Cobb, Fulton, DeKalb, Gwinnett, Barrow, Clarke, Oconee, Madison, Franklin, and Hart counties, bisecting the northern part of the state of Georgia.  The route runs from its western terminus at US 78 and AL 4 at the Georgia-Alabama state line west of Tallapoosa to its eastern terminus at US 29 at the Georgia-South Carolina state line at the south end of Lake Hartwell.  The route is concurrent with either US 29 or US 78 for much of its entire length.

==Route description==

The route starts at the Alabama state line west of Tallapoosa in Haralson County, and closely parallels I-20 from there into Atlanta.  SR 8 heads through Bremen and crosses through Carroll County and Villa Rica and on through Douglasville in Douglas County.  The route continues through Austell in Cobb County before it reaches the City of Atlanta and Fulton County, crossing the Downtown Connector on its way into Decatur in DeKalb County.
In Decatur, SR 8 turns northeast, crossing I-85 southeast of Tucker, and paralleling I-85 through Lilburn and Lawrenceville in Gwinnett County to Auburn in Barrow County, where the route turns southeast and heads into Winder.  Continuing southeast, SR 8 makes a southern half-circle around Athens in Clarke County, just briefly touching Oconee County, before turning sharply northeast and heading through Danielsville in Madison County to Franklin Springs in Franklin County. There, the route turns east, runs through Royston, and heads to its eastern terminus after heading through Hartwell.
The route of SR 8 is concurrent with the following U.S. Highways, through Georgia:

==Major intersections==

|-

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


