[[Madge Tennent]]

CATEGORIES: English women painters, Artists from Hawaii, 20th-century English painters, 1972 deaths, 1889 births

Madge Tennent (1889 in Dulwich, London – 1972 in Honolulu) was an English artist. 
Born to Arthur Cook, an architect and landscape painter and his wife, Agnes, a writer.  The family moved in 1894 to Cape Town, South Africa, and Madge’s parents’ efforts to promote tolerance among various races and creeds there no doubt left a lasting impression on the young Madge.Haar, Francis and Neogy, Prithwish, "Artists of Hawaii: Nineteen Painters and Sculptors", University of Hawaii Press, 1974, p. 9Forbes, David W., "Encounters with Paradise: Views of Hawaii and its People, 1778-1941", Honolulu Academy of Arts, 1992, pp. 267
Because of Madge’s artistic promise, her family to give up their home in Cape Town so that she might study in Paris.  There, she studied with William-Adolphe Bouguereau, the leading proponent of academic art.  Eventually finances caused her family to move back to South Africa, where sixteen-year-old Madge led a government-sponsored art school.Haar, Francis and Neogy, Prithwish, "Artists of Hawaii: Nineteen Painters and Sculptors", University of Hawaii Press, 1974, p. 9Forbes, David W., "Encounters with Paradise: Views of Hawaii and its People, 1778-1941", Honolulu Academy of Arts, 1992, pp. 267
Madge was also an accomplished pianist, taught by her mother, and gave regular recitals in Cape Town.  One such recital was attended by a visiting military officer from New Zealand, Hugh Cowper Tennent, who was in South Africa with his regiment.  After their marriage in 1915, the couple moved to New Zealand.  Again Madge directed an art school, having been appointed head instructor at the Government School of Art in Woodville, the village where Madge and Hugh lived while he awaited further military orders.  When orders came, Hugh was posted to France in support of the allied effort in World War I.  Hugh returned from France in 1917 with a badly wounded arm.  An accountant by trade, he was offered a position as treasurer to the government of British Samoa, which he chose to accept.  The Tennents lived in Samoa for six years, during which time Madge was able to indulge a fascination with the native people of Polynesian descent.  Madge was able to devote much of her time to drawing charcoal portraits of Samoans.  In 1923, en route to England to enroll their sons in school, the Tennents stopped over in Honolulu.  It was to have been a brief stop, but they soon were persuaded by members of the local cultural elite, including poet Don Blanding, to stay on.  Madge was immediately taken with the Hawaiian people.  
A renowned art educator as well as painter of modern figurative canvases of Hawaiian subjects, Madge Tennent had a distinguished career based primarily in Hawaii from where she sent paintings to the mainland United States for exhibitions in New York City and Chicago between 1930 and 1939.  She was among the first artists to embrace native Hawaiians as a primary subject matter, whom she depicted as large and robust with audacious, swirling forms and colors.  Two Sisters of Old Hawai[tpl]okina[/tpl]i in the collection of the Hawaii State Art Museum is an example of her large paintings of Hawaiian women.  Her influence was increased by her association with the Honolulu Museum of Art in its early days, where she was a frequent lecturer, and where she was included in most of the Academy’s early group shows.  Madge died in Honolulu in 1972.Haar, Francis and Neogy, Prithwish, "Artists of Hawaii: Nineteen Painters and Sculptors", University of Hawaii Press, 1974, p. 9
The Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco, the Hawaii State Art Museum, the Honolulu Museum of Art, the National Museum of Women in the Arts (Washington, D. C.), the Isaacs Art Center (Waimea, Hawaii), and the Victoria and Albert Museum (London) are among the public collections holding works by Madge Tennent.Madge Tennent in AskArt.com

==Gallery==

Image:Madge Tennent oil on canvas painting 'Lei Queen Victoria', 1945.jpg|Madge Tennent oil on canvas painting 'Lei Queen Victoria', 1945
Image:Madge Tennent oil on canvas painting 'Dancer at Rest'.jpg|Madge Tennent oil on canvas painting 'Dancer at Rest'

==References==

==Footnotes==


