[[International Russian Rotary Children's Music Competition]]

CATEGORIES: Russian culture, Music competitions, Rotary International, Piano competitions

The International Russian Rotary Children's Music Competition, a member of EMCY, is one of the leading events in cultural life of Russian and European youth. The competition take place in the Moscow State Conservatory P.I.Tchaikovsky or in the Central Music School of the Moscow State Conservatory.
This competition was initiated by the President of Rotary Club Moscow International Josef Marous in 2002 and in just 11 years it is giving an important chance to young, talented musicians to become known and to make a serious step in their development as artists.

==Instruments==

Piano, violin, violoncello, harp, wind instruments

==Participating countries==

Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, China, Cuba, Germany, Hungary, England, Estonia, France, Hong Kong, Ireland, Israel, Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Mexico, Moldova, Montenegro, Norway, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Singapore, Slovenia, Sweden, Spain, South African Republic, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, USA, Vietnam have already participated in Rotary music competitions.

==Jury==

Members of the jury were People's Artist of the USSR, Professor of Moscow Conservatory, soloist of Moscow Philarmony, Art Director and Conductor of Chamber Orchestra Moskovia Eduard Grach, national artist of Russia and chief conductor of the Moscow State Philharmonic Orchestra Pavel Kogan, People's Artist of Russia, honored Artist of the USSR Dimitri Bashkirov, People's Artist of Russia Vladimir Ovchinnikov, President of EMCY Eckart Rohlfs, national artist of the USSR Natalia Gutman, People's Artist of Russia, Professor of Tchaikovsky Moscow State Conservatory Dmitriy Miller, Merited Artist of Russia, Professor of Tchaikovsky Moscow State Conservatory Kseniya Knorre, Merited Artist of Russia, director of the Gnessin Music School Mikhail Khokhlov.

==Greetings==

This musical competition is supported by many ambassadors in Moscow. Leading Russian and foreign companies and individuals, as well as famous Russian musicians Vladimir Spivakov, Yuri Bashmet and Natalia Gutman, who was the Chairman of the 3rd Musical Competition, which took place in the Residence of the Ambassador of France in Moscow.
Greetings to the competition were sent by the Minister of Foreign Affaires of the Russian Federation Lavrov, the Minister of Culture and Mass communications of the Russian Federation Sokolov, the Mayor of Moscow Luzhkov, the head of the Russian Federal Culture and Cinematography Shvydkoi, national artist of the USSR Nikolai Petrov, Presidents of Rotary International Bhichai Rattakul and Dong Kurn Lee.

==Sponsors==

Golden Sponsors: Julius Bär, KPMG
General Sponsors: Deutsche Bank Switzerland, TUI, Hella, Severstal, RC Moskau Humboldt, RC Remscheid, RC Paderborn Land + Stadt, RC Ravenna, Mr. Vladimir Lisin, Mr/Mrs Tiberius and Elena Braun, Mr/Mrs Ilya and Svetlana Chernykh, Mr/ Mrs Erik and Doris Koebe, Mr/Mrs Josef and Marie-Jose Marous, Mrs Zsuzsa Barna, Mr/Mrs Philippe and Karina Cohen, Wermuth Asset Management, Blackwood, Rödl & Partner, Cetelem, Alstom, Blackwood, Swissotel Krasnye Holmy, Intercontinental Moscow Tverskaya, Radisson Slavyanskaya; The Ritz-Carlton Moscow, Marriott Moscow Grand; Radisson Royal Moscow, Hilton Moscow Leningradskaya; Hotel Baltchug Kempinski, Simple.
Fundraising Sponsors:
Juan Carlos Sanchez Arnau, Ambassador of Argentina
Claude Blanchemaison, Ambassador of France
Gianfranco Facco Bonetti, Ambassador of Italy
Jean Cadet, Ambassador of France
Jose Maria Robles Fraga, Ambassador of Spain
Erwin Hofer, Ambassador of Switzerland
B.B. Jonsson, Ambassador of Iceland
Carlo Krieger, Ambassador of Luxemburg
Andre Mernier, Ambassador of Belgium
Ernst-Jörg von Studnitz, Ambassador of Germany
Vittorio Claudio Surdo, Ambassador of Italy
Richard Wright, Ambassador of European Commission
Miroslav Kostelka, Ambassador of Czech Republic
Dame Anne Pringle, Her Britannic Majesty`s Ambassador
Margot Klestil-Löffler, Ambassador of Austria

==Advisory board==

==LAUREATES==

2013
1. Yi Ting Ong, Singapore, flute and Mariamna Sherling, Russia, piano
3. Maria Andreeva, Russia, piano
4. Robert Neumann, Germany, piano
5. Polina Tarasenko, Ukraine, trombone
6. Daniel Lozakovitj, Sweden, violin
2012
1. Marusya Matveeva, Russia, Piano; Arina Pan, Russia, Piano
3. Sara Dragan, Poland, violin ; Inga Rodina, Russia, violin
5. Patricia Bloma, Latvia, saxophone
6. Danila Vladyko, Russia, violoncello
2011
1. Matvey Sherling, Moscow, Saxophone
2. Roman Boldyrev, Moscow, Piano
3. Rodion Synchyshin, Kiev, Ukraine, Violin and Andrei Zabavnikov, Moscow, Violin
5. Marja Tikhomirova, St. Petersburg, Piano
6. Daria Kaliuzhnaya, St. Petersburg, Violoncello
2010 ALUMNI
1. Ekaterina Rybina, Moscow-piano
2.Sergey Belyavskiy,Moscow-piano
3. Dmitriy Mayboroda,Moscow-piano
4. Anastasiya Vorotnaya,Moscow-piano
5. Anna Denisova,Moscow-piano
2010
1.Pak Di Na, Novosibirsk, Russia - Flute
2. Aggejalfis Taelia-Jaroslavna, Moscow, Russia- Harpe
3. Lee Jelin - Seul, Korea - Violin and Egorenkova Anastasia, Moscow, Russia - Piano
5. Prikhodko Mark, Minsk, Belarus - Violoncello
6. Mun Arsenyi, St. Petersburg, Russia - Piano
2009
1. Yeagy Park, Pasadena, Texas, USA -violin ;Georgy Krizhnenko - Omsk, Russia - piano
3. Naina Kobzareva, Rostov na Donu, Russia - violin
4. Viktor Maslov, Moscow, Russia - piano
5. Judith Stapf, Koeln, Germany - violin
2008
1st: Martin Garcia Garcia, Spain - Piano http://www.jmspain.org/newsDetalle.php?idNoticia=248&fl=20090118&fh=&q1=
2nd: Ruslan Shainazarov, Russia - Piano
3rd: Dmitriy Tyurin, Russia - Piano
4th: Sarah Zajtmann, France - Piano
5th: Arseniy Bardovkiy, Russia -Flute
6th: Anastasia Pentina, Russia - Violin
7th: Tsoi Se Pel, Korea - Violin
2007
1st: Alexandra Lee, Korea/Russia - violin
2nd: Vsevolod Brigida, Russia - Piano
3rd: Christina Toroshchina, Ukraine - Violin
4th: Anastasia Sokolova, Russia - Piano
5th: Dmitry Umerenkov, Russia - Piano
6th: Ekaterina Kornishina, Russia - Flute
7th: Elizaveta Irgasheva, Russia - Piano
2006
1st: Anna Savkina, Russia - Violin
2nd: Ekaterina Rybina, Rusia- Piano
3rd: Elenora Makhmudova, Russia - Piano
3rd: Elena Prosolupova, Russia - Violin
3rd: Julia Vanyushina, Russia - Piano
4th: Katariina Maria Kits, Estonia - Violin
2005
Gran prix: Narek Arutyunyan, Armenia - Clarinet
1st: Sergey Belyavsky, Russia - Piano
2nd: Dmitry Smirnov, Russia - Violin
3rd: Rimma Benyumova, Russia - Violin
4th: Timur Nardinov, Russia - Flute
4th : Anastasia Kobekina, Russia - Violoncello
2004
1st: Anna Denisova, Russia - Piano
2nd: Mikhail Mering, Russia - Clarinet
3rd: Anastasia Vorotnaya, Russia - Piano ; Elena Ilyinskaya, Russia - violin
2002
1st: Roman Kim, Korea Violin / Vladimir Kozhukhin, Russia- Piano
2nd: Emma Alikova, Russia- Violin / Tatiana Shalaginova, Russia - Violin
3rd: Dmitry Shishkin, Russia - Piano
4th: Dmitry Maiboroda, Russia - Piano http://ruvr.ru/main.php?lng=eng&q=5824&cid=62&p=27.12.2006

==External links==

Russia

