[[Martín Herrera]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, Living people, People from Río Cuarto, Córdoba, Argentine footballers, Association football goalkeepers, Primera División Argentina players, Boca Juniors footballers, Club Atlético Atlanta footballers, Ferro Carril Oeste footballers, Estudiantes de La Plata footballers, Liga MX footballers, Deportivo Toluca F.C. footballers, La Liga footballers, Deportivo Alavés footballers, Premier League players, Fulham F.C. players, Argentine expatriate footballers, Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain, Expatriate footballers in Mexico, Expatriate footballers in Spain, Expatriate footballers in England

Martín Horacio Herrera (born 13 September 1970 in Río Cuarto, Córdoba) is an Argentine retired footballer who played as a goalkeeper.

==Football career==

Herrera started his career with Argentine giants Club Atlético Boca Juniors in 1991 but things didn't work out for him there, and he moved to Club Atlético Atlanta of the third division three seasons after. There, he helped to the 1995 championship, as the club achieved promotion.
In 1998, Herrera moved to Mexico to play for Club Toluca but he soon returned to Argentina, representing Ferro Carril Oeste during two seasons. The following year, he signed with Spain's Deportivo Alavés, being an undisputed starter in two of his three campaigns at the Basque club, only missing two La Liga games out of 76; in his first year he was awarded the Ricardo Zamora Trophy, with only 37 goals conceded (all 38 matches played). 
On 16 May 2001, Herrera was in goal during the 4–5 extra time loss against Liverpool in the season's UEFA Cup final. In 2002, no longer an automatic first-choice with Alavés, he was signed by Premier League team Fulham on a three-year contract,Fulham sign goalkeeper; BBC Sport, 30 May 2002 but he only made two appearances for the club before being loaned to Estudiantes de La PlataFulham duo go on loan; BBC Sport, 17 July 2003 and eventually released.
In 2006, Herrera saw Estudiantes win the 2006 Apertura championship, defeating former side Boca Juniors in an end-of-season title deciding playoff. He subsequently retired from football at the age of 37.

==Honours==

==References==

==External links==


