[[Ruben Reyes]]

CATEGORIES: Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of the Philippines, 1939 births, Living people, Filipino lawyers, Filipino judges

Ruben T. Reyes (born January 3, 1939) is a Filipino jurist who served as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the Philippines from 2007 to 2009.

==Profile==

Reyes was born in Hagonoy, Bulacan, and is married to lawyer Ellie Cruz-Reyes, of Baliuag, Bulacan (head of screening and evaluation, Ombudsman office, 2001) and have four children with initial WRIT: Pastor Winston, Dr. Roselin, IT consultant Jason Immanuel and lawyer Tammy Ann. Tammy Ann (valedictorian of San Beda college of law) is a division clerk of court in the Court of Appeals.Philippine Panorama, Sunday, January 21, 2001, page 10.
Reyes earned his law degree from the Manuel L. Quezon University in 1962. He engaged in private practice for several years before becoming a city fiscal in Manila. Reyes won the 1981 Best Resolution Contest.
Reyes was then appointed as a trial court judge, assigned first in Batangas, then in Manila where he received an Outstanding RTC award and became RTC Judges Association president. He also edited the Philippine Judges Association Newsletter and Bench Bulletin.
Reyes studied 8 summer courses in the U.S., including the 1st Harvard Law School Workshop for Law Teachers and Scholars, the 35th Academy of American and International Law, Appellate Judges Seminar, California Judicial College and National Judicial College. He was also president of the Philippine Association of Law Professors, trustee and lecturer of the Philippine Judicial Academy. In 2002, he was a Bar examiner in Legal Ethics and authored the Bar Reviewer on Special Penal Laws. He was a lecturer on Mandatory Continuing Legal Education, co-chair of the Supreme Court sub-committee on MCLE Draft Rules, member of the Supreme Court committee on legal education & Bar matters and resource person in Criminal and Remedial Laws at the UP Law Center. He received the following awards - the CUP Outstanding Justice of the Court of Appeals, Bulacan Dangal ng Lipi, YMCA Presidential awards, and two Supreme Court awards on judicial reforms.Inquirer.net,SC appointment beat the buzzer -- Justice Reyes
In 1994, he was appointed by President Fidel V. Ramos to sit on the Court of Appeals. Reyes sat on the appellate court for 13 years, and was eventually named as its Presiding Justice in January 2006.
He was appointed to the Court on August 2, 2007 by President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo.[ref]
