[[Bob the Squirrel]]

CATEGORIES: Comic strips missing date information, Fictional squirrels

Bob the Squirrel is a comic strip by Frank Page.  Its name refers to the main character, a squirrel named Bob, who represents the strip's creator's consciousness.  Because of this premise, Frank Page actually appears in the comic strip as one of the central characters.
The squirrel represents the cartoonist's inner voice... a voice that verbalizes everything that the cartoonist wants to say but is afraid to do so.
Page is not afraid to put real events from his life into the strip.  Everything from divorce, emotional distress as well as life changing triumphs are all fair game.

==Cast of characters==

Bob the Squirrel - Bob originally started out as a motown music loving squirrel.  Bob met Frank one day at a park---Frank was under a tree drawing in his sketchbook--- Bob was in that tree on a limb trying to get a closer look at what Frank was sketching when he fell out.  A friendship was born.  Bob is Frank's connection to the outside world.  He is the friend that Frank always wanted.  And, he's cute too.
Frank - Frank is literally the creator of the strip.  In the comic, he, like his real life counterpart, is a cartoonist just trying to make his way in the big cold world.  He is an introvert that would rather draw at his board than go out and see the world... that little studio is his world.
Lezley - Lezley is a woman that Frank met at a local coffee house... one which Bob forced him to go to.  She is a strong single mother who's always looking out for others before herself.  Early on in her introduction to the strip, she was commonly referred to as "the Foofy Coffee Chick"--- because of her love of coffee with multiple ingredients.  When she and Frank were introduced to each other--- Bob was the one who did all the talking.  They are now boyfriend/girlfriend that have a deep connection.
Lauren - Lezley's daughter.  A pint-sized bundle of energy. She loves animals---which is why she and Bob get along so well. But don't tell Bob that.
Lucy - Frank's brand new Jack Russell Terrier.  She was a birthday gift from Lezley to Frank.  Lucy was a Humane Society rescue.  She exhibits all the traits that make a Jack Russell and interesting dog to own.  She's loud, energetic, mildly destructive and has an affinity for hunting small animals--- that last one makes life very interesting for Bob.
Lady - Lezley's Collie.  She's big and barks a lot.  Lady died on May 10, 2011.  The strips dealing with her death along with the other character's reactions began running on June 13, 2011.  
Maggie - Yet another dog that was rescued.  No one is really sure what breed she is...definitely Pug mixed with something...
Izzy - Lezley's cat.  She's big and has an even bigger attitude.  She has an aversion to being moved...that's why when transportation is necessary they have to suit her up Hannibal Lecter style...otherwise, blood will be shed.
Tommy - Lezley's other cat.  Adding a little more male hormone to the cast, Tommy is a 20-something pound cat that has eyes like Bambi.  The only problem is that because he sleeps so much no one ever sees them.

==Marriage==

In the December 24, 2013 comic strip, Frank asks Lezley to marry him.

==Squirrelosophy==

In early 2012, Page branched off his Bob character into something he likes to call Squirrelosophy.  He created single panel images using Bob to express views on life, philosophy and many other things... topics that wouldn't necessarily fit into the confines of a daily comic strip.

==Publications==

Since making its debut in 2002, creator Frank Page has compiled a number of Bob the Squirrel book collections:

==External links==


