[[Lydd-on-Sea]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Kent, Populated coastal places in Kent

Lydd-on-Sea is a modern village, mostly built after World War II, which consists mainly of bungalows built along the Dungeness coastal road south of Greatstone, Kent, England. The Southern Railway opened a railway station here in 1937 but was closed in 1967. Lydd-on-Sea is part of the ecclesiastical parish of Lydd, now several miles distant, which once had access to the sea.
An island in a lake (created by gravel extraction) slightly to the northwest of Lydd-on-Sea is the site of a collection of sound mirrors designed by Dr William Sansome Tucker, to detect the approach of enemy aircraft, in the years before radar had been developed.

==Services==

To the east on the border of Dungeness is the Pilot Inn restaurant and pub and a Fish Tackle shop. These both have Dungeness in the name, The Pilot Dungeness and Dungeness Fish, but actually fall under Lydd-on-Sea. Even the Castaways B&B say they are in Dungeness but actually in Lydd-on-sea and its not located on the order but near it. Lydd-on-Sea has some services that use its name like Spar on Taylor Road. Spar is a little convenience shop for the local community. It attracts customers all over Lydd-on-Sea, Dungeness and nearby Greatstone as it's located just before the border. The Varne Fish and Chip shop is also located on Taylor Road and is only open in the afternoon for a short time and evening for a longer time. Hair to please is next door and is a unisex hairdresser's. Heysham Hall is also next door to the chip shop and is a large public hall which holds clubs and party's. The Ship Inn free house is opposite on Taylor Road but is CLOSED! There are talks about this  may opening agian but most probably not. Lydd-on-Sea has a park, Lade Fort Park, located on Lade Fort Crescent 3Km north of the historic Lade Fort. Opposite Taylor Road on the beach is a visitor car park and toilets. Its also the location of Dungeness Nature Reserve. Many villagers use local services in other nearby towns.

==Transport connections==

Lydd-on-Sea has two main roads from two locations. One way to Lydd, Lydd Airport and East Sussex or to Greatstone and New Romney for the rest of Kent. The Romney, Hythe and Dymchurch Railway runs through the whole length of the village from Greatstone to Dungeness but no longer has a station in the village. The nearest station is either Dungeness or Romney Sands. Stagecoach in East Kent run local buses to other towns.
Services:

==External links==


