[[Barbara Morrison]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American jazz singers, People from Wayne County, Michigan, 1952 births

Barbara Morrison (born 10 September 1952) is an American singer of jazz music. Barbara Morrison Januszkiewicz is a jazz visual painter, see Barb Januszkiewicz.

==Biography==

Born in Ypsilanti, Michigan, and raised in Romulus, Michigan, Barbara Morrison recorded her first appearance for radio in Detroit at the age of 10. She moved to Los Angeles in 1971, at the age of 21.Kirk Silsbee, "This time, it's Barbara Morrison's turn for a favor", Los Angeles Times, September 10, 2011. Well known in the Los Angeles area for her duo and trio dates Ms. Morrison also tours extensively, blazing a trail as a Jazz and Blues legend in her own right across the Continental United States, Western Europe the Far East and "Down Under", wowing audiences with her band. In 1986, touring with the Philip Morris Superband, a 14 city one month tour of Canada, Australia, Japan and the Philippines starting on September 3, 1986, Barbara did vocal honors with jazz organist Jimmy Smith, backed by saxophonist James Moody, guitarist Kenny Burrell, trumpeter Jon Faddis with Grady Tate on drums.
Barbara recently completed a 33-city tour in the US, co-headlining in an all-star tribute to composer Harold Arlen (most recognizable for his genius behind the music for the classic film, The Wizard of Oz). Over the years she has performed with a virtual "who's who" of the Jazz and the Blues worlds. That list includes legends such as Gerald Wilson, Dizzy Gillespie, Ray Charles, James Moody, Ron Carter, Etta James, Esther Phillips, David T. Walker, Jimmy Smith, Johnny Otis, Dr. John, Kenny Burrell, Terence Blanchard, Joe Sample, Cedar Walton, Nancy Wilson, Mel Tormé, Joe Williams, Tony Bennett, and Keb' Mo. Ms. Morrison has also guest-starred with the Count Basie Orchestra, the Clayton-Hamilton Orchestra and Doc Severinsen's Big Band.
Barbara Morrison has been featured on over 20 recordings. She has dazzled fans of a wide array of genres from traditional Jazz and Blues to Gospel and Pop. Her melodic voice, with its two-and-a-half-octave range, is known worldwide, as are her rich, unique, soulful and highly spirited interpretations of both, familiar Jazz and Blues classics and original contemporary tunes.
In additional to her gigs with other jazz and blues groups and legends, Barbara Morrison also performs at the more renown blues and jazz festivals around the world. Her appearances include Montreux, Nice, Pori, Carnegie Hall, North Sea, Monterey, Long Beach, as well as salutes to Dizzy Gillespie and her tribute to Benny Golson.
More recently beginning in 2011, Barbara Morrison has been performing with Jack Hale, a S.Cal popular master guitarist/ arranger/ band leader of cool and hot vintage jazz and swing styles from the 1920s through 1950s.

==References==

==External links==


