[[Thomas v Mowbray]]

CATEGORIES: High Court of Australia cases, Australian constitutional law, Defence power in the Australian Constitution cases, 2007 in Australia, 2007 in case law

Thomas v Mowbray 2007 HCA 33, was a decision handed down in the High Court of Australia on 2 August 2007 concerning the validity of Subdivision B of Division 104 of the Commonwealth Criminal Code, which allows the for imposition of "interim control orders". The case was brought by Joseph Terrence Thomas (referred to as "Jihad" Jack Thomas by the media), where he sought to challenge the interim control order that had been placed on him by a Federal Magistrate. The High Court ruled, by a 5:2 majority, that interim control orders were constitutional.

==Background facts==

Thomas had been the first Australian to be convicted under anti-terrorism laws introduced in Australia after the 11 September 2001 attacks in the United States.Thomas convicted under terror laws, The Age, 26 February 2006 He was sentenced on 31 March 2006 to five years prison with a non-parole period of two years.Thomas sentenced under terror laws, News.com.au, 31 March 2006 The trial was highly controversial, as the evidence used to prosecute Thomas consisted solely of an interview conducted in a Pakistani military prison.The Convert, Four Corners, 27 February 2006 Despite claims that the evidence was obtained under duress and that Thomas had been tortured, the judge deemed the interview to be admissible. The conviction was overturned on appeal by the Victorian Court of Appeal in the case of R v Thomas, with the appeals judges ruling that the trial judge should have ruled the evidence inadmissible.Australian terror convictions quashed - The Australian. 18 August 2006.R v Thomas (2006) VSCA 165 18 August 2006.
On 27 August 2006, the Federal Magistrates Court (constituted by the first defendant) placed Thomas on an interim control order. The Court's order was made on the following grounds:per Gleeson CJ at 1
The order placed the following restrictions on Thomas:
Prior to the Federal Magistrates Court confirming the interim order, i.e. making it permanent, Thomas commenced his special case in the High Court. He joined the magistrate, the Australia Federal Police officer that brought the application for the control order and the Commonwealth as defendants in the action. The Attorneys-General for New South Wales, South Australia and Western Australia intervened, largely in support of the Commonwealth.  per Gummow & Crennan JJ at 37 The Federal Magistrates Court proceedings were, therefore, adjourned by consent of the parties.
The special case that eventually came before the High Court posed the following four questions for the Court's consideration:
Q1 #Is Division 104 of the Criminal Code invalid because it confers on a federal court non-judicial power contrary to Chapter III of the Commonwealth Constitution? 
A Subdivision B of Division 104 is valid; otherwise inappropriate to answer Thomas v Mowbray 2007 HCA 33
Q2 #Is Division 104 of the Criminal Code invalid because insofar as it confers judicial power on a federal court, it authorises the exercise of that power in a manner contrary to Chapter III of the Commonwealth Constitution? 
A Subdivision B of Division 104 is valid; otherwise inappropriate to answer. Thomas v Mowray 2007 HCA 33
Q3 Is Division 104 of the Criminal Code invalid because it is not supported by one or more express or implied heads of legislative power under the Commonwealth Constitution? 
A Subdivision B of Division 104 is valid; otherwise inappropriate to answer Thomas v Mowray 2007 HCA 33
Q4 #Who should pay the costs of the special case?
A The plaintiff should pay the costs of the Commonwealth of the special case. Thomas v Mowray 2007 HCA 33
His appeal was therefore dismissed, and the interim control order upheld.

==References==


