[[Peter McMahon]]

CATEGORIES: 1989 births, Living people, People from Watford, Republic of Ireland association footballers, Drogheda United F.C. players, University College Dublin A.F.C. players, League of Ireland players, Bohemian F.C. players, Portadown F.C. players

Peter McMahon (born April 20, 1989 in Watford, England) is an Irish football midfielder who currently plays for Portadown in the NIFL Premiership.
McMahon was approached by Rangers after scoring the winning goal in a 1-0 win over Bournemouth in the Foyle Cup final for Drogheda United U-17's but turned down the chance of joining the Scottish giants as he wanted to finish school.
McMahon made his senior debut with Drogheda United, whilst being a member of the youth team against Shamrock Rovers on 8 May 2007 in a League of Ireland Cup game. He previously played with hometown club Monaghan United, Glenmuir (Dundalk) and Drogheda Boys at underage level.
After he was awarded a soccer scholarship at University College Dublin in 2008, McMahon officially joined UCD for their 2009 League of Ireland First Division campaign.UCD Awards 45 New Sports Scholarships www.ucd.ie/sport In what was a successful season for both McMahon and the Students, UCD won the First Division title along with promotion back to the Premier Division at their first attempt.
Mid-way through the 2010 Premier Division campaign McMahon departed UCD to return for former club Drogheda United. He made a total of 37 competitive appearances for UCD, scoring 3 goals. 
McMahon took a short break out of the game at the start of the 2011 season to concentrate on his final year at college in UCD. 
Mid-way through the 2011 season, Mick Cooke re-signed McMahon for Drogheda United.
In January 2012, Peter moved to Dalymount Park and Bohemians. He made his competitive debut in a 2-1 win over Portadown in the Setanta Sports Cup,http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/sport/football/local/bohemians-2-portadown-1-16117669.html with his league debut coming against Derry City on March 2.
In February 2013, Peter moved closer to his hometown of Monaghan to Shamrock Park and Portadown.
McMahon agreed a 2-year deal with Portadown at the end of his first season with the club on May 1st 2014.

==Honours==

UCD

==References==

==External links==


