[[Alonso García Tamés]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Federal political office-holders in Mexico, Mexican bankers, 1959 births

Alonso García Tamés (born January 21, 1959 in Mexico City) is the former CEO of the National Bank of Public Works and Services (Banobras).
García Tamés has a wide experience in the Mexican Federal Public Sector, where he has served in different charges among which stand: Under-Secretary of Finance and Public Credit and Deputy Under-Secretary in Charge of Public Credit for the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (Secretaría de Hacienda y Crédito Público), and Managing Director in Charge of Central Banking Operations for the Central Bank of Mexico (Banco de México). 
He is an active guest speaker at conferences related to debt management policy, monetary policy, exchange rate management policy, payment systems and international asset management.

==Public Sector==

García Tamés graduated with a bachelor's degree in Actuarial Science from the Universidad Anahuac, in which he showed a great interest for Mexico's economic policy. In 1981 he joined the Central Bank where he where participated in different areas which are in charge of Mexico’s international reserve management, currency markets and monetary policy implementation. 
In 1993 García Tamés rose to the position of Treasurer in Mexico's Central Bank. After which he was appointed Director in Charge of Operations from October to December 1994. The last position he took in the Central Bank was Director in Charge of Central Banking Operations, from 1995 to 2000.
Given the extensive professional experience of Mr. García Tamés in areas related to exchange and monetary policy, financial markets, and balance of payment, in December 2000 he was appointed deputy Under-Secretary in Charge of Public Credit for the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit, position he occupied until September 2003 where he was promoted to Under-Secretary of Finance and Public Credit. 
In December 2006 he was appointed CEO of the National Bank of Public Works and Services, development bank dedicated to promote infrastructure investment in Mexico through sub-national government lending, project finance, and technical assistance.

==Participation in International Organizations and Boards of Directors==

===International Organizations===

As part of his public sector responsibilities García Tamés has represented Mexico in several international forums. In particular, he represented Mexico's Central Bank in working groups and task forces, sponsored by the Bank of International Settlements, related to the improvement of the international financial architecture. 

===Boards of Directors===

As part of his responsibilities as Under-Secretary of Finance and Public Credit he was a board member in several Development Banks and Mexican financial regulation agencies, among which stand:

==External links==


