[[Debra Fine]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American self-help writers, Year of birth missing (living people)

Debra Fine is an American self-help writer and keynote speaker.

==Biography==

Fine began her career as an engineer, an occupation that allowed her to maintain her natural shyness and avoid situations that required social interactions.
Fine developed her presentation and wrote her first book, The Fine Art of Small Talk, to teach technically oriented professionals conversational skills and networking techniques that help them develop business relationships, build rapport, and enhance networking opportunities.  Her book was initially self-published and was so well-received that Hyperion Books ultimately decided to take over as its publisher.Hyperion Books   
Fine has researched and gathered insights in such areas as overcoming communication barriers, striking up conversations and keeping them going; mastering introductions; remembering names; making the most of association events, networking occasions, receptions and meetings; and active listening.
Her next book, The Fine Art of the Big Talk (also a Hyperion title), takes small talk skills to the next level and focuses on how to handle conversations concerned with weightier matters that arise such as resolving conflict in the workplace, breaking difficult news, offering feedback, negotiation techniques, managing meetings to stick to an agenda, and the like. 
Fine is a recognized expert on conversation skills. Her clients include First Data Corporation, General Electric, United States Department of the Treasury, Lockheed Martin, Wells Fargo, GlaxoSmithKline, and New York University Stern School of Business. She has appeared on NBC-TV’s Today show, CBS TV’s The Early Show, National Public Radio’s Morning Edition,NPR: Small Talk Secrets for the Holiday Season and on CNN. She has also been extensively quoted online in iVillage, CareerBuilder,CNN.com - 12 tips for making small talk - Mar 4, 2005 and more. 
She has been an active Rotarian for over 14 years as a member of the Southeast Denver Rotary Club. Fine lives in the Denver area with her husband and their four children.

==Notes==

==External links==


