[[Valorie Burton]]

CATEGORIES: University of Pennsylvania alumni, Florida State University alumni, Florida A&M University alumni, Living people, Military brats, Miss Black USA delegates, American women writers, Life coaches

Valorie Burton is a life coach, author, and motivational speaker. She is also the founder of the Coaching and Positive Psychology Institute (CaPP). Her published works include:
She is also the author of Rich Minds Rich Rewards, How Did I Get So Busy, Listen to Your Life, Why Not You? 28 Days to Authentic Confidence, and Where Will You Go From Here? Her ninth book, Happy Women Live Better, will be published in fall 2013. 
Valorie has appeared on the TODAY Show, the Dr. Oz Show and made regular appearances on CNN and HLN. She has written for Oprah Magazine, Essence Magazine and many others. Ms. Burton is a frequent media contributor on issues of happiness, purpose, and success.She was a columnist for BlackAmericaWeb.com and is a frequent guest on CNNs Reclaim Your Career segment. She co-hosted the Emmy-award winning television program Aspiring Women, which aired on the Total Living Network (TLN). She has also co-hosted the national television program The Potter’s Touch with T.D. Jakes which aired weekdays on the TBN and BET. Valorie’s corporate clientele includes multi-million dollar businesses such as Accenture, Black Entertainment Television (BET), Deloitte, General Mills, McDonalds Corp., and many more. Her work is dedicated to helping others get unstuck and be unstoppable. Those interested in her services have access to her website, Facebook page, Twitter page, blog, monthly newsletter, audio books, personal coaching on demand products and Coach Training Intensive course. Burton currently resides in Atlanta, GA. 

==Early years==

Burton grew up moving a number of times as a child in an Air Force family, living in Florida, West Germany and Colorado. She spent eight years in Dallas, Texas, which is where she started her first business, The Burton Agency. Burton ran the marketing and public relations firm from 1997 until 2001. The agency helped companies shape their image, positively influence customers and increase sales.   In 2001 she founded Inspire, Inc. In the same year, Burton was appointed by Texas Governor Rick Perry to the Governor's Commission for Women and served a two-year term. In 2009, she launched CaPP to address organization’s training needs. The CaPP Institute offers training programs that focus on what makes people happier, more resilient, and prepared to perform better. The programs also provide students/ trainees with research based tactics for entrepreneurial success. 
She is a former Miss Black Texas USA, Miss Black USA "top 10" finalist, and a runner-up to Miss Texas. Ms. Burton is a credentialed member of the International Coach Federation and a member of the National Speakers Association.

==Education==

Valorie Burton graduated from the University of Pennsylvania with a master's degree in applied positive psychology. She is also a graduate of Florida State University and has a master's degree in journalism from Florida A&M University. 

==References==

http://www.valorieburton.com/

==External links==


