[[My Typhoon]]

CATEGORIES: 2002 racehorse births, Thoroughbred racehorses, Northern Dancer bloodline, Racehorses bred in Ireland, Racehorses trained in the United States, American racehorses, Thoroughbred family 9

My Typhoon (foaled 2002 in Ireland) is an American Thoroughbred racehorse whom the NTRA calls "one of the world's best-bred horses."

==Background==

Bred in Ireland by David Tsui's Sunderland Holdings, she was sired by Giant's Causeway, a son of Storm Cat whose stud fee in 2006 became the highest in the world at $500,000. Her dam is Urban Sea, winner of the 1993 Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe and her damsire was Miswaki, a two-time Leading broodmare sire in Great Britain & Ireland and a son of Mr. Prospector. My Typhoon is a half-sister to Galileo, a colt who in the year before My Typhoon's birth won the 2001 Epsom Derby, the Irish Derby, and the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Stakes and was voted the 2001 European Champion Three-Year-Old. She is also a half sister to Sea the Stars.
At the December 2002 Tattersalls Sale, My Typhoon was sold as a weanling to Live Oak Stud of Ocala, Florida for a then-record price of US$2.95 million. Her new owners entrusted her race conditioning to U.S. Racing Hall of Fame trainer William I. Mott.

==Racing career==

At Churchill Downs, in 2005 My Typhoon won her first significant race, capturing the Grade II Mrs. Revere Stakes. She won again that year at Colonial Downs, taking the Virginia Oaks. At age four, she returned to racing and in May 2006 won the Grade III Gallorette Handicap at Pimlico Race Course and June's Grade II Mint Julep Handicap back at Churchill Downs. In August she won the GII Ballston Spa Breeders' Cup Handicap and after a third place result in the First Lady Stakes at Keeneland Race Course returned to Churchill Downs where she finished sixth in November's Breeders' Cup Filly & Mare Turf won by the great Ouija Board.
Despite being extremely valuable for her breeding potential, My Typhoon's owners decided to race her at age five. She began 2007 in March with a second place finish in the Hillsborough Stakes at Tampa Bay Downs then won April's Grade III Jenny Wiley Stakes at Keeneland Race Course. Shipped north, in June she won the Grade II Just A Game Stakes at Belmont Park and at Saratoga Race Course on July 28 won her third straight stakes under jockey Eddie Castro. Her victory in the 1⅛ miles Diana Handicap turf race marked her first ever Grade 1 win and was also significant because throughout her racing career, My Typhoon has struggled at distances beyond 1-1/16 miles. As well, under the new Breeders' Cup "Win and You're In" provision for designated races, her victory in the Diana Handicap guaranteed her a berth in the 2007 Breeders' Cup Filly & Mare Turf. In her next outing on August 23, My Typhoon finished sixth in the Ballston Spa Handicap.

==References==


