[[FK Metalac]]

CATEGORIES: Football clubs in Serbia, Association football clubs established in 1961, 1961 establishments in Serbia

Fudbalski klub Metalac (Serbian Cyrillic: Фудбалски клуб Meтaлaц), or simply Metalac, is a professional football club based in Gornji Milanovac, Serbia. The club currently competes in the Serbian First League.

==History==

On June 12, 1961 in Gornji Milanovac, by the initiative of former FK Takovo footballer Miroslav Spasojević, was held the first foundational assembly of the newly created football club. The assembly was attended by the sindical union members of the companies "Graditelj" and "Metalac" and they suggested that the workers of the city companies should actively play football in the club. The club was founded as FK Radnik and the club menagment was elected. The presidents of the companies "Metalac" and "Graditelj" were elected president and vice-president respectively. The coaching position was attributed to Miroslav Spasojević, nicknamed "Era", who was also the team captain and main player. The club started competing within the league of the football association of Čačak. In the season 1963-64 FK Radnik won the championship and got promoted. At the end of the 1964-65 season, by the initiative of the general menager of Metalac company, Milan Mišović, the club changed its name into FK Metalac, and the company begins to support financially the club. The new club president was Veljo Perišić and a new age begins for the club. In 1968 the club is promoted to the Western Morava League (Zapadnomoravska Liga), in 1970 is promoted to the Morava-Šumadija League (Moravsko-šumadijska Liga) and again two seasons later, the club starts competing in the Serbian League South, Yugoslav fourth tier back then. In that period the club also won the Serbian Cup by winning FK Rudar Kostolac by 4-0, and reached the 1/16 finals of the Yugoslav Cup where they lost after extra-time in Travnik against Borac by 1-2.
By the early 1990s and after the break up of Yugoslavia the club competed in regional leagues. In 1995 the company Metalac becomes the club main sponsor. It is then when the club begins climbing up the leagues, reaching by 2000 the Second League of FR Yugoslavia. They didn´t manage to hold on in their first attempt and were relegated, but next season the won the Serbian League West and returned to Second League staying there this time two seasons. In 2007 they won again the third league and played the 2007–08 Serbian First League surprisingly menaging to finish sixth, which gave them access to the SuperLiga play-offs. That year the club failed, but next season, 2008-09 Metalac finished even better, fifth, and this time was promoted to the Serbian SuperLiga. At the end of the 2009–10 Serbian SuperLiga they finished 9th.About the club at club official website.
There are around 300 athletes in several age levels competing in the club.

==Current squad==

==Notable former players==

This is a list of club players with national team appearances:FK Metalac G. Milanovac at National-Football-Teams.com.
For a list of current and former players with wikipedia article, please see :Category:FK Metalac Gornji Milanovac players.

==Coaching history==

==Stadium==

Metalac Stadium has 4,500 seats, and it was built in 2012. After the club archived promotion to the SuperLiga in 2010, Metalac briefly played home matches in the Stadion Mladost which is in Lučani and holds 8,000 spectators.

==References==

==External links==


