[[John Tudno Williams]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Welsh scholars and academics, Welsh theologians, Welsh Presbyterians, 1938 births, Alumni of Jesus College, Oxford, Alumni of the University of Wales, Alumni of Aberystwyth University, Welsh-speaking people, Translators of the Bible into Welsh, People from Aberystwyth

Rev. Professor Dr. John Tudno Williams was the Moderator of the Presbyterian Church of Wales 2006–7PCW | Connexion | The Moderator and the Principal of the United Theological College, Aberystwyth from 1998 to 2003.

==Early career==

John Tudno Williams was born in 1938 in Flint and educated in Liverpool and London. Williams studied Theology at Jesus College, Oxford, graduating in 1960. On leaving Oxford, he registered as a research student in the Classics Department of University College of Wales, Aberystwyth whilst studying at the same time at United Theological College, Aberystwyth in preparation for entering the ministry with the Presbyterian Church of Wales. He was ordained in 1963 and served at Borth, in north Cardiganshire, for ten years. He gained a doctorate from the University of Wales for a research thesis on the Jewish background to St John's Gospel.

==Aberystwyth==

In 1966 Williams joined the teaching staff at the United Theological College, Aberystwyth under its Principal, Rev Prof Samuel Ifor Enoch, lecturing in Biblical Studies. Williams took leading baritone roles in the University College's Gilbert and Sullivan Society, then under the conductor David Russell Hulme. 
On his retirement in 2003 Williams had completed a period of 37 years as a lecturer within the Faculty of Theology of the University  of Wales. He served as Principal of the United Theological College in Aberystwyth between 1998 and 2003.

==Achievements==

Williams was Visiting Professor at Acadia Divinity College, Acadia University in Nova Scotia in 1997. He sat on the translating panel for the New Testament section of Y Beibl Cymraeg Newydd (The Revised New Welsh Bible) from 1975 onwardsThe Revised New Welsh Bible on the Bible Society website and was secretary of the Theological Branch of the University of Wales's Guild of Graduates for 36 years. He also served as chief A level examiner in Religious Studies for the WJEC for twelve years. 
Currently, he is an Honorary Research Fellow at the  University of Wales, Lampeter's Department of Theology and Religious StudiesDepartment of Theology and Religious Studies, University of Wales Lampeter, Visiting and Honorary Staff and Research Fellow at the National Library of Wales. In 2002/03, he was Moderator of the Presbyterian Church of Wales's Association in the South and was the General Assembly's Moderator in 2006/07. In 1990 he was elected Moderator of the Free Church Federal Council in Wales and England: only the second of his denomination to fill the post in half a century. 
In 2006 Professor Williams received the honorary Degree of Doctor of Divinity from the University of Wales in recognition of his contribution to biblical scholarship, and to religion and education in Wales.
The Rev. Dr. Williams is married and has two grown-up children.

==References==


