[[Gabin Dabiré]]

CATEGORIES: Burkinabé musicians, Living people, Burkinabé expatriates in Italy, People from Bobo-Dioulasso

Gabin Dabiré is a singer, guitar player, and composer from Burkina Faso (former Upper Volta) who is resident in Italy.Rough Guide to World Music Volume One: Africa, Europe & The Middle East 1999Banning Eyre's Afropop page for Burkina Faso
Born in Bobo Dioulasso in the African state of Burkina Faso, Gabin Dabiré’s first experiences in music were taking lessons from and playing with the great masters of the traditional music of Burkina Faso.[tpl]cn|date=January 2012[/tpl] In 1975 he traveled to Denmark and it was while studying there that he was first exposed to alternative European and contemporary music. In 1976 he toured in Italy and afterwards embarked on a study trip of chordophones and Indian percussion.

==Career==

In 1979 his collection of ethnic music of Western Africa was published by the cultural association and music group Futuro Antico, which he co-founded with Walter Maioli and Riccardo Sinigaglia. The group used synthesized electronic tonalities matching the traditional musics from around the world. Their work was realised in the self-titled recording Futuro Antico in 1980.Soundcenter page dedicated to Futuro Antico Also he formed the group ‘Yelbuna’ with some musician friends and performed in several Italian cities.
In order to consolidate the wide-ranging activities he was involved in, including music, cinema and theatre, he founded the Centro Diffusione Promozione Cultura (Culture Promotion Diffusion Centre) in Milan in 1983. This enabled him to present various aspects of African Culture. In 1986 he moved to Tuscany with his family where he organised concerts, and completed the recording of his first CD Kontome ("Spirits"), which was released the following year. In 1992 he started to expand his repertoire to include crossover music, resulting in a successful collaboration with the Gregorian choir ‘Santa Cecilia’.
In 1994 his second CD entitled Afriki Djamana was released by the label Amiata Records. The multi-faceted career of this composer and musician has caused him constantly to research new timbres and sonorities. He has kept his African origins despite using instruments of other continents and working with western musicians.
The group ‘Gabin Dabiré and Musicians’ is inspired by Dabiré’s compositions, using harmonies that maintain the character of African music. The collaboration with the saxophone player Daniele Malvisi and the drummer and percussionist Paolo Corsi, who are both very open minded towards new musical horizons, has allowed Gabin Dabiré and his brother Paul Dabiré to explore sonorities and rhythms.
Presently he plays in a group with Giovanni Conversano (Guitar), Gianmarco Scaglia (Bass), Daniele Malvisi (Sax), Paolo Casu (Drums), Paul Dabiré (percussion instruments). In 2007 he released another Futuro Antico recording with Maioli and Sinigaglia, called Intonazioni Archetipe

==Style==

Gabin Dabiré's music is broader than the narrow confines of Burkina Faso or even Africa. This may be partly explained by the fact that Dabiré wields the acoustic guitar in the same troubadour tradition of African guitar legends like Jean Bosco Mwenda, S.E. Rogie and Ali Farka Toure. However, he is truly original in layering various sounds over each other. Each song is indelibly stamped with Dabiré's unmistakable trademark tapestry whereby the sound of one instrument is woven into the next, creating sparkling sound waves.

==Performances==

Gabin has played with: Mario Arcari, Walter Maioli, Riccardo Sinigaglia,Riccardo Sinigaglia Maurizio Deho, Tommaso Leddi, Mino De Martino, Lucas Flores, Giulio Capiozzo, Tulio De Piscopo, Paolo Giaro, Paolo Panigada, Jack Tama, Paolo Corsi, Bruno Genero, Cecilia Chailly, Bernardino Pennazzi, Marc Eagleton, Matteo Silva-Dominic Miller, Manu Katché, Pino Palladino.

==Discography==

==References==

==External links==


