[[American Childhood Cancer Organization]]

CATEGORIES: Children's charities, Cancer organizations

The American Childhood Cancer Organization, abbreviated ACCO, (previously named Candlelighters Childhood Cancer Foundation) is a 501(c)(3) non-profit charitable organization dedicated to childhood cancer.
Today their membership of over 50,000 members of the national office and more than 100,000 members across the country, including ACCO affiliate groups, includes:

==History==

The organization was founded in Washington, D.C. in 1970 by parents of children and adolescents with childhood cancer to advocate for their needs, and to support research so every child survives and leads a long and healthy life. The Candlelighters name is derived from an old Chinese proverb "It is better to light a candle than to curse the darkness." Two other Candlelighters organizations formed simultaneously in 1970, one in Florida, the other in California. The initial focus of the Washington D.C. group was legislative; to achieve congressional and administrative support for increased funding for childhood cancer research during the Nixon Administration and the writing of the National Cancer Act.
Parent to parent contact had such a profound impact on the parents and families of children with cancer in the initial three groups that they decided to form a national organization. It was mutually agreed upon that the metropolitan Washington area group would assume the role of National Office of Candlelighters Childhood Cancer Foundation. From this initiative, local community organizations were established throughout the country. In 1976, the Candlelighters Foundation was incorporated as the communication link for groups and contacts throughout the country. In 1985, the name was officially changed to Candlelighters Childhood Cancer Foundation. In 1997, the National Office assisted one of the local Candlelighters organizations with the development and promotion of the gold ribbon symbol as the universal awareness symbol of childhood cancer. In 2001, the National Office released a new logo, one that embraced both symbols - the candle and the gold ribbon. In 2002 Candlelighters formed legal agreements with local organizations across the nation in a binding Affiliation Agreement regarding the use of the trademark name/logo and mission statement. In 2006, the national Candlelighters board voted to expand its mission and support innovative research initiatives.

==Programs and Services==

==External links==


