[[Curtin Winsor, Jr.]]

CATEGORIES: 1939 births, Living people, Brown University alumni, Ambassadors of the United States to Costa Rica, Employees of the United States Senate, Reagan Administration personnel

Curtin Winsor, Jr. (born April 28, 1939)  is a former Ambassador of the United States to Costa Rica and a philanthropist.

==Biography==

Winsor was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on April 28, 1939, and graduated from Brown University in 1961 with a degree in English literature. Following his undergraduate studies, he received a Masters in Latin American studies in 1964, and his Ph.D. in international studies in 1971, from the School of International Service at American University in Washington, D.C. After a stint as an academic researcher, he joined the United States Foreign Service in 1967, and from 1971 to 1973, he worked as an assistant to Senator Robert Dole of Kansas. Winsor subsequently worked for Chase Manhattan Bank and several non-profit concerns focusing on international and free-trade issues. 
Re-entering the political world, Winsor served as a foreign-policy adviser to former California Governor Ronald Reagan in his successful 1980 presidential campaign. Following the 1980 campaign, President Reagan sent him as Special Emissary to the Middle East. From 1983 to 1985, he served as the United States Ambassador to Costa Rica, advising the Central American government on economic policy. Winsor also serves on several non-profit boards, including those of the William H. Donner Foundation, the Donner Canadian Foundation, the Hudson Institute, the Atlas Economic Research Foundation, and the Media Research Center, as well as the National Council of the American Council of Trustees and Alumni. He has also served as an observer to the Russian presidential election of 2000 and several Latin American elections.
Winsor is the founder and owner of the American Chemical Services Company of Marmet, West Virginia, which has produced chemicals for the control of dust and frozen coal for coal mines and coal users since 1981. He is currently serving as the Chairman of the Advisory Board of Intellaine, LLP, a U.S. defense and risk engineering firm located in Arlington, Virginia.

==External links==


