[[Beulah Baptist Church]]

CATEGORIES: Churches completed in 1863, 19th-century Baptist church buildings, African-American historic places, Baptist churches in Virginia, Churches in Alexandria, Virginia, Properties of religious function on the National Register of Historic Places in Virginia, National Register of Historic Places in Alexandria, Virginia

Beulah Baptist Church (Alexandria, Virginia) was established in 1863 in an African American neighborhood ("the Bottoms") in Alexandria, Virginia, USA.  Rev. Clem Robinson, graduate of Ashmun Institute (now Lincoln University) and supported by the American Baptist Free Mission Society worked with his wife, Rev. George Washington Parker, and Miss Amanda Borden to establish "The First Select Colored School," as  a school for African- Americans at the site in 1862, which preceded later Freedman Bureau schools in town.   The church was founded the next year.  In the first year, 715 students attended classes there. Robinson also taught upper level students at the church in the "Beulah Normal and Theological Institute," which had over 80 students in a few years, and which preceded similar schools in the South, like Howard Normal and Theological Institute (1867, later Howard University) and the Hampton Institute (1868).M. B. Goodwin.  “History of schools for the colored population,” in Special Report of the Commissioner of Education on the Improvement of Public Schools in the District of Columbia, Washington D.C.: U.S. Office of Education 1871, reprinted Arno Press, 1969, pp. 246, 286.   
Robinson and Parker assisted the efforts of other pioneers for Black education in Alexandria, like Harriet Jacobs and Julia Wilbur.Jean Fagan Yellin, ed.  The Harriet Jacobs Family Papers, Volume 2.  Univ of North Carolina Press, 2008, pp. 444, 452-3, 490.   Robinson's school remained in place until 1870, when Alexandria opened its public school system.  The church was also the first black church founded in Alexandria after its Union occupation in 1861.Virginia African Heritage Program
It is a two story brick building with a gable roof and large stained glass window.  The church is located at 320 South Washington Street in Alexandria, Virginia.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


