[[Mark Gregory Hambley]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 births, Living people, American diplomats, Ambassadors of the United States to Qatar, Ambassadors of the United States to Lebanon

Mark Gregory Hambley (born February 12, 1948, in Boise, Idaho) is an American diplomat.
A veteran of more than 30 years in the U.S. diplomatic service, Ambassador Mark Hambley served in eleven postings in nine Middle Eastern countries, including as U.S. Ambassador in Qatar and, later, in Lebanon and as the U.S. Consul General in both Alexandria, Egypt, and in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. Recently information has come to light regarding Ambassador Hambley's remarkable role in the siege of Mecca.http://online.wsj.com/public/article/SB119007965327330717.html
Ambassador Hambley's service in multilateral diplomacy included his designation as the Special Representative to the UN Commission on Sustainable Development, as the U.S. Representative to the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests, and as the Special Negotiator on Climate Change during the Clinton and early months of the current Bush administration.
Following the September 11 attacks, Ambassador Hambley served as the Political Advisor to the commander of the U.S. Air Force deployment in the Middle East during the conflict against al-Qaeda and the Taliban in Afghanistan throughout the fall of that year. He was then appointed as director of the Media Outreach Center in London in March 2003. This is a specialized unit established under the authority of the U.S. Congress in early 2003. The goal of this center is to improve dialog with the pan-Arab media and to monitor the programming and coverage of various pan-Arab newspapers and satellite television.
Ambassador Hambley left full-time service with the government of the United States of America in 2005. He still undertakes special commissions on an ad hoc basis for his government.
In early 2005 Ambassador Hambley became a senior trustee of the Next Century Foundation. In this capacity he has undertaken two missions to date, one to Red Zone Baghdad to facilitate negotiations with Abdul Aziz al Hakim, the other to Jerusalem during the Summer War, during which he discussed matters relating to the Syrian track. He also hold the position of Senior Managing Director for International Matters at Apollo Security, a Massachusetts-based security, investigative, and consulting service company.

==References==


