[[Brody Bishop]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 births, Living people, British Basketball League players, British basketball players, British people of Canadian descent, Canadian basketball players, Canadian expatriate basketball people in the United States, Canadian emigrants to the United Kingdom, Canadian people of English descent, Citizens of the United Kingdom through descent, Junior college men's basketball players in the United States, Laurentian Voyageurs basketball players, Plymouth Raiders players, People from Prince Rupert, British Columbia, Basketball people from British Columbia

Brody Bishop (born May 28, 1984 in Prince Rupert, British Columbia) is a Canadian-British professional basketball player, currently playing for the Bristol Flyers the English Basketball League (EBL).
The 6"1 point guard was born with basketball in his blood, a love that was instilled by his father Mel Bishop, who  was also a basketball star in England during the 1970s, playing for Cinzano Crystal Palace.
In high school, Brody led his team, the Prince Rupert Rainmakers, to a 'AA' provincial championship in 2000-2001 and went on to play for the Under-17 provincial team. Following his high school graduation, he left to play basketball JuCo Basketball at Gogebic Community College in Michigan and then returned to Canada where he attended Laurentian University in Ontario, starting at point guard for each of his four years there. In his final season at Laurentian, he averaged 15.7 points per game, 4.8 rebounds per game and 3 assists per game.
In July 2007, Bishop signed his first professional contract with BBL team Plymouth Raiders,"Raiders duo stall on new contracts", thisisplymouth.co.uk, 13 June 2008, retrieved 2011-06-26 after turning down offers from fellow BBL team Sheffield Sharks and their EBL rivals Sheffield Arrows. He chose Raiders because he "felt it would be a good fit (for him) as a first year player." Bishop made his debut wearing the number 13 vest in the BBL Cup Winners' Cup first leg against Guildford Heat on September 9, 2007. Despite losing 77-83, he was crowned as the games MVP, a fitting start to his career.
After being released from Plymouth Radiers, Brody signed for the Bristol Flyers for the 2008-09 season and is starting PG for the Division 1 team
Bishop has British citizenship, qualifying due to his family's British heritage; his Mother was born and raised in Sutton, Surrey, while his paternal Grandfather was born in Darlington. Brody also has an older brother named Ryan who resides in Thunder Bay, Ontario.

==References==


