[[Compromise of 1850]]

CATEGORIES: 1850 in law, 1850 in American politics, 1850 in California, Pre-statehood history of California, New Mexico Territory, History of United States expansionism, Slavery in the United States, United States federal territory and statehood legislation, History of the United States (1849–65), 31st United States Congress, Presidency of Millard Fillmore

The Compromise of 1850  was a package of five separate bills passed in the United States in September 1850, which defused a four-year confrontation between the  slave states of the South and the free states of the North regarding the status of territories acquired during the Mexican-American War (1846–1848). The compromise, drafted by Whig Senator Henry Clay of Kentucky and brokered by Clay and Democrat Stephen Douglas, avoided secession or civil war and reduced sectional conflict for four years. thumb|Map of free and slave states c. 1856 The Compromise was greeted with relief, although each side disliked specific provisions.
The Compromise became possible after the sudden death of President Zachary Taylor, who, although a slaveowner, had favored excluding slavery from the Southwest. Whig leader Henry Clay designed a compromise, which failed to pass in early 1850, due to opposition by both pro-slavery southern Democrats, led by John C. Calhoun, and anti-slavery northern Whigs. Upon Clay's instruction, Democratic Senator Stephen Douglas (Illinois) then divided Clay's bill into several smaller pieces and narrowly won their passage over the opposition of those with stronger views on both sides.

==Background==

Soon after the start of the Mexican War, when the extent of the territories to be acquired was still unclear, the question of whether to allow slavery in those territories polarized the Northern and Southern United States in the most bitter sectional conflict up to this time. Since Texas was a slave state, not only the residents of that any State, but the pro- and anti-slavery camps on a national scale had an interest in the size of the state of Texas.  Texas claimed land north of the 36°30' demarcation line for slavery set by the 1820 Missouri  Compromise.
The Texas Annexation resolution had required that if any new states were formed out of Texas’ lands, those north of the Missouri Compromise line would become free states.Joint Resolution of Congress, Mar. 1, 1845
Senator Joseph Underwood referred to "the threatened civil war, unless we appease the hot bloods of Texas."#Keleher, p.41
According to historian Mark Stegmaier, "The Fugitive Slave Act, the abolition of the slave trade in the District of Columbia, the admission of California as a free state, and even the application of the formula of popular sovereignty to the territories were all less important than the least remembered component of the Compromise of 1850--the statute by which Texas relinquished its claims to much of New Mexico in return for federal assumption of the debts."[tpl]Cite book|url=http://books.google.com/books?id=RDp6AAAAMAAJ|author=Mark J. Stegmaier|title=Texas, New Mexico, and the compromise of 1850: boundary dispute & sectional conflict|year=1996 | publisher=Kent State University Press[/tpl]
Stegmaier also refers to "the principal Southern demand for a division of California at the line of 35° north latitude" and says that "Southern extremists made clear that a congressionally mandated division of California figured uppermost on their agenda."Stegmaier, p. 172 and p. 177
During the deadlock of four years, the Second Party System broke up, Mormon pioneers settled Utah, the California Gold Rush settled northern California, and New Mexico under a federal military government turned back Texas's attempt to assert control over territory Texas claimed as far west as the Rio Grande. The eventual Compromise of 1850 preserved the Union, but only for another decade.

==Proposals of compromise==

Proposals during 1846–50 on the division of the Southwest included;

==Henry Clay and Douglas draft compromise==

