[[ABN Newswire]]

CATEGORIES: Press release agencies, News agencies

ABN Newswire disseminates full-text news announcements and media from companies and organizations worldwide to news media, financial markets, disclosure systems, investors, information web sites, mobile devices, databases and other audiences.

==Editorial==

Asia Business News is produced daily in thirteen (13) languages and distributed to major international media outlets such as Bloomberg L.P. (ABN Wire Code ABZN), Thomson Reuters, Comtex, FinancialContent, Factiva, Yahoo! Finance and the Financial Times Global Media Monitor at FT.com as well as many financial internet news publishers. Business news and market reports are produced for both the Australian financial market as well as wider Global and Asian financial markets, with specialist comment on companies leading the day's news.
ABN Newswire also produces Video Market Reports and Multimedia News Releases (Electronic Press Kit)

==Distribution==

Currently publishing in thirteen languages, the ABN Newswire distributes financial editorial, Company Announcements, Press Releases, CEO Audiocasts, Video Webcasts, Presentations and Corporate Media on behalf of Investor Relations and Public Relations Professionals from Listed and Non-Listed business entities worldwide.
Publishing platforms include:
Real Time Financial Systems (such as Bloomberg)
Equity Research Databases (such as Dow Jones Factiva)
Stock Trading and Informational Websites
Finance and Trade Internet Portals
Key Editors in Industry and Trade Publications
Mobile Platforms (iPod, iPhone)
ABN Newswire content is aggregated and redistributed online in the USA via Comtex, FinancialContent and Acquire Media.

==Languages==

ABN Newswire distributes to a Pan-Asian and Global audience in Chinese Simplified, Chinese Traditional, Korean, Japanese, Arabic, German, Spanish, Indonesian, French, Thai, Portuguese, Russian and English.

==Commercial Services==

ABN Newswire is a commercial news agency that charges a fee to distribute information on behalf of companies who request their information to be published and distributed to major international media and news channels.
ABN Newswire operates an Investor Relations suite of services that include Announcement Translation, Corporate Websites in various languages, Investor Roadshows and connecting opportunities directly with participants in the Capital Markets through introduction and referral.
ABN Newswire is a division of Asia Business News Pty Ltd, an Australian Registered Private Company. (See Note 2)

==Subsidiaries==

Asia Business News also controls Global Fashion Wire, a dedicated newswire for the fashion and lifestyle industry, producing and distributing news in traditional and multimedia formats to a global audience in nine languages and Investorium.tv, a live streaming platform for Company Executives to Present to participants in the Capital Markets in a closed venue and simultaneously broadcast via web streaming video over the Internet.

==References==


