[[Batton Lash]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Year of birth missing (living people), American webcomic creators

Batton Lash is a comic book creator. His art is inspired by Steve Ditko and Charlton Comics horror stories.
Since 1979, he has been writing and drawing Wolff and Byrd, Counselors of the Macabre which first appeared as a weekly newspaper strip in The Brooklyn Paper and The National Law Journal, later renamed Supernatural Law when it made the leap to full-length comic book stories under Batton Lash's own company, Exhibit A Press, in 1994. It also appears online.Supernatural Law on Webcomics Nation
Later he also wrote Radioactive Man for Bongo Comics which received an Eisner Award for Best Humor Publication in 2002.
Batton was nominated for the 2003 Harvey Special Award for Humor for the collection Mister Negativity and Other Tales of Supernatural Law, and Supernatural Law #35 was nominated for Best Single Issue.
In 2009, another collection of Wolff and Byrd stories, The Soddyssey, And Other Tales of Supernatural Law, won the Independent Book Publishers Association's Benjamin Franklin Award.http://www.ibpa-online.org/pubresources/benfrank2009_Winners.aspx The story contains guest art by Steve Bissette, Bernie Wrightson, Jeff Smith, Shawn McManus, Phil Hester, and Charles Vess.
Also in 2009 Lash began working together with conservative writer James D. Hudnall on an online comic strip highly critical of President Barack Obama called "Obama Nation" (meant to sound like "Abomination"). The controversial cartoons appear on a website run by Andrew Breitbart have been criticized by some as being nonsensical and hateful. A 2011 cartoon was also called racist because it caricatures First Lady Michelle Obama and President Obama in ways that stereotype African-Americans, although that has been denied by those responsible for creating and posting the cartoon.http://www.therightscoop.com/larryo-goes-off-deep-end-over-racist-cartoon
Lash, who attended New York's School of Visual Arts, is married to comics industry figure Jackie Estrada. They both attended the 2011 Los Angeles Times Festival of Books.

==Bibliography==

Collections

==References==


