[[Patagonian Expedition Race]]

CATEGORIES: Adventure racing

The Patagonian Expedition Race is an annual endurance adventure race that takes place in the remote wilderness of Chilean Patagonia, run to help protect and raise awareness about the fragile environment in this region. Known as the ‘Race to the End of the World’, the 10-day event challenges co-ed international teams of four athletes in the disciplines of trekking, sea kayaking, orienteering, and mountain biking. The race takes place on a different course each year, with competitors using a map and compass to navigate through previously unknown terrain. Due to its challenging nature, it is also known as 'The Last Wild Race’,Patagonian Expediton: The last wild race, Amy Middleton, Australian Geographic, 4 February 2010 and has been described as 'The World’s toughest adventure race'Adventurers battle the elements in Patagonia race, Will Gray, Reuters, 25 Feb 2009 and the ‘Dakar’ of adventure racing.Novoa llama a sector público a deponer movilizaciones, ORBE, Emol, 30 November 2000

==Description==

The Patagonian Expedition Race takes place in February each year and involves a maximum of 20 four-person co-ed teams, limited to minimize the impact on the environment. Created by geologist Stjepan Pavicic, a pioneer of Chilean Patagonia, the first race was run in 2004 and since then athletes from 26 different nations have taken part. It is the only adventure race worldwide that has been granted an official partnership by an Olympic Committee.
Each edition takes place on a different course through the most remote and untouched regions of Chilean Patagonia. The terrain in this region is incredibly diverse and includes the mountains of Torres del Paine and the Cordillera Darwin, the flat plains and rolling hills of Tierra del Fuego and Isla Riesco, and the icy waterways of the Strait of Magellan and the Beagle Channel.
The combination of rugged terrain, long distances and unpredictable climatic conditions creates a great challenge, with the rate of team completion averaging between 35 and 50 percent. There is usually only a summer edition (February), but in 2006 a winter edition was organized, which took place in June.
The 26 nations that have competed, up to and including the 2011 edition, are: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Columbia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Great Britain, Japan, Kazakhstan, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Uruguay and USA. 
The race is organized by NIGSA (Nómadas International Group S.A.), formerly known as, Nómadas Outdoor Services Ltda., an organization located in Punta Arenas, working for the goals of environmental protection and the advancement of eco-tourism in the region of Chilean Patagonia.

==Goals of the Race==

The mission of the race is to raise international awareness of the fragile environment of Chilean Patagonia. It promotes the area’s unique and pristine wilderness, as well as its rich cultural heritage as attractions for a viable sustainable tourism destination.
Stjepan Pavicic, Race Director, explains: "From the beginning, we have focused on creating an experience that is not only a physical and mental challenge, but one that sends a real message: we must protect and preserve this remote and pristine region of Chilean Patagonia. Our event brings this message to the world."
For centuries, the extreme isolation of the southernmost region of South America has been a favorable characteristic for the preservation of its flora and fauna. However, in recent decades, devastation of extensive areas of these southern forests has occurred. The Patagonian Expedition Race focuses on working to avoid the exploitation of natural resources by non-sustainable industrial activities.
Important sections of the 2004, 2006 Winter, 2008 and 2010 races passed through the Karukinka reserve on Tierra del Fuego, a 300,000 ha conservation area owned by the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS). This is the largest terrain of its kind and holds one of the very last protected sub-Antarctic forest reserves on earth. The race has brought to attention the necessity to protect this distinct region. The organization behind the Patagonian Expedition Race, NIGSA, is now active in its trail building projects within Karukinka. Eventually the new trails will allow international tourists access to this region's unique features,  increasing eco-tourism in Chilean Patagonia.

==Awards==

The race produces an annual documentary showing the struggles and experiences of the teams participating in the Patagonian Expedition Race. The 2011 edition of the documentary called 'The Last Wild Race' received huge international media attention and was recognized seven times in the following global film events:
Winner BEST ENVIRONMENTAL FILM: Colorado Film Festival of 2011
Winner BEST ENVIRONMENTAL FILM: Yosemite Film Festival of 2011
Winner BEST MOVIE: Vanka Regule, Croatia Film Festival 2011
Winner of Adventure Sport Category: Killarney Adventure Film Festival 2011
Finalist: New Zealand Mountain Film Festival 2011
OFFICIAL SELECTION: Breckenridge Festival of Film 2011
OFFICIAL SELECTION: Danish Adventure Film Festival 2011

==History==

Since the Patagonian Expedition Race was founded in 2004, courses have ranged from 320 miles (520 km) to 680 miles (1112 km), with completion targets from 9 to 14 days.
The popularity and awareness of the event has increased since its inception in 2004, with increasing features in many international magazines, newspapers, websites and TV broadcasts. The race secured its first title sponsor in 2009, with Switzerland-based company Wenger, the manufacturer of the Genuine Swiss Army Knife. At this point, the logo was altered to carry Wenger’s Swiss flag emblem and the name was changed to the Wenger Patagonian Expedition Race.

==Editions==

2012:
The 10th anniversary edition of the race presented the 19 international co-ed teams with 565 km (351 miles) of challenging Patagonian nature; ranging from strength-sapping peat bogs to freezing cold glacial rivers. Part of the route also led them to the Kurukinka National Park where NIGSA has recently ended a trail building project, allowing walkers and rangers to effectively reach some of the more remote parts of the area. The route took the teams from the regional capital, Punta Arenas to the eventual finish on the Fiordo Pia on the Beagle Channel. For the fourth year in a row British based team Adidas TERREX/Prunesco were the overall winners. The second and third step on the podium respectively went to Japanese team EastWind and the American team  Gearjunkie/Yogaslackers.
2011:
The ninth edition of the Wenger Patagonian Expedition Race took on a challenging route through the dramatic landscapes of Torres del Paine, Bernard O’Higgins and Pali Aike National Parks. The race involved a total of 248 km of mountain biking, 150 km of trailless trekking and 105 km of river and sea kayaking. British team adidasTERREX/Prunesco completed their third consecutive victory,  while persistent rain forced a section of the course to be cancelled, and swollen rivers caused three teams to be airlifted over an impassable part of the course (two of which completed the race). British team captain Bruce Duncan said: “To have won this race once is something special, to win it three times is simply amazing.” Six teams completed the challenging course, with US team GearJunkie.com taking second place, French team Vaucluse Adventure Evasions finishing third and Croatians Ad Natura taking fourth place. Karibu finished several hours behind the top placed teams, while teams East Wind from Japan, and Perdido en el Turbal, from the USA and UK, were the final finishers.
2010: 
