[[Oscar J. Zuniga]]

CATEGORIES: 1922 births, 2007 deaths, American engineers, American electrical engineers, American mechanical engineers, American real estate businesspeople, American people of Mexican descent, American ranchers, Martin High School (Laredo, Texas) alumni, University of Texas at Austin alumni, American military personnel of World War II, United States Navy sailors, People from Laredo, Texas

Oscar J. Zuñiga, Sr.  (May 30, 1922 - July 23, 2007), was a registered professional engineer and land surveyor who played an important role in the construction of several residential neighborhoods in his native Laredo, Texas. In 1988, he was honored by his peers as "Engineer of the Decade" by the Gateway Chapter of Professional Engineers. 

==Background==

Zuñiga was the fourth of thirteen children born to Alfonso J. Zuñiga, Sr., and the former Conception B. de Quiroga. The original family home at 1101 Market Street in downtown Laredo was known as La Casa de Miel or "House of Honey". He graduated from Laredo  School (subsequently Martin High School) and served in the United States Navy aboard the USS Jerauld "Ocar Zuñiga obituary, Laredo Morning Times, July 26–27, 2007 in the Pacific Theater of World War II. The Jerauld was launched in November 1944, from Astoria, Oregon, and steamed to Pearl Harbor, Okinawa, and Guadalcanal during 1945.[tpl]cite web|url=http://www.ibiblio.org/hyperwar/USN/ships/dafs/APA/apa174.html|title=USS Jerauld|publisher=ibiblio.org|accessdate=August 3, 2007[/tpl]
After his military duties, Zuñiga completed his Bachelor of Science degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Texas at Austin. Registered as a professional engineer and surveyor, Zuñiga practiced as a consulting engineer for more than thirty years. He provided mechanical and electrical engineering design and consulting services to public and private clients across south Texas. In later years, he joined with partners, including Armadillo Construction Company which he co-founded, in structuring residential neighborhoods throughout Laredo, including Hillside Terrace, Shiloh, and Eastwoods.
His partners in the development of Hillside were Clinton Smith and Jorge O. de la Garza, Sr. (1930-2012), an air conditioning contractor, a former member of the Webb County Coimmissioner's Court, and a founding member of the Laredo Manufacturing Association.Ricardo R. Villarreal, "Jorge O. de la Garza dies at 82", Laredo Morning Times, November 18, 2012, pp. 1, 21A
In addition, Zuñiga served on the boards of various financial institutions and community organizations, including City National Bank (later NBC Bank) and the Mercy Hospital Advisory Board (later Laredo Medical Center).
Zuñiga was also active in the Border Olympics, a track-and-field event held in Laredo in which Southwest Conference teams compete. Sabas Zapata, III, a Laredo businessman and a Border Olympics official in the 1980s, recalled Zuñiga as one of "quiet demeanor, always offering advice and help. . . . a valued behind-the-scenes volunteer." Zuñiga died at the age of eighty-five at his home on the Big 'O' Ranch."Recalling Garner and Zuniga, two great Border Olympics volunteers", Laredo Morning Times, August 3, 2007; Salo Otero, "Two track meet veterans die", Laredo Morning Times, July 31, 2007
Zuñiga was preceded in death by his wife, the former Patricia Young (October 27, 1928 - August 24, 2002); a son, Bernard "Zed" Zuñiga (1961 - 2001); grandson, Robert Paul Zuñiga (1974–2005); four brothers and three sisters. Survivors included his brother, Alfonso J. Zuñiga, Jr.; sisters Norma Lucila Benavides, Martha Cecilia Martinez (husband Robert), Florencia Treviño (husband Meme) and Sylvia Zuñiga; nine children, Patricia Zuñiga "Patti" Starnes, engineer Oscar J. Zuñiga, Jr. (wife Jay), of San Antoni o, Lydia Z. Juarez (husband George), engineer and AmericaAgain! founder David Michael Zuñiga (wife Sylvia), of Boerne, Texas, Paul Zuñiga (wife Sally), Helen "Bucca" Treviño (husband Bill), Dee Dee Hrncir (husband Bill), Arthur Zuñiga (wife Melissa), of Boerne, and Stella Zuñiga Burkhalter (husband Hunter Wyatt Burkhalter) of Austin; thirty-two grandchildren, and nineteen great-grandchildren. 
Zuñiga was Roman Catholic. He was cremated; his ashes were scattered in the Gulf of Mexico at his request.

==See also==

==References==


