[[10th Airlift Squadron]]

CATEGORIES: Airlift squadrons of the United States Air Force, Military units and formations in Washington (state)

The 10th Airlift Squadron (10 AS) is part of the 62d Airlift Wing at McChord Air Force Base, Washington. It operates C-17 Globemaster III aircraft supporting the United States Air Force global reach mission world-wide.

==Mission==

To train and equip C-17 aircrews for global air-land and airdrop operations.10th Airlift Squadron Public Page 

==History==

Established as part of the Army Air Corps in January 1938 at Olmsted Field, Pennsylvania but not activated until 1 December 1940. Not equipped or manned.   Unit designation transferred to Westover Field, Massachusetts, but not equipped or manned until after the Pearl Harbor Attack.   Equipped with C-47 Skytrain transports and trained for combat resupply and casualty evacuation mission.
Was ordered deployed to England, assigned to Eighth Air Force in June 1942.  Assigned fuselage code 7D.  Performed intro-theater transport flights of personnel, supply and equipment within England during summer and fall of 1942, reassigned to Twelfth Air Force after Operation Torch invasion of North Africa, stationed at Tafaraoui Airfield, Algeria.    In combat, performed resupply and evacuation missions across Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia during North African Campaign.  During June 1943, the unit began training with gliders in preparation for Operation Husky, the invasion of Sicily.  It towed gliders to Syracuse, Sicily and dropped paratroopers at Catania during the operation.  After moving to Sicily, the squadron airdropped supplies to escaped prisoners of war in Northern Italy in October. Operated from Sicily until December until moving to Italian mainland in December.  
Supported Italian Campaign during balance of 1944 supporting partisans in the Balkans.  Its unarmed aircraft flew at night over uncharted territory, landing at small unprepared airfields to provide guns, ammunition, clothing, medical supplies, gasoline, and mail to the partisans.  It even carried jeeps and mules as cargo.  On return trips it evacuated wounded partisans, evadees and escaped prisoners.  These operations earned the squadron the Distinguished Unit Citation.  It also dropped paratroopers at Megava, Greece in October 1944 and propaganda leaflets in the Balkans in the Mediterranean Theater of Operations until end of combat in Europe, May, 1945.
After hostilities ended, was transferred to Waller Field, Trinidad attached to the Air Transport Command Transported  personnel and equipment from Brazil to South Florida along the South Atlantic Air Transport Route.  Squadron picked up personnel and equipment in Brazil or bases in Northern South America with final destination being Miami, Boca Raton Army Airfield or Morrison Fields in South Florida.     
Was reassigned to the United States Air Forces in Europe (USAFE), September 1946, performing intro-theater cargo flights based at Munich-Riem Airport.   Transferred to Kaufbeuren AB when Reim Airport was closed. Was re-equipped with C-54 Skymaster aircraft and deployed to RAF Fassberg during 1948 Berlin Airlift.  Flew continuous missions across hostile Soviet Zone of Germany in Berlin Air Corridor, transporting supplies and equipment to airports in West Berlin, 1948-1949.  Later operated from Rhein-Main AB and Wiesbaden AB in American Zone of Occupation, later West Germany until blockade ended. Remained as part of USAFE until 1961, being upgraded to C-82 and later C-119 Flying Boxcar transports as part of USAFE 322d Air Division based in West Germany and France.  Inactivated as part of downsizing of USAFE bases in France, 1961.    
Was briefly re-activated in the late 1960s at Chanute AFB, Illinois as a VT-29A VIP transport squadron as part of Military Airlift Command. Conducted airlift tasks in connection with aircraft delivery; in 1970 re-equipped with C-131 Samaritan medical evacuation aircraft.   Inactivated September 1970.   Re-assigned to USAFE and reactivated in 1984 with C-23 short-range transports for personnel movements within USAFE.  Flew scheduled flights from Zweiburcken, Ramstein and other USAFE bases, replacing C-130 European Shuttle flights.    Inactivated March 1991 as part of USAFE drawdown at the end of the Cold War.
Reactivated in 2003 as C-17 aircrew training squadron at McChord AFB, Washington.

===Lineage===

===Assignments===

===Stations===

==Aircraft operated==

==External links==

==External links==


