[[Dan Forrest, Jr.]]

CATEGORIES: 1978 births, Living people, American composers, 20th-century classical composers, University of Kansas alumni, People from Elmira, New York, People from Greenville, South Carolina, American pianists, People from Chemung County, New York

Daniel Ernest Forrest, Jr. (born  January 7, 1978) is a composer, pianist, and music editor.

==Biography==

Dan Forrest was born in Elmira, New York and received a B.Mus. and an M.Mus. in Piano Performance from Bob Jones University and a D.M.A. in composition from the University of Kansas.  He has studied composition with Joan Pinkston, Dwight Gustafson, James Barnes, and Alice Parker.Beckenhorst Press bio. Forrest's compositions include choral, instrumental, orchestral, and wind band works. His church music appears in the catalogs of ten publishers, including Hinshaw, Hal Leonard, Beckenhorst, Shawnee Press, and Chorister’s Guild.Forrest website.
Forrest's choral works have received the ASCAP Morton Gould Young Composer’s Award, the ACDA Raymond Brock Award, a Meet The Composer grant, and the ALCM Raabe Prize. His “A Basque Lullaby” for wind band was included in Volume 8 of the Teaching Music Through Performance In Band series.  Forrest's music has been performed in leading venues including Carnegie Hall, the Lincoln Center, and on NPR’s “Performance Today.”Teaching Music Through Performance in Band vol. 8. According to the composer's website, nearly a million copies of his choral works are in print. Forrest website. A review in The Salt Lake Tribune referred to Forrest's "superb choral writing" and gave as an example his arrangement of "The First Noel," which it said was "full of spine-tingling moments." Salt Lake Tribune review, December 3, 2011.
Forrest is an associate editor at Beckenhorst Press, has a choral series in his name with Hinshaw Music,Hinshaw Music website and serves on the editorial board of The Artistic Theologian.The Artistic Theologian website. He served as chairman of the department of music theory and composition at Bob Jones University from 2007 to 2012.Forrest website.

==Awards==

==Notable Performances==

==References==


