[[Hesperian Foundation]]

CATEGORIES: Charitable organizations, Publishing companies of the United States

Hesperian Health Guides, formerly known as Hesperian Foundation, is a nongovernmental non-profit organization publishing health guides for trained and untrained people to care for themselves and others. The foundation is based in Berkeley, California. Among their best-selling publications is Where There is No Doctor, first published in 1973Hesperian History, Hesperian Health Guides. Retrieved 2011-11-15. and updated every few years;Where There Is No Doctor information page at Hesperian's official site. Retrieved 2008-01-01. the book has been translated to more than 80 languages and the World Health Organization estimates that it may be the most widely used public health manual in the world."Health of Women with Disabilities: An interview with Jane Maxwell of the Hesperian Foundation," Moving Toward Inclusion, Mobility International USA (undated). Retrieved 2008-01-01.
Hesperian's publications are known for their simplicity of expression and copious illustrations, both intended to make them suitable for use by ordinary people in home and community contexts. Where There is No Doctor in particular was praised by those who felt it "demystified and politicized health care," communicating that "although some health problems require expert medical attention, there is much that we can do on our own to positively affect our health," a message also communicated in subsequent works.Cynthia Peters. Book review: Where Women Have No Doctor, Z Magazine, November 1997. Retrieved 2008-01-01. These publications are empowering to many.
Hesperian often works with other organizations to create new publications and revise older ones. The short work Water for Life: Community Water Security was published in conjunction with the United Nations Development Program.Water for Life: Community Water Security at United Nations Development Program: Energy and Environment. Retrieved 2008-01-01. In 2006, Hesperian received a US$40,000 grant from the Rockefeller Brothers Fund to develop a book on environmental health,Grants and grantees: Hesperian Foundation, Rockefeller Brothers Fund. Retrieved 2008-01-01. and in 2004 the Firelight Foundation provided a small grant to fund the revision of the 1999 book HIV, Health, and Your Community."Grants awarded in Canada, United Kingdom, and United States," Firelight Foundation. Retrieved 2008-01-01.
As of 2011, the organization had a rating of four out of four stars from Charity Navigator for the efficient use of donated funds.Charity Navigator: Hesperian Foundation. Retrieved 2011-11-15. Complementing its other activities, the organization includes a Gratis Fund that sends free copies of its publications to those who cannot afford them, a translation fund providing seed grants to cover the costs of local translation and adaptation in international communities, and a grant fund to assist health education programs in developing creative ways to use Hesperian publications by such means as street theater and radio broadcasts.InterAction member profile: Hesperian Foundation, InterAction: American Council for Voluntary International Action. Retrieved 2008-01-01."Creative Education Fund—Global," The Communication Initiative Network. Access to the publications also is fostered through the organization's policy of permitting copying, reproduction or adaptation of any part of a publication to meet local needs "provided the parts reproduced are distributed free or at cost—not for profit," resulting in the availability of online copies of various publications."Free Online Manuals: HIV, Health and Your Community," Solidarity and Action Against The HIV Infection in India.Disabled Village Children: A guide for community health workers, rehabilitation workers, and families via DINF: Disability INFormation Resources, Japan.
Hesperian Health Guides is an official supporting organization of Healthcare Information For All by 2015.

==Reviews==

Hesperian Health Guides "is responsible for countless miracles in various parts of the world by providing basic health care books to those who either cannot afford medical treatment or cannot survive the long, arduous journey to the nearest doctor," says the San Francisco Chronicle.Harriet Chang. "Foundation gets health books to far corners of the world where there are no doctors," San Francisco Chronicle'', July 2005.
Hesperian's publications are widely praised by a variety of sources, and Hesperian involves organizations from all over the world in the development of its books. "Where There Is No Doctor is an indispensable resource... This book has been, quite literally, a lifesaver for the poor - even where there is a doctor." says Paul Farmer, Professor of Social Medicine, Harvard Medical School.
"Helping Children Who are Deaf" was praised in The Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education for its "broad perspective. Parents, teachers, deaf adults, and health care workers from around the world—over 17 countries—advised and reviewed draft materials of the book. A very long and impressive list of individuals and organizations from Bangladesh to Zimbabwe are given credit and thanks for sharing their experiences, stories, and knowledge."Barbara Bodner-Johnson."Book review: Helping Children who are Deaf," Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, May 2005. Another review criticized the book as not sufficiently overcoming Western cultural assumptions about areas such as privacy.M. Miles. "Book review: Helping children who are deaf," Disability World, January 2007.

==Selected publications==

===In English===

===In languages other than English===

Most of the titles listed above are available from Hesperian in Spanish, and a few are available from the Foundation in French, Vietnamese, and Chinese.Hesperian titles in other languages, Hesperian.org. Publications are distributed by a variety of other organizations in over 100 other languages, including:

==Notes==

==External links==


