[[Brian Shactman]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), American television journalists, Amherst College alumni, Clark University alumni, Living people, CNBC people, Phillips Exeter Academy alumni, MSNBC, American schoolteachers, ESPN people, News & Documentary Emmy Award winners

Brian A. Shactman is an American journalist for CNBC and MSNBC.

==Biography==

Shactman grew up in Connecticut,The Laurel: "Catching up with Brian Shactman" January 26, 2009 the son of Nancy and David Shactman.http://www.legacy.com/obituaries/wickedlocal-marblehead/obituary.aspx?pid=166543593 Legacy.com He graduated from Phillips Exeter AcademyCNBC: "Brian A. Shactman - CNBC Reporter" retrieved November 25, 2013 and earned a B.A. in English and History from Amherst College in 1994.Amherst College Bulletin: "Brian Shactman '94 Earns Emmy Nomination" by Justin Long December 2011 He also has a Master of Arts degree in English from Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts.
After school, he worked as a member of the faculty at Taft School in Watertown, ConnecticutTaft School Bulletin: "The Matzkin Missions" Winter 2006 and then worked for ESPN as an analyst at ESPNEWS, SportsCenter and ESPN Radio. In 2002, he joined Hartford NBC-affiliate WVIT (owned and operated by General Electric, the parent company of CNBC). In June 2007, he joined CNBC as a general assignment reporter and substitute anchor for CNBC's Business Day program. In October 2007, he became the co-anchor on Worldwide Exchange with CNBC Europe's Ross Westgate in London and CNBC Asia's Christine Tan in Singapore. In May 2013, he began anchoring Way Too Early on MSNBC; he was replaced by Thomas Roberts in January 2014.
Shactman received three regional Emmy Awards in 2002 for his sports anchoring and reporting.  A year later (2003), he won The Associated Press Award for a documentary on University of Connecticut women's head basketball coach Geno Auriemma. Shactman is also involved in community service, volunteering for Junior Achievement, ALS, and Connecticut's mentoring program.  He is also on the Board of Directors for Special Olympics.
He is married to Jessica Matzkin ShactmanHartford Courant: "Marathoners Munch And Mingle At The Mansion" By Teresa M. Pelham" October 05, 2006New Jersey.com: "Blair Academy counselor brings medical care to Honduran people" By  Kevin Lechiski October 08, 2008 who he met while working at the Taft School. She is the dean of students at Blair Academy in Blairstown, New Jersey.Blaire Academy: "Self & Society Class Encourages Students to Be Introspective & Self-Reflective" March 13, 2013

==References==

==External links==


