[[Duncan MacKay (footballer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1937 births, Living people, Sportspeople from Glasgow, Scottish footballers, Association football fullbacks, Scotland international footballers, Celtic F.C. players, Third Lanark A.C. players, Melbourne Knights FC players, Scottish Football League players, Scottish football managers, South Melbourne FC managers, Scotland under-23 international footballers, Scottish expatriate football managers, Scottish expatriate footballers, Expatriate soccer managers in Australia, Expatriate soccer players in Australia

Duncan MacKay (born 14 July 1937) is a former Scottish footballer who played for Celtic, Third Lanark, Melbourne Croatia, Perth Azzurri and the Scotland national team.
Born in Glasgow, Mackay turned professional when he joined Celtic from Maryhill Harp aged 17 in 1955. He developed rapidly, making his club debut within two years and earning the first of an eventual 14 caps for the Scottish national side four years later. However, Celtic were at this time in the shadow of rivals Rangers and he was destined not to win any honours with the Parkhead club. Celtic manager Jimmy McGrory's attempts to rejuvenate his side eventually resulted in MacKay's departure from Celtic Park after over 200 first team appearances, the fullback moving to south Glasgow side Third Lanark in November 1964. Thirds were relegated at the end of the 1964-65 season though, and MacKay was one of several players released.
MacKay opted to move to Australia at this juncture, joining Melbourne Croatia of the Victorian State League.  He helped the side to the State title in 1968 and several Dockerty Cup triumphs but left when Croatia were suspended following crowd disturbances in 1972. He returned to Scotland and joined junior club St Anthony's as a player-coach for two years before deciding upon a second stint in Australia. After playing for Perth Azzurri between 1974 and 1977 he coached with South Melbournehttp://www.smfc.com.au/history/1970-s/ and Essendon Lions.

==References==

==External links==


