[[Isidro Larrañaga Accordion Orchestra]]

CATEGORIES: Accordionists

The Isidro Larrañaga Accordion Orchestra is an accordion ensemble based in Tolosa, Spain. It has about 25 members and is famous internationally. The director is Isitxo Larrañaga Moreno.

==History==

ISIDRO LARRAÑAGA ACCORDION ORCHESTRA was founded by Isidro Larrañaga Beloki in 1980. Today, it is formed of 25 musicians, aged between 14 and 35 years. Most of them are making superior studies of music and the rest have already finished them.
The orchestra made its name through various concerts in towns of Araba, Biscay, Gipuzkoa and Navarre 21 years ago. Since then, the orchestra has never lost its original spirit of improvement, although the members have been changed along the time. Its first historical milestone was marked by the international tour in France, having a great success, in April 1985.
In May 1985, the orchestra offered a performance in the RTVE program "Gente Joven ".
A second orchestra formed by students of music, between 9 and 15 years old, was founded in 1987 under the direction of Isidro Larrañaga.
It also participated in several festivals in Navarre and Gipuzkoa between 1987 and 1989, organized with the aid of the delegations of Navarre and Gipzkoa and the Council of Culture of the Basque Government.
In 1988 it offered various performances in the RTVE program "Por La Mañana " and in the ETB program "Iñigo En Directo".
It was in November 1985 when it got its international recognition by winning the first prize and the gold medal of the "XVI. Accordion International Grand Prix" held in Mutzig, France.
In 1997, the 2 orchestras participated in the "XVII Acordion International Gran Prix", celebrated in the French city of Bischwiller, obtaining silver medals in the corresponding categories.
In 1998, took part in the "Castelfidardo International Great Prize of Accordions" also obtaining a silver medal.
In 2000, it participated in the "XVIII Acordion International Gran Prix" held in the Swiss city of Geneva, winning the gold medal.
In the year 2001, it participated in the "X. International Accordion Contest of Cantabria", obtaining the first position and the gold medal.
In 2002, the two orchestras took part in the "XI. International Accordion Contest of Cantabria", obtaining the first position and the gold medal in the respective categories.
In 2003, the two orchestras took part in the "XII. International Accordion Contest of Cantabria". The young orchestra won the gold medal while the adult one got the silver medal.
Between the 3rd and the 12th of December 2004, the orchestra offered several concerts in three Austrian cities (Innsbruck, Salzbourg and Vienna) harvesting a great success.
In May of the 2007 it offered several concerts in Galicia, being acclaimed by the public. In October 2007, the orchestra wins the prestigious "Prague Harmonica Days" prize in a very hard competition with other 7 international orchestras. They obtained 23,8 points out of 25, with "Outstanding" qualification, whereas the second classified got 23 points.
Nowadays, the orchestra is under the direction of Isidro Larrañaga Moreno, and continues offering concerts interpreting varied styles.

==See also==

==External links==


