[[Rebecca Bulley]]

CATEGORIES: Australian netball players, Commonwealth Games competitors for Australia, Commonwealth Games silver medallists for Australia, Netball players at the 2010 Commonwealth Games, Adelaide Thunderbirds players, New South Wales Swifts players, Melbourne Kestrels players, Australian Institute of Sport netball players, 1982 births, Living people

Rebecca Bulley (née Strachan; born 18 August 1982) is an Australian international netball player. A defence circle player, Bulley was included in the Australian national squad in 2005 and 2007. Previously, she was the co-captain of the Melbourne Kestrels and of the AIS Canberra Darters during the Commonwealth Bank Trophy. Bulley is currently playing for the Adelaide Thunderbirds in the ANZ Championship.

==Career==

In 2008, after not being included into the Melbourne Vixens squad for the inaugural ANZ Championship, Bulley accepted an offer to play for the NSW Swifts. In the 2008 ANZ Championship, Bulley became one of the main defenders in the Swifts line up along with Kimberly Purcell and Selina Gilsenan after Liz Ellis (retired in 2007) and Mo'onia Gerrard (played for Adelaide Thunderbirds) left the Swifts. As a result, the Swifts won the 2008 ANZ Championship Grand Final against Waikato Bay of Plenty Magic where Bulley played as Goal Keeper (GK) for the whole match. Bulley also made her on-court debut for the Australian Netball Diamonds against the Silver Ferns at the Wing Defence (WD) position for the first half of the game. Bulley also played for the Australian Netball Diamonds as Goal Defence (GD) against England.
In 2009, during an ANZ Away from the Game segment, Bulley had surfing lessons with other members of the team, Vanessa Ware and Erin Bell. In the 2009 ANZ Championship, Bulley played in all thirteen games at Wing Defence (WD), Goal Defence (GD) and Goal Keeper (GK). In round 3 against the Magic, during the second quarter, Bulley had a heavy fall on the ground and was sidelined for the remainder of the game. This was the only game Bulley did not play in all four quarters of a match. Later on, despite not being included in the Australian Diamonds squad, she eventually got a call that she was included to replace injured players Bianca Chatfield, Mo'onia Gerrard and Laura Geitz. At that time, Bulley trained with the Diamonds during training in Invercargill. In the 2009 World Netball Series, Bulley was part of the 12 player squad replacing Mo'onia Gerrard. During the World Netball Series, Bulley played in Goal Defence (GD) and was one of the key players against England to claim third in the championship. After the World Netball Series, Bulley was part of the 12 player squad against England in Bath and Jamaica in Kingston.
In 2010, Bulley played for the Australian Diamonds against Scotland and England where she took part in every match at Goal Defence, Wing Defence (against Scotland) and Goal Keeper (against England). In the 2010 ANZ Championship, Bulley played in every match at Goal Defence and Goal Keeper. At the end of the regular season, Bulley won the Holden Cruze Player of the Year Award with 18 votes, 4 points ahead of second place and fellow Swifts player Catherine Cox. Bulley also won the NSW Swifts MVP award and the Members' Player of the Year award. After the ANZ Championship, Bulley was selected as one of the fifteen members of the Australian squad to take part in test matches against Jamaica and New Zealand. Bulley was selected in the final squad of twelve to take part in the 2010 Commonwealth Games including the gold medal match against New Zealand during overtime.
In 2011, Bulley was part of the twelve player squad to tour in Jamaica playing at either Wing Defence or Goal Defence. In the ANZ Championship, Bulley played in every match at either Goal Defence and Goal Keeper.
Bulley has signed a contract for the Adelaide Thunderbirds for 2012 ANZ Championship Season for two years.

==Awards==

==References==


