[[Farmingdale School District]]

CATEGORIES: New Jersey District Factor Group DE, School districts in Monmouth County, New Jersey

The Farmingdale School District is a community public school district that serves students in Kindergarten through eighth grade from Farmingdale, New Jersey, United States.
As of the 2007-08 school year, the district's one school had an enrollment of 143 students and 16.0 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 8.9.District information for the Farmingdale Borough School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed November 5, 2009.
The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "DE", the fifth highest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed October 27, 2009.
Public school students in grades 9-12 attend Howell High School, as part of the Freehold Regional High School District. The district also serves students from Colts Neck Township, Englishtown, Freehold Borough, Freehold Township, Howell Township, Manalapan Township and Marlboro.Freehold Regional High School District 2007 Report Card Narrative, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed April 28, 2008. "Freehold Regional High School District, the largest high school district in New Jersey, has six high schools with almost 12,000 students and over 1,500 employees.... District members include the Townships of Colts Neck, Freehold, Howell, Manalapan, and Marlboro, and the Boroughs of Englishtown, Farmingdale, and Freehold." 

==School==

Farmingdale Elementary School served 143 students as of the 2007-08 school year.Data for the Farmingdale School District. Accessed December 9, 2009.

==Administration==

Core members of the district's administration are:Administration & Staff, Farmingdale School District. Accessed April 28, 2008.Monmouth County School Directory, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed November 5, 2009.

==References==

==External links==


