[[Brian Weinstein]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), Living people, Washington (state) State Senators

Brian Weinstein is a former Washington State Senator representing the 41st Legislative District.

==Background==

After a long career as an attorney representing mesothelioma victims nationwide, Weinstein was elected to the Washington State Senate in 2004 to represent the 41st legislative district of Washington (Seattle suburbs) as a Democrat, defeating a 16-year incumbent Republican legislator.    Weinstein lives on Mercer Island with his wife (Gaylene Vaden) and children Trevor, Arielle and Madeleine.  He graduated with honors from the University of Wisconsin–Madison with a BA in Economics in 1976.  He then went on to attend the University of Texas Austin School of Law to earn his JD in 1981.  He also served as the former Director of the Pike Place Market Foundation Board.Washington State Senate official bio In February 2009, Brian was appointed by Governor Gregoire to the Public Stadium Authority.Public Stadium Authority After retiring from the legislature in 2008, Weinstein resumed the practice of law and has recently founded, as senior partner, the law firm of Weinstein Couture, PLLC (http://www.weinsteincouture.com), specializing in pleural and peritoneal mesothelioma, pharmaceutical induced birth defects (Paxil, Topomax) and defective medical device cases, such as DePuy Hip Replacement cases.

==Legislative History==

Weinstein served as Assistant Majority Whip from 2005 to 2006.  After only two years in the Senate, Weinstein was chosen by the Senate Democratic Caucus to chair the Consumer Protection and Housing Committee.  Weinstein is a member of the Judiciary Committee and the Early Learning and K-12 Education Committee.  In 2005 at the Governor's request, Weinstein prime sponsored the Washington Learns bill, SB 5441.  Signed into law, the legislation required a comprehensive study of Washington's structure and funding of public education, including recommendations for reform.  Many of the recommendations have been adopted.  In 2007, he prime sponsored and helped pass the Insurance Fair  Conduct Act which made it unlawful for insurers to unreasonably deny a claim for coverage or payment of benefits.  The insurance industry and others tried to repeal the legislation through Referendum 67, but the voters  rejected  the insurance industries efforts to repeal Weinstein's law.  In 2008, Weinstein sponsored and passed SB 6381 which imposes a fiduciary duty on mortgage brokers (requiring mortgage brokers to act in the best interest of the borrower).  Weinstein was also instrumental in securing state funding for the Washington State Holocaust Education Resource Center. 
The Legislature failed to pass Weinstein's Homebuyer's Bill of Rights which would have held builders liable for shoddy construction.  In 2007 and 2008 the bill passed the Senate but was never brought to a vote before the full House of Representatives. In 2008, Weinstein announced he would return to the practice of law and not run for re-election.

==Awards and recognition==

Weinstein is the recipient of the 2008 Fuse "Sizzle" award for "Favorite Gunslinger." The Washington-based online advocacy group honored Weinstein for his "four years as a fearless and relentless crusader for consumer protection."2008 Fuse "Sizzle" Awards 

==References==


