[[Matt Wilkinson]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), Living people, Alumni of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, British male television actors, British male film actors

Matt Wilkinson is a British actor.

==Career==

Wilkinson Trained at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, he has appeared in theatre, film and television, including Alan Bennet's The Wind in the Willows (Old Vic), Shackleton (Channel 4) and V for Vendetta (Warner Bros.).
He is also a voice artist known for his versatility.  Numerous radio commercials and TV animations include Empire Square (Channel 4), The Adventures of Bottle Top Bill and His Best Friend Corky (Channel 5), Watership Down (CITV) and 64 Zoo Lane (CBBC).  He has narrated various TV documentaries and was the voice of Scott in Blizzard; Race to the Pole (BBC).  For gamers, he is the voice of Murmur in EA's Hellgate: London.
He also wrote and directed his first play Sun is Shining for Mu-lan Theatre Company.  It played in London at the Kings Head (2002), BAC Time Out Critics Choice season (2003) and transferred to the 59E59 Theaters in New York City in 2004.  Published by Samuel French (US).  He co-wrote and performed in the UK adaptation of Hideki Noda's play Red Demon (Young Vic 2003), published by Oberon.
Wilkinson has written and directed several short films selected for festivals in Berlin, Paris, Nashville, Havana and London. He provides the voice of Kodder in Cars 2 and Sulger in Storm Hawks.

===Thomas & Friends - CGI Version===

From 2009 onwards, Wilkinson has provided voices for lots of Thomas TV characters like Spencer, Stanley, Victor (Hero of the Rails - Series 16), Charlie, Bash, Scruff, Diesel 10, Rocky, Rusty, Cranky, Butch (Series 16 onwards), Kevin, Winston, Stephen Hatt, Farmer McColl, The Duke of Boxford and Farmer Trotter in the newly-switched "CGI version" of the British TV series and the 3D animated feature film specials (see below in Filmography).
Wilkinson replaced Rupert Degas as Diesel 10 in the 2010 special Misty Island Rescue after he was cut. In series 16, the role of Butch (voiced by Rupert Degas in series 15) was given to Wilkinson. He provided the voice of Victor from Hero of the Rails to series 16, until David Bedella replaced Wilkinson ín the role in Blue Mountain Mystery.
There are likely to be more characters of the series for Wilkinson to possibly voice in the near-future.

==Radio==

Matt presented weekday afternoons on Trent FM before moving to Heart FM where he currently hosts the Weekday afternoons show from 1pm-4pm replacing Nick Snaith in March 2014. Previously he presented the Early Breakfast show from 4-6AM every weekday broadcast across the Heart Network. And before this he hosted the weekend breakfast show across the Heart Network from 6-8AM and across Heart London from 6-9AM. However this ended during the summer of 2012 when the weekend breakfast show was replaced by JK and Lucy (Saturday) and Stephen Mulhern and Emma Willis (Sunday). Previous to this, Matt hosted the weekday evening show on Heart (19:00-22:00) and Club Classics on Friday nights (19:00-00:00). He is also the main stand-in for Rich Clarke & Kat Shoob on the Big Top 40 Show which broadcasts on more than 140 commercial radio stations in the UK. Matt typically presents Drivetime across the Heart Network on Bank Holidays however this is not always the case.

==Filmography==

==External links==


