[[Lee County Sheriff's Office (Florida)]]

CATEGORIES: Lee County, Florida, Sheriffs' departments of Florida, Law enforcement agencies of Florida

The Lee County Sheriff's Office is located in Fort Myers, Florida.  Founded in 1887, the Office of the Sheriff has a duty to enforce both the Florida Constitution and Florida state laws and statutes, and to provide for the security, safety and well being of its citizens. This is accomplished through the delivery of law enforcement services, the operation of the Lee County Jail, and the provision of court security. The Office of the Sheriff functions as the Executive Officer of the court.
Under Florida law, the Sheriff is defined as a constitutional officer and derives his legal authority from the Constitution of the State of Florida. The Sheriff is vested with the ability to appoint and direct deputies who will act in his name and office to enforce the appropriate and applicable laws of the State of Florida. Those deputies of the Lee County Sheriff's Office who are certified law enforcement officers must maintain a thorough working knowledge of the laws they enforce and the underlying principals from which they emanate.
The Lee County Sheriff's Office Headquarters is located at 14750 Six Mile Cypress Parkway, Fort Myers, FL 33912.

==About the Sheriff==

Mike Scott (R) was elected as the county's 12th sheriff in 2004.  He was re-elected for a second term in 2008. Sheriff Scott holds a Bachelor's Degree from the University of South Florida and a Master's Degree in Business Administration from IMPAC University.

==Agency Structure==

Under the Sheriff there are five (5) distinct operational Bureaus: Patrol, Criminal Investigations, Administration, Special Operations, and Corrections. Each Bureau consists of divisions, sections and units; each has specific functions and responsibilities. In addition, under the Sheriff's direction, the Chief Deputy has direct responsibility for several operational units.
The LCSO serves the entire county, with primary jurisdiction in parts of Fort Myers, North Fort Myers, San Carlos Park, Iona McGregor, Bonita Springs, Lehigh Acres, Estero, coastal communities like Pine Island and Fort Myers Beach.  Other areas of the county not incorporated fall into the jurisdiction of the Fort Myers or Cape Coral Police departments.
Jurisdiction covers six (6) districts:  Alpha (North Fort Myers and parts of Cape Coral), Bravo (mainly Lehigh Acres), Charlie (parts of west Fort Myers and into Cape Coral), Delta (areas south of Fort Myers, including Bonita and San Carlos Park), Echo (portions of South Fort Myers near the Southwest Florida International Airport, includes Gateway), and Gulf (island coastal communities such as Boca Grande and Captiva Island).
Each district has a headquarters. The District Headquarters of the Sheriff's Office are full-service divisions, very similar to small police departments.  Each district is open 24 hours a day, and offers the following services:

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


