[[Post City Magazines]]

CATEGORIES: Companies based in Toronto, Companies established in 1989, Magazine companies of Canada

Post City Magazines is an independently owned Toronto-based publisher of seven magazines that are distributed monthly to an affluent readership in Toronto and the Greater Toronto Area: the Bayview Post, North York Post, North Toronto Post, Village Post, Thornhill Post, Richmond Hill Post and the Midtown Post. 
The magazines are delivered free of charge to houses within each publication's coverage area with a total distribution of 175,000 copies per month (or two million copies a year). Eight of the top 10 highest median income areas in Canada are covered by a Post City Magazines publication, such as The Bridle Path, Rosedale, Forest Hill, York Mills, Moore Park, Lawrence Park, Lytton Park, Thornhill and Richmond Hill.
They are also available free in boxes and racks located within the neighbourhoods or by paid subscription. 
Post City Magazines recently re-launched their website http://www.postcity.com/. The revamped site now features breaking local news stories for all seven of Post City’s neighbourhoods as well as features, food and theatre reviews. The site also hosts blogs by some of Toronto’s top names in food, fashion and real estate.

==Content Of Publications==

Celebrity profiles of prominent community residents anchor the magazines. They have included notable celebrities such as 
Margaret Atwood, Norman Jewison, Karen Kain, Robert J. Sawyer, Pamela Wallin, and Neil Young.
Columnists include Tony Aspler (Toronto wine connoisseur and author, recently inducted into the Order of Canada), Rose Reisman (one of Canada's top chefs and cookbook authors), David Suzuki (environmentalist, scientist and broadcaster),  Joanne Kates, (former food critic for the Globe and Mail) and Mark Breslin (founder of  Yuk Yuk's international stand-up comedy chain).
The magazines also feature community news, local restaurant reviews, profiles of local heroes and notable graduates as well as lifestyle, arts and entertainment features. It also frequently contains a Kids' Post section with several parenting articles (including Yummy Mummy by Erica Ehm, former Much Music video jockey).
Every September, a special edition of the Kids' Post, which is known for its comprehensive private school guide, is also distributed.
An annual "Best Of"  list of the favourite people places and things that the neighbourhood has to offer is featured in each publication, with a heavy focus on offerings from the community's independent retailers.

==Company history==

In 1989 Toronto resident Lorne London established the company Post Newspapers Inc. and  published the first edition of the Bayview Post. This was followed by The Village Post in 1991,  North Toronto Post in 1993, the Thornhill Post in 1995, the Richmond Hill Post in 1997, and the North York Post in 1999.
The Midtown Post, launched in 2007, targets the same geographic area as the North Toronto, Village, Bayview and North York publications, however it is distributed specifically to upscale condominium residents in those neighbourhoods.
To this day, Lorne London remains as publisher for all seven Post City Magazines publications.
The magazines have received accolades from the Globe & Mail, The Toronto Sun, The Toronto Star and Marketing Magazine.

