[[United States presidential election in Massachusetts, 1972]]

CATEGORIES: United States presidential election, 1972, United States presidential elections in Massachusetts, Massachusetts elections, 1972

The 1972 United States presidential election in Massachusetts took place on November 7, 1972 as part of the 1972 United States presidential election, which was held throughout all 50 states and D.C. Voters chose 14 representatives, or electors to the Electoral College, who voted for President and Vice President.
Massachusetts voted for the Democratic nominee, Senator George McGovern of South Dakota, over incumbent Republican President Richard Nixon of California. McGovern's running mate was U.S. Ambassador Sargent Shriver of Maryland, who had replaced Senator Thomas Eagleton during the campaign, while Nixon ran with incumbent Vice President Spiro Agnew of Maryland.
McGovern carried Massachusetts with 54.20% of the vote to Nixon's 45.23%, a Democratic victory margin of 8.97%. 
In the midst of a massive nationwide Republican landslide in which Richard Nixon had carried 49 states, Massachusetts proved to be the only state in the nation that would cast its electoral votes for George McGovern, joined only by the District of Columbia. 
McGovern also carried the state by a surprisingly comfortable 9 point margin, making the state a whopping 32% more Democratic than the national average in the 1972 election. 
McGovern, a staunch liberal Democrat best known for his strong principled opposition to the Vietnam War, was painted by the Nixon campaign as an extremist too far to the left of the American mainstream at the time, and this paid off in delivering Nixon a nationwide re-election landslide. 
However liberal Massachusetts would prove to be the one state that was immune to the Nixon campaign's rhetoric. 
Prior to 1972, Massachusetts had been a Democratic-leaning state since 1928, and a Democratic stronghold since 1960. But McGovern's comfortable victory in 1972 still stands out, as many other traditional Democratic strongholds abandoned the Democrats in 1972. For example, neighboring Rhode Island, which normally voted similarly to Massachusetts, went to Nixon in 1972 by 6 points. 
On the county map, McGovern carried nine of the state's 14 counties, including the most heavily populated parts of the state. The state's capital and largest city, Boston, would prove to be a McGovern stronghold; Suffolk County, where Boston is located, went to McGovern with 66% of the vote. Boston is one of the few areas in the country where McGovern actually outperformed Jimmy Carter's performance four years later in 1976; while Carter was narrowly winning the presidency nationally, in Suffolk County he only took 61%. 
The results in 1972 made Massachusetts the only state which Richard Nixon would never carry in any of his three presidential campaigns. 

==Results==

==References==

==See also==


