[[Ministry of Defence (Pakistan)]]

CATEGORIES: Defence ministries, Cabinet of Pakistan, Government ministries of Pakistan, Military of Pakistan

The Ministry of Defence (Urdu: وزارت دفاع); initially called as Defence Ministry; reporting name:  MoD), is a Cabinet-level ministry tasked with coordinating and supervising all major government agencies and federal departments of the government relating directly to National security and the Pakistan Defense Forces. The MoD plays an integral role in allocating and formulating the defence budget and pertains military excersizes to all the branches of Pakistan Armed Forces engaged in the defense of the country. The organization and functions of the  MoD are set forth in the Part XII, Chapter II (Miscellaneous) of the Constitution.
The MoD is responsible for defending the State of Pakistan from external military and non-military threats. The MoD's political executive figure is known as Defense Minister (Def Min), and the current Def Min is Parliamentarian Khawaja Mohammad Asif. The MoD is an evolution and derivative of Ministry of Defence of British Indian Empire. MoD is a high-profile government portfolio, and is directly related to the Pakistan's Armed Forces, where number of its military officers served with the civilian officers.  The MoD is a major tenant of the Pakistan Armed Forces buildings located at Rawalpindi, Punjab Province, and it has three main buildings: The Generals Combatant Headquarter (GHQ), Air Force Combatant Headquarters (AHQ), and the Naval Combatant Headquarter (NHQ). Among the many MoD departments are Military Lands and Cantonments Department (MLCD), Pakistan Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), Airports Security Force, DESTO, Pakistan Intelligence Bureau, and the Naval Intelligence Bureau. The MoD also operates civilian joint institutions, including the Defence and Strategic Studies Department at the Quaid-i-Azam University.
The Airports Security Force is part of the Ministry of Defence  and is responsible for protecting the airports and the facilities and the planes (on-ground or in-air). ASF safeguards the civil aviation industry against unlawful interferences, adopting counter terrorism measures, preventing crime and maintaining law and order within the limits of Airports in Pakistan.
The ASF was established in 1976 under the Airport Security Force Act LXXVII of 1975 initially as the Directorate of the Department of Civil Aviation. After the hijacking of a Pakistan International Airlines aeroplane in March 1981, sensing the contradictory requirements of security and facilitation, the ASF was separated, and in December 1983, was placed under the folds of the Ministry of Defence.

==Structure of Ministry of Defence==

==See also==

Bahria Foundation, PN

==External links==


