[[Jay Benedict]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 births, American male television actors, American translators, Living people, Male actors from Burbank, California

Jay Benedict (born 1951) is an American  actor, best known in the United Kingdom for his role as Captain/Major John Kieffer in Foyle's War (in the episodes "Invasion" and "All Clear").

==Life and career==

Benedict was born in Burbank, California. He has lived and worked in Europe since the 1960s. His theatrical credits include The Rocky Horror Show in the Kings Road in the early 1970s, Harold Pinter's production of Sweet Bird of Youth, The Reverend Lee in The Foreigner and Riccardo in Franco Zeffirelli's production of Filumena in which he played opposite Pierce Brosnan in the latter's first stage role, and Bill Wilson, co-founder of Alcoholics Anonymous,in a touring production of "One Day at a Time". In 2013 he appeared opposite  Steven Berkoff and Andree Bernard in the world premiere of the former's one act play An Actor's Lament at The Berkoff Performing Arts Centre at Alton College, followed by a second performance at The Sinden Theatre, Homewood School, Tenterden in Kent, two nights at The Maltings Theatre & Cinema in Berwick-upon-Tweed and then a three week run at the Assembly Hall in Edinburgh as part of the Edinburgh Festival Fringe.
He has also appeared widely on television, most notably as Frank Crowe in an episode of the BBC's award-winning 2003 docudrama television miniseries Seven Wonders of the Industrial World, John E. Jones III in Nova's Judgment Day: Intelligent Design on Trial, Alan Kalanak in the 2001 Christmas Special edition of Jonathan Creek and Yves Houdet in Thames Television's mini-series of Angus Wilson's Anglo-Saxon Attitudes. Other television appearances include  Lilyhammer as Agent Becker, Queen Victoria's Men (Lord Melbourne), Sharpe's Honour (General Verigny), Bergerac (Martin Colley), Emmerdale (Doug Hamilton), Death Train (Halloran), Harnessing Peacocks (Eli Drew) and Only Love (Roger).  He provided the voice for Shiro Hagan in Star Fleet, the English adaptation of the Japanese X-Bomber.
His first film role, at the age of 11, was in the 1963 Tony Saytor film La Bande à Bobo. In 1977 he played Deak in the Tosche Station scenes in Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope which were deleted from the film before release.  Subsequent film appearances include Aliens (Russ Jorden), The Dirty Dozen: Next Mission (Didier le Clair), Icon (Carey Jordan), The White Knight (Turkish Ambassador), The Russia House (Spikey), Saving Grace (the MC) and Rewind.  In 2003 he was third lead in Vicente Aranda's  version of Carmen, playing Don Prospero.
In addition to English, he also works in French and Spanish, and has performed widely on the continent, appearing as Paul Matthiews in the French day-time soap opera Cap des Pins and William Wilbur  in Le Grand Charles (a French mini series on Charles De Gaulle), among many other roles.
He is married to actress Phoebe Scholfield and together they run Sync or Swim, an ADR/Loop group (see dubbing). They have also translated and written movies together - such as The Card Player (Il Cartaio) - which they translated into English.
They have two children: Leopold Benedict (Before the Rains, Azur & Asmar: The Princes' Quest) and Freddie Benedict (Planet 51, Azur & Asmar: The Princes' Quest).  He has a daughter by a previous marriage.

==Television credits==

==Selected Filmography==

==External links==


