[[Ñu Guasú Park]]

CATEGORIES: Parks in Paraguay, Central Department

Ñu Guasú Park is located in Luque, in the Central Department of Paraguay, near the Silvio Pettirossi International Airport. A green area of about 25 hectares, it has been transformed into a recreational park, in part due to ample tree coverage. It is maintained through the Communications and Public Constructions Ministry of Paraguay, through the Public Constructions Direction, dependent of the Vice-Ministry.
Ñu Guasú Park has a 5-kilometer walking/jogging path and a 1.2-kilometer bicycle path. It also has soccer, volleyball, basketball, and tennis facilities. There are also areas for children to play and areas for doing gymnastic exercises.
The main objective of the park is to give the community a place for sharing and recreation. There is no cost to enter the park.

==Infrastructure==

The park has 25 hectares of green space, equipped with lanes, sport courts, children playgrounds, bars and resting areas.
The park is in kept in good condition by many companies, some of them private, trying to maintain the infrastructure in the best conditions because the place is one the lungs of the of Luque and Asunción area.
One on-going project is the maintenance of the paths and another is the forestation of the park, trying to provide the adequate oxygenation of the park. There is also an area for doing physical exercise, with machines that help fortifying the body.
The place also counts with attention for visitors and general information offices, touristic information area, exposition, deposit and hygienic services.
There is also a parking lot, an ambulance and a fire truck; the food area has 1445 square meters.

==Taiwan Park==

Inside the park there is a location called “Taiwan Park”. This location has an Oriental style to it, was created trying to resemble the Taiwanese iconography, to show the brotherhood and solidarity shared between Paraguayan and Taiwanese people. 
The opening of this section of the park had as honor guests, the President of Taiwan, Ms. Chen Shui-bian and the President of Paraguay, Nicanor Duarte Frutos.
The Chinese Garden project is located in an island in the first lake, being part of the Paseo de los Lagos (Lagos’ tour), with a 10 meters long bridge of access, benches, roads, illumination, and a gazebo with characteristic of the oriental architecture.
The Bike road
The bike road is located outside the Ñu Guasú Park, on the Autopista Avenue, but when finished it will go from the Park to Silvio Pettirossi Airport, the main airport of the country.
The first part of it goes from Gate of Access No. 1 to Gate of Access No. 2 and its joining with the interior circuit in the park. The width is 3 meters and length is 2.200 meters.

==Activities in the park==

This beautiful park in the between 2 big cities, is the ideal environment for activities that bind a lot of people.
This is the case of DEQUENI Organization, which organizes the “Caminata de la Solidaridad” (Solidarity Walk) every year, with the main gold of promoting the health, education and protection of children in Paraguay.
Another activity that is organized every year is the Children’s Day, celebrated in the country on August 16, in the memory of the Acosta Ñu Battle in the Paraguayan War. The battle is always remembered because of the many children that died in it, fighting defending the country.
thumb|left|300px|TheaterBesides spending a nice moment with the family and celebrate with the children their day, the MOPC (Communications and Public Constructions Ministry) tries to encourage the children to learn the value of Ñu Guasú Park and start to develop a sense of responsibility with the society in the natural environment.
For people who like airplane modeling, the park is indeed the perfect place for practice.
The park is also a good place for skydiving. Every now and then, skydiving festivals are organized and many people go to the park to enjoy the show.
Skydivers from Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Uruguay, Bolivia, England, United States, France, Spain, and Switzerland assist, giving great importance to this kind of events.

==The Lung of the City==

thumb|right|300px|Resting areaWithout any doubts, Ñu Guasu Park is very important green area for the inhabitants of Luque and Asunción. Daily, hundreds of people go to this park to walk, practice some sports o just to breathe fresh air and relax after a long day work.
Near Asunción (only 20 minutes away), this place high lightens the importance of healthy life style, responsibility towards the environment and conscience about the well preservation of public spaces for the common good.

==Park map==


