[[Richard Gene Arno]]

CATEGORIES: American evangelicals, American broadcasters, Living people, Shaw University alumni

Dr. Richard Gene Arno is the founder of the National Christian Counselors Association and currently serves as the Chaplain to N.C.C.A.'s staff and members. He served as the Director of Counseling for the Christian Broadcasting Network's The 700 Club for seven years prior to conducting his research for Treatment Theory and Therapy. He was elected to Who's Who in Leading American Executives in 1991 and has been awarded honorary doctorates and citations such as the Eagles Award and Good Shepherd Award. His education includes Shaw University (B.A.), Valley Christian University (M.A.), Faith Theological Seminary (D. Psy.), Andrew Jackson University (Ph.D.) and Jacksonville Theological Seminary (D.D.). 
In addition to serving as the Chaplain of the N.C.C.A., Dr. Arno is also the President of The National Board of Christian Clinical Therapists and serves as the Resident Bishop of The National Conservative Church, a worldwide denomination.
Dr. Arno has been very active researching the concept of temperament, and discovered a fifth temperament (Supine) which has been added to the more ancient theory of four temperaments. The Five Temperaments in addition include Choleric, Melancholy, Sanguine and Phlegmatic.  This theory provides the foundation for an entire model of Christian Counseling, collectively known as Creation Therapy.  The premise is that if a counselor can know the inborn temperament of an individual and compare it to the current life experience of that individual, disparities between what that person wants, needs and actually receives can be revealed. Appropriate measures taken to correct these imbalances can promote healing.

==Literature==

Dr. Richard G. Arno and his wife, Dr. Phyllis J. Arno, are the Founders of The Sarasota Academy of Christian Counseling. Dr. Richard Arno served as the director for the Christian Broadcasting Network for seven years. Dr. Phyllis Arno was a legal secretary for over 20 years. Dr. Richard Arno focused on developing a Biblically based counseling model for Christians. Dr. Phyllis Arno focused on the research and development of the Arno Profile System (A.P.S.) reports. Together they have written numerous counselor training texts, including Creation Therapy.
A Touch of Grace
                                                           
written by Dr. Richard Gene Arno
The Missing Link, ''Revealing Spiritual Genetics''
     
written by Dr. Richard Gene Arno and Dr. Phyllis J. Arno

==Study courses==

===Created In God's Image===

This course is designed to help people understand innate (not learned) human behavior from a Christian perspective. It provides general information about God-given temperament, however does not teach counseling.  This course provides specific information about each temperament and each temperament blend.

===Creation Therapy===

Creation Therapy is a new approach to counseling that deals with the inner man rather than outer manifestations or problems. Creation Therapy will teach you how to identify the "hidden" problems and how to counsel those who turn to you for help. It is for pastors and lay people who want to learn the God-given A.P.S. temperament-based counseling method, to be certified to administer the A.P.S. Response Forms, and to generate the A.P.S. Reports.

==External links==


