[[Anandamohan Bose]]

CATEGORIES: Brahmos, Indian independence activists, Presidents of the Indian National Congress, 1847 births, 1906 deaths, University of Calcutta alumni, Founders of Indian schools and colleges, Bengali politicians

Ananda Mohan Bose ([tpl]lang-bn|আনন্দমোহন বসু[/tpl]) (September 23, 1847 – August 20, 1906), a barrister, was one of the earliest Indian political leaders during the British Raj. He co-founded the Indian National Association, one of the earliest Indian political organizations, and later became a senior leader of the Indian National Congress. In 1874, he became the first Indian Wrangler (a student who has completed the third year of the Mathematical Tripos with first-class honours) of the Cambridge University. He was also a prominent religious leader of Brahmoism and with Sivanath Sastri a leading light of Adi Dharm. Ananda Mohan Bose Banglapedia.Ananda Mohan Bose Britannica.com.

==Early life==

Anandamohan was born at Jaysiddhi village in Mymensingh District of Bengal province in British India (in Itna Upazila of Kishoreganj District of present-day Bangladesh). His father was Padmalochan Bose and mother was Umakishori Devi. He passed his matriculation examination from the Mymensingh Zilla School and stood ninth in the examination. He passed his F.A. and B.A. examination from the Presidency College, Calcutta and secured first position in both the examination. In 1870, he received the Premchand Roychand studentship. In 1878, he went to England for higher education along with Keshab Chandra Sen.

==Anadamohan and the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj==

Anandamohan was a supporter of Brahmo Dharma from his student days. He was officially converted to Brahmo religion along with his wife Swarnaprabha Devi (sister of Jagadish Chandra Bose) by Keshab Chandra Sen in 1869. The young members of Brahmo Samaj differed with Keshab Chandra Sen regarding matters like child marriage, running of the organisation and various other matters. As a result, on May 15, 1878 he, along with Shibnath Shastri, Sib Chandra Deb, Umesh Chandra Dutta and others founded the  Sadharan Brahmo Samaj . He was elected its first president. On April 27, 1879 he founded the Chhatrasamaj, the student's wing of the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj movement. In 1879, he founded the City College, Calcutta, as an initiative by the movement.

==His political and educational contributions==

Anandamohan was the founder of City School and City College in Kolkata. He founded the Students' Association with an objective of promoting nationalism among the students and along with Surendranath Banerjee and Shibnath Shastri organised regular lectures. He was also associated with Calcutta University and was elected a member of Education Commission. He protested against changing the composition of Educational Service. 
Anandamohan was interested in politics from his student days. While in England, he founded "India Society" along with a few other Indians. He was also associated with "Indian League" founded by Sisir Kumar Ghosh. He was the secretary of "Indian Association" till 1884 and was its president throughout his lifetime. He protested against acts like Vernacular Press Act and the reduction of the maximum age for Indian Civil Service Examination. He presided in the protest meeting against Partition of Bengal held at Federation Hall in 1905, where his address was read by Rabindranath Tagore due to his ill health.

==References==

==External links==


