[[Magnolia School District]]

CATEGORIES: New Jersey District Factor Group CD, School districts in Camden County, New Jersey

The Magnolia School District is a community public school district that serves students in pre-Kindergarten through eighth grade in Magnolia, in Camden County, New Jersey, United States.
As of the 2007-08 school year, the district's one school had an enrollment of 460 students and 30.0 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 15.3.District information for the Magnolia Borough School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed November 5, 2009.
The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "CD", the sixth highest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed October 27, 2009.
For grades 9 - 12, public school students attend Sterling High School, a regional high school serving students from Magnolia, Somerdale, Stratford, along with students from Hi-Nella and Laurel Springs who attend as part of sending/receiving relationships.Sterling High School 2008 Report Card Narrative, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed December 12, 2009. "Sterling High School District is a regional district serving Hi Nella, Laurel Springs, Magnolia, Somerdale and Stratford." The high school is located in Somerdale.

==School==

The Magnolia School had an enrollment of 460 students in the 2007-08 school year.Data for Magnolia School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed December 12, 2009.

==Administration==

Core members of the district's administration are:Camden County School Directory, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed November 5, 2009.

==References==

==External links==


