[[Jeff Rohrman]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American Indoor Soccer Association players, American soccer coaches, American soccer players, Maryland Terrapins men's soccer coaches, Milwaukee Wave players, Real Santa Barbara players, Western Soccer Alliance players, Wisconsin Badgers men's soccer coaches, Milwaukee Panthers men's soccer players

Jeff Rohrman is a retired U.S. soccer midfielder who spent two seasons in the American Indoor Soccer Association and one in the Western Soccer League.  He has also coached for nearly twenty years at the collegiate level.

==Player==

Rohrman began his collegiate career at Bethany Lutheran College where he was a junior college All American his sophomore season.  In 2008, Bethany Lutheran inducted Rohrman into the school's Athletic Hall of Fame.Viking Hall of Fame  He then transferred to the University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee in 1984 where he finished his final two years of college eligibility.UW–Milwaukee soccer records  While at UW–Milwaukee, he was team captain, and was voted team MVP following his senior season.  Rohrman earned a bachelor’s degree in zoology from Wisconsin-Milwaukee in 1986 and his master’s degree in physical education and sports administration from Mankato State in 1991.
Rohrman was invited to the 1986 Olympic Soccer Festival in Houston.  In 1986 and 1987, he played for the Milwaukee Wave of the American Indoor Soccer Association and for Real Santa Barbara of the Western Soccer League in 1989.1989 Real Santa Barbara

==Coach==

In 1990, Rohrman began his coaching career as head coach of Bethany Lutheran College.  He then spent several seasons as an assistant women’s soccer coach at the U.S. Naval Academy.  Rohrman also worked as an intern for the U.S. Olympic Committee where he coordinated the competition for the U-20 National Team.  He was then the top assistant at the University of Maryland, College Park for seven years. 
In 2002, he was hired as the head men's soccer coach at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. Wisconsin recorded the 300th win in program history under his watch,  In 2006, Wisconsin was ranked in the polls for the first time in more than 7 years, after upsetting number seven Illinois-Chicago.  In November 2008, he resigned after compiling a 61-63-12 record.Rohrman 'disappointed' to leave

==References==

==External links==


