[[Fawni]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, Living people, Austrian actresses, Austrian female singers, Austrian pop singers, Musicians from Vienna, Pop singer-songwriters

Stefanie Jamaica Pschill aka Fawni (born 17 July 1985) is an Austrian singer-songwriter, artist and actress.  She currently lives in Hollywood, CA.

==Early life==

Stefanie “Fawni” Pschill was considered a prodigy since the first viewing of her art at a very early age.  Born to a local leader within the Vienese artistic community named Paul Simon Hill in Vienna, Austria in 1985, Fawni was destined to go into the arts. In 2008, Fawni's work was featured in Vienna at the Atelier Stumppergasse with an immediate demand for her artwork from the local art scene.  Within a very short period of time, Fawni’s paintings were in high demand across the region.  International art collectors purchased many of her works due to her unique style and talent that thrived, at the time, despite a lack of professional representation.

==Music==

At the age of seven, Fawni entered the music business; joining a musical group that traveled throughout Europe until her thirteenth birthday.  The group performed in both major plays and musicals, and gained solid acclaim throughout the field of aspiring young talent.  In her teens, Fawni moved to London where she began to perform, study, act, and sing.  She received musical training from several leading teachers and worked on a few small television and film projects as well.  She also began to watch and learn from her brother, the famous actor Alexander Pschill, known best for his role as “Kommissar Rex” in the Austrian P.I. show.
A few years later, Fawni left London for Los Angeles on the recommendation of her agent.  There she continued training in acting, singing, and dancing.  Fawni was soon scouted by Herman Jackson, a leading west coast music producer, who assisted her in developing her solo career.  She has recorded tracks in multiple cities across the world, most recently in Los Angeles, New York, Vienna, London, Palma Mallorca, and Stockholm, working with world renowned producers such as Herbie Chrichlow from the Max Martin Team, DJ Sammy, and King Logan.

==Artwork==

Inspired by many great modern artists, such as Warhol, Basquiat, Rauschenberg, and Lichtenstein, as well as classical artists like Goya, Munch, Picasso, and most notably her father Paul Simon Hill, Fawni’s paintings are unique and striking, and always make an impression and a powerful statement. The absence of classical training allowed Fawni to quickly establish her own personalized style, which defies categorization and expresses her unique artistic perspective. Her paintings are warm, vivacious, audacious, and striking. It seems that Fawni has perfected a style of deeply disturbing and thought-provoking images, coupled with an innocent joy. The work is very youthful, almost childish in a way, but also with an unflagging sense of maturity.  Her art makes an impression on all who view her work as she continues to gain recognition as one of the most promising artists in today’s art community.

==Discography==

Dirty Street Glam 2013, Roxy Music
all songs written by Victor Finke.
"Echo" contains additional songwriting by Waldo's People.

==External links==


