[[Didier Matrige]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, 2008 deaths, People from Charleroi, Belgian painters

Didier Matrige (1961–2008) was a Belgian painter and a draughtsman born in Charleroi, Belgium. He studied at the Academies of Art of Charleroi (in the studio of Charles Szymkowicz), Liege and Mons (in the studio of Gustave Camus). His work has deeply expressionists accents, coloured, sometimes recalling the satirical spirit of James Ensor. Many group exhibitions in Belgium and abroad since 1977. Personal exhibitions: Metz 1988, Charleroi 1988–2006, Brussels 1989–1991, Paris 2005, Châtelet, Charleroi 2008. Teacher of Drawing and Painting at the Academy of Watermael-Boitsfort (common of the area of Brussels-Capital). He died during the night of 19–20 April 2008 in Couillet, Charleroi. Works of art from his studio are then dispersed among his brother Eric and his friend the Belgian-Rwandan artist Tröss Nipanki Le Roij.
Didier Matrige was a foundating member of Morpholinic Arts whose philosophy, Morpholinism was launched by Lere Shakunle. Some of his paintings in morpholinic arts and those that he gave to Lere Shakunle in Berlin when he travelled down there in search of new ideas in arts shall be posted soon on this page. Some other information about his exhibitions shall be added too.
According to Lere Shakunle, morpholinism originated from "Meta(morpho)sis of the (line)" in which line was changed to "linism". The very idea had its source in The Morpholine Effect being Lere Shakunle's paper which was submitted for "Science pour l'Art" Science Prize Competition of LVMH—Moët Hennessy/Louis Vuitton 1994. 
An arts-mathematics group, called THE ARTeMATIC GROUP was launched in Berlin by Lere and others whose Founding Members are: 
Lere Shakunle (Mathematics)Germany, Angelika Ludwig (Linguistics)Germany, Didier Matrige (Painting)Belgium, Hella von Ploetz (Music, Singing)Germany, Myriam Iofrida (Arts), Juliane deMoerlooze (Mathematics, Painting), Julie Walti-Desbiolles (Video, Photo, Painting), Luis Martin de los Santos (Painting)Spain, Paul Kucerskji (Architecture, Photography)Ukrain, Vadim Kucerskji (Multimedia)Ukrain
Morpholinism as a philosophy of art and a new arts movement is based on the nature and condition of change.  


