[[Picturenation]]

CATEGORIES: Stock photography

Picturenation is a British based online stock image library providing royalty-free images to the editorial, commercial and education sectors.
Images are submitted by amateur and professional photographers from around the world. Image are checked for technical quality, copyright and tags, before going live on site. As well as creative stock images, Picturenation concentrates on the 'boring but useful'. Real pictures of real people and places taken in spontaneous settings.

==Picturenation for Schools==

As the old blackboard is becoming obsolete, children are being educated with interactive learning tools, computers and interactive whiteboards on a daily basis. Picturenation images can be used on computers, mobiles, and whiteboards for lessons. Schools use Picturenation images knowing that they have been checked and cleared for copyrights and all the accompanying text checked for accuracy and relevance. Picturenation is accredited partners with  Promethean

==History==

Picturenation was set up in 2006 by Jane Green, a former BBC journalist, TV news director and web producer. The company is based at Staffordshire University in Stoke-on-Trent, UK, and the University is a shareholder in the company. As of August 2009 the company stocked over 96,000 checked images from over 9,800 photographers. The collection is proving to be an historical record of 21st century Britain, with the UK photographers literally photographing what's on their doorsteps. Picturenation is a member of BAPLA
Picturenation is a totally web-based operation, and has been offline since early October 2009. This is due, according to messages posted on their parked web domain, to Picturenation's decision to transfer the management of their website to another company. Picturenation says it expects to be back on line by the beginning of December 2009.

==Contributors and use==

Members are from around the world though mostly currently in the UK. Picturenation encourages everyone to have a go at photography and no one has to pass an exam or test before uploading. Members range in age from 13 to 78, and include keen amateurs as well as professional photographers. Contributors manage their images to their own account area, uploading jpeg images then writing descriptions and keywords following simple to use guidelines.
Picturenation's criteria for acceptance is geared principally to their understanding of what their customers require. Consequently there are styles and subjects that will be accepted even if the technical image quality is lower than is normally acceptable.  Images reflecting the cultural diversity of Britain seem to be very acceptable.
Picturenation charges photographers a £10 per year membership fee if they wish to have more than five images for sale. For each download of one of their images they receive 40% commission. Actual fees vary depending on how the photographer's image is used (as in high quality print material or lower quality web-based use.)
Buyers include media and broadcasting corporations, press and marketing companies, web designers, environmental groups, charities, schools and colleges, hotels and restaurants, banks, businesses and individuals. Clients can buy single images or multiple-image subscriptions.

==Child Picture Policy==

Picturenation knows there is a legitimate need for pictures of children for editorial and educational use. The company has developed its own Child Picture Policy to reassure image providers that pictures of their children have a check in place before they can be downloaded by a client. This policy encourages members to upload their photos of their children playing, working and learning. All child pictures on Picturenation are model released by the parent/guardian.

==External links==


