[[Health Unlimited]]

CATEGORIES: Health charities

Health Unlimited is a British non-governmental organization founded in 1984 that aims to secure health care access for marginalized communities in developing countries.Siegel, Michael & Lynne Doner Lotenberg. Marketing Public Health: Strategies to Promote Social Change. Jones & Bartlett Publishers (2007), p165. ISBN 0-7637-3891-3.Tayal, Upasana. "Website of the Week: Indigenous health". British Medical Journal vol. 327(7412) (August 23, 2003): 456. In March 2010 it changed its name to Health Poverty Action. It is working with communities and health service providers, they undertake long-term projects targeted at women and children in remote, often war-torn, areas. They prioritize projects focusing on indigenous communities and communities affected by conflict and political instability.
The organisation aims to bring sustainable solutions to people suffering from poor health due to war, poverty, or marginalization from care for other reasons.

==History==

Health Unlimited was founded in 1984. Its first programme was in southern Afghanistan, where the founders of the organization recognized the strong link between war and health. They provided care and assistance to communities in Afghanistan during the 1980s and early 1990s. They have also aided communities in The Karen, Kachin and Wa, in the hills of Burma for more than 15 years.

==Approach==

Health Unlimited aims its work at those communities others have forgotten. They aim to improve health services and immunization programmes; however also look at the bigger picture, and target other areas such as nutrition, access to water, sanitation, and income generation. The idea is to give these people the boost they need to be self-sustaining, rather than handing out short term health solutions.
Alerting local authorities to the need for better health service is a big part of the work of Health Unlimited. Equipping the affected communities to voice their concerns to their local authorities is an important part of this; however they also campaign to the governments of leading nations to lead the way in providing better health services to victimized and marginalized people. In theory this will help everyone, not just those people that Health Unlimited already runs programmes for.

==Current==

Health Unlimited is now supporting programmes in 12 countries across Africa, Asia and Latin America. They have established relationships with many indigenous peoples and ethnic minorities such as:

==References==

==External links==


