[[David B. Allison]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, Living people, American geneticists, Statistical geneticists, Vassar College alumni, Hofstra University alumni, Johns Hopkins University alumni, Fellows of the American Statistical Association, Columbia University fellows

thumb|right|David B. AllisonDavid Bradley Allison (born 1963) is an American biostatistician who is Distinguished Professor, Quetelet Endowed Professor of Public Health, Associate Dean for Science of the School of Public Health at the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB). He is also Director of Office of Energetics, and Director of the NIH-funded Nutrition Obesity Research Center at UAB.  Allison founded the Section of Statistical Genetics (SSG) in the Department of Biostatistics at UAB, and he has authored over 490 scientific publications and has authored, co-authored, or written chapters in 46 different books. He has won many awards, including the 2002 Lilly Scientific Achievement Award from The Obesity Society (TOS) (formerly known as North American Association for the Study of Obesity, NAASO), the 2002 Andre Mayer Award from the International Association for the Study of Obesity, and the National Science Foundation Administered 2006 Presidential Award for Excellence in Science, Mathematics, and Engineering Mentoring (PAESMEM). He was elected as a Fellow of the American Statistical Association (ASA) in 2007, the American Psychological Association (APA) in 2008, and the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) in 2009. In 2009, he was also awarded the Centrum Award from the American Society of Nutrition (ASN) and the TOPS research achievement award from the Obesity Society. He holds several NIH and National Science Foundation grants, and has been a member of the Board of Trustees for the International Life Sciences Institute, North America, since 2002 and is currently Chair of the board. Allison is also a member of the board-appointed Committee on Science and Technology Engagement with the Public (CoSTEP) for the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), 2014 – 2017.
Allison's research interests include obesity, quantitative genetics, clinical trials, and statistical and research methodology.
He serves or has served on the editorial boards of: Journal of Diabetes Research and Clinical Metabolism (JDRCM); Behavior Genetics; Clinical Pharmacology: Advances and Applications; Computational Statistics and Data Analysis; European Journal of Clinical Investigation; Global Epidemic Obesity; Human Heredity; International Journal of Eating Disorders; International Journal of Obesity; International Scholarly Research Network (ISRN) Nutrition; Journal of Obesity; Nutrients; Nutrition and Dietary Supplements; Nutrition Today; Obesity Reviews; Obesity; PeerJ; Public Library of Science (PLOS) Genetics; American Journal of Clinical Nutrition; and Surgery for Obesity and Related Diseases (SOARD).
Allison is also the founding Field Chief Editor of Frontiers in Genetics.
Allison's research interests include obesity, quantitative genetics, clinical trials, and statistical and research methodology. He also serves as a frequent consultant and expert witness in the legal setting.

==Education==

==Honors and Awards==

Allison was the recipient of a 2006 Presidential Award for Excellence in Science, Mathematics and
Engineering Mentoring (PAESMEM). The White House established the Presidential
Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
(PAESMEM) to identify outstanding mentoring efforts to enhance the participation of
groups underrepresented in science, mathematics and engineering. The awards are
given competitively as part of a national peer‐review process. This is the nation’s
highest award for mentoring given to no more than 10 individuals nationally each
year. It was accompanied by a $10,000 prize, a Presidential certificate awarded at the
White House on November 16th, 2007, and a personal visit with President Bush in the
Oval Office.David Allison receives presidential honors in White House ceremony
Recipient of a 2008 Minority Health Research Center (MHRC) Charles Barkley
Excellence in Mentoring Award. Award conferred by Charles Barkley at the UAB MHRC Gala.
Elected as a Fellow of the American Psychological Association, 2008.
Faculty mentor of the year nominee at the Compact for Faculty Diversity Institute on
Teaching and Mentoring, 2009.
Elected as a Fellow of the Society of Behavioral Medicine, 2009.
Elected as a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS),
2009.
Recipient of the American Society of Nutrition’s Centrum Center for Nutrition Science
Award. Given in recognition of recent investigative contributions of significance to the
basic understanding of human nutrition. Conferred at ceremony at the Experimental Biology meeting in April, 2009.
Recipient of the 2009 TOPS Research Achievement Award from the Obesity Society
(formerly NAASO). This award recognizes an individual for singular achievement or
contribution to research in the field of obesity. Recipients receive a $5,000 cash prize plus
a travel grant to the Annual Scientific Meeting. The award was presented during a plenary
session at the annual meeting at which the recipient delivers the TOPS Award Lecture.
Member of National Institutes of Health College of CSR Reviewers, 2010 to present.
Selected as 2011 Annual Delta Omega Honorary Society Lecturer by the University of
South Carolina. Presented talk entitled: “Obesity: A Look Through the Kaleidoscope”.
Selected as the 2011 UAB Distinguished Faculty Lecturer Award. The Distinguished
Faculty Lecturer Award honors individuals in the Academic Health Center of the
University of Alabama at Birmingham who have made major contributions in education,
research, or service. It is the highest award UAB gives on the Health Sciences campus.
Selected to deliver the 2012 first annual Provocateur Lecture for Scientific Conference of
the Coca-Cola Company, for lecture titled “Science Itself is the Antidote to Bias in
Science: Using the Scientific Method to Measure and Buttress Research Integrity.”
Elected to Fellowship in the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, April 2012.
Distinguished Professor. “Distinguished Professor
is a campus-wide appointment, recognizes international accomplishments, is to be
limited in number, and is to be recommended to the Board by the appropriate President
and the Chancellor in order to confer richly deserved prestige and honor on those
selected to receive this designation” (UAB Faculty Handbook). Dr. Allison was the 21st
person to receive this distinction in the history of UAB.
Elected to The Institute of Medicine of the United States National Academies,
October 2012.
Recipient of 2013 The Wright Gardner Award from the Alabama Academy of Science
(conferred March 21, 2013). This award was established by the Alabama Academy of
Science to honor individuals whose research work during residence in Alabama has been
outstanding.
Elected to membership in the Johns Hopkins Society of Scholars in 2013. The Society was
established in 1967 by the trustees of the University to honor distinguished former Johns
Hopkins postdoctoral fellows and junior or visiting faculty who have served at least a year at
Johns Hopkins and thereafter gained marked distinction elsewhere in their fields.[tpl]cite news|url=http://hub.jhu.edu/gazette/2013/april/society-of-scholars-new-members-inducted|title=Society of Scholars inducts new members[/tpl]
Recipient of American Society of Nutrition’s 2013 Dannon Institute Mentorship Award
(announced Feb 2013, to be conferred April, 2013).
Recipient of UAB Graduate Dean’s Excellence in Mentorship Award for 2013.
Selected as the 1st prize of "International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
Health Best Paper Award 2014".
Selected as the 2014 Atwater Lecturer by the USDA and the American Society for Nutrition.
The W.O. Atwater Lectureship was established in 1968 to honor the memory of Wilbur Olin
Atwater (1844-1907) and to recognize scientists who have made unique contributions toward
improving the diet and nutrition of people around the world. Atwater, considered the father of
modern nutrition research and education, was the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s first chief
of nutrition investigations.
During 2014, he is writing a column in Cooking Light.Diet Myth: Eat Healthy Foods and You'll Lose Weight 
Elected as a member of the board-appointed Committee on Science and Technology Engagement with the Public (CoSTEP) for the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), 2014 – 2017.

==References==

==External links==


