[[Town drunk]]

CATEGORIES: Drinking culture, Stock characters, Alcohol abuse

The town drunk (also called a tavern fool) is a stock character, almost always male, who is drunk more often than sober.  
The town drunk typically dwells in a small enough town that he is the only conspicuous alcoholic.  Larger cities may have more than one, but this term appears to come from around the 17th century; in the stereotype, when a city grows large enough to house a sufficient mass of town drunks, the area where they congregate becomes known as Skid Row.

==Uses in fiction==

In fiction, the town drunk character serves a number of functions.  

==Antecedents==

Because the town drunk is notable only for drinking heavily, there are relatively few historical figures who inform the stereotype of the town drunk.  However, Mad Jack Mytton and his antics would appear to be a historical example.  Mytton is an example of one variation on the character, the drunken aristocrat; another example, more frequently found in British humour than American, is the drunken clergyman.  American humor, by contrast, is likely to produce a drunken politician, from a local mayor to a Senator – as in, for example, the ending of National Lampoon's Animal House, revealing the future "Senator and Mrs. Blutarksi".  The musical 1776 and the movie based on it portrayed Stephen Hopkins as being the town drunk to the Second Continental Congress.  A number of writers and artists have gained some notoriety from eccentric public performances while intoxicated; Brendan Behan and Dylan Thomas are particularly notorious in this respect.  The comedian W. C. Fields and his movie performances are often classic examples of the character, as were those of supporting actors Arthur Housman, Jack Norton, Frank Fontaine and Foster Brooks, who spent most of their careers playing comical drunkards.
The rake is another stock character associated with heavy drinking.  However, the rake is invariably much younger than the town drunk, and the designation casts attention on sexual excess and spending money more than on strong drink.

==References==


