[[The Salinas Californian]]

CATEGORIES: Gannett publications, Newspapers published in California, Media in Salinas, California, Media in Monterey County, California, Companies based in Monterey County, California

The Salinas Californian, sometimes referred to as The Californian, is the major daily newspaper published in Salinas, California. It is the oldest continuously publishing newspaper in California. The paper is owned by the Gannett Company, one of the largest media organizations in the world. The Salinas Californian is part of an organization that produces USA Today, the Des Moines Register, the Louisville Courier-Journal, the Arizona Republic and the Visalia-Times Delta. It also owns numerous other papers, radio and television stations, and other businesses.Gannett.
Since its inception, The Salinas Californian has issued newspapers from Monday to Saturday. It has never produced a Sunday Edition. Its mission is to serve the common good with a special emphasis on local reporting. It has expanded its media tools to include video reports, documentaries, photo galleries, and live feeds -- all available on multiple formats. 
The Californian also produces El Sol, a Spanish-language weekly paper that has served Monterey County for 45 years; Off 68, a weekly paper distributed to individuals residing in communities along California Highway 68 which runs from Salinas to Monterey; and numerous special publications including a Welcome to Salinas Guide, Reader's Choice Awards listing, Guide to the Salinas Rodeo, Spring Wedding Guide, and Health Quarterlies.
The President/Publisher is Paula Goudreau. Pete Wevurski is the managing editor. Katharine Ball is the Community Conversations/Digital editor. Valentin Mendoza is the editor of El Sol and Joe Truskot is the Features/Off 69 editor.
Popular features of The Salinas Californian include Jeff Mitchell's "Under the Dome" column reporting on local government and politics; Dennis L. Taylor's reporting on science, health, and agricultural topis; Allison Gatlin's articles on crime and the justice system; and David Nordstrand's personal profiles and features articles. Jay Dunn, III and Travis Geske, two multi-media journalists, produce a wide range of engaging content from stand alone "Slice of Salinas" photographs to extensive video commentaries on topics of importance.
In addition to staff reporters, The California publishes weekly features such as Jim Albanese's history column called "The Wayback Machine," Laura Ness' "HerVineNess" a column on the area's expansive wine industry, Elaine Hesser's "Simply Local" a recipe column featuring local produce, Ricardo Diaz' "Restaurant" column with an emphasis on young diners, and several popular syndicated columns.
The Salinas Californian continues to list community events at no charge in its weekly calendars under the guidance of Rachel Zentz and Laramie Trevino. 
In addition, the Californian's sports pages have provided extensive coverage of local and national athletics under the careful eye of veteran sports journalists George Watkins and Glenn Cravens.
The Californian was initially founded in 1871 as the The Salinas Index  and assumed its current name during World War II.About us | thecalifornian.com | The Salinas Californian In 1936, the Index  was acquired by Merritt C. Speidel.Buys California Papers Gannett bought Speidel Newspapers in 1977.Newspaper Merger Is ApprovedGannett, Speidel In Merger

==References==

==External links==


