[[Dr. V. N. Bedekar Institute of Management Studies]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 1935, Universities and colleges in Maharashtra, 1935 establishments in India

Vidya Prasarak Mandal, Thane, Maharashtra, India was established in 1935. VPM, Thane
VPM Institutes have more than 16000 students from Kindergarten to Postgraduate through its Marathi language and English Medium Schools and through its Arts, Commerce, Science and Law Colleges, Polytechnic, Information and Technology Centre, Institute of Management Studies, Advanced Study Centre, VPM's London Academy of Education and Research, Maharshi Parshuram College of Engineering. Maharshi Parshuram College of Engineering
The Dr. V. N. Bedekar Institute of Management Studies was established on 3 July 1973. It was then named as Department of Management Studies.
Courses Offered
1. Master in Management Studies (MMS) 
2. P. G. Diploma in Management (PGDM)
Autonomous Courses:
--EpMBA – (Pharma / General ) 
--Certificate Programmes - Retail Mgmt; Foreign Trade, 
-- Banking Insurance, Tax Mgmt; Supply Chain & Logistic—Language Courses-German, French, Japanese, 
Chinese, Spanish
Teaching Pedagogy:
The teaching pedagogy for the MMS degree course includes a wide variety of teaching/facilitating methods. The learning process will include, inter alia, lectures, group discussions, role-play, case studies, laboratory / computer driven teaching methods, guest lectures, visiting faculty and core faculty. Evaluation of students for internal assessment papers of the MMS degree course will be based on assignments, class participation, group exercises, case studies, presentation of term paper / projects and final examination. Students will have to do field work and also visit Industry to enhance and augment the quality of their learning process. The internal assessment courses will be evaluated by the concerned faculty. The institute will facilitate the evaluation process. The faculty will provide necessary feedback to the students from time to time.
Whenever a paper in the third / fourth semesters is to be assessed by the university, the examination and evaluation will take place through the Examination Department of the University of Mumbai. The annexures enclosed provide necessary details regarding the different papers and the nature of the assessment. (Internal Assessment / University Examination)

==Infrastructure==

Campus
BRIMS campus is spread over [tpl]convert|13.5|acre|m2[/tpl] of land. The Institute is located among the industrial hub of Thane and enjoys a panoramic view of the railway network with the greenery and picturesque view of the beautiful Parsik Hills.
Library
The Library holds a collection of books, research reports, magazines, journals and periodicals. It is stocked with 6960 books and subscribes to 62 national, 11 international journals and 11 newspapers. The faculty keeps in touch with the publishers and updates the collection on regular basis.
Computer Centre
The Institute has a computer centre. It has sufficient capacity to accommodate 100 students at a time. Dedicated leased line provides uninterrupted Wireless Internet (WIFI) connectivity.
College Website is here: VNBRIMS. Also available from here: Vidya Prasarak Mandal, Thane

