[[Woodbine School District]]

CATEGORIES: New Jersey District Factor Group A, School districts in Cape May County, New Jersey

The Woodbine School District is a community public school district that serves students in  kindergarten through eighth grade from Woodbine, in Cape May County, New Jersey, United States. 
As of the 2008-09 school year, the district's one school had an enrollment of 213 students and 23.6 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 9.0.District information for the Woodbine School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed November 5, 2009.
The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "A", the lowest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed October 27, 2009.
Public school students in grades 9-12 attend high school in Millville, as part of a sending/receiving relationship with the Millville Public Schools. Students attend Memorial High School for grades 9 and half of the 10th grade and Millville Senior High School for half of the 10th grade through the 12th grade.Campbell, Al. "Woodbine School Proposes Consolidation with Middle Schools", Cape May County Herald, February 27, 2008. Accessed April 6, 2011. "One key factor, said Kopakowski, is Woodbine’s sending-receiving relationship with Millville School District. That Cumberland County district, with about 6,400 pupils K-12 has long educated Woodbine’s high school students."

==School==

Woodbine Elementary School had an enrollment of 213 students in the 2008-09 school year.Data for the Woodbine School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed December 6, 2009.

==Administration==

Core members of the district's administration are:Administration, Woodbine School District. Accessed April 6, 2011.Cape May County School Directory, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed November 5, 2009.

==References==

==External links==


