[[Kadamattom Church]]

CATEGORIES: Saint Thomas Christians, Churches in Kerala, Syriac Christianity

Kadamattom Church is one of the ancient churches in India. The church is situated near to Kolenchery town near Muvattupuzha, India.

==History==

The church is believed to have established in the 9th Century AD.  Kadamattom church (Saint George Jacobite Syrian  Orthodox  Church). There is no concrete evidence of the exact date of the establishment of the church but as per historians the church was built before AD 650 as at the time Kolencherry church was yet to be constructed. (Kolencherry church was built around AD 650).
The church and the property was a gift by 'Karthas' the then prominent family of Kadamattom. One of the kid of the family caught by a disease which was neither identified nor cured by the local doctors. Mar Abo, the middle eastern monk from Egypt reached Kadamattom at the same time. He cured the disease and the Karthas were very happy and as a favor they provided the land and constructed the Church in its form as it is now.

==Location==

Kadamattom church is situated in National Highway 49 (India) (Kochi-Madhurai National Highway) between Kolenchery and Muvattupuzha towns in Ernakulam District. While traveling from Cochin towards East, you could see this ancient church in the Northern side of the road after 2 kilometers from Kolenchery Medical College Junction. While traveling from Muvattupuzha towards Kolenchery, the church can be seen after 1 Kilometer after Peruvammuzhi junction.

==Church==

Once you enter the church, at the left there’s a photo of Mar Abo Metropolitan. He is Rev. Paulose, alias the legendary Kadamattathu Kathanar’s mentor.  It is believed that Mar Abo, a Persian high priest established the church with the help of Kartha, the then local ruler of Kadamattom. Mar Abo was not only a theologian but also a conjurer.  He stayed in a hut with a poor widow and her only son Paulose.  Paulose assisted Mar Abo for years and later Paulose was ordained a priest.  A Persian cross can be seen on the right wall of the Madhbaha or Holy of Holies, having four equal arms with ancient writings inscribed.  The wings of the cross also end with floral designs.  The tombstone of Mar Thoma IX (Formerly Pakalomattom Iype Kathanar) lies on the left side just outside the Madhbaha.  Another unique thing about the church is the door lock (wood mechanism).  The pathala kinar (well) lies near the Poyyedom church. It is believed that Kathanar went to pathalam from here.
The Kathanar’s devotees, mostly non-Christians, throw in chicken, money and bottles of liquor into the well as mark of respect and gratitude. Kadamattom feast is one of the major festivals observed held during the January – February period.  It marks the death anniversary of the legendary priest.  There are many legends of Kadamattathu Kathanar.  It is believed that he possessed supernatural powers.The old church is the one which you see when you walk up the numerous stairs in front of the church. It's a very silent environment, and when you start climbing the first entrance you can see the kadamattom ITC which is run by the church authorities.The Church consists of jacobites and a small faction of Indian orthodox Christians.
After that when we enter the church we can see the church which looks magnificent with its huge structure and the greenery around. There are 2 other churches associated with this. The one on the right side is the Parumala church which is built in remembrance of a holy priest named Parumala Thirumeni. When you look at the left side of the church you can see a gate with two lion statues on both sides as if they are guarding the church. When you go out of that gate you can see the steep way down to the church which was built separately for the legendary Kadamattom Kathanar since his way of action was totally different from the normal way which the church accepts. when you go to that church dot forget to have a look at the well which is believed as an entrance to the underworld, through he went to visit the jungle chief who taught all the magical powers to him.

==External links==


