[[Bateshwar, Uttar Pradesh]]

CATEGORIES: Cities and towns in Agra district, Religious places, Villages in Agra district

Bateshwar ([tpl]lang-hi|बटेश्वर[/tpl]) is a village in Agra District, on the banks of the river Yamuna in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh, India. Bateshwar is in between Agra and Etawah and is 5 km from Bah. It is an important spiritual and cultural centre for Hindus and Jains. It is known for the 101 Shiv Temple Complex. An annual religious and animal fair is also organised in the village ground area.
The name Bateshwar is derived  from the main Bateshwarnath Temple dedicated to Lord Shiva (Bateshwarnath Mahadev). As per the mythology and legends, here under a marvelous  Banyan tree (Bat in Sanskrit), lord Shiva took rest for some time under that tree which stile standing at that place, the place known as Bat-Ishwar; the banyan lord.
Since ages Bateshwar remained a renowned religious centre both for Hindu and Jain communities. In the epic Mahabharat Bateshwar is supposed to be referred as Shouripur a city of king Suresaine. It is known for 101 Shiv Temples built by Raja Badan Singh Bhadauria on a dam on the banks of Yamuna. Shaouripur, near Bateshwar, which is the birthplace of the 22nd Tirthankar of Jain faith, Lord Neminath. Each year the region hosts a cattle fair in October and November. The commercial livestock event is also of significance to Hindus, who make pilgrimage to the river Yamuna in honor of Lord Shiva.
Bateshwar has long been celebrated for its annual fair, believed to have been a fixture since time immemorial given the significance of Shoripur/Bateshwar in Hindu mythology.  Although the origins of this ancient fair are religious, and of immense importance in the Hindu religious calendar, the fair is also of great commercial value and is renowned as the 2nd largest animal fair in the country (Sonepur in Bihar being the largest).
Bateshwar is the ancestral village of former prime minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee. Vajpayee's first exposure to politics was in August 1942, when he and his elder brother Prem were arrested at Bateshwar for 23 days during the Quit India movement.Chatterjee, Mannini. V. K. Ramachandran. "Vajpayee and the Quit India movement". Frontline. 7–20 February 1998. Retrieved 04 April 2014.

==Climate==

Bateshwar features a semiarid climate that borders on a humid subtropical climate. The village features mild winters, hot and dry summers and a monsoon season.

==References==

==External links==


