[[Big Wave Dave's]]

CATEGORIES: 1990s American television series, 1993 American television series debuts, 1993 American television series endings, American television sitcoms, CBS network shows, English-language television programming, Television series by CBS Paramount Television, Television shows set in Hawaii

Big Wave Dave's is a sitcom that ran from August 9, 1993 until September 13, 1993. In it, three friends decide to drop everything and run a surf shop in Hawaii. When they arrive, they find out that it's not as easy as they thought. The show was produced by Levine & Isaacs Productions in association with Paramount Television.

==Pilot synopsis==

The pilot episode opens with three friends, Marshall Fisher (Adam Arkin), Richie Lamonica (Patrick Breen), and Dave Bell (David Morse), sitting in a bar, talking. Apparently, Marshall has just lost his job, and Dave is divorcing his wife. Dave comes up with the idea of starting a surf shop in Hawaii called Big Wave Dave's, and the whole club starts dreaming about it. Dave suggests that they should really do it; his friends are a bit doubtful, but they eventually decide to go along with it. But then they think about Marshall's wife, and they have to convince her. That same night, the three guys go over to Marshall's house to convince his wife, Karen (Jane Kaczmarek). Out of the blue, Karen decides to go along with them. 
All of them, very excited, arrive in Hawaii a few weeks later. Karen tries to help Dave and Marshall with decorating the store, but they want to do that on their own. After looking around the store a bit, Dave decides to go surfing. A few seconds later, Richie comes into the store saying that he found himself in Hawaii. Meanwhile, a man with a barrow carrying Dave comes in, saying that he blames the Beach Boys for all the surfers at the beach. Dave had had a surfing accident but seems to be all right. The man introduces himself as Jack Lord and says that he hates newcomers on the beach and that he had named himself after his idol, Jack Lord. When he leaves the shop, it starts raining. Two hours later, when it's still raining, Marshall decides to leave, but nobody wants to go with him. Dave doesn't want to go because this was his idea, and Richie still believes he's a different person in Hawaii. When a woman walks in, Richie wants to prove that he's different here; after saying hello to her, however, he decides to go back to Chicago. Just when the guys are about to leave, Karen walks in and gives them a speech that pulls them back in. When Marshall still isn't happy, Karen reveals that she became pregnant the night they decided to go to Hawaii.

==Characters==

==Episodes==

==References==

==External links==


