[[Craig Mitnick]]

CATEGORIES: American television personalities, Emory University alumni, George Washington University alumni, Living people, New Jersey lawyers, People from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, American prosecutors, Year of birth missing (living people)

Craig Mitnick is an American lawyer, broadcaster and businessman.

==History==

Mitnick received his BBA in finance from Emory University (Atlanta, Georgia) and subsequently received his Juris Doctor from the George Washington University School of Law (Washington DC).
Mitnick began his career as an Assistant Prosecutor in two separate counties in the state of New Jersey. During the same time period, he also acted as a certified instructor of law and procedure at two countywide police academies.
After leaving the public sector, Mitnick entered the private practice of law and created Mitnick Law Office. The firm specializes in litigation and trial related matters.
Mitnick was contracted as an on-air legal analyst for Fox News Channel, Fox Radio Network, and CBS
Mitnick also established Nixle, LLC, an information and technology company that enables law enforcement and public safety agencies to instantly send secure text alerts to local residents via their cell phones with regard to urgent, need-to-know, local information. The service is free of charge and is currently being used by law enforcement agencies in all 50 states.
Within his litigation practice, Mitnick's current focus is the representation of former professional athletes who may have been subjected to traumatic brain injury and other debilitating injuries. He is actively involved in the Multi-District "Concussion" Litigation against the NFL by the League's former players. Mitnick currently represents over 1200 retired NFL players in this mass tort action.  
In April 2013 and 2014, Mitnick was named one of the top 100 criminal defense attorneys in the country by "The National Trial Lawyers".
Specialties include complex civil and criminal litigation, including traumatic brain injury matters, matters involving neuro-degenerative disorders, trial strategy and public speaking.

==Notes and references==

==External links==


