[[Nikolai Yevgenyevich Markov]]

CATEGORIES: 1866 births, 1945 deaths, People from Kursk Oblast, Jewish Russian and Soviet history, Nazis, Russian engineers, Russian fascists, Members of the State Duma of the Russian Empire, Members of the Union of the Russian People, Antisemitism in Russia, Russian monarchists

Nikolai Yevgenyevich Markov ([tpl]lang-ru|Никола́й Евге́ньевич Ма́рков[/tpl]), known as Markov II or Markov the Second ([tpl]lang-ru|Марков Второй[/tpl])Because he was the younger of two Duma members named Markov. (2 April 1866-25 April 1945, Wiesbaden),Марков Николай Евгеньевич (1866-1945) by Roman Romov [tpl]ru icon[/tpl] was a Russian right wing political figure who was a leading figure in the Union of the Russian People (UPR).
Born in Kursk, Markov came from a land-owning background but was also a trained engineer. He entered politics in 1905 when he formed a defence group for the upper middle classes called the Party of Civil Order, whilst also starting the journals Kurskaia Byl and Zemschchina.Philip Rees, Biographical Dictionary of the Extreme Right Since 1890, p. 255 He became a founder of the UPR and was noted as its most formidable leader, using his membership of the State Duma of the Russian Empire to attack both capitalism and socialism, as well as launching frequent attacks on the Jews, whom he predicted would be wiped out in a mass pogrom. In 1911, during the discussions of the draft of the new Statute on Military Service he launched an attack on Jews in the military service, recommending the removal of Jews from the militaryYohanan Petrovsky-Shtern, "The "Jewish Policy" of the Late Imperial War Ministry: The Impact of the Russian Right", in "Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History 3.2 (2002) pp. 217-254" - "The Talmud provides us with innumerable passages that make clear how observant Jews should avoid the fulfillment of any promise or any oath. The Jews mock and jeer at oaths. Now, if a soldier does not respect an oath, violates an oath, and even considers that his religious cult approves his scorn of an oath, it is obvious that we can get nothing but evil from him... It is shocking that the War Ministry hesitates to cut this sore out of the noble pure body of the Imperial Russian Army."
He became URP leader in 1910 following the departure of Aleksandr Dubrovin and his followers and took over editorship of the pro-Vladimir Purishkevich journal Vestnik Soyuza Russkogo Naroda. He used his position to argue for a restoration of absolutism and in the First World War supported a separate peace treaty between Russia and Germany, even attempting to get the Germans involved in a conspiracy to save the House of Romanov after the revolutions.
He fled to Germany following the October Revolution and set up the émigré Russian Monarchist Union, although he became more associated with the far right of the monarchist movement when he expressed his admiration for Italian fascism. He conspired to have Cyril of Coburg crowned Tsar, a man whose wife, Viktoria Feodorovna, was close to far right former German Imperial Army general Erich Ludendorff.Walter Laqueur, Russia and Germany: A Century of Conflict, 1990, p. 74 Markov also played a leading role in the conspiracy that resulted in the murder of Constitutional Democratic Party politician Vladimir Dmitrievich Nabokov.
He published his memoirs, Voiny temnykh sil of dark forces, in 1928 and soon thereafter became a follower of the Nazi Party. He would go on to argue that the URP had shared many characteristics with the Nazi Party, although this has been rejected given that the URP was little more than anti-Semitic populism.H. Rogger, Jewish Policies and Right Wing Politics in Imperial Russia, 1986 His anti-Semitism grew more pronounced in the 1930s and he undertook lecture tours and propaganda duties for the Nazis on the subject.

==References==


