[[Portuguese Australian]]

CATEGORIES: European Australian, Australian people of Portuguese descent, Portuguese diaspora

Portuguese Australians are either Portuguese living in Australia or native Australians with Portuguese ancestry.
Despite their rather modest number compared to the Greek and Italian communities, Portuguese Australians form a very organised, self-conscious and active community in many fields of Australian life. With a population spread over many parts of the continent, sporting teams, social clubs,"List of numerous Portuguese Social Clubs and institutions based in Australia (Portuguese)" radio shows,"SBS Radio – Portuguese" newspapers,"Portuguese Consulate – New South Wales" outdoor cultural festivals,"Portuguese Festival at Petersham, Sydney – Youtube" culinary feasts, and even a traditional ethnic neighbourhood, the ever-growing Portuguese Australians form roughly 0.4 of Australia's population. The biggest Portuguese Australian community is in Petersham, Sydney: but there are other communities around Australia such as Melbourne,"Portuguese Association of Victoria" Wollongong, Newcastle and Perth."Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade – Australian Government""Portuguese Consulate – Western Australia" There are also communities present, to a lesser extent, in Brisbane,"The Brisbane Portuguese Family Center (Portuguese)""The Brisbane Portuguese Family Center (Portuguese)" Adelaide and Darwin."Department of the Chief Minister, Northern Territory – Australian Government" (PDF) There are approximately 56,000 Portuguese migrants and Australians with Portuguese heritage in Australia.
Portuguese cuisine has also made its way into mainstream Australian society, with the fast expansion and establishment of restaurant and fast food outlets such as "Nando's", "Oporto" and "Ogalo" to confirm its success. The Portuguese "pastel de nata" is a very popular delicacy in Australia and is commonly found throughout the country.
One of the most high-visibility moments for the Portuguese community was in 2005, when António Milhinhos, a shopkeeper from Darwin, was awarded the Senior Australian of the Year Award for his outstanding charity works and continuous catastrophe relief since 1983."Australian of the Year Awards"

==History==

===In Victoria===

A few Portuguese were among the earliest settlers in Australia. Emanuel and Ana Serrão and their infant daughter arrived in Sydney in 1824, and moved to Warrnambool with their family in 1852. Few followed, and by 1901 only 86 Victorians were Portugal-born. Males made up 90% of the community.
The Portugal-born population in Victoria declined in the early twentieth century, and by 1933, only 12 were recorded in the census.
While the post-war migration boom had little effect on the Portuguese population of Victoria, the late 1960s saw the beginning of a dramatic increase in immigration. After the Portuguese colonial wars in Angola and Mozambique ended in 1975, and the former Portuguese colony of East Timor was invaded by Indonesia in 1975, more ethnic Portuguese immigrants settled in Victoria. The number of immigrants from Portugal also increased, from 131 in 1966 to 2,335 in 1986.
By 2001, 2,661 Portugal-born migrants were living in Victoria. The white Portuguese migrants and their Australian-born descendants are part of an even larger Portuguese-Speaking community in Victoria today that also includes people from the former Portuguese colonies of Macau, East Timor, Cape Verde, Mozambique, Angola, Goa and Brazil.
Members of the Portuguese-born community today are predominantly employed as tradespeople and workers within the manufacturing and construction industries. More than three-quarters still speak Portuguese at home.
The community is supported by organisations including the Portuguese Community Council of Australia, which serves as an umbrella organisation for all Portuguese people in Australia. Portuguese-language radio programs, weekly newspapers, language classes and sporting clubs help maintain the community in Australian cities. Events such as performances by Madeira Folk Dancing provide an opportunity for the wider community to appreciate Portuguese culture.

===In Western Australia===

Portuguese migrants from the islands of Madeira settled in Fremantle in Western Australia in the 1950s and established a fishing community which, by the mid-1980s, had grown to about 6,000 people, including their descendants."Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade – Australian Government" Since then, Perth and Western Australia in general have been a frequent destination for Portuguese students and skilled labour, and although no mass-migration has occurred, the Portuguese population is still prevalent in the state. John Da Silva, the founder and owner of Bell-Vista vegetables, one of Western Australia's biggest vegetable provider migrated to Fremantle in the Portuguese migrant wave to that area in the 1960s."Bell-Vista Fruit and Vegetables"

==Notable Portuguese Australians==

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


