[[Telecommunications in Tunisia]]

CATEGORIES: Communications in Tunisia, Telecommunications in Tunisia

Telecommunications in Tunisia includes telephones (fixed and mobile), radio, television, and the Internet. The Ministry of Communication Technologies, a cabinet-level governmental agency, is in charge of organizing the sector.

==Telephones==

==Radio and television==

The government of former President Ben Ali tightly controlled the press and broadcasting. But since the 2011 popular revolt, many journalists have enjoyed new-found freedoms. The number of radio and TV channels and print publications has increased, as has their freedom to report and debate political and social issues. State TV, which had toed the government line, has changed tack, giving airtime to the former opposition. 
Prior to the Tunisian revolution there were four private radio stations operating in Tunisia. In June 2011, following the Tunisian revolution, a recommendation to license twelve new private radio stations was forwarded to the interim Prime Minister. In August 2011 none of the recommendations had been acted upon. However, several stations began broadcasting under time-limited provisional licenses. The stations operate without specific operating rules because a new regulatory framework is not yet in place."New Private Radios: Authorized but still Voiceless", Latifa Al-Mekbali, 27 August 2011"Tunisia: The hijacking of free radio", Sana Sbouai, Nawaat, 17 July 2012 In part due to the lack of a regulatory framework the government’s National Office of Broadcasting (ONT) requires broadcasters to pay a licensing fee of 120,000 dinars (approximately $75,000), and while that license is not necessary to broadcast, it confers a certain amount of legitimacy that broadcasters need to draw advertisers. The large fee is difficult for new start-up stations and the new stations feel that the fees provide an unfair advantage for the older more established private groups organized under the previous regime."Emerging from the Underground, Pirate Radio Seeks Acceptance", Paul Rosenfeld, Tunisia Live, 14 November 2012

==Internet==

==Information and communications technology==

The Tunisian government considers information and communications technology (ICT) an important tool to boost the country’s economy and to adapt the education system to the opportunities available from using Information Technology (IT) as a tool. E-commerce, e-learning, and e-medicine are all areas of strong interest where the Government is seeking international partnership and investments. During the last 15 years, several important efforts were made to invest in ICT and the Internet. Physical infrastructures were modernised. In July 2004 the World Bank approved a  $13 million loan to the Tunisian government to support the government effort in accelerating its ICT reforms. Though, beyond the high priority the government is giving to ICT, development of telecommunications in Tunisia has been slower than expected compared to other developing countries in Middle East and North Africa."Chapter 2.3: ICT on Tunisia: A Strategic Lever for Building a Knowledge-Based Economy", Tawfix Jelassi, Ecole Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées (France), The Global Information Technology Report 2009-2010, World Economic Forum, 9 March 2010

==2005 World Summit on the Information Society==

The first World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) was held in Geneva in 2003. Tunisia hosted the second World Summit in November 2005. The Tunisian government took the initiative to host the summit in 1998. It was organised by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) under the auspices of UNESCO. A declaration of Principles and Plan of Action were approved in order to bridge the digital gap between developing and developed countries within the World Information Society."Second Phase of the WSIS, 16-18 November 2005, Tunis", World Summit on the Information Society, International Telecommunications Union, retrieved 20 February 2013

==References==


