[[Terpstra]]

CATEGORIES: Surnames of Frisian origin

The surname “Terpstra” derives its origin from the North Eastern region of the Netherlands in an area called Friesland. Friesland is the largest of the Dutch provinces (if one includes areas of water;) but in terms of land area only, it is the third largest province. Most of Friesland is on the mainland, but it also includes a number of West Frisian islands, including Vlieland, Terschelling, Ameland and Schiermonnikoog, which are connected to the mainland by ferry. The province's highest point is at 45 meters above sea level, on the island of Vlieland.
Terpstra is a toponymic, location, or habitation name.  These types of names derive from the inhabited location associated with the person given that name.  Such locations can be any type of settlement, such as: homesteads, farms, enclosures, villages, hamlets, strongholds or cottages.  One element of a habitation name may describe the type of settlement.  The habitative elements in such names can differ in meaning, according to different time-periods, locations, or with being used with certain other elements.
In the Friesian dialects there are two different definitions of the word “terp.”  The first definition of a “terp” from the more modern Friesian dialect means: “an artificial dwelling hill” (plural “terpen”.)  The second definition is in the Old Frisian dialect and means: "village".  The latter half of the surname “stra” means “of the” or “from the” and is used in various other surnames as well. 
Historical Frisian settlements were built on artificial terpen which were up to 15 m in height to be safe from floods in periods of rising sea levels.  The first terp-building period began around 500 BC, and a second dated from 200 BC to 50 BC.  Then, in the mid-3rd century, the rise of sea level was so dramatic that many low lying areas were deserted, and settlers were only able to return around 400 AD.  A third and final terp-building period began around 700 AD (Old Frisian times).  This ended with the invention of the dike somewhere around 1200 AD.  During the 18th and 19th centuries, many terps were destroyed to use the fertile soil they contained to fertilize farm fields. 
The greater part of the villages built on terps have names ending in -um, -heem, or -hiem, meaning farm-yard, or grounds.  However, there are a few village names in Friesland ending with -terp as well (e.g. Ureterp), referring not to a dwelling mound but merely to the Old Frisian word for village. For these places, the first element of the toponym is quite often a person's name or is simply describing the environmental features of the settlement.
The Low Countries, such as the Netherlands, were great centers of heraldry in medieval times. Coats of arms in the Netherlands were not controlled by an official heraldic system like the two in the United Kingdom, nor were they used solely by noble families. Any person could develop and use a coat of arms if they wished to do so, provided they did not usurp someone else's arms, and historically, this right was enshrined in Roman Dutch law.  As a result, many merchant families had coats of arms even though they were not members of the nobility. These are sometimes referred to as “Burgher Arms,” and it is thought that most arms of this type were adopted while the Netherlands was a republic (1581–1806).  In some regions even peasants sometimes bore arms. In Switzerland 14th century arms of farmers are known, but they are rare and did not become numerous until the 17th century. This was the case as well as in Lower Saxony, Frisia (Friesland) and Tyrol, where farmers had more personal freedoms. This heraldic tradition was also exported to the erstwhile Dutch colonies.  Dutch heraldry is characterized by its simple and rather sober style, and in this sense, is closer to its medieval origins than the elaborate styles which developed in other heraldic traditions
The Terpstra Family coat of arms has various aspects that refer to its origins and regional history.  This coat of arms can be broken into two parts: the shield and the crest.
When describing the shield, one must first note the tincture, or background colors of royal blue and white. These colors are representative of the waters of the Northern Sea which were an ever-present threat in ancient days. They were both nurturing and destructive at the same time to the early Friesians.  As for the designs on the shield itself: in the lower right field there is an example of a terp; An artificial mound rising above the flood waters.  This field is then separated from the upper right of the escutcheon by a downward horizontal white field with three red “Crosslet crosses”.  This heraldic cross is made from four Latin Crosses arranged at right-angles to each other, with their tops pointing north, south, east and west. The Crosslet cross is a symbol for the world evangelism of the Gospels, which gives it an alternative name as well: the Mission Cross.  Another common interpretation of these types of crosses is that it represents the four evangelists: Matthew, Mark, Luke and John.  To this day, like the evangelists, the Terpstras seem to spread themselves few and far between.  It has become exceedingly rare to find more than one family with this surname in any given area outside the homeland.  The burning castle in the upper left of the shield is a nod to the fact that the geographical region of Friesland has been conquered by various overlords during the centuries past such as the Roman Empire, the Frankish tribes (which later became the Merovingian and the Carolingian Dynasties), the Holy Roman Empire, the Duchy of Burgundy, the Spanish Empire, and even the Nazis in World War II.  Throughout it all, the Friesians were able to maintain their own cultural dialects and identity unlike most other occupied regions who find themselves under the same situations.  The occupiers all have left; the Friesians have remained relatively unchanged.
Therefore, it also seems appropriate that the family motto is “Rising Above the Tides” as this makes reference to both literally rising above the waters of the encroaching North Sea, and the political sways of the European theater. 
On the top of the shield rests the second part of the family’s coat of arms.  This is broken into three separate parts: the helmet, the torse or wreath, and the crest.  First, the Terpstra family, coming from a commoner’s background, utilizes a tilting helmet or jousting helmet reserved for non-nobles. Historically, the helmet itself was not specifically granted as an achievement of arms, but was naturally assumed by appropriate rank as a matter of "inherent right" for those who have fought in regional conflict, so a helmet with torse and mantling would not be misplaced even above a shield which had no crest to place above it. Above the helmet is the torse with the family colors of blue and white interchanging.  This in turn is topped by a crest of wheat in recognition of the region’s history of farming as its primary means of livelihood.
Terpstra is a surname of Frisian origin, and may refer to:

