[[Deerfield Township School District]]

CATEGORIES: New Jersey District Factor Group B, School districts in Cumberland County, New Jersey

The Deerfield Township School District is a community public school district that serves students in Kindergarten through 8th grade from Deerfield Township, in Cumberland County, New Jersey, United States. 
As of the 2007-08 school year, the district's one school had an enrollment of 339 students and 30.2 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 11.2.District information for the Deerfield Township School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed November 5, 2009.
The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "B", the second lowest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed October 27, 2009.
For grades 9-12, public school students attend Cumberland Regional High School, which serves students from Deerfield Township, Fairfield Township, Greenwich Township, Hopewell Township, Shiloh Borough, Stow Creek Township and Upper Deerfield Township.Cumberland Regional High School, South Jersey Magazine. Accessed November 1, 2007. "The Cumberland Regional High School is carved out of the northwest section of Cumberland County, New Jersey. The school serves seven municipalities, whose boundaries are the same as the school districts in them. Districts include Deerfield Township, Fairfield Township, Greenwich Township, Hopewell Township, Shiloh Borough, Stow Creek Township, and Upper Deerfield Township." The high school is located in Upper Deerfield Township and is part of the Cumberland Regional High School District.

==School==

Deerfield Township School served a total enrollment of 339 students (as of 2007-08, per the National Center for Education Statistics).Data for the Deerfield Township School, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed December 7, 2009.

==Administration==

Core members of the district's administration are:Cumberland County School Directory, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed November 5, 2009.

==References==

==External links==


