[[Seus Olhos]]

CATEGORIES: Sistema Brasileiro de Televisão telenovelas, Brazilian telenovelas, Portuguese-language telenovelas

Seus Olhos (Your Eyes) is a Brazilian soap opera produced and shown by the SBT from 18 May 2004 through 4 December 2004, with 173 chapters. Based on the original text from Inés Rodena "Seus Olhos" is an adaptation to the Portuguese language. The series writers were: Ecila Pedroso, Marine Noemi, Marcos Lazzarini, Aimar Labaki, Mário Viana and Fábio Torres. The series directors were: Jacques Lagoa, Luiz Antonio Piá and Henrique Martins, with David Grimberg as managing generality of teledramaturgia.

==Plot==

===First phase===

After the death of Marina's mother, Edite, she decides to move to 1980 São Paulo in search for a better life and inspiration for her greatest passion and talent...Painting.
Vítor possesses many attributes to conquer Marina's heart. He's a successful lawyer who works for a naval construction company. However, the heir of this company, Tiago, also forms a passion for Marina. At this point, Marina is unaware of the fact that Vitor is married to Elaine and has a two year old son, Arthur.
After Edite's death she leaves Marina fragile and with nothing, leaving her vulnerable to the very capable and providing Vitor. Marina falls in love with Vitor. Of course Vitor would like to keep their affair a secret because he can't afford his wife to find out about it. After Marina, finds out the truth about Vitor and his family, she is appalled and ends their romance. Shortly after, Marina approaches Tiago to start a friendship, however the friendship quickly turns romantic and very quickly turns into a marriage.
Marina's friend, Flávia lives with Sergio and is having his baby. During Flávia's nine month gestation period, Vítor lands the one blow that results in his employing company's bankruptcy. The vice-president of the company, Sergio, discovers everything. after Sergio has a fight with Vitor, Vítor puts the blame on Tiago for the reason the company went bankrupt. It counts for Marina all the truth. But, to prove that he made everything for love, he all passes the money that he stole for the just-born son of the young woman, Renata. The mother is infuriated. The two fight e, in the end, murderous. Vítor Marina. Despaired, it looks tests to blame Tiago, that, exactly being innocent, is judged and condemned the 30 years of arrest. 
Flávia has her daughter and names her Cibele. Cibele's and Renata's paths cross 20 years later. However, Renata gets kidnapped by Dirce, an explorer of children who deferred payment in the periphery of the São Paulo city. Rinaldo, more known as I bawl and son of the explorer, commits an assault. Rinaldo gets imprisoned and makes acquaintances with Tiago in the chain gang.

===Second phase===

The second chapter starts with a flash forward of eight years. Renata continues to live with Dirce, explores that it how much it can. Vítor no longer works for the same company and opened his own law office, where his main client is a crime organization. Dirce's social assistant and sociologist, Norma, knows about Renata and is collaborating with Dirce's conditions for the girl. However, Norma's guilt about Renata starts to weigh heavy on her conscience. Norma's guilt initiates a persecution against Dirce for his crimes against Renata. While Renata is in captivity she becomes great friends with a man named Arthur, who teaches her to read and write. Renata finds a love drawing, which is seemingly and eerily similar to that of Renata's dead mother.

===Third phase===

The third chapter starts with a twelve year flash forward. Renata and Arthur have grown passionately in love. Due to their social differences and Renata's current position, the couple decides to keep their love a secret. During Vítor and Elaine's wedding anniversary, Arthur presents Renata to the family as his fiancé. Unfortunately Arthur's mother becomes blindingly mad and banishes her future daughter-in-law from the house. Vítor becomes amazed with the similarities that Renata shares with her mother Marina, and immediately becomes suspicious that she is the girl who disappeared all those years ago. Much more than these similarities, Vitor becomes suspicious that she could be there to take back Vitor's dinheiro (money). But the passion that Vítor felt for Marina starts to resurface, Renata's figure was too reminiscent to her mother's. Thus, the loving triangle begins, between Renata, Arthur, and Vitor. Vitor's passion for Renata's mother comes back and finds a place in Renata's likeness. Elaine feels the same thing that happened more than 20 years ago is repeating itself, and this time Elaine will do anything to make sure that she doesn't lose Vítor. Renata begins to live in the very same loft that belonged to her mother. When Renata finds the picture that was taken of Marina during her maternity period, she has a realization about her mother. Renata and Arthur surpass the problems and traumas of the past together and proceed to take it all as a blessing and a gift, because in the end if none of the bad things in the past didn't happen then Renata and Arthur would never had met and fell in love.

==Cast==

==Soundtrack==

==External linkings==

Information on the novel

