[[Grashof number]]

CATEGORIES: Convection, Dimensionless numbers of fluid mechanics, Dimensionless numbers of thermodynamics, Fluid dynamics, Heat transfer, Buoyancy

The Grashof number (Gr) is a dimensionless number in fluid dynamics and heat transfer which approximates the ratio of the buoyancy to viscous force acting on a fluid. It frequently arises in the study of situations involving natural convection. It is named after the German engineer Franz Grashof.
where the L and D subscripts indicates the length scale basis for the Grashof Number.
The product of the Grashof number and the Prandtl number gives the Rayleigh number, a dimensionless number that characterizes convection problems in heat transfer.
There is an analogous form of the Grashof number used in cases of natural convection mass transfer problems.
where
and

==Derivation of Grashof Number==

where
There are two different ways to find the Grashof Number from this point. One involves the energy equation while the other incorporates the buoyant force due to the difference in density between the boundary layer and bulk fluid.

===Energy Equation===

This discussion involving the energy equation is with respect to rotationally symmetric flow. This analysis will take into consideration the effect of gravitational acceleration on flow and heat transfer. The mathematical equations to follow apply both to rotational symmetric flow as well as two-dimensional planar flow.
where
In this equation the superscript n is to differentiate between rotationally symmetric flow from planar flow. The following characteristics of this equation hold true.
This equation expands to the following with the addition of physical fluid properties:
From here we can further simplify the momentum equation by setting the bulk fluid velocity to 0 (u = 0).
This relation shows that the pressure gradient is simply a product of the bulk fluid density and the gravitational acceleration. The next step is to plug in the pressure gradient into the momentum equation.
The asterisks represent dimensionless parameter. Combining these dimensionless equations with the momentum equations gives the following simplified equation.
where
The dimensionless parameter enclosed in the brackets in the preceding equation is known as the Grashof Number

===Buckingham Pi Theorem===

This equation can be manipulated to give,
The list of variables that are used in the Buckingham Pi method is listed below, along with their symbols and dimensions.
In forced convection the Reynolds Number governs the fluid flow. But, in natural convection the Grashof Number is the dimensionless parameter that governs the fluid flow. Using the energy equation and the buoyant force combined with dimensional analysis provides two different ways to derive the Grashof Number.

==References==

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

