[[John Burnet (abolitionist)]]

CATEGORIES: 1789 births, 1862 deaths, British Congregationalist ministers, Burials at West Norwood Cemetery

John Burnet (1789–1862) was a pastor in Cork in Ireland before taking up the same position at the Mansion House Chapel in Camberwell. He was a well known "platform speaker" speaking human rights issues particularly at Exeter Hall. He was a leading member of both Congregational Union of England and the Bible Society.The Black Abolitionist Papers Vol. 1, C. Peter Ripley, University of North Carolina Press, 1985, accessed 27 July 2008

==Biography==

Burnet was born in Perth in 1789 and originally joined the army before becoming a pastor to an independent congregation in Cork in Ireland. A neat Grecian chapel was raised in George Street in Cork due to his efforts.The Parliamentary Gazetteer of Ireland: Adapted to the New Poor-law, Franchise, Municipal and Ecclesiastical Arrangements, and Compiled with a Special Reference to the Lines of Railroad and Canal Communication, as Existing in 1814-45
He came to England and took up a position as pastor to another Independent congregation at the Mansion House Chapel in Camberwell. He was a leading member of both the Congregational Union of England and the Bible Society, Peace Society the Liberation of Religion from State Control Society the Society for the Abolition of Capital PunishmentsMen of the Time Biographical Sketches of Eminent Living Characters ... Also Biographical Sketches of Celebrated Women of the Time
Burnet was not known for his preaching, but more as an orator and speaker on platforms like Exeter Hall. He spoke against the Corn Laws and for Anti-Slavery. In 19 March 1838, Burnet was with Peter Clare, Rev. W.N. Bunting; William Dilworth Crewdson when they presented a petition to Queen Victoria signed by 28,386 females of Manchester and Salford who requested freedom for the negro apprenticesbasically a legal nicety. "Apprentices" were nearly but not quite slaves. in the British Colonies.The Calcutta Christian Observer, 1838, accessed 4 August 2008 (A similar petition was presented by Lord Brougham, Joseph Sturge, Captain Hansard RN and the Reverend Thomas Scales based on resolutions passed ar meetings at Exeter Hall of "friends of the negro".).
He attended the 1840 and 1843 Anti-Slavery conventions and spoke at the Freemasons Hall concerning anti-slavery. A less than generous account was given at the time of one his speeches:
It was said that his supporters considered putting him forward for parliament but these did not come to fruition.
He died at Grove Lane, Camberwell, and was buried at West Norwood Cemetery.

==References==


