[[Ross Montgomery]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, Living people, Scottish darts players, Place of birth missing (living people), British Darts Organisation players

Ross Montgomery (born 16 October 1962) is a Scottish darts player who plays for the British Darts Organisation. His nickname is The Boss.

==Darts career==

Montgomery plays in the East Kilbride & District Darts League and in the Glasgow Premier League. He is a multiple time Rutherglen / East Kilbride singles champion.
Montgomery qualified for the 2006 BDO World Championships along with players like Brian Woods and eventual champion Jelle Klaasen of the Netherlands. Montgomery was drawn in the first round with another Dutchman Vincent van der Voort, losing 3-1 in sets.
He followed this, however, by reaching the final of the Scottish Open, beating Gary Robson and Michael van Gerwen before losing in the final to Sweden's Goran Klemme, runner-up in the 2005 World Masters. He played in the 2007 International Darts League, beating PDC player Chris Mason, Belgium's Dirk Hespeels and avenged his Lakeside defeat by van der Voort to win Group 4 with a 100% record. He wasn't able to repeat his performances in the Last 32 Group Stage, losing all 3 of his games in Group D to Martin Atkins, Scott Waites and group winner Raymond van Barneveld. Montgomery produced a good run in the Winmau World Masters, reaching the last 16 of the tournament, losing to Atkins.
In 2008, Montgomery won the newly created EDO England Open, which was run by the newly formed English Darts Organisation. He scored wins over Johnny Nijs, Ted Hankey, Gary Robson and Edwin Max before beating another Scotsman Gary Anderson in the final. He then reached the final of the inaugural BDO International Open, an event formerly known as the BDO England Open, losing to Davy Richardson. On 26 July 2008 Montgomery won his second event of the year, winning the British Classic, again beating Anderson in the final. Montgomery regained the British Classic crown in 2010, defeating Stuart Kellett in the final.
These performances helped Montgomery earn automatic qualification for the 2009 BDO World Championships as the number 10 seed. He defeated Welshman Martin Phillips in the first round but lost in round two to eventual champion Ted Hankey. He entered the tournament the following year as the Number 6 seed, but wasted six darts to win his first round match and lost to Garry Thompson.
Montgomery won the 2010 British Classic as well as the 2010 Zuiderduin Masters, his inaugural major title, where he came from 4-0 down in sets to win 5-4 against Robbie Green, also surviving three match darts.  At the 2011 BDO World Darts Championship, Montgomery was beaten 3-1 in sets by Alan Norris.
Montgomery reached the semi-finals of the 2011 Winmau World Masters where he was beaten in a deciding leg by Dean Winstanley. In the 2012 BDO World Championship, Montgomery reached the second round for only the second time courtesy of a 3-1 win over Fabian Roosenbrand in the first round, but was subsequently defeated 4-1 by eventual runner-up Tony O'Shea.
Montgomery was defeated in the first round of the 2013 BDO World Darts Championship 3-1 by Paul Jennings, having had four darts to lead 2-1. Montgomery lead Scotland to gold in the men's team event at the WDF World Cup in 2013 alongside team-mates Gary Stone, Craig Baxter and Alan Soutar. Scotland defeated America 9-7 in the team final. England were crowned the overall world champions, but Montgomery helped Scotland win silver in the overall competition.'The Boss' Montgomery is on top of the World dailyrecord.co.uk. 10-10-2013. Retrieved 14-11-2013.
Montgomery reached the semi-finals of the 2013 Zuiderduin Masters, losing to eventual champion James Wilson. He followed this with a narrow 3-2 first round win at the 2014 World Championship over qualifier Michael Meaney, after Meaney missed seven darts to take a 2-0 lead in the deciding set. Montgomery faces three-time champion Martin Adams in round two.

==World Championship results==

===BDO===

==Personal life==

Montgomery played American Football for the Glasgow Diamonds for 11 years and met his wife Dorothy while she was a cheerleader for the team. He was forced to retire through injury and took up darts instead. He and his wife Dorothy have a son Scott (born 1993) and daughters Alisha (born 1998) and Gemma (born 2000).

==References==

==External links==


