[[Leopold II of Belgium]]

CATEGORIES: Belgian monarchs, Dukes of Brabant, Belgian royal princes, House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (Belgium), People from Brussels, Congo Free State, 1835 births, 1909 deaths, Deaths from cerebral hemorrhage, 19th-century monarchs in Europe, 19th-century Belgian people, Burials at the Church of Our Lady of Laeken, Grand Cordons of the Order of Leopold (Belgium), Grand Crosses of the Order of the African Star, Grand Crosses of the Royal Order of the Lion, Grand Crosses of the Order of the Crown (Belgium), Grand Crosses of the Order of Leopold II, Knights of the Golden Fleece, Recipients of the Order of the Black Eagle, Extra Knights Companion of the Garter, Knights of the Order of the Most Holy Annunciation, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown (Württemberg)

Leopold II ([tpl]lang-fr|Léopold Louis Philippe Marie Victor[/tpl], [tpl]lang-nl|Leopold Lodewijk Filips Maria Victor[/tpl]; 9 April 1835 – 17 December 1909) was the second King of the Belgians, and is chiefly remembered for the founding and exploitation of the Congo Free State. Born in Brussels the second (but eldest surviving) son of Leopold I and [tpl]lang|fr|Louise of Orléans[/tpl], he succeeded his father to the throne on 17 December 1865, reigning for 44 years until his death, the longest of any Belgian monarch. 
Leopold was the founder and sole owner of the Congo Free State, a private project undertaken on his own behalf. He used Henry Morton Stanley to help him lay claim to the Congo, an area now known as the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the Berlin Conference of 1884–1885, the colonial nations of Europe committed the Congo Free State to improving the lives of the native inhabitants. From the beginning, however, Leopold essentially ignored these conditions and ran the Congo using a mercenary force for his personal gain. Some of the money from this exploitation was used for public and private construction projects in Belgium during this period.
Leopold extracted a fortune from the Congo, initially by the collection of ivory, and after a rise in the price of rubber in the 1890s, by forcing the population to collect sap from rubber plants. Villages were required to meet quotas on rubber collections, and individuals' hands were cut off if they did not meet the requirements. His regime was responsible for the death of an estimated 2 to 15 million Congolese. This became one of the most infamous international scandals of the early 20th century, and Leopold was ultimately forced to relinquish control of it to the Belgian government.

==Personal life==

Leopold was born in Brussels on 9 April 1835. He was the second child of the reigning Belgian monarch, Leopold I, and his second wife, Louise, the daughter of King Louis Philippe of France. The French Revolution of 1848, which spared Belgium, forced Louis Philippe to flee to the United Kingdom, ruled by Leopold's German cousin Queen Victoria. The royal families of Belgium and the United Kingdom were linked by numerous marriages, and were additionally both descended from the House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. Louis Philippe died two years later, in 1850. Leopold's fragile mother was deeply affected by the death of her father, and her health deteriorated. She died that same year, when Leopold was 15 years old.
Three years later, in 1853, he married Marie Henriette of Austria in Brussels on August 22. Marie Henriette was a cousin of Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria, and granddaughter of Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor through her father, Austrian archduke Joseph. Marie Henriette was lively and energetic, and endeared herself to the people by her elevated character and indefatigable benevolence, while her beauty gained for her the sobriquet of "The Rose of Brabant". She was also an accomplished artist and musician, and a fine horsewoman, passionate about horseback riding to the point that she would care for her horses personally. Some joked about this "marriage of a stableman and a nun",[tpl]fr icon[/tpl] « mariage d'un palefrenier et d'une religieuse » the shy and withdrawn Leopold being the nun.  
Four children were born of this marriage, three daughters and one son, also named Leopold. The younger Leopold died in 1869 from pneumonia after falling into a pond at only 9 years old. His death was a source of great sorrow for King Leopold, who thereby lost his only heir. The marriage had become unhappy and the couple lived more or less separate lives, and the couple separated completely after a last attempt to have another son, which, however, resulted in their daughter Clementine. In 1895 Marie Henriette retreated to Spa to live out the remainder of her days, and she died there in 1902.
