[[Brazil's Next Top Model (cycle 2)]]

CATEGORIES: Top Model series

Brazil's Next Top Model Cycle 2 was the second season of Brazil's Next Top Model hosted by model Fernanda Motta, which aims to find the next top fashion model. Filming ran from July to August 2008 and the premiere aired September 4, 2008. 
The winner received a R$ 200,000 contract, management and representation by Ford Models, a brand new car and a photo shoot for the cover and a six-page spread within Vogue Brasil. 
The cycle features 13 contestants. For the first time, the show had an international destination during this cycle, which was Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
The winner was 20 year old Maíra Vieira from Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais.

==Episode Summaries==

===Episode 1===

'Original Airdate: September 4, 2008
In the first episode, the public attends the choice of the 13 finalists of the reality show. The host Fernanda Motta, and the judges, Érika Palomino, Duda Molinos and Dudu Bertholini decide who stays in the competition, after an individual interview with each of the 20 selected contestants. Soon afterwards, 4 girls are eliminated, and the remaining 16 do a topless photoshoot for a campaign against breast cancer. Even though some of the girls feel uncomfortable posing half-naked, they all participate in the shoot. 
From now on, the 13 finalists lived in the same house.

===Episode 2===

'Original Airdate: September 11, 2008
The girls received tips from designer Amir Slama, founder of "Rosa Chá", one of the most important Brazilian labels. For the reward challenge, the girls had only 5 minutes to put together an outfit with the other participants' clothes, without communicating with one another. Flávia Giussani was criticized for her choice. Isabel won the challenge and received a dress and a dinner in the restaurant "Chakras" with 3 friends as a reward; she chose Alinne, Malana, and Marianna to join her. 
The photo shoot was based on horror movies and each girl wore makeup based on the film she was supposed to represent. They had to express three specific moods: sexy, evil and scared. Isabel once again gave up in the middle of the photo shoot, and, later at panel, all of the judges agreed it had been a "big mistake". Alinne's and Dayse's pictures were praised as the best ones by the judges. Flávia Gleichmann showed great improvement compared to last week's performance. In the end, Luana was eliminated, as the judges did not think her personality had translated well onto her pictures. 

===Episode 3===

'Original Airdate: September 18, 2008
The girls were taken to EV salon for makeovers. Marianna did not like her makeover; she complained about it throughout the episode and her attitude was later severely criticized at panel.
The models were paired up for the photoshoot: one of them embodied a mechanic, and the other, a snobby high-class woman. Alinne, Elly and Priscila were praised for their resourcefulness. Isabel and Rebecca showed no improvement. The girls also had their first runway lesson with Namie Wihby, during which Flávia Gleichmann and Malana were harshly criticized for their walks, and Rebeca was warned about not being able to fully close her mouth.
At panel, Flávia Giussani was praised for her attitude. The girls were asked to judge their performance and decide which of the pair had done better in their photoshoot. In the end, Isabel was eliminated because of her lack of interest in the fashion world.

===Episode 4===

'Original Airdate: September 25, 2008
The girls continue the runway lessons with Namie Wihby. He introduces them to the various types of runway walks. The challenge this week was to put on lipstick Avon with one hand while walking in the runway, and handling 3 dogs on the hand. The winner was Priscila, who was given a shopping voucher valued at R$ 1500.00. Rebeca was criticized for showing no evolution.
In the photoshoot, the girls embodied João Machado's plastic art and are dressed in organic food, such as squid, pig ears, beef and raw salmon. Dayse was disgusted by being dressed in beef, and it showed in her photos; the judges think that she exaggerated all of her expressions. Unlike Dayse, Maira is told that she has to exaggerate and show emotions. At panel Alinne and Flávia Giussani are told that they have not showed any kind of evolution. Dayse was once again criticized for not handling correctly feedback from the judges. Marianna is also criticized for not being able to let go of her "good girl" image. Flávia Giussani was eliminated for not showing attitude in her photos.

===Episode 5===

'Original Airdate: October 2, 2008
At sunrise, the girls are summoned by soldiers for the challenge of the week: join a military training in the style of the Brazilian film, Elite Troop (in Portuguese, Tropa de Elite). In the barracks they must prove, among classes of ballet with the choreographer Laís Correa, that they are disciplined and have the ability to overcome obstacles. In the final challenge, the girls must to go through a sequence of physical obstacles and followed by a quick photoshoot. Alinne felt terrible pain in her legs because of an accident she had two years ago. Despite this she completed the race and along with Priscila and Carolline, won the challenge, The prize was an afternoon at the Kyron Spa. 
The next day, Namie Wihby came back to the house to teach the girls a lot more about different kinds of catwalks. The girls also took a yoga class with Mauro Giuselli using the new kit Nívea My Silhouette. 
After an entertaining message from Pazzeto, the girls are informed by Fernanda Motta that this week's photoshoot will be based on the famous pin up's but at the same time they will also pose as giants. Malana and Maíra are criticized for lack of variety in their pictures. Once in the house, the girls receive a visit from the fashion designer Juliana Jabour, who gives them tips about the fashion world. 
At panel, Élly, Rebeca and Dayse are praised for the visible evolution since the beginning of the show. Priscila and Alinne are criticized for not showing any improvement. Malana was criticized for not being able to show her spirit through her pictures. Maíra is criticized for her lack of variety in her expressions; she's had the same facial expression in all of the photos she's done throughout the competition. Flávia Gleichmann is told that she does not photograph well. Marianna and Carolline were in the bottom 2 for being unable to demonstrate attitude, and personality in the photos. Carolline was sent home.

===Episode 6===

'Original Airdate: October 9, 2008
To commemorate the Centenary of Japanese Immigration in Brazil, the week the made a tribute to the land of the rising sun. After the girls received a Fernanda's Mail talking about the history of Brazil. 
The 9 models meet fashion stylist, Erika Ikezili. They do a workshop on Japanese culture, this serves as the inspiration for the challenge of the week: participe in Erika's Runway Fashion Show, using the guetta, Japanese wooden clog. After the challenge, Pazzeto gave some tips to Maíra and Flávia Gleichmann, ignoring Rebeca, who felt excluded and ignored. Dayse and Elly won the challenge and a dinner with two friends (Maíra and Malana) at a Japanese restaurant, Shintori. 
Dayse's bad attitude begins to anger some of the girls, mainly Alinne and Marianna. Her behavior is also reviewed by Namie, who once again calls her arrogant. In the photoshoot, the girls had to dress as super-heroines of manga, suspended 10 feet from the ground by wires, which caused much discomfort. Most of the girls took great photos. Maíra showed great improvement; she finally succeeded in giving a vast variety of facial expressions. Marianna was praised for her use of body language. Just before the photoshoot Elly begins to feel sick and fails to deliver a good picture. 
At panel, the judges praised Rebeca for finally being able to take a picture with her mouth fully closed. Maíra was also praised for her facial expressions and Malana for her softness. Dayse was harshly criticized for the lack of variety in her pictures. In the end, Fernanda eliminates Flávia Gleichmann for lack of feminism in her photos and subtleness.

===Episode 7===

'Original Airdate: October 16, 2008
The girls go through a workshop with Fernando Torquatto, who teaches them to pose and various types of facial expressions. In the end, the girls receive a video from Érika Palomino, inviting them to visit the "House of Palomino". There, the girls put what they learned into practice taking three pictures, showing a specific emotion. Alinne won the challenge, Cocci's clothes and an interview for the site's "House of Palomino". That night Fernanda went to the house for dinner and talks to the girls about her career. 
In the photoshoot, the girls are dressed by the fashion photographer Fabricio Maia and had to pose with actress and model Bia Schmidt. At panel, the judges (with the absence of Erica) choose Rebeca's, Priscila's, and Dayse's pictures as the best of the mini-challente. The three managed to show more emotions. Elly was criticized for her lack of concentration and not interacting with Bia. Priscila had the best picture of the group, while Maíra continues progressing, but is not confident enough. Elly and Rebeca land in the bottom two by the lack of concentration at the time of the shoot, but in the end Rebeca is eliminated. 

===Episode 8===

'Original Airdate: October 23, 2008
The models visit the "Osklen's" store and meet the fashion designer Oskar Metsavaht, who explains the entire process of designing a brand and shows some of the summer 08/09 collection. As a challenge, the girls try some of the clothes and simulate an audition for a fashion show. Malana and Elly were praised for their choice of clothes and their attitude. Alinne had the worst performance because of her exaggeration. At night, the girls visit the set of the nacional Cori's campaign where Fernanda Motta is doing a photoshoot.
In this week's photoshoot the girls have to represent different fashion trends from various decades:
At panel, the judges praised the evolution of all the girls. Elly and Priscila are chosen as the best of the night, with photos that showed a sexy side, but were also glamorous, Maira was praised for her picture was the most versatile and transcended time. Alinne once again failed to take a good picture. Malana was criticized for being too over the top, her picture was the weakest of the bunch. Even being one the most consistent contestants, Alinne was sent packing. 
The judges showed concern about Priscila's weight loss. The other girls are worried that Priscila has not been eating well and losing too much weight. Priscila says she's been eating well, and she's convinced that she needs to diet and exercise more so that she can reach an ideal weight. 

===Episode 9===

'Original Airdate: October 30, 2008
After a workshop about acting, the girls were tested for a TV commercial, speaking in Spanish. Priscila wins the challenge, getting as a reward one dinner in a famous restaurant with two friends, and a commercial with Fernanda Motta about breast cancer. The girls then were styled as men for their photoshoot, and had to pose in pairs with working models, portraying a sexy couple. This photoshoot was inspired by the gender swap shoot on the episode The Girl Who Takes Credit from America's Next Top Model, Cycle 8. Mariana Richardt from Cycle 1 makes an appearance as one of the models. Priscila, Élly and Maíra are praised during their photoshoots. Malana was said to be too masculine, even though they were supposed to look feminine. Marianna was criticized for looking like a girl, and focusing too much on looking pretty, while Dayse couldn't make a connection with her partner. 
At panel, Malana redeems herself from her cockiness during last judging, by opening up. Maíra and Priscila get great praise from the judges, thanks to their development. Dayse and Marianna both got the worst critiques, since they didn't get into the character, and didn't work with their partners. After deliberation, the judges decided to send Marianna home, since she's been criticized for the same reason since the beginning of the competition, and still, didn't let her model side show through. 

===Episode 10===

'Original Airdate: November 6, 2008
The candidates are surprised with a trip to an ecological resort in São Paulo, the Paradise Ecolodge and learn about eco-fashion, a new niche of the fashion world. In the challenge of the week, should customize a shirt and still parading the catwalk in stylish, with both the concept of creation as valeriam the presentation points. Despite the creativity of the presentation Dayse, Elly comes out victorious and won as a prize and a gold necklace from around the reservation. Already in photo shoot, the theme was the side fashionâ most of the garbage, which should embody monsters of pollution through the creations of Marcio Banfi, Stylist of Fernanda Motta. 
Back in São Paulo, the girls face the judges. Elly was praised by the picture that, although strange, was the only one who figured the issue properly, Priscila had a weak test and back in every sense; Maíra, despite a weak picture, was notable for its development and loss of their paradigms; Malana was criticized for being tense in the trial and not posing, Dayse by opinion and mechanics in their photos and bad attitudes demonstrated by the house. 
In the end, Priscila and Dayse were in the bottom two. Despite being photogenic and have evolved during the program, Fernanda eliminates Dayse because it was not as complete as the other girls and even surprised with the news that they would be leaving for Buenos Aires, Argentina, part of Fashion Week of Argentina.

===Episode 11===

'Original Airdate: November 13, 2008
The girls travel to Buenos Aires, Argentina, and in the company of Pazetto, will have a great opportunity to hear from Fashion Week in Buenos Aires, the most important event in the country. The girls have access to scenes and are able to talk to big names in fashion, as Fernanda Bruchiele and Laurencio Adot, as well as participate in a simulated casting with Gabriela Vidal, the agency's La Bien Models. 
The reward challenge took place in one of the most famous shows the Argentinean capital, Esquina de Carlos Gardel, where they had 30 minutes to learn tango and make a number with professional dancers, showing passion. The winner, Priscila, was allowed to choose between three looks that the Argentinean brand, Tramando, had prepared for her. After talking about what they had learned with each other, the girls needed to show everything they know in a photoshoot without a theme and the inspiration of women in the 40's, with a photograph of a collection of Pablo Ramirez, where they should improvise and use all they learned during the program. 
Back to Brazil, the most exciting elimination begins. The girls demonstrate to the jury that they could find criticism of Argentine models, mainly in runway walk. After talking about how much they want to go to the Top 3, the judges criticize their pictures: Elly demonstrates great body expression, elegance and an absolute control, showing her best work; Malana brings back her lightness in the photos; Maíra showed a bad angle of her face, a harmonious set, but weak and has not yet found the courage and conviction to be a model, still evolving, but is unstable. And Priscila, despite her bright face and strong poses, was unable to work her body and her curves, and thus, sending her home.

===Episode 12===

'Original Airdate: November 20, 2008
After being in shock by the elimination of Priscila, the three girls rewand are preparing for a final challenge, which they will be tested on everything they were learned: first, the video challenge, where a record commercial for next cycle of Brazil's Next Top Model; then the photography challenge, should simulate a cover for Vogue Brazil over the eyes of the fashion editor of the magazine, Giovani Frassoni, and finally, would the booker by Marco Aurelio Key, director of Ford Models Brazil. 
After talking to recharge your batteries and their families counting on his life, the girls faced the jury. Maíra is extremely professional in the business and its evolution is the most visible, with the largest repertoire of poses, Elly, from Marcus Aurelius, is the most complete of participants, can be light, modern, but Malana, who throughout the competition managed to bring her luster in her eyes, is more sophisticated and mysterious, becoming a model of high fashion, she left her nervousness hinder the commercial and was eliminated. 
In the grand finale, the girls go to the hall of SENAC, along with all other participants in the top 13 and Fernanda Motta, the parade of the Neon, from the judge Dudu Bertholini, where the theme is a retrospective of the brand over the years of 2008 and the program itself. 
After the judges once again come together and the girls are evaluated picture by picture from the start of the competition. Ultimately, a teary Fernanda announces Maíra as Brazil's Next Top Model for being more complete, professional & ready for the market.

===Episode 13===

'Original Airdate: November 27, 2008
This episode goes back to the beginning of the competition and shows viewers Maira's journey towards becoming Brazil's Next Top Model.

==Contestants==

(ages stated at time of contest)

==Summaries==

===Call-Out Order===

===Photo Shoot Guide===

===Judges===

==References==


