 cited by Whymper, 1892.</ref> that "the few stone objects found here show but slight traces of workmanship, an exception being … a stone weapon of the [[Morning star (weapon)|morning star]] type … the six-rayed stone star, here found once only, is elsewhere in Peruvian graves by no means rare."
Though all these writers appear to regard these objects as a kind of battle-axe (and are probably correct so far as those having a ray prolonged into a hatchet are concerned), there are several considerations which suggest these objects were habitually used as weapons.  The larger of the stars (which are as heavy as a pound and a quarter) no doubt might be used effectively; but the smaller ones, weighing only a few ounces, would not be very formidable; and taking them as a whole they are less adapted either for offensive or defensive purposes than most of the other stone implements.  To this may be added that many are uninjured, and do not seem to have been put to any use whatever.  Francisco Campaña (a half-Indian who joined the latter part of Whymper's journey) had assisted in the examination of graves in Peru, and said these stars in stone were found there placed upon the breasts of corpses; and it seems likely that they were to the Children of the Sun symbols of the luminary that they worshipped.
These weapons are known as Macana(s), used by armies of many Andean and Mesoamerican cultures during centuries until Spanish conquest. They are very effective.

==Implements==

A large number of stone objects were found which were undoubtedly implements.
Five types are shown in the illustration with a white background. In the top row, series A-E, the whole of the edges are rounded, except the bottom ones.  In the next line (F-J) all are of a chisel type.  The tops and sides of these are sometimes flat or angular, and sometimes rounded; and the lower, or cutting edges, are sharp.  The examples in the next series (K-O) bear some resemblance to a bill-hook; the top edges are flat; and they are all pierced with holes drilled from the two sides.  The specimens in the next row have similar holes—otherwise they approximate to the chisel type; while the type represented in the bottom series U-Y differs from all the others in having projecting shoulders, and (occasionally) in having a groove along the length of the top edge, apparently to facilitate handling.
All these five types were found in numbers, in many localities, and have evidently been amongst the most common and generally used implements during the Equatorial Stone Age. In minor respects they exhibit considerable variety, and there are large differences in their size, thickness, and weight.  The type P-T was the most numerous. The greater part have holes drilled from each side (with the holes having less in diameter in the middle than on their surfaces), though in some the aperture is as broad internally as externally. The positions of the holes vary, some being central, although most of them are nearest to the top. The lower edge is always the sharpest; and, while many would not have cut butter, there are a few sharp enough to cut wood. Their weight ranges from 3¼ to 29 ounces, and like the stars in stone they have been fashioned from a diversity of rocks.
A large number of implements in stone were obtained, from which selections are given in the illustration with a black background. Those marked E, J, K, L, N-T are unique, and the other forms are more or less rare. The central one, marked M, was the only object for which Ecuadorian natives could assign a use, and it was pronounced to be a corn-pounder. This one weighs five and a quarter pounds, and another of eleven pounds was obtained. Several examples of form I were found, considered by Thomas Ewbank to be a "hollowing-hammer for metal" by making a handle with a pliable wood rod. It is possible those marked A, B, and C were used for the same purpose. The objects D, F, G, and H are more puzzling. The two latter somewhat resemble the two others represented here, but differ from them in not having the circular cavities in the sides. The objects of this type are highly wrought, and fashioned out of hard stone. It seems not unlikely that they were used for sharpening tools, and that the examples G, H are unused specimens. They have also been found by M. Wiener in Peru.
Amongst the distinctly ornamental objects in stone there are imitations of corn cobs. These were particularly mentioned in Juan & Ulloa's work, in the mid-18th century. Spanish writers say:
  | last =
  | first =
  | authorlink =
  | coauthors =
  | title =Relacion Historica del viaje a la Americana Meridional
  | publisher =
  | origyear=1748
  | year =1807
  | location =Madrid
  | edition=5th English edition, London
  | chapter =1047,1048 }} cited by Whymper, 1892.</ref>
Squier gives in his book on Peru a bad representation of one of these stone maize-heads and says that they were specially mentioned "by Padre Arriaga in his rare book on the Extirpation of Idolatry in Peru under the name zaramama," and were household gods of the ancient inhabitants.

==Age of objects==

That the principal part of these objects and implements in stone are of considerable or of great age is apparent from the fact that they are scarcely mentioned at the time of the Pizarros. Garcilaso de la Vega says that the Indians
  | last =de la Vega
  | first =Garcilasso
  | title =The Royal Commentaries of Peru
  | pages =52–3}} cited by Whymper, 1892.</ref>
From this passage it appears that at the time of the Pizarros the Indians used tools of metal for most purposes. The concluding sentence evidently refers solely to fashioning stones for building. Older writers in general do not indicate that they had a congnizance of a Stone Age.

==Ecuador under Incan rule==

The history of Ecuador is better known from the point of the Inca expansion than during the Pre-Columbian era. In 1463, the Inca warrior Pachacuti and his son Tupac Yupanqui began the incorporation of Ecuador into Inca rule. They began by defeating the people of the Sierra including the Quitus tribe (the people for whom modern-day Quito is named). They continued by heading southwest to the coast, eventually subjugating the Ecuadorians living near the Gulf of Guayaquil and the Island of Puna to Inca rule.
By the end of the 15th century, despite fierce resistance by several Ecuadorian native tribes, Huayna Capac, Tupac Yupanqui's son with a Cañari princess (the people from modern-day Canar province), was able to conquer the remaining tribes and by 1500 most of Ecuador was incorporated into the Incan Empire loosely.
Huayna Capac grew up in Ecuador and loved the land, in contrast preference to his native Cuzco. He named Quito the second Inca capital and a road was built to connect the two capitals. Cities and temples were built throughout the country. He married a Quitu princess and remained in the country until his death. When Huayna Capac died, he left the northern portion of the current empire to Atahualpa to be ruled from Quito, while the Southern portion was given to Huascar to be ruled from Cuzco.
Since neither of the brothers liked the idea of a torn empire, the two sons sought the throne. Huáscar, born of Huayna Capac's sister in Cusco, was the legitimate heir. Atahualpa, born in Quito according to Ecuadorian historiography, and in Cusco according to the Peruvian, was the usurper. The brothers battled for six years, killing many men and weakening the empire. Finally in 1532 near Chimborazo, Atahualpa with aid of two of his father's generals defeated his brother. Huáscar was captured and put in prison. Atahualpa became emperor of a severely weakened empire only to face the Spanish conquistadors' arrival in 1532.Galapagosonline.com Incas in Ecuador
During the period of Inca presence, the Ecuadorian organizations adopted agricultural practices, and few social organization of the Inca occupants, but maintained their traditional religious beliefs and many customs.
Inca domination in Ecuador was short (≈70 years) but they left one of the best-known archaeological sites of Ecuador: Ingapirca. They tried to conquer high Amazonian valley with only partial success, especially in the south, where the Bracamoros defeated them three times.San Agustin Battle

==Gallery==

Image:MORTERO JAGUAR MACHALILLA 2.JPG|Valdivia-Machalilla jaugar mortar (c. 2000—1300 BC) 
Image:Vasija con figura humana Jama-Coaque (M. Am. Madrid) 01.jpg|Ceramic vessel with a sitting human figure. Jama-Coaque Culture, of the Regional Development Period (500 BC–AD 500)
Image:Ecuador ceramic bowls.JPG|Ceramic bowls of Carchi culture (800-1500)
Image:Ecuador untesil.JPG|Untesil with a figure from Chorresra culture (900–300 BC)
Image:Tolita-Tumaco gold figure 1st century BC.jpg|Standing Figure, La Tolita/Tumaco (1st century BC — 1st century AD)
Image:Chorrera Auch 3.jpg|Statue from Chorrera Culture (1800—300 BC)
Image:Chorrera Auch 2.jpg|Statue from Chorrera Culture (1800—300 BC)
Image:Tolita-Tumaco ceramic sculpture from Ecuador.jpg|Statue from La Tolita/Tumaco  (c. 1 BC)
Image:Capulí contortionist Santiago.jpg|Capulí ceramic sculptor of a contortionist (800—1500)
Image:Cashaloma cup with dripped painting.JPG|Cashaloma cup with dripped ("goteado") painting, Museo de las Culturas Aborigenes, Cuenca, Ecuador
File:Jama-Coaque - Figure Seated on a Bench with Hands Held to Mouth - Walters 482862.jpg|Jama-Coaque figurine, 300 BC-AD 800

==See also==

==References==


