[[Solon]]

CATEGORIES: 638 BC births, 558 BC deaths, 6th-century BC poets, Ancient Greek statesmen, Ancient Athenians, Ancient Greek poets, Ancient Greek elegiac poets, Archaic Athens, Ancient legislators, LGBT history in Greece, LGBT history prior to the 19th century, Seven Sages of Greece, Greek people, Ancient Greeks

Solon ([tpl]IPAc-en|ˈ|s|oʊ|l|ɒ|n[/tpl] or [tpl]IPAc-en|ˈ|s|oʊ|l|ə|n[/tpl]; [tpl]lang-grc|Σόλων[/tpl], c. 638 BC – 558 BC) was an Athenian statesman, lawmaker, and poet. He is remembered particularly for his efforts to legislate against political, economic, and moral decline in archaic Athens. His reforms failed in the short term, yet he is often credited with having laid the foundations for Athenian democracy.Stanton, G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1990), p. 76.Andrews, A. Greek Society (Penguin 1967) 197E. Harris, A New Solution to the Riddle of the Seisachtheia, in 'The Development of the Polis in Archaic Greece', eds. L.Mitchell and P.Rhodes (Routledge 1997) 103Aristotle Politics 1273b 35–1274a 21.
Knowledge of Solon is limited by the lack of documentary and archeological evidence covering Athens in the early 6th century BC.Stanton G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500 BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1990), pp. 1–5.Aristotle Politics 1273b 35–1274a 21 He wrote poetry for pleasure, as patriotic propaganda, and in defense of his constitutional reforms.  His works only survive in fragments.  They appear to feature interpolations by later authors and it is possible that fragments have been wrongly attributed to him (see Solon the reformer and poet).[tpl]or|date=November 2013[/tpl] Ancient authors such as Herodotus and Plutarch are the main source of information, yet they wrote about Solon long after his death, at a time when history was by no means an academic discipline. Fourth century orators, such as Aeschines, tended to attribute to Solon all the laws of their own, much later times.V.Ehrenberg, From Solon to Socrates: Greek History and Civilization, Routledge (1973) 71  Archaeology reveals glimpses of Solon's period in the form of fragmentary inscriptions but little else.  For some scholars, our "knowledge" of Solon and his times is largely a fictive construct based on insufficient evidenceW.Connor et al. Aspects of Athenian Democracy (Copenhagen, Museum Tusculanam P., 1990) 71–99C.Mosse, Comment s'elabore un mythe politique: Solon Annales ESC XXXIV (1979) 425–437  while others believe a substantial body of real knowledge is still attainable.P.Rhodes, The Reforms and Laws of Solon The Wise: an optimistic view in 'Solon of Athens: new historical and philological approaches', eds. J.Blok and A.Lardinois (Brill, Leiden 2006) Solon and his times are interesting to students of history as a test of the limits and nature of historical argument.Stanton G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook'', Routledge, London (1990), page 2

==Biography==

Solon was born in Athens around 638 B.C.Solon: Biography of SolonHis family was distinguished in Attica as they belonged to a noble or Eupatrid clan although only possessing moderate wealth. Solon's father probably was Execestides. Solon's lineage, therefore, could be traced back to Codrus, the last King of Athens."Solon" in Magill, Frank N. (ed)., The Ancient World: Dictionary of World Biography (Salem Press/Routledge, 1998), p. 1057. According to Diogenes Laërtius, he had a brother named Dropides who was an ancestor (six generations removed) of Plato.Diogenes Laërtius, The Lives and Opinions of Famous Philosophers, Book 3 "Plato", chapter 1. According to Plutarch, Solon was related to the tyrant Pisistratus for their mothers were cousins.Plutarch Solon 1 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#1. Solon was eventually drawn into the unaristocratic pursuit of commerce.Plutarch, Life of Solon, ch.2  
When Athens and Megara were contesting for the possession of the Salamis Island, Solon was given leadership of the Athenian forces. After repeated disasters, Solon was able to increase the morale and spirits of his body of troops on the strength of a poem he wrote about the islands. Supported by Pisistratus, he defeated the Megarians either by means of a cunning trick  or more directly through heroic battle around 595 B.C.Plutarch Solon 9 s:Lives/Solon#9 The Megarians however refused to give up their claim to the island. The dispute was referred to the Spartans, who eventually awarded possession of the island to Athens on the strength of the case that Solon put to them.
According to Diogenes Laertius, in 594 B.C. Solon was chosen archon or chief magistrate.SOLON of Athens As archon, Solon discussed his intended reforms with some friends. Knowing that he was about to cancel all debts, these friends took out loans and promptly bought some land. Suspected of complicity, Solon complied with his own law and released his own debtors, amounting to 5 talents (or 15 according to some sources). His friends never repaid their debts.Plutarch Solon 15 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#15
After he had finished his reforms, he travelled abroad for ten years, so that the Athenians could not induce him to repeal any of his laws.Herodotus, The Histories, Hdt. 1.29 His first stop was Egypt. There, according to Herodotus he visited the Pharaoh of Egypt Amasis II.Herodotus, The Histories, Hdt. 1.30 According to Plutarch, he spent some time and discussed philosophy with two Egyptian priests, Psenophis of Heliopolis and Sonchis of Sais.Plutarch Solon 26 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#26 
According to Plato's dialogues Timaeus and Critias, he visited Neith's temple at Sais and received from the priests there an account of the history of Atlantis. Next Solon sailed to Cyprus, where he oversaw the construction of a new capital for a local king, in gratitude for which the king named it Soloi.
Solon's travels finally brought him to Sardis, capital of Lydia. According to Herodotus and Plutarch, he met with Croesus and gave the Lydian king advice, which however Croesus failed to appreciate until it was too late. Croesus had considered himself to be the happiest man alive and Solon had advised him, "Count no man happy until he be dead." The reasoning was that at any minute, fortune might turn on even the happiest man and make his life miserable.  It was only after he had lost his kingdom to the Persian king Cyrus, while awaiting execution, that Croesus acknowledged the wisdom of Solon's advice.Herodotus 1.30.Plutarch Solon 28 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#28
After his return to Athens, Solon became a staunch opponent of Pisistratus. In protest and as an example to others, Solon stood outside his own home in full armour, urging all who passed to resist the machinations of the would-be tyrant. His efforts were in vain. Solon died shortly after Pisistratus usurped by force the autocratic power that Athens had once freely bestowed upon him.Plutarch Solon 32 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#32 He died in Cyprus at the age of 80 and, in accordance with his will, his ashes were scattered around Salamis, the island where he was born.Diogenes Laertius 1.62I. M. Linforth, Solon the Athenian, University of California press (1919), p.308, Google Books link
The travel writer, Pausanias, listed Solon among the seven sages whose aphorisms adorned Apollo's temple in Delphi.Pausanias 10.24.1 (e.g. Jones and Omerod trans. http://www.theoi.com/Text/Pausanias10B.html). Stobaeus in the Florilegium relates a story about a symposium, where Solon's young nephew was singing a poem of Sappho's; Solon, upon hearing the song, asked the boy to teach him to sing it.  When someone asked, "Why should you waste your time on it?" Solon replied [tpl]lang|grc|ἵνα μαθὼν αὐτὸ ἀποθάνω[/tpl], "So that I may learn it then die."Stobaeus, III, 29, 58, taken from a lost work of Aelian. Ammianus Marcellinus however told a similar story about Socrates and the poet Stesichorus, quoting the philosopher's rapture in almost identical terms: "ut aliquid sciens amplius e vita discedam",Ammianus Marcellinus 38.4 meaning "in order to go away knowing more out of life".

==Background to Solon's reforms==

During Solon's time, many Greek city-states had seen the emergence of tyrants, opportunistic noblemen who had taken power on behalf of sectional interests.  In Sicyon, Cleisthenes had usurped power on behalf of an Ionian minority.  In Megara, Theagenes had come to power as an enemy of the local oligarchs.  The son-in-law of Theagenes, an Athenian nobleman named Cylon, made an unsuccessful attempt to seize power in Athens in 632 BC.  Solon was described by Plutarch as having been temporarily awarded autocratic powers by Athenian citizens on the grounds that he had the "wisdom" to sort out their differences for them in a peaceful and equitable manner.Plutarch Solon 14 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#14 According to ancient sources,Plutarch Solon 14.3 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#14Athenaion Politeia 1.5 (e.g. Kenyon's translation s:Athenian Constitution#5) he obtained these powers when he was elected eponymous archon (594/3 BC). Some modern scholars believe these powers were in fact granted some years after Solon had been archon, when he would have been a member of the Areopagus and probably a more respected statesman by his (aristocratic) peers.Stanton G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1990), p. 36.Hignett C. A History of the Athenian Constitution to the End of the Fifth Century B.C. (Oxford 1952).Miller, M. Arethusa 4 (1971) 25–47.
The social and political upheavals that characterised Athens in Solon's time have been variously interpreted by historians from ancient times to the present day.  Two contemporary historians have identified three distinct historical accounts of Solon's Athens, emphasizing quite different rivalries: economic and ideological rivalry, regional rivalry and rivalry between aristocratic clans.Stanton G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1991), pp. 3–4.Walters, K.R., Geography and Kinship as Political Infrastructures in Archaic Athens http://www.uwo.ca/english/florilegium/vol2/walters.html These different accounts provide a convenient basis for an overview of the issues involved.
The historical account of Solon's Athens has evolved over many centuries into a set of contradictory stories or a complex story that might be interpreted in a variety of ways. As further evidence accumulates, and as historians continue to debate the issues, Solon's motivations and the intentions behind his reforms will continue to attract speculation.See, for example, J. Bintliff, "Solon's Reforms: an archeological perspective", in Solon of Athens: new historical and philological approaches, eds. J. Blok and A. Lardinois (Brill, Leiden 2006)https://openaccess.leidenuniv.nl/dspace/bitstream/1887/8303/1/1_036_145.pdf, and other essays published with it.

==Solon's reforms==

Solon's laws were inscribed on large wooden slabs or cylinders attached to a series of axles that stood upright in the Prytaneum.V.Ehrenberg, From Solon to Socrates: Greek History and Civilization, Routledge (1973) 71–72Stanton, G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1991), page 52 These axones appear to have operated on the same principle as a Lazy Susan, allowing both convenient storage and ease of access. Originally the axones recorded laws enacted by Draco in the late 7th Century (traditionally 621 BC). Nothing of Draco's codification has survived except for a law relating to homicide, yet there is consensus among scholars that it did not amount to anything like a constitution.Stanton, G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1990), page 26Oxford Classical Dictionary (1964), 'Draco' Solon repealed all Draco's laws except those relating to homicide.Plutarch Solon 17 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#17 Fragments of the axones were still visible in Plutarch's time Plutarch Solon 25.1 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#25 but today the only records we have of Solon's laws are fragmentary quotes and comments in literary sources such as those written by Plutarch himself. Moreover, the language of his laws was archaic even by the standards of the fifth century and this caused interpretational problems for ancient commentators.Andrews A. Greek Society (Penguin 1967) 114, 201 Modern scholars doubt the reliability of these sources and our knowledge of Solon's legislation is therefore actually very limited in its details.
Generally, Solon's reforms appear to have been constitutional, economic and moral in their scope. This distinction, though somewhat artificial, does at least provide a convenient framework within which to consider the laws that have been attributed to Solon. Some short term consequences of his reforms are considered at the end of the section.

===Constitutional reform===

Before Solon's reforms, the Athenian state was administered by nine archons appointed or elected annually by the Areopagus on the basis of noble birth and wealth.Athenaion Politeia 3.6 s:Athenian Constitution#3Athenaion Politeia 8.2 s:Athenian Constitution#8 The Areopagus comprised former archons and it therefore had, in addition to the power of appointment, extraordinary influence as a consultative body. The nine archons took the oath of office while ceremonially standing on a stone in the agora, declaring their readiness to dedicate a golden statue if they should ever be found to have violated the laws.Athenaion Politeia 7.1, 55.5 s:Athenian Constitution#7Plutarch Solon 25.3 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#25 There was an assembly of Athenian citizens (the Ekklesia) but the lowest class (the Thetes) was not admitted and its deliberative procedures were controlled by the nobles.Stanton, G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1991), page 35, note 2 There therefore seemed to be no means by which an archon could be called to account for breach of oath unless the Areopagus favoured his prosecution.
According to the Athenian Constitution, Solon legislated for all citizens to be admitted into the EkklesiaAthenaion Politeia 7.3 s:Athenian Constitution#7 and for a court (the Heliaia) to be formed from all the citizens.Aristotle Politics 1274a 3, 1274a 15 The Heliaia appears to have been the Ekklesia, or some representative portion of it, sitting as a jury.Ostwald M. From Popular Sovereignty to the Sovereignty of the Law: Law, Society and Politics in Fifth Century Athens (Berkeley 1986) 9–12, 35.Stanton, G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1990), page 67 note 2 By giving common people the power not only to elect officials but also to call them to account, Solon appears to have established the foundations of a true republic. However some scholars have doubted whether Solon actually included the Thetes in the Ekklesia, this being considered too bold a move for any aristocrat in the archaic period.Hignett C. A History of the Athenian Constitution to the End of the Fifth Century B.C. (Oxford 1952) pages 117–118 Ancient sourcesAthenaion Politeia 8.4 s:Athenian Constitution#8Plutarch Solon 19 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#19 credit Solon with the creation of a Council of Four Hundred, drawn from the four Athenian tribes to serve as a steering committee for the enlarged Ekklesia. However, many modern scholars have doubted this also.Hignett C. A History of the Athenian Constitution to the End of the Fifth Century B.C. (Oxford 1952) 92–96Stanton, G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1990), page 72 note 14
There is consensus among scholars that Solon lowered the requirements—those that existed in terms of financial and social qualifications—which applied to election to public office. The Solonian constitution divided citizens into four political classes defined according to assessable propertyPlutarch Solon 18 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#18 a classification that might previously have served the state for military or taxation purposes only.Stanton, G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1990), page 71 note 6 The standard unit for this assessment was one medimnos (approximately 12 gallons) of cereals and yet the kind of classification set out below might be considered[tpl]weasel-inline|date=January 2014[/tpl] too simplistic to be historically accurate.V.Ehrenberg, From Solon to Socrates: Greek History and Civilization, Routledge (1973) 
According to the Athenian Constitution, only the Pentacosiomedimnoi were eligible for election to high office as archons and therefore only they gained admission into the Areopagus.Athenaion Politeia 7–8 s:Athenian Constitution#7 A modern view affords the same privilege to the hippeis.Oxford Classical Dictionary (3rd edition 1996) Solon The top three classes were eligible for a variety of lesser posts and only the Thetes were excluded from all public office.
Depending on how we interpret the historical facts known to us, Solon's constitutional reforms were either a radical anticipation of democratic government, or they merely provided a plutocratic flavour to a stubbornly aristocratic regime, or else the truth lies somewhere between these two extremes.[ref]"In all areas then it was the work of Solon which was decisive in establishing the foundations for the development of a full democracy."[tpl]emdash[/tpl]Marylin B. Arthur, 'The Origins of the Western Attitude Toward Women', in Women in the Ancient World: The Arethusa Papers, John Patrick Sullivan (ed.), State University of New York (1984), page 30. 
"In making their own evaluation of Solon, the ancient sources concentrated on what were perceived to be the democratic features of the constitution. But...Solon was given his extraordinary commission by the nobles, who wanted him to eliminate the threat that the position of the nobles as a whole would be overthrown."[tpl]emdash[/tpl]Stanton, G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1990), p. 76.[/ref]

===Economic reform===

Solon's economic reforms need to be understood in the context of the primitive, subsistence economy that prevailed both before and after his time. Most Athenians were still living in rural settlements right up to the Peloponnesian War.Thucydides 2.14–2.16 Opportunities for trade even within the Athenian borders were limited. The typical farming family, even in classical times, barely produced enough to satisfy its own needs.Gallant T. Risk and Survival in Ancient Greece (Stanford, 1991), cited by Morris I. in The Growth of City States in the First Millennium BC (Stanford, 2005) page 7 http://www.princeton.edu/~pswpc/pdfs/morris/120509.pdf Opportunities for international trade were minimal. It has been estimated that, even in Roman times, goods rose 40% in value for every 100 miles they were carried over land, but only 1.3% for the same distance were they carried by ship Laurence R. Land Transport in Rural Italy (Parkins and Smith, 1998), cited by Morris I. in The Growth of City States in the First Millennium BC (Stanford, 2005) http://www.princeton.edu/~pswpc/pdfs/morris/120509.pdf and yet there is no evidence that Athens possessed any merchant ships until around  525 BC.Morris I. The Growth of City States in the First Millennium BC (Stanford, 2005) page 12  http://www.princeton.edu/~pswpc/pdfs/morris/120509.pdf Until then, the narrow warship doubled as a cargo vessel. Athens, like other Greek city states in the 7th Century BC, was faced with increasing population pressures Snodgrass A. Archaic Greece (London, 1980) cited by Morris I. in The Growth of City States in the First Millennium BC (Stanford, 2005) page 11 http://www.princeton.edu/~pswpc/pdfs/morris/120509.pdf and by about 525 BC it was able to feed itself only in 'good years'.Garnsey P. Famine and Food Supply in Graeco-Roman World (Cambridge, 1988) page 104, cited by Morris I. in The Growth of City States in the First Millennium BC (Stanford, 2005) http://www.princeton.edu/~pswpc/pdfs/morris/120509.pdf
Solon's reforms can thus be seen to have taken place at a crucial period of economic transition, when a subsistence rural economy increasingly required the support of a nascent commercial sector. The specific economic reforms credited to Solon are these:
It is generally assumed, on the authority of ancient commentators Plutarch (quoting Androtion) Solon 15.2–5 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#15 that Solon also reformed the Athenian coinage. However, recent numismatic studies now lead to the conclusion that Athens probably had no coinage until around 560 BC, well after Solon's reforms.Stanton, G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1990), page 61 note 4
Solon's economic reforms succeeded in stimulating foreign trade. Athenian black-figure pottery was exported in increasing quantities and good quality throughout the Aegean between 600 BC and 560 BC, a success story that coincided with a decline in trade in Corinthian pottery.Stanton, G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1990), page 76 The ban on the export of grain might be[tpl]weasel-inline|date=January 2014[/tpl] understood as a relief measure for the benefit of the poor. However, the encouragement of olive production for export could actually[tpl]weasel-inline|date=January 2014[/tpl] have led to increased hardship for many Athenians to the extent that it led to a reduction in the amount of land dedicated to grain. Moreover, an olive produces no fruit for the first six yearsStanton, G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1991), page 65 note 1 (but farmers' difficulty of lasting until payback may also give rise to a mercantilist argument in favour of supporting them through that, since the British case illustrates that 'One domestic policy that had a lasting impact was the conversion of "waste lands" to agricultural use. Mercantilists felt that to maximize a nation's power all land and resources had to be used to their utmost...'). The real motives behind Solon's economic reforms are therefore[tpl]weasel-inline|date=January 2014[/tpl] as questionable as his real motives for constitutional reform. Were the poor being forced to serve the needs of a changing economy, was the economy being reformed to serve the needs of the poor, or were Solons policies the manifestation of a struggle taking place between poorer citizens and the aristocrats?

===Moral reform===

In his poems, Solon portrays Athens as being under threat from the unrestrained greed and arrogance of its citizens.Demosthenes 19 (On the Embassy) 254–5 Even the earth (Gaia), the mighty mother of the gods, had been enslaved.Athenaion Politeia 12.4 (quoting Solon) s:Athenian Constitution#12 The visible symbol of this perversion of the natural and social order was a boundary marker called a horos, a wooden or stone pillar indicating that a farmer was in debt or under contractual obligation to someone else, either a noble patron or a creditor.Stanton, G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1991), pages 55–6 notes 3 and 4 Up until Solon's time, land was the inalienable property of a family or clan Innis H. Empire and Communications (Rowman and Littlefield, 2007) pages 91–92 and it could not be sold or mortgaged. This was no disadvantage to a clan with large landholdings since it could always rent out farms in a sharecropping system. A family struggling on a small farm however could not use the farm as security for a loan even if it owned the farm. Instead the farmer would have to offer himself and his family as security, providing some form of slave labour in lieu of repayment. Equally, a family might voluntarily pledge part of its farm income or labour to a powerful clan in return for its protection. Farmers subject to these sorts of arrangements were loosely known as hektemoroi Stanton, G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1991), page 38 note 3 indicating that they either paid or kept a sixth of a farm's annual yield.Stanton, G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC: A Sourcebook, Routledge, London (1990), page 35 note 3Kirk. G, Historia Vol. 26 (1977) 369–370Woodhouse W. Solon the Liberator: A Study of the Agrarian Problem in Attika in the Seventh Century (Oxford 1938) In the event of 'bankruptcy', or failure to honour the contract stipulated by the horoi, farmers and their families could in fact be sold into slavery.
Solon's reform of these injustices was later known and celebrated among Athenians as the Seisachtheia (shaking off of burdens).Athenaion Politeia 6 s:Athenian Constitution#6Plutarch Solon 15.2 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#15 As with all his reforms, there is considerable scholarly debate about its real significance. Many scholars are content to accept the account given by the ancient sources, interpreting it as a cancellation of debts, while others interpret it as the abolition of a type of feudal relationship, and some prefer to explore new possibilities for interpretation. The reforms included:
The removal of the horoi clearly provided immediate economic relief for the most oppressed group in Attica, and it also brought an immediate end to the enslavement of Athenians by their countrymen. Some Athenians had already been sold into slavery abroad and some had fled abroad to escape enslavement – Solon proudly records in verse the return of this diaspora.Solon quoted in Athenaion Politeia 12.4 s:Athenian Constitution#12 It has been cynically observed, however, that few of these unfortunates were likely to have been recovered.Forrest G. The Oxford History of the Classical World ed Griffin J. and Murray O. (Oxford Uni Press, 1995) page 32 It has been observed also that the seisachtheia not only removed slavery and accumulated debt, it also removed the ordinary farmer's only means of obtaining further credit.Stanton, G.R. Athenian Politics c800–500BC; a Sourcebook Routledge, London (1991) page 57 note 1
The seisachtheia however was merely one set of reforms within a broader agenda of moral reformation. Other reforms included:

===Aftermath of Solon's reforms===

After completing his work of reform, Solon surrendered his extraordinary authority and left the country. According to Herodotus :6. Herodotus 1.29 (e.g. Campbell's translation 2707) the country was bound by Solon to maintain his reforms for 10 years, whereas according to Plutarch  and the author of Athenaion Politeia Athenaion Politeia 7.2 s:Athenian Constitution#7 (reputedly Aristotle) the contracted period was instead 100 years. A modern scholar Stanton, G.R. Athenian Politics c800–55BC; a Sourcebook Routledge, London (1991) page 84 considers the time-span given by Herodotus to be historically accurate because it fits the 10 years that Solon was said to have been absent from the country.Plutarch Solon 25.6 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#25 Within 4 years of Solon's departure, the old social rifts re-appeared, but with some new complications. There were irregularities in the new governmental procedures, elected officials sometimes refused to stand down from their posts and occasionally important posts were left vacant. It has even been said that some people blamed Solon for their troubles.Athenaion Politeia 13 s:Athenian Constitution#13 Eventually one of Solon's relatives, Pisistratus, ended the factionalism by force, thus instituting an unconstitutionally gained tyranny. In Plutarch's account, Solon accused Athenians of stupidity and cowardice for allowing this to happen.Plutarch Solon 30 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#30

==Poetry==

Solon was the first of the Athenian poets whose work has survived to the present day. His verses have come down to us in fragmentary quotations by ancient authors such as Plutarch and Demosthenes Demosthenes 19 (On the Embassy) 254-5 who used them to illustrate their own arguments. It is possible that some fragments have been wrongly attributed to him K.Hubbard, Homosexuality in Greece and Rome: a sourcebook of basic documents, Uni. California Press, 2003; p.36 and some scholars have detected interpolations by later authors.A.Lardinois, Have we Solon's verses? and E.Stehle, Solon's self-reflexive political persona and its audience, in 'Solon of Athens: new historical and philological approaches', eds. J.Blok and A.Lardinois (Brill, Leiden 2006) He was also the first citizen of Athens to reference the goddess Athena (fr. 4.1-4).Susan Deacy, Gods and Heroes of the Ancient World: Athena (2008) pg. 77 
The literary merit of Solon's verse is generally considered unexceptional. Solon's poetry can be said to appear 'self-righteous' and 'pompous' at times Forrest G., The Oxford History of the Classical World, ed. Boardman J., Griffin J. and Murray O., Oxford Uni. Press (New York, 1995), page 31 and he once composed an elegy with moral advice for a more gifted elegiac poet, Mimnermus. Most of the extant verses show him writing in the role of a political activist determined to assert personal authority and leadership and they have been described by the German classicist Wilamowitz as a "versified harangue" (Eine Volksrede in Versen).Wilamowitz, Arist. u. Athen, ii 304, cited by Eduard Fraenkel, Horace, Oxford University Press (1957), page 38 According to Plutarch Plutarch Solon 3.1-4 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#3 however, Solon originally wrote poetry for amusement, discussing pleasure in a popular rather than philosophical way. Solon's elegiac style is said to have been influenced by the example of Tyrtaeus.Oxford Classical Dictionary (1964) Solon He also wrote iambic and trochaic verses which, according to one modern scholar,David.A.Cambell, Greek Lyric Poetry, Bristol Classical Press 1982, Intro. xxix are more lively and direct than his elegies and possibly paved the way for the iambics of Athenian drama.
Solon's verses are mainly significant for historical rather than aesthetic reasons, as a personal record of his reforms and attitudes. However, poetry is not an ideal genre for communicating facts and very little detailed information can be derived from the surviving fragments.Andrews A. Greek Society (Penguin 1981) 114 According to Solon the poet, Solon the reformer was a voice for political moderation in Athens at a time when his fellow citizens were increasingly polarized by social and economic differences:
 
 πολλοὶ γὰρ πλουτεῦσι κακοί, ἀγαθοὶ δὲ πένονται: 
ἀλλ' ἡμεῖς αὐτοῖς οὐ διαμειψόμεθα 
τῆς ἀρετῆς τὸν πλοῦτον: ἐπεὶ τὸ μὲν ἔμπεδον αἰεί, 
χρήματα δ' ἀνθρώπων ἄλλοτε ἄλλος ἔχει. 
Some wicked men are rich, some good are poor; 
We will not change our virtue for their store: 
Virtue's a thing that none can take away, 
But money changes owners all the day.Plutarch Solon 1 s:Lives (Dryden translation)/Solon#1

Here translated by the English poet John Dryden, Solon's words define a 'moral high ground' where differences between rich and poor can be reconciled or maybe just ignored. His poetry indicates that he attempted to use his extraordinary legislative powers to establish a peaceful settlement between the country's rival factions:
 
<br> 
    Before them both I held my shield of might<br>
    And let not either touch the other's right.<ref name="ReferenceC"/><br/>

His attempts evidently were misunderstood:
 
     χαῦνα μὲν τότ' ἐφράσαντο, νῦν δέ μοι χολούμενοι<br>
    λοξὸν ὀφθαλμοῖς ὁρῶσι πάντες ὥστε δήϊον.<br>
    Formerly they boasted of me vainly; with averted eyes<br>
