[[Evangelical Mission Ministries]]

CATEGORIES: American Christian missionaries, Organizations based in Texas, Religious organizations established in 1954, Evangelical organizations established in the 20th century, Pharr, Texas

Evangelical Mission Ministries (EMM) is a non-denominational, evangelical mission agency based in Pharr, Texas, United States  EMM missionaries work primarily in  Mexico in the areas of church planting, evangelism, sales and distribution of Christian literature, and Christian education.  Beginning in 1995, EMM constructed the Walter Gomez Evangelical Center in Pachuca, Hidalgo, that now houses a Bible College, performing arts auditorium, and administrative offices for the Mexican National Church with which it partners.

==History==

Evangelical Mission Ministries (formerly Mexico Mission Ministries) was originally formed in 1954 by the Reverend Walter Gomez.  Initially, the mission focused on planting churches through foreign missionaries and national workers in Northern Mexico.  Due to its efforts of sharing the gospel of Jesus Christ with the people of Mexico, groups of believers began to form with concentrations in the small villages surrounding Monclova, Coahuila.  The need to train Christian workers, and specifically nationals as pastors, for these growing congregations soon became apparent.
In 1955, the Mexico Mission Ministries started a Bible School just outside the city of Oaxaca to address these needs.  The school moved after three years to the city of Monclova and later moved again to its current home in Pachuca in the year 2000.  In 2007 the mission changed its name to 
Evangelical Mission Ministries, no longer limiting itself to Mexico for any additional fields that God may open.http://www.emm-mexico.org

==Supporters==

EMM is a faith-based mission.  Because it is not affiliated with any single church denomination, its supporters come from a wide variety of protestant and evangelical backgrounds.  They also range geographically from Florida to Washington, and from California to New York.  Due to a strategic partnership with Global Outreach Mission of Buffalo, New York, supporters throughout Canada are also able to receive tax-deductible contributions to the mission.

==External links==


