[[University College Dublin Library]]

CATEGORIES: Academic libraries in Ireland, University College Dublin, Libraries in Dublin (city), Deposit libraries

UCD Library dates from the establishment of University College Dublin (UCD) as a constituent college of the National University of Ireland in 1908. It supports the learning, teaching and research needs of some 24,000 students and staff (plus a considerable number based in affiliated and otherwise related UCD programmes abroad) in a wide range of disciplines including agriculture,UCD School of Agriculture, Food Science & Veterinary Medicine architecture,UCD School of Architecture, Landscape & Civil Engineering arts and humanities,UCD Arts, Celtic Studies and Human Sciences Programme Office business studies,UCD College of Business and Law engineering,UCD College of Engineering, Mathematical & Physical Sciences law, medicine,UCD School of Medicine & Medical Science science,UCD Science Programme Office social sciencesUCD School of Sociology and veterinary medicine.
University College Dublin (UCD) is the Republic of Ireland's largest university.http://www.ucd.ie/universityrelations/about-ucd/docs/UCD_Profile_updated_May_12.pdf It is located in Dublin, capital of Ireland.

==Buildings and locations==

There are 5 UCD libraries: the James Joyce Library at Belfield serves as the administrative centre of the library system: it accommodates the central services and 85% of the stock; the Health Sciences library (for medicine, nursing and physiotherapy) is located in the UCD Health Sciences Centre at Belfield; Architecture (for architecture, landscape and planning) is in the Richview precinct at Belfield; Veterinary Medicine, located in the Veterinary Sciences Centre at Belfield; the UCD Michael Smurfit School of Business libraryUCD Michael Smurfit School of Business at the Blackrock Campus.
Accommodation for readers consists of some 3,150 reading and study places, including some single and group study and PBL rooms, and a social learning area. Wireless internet is available throughout all of the libraries, there are wired network points provided, and a limited number of power outlets are available to about a third of study seats. A number of IT Services open computer labs and PC clusters are located within the libraries.

==Information resources==

The Library as a whole contains about a million print volumes, with substantial collections of around a million non-print formats, including 650,000 e-books. Almost 80% of stock is on open access. Approximately 9,500 purchased monographs, and 2,500 donations or legal deposit items are added to stock each year, and 32,000 current journal titles and databases are available, the vast majority of which are e-journals. In summer 2013 the Library piloted PDA – Patron Driven Acquisition – for a significant amount of its spend on both print and online materials and this is being offered again in 2014.  The Library is a European Documentation Centre, a national depository for United States government publications, and a legal deposit library for Irish publications. A small but significant holding of some 30,000 early printed books and special collections is housed in a separate bookstack with independent environmental control. In addition, almost 40,000 pre- 1930 items are managed by them and will be added to Special Collections when space is available. This additional material is currently on open access or in the Library store.

==The UCD Digital Library==

The UCD Library supports digital repository services for dissemination of open access publications by university staffUCD Research Repository as well as for management of digitised cultural heritage resources and data produced or consumed by the UCD community.UCD Digital Library
In collaboration with UCD Research, there is interoperability between the Library Institutional Repository (IR) and the UCD Research Management System (RMS) providing a single route to update research profiles and deposit individual full text items. The institutional repository is based on DSpace and provides access to full text articles, working papers, reports, and other staff publications. It also provides a means of exporting information to a national open access repository, RIAN, as well as other subject-specific portals.
The UCD Digital Library, the successor to the IVRLA project, is a platform for the dissemination of diverse digital content associated with the University. The major cultural heritage collection is the Irish Virtual Research Library and Archive (IVRLA); additional information includes geographic, quantitative and qualitative data produced or consumed by the UCD community. The new platform went live in summer 2012.

==Library management system and other online environments==

The Library website was completely re-designed and the content refreshed in 2011. A new Library Management System, from Innovative Interfaces went live in July 2012.Library catalogue In 2013 the Library piloted the LibGuides product as a complement to the website and decided to mainstream this from 2014 for subject and thematic guides. During 2014 the major online resource discovery service Metalib/SFX will be replaced with a new product. The Library also maintains a presence in the key social media. These include an instant messaging chat service, a Twitter feed, an Instagram presence, a YouTube channel and a page on Facebook.http://www.ucd.ie/library/using_the_library/contact_us/
A mobile website and catalogue are available, with integration of these into the University app, and a wider mobile strategy and service is developing.

==Services==

Lending (including self-service lending at all our sites), document supply, information skills training, and reference and information services are available in all library locations. Print journals, reference materials, official publications, theses, and Special Collections materials are not available for loan. A charge is made for Inter-Library Loan and document supply. Copi Print provides print and copying facilities, on a paid self-service basis, in the libraries and in other University buildings.
Services are increasingly moving online, with online fines and charges payment introduced November 2013 using the University e-wallet system UCard, followed by online group study room booking from January 2014 using the Springshare product LibCal.
The James Joyce and Health Sciences libraries provide a laptop loan service. This service enables students and staff to borrow laptops on a short-term basis within the confines of the library.Laptop loans
The Short Loan collection in the James Joyce library and the entire stock of the Blackrock and Veterinary Medicine libraries uses RFID technology. This allows readers to borrow and return books without the assistance of library staff.
Opening hoursUCD Library opening hours in each of the five UCD libraries vary throughout the year.
Online access is provided on a 24/7 basis to an extensive range of databases, information services, electronic journals, subject guides and e-Learning materials.

==Liaison with other libraries and organisations==

There is a strong collaborative ethos among the Irish university libraries, and UCD Library participates in a number of collaborative initiatives and projects. These include IReLIReL (the Irish e-Library, an initiative funded by the Higher Education AuthorityHigher Education Authority of Ireland and Science Foundation Ireland to provide a world-class portfolio of e-journals to support research), IRIS (a company which manages the IReL initiative), ALCIDALCID (a reciprocal access scheme for academic staff and postgraduate research students), ANLTC (the Academic and National Library Training Co-operative),ANLTC – the Academic and National Library Training Co-operative which provides a regular staff training and development programme, and the RIAN Project, funded through the Higher Education Authority's Strategic Innovation FundHigher Education Authority of Ireland, Strategic innovation fund to provide e-repositories in each university, and a national portal, for open-access research publications.
Internationally, the Library has participated in the past in a number of research projects funded through the European Commission's FRAMEWORK Programmes, and, as an affiliate member of the NEREUS Consortium,NEREUS Consortium participated in the NEEO (Network of European Economists Online)NEEO project, funded by the eContentplus Programme, a multilingual portal to the full-text research outputs of 500 top researchers in the partner institutions.
UCD Library was a partner with the Library of the Queen's University of Belfast in the PADDI (Planning Architecture Design Database Ireland) project and both libraries continue to jointly operate the PADDI Database service.PADDI website
UCD Library is an institutional member of SCONUL, CONUL,CONUL IATUL,IATUL IFLA and LIBER.LIBER

==References==

==External links==


