[[Dokufest]]

CATEGORIES: Documentary film festivals, International film festivals, Short film festivals

Dokufest is an International Documentary and Short Film Festival that is held every year during August in Prizren, Kosovo. It started in 2002. This Festival attracts numerous international and regional artists. In this annually organized festival, films are designed to be screened throughout the day, in two open air cinemas as well as in two regular cinemas accompanied with the program of activities. Except for its films, the festival is also well known for lively nights after the screening. Various events happen within the scope of the festival: workshops, DokuPhoto exhibitions, festival camping, concerts, which together turn the city into a lively and colorful place.[tpl]cite web|url=http://www.dokufest.com/?cid=2,7|title=Dokufest Website|author=dokufest.com[/tpl]
DokuFest, since its establishment has proven that through consistent work and dedication, a volunteer based organization with almost no funding at the beginning, could become one of the leading cultural organizations in Kosovo and the region. 
However, this path has often been associated with major difficulties due to the unique context that organization operated (post war situation, lack of similar referent events, lack of trust from institutions and potential donors etc.) as well as specific obstacles in running the film festival (lack of infrastructure, insufficient technical personnel and lack of local film production, to name a few). Inevitably, the circumstances led us to adopt trial and error methodology in first years prior to embarking on a more structured and consolidated modus of operation. This painful switch was achieved predominantly through motivated and mostly by committed voluntary work of its staff, making possible the growth and popularity that DokuFest enjoys today. This also proved a need to adopt higher professional standards in its structure and phase-out the volunteer based structure.
Initial consolidation of staffing structure started in 2008, through introduction of full-time and part-time contracts that led to the employment of a small number of staff. The need for an organizational structure arose when the organization became involved in implementation of yearly-based projects, in addition to organizing the festival. This led to the establishment of a core team that took over the design, planning and implementation of many initiatives resulting in successful implementation of several projects. 
To date DokuFest has proven not only as a leader when it comes to organization of large-scale cultural events, but also as a successful partner and driving force in the fields of culture, education and activism for sound cultural policies and alternative education system in Kosovo. 
The overall programme involves organization of:
(1)	Annual International Documentary and Short Film Festival that includes screening of films in seven improvised cinema’s in the city of Prizren, photographic exhibition “DokuPhoto”, Workshops, Master Classes and debates, amongst others.
(2)	Film training initiative called “Human Rights’s Film Factory - Stories from Kosovo’s Margins” that includes series of workshops for filmmakers, production of six documentaries on Human Rights coupled with series of human rights debates throughout Kosovo.
(3)	Promotion of Human Rights and Democratic Values through Film that includes usage of human rights documentary films as educational tools and establishment of Kino Clubs in Highs Schools as well as Documentary film school guiding high school students from Kosovo throughout the process of transforming their film ideas into a finished documentary. The films will be screened in a special programme at DokuFest 2013.
(4)	Travelling Cinema “Cinema at Your Door” aiming at documentary film screenings in rural areas of Prizren region coupled with discussions focusing on the difficulties that rural communities experience in their everyday life and the lack of the cultural activities in their surroundings.
(5)	Part of larger NGO network working actively on environmental related issues and promotion of renewables in Kosovo. 
(6)	Active participation and contribution on national and regional networks, aimed at development of sound cultural policies and organization of debates with relevant stakeholders, both in Kosovo and the region.

==Awards==

In 2010 Dokufest was voted as one of the 25 best international documentary festivals.

==References==

==External links==


