[[National Off-Highway Vehicle Conservation Council]]

CATEGORIES: Off-roading

The National Off-Highway Vehicle Conservation Council (NOHVCC) is a publicly supported, education foundation organized for the sole purpose of developing and providing a wide spectrum of programs, materials and information, or “tools”, to individuals, clubs, associations and agencies in order to further a positive future for responsible OHV recreation.

File:Nohvcc2.jpg|Trail riding ATVs is a huge sport in the U.S. Click on this photo for a larger version.
File:Nohvcc3.jpg|Off-Highway motorcycle riding first became popular in the early '70s.
File:Nohvcc4.jpg|Jeep and 4x4 enthusiasts enjoy challenging terrain. 
File:Nohvcc5.jpg|Aimed primarily at young riders, the NOHVCC Adventure Trail program stresses safe and responsible riding practices.

The primary purpose of the National Off-Highway Vehicle Conservation Council is to help off-highway riders (ATVs, dirt bikes and 4x4s) keep their riding areas open, and create new ones, by giving them the tools to organize, gather funds, work with local politicians, land owners, and land managers, and other ways to keep the sport happy and healthy. Rider education (promoting safe and responsible riding practices) is also a very important part of their mission since they believe that responsible riders are the best way to keep riding areas open. The organization also hosts detailed workshops and an annual conference for professional OHV (Off-Highway Vehicle) land managers and agencies.
The reason the NOHVCC was formed in 1991 was to gather the nation’s most influential OHV activists and pick their brains for what works and what doesn’t in their battle to keep riding areas open, as well as starting new ones.
Every year they gather in one place to meet with all the NOHVCC State Partners as well as many other important OHV organizers and land managers to share and record information. This info eventually becomes the basis for the ‘tools’ they utilize in their literature and consulting services. Their intensive organizational and management workshops that are held at various locations throughout the country dispense important information to OHV activists and federal and state land managers.
The NOHVCC is a non-profit organization that doesn’t solicit memberships or money from the grassroots weekend riders.

==NOHVCC Vision, Values, Mission and Objectives==

Vision
OHV recreation is a nationally accepted outdoor activity and quality opportunities are readily available to all who wish to participate responsibly.
Values
We value OHV Recreation as a means to provide:
Quality family and social time;
Healthy, physical outdoor activity for a broad range of ages, physical abilities and interests;
Experiences that promote a responsible life style;
Enjoyment of and appreciation for natural and cultural resources; and
Relief from the pressures of daily life.
Mission
NOHVCC, as a national body of OHV recreation enthusiasts, develops and provides a wide spectrum of programs, materials and information, or “tools”, to individuals, clubs, associations and agencies in order to further a positive future for responsible OHV recreation.
Mission Objectives
Help establish new OHV clubs and state associations where they don’t exist;
Strengthen existing clubs and state associations by providing information, training and services to help them be more effective;
Improve and promote responsible OHV recreation management and resource protection by working in partnership with private and public land managers and recreation planners;
Provide and promote best management practices for OHV recreation planning, development and management to policy makers;
Promote a positive OHV recreation image to all publics;
Build a better understanding of responsible OHV recreation among all publics;
Build recognition and acceptance that OHV recreation is a positive activity and promotes a responsible life style;
Provide broad-based, ongoing educational opportunities for OHV recreationists, recreation planners and decision-makers; 
Provide and promote educational, safety, ethics, environmental and character-building programs for all OHV recreationists including youth; and
Emphasize the benefits of responsible recreation behavior and raise awareness of the impacts from irresponsible recreation activity.

==References==

NOHVCC Website; http://nohvcc.org/
http://www.4x4review.com/feature/nohvcc.asp
http://www.americantrails.org/nttp/NOHVCCnttp.html
http://www.allbusiness.com/sector-44-45-retail-trade/motor-vehicle-parts-dealers/1175045-1.html
http://motorcycling.speedtv.com/article/nohvcc-to-conduct-new-post-route-designation-workshop-series/

==External links==

NOHVCC Website; http://nohvcc.org/

