[[Martin Bayfield]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 births, British and Irish Lions rugby union players from England, British police officers, Metropolitan Police officers, English rugby union players, Living people, Northampton Saints players, Bedford Blues players, People educated at Bedford School, Rugby union locks, People from Bedford, England international rugby union players, National Football League announcers, Rugby union commentators

Martin Christopher Bayfield (born 21 December 1966) is an English former rugby union footballer who played lock forward for Northampton Saints, Bedford Blues and England, gaining 31 England and 3 Lions caps.
Bayfield was born in Bedford and was educated at Bedford School. He served in the Metropolitan Police from 1985 to 1989, when he transferred to Bedfordshire Police. The 208 cm (6 ft 10in) tall Bayfield made his England debut in 1991, and although he was omitted from the 1991 World Cup squad, was a part of the 1992 Five Nations Grand Slam winning side. He went on the 1993 British Lions tour to New Zealand and was part of the 1995 World Cup squad. He would play 18 times partnering Martin Johnson. His final appearance for England came in the 1996 Five Nations match against Wales.
His last game was against Gloucester in February 1998; a neck injury sustained in training a few days later forced him to retire.
Since retirement, Bayfield has worked as a journalist, an after-dinner speaker and has since appeared in the Harry Potter films playing the half-giant Hagrid, normally played by Robbie Coltrane, in longer shots which need to emphasise Hagrid's height. He presents the NFL and World's Strongest Man coverage on UK Channel Five and works as a rugby correspondent on BBC Radio 5 Live. He has also been involved as a presenter in ITV's coverage of the 2007 Rugby World Cup as well as presenting ITV's Guinness Premiership highlights. He is actively involved with charity, and is an Honorary President of Wooden Spoon – the rugby charity that supports disadvantaged children and young people.
He also appeared in Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, as a young Rubeus Hagrid, and has also been a stuntman on all the Harry Potter films. He also played a cyclops in Jonathan Liebesman's Wrath of the Titans,the sequel to 2010 movie Clash of the Titans.
Bayfield also played Rugby Player 2 in an episode of New Tricks on BBC1 (first shown on 1 September 2008). Since March 2012 he now also     
co-presents Crimewatch on BBC 1. In 2013 BT Sport acquired the exclusive rights to the Aviva Premiership. Bayfield, along with his ITV Co presenter Craig Doyle, moved to the new channel and he now works as a presenter, pundit and pitchside reporter.Bt Sport.com
He has three daughters: Roseanna, Polly and Lucy.

==References==

==External links==



