[[Oh, Pretty Woman]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 singles, 1982 singles, Songs written by Roy Orbison, Songs written by Bill Dees, Roy Orbison songs, Andy Kim songs, Connie Francis songs, Van Halen songs, Al Green songs, Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles, Billboard Mainstream Rock number-one singles, UK Singles Chart number-one singles, Number-one singles in Germany, Number-one singles in Norway, Irish Singles Chart number-one singles, Grammy Hall of Fame Award recipients, United States National Recording Registry recordings, Singles certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America, RPM Top Singles number-one singles, Monument Records singles, Song recordings produced by Fred Foster, 1964 songs

"Oh, Pretty Woman" is a song, released in August 1964, which was a worldwide success for Roy Orbison. Recorded on the Monument Records label in Nashville, Tennessee, it was written by Roy Orbison and Bill Dees. The song spent three weeks at number one on the Billboard Hot 100.Bronson, Fred (2003). The Billboard Book of #1 Hits, 5th Edition (Billboard Publications), page 157. "Pretty Woman" was also Orbison's third single to top the UK Singles Chart chart (for a total of three weeks). The previous Orbison singles to reach No.1 in the UK were "Only the Lonely" in 1960 and "It's Over" earlier in 1964. There were three guitar players on the session,  Billy Sanford, Jerry Kennedy and Wayne Moss.  Billy Sanford,  who later played session for everybody from Elvis to Don Williams (and took to the road with Don in the 1990s) did the kick-off.  Williams introduced him as a kid who had just arrived Nashville, with a borrowed guitar, who heard Orbison was minus a guitar player,  who went over and got the gig. Other musicians on the record included Floyd Cramer on piano, Bob Moore on an upright bass, Boots Randolph and Charlie McCoy on guitar, and Buddy Harman and Paul Garrison on drums. Orbison also played a 12 string epiphone.
The record sold seven million copies and marked the high point in Orbison's career.Lehman, Peter. Roy Orbison: Invention of an Alternative Rock Masculinity. Philadelphia: Temple UP, 2003, p. 2, 13 Five years after its release, in 1969, the single was awarded gold record by RIAA.[tpl]cite certification|region=United States|title=Pretty Woman|artist=Roy Orbison[/tpl] Orbison posthumously won the 1991 Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance for his live recording of the song on his HBO television special Roy Orbison and Friends, A Black and White Night. In 1999, the song was honored with a Grammy Hall of Fame Award and was named one of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame's 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll. In 2004, Rolling Stone magazine ranked it #222 on their list of the "500 Greatest Songs of All Time."

==Content==

The lyrics tell the story of a man who sees a pretty woman walking by. He yearns for her and wonders if, as beautiful as she is, she might be lonely like he is. At the last minute, she turns back and joins him.
The title was inspired by Orbison's wife Claudette interrupting a conversation to announce she was going out; when Orbison asked if she was okay for cash, his co-writer Bill Dees interjected "A pretty woman never needs any money."Amburn, Ellis. Dark Star: The Roy Orbison Story. New York: Carol Publishing, 1990, p. 127 

==Lawsuit against 2 Live Crew==

In 1989, the controversial rap group 2 Live Crew recorded a parody of the Orbison song, using the alternate title "Pretty Woman" for their album Clean As They Wanna Be. The 2 Live Crew sampled the distinctive bassline from the Orbison song, but the romantic lyrics were replaced by talk about a hairy woman and her bald-headed friend and their appeal to the singer, as well as denunciation of a "two-timing woman."
Orbison's publisher, Acuff-Rose Music sued 2 Live Crew on the basis that the fair use doctrine did not permit reuse of their copyrighted material for profit. The case, Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc. went all the way to the United States Supreme Court. The Supreme Court decided in 2 Live Crew's favor, greatly expanding the doctrine of fair use and extending its protections to parodies created for profit. It is considered a germinal fair use decision.Jackson, Matt.  (1995).  Commerce versus art: The transformation of fair use. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 39, 190-199.

==Cover versions and parodies==

The song has been covered by a number of artists:

==In other media==

==References==

==External links==


