[[Donald L. Hallstrom]]

CATEGORIES: 1949 births, 20th-century Mormon missionaries, American general authorities of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, American Mormon missionaries in the United Kingdom, Area seventies of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Bishops of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Brigham Young University alumni, Counselors in the General Presidency of the Young Men (organization), Living people, Members of the First Quorum of the Seventy of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Mormon missionaries in England, Presidents of the seventy of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Regional representatives of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Stake presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Donald Larry Hallstrom (born July 27, 1949) has been a general authority of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) since 2000 and a member of the Presidency of the Seventy since 2009.

==Biography==

Hallstrom grew up in Hawaii. As a young man he enjoyed several sports, including basketball and surfing. He served as a missionary of the LDS Church in the England Central Mission from 1969 to 1971.  After his mission, he received a bachelor's degree in economics from Brigham Young University. Hallstrom owned and operated a real estate economics company.  
In 1972, Hallstrom married Diane Clifton, a native of Taber, Alberta, Canada and they are the parents of four children.
Hallstrom served on various boards, including the executive board of the Aloha Council of the Boy Scouts of America, the National Advisory Council of the Boy Scouts of America, and the President's Roundtable of Brigham Young University–Hawaii. He was also vice chairman of Hawaii Reserves, Inc., which manages the LDS Church's non-ecclesiastical real estate in Hawaii. 
In the LDS Church, Hallstrom served as bishop of the Makiki Ward in Honolulu from 1980 to 1985 and as president of the Honolulu Hawaii Stake from 1985 to 1990. He then served as a regional representative from 1990 to 1995 and as an area seventy from 1995 to 2000. 
Hallstrom was called as a general authority and member of the First Quorum of the Seventy in 2000.  Among other assignments, he has served in several area presidencies, including as a counselor in the church's North America Central Area, then as both a counselor and as president of the Asia Area.  He became a member of the Presidency of the Seventy in 2009, filling a vacancy created by the call of Neil L. Andersen to the Quourm of the Twelve Apostles and has responsibility for the work of the church in the North America Northeast Area.

==References==

==External links==


