[[Plato's number]]

CATEGORIES: Integers, Plato, Greek mathematics

Plato’s number is a number enigmatically referred to by Plato in his dialogue the Republic (8.546b). The text is notoriously difficult to understand and its corresponding translations do not allow an unambiguous interpretation. There is no real agreement either about the meaning or the value of the number. It also has been called the "geometrical number" or the "nuptial number" (the "number of the bride"). The passage in which Plato introduced the number has been discussed ever since it was written, with no consensus in the debate. As for the number's actual value, 216 is the most frequently proposed value for it, but 3,600 or 12,960,000 are also commonly considered.  
An incomplete list for more names and references see Dupuis J., Le Nombre Geometrique de Platon, Paris: Hachette, 1885 of authors who mention or discourse about includes the names of Aristotle, Proclus for antiquity; Ficino and Cardano during the Renaissance; Zeller, Friedrich Schleiermacher, Paul Tannery and Friedrich Hultsch in the 19th century and further new names are currently added.McNamee K., and Jacovides M.,  Annotations to the Speech of the Muses (Plato "Republic" 546B-C), Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik, Bd. 144, (2003), pp. 31-50
Further in the Republic (9.587b) another number is mentioned, known as the "Number of the Tyrant".

==Plato's text==

Great lexical and syntactical differences are easily noted between the many translations of the Republic. Below is a typical text from a relatively recent translation of Republic 546b–c:
 
 "Now for divine begettings there is a period comprehended by a perfect number, and for mortal by the first in which augmentations dominating and dominated when they have attained to three distances and four limits of the assimilating and the dissimilating, the waxing and the waning, render all things conversable and commensurable 546c with one another, whereof a basal four-thirds wedded to the pempad yields two harmonies at the third augmentation, the one the product of equal factors taken one hundred times, the other of equal length one way but oblong,-one dimension of a hundred numbers determined by the 
rational diameters of the pempad lacking one in each case, or of the irrational lacking two; the other dimension of a hundred cubes of the triad. And this entire geometrical number is determinative of this thing, of better and inferior births."Translation by Paul Shorey, Plato: The Collected Dialogues, Eds. Edith Hamilton & Huntington Cairns, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N. J., 1961, (p.775)

The 'entire geometrical number', mentioned shortly before the end of this text, is understood to be Plato's number. The introductory words mention (a period comprehended by) 'a perfect number' which is taken to be a reference to Plato's perfect year mentioned in his Timaeus (39d). The words are presented as uttered by the muses, so the whole passage is sometimes called the 'speech of the muses' or something similar.Erhardt E., The word of the muses, Classical Quarterly (New Series) (1986), 36: 407-420 Indeed Philip Melanchthon compared it to the proverbial obscurity of the Sibyls.Selectae declamationes. Declamatio de periodis imperiorum, v.3, p. 722, Strasbourg, 1559 Cicero famously described it as 'obscure'  but others have seen some playfulness in its tone.

==Interpretations==

Shortly after Plato's time his meaning apparently did not cause puzzlement as Aristotle's casual remark attests.Aristotle, Politics, Book V, 12, 8: "He only says that nothing is abiding, but that all things change in a certain cycle: and that the origin of the change is a base of numbers which are in the ratio of 4:3 and this when combined with a figure of five gives two harmonies: he means when the number of this figure becomes solid." Half a millennium later however it was an enigma for the Neoplatonists, who had a somewhat mystic penchant and wrote frequently about it, proposing geometrical and numerical interpretations. Next, for nearly a thousand  years Plato's texts disappeared an it is only in the Renaissance that the enigma briefly resurfaced. During the 19th century, when classical scholars restored original texts, the problem reappeared. Schleiermacher interrupted for a decade his edition of Plato while attempting to make sense of the paragraph. Victor Cousin inserted a note that it has to be skipped in his French translation of Plato's works. In the early 20th century scholarly findings suggested a Babylonian origin for the topic.Barton G., On the Babylonian Origin of Plato's Nuptial Number, Journal of the American Oriental Society, v.29, (1908), p.210-9
Most interpretators argue that the value of Plato's number is 216 
Other values that have been proposed include:

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==


