[[The Georgetown Voice]]

CATEGORIES: Georgetown University student organizations, Student newspapers published in Washington, D.C.

The Georgetown Voice is the student-run weekly campus newsmagazine at Georgetown University. It has a circulation of approximately 4,000 and prints an edition every Thursday. 
The Voice was founded in March 1969 in the context of the Vietnam War, when a group of senior editors at The Hoya, Georgetown University's main campus news source, left in order to comment on topics off as well as on campus. The debut editorial, published March 4, 1969, explained the organization’s goals and purposes:
 “Our editorial policy will view and analyze issues in a liberal light. We shall not limit our editorial content to campus topics. We promise to present and analyze national and local issues of concern to the student, whose concern should spread beyond the campus … We shall attempt with all our energy to inform the community, to make the community conscious of controversial subjects by an open presentation and discussion of relevant issues, to communicate a culture, and to entertain our readers.”Vox Populi: About 
The Voice consists of Editorial, News, Sports, Feature, Leisure (arts & entertainment), Page 13 (the content of which is largely left to its editor's discretion), and Voices (non-fiction submitted by the campus community). While The Voice is explicitly liberal in its editorial content, its news reporting is objective. It is primarily known for its in-depth pieces featured on the cover, as well as its Leisure section that focuses on less well-known film, art, theatre, music and food in the District of Columbia. In 2006, The Voice also founded a blog, Vox Populi, the popularity of which soared in recent years.
On April 11, 2007, The Voice was quoted on the Senate Floor as Democratic Senator Robert Menendez from New Jersey got into a lengthy argument with President Bush’s Special Envoy to Sudan Andrew Natsios over whether the classification of genocide still holds in Darfur.Sudane Tribune. Transcript: US Natsios, Senator Menendez clash over Darfur. April 16, 2007
Although Georgetown does not have a Journalism Major, alumni from The Voice have worked in the field with CNN, CBS, Agence France-Presse, The Los Angeles Times, The Wall Street Journal, The New Republic, The Atlantic, the Washington City Paper, PopMatters, Entertainment Weekly, the Poynter Center, The Nation, Slate, The New Yorker, and The Washington Post.

==References==

==External links==


