[[Friedensreich Hundertwasser]]

CATEGORIES: 20th-century Austrian painters, Austrian sculptors, Austrian architects, Austrian performance artists, Expressionist architects, Organic architecture, Green thinkers, Stamp designers, Flag designers, Austrian expatriates in New Zealand, Austrian people of Silesian German descent, Austrian Roman Catholics, Austrian Jews, Artists from Vienna, People who died at sea, 1928 births, 2000 deaths, Academy of Fine Arts Vienna alumni, People from Kawakawa, New Zealand, Recipients of the Grand Decoration for Services to the Republic of Austria, Recipients of the Grand Austrian State Prize

Friedensreich Regentag Dunkelbunt Hundertwasser (December 15, 1928 – February 19, 2000) was an Austrian artist (who later took on New Zealand citizenship). Born Friedrich Stowasser in Vienna, he became one of the best-known contemporary Austrian artists by the end of the 20th century.

==Life==

The Second World War was a difficult time for Hundertwasser and his mother Elsa, who was Jewish. They avoided persecution by posing as Christians, a credible ruse as Hundertwasser's father had been a Catholic. Hundertwasser was baptized as a Catholic in 1935. To remain inconspicuous Hundertwasser also joined the Hitler Youth.Pawley, Martin. Friedensreich Hundertwasser - Maverick architect building against the grain (obituary), The Guardian, 14 April 2000. Retrieved 1 June 2009.
Hundertwasser developed artistic skills early on. After the war, he spent three months at the Academy of Fine Arts in Vienna. At this time he began to sign his art as Hundertwasser instead of Stowasser. He left to travel using a small set of paints he carried at all times to sketch anything that caught his eye. In Florence he met the young French painter René Brô for the first time and they became lifelong friends. Hundertwasser's first commercial painting success was in 1952−53 with an exhibition in Vienna.
His adopted surname is based on the translation of "sto" (the Slavic word for "(one) hundred") into German. The name Friedensreich has a double meaning as "Peace-realm" or "Peace-rich" (in the sense of "peaceful"). Therefore his name Friedensreich Hundertwasser translates directly into English as "Peace-Realm Hundred-Water". The other names he chose for himself, Regentag and Dunkelbunt, translate to "Rainy day" and "Darkly multi-coloured".
Beginning in the early 1950s, he entered the field of architecture. Hundertwasser also worked in the field of applied art, creating flags, stamps, coins, and posters. His most famous flag is the Koru Flag, as well as several postage stamps for the Austrian Post Office. He also designed stamps for Cape Verde and for the United Nations postal administration in Geneva on the occasion of the 35th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
In 1957 Hundertwasser acquired a farm on the edge of Normandy.Erika Schmied, W. Schmied: Hundertwassers Paradiese. Das verborgene Leben des Friedrich Stowasser. Knesebeck, München 2003, ISBN 978-3-89660-179-7. Hundertwasser married Herta Leitner in 1958 but they divorced two years later. He married again in 1962 to the Japanese artist Yuko Ikewada but she divorced him in 1966. He had gained a popular reputation by this time for his art.
In 1964 Hundertwasser bought "Hahnsäge", a former saw mill, in the sparsely populated Lower Austria's Waldviertel. There, far from the hustle and bustle and surrounded by nature, he set up a new home.
In 1972 Hundertwasser incorporated in Switzerland, the "Grüner Janura AG", which was renamed in "Namida AG" 2008. Via this stock company Hundertwasser managed his intellectual property rights.Company register of Kanton Glarus Andreas Wetz: Hundertwassers verschollenes Millionenerbe In: Die Presse.com., 9. Februar 2013.
In the 1970s, Hundertwasser acquired several properties in the Bay of Islands in New Zealand, which include a total area of approximately 372 ha of the entire "Kaurinui" valley. There he realized his dream of living and working closely connected to nature. Beside other projects he designed the "Bottle House" there. He could live largely self-sufficient using solar panels, a water wheel and a biological water purification plant. Also his first grass roofs experiment took place here. thumb|bottle house, Kaurinui, New Zealand
In 1979 Hundertwasser bought the vast historical garden Giardino Eden including the Palazzo Villa delle Rose, from Alexandra of Yugoslavia via his Swiss company.Francesco Basaldella: Giudecca - Fatti di Cronaca, Filippi Editore - Venezia, 2011, Quaderno di Cultura Giudecchina n.21(24), S. 252, 258–259land title register Venice
In 1982 Hundertwasser's only child, his daughter Heidi Trimmel, was born.Markus R. Leeb: 150 Millionen weg! Hundertwassers Tochter: "Ich wurde um mein Erbe betrogen (150 million away! Hundertwasser's daughter: "I was cheated out of my inheritance")". In: News, 1 August 2013. p. 16ff.
Hundertwasser was buried in New Zealand after his death at sea on the RMS Queen Elizabeth 2 in 2000 at the age of 71.
His friends reported that Hundertwasser lived extremely modestly and had not even spent money on a haircut.„Das darf ich nicht, Joram hat mir das doch verboten“. In: Die Presse, 5. April 2013.

==Political views==

As a result of his experiences persecuted by the Nazi regime Hundertwasser developed an anti-totalitarian position early on. He was likely raised by his mother in the popular sense of imperial nostalgia, which was popular in the interwar period. His early fears of the square marching battalions associated with dictatorships may have led him to oppose any "geometrization" of people and their architecture. In a letter from 1954 Hundertwasser described the square as "geometric rectangles compressed columns on the march".see Robert Schediwy - Hundertwassers Häuser, Vienna 1999, p.12 In 1959 Hundertwasser got involved with helping the Dalai Lama escape from Tibet by campaigning for the Tibetan religious leader in Carl Laszlo's magazine Panderma. In later years, when he was already a known artist, Friedensreich Hundertwasser became an environmental activist and most recently operated as a more prominent opponent of the European Union, advocating the preservation of regional peculiarities. Among the lesser known facets of Hundertwasser's personality is his commitment to constitutional monarchy:  Austria needs a parent center, consisting of perennial higher values - the one no longer dares to speak - like beauty, culture, internal and external peace, faith, abundance of the heart ... Austria needs an emperor, who is subservient to the people. A parent and radiant size to which all have confidence, because this size is in possession of all. While the rationalist way of thinking has given us in this century, an ephemeral (short-lived Ed.) higher American standard of living at the expense of nature and creation, which has now come to an end, but our heart, our quality of life destroyed, our desires, without which an Austrian does not want to live. It is outrageous that Austria has an emperor who did no evil to anyone, but is still treated like a leper. Austria needs a crown! Long live Austria! Long live the constitutional monarchy! Long live Otto von Habsburg ! - Friedensreich Hundertwasser: In support of the return of constitutional monarchy. Kaurinui, New Zealand , 28 March 1983. On 14 May 1987, Otto von Habsburg on his 75th day. 

==Artistic style and themes==

Hundertwasser's original and unruly artistic vision expressed itself in pictorial art, environmentalism, philosophy, and design of facades, postage stamps, flags, and clothing (among other areas). The common themes in his work utilised bright colours, organic forms, a reconciliation of humans with nature, and a strong individualism, rejecting straight lines.
He remains sui generis, although his architectural work is comparable to Antoni Gaudí (1852–1926) in its use of biomorphic forms and the use of tile. He was also inspired by the art of the Vienna Secession, and by the Austrian painters Egon Schiele (1890–1918) and Gustav Klimt (1862–1918).
He was fascinated by spirals, and called straight lines "the devil's tools". He called his theory of art "transautomatism", based on Surrealist automatism, but focusing on the experience of the viewer, rather than the artist.  This was encapsulated by his design of a new flag for New Zealand, which incorporated the image of the Koru a spiral shape based on the image of a new unfurling silver fern frond and symbolizing new life, growth, strength and peace according to the Māori people.

===Architecture===

Although Hundertwasser first achieved notoriety for his boldly-coloured paintings, he is more widely known for his individual architectural designs.  These designs use irregular forms, and incorporate natural features of the landscape. The Hundertwasserhaus apartment block in Vienna has undulating floors ("an uneven floor is a melody to the feet"), a roof covered with earth and grass, and large trees growing from inside the rooms, with limbs extending from windows. He took no payment for the design of Hundertwasserhaus, declaring that it was worth the investment to "prevent something ugly from going up in its place".
From the early 1950s he increasingly focused on architecture, advocating more just human and environmental friendly buildings. This began with manifestos, essays and demonstrations. For example, he read out his "Mouldiness Manifesto against Rationalism in Architecture" in 1958 on the occasion of an art and architectural event held at the Seckau Monastery. He rejected the straight line and the functional architecture.see Wieland Schmied, Hundertwasser 1928-2000, Catalogue Raisonné, Köln: Taschen 2001/2002, Band 2, S. 1167 In Munich in 1967 he gave a lecture called "Speech in Nude for the Right to a Third Skin". His lecture "Loose from Loos, A Law Permitting Individual Buildings Alterations or Architecture-Boycott Manifesto", was given at the Concordia Press Club in Vienna in 1968.
In the Mouldiness Manifesto he first claimed the "Window Right": "A person in a rented apartment must be able to lean out of his window and scrape off the masonry within arm's reach. And he must be allowed to take a long brush and paint everything outside within arm's reach. So that it will be visible from afar to everyone in the street that someone lives there who is different from the imprisoned, enslaved, standardised man who lives next door." In his nude speeches of 1967 and 1968 Hundertwasser condemned the enslavement of humans by the sterile grid system of conventional architecture and by the output of mechanised industrial production.Catalogue Raisonné, p. 1177 He rejected rationalism, the straight line and functional architecture.Wieland Schmied (ed.), Hundertwasser 1928-2000, Catalogue Raisonné, Cologne: Taschen, 2000/2002, Vol. II, pp. 1167-1172.
For Hundertwasser, human misery was a result of the rational, sterile, monotonous architecture, built following the tradition of the Austrian architect Adolf Loos, author of the modernist manifesto Ornament and crime (1908). He called for a boycott of this type of architecture, and demanded instead creative freedom of building, and the right to create individual structures.Cat. Rais. p. 1178  In 1972 he published the manifesto Your window right — your tree duty. Planting trees in an urban environment was to become obligatory: "If man walks in nature's midst, then he is nature's guest and must learn to behave as a well-brought-up guest." Hundertwasser propagated a type of architecture in harmony with nature is his ecological commitment. He campaigned for the preservation of the natural habitat and demanded a life in accordance with the laws of nature. He wrote numerous manifestos, lectured and designed posters in favor of nature protection, including against nuclear power, to save the oceans and the whales and to protect the rain forest. He was also an advocate of composting toilets and the principle of constructed wetland. He perceived feces not as nauseous but as part of the cycle of nature. His beliefs are testified by his manifesto The Holy Shit and his DIY guide for building a composting toilet.Manifest Die heilige Scheiße
In the 1970s, Hundertwasser had his first architectural models built.  The models for the Eurovision TV-show "Wünsch Dir was" (Make a Wish) in 1972 exemplified his ideas on forested roofs, tree tenants and the window right. In these and similar models he developed new architectural shapes, such as the spiral house, the eye-slit house, the terrace house and the high-rise meadow house. In 1974, Peter Manhardt made models for him of the pit house, the grass roof house and the green service station – along with his idea of the invisible, inaudible Green Motorway.
In the early 1980s Hundertwasser remodelled the Rosenthal Factory in Selb, and the Mierka Grain Silo in Krems. These projects gave him the opportunity to act as what he called an "architecture doctor".
In architectural projects that followed he implemented window right and tree tenants, uneven floors, woods on the roof, and spontaneous vegetation. Works of this period include: housing complexes in Germany; a church in Bärnbach, Austria; a district heating plant in Vienna; an incineration plant and sludge centre in Osaka, Japan; a railway station in Uelzen; a winery in Napa Valley; and the Hundertwasser toilet in Kawakawa.
In 1999 Hundertwasser started his last project named Die Grüne Zitadelle von Magdeburg. Although he never finished this work completely, the building was built a few years later in Magdeburg, a town in eastern Germany, and opened on October 3, 2005.
An art gallery featuring Hundertwasser's work will be established in a council building in Whangarei, New Zealand, and will bring to fruition his 1993 plans for improving the building.[tpl]cite web |url=http://www.nzherald.co.nz/topic/story.cfm?c_id=250&objectid=10494276&pnum=0 |title=New gallery to show artist's work |author=Gee, Tony |date=25 February 2008 |work=The New Zealand Herald |accessdate=30 September 2011[/tpl]

File:Magdeburg_Hundertwasserhaus.jpg|Grüne Zitadelle in Magdeburg, Germany
File:Quixote winery.jpg|Quixote Winery in Napa Valley
File:SP4671_Hundertwasserhaus_Plochingen_RGB.jpg|Hundertwasser façade in Plochingen, Germany
File:Darmstadt-Waldspirale-Hundertwasser2.jpg|House Waldspirale in Darmstadt
File:Hunderwasser Fernheizwerk.JPG|Thermal power plant in Vienna
File:Hundertwasserhaus Bad Soden Autumn.jpg|Residential building at Bad Soden am Taunus (suburban Frankfurt, Germany)
File:Bad Fischau Raststaette.JPG|Raststätte Bad Fischau at A2 (Southern Motorway), Austria
File:Hundertwasser-Kindergarten (8).jpg|Roof garden of a Kindergarten in Frankfurt-Heddernheim
File:Hundertwasser_Quixote_Entrance.jpg|Quixote Winery entrance in Napa Valley
File:Hundertwasser toilet interior (ladies).jpg|Hundertwasser Toilets of Kawakawa, New Zealand

===Paintings===

===Stamps===

The extensive work of Hundertwasser includes 26 stamps with for various postal administrations. Seventeen of these designs were - in part after his death - implemented as a postage stamp.
Two of the unrealized designs are alternative designs for a stamp issue (United Nations, Senegal) and were therefore not performed. Seven other designs created for the postal administrations of Morocco and French Polynesia, were not realized as a postage stamp.
In addition, Friedensreich Hundertwasser, has adapted some of his works for stamp issues. On the basis of these adaptations have been stamps issued by:
The Austrian post office used more Hundertwasser motives for the European edition 1987 (Modern architecture, Hundertwasser House), on the occasion of his death in 2000 (painting Blue Blues, under the WIPA 2000) and 2004 National Donauauen (poster: The outdoors is our freedom at civil protests in Hainburg).
For the first time a Hundertwasser motive was also used on a Cuban stamp, as part of the art exhibition Salon de Mayo (Havana, 1967).
With the exception of service marks for the Council of Europe and the Cuban stamp, all stamps were engraved by Wolfgang Seidel and by the Austrian State Printing Office in a complex combination printing process produces (intaglio printing, rotogravure printing, as well as metal stamping).

===Books===

==Influence==

• In New Zealand his design beliefs have been adopted by a New Zealand terracotta tile manufacturer, who promotes his style as "Organic Tiling".Middle Earth Tiles, Organic Tiling The tiling is designed by Chris Southern, who worked with Hundertwasser on the Kawakawa toilets.
• In 1987, at the request of John Lydon, British designer and illustrator Richard Evans produced a homage to Hundertwasser for the cover of Public Image Limited's album Happy?.

==Awards==

==Documentary films==

==See also==

==References and sources==

==External links==


