[[Gursikh]]

CATEGORIES: Sikh terms

A Gursikh is a Sikh fully devoted to the true Guru.
Guru comes from gu meaning darkness and ru meaning light
"dispels the darkness of ignorance ('gu'), and proclaims enlightenment ('ru'). It is the application of the formula to make our life excellently balanced and successful."
 Excerpt from the book "LIVING REALITY - Questions and Answers about life, under the guidance of The Siri Guru Granth Sahib" by Bibiji Inderjit Kaur Khalsa, Ph.D  
Sikh
Literally "learner"
The follower of true Guru who lives his life according to his teachingss.
"One who calls himself a Gursikh of the True Guru, shall rise in the early morning hours and meditate on the Lord's Name."
 Guru Raam Daas Ji in Raag Gauree on page 305 of Guru Granth Sahib.
A Gursikh does not cut hair or trim beard. He does not take alcohol. He never bows before anyone other than Guru Granth Sahib. A Gursikh man can be identified as a person with unshorn hair, flowing beard and turban. A Gursikh may be Amritdhari or non Amritdhari, but must keep unshorn hair. He often visits Gurdwara Sahib. He is fond of doing sewa & simran.
Gursikhs are required to walk on the Guru's Path, as described by fourth master, Guru Ram Das:
gurasikh meeth chalahu gur chaalee
O Sikhs of the Guru, O friends, walk on the Guru's Path.
Guru's path means the three concepts of Sikhism: 
1) Naam Japna - Meditation on the Divine Name

2) Kirat Karna - Earning an honest living

3) Vand chhakna - Sharing your earnings with the needy

==Life of a Gursikh==

One who calls himself a Sikh of the Guru, the True Guru, shall rise in the early morning hours and meditate on the Lord's Name. Upon arising early in the morning, he is to bathe, and cleanse himself in the pool of nectar. Following the Instructions of the Guru, he is to chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. All sins, misdeeds and negativity shall be erased. Then, at the rising of the sun, he is to sing Gurbani; whether sitting down or standing up, he is to meditate on the Lord's Name. One who meditates on my Lord, Har, Har, with every breath and every morsel of food - that GurSikh becomes pleasing to the Guru's Mind. That person, unto whom my Lord and Master is kind and compassionate - upon that GurSikh, the Guru's Teachings are bestowed. Servant Nanak begs for the dust of the feet of that GurSikh, who himself chants the Naam, and inspires others to chant it.
A Gursikh usually avoids adding a caste as suffix to his name. Gursikh is a person who lives his life according to the tenets of Sikhism. A Gursikh works for the welfare of whole humanity. A true Gursikh never hurts the feelings of anyone.
The first Gursikh was Bebe Nanaki, the sister of Guru Nanak Dev Ji.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


