[[Peter Naur]]

CATEGORIES: 1928 births, Living people, People from Frederiksberg, Programming language designers, Danish computer scientists, Technical University of Denmark faculty, University of Copenhagen faculty, Danish astronomers, Turing Award laureates

Peter Naur (born 25 October 1928) is a Danish pioneer in computer science and Turing award winner.  His last name is the N in the BNF notation (Backus-Naur form), used in the description of the syntax for most programming languages.  He contributed to the creation of the ALGOL 60 programming language.
He began his career as an astronomer for which he received his PhD degree in 1957, but his encounter with computers led to a change of profession.  From 1959 to 1969, he was employed at Regnecentralen, the Danish computing institute, while at the same time giving lectures at the Niels Bohr Institute and the Technical University of Denmark.  From 1969 to 1998 Naur was a professor of computer science at University of Copenhagen.
His main areas of inquiry are design, structure and performance of computer programs and algorithms.  Areas such as software engineering and software architecture have also been pioneered by Naur.  In his book Computing: A Human Activity (1992), which is a collection of his contributions to computer science, he rejects the formalist school of programming that view programming as a branch of mathematics.  He does not like being associated with the Backus-Naur form (attributed to him by Donald Knuth) and says that he would prefer it to be called the Backus Normal Form.
Naur was married to computer scientist Christiane Floyd.
Naur dislikes the very term computer science and suggests it be called datalogy.  This term has also been adopted in Denmark and in Sweden as datalogi.
In later years he has also been quite outspoken of the pursuit of science as a whole: Naur can possibly be identified with the empiricist school, that tells that one shall not seek deeper connections between things that manifest themselves in the world, but keep to the observable facts.  He has attacked both certain strands of philosophy and psychology from this viewpoint.  He is also currently developing a theory of human thinking which he calls Synapse-State Theory of Mental Life.Naur, Synapse-State Theory of Mental Life, 2004.
Naur won the 2005 ACM A.M. Turing Award for his work on defining the ALGOL 60 programming language.Software Pioneer Peter Naur Wins ACM's Turing Award - February 2006. In particular, his role as editor of the influential "Report on the Algorithmic Language ALGOL 60" with its pioneering use of BNF was recognized. Naur is the only Dane to have won the Turing Award.

==Bibliography==

Numbers refer to the published bibliography. Naur has published a large number of articles and chapters on astronomy, computer science, issues in society, classical music, psychology, and education.

==References==

==External links==


