[[Sayyid Sahib Husayni]]

CATEGORIES: Sufi saints, Sufi religious leaders, Indian Sufis, Indian people of Arab descent, Urdu writers from India, Qadiri order, 1805 births, 1880 deaths

Hazrat Sayyid Sāhib Ḥusayni ([tpl]lang-ur|ﺳﻴﺪ ﺻﺎﺣﺐ ﺣﺳﻴﻨﻰ[/tpl]) (born 1805 - died January 9, 1880), was a famous Sufi saint from Hyderabad State, India and had a great influence over spiritual developments in the Deccan area. He belonged to Qadiri Order, and was a great proponent of the concept of Wahdat al-Shuhood.
Sahib Ḥusayni was a murid (disciple) of the noted Sufi saint of Hyderabad, Hazrat Shah Muhammad Maroof Shahidullah Farooqui Chisti Qadiri, who also belonged to the Qadiri Order.

==Biography==

As per the family tree preserved in the family records, Sayyid Sahib Ḥusayni was a direct descendent of Prophet Muhammad through his daughter Fatimah and Ali ibn Abi Talib. The thirteenth in line from their descent was the famous sufi Shaikh Abdul Qadir Gilani, who founded the Qadiri Order and Sayyid Sahib Ḥusayni is his direct descendent.  Sayyid Sahib Ḥusayni belongs to the forty-first generation after Fatimah.See History of Takemal Dargah by Syed Ahmed Quadri, Hyderabad, 1978, pp 4-5 for the complete list of ancestors of Sayyid Sahib Ḥusayni .
He was born Sayyid Sahib Ḥusayni in Tekmal in 1805. His father was Sayyid Abdur Razzaq	 who was also initiated into the Qadiri Order. This was during the period of the Nizam Mir Akbar Ali Khan Sikander Jah, Asaf Jah III of Hyderabad State.
Sahib Ḥusayni moved to Hyderabad city at the age of 14 to pursue his higher education and remained there for five years despite financial pressures.  He was determined to acquire the knowledge of religious and worldly sciences. In 1824, he was forced to return to Tekmal due to illness and death of his father. That is when he realized that he had not been able to acquire the knowledge of spiritual awareness from his father who was very advanced in these matters.
Sayyid Sahib Ḥusayni lamented this for a long time. Eventually he claims to have had dreams in 1825 which his father appeared and advised him to become the disciple of Hazrat Shah Muhammad Maroof Shahidullah Farooqui Chisti Qadiri, who was a famous Sufi of his times in Hyderabad. Therefore, he sought out this great sufi, and became his disciple the following year in 1826. The same year, Hazrat Shah Muhammad Maroof Shahidullah Farooqui Chisti Qadiri appointed Sayyid Sahib Ḥusayni as his "khalifa" (successor). Having acquired this status, Sahib Husayni returned home to Tekmal.
During the upcoming years, Shah Muhammad Maroof Shahidullah Farooqui Chisti Qadiri visited his khalifah Sayyid Sahib Ḥusayni a number of times in Tekmal. During one such visit in 1831, he also granted the title of "sajjadah" to Sayyid Sahib Ḥusayni
In 1833, Shah Muhammad Maroof Shahidullah Farooqui Chisti Qadiri visited Tekmal again, and proclaimed that he would die in that town, and be buried there.  A place for his grave was determined.  He came again the following year in 1834 and expired and is buried in Tekmal according to his will. His death occurred on 2 Sha'aban 1249 Hijri.Shajar Ghawsiya tekmal mein, by Syed Ahmed Quadri, Hyderabad, 1977, page 59. Twenty one years later in 1854, Sayyid Sahib Ḥusayni had a mausoleum constructed over the tomb of his master.
Sayyid Sahib Ḥusayni died in Tekmal in the year 1880 and his buried there. He left behind 5 sons and one daughter as follows:

==Development activities==

Sayyid Sahib Husayni is remembered for the number of development works he initiated in and around Tekmal. Among the projects he undertook, the following ones are of key importance:

==His works==

Sayyid Sahib Ḥusayni wrote a number of books on aspects of Sufism.
His other famous works are the following books in Persian and Urdu languages:

==Ancestry==

Sayyid Sahib Ḥusayni is a direct descendent of the Prophet Muhammad. His family lineage is as follows, which also indicates how his ancestors moved to India and eventually to Tekmal:

==References==

==Bibliography==

==See also==


