[[Hybrid (DC Comics)]]

CATEGORIES: Comics characters introduced in 1986, DC Comics supervillains, Characters created by Marv Wolfman

The Hybrid are a fictional group of supervillains appearing in DC Comics. Their first appearance as a group was in New Teen Titans vol. 2, #24, which was marketed in October 1986. The issue was written by Marv Wolfman and illustrated by Eduardo Barreto, with inks by Romeo Tanghal.

==Fictional group history==

Left insane by the events of the Crisis on Infinite Earths, Mento believed it was his destiny to recreate his old team, the Doom Patrol.  Gathering people who'd suffered bizarre accidents—some possibly caused by him—Mento experimented on them with the artificial compound Promethium, turning many of them into superhuman freaks.  Under Mento's influence, the Hybrid were set to fight the New Teen Titans, in order to kill Mento's adopted son Changeling, a fellow surviving Patroller whom Mento blamed for the death of the original team.  Eventually dissuaded after several conflicts, they left Mento to fight alone. After his defeat at the hands of the Titan Raven, Hybrid took him with them as they harbored at his estate.
The Hybrid were briefly seen much later in issue 87 of the New Teen Titans, shown still living on the Dayton estate, Harpi moping about having to isolate themselves from normal society.  This was supposed to be the beginning of a storyline that would have led to the Hybrid having a spin-off series in 1993; however, matters such as questions on royalties appeared before too much was planned, and the proposed series was shelved.
Later, members of the group joined battles at "The House", a fight club organized by Roulette where all but Pteradon seem to have died as only he is not displayed on the wall commemorating "Fallen Players of the House." One month after this issue was released however Touch-n-Go and Scirocco showed up in Wonder Woman Vol. 2, issue 175 as two of many female villains causing mayhem in New York City. The chronological reading order of these two issues is not certain.
Since this last appearance, the history of the Doom Patrol was retconned by the events of The Infinite Crisis, resurrecting the original Doom Patrol and largely restoring them to their original forms and mentalities, including Mento. How or if this affects the Hybrid has not yet been shown.

==Membership==

==External links==


