[[Institute of Leather Engineering and Technology, University of Dhaka]]

CATEGORIES: Colleges in Bangladesh, University of Dhaka, 1949 establishments in Pakistan

The Institute of Leather Engineering & Technology is an educational institution in Hazaribagh, Dhaka, Bangladesh that provides education related to the art and technology of making leather, leather products and footwear. The institute offers graduate courses through the University of Dhaka certificate courses and short-term courses.
Institute of Leather Engineering & Technology (ILET),was the only educational institution of its kind in the country before  Khulna University of Engineering & Technology (KUET) introduced Leather Engineering Department for honors.

==Administration==

==History==

Just after the division of the Indian subcontinent the Ministry of Industry approved on 15 August 1947 the setting up of the East Bengal training institute for the development of the leather and leather products sector. Officially, the institute was founded on 10 June 1949 and the academic activities of this institute started from the year 1952 after necessary infrastructure development. Later, the institute remained as the East Pakistan leather technology.
During the Pakistan period the institute failed to provide necessary services to the industry due to socio-political reasons. To provide better academic and educational facilities, the institute was transferred to the Ministry of Education and placed under the administrative control of the technical education in 1967.
After liberation, the institute was recognized as the Bangladesh Institute of Leather Technology and was involved with diploma, certificate and artisan levels education until 1979. The government of Bangladesh has introduced a graduate course in B.Sc. Engineering in Leather under the university of Dhaka from the 1979-80 academic session.
On 18 August 2011 the name of the college was changed into Institute of Leather Engineering and Technology (ILET) Of University of Dhaka.

==Faculty and departments==

ILET is an institute of The University of Dhaka under the faculty of Engineering and Technology. The degree awarded by the University of Dhaka is Bachelor of Leather Engineering, Bachelor of  Footwear Engineering and Bachelor of Leather Products Engineering. 
Leather Engineering:
Leather engineering is a professional engineering discipline that deals with the manufacturing technology of leather, chemistry, microbiology and biotechnology involves in leather manufacture. 
Director: Professor Marufa Mahbub.
Head of the departments:

==External links==


