[[John Rais]]

CATEGORIES: 1970s births, Living people, American blacksmiths, Cranbrook Academy of Art alumni, Massachusetts College of Art and Design alumni, State University of New York faculty, University of the Arts (Philadelphia) faculty, People from Burlington, Massachusetts

John Rais (born c. 1973) is a designer, blacksmith and sculptor known for his architectural work, vessels, and furniture.  Rais primarily works in steel as well as titanium, bronze, copper, stainless steel, and other materials.  He is well known for his one-of-a-kind firescreens.  Rais was born and raised in  Burlington, Massachusetts, the youngest of seven children.  Rais was introduced to blacksmithing in a sculpture class at the age of 18.  He went to college at the Massachusetts College of Art, graduating in 1995, BFA Sculpture. After working at an architectural ironworks and a living history museum in Massachusetts, he decided to go to graduate school.  Rais received his masters of fine arts degree from Cranbrook Academy of Art in 1998, after which he worked at Peters Valley Craft Center as a department head. Rais was a department head of blacksmithing at Peter's Valley from 1998 to 2001. He has run his own design and metalsmithing studio since 1998. He now lives in Shelburne, Massachusetts.
While at Cranbrook, Rais was approached by two collectors to make three fire screens for their large Arts and Crafts style home in Bloomfield, Michigan. This commission was the springboard to him opening a business.  Rais opened his studio  after graduate school in 1998. He did so with about $850.00 and a fire screen commission. In the early years of the studio, several collectors and gallery shows sustained the studio, including the designer, ceramic artist, mentor and friend, Bennett Bean. In 2001, Rais began to try doing craft shows as a way to reach a wider audience and gain the attention of galleries. His first national show was the Philadelphia Museum of Art Craft Show. He went on to repeatedly exhibit at the Philadelphia Museum Show, Smithsonian Craft Show, Washington Craft Show, and Craft Boston. 
He gained many gallery relationships through these shows. He had shown with and or represented by Thirteen Moons Gallery (now Jane Sauer), Del Mano Gallery, Gallery 500, Mobilia Gallery, and Snyderman-Works Gallery including several others. 
His commissioned architectural work has always been one of a kind. It is collected nationally and is often featured in books and magazines. In 2009 he began working on a Museum acquisition for Yale University Art Galleries. The project is a series of 90 decorative panels that span the railing of the main staircase. The project takes many design cues from the building's Gothic Revival style and is influenced in part by some of the architectural ironwork in the museum by Samuel Yellin. The work is now part of the museum's permanent collection. Rais was one of only three artists commissioned by Yale Art Galleries as part of the museum's massive renovation/expansion completed in 2012. Rais's piece is open for viewing in late 2012.

==Teaching==

==Publications include==

==Books/video==

==Awards==

==References==


