[[Victor Marius Beliciu]]

CATEGORIES: 1978 births, Living people, Romanian musicians, Politehnica University of Bucharest alumni

Beliciu Victor Marius (born August 4, 1978) is a Romanian sitarist belonging to the Senia Gharana tradition (school or style). He was promoted by Indian Embassy in Romania and also played under the patronage of  Romanian Embassy in India. Victor performed Turkey, Romania, Italy, Hungary. In India he played in temples as well as auditoriums, live on Doordarshan national TVDoordarshan Production Telecast registration number 301 may 14 2004 and at All India Air radio. He also had the honour to play sitar for Romanian president Traian Băsescu and for Indian counterpart Abdul Kalam.Magazine Hindusthan Times "Ht City"  february 21 2008

==Background==

At a very young age Victor follows classical guitar course and few years later canto lessons in his home city Brăila, a cultural city par excellence.  Attending with his father sahaja yoga classes he gets in touch with Indian Classical Music. Its purity, mathematics and elaborate intricacies fascinated him and gave him an ardent desire to learn more.While performing in the Sziget Pepsi festival, Budapest, he was introduced to professor Andras Kozma,  the only recognised European disciple of Pandit Ravi Shankar and accepted by him as his disciple. Andras has taught him the basic tehniques of playing sitar.
Victor  graduated in 2002 Polytechnic University of Bucharest - Faculty of Automatics and Computers, expert system and artificial intelligence specialty.Romanian Ministry of Research and Education registration number 3099 may 14 2003 He became aware that esthetical potential is much beyond computers  capacities of judgment. In June 2003 the Indian GovernmentIndian Council for Cultural Relations file registration number ISD-||/8/2003-04 august 12 2003 awarded him a scholarship for learning Indian Classical Music under the most prominent exponent of the Senia Gharana, Padma Bushan Pandit Debu Chaudhuri and since then Victor has been living in  Delhi, his soul being nurtured in the Indian ethos and spirit. However from 2004 he was promoted by Romanian Embassy in India, which offered him also a scholarship.
In May 2005 he finishes the research work which  he calls " The Periodical System of Indian Classical Music ".State Office for Inventions and trademarks number registration 204644 may 9 2006  a documented study regarding the mathematics used in the Indian Classical Music. The result eliminates completely the adjustments from musical compositions and offers the entire range of solutions (numerical series). The formulas and tables are registered at OSIM and protected by copyright.
Today he is performing solo and also  with Anne Marie Ene, a professional violinist at Radio Chamber Orchestra Bucharest in an attempt to fusion two cultures, Eastern Classical Music with Western Classical Music.On 21 October 2008 Turya Classical music ensemble was born.The group becomes part of Tansen,Indian Cultural Centre for Europe an institution established to promote authentic Indian culture.

==References==

==Notes==

==External links==


