[[SS William B. Davock]]

CATEGORIES: Great Lakes ships, Maritime incidents in 1940, Shipwrecks in the Great Lakes, 1907 ships

The SS ''William B. Davock'' was a lake freighter that was constructed in 1907 by Great Lakes Engineering Works, at their St. Clair, MI facility for the Vulcan Steamship Co. (R.H. Pigott, Mgr.).  She was operated by Vulcan Steamship from 1907 to 1915 in The Great Lakes coal, iron ore, grain and stone trades.  In 1915 the ship came under the management of The Interlake Steamship Co. (Pickands Mather & Co., Mgrs.).  While laid up for the winter (1922-23) in Fairport, Ohio, she was reconstructed and updated, this work lead to a tonnage change in the amount of 4220 gross - 2671 net.  The Davock resumed its traditional trade pattern of coal carried to upper lakes ports from Lake Erie and iron ore from Lake Superior ports to the steel mills of Lake Erie and Lake Michigan.  
This routine was permanently disrupted on November 11, 1940 as a ferocious storm swept the lakes late on that Monday afternoon.  Considered to be the worst storm to that point on Lake Michigan it saw 75 mph winds and rain turning to snow.  Several vessels transiting Lake Michigan were caught with little warning.  The Davock making her way down the lake with coal for Chicago was presumably overwhelmed at the height of the storm succumbing to the intense wind and waves, and slipping to her final resting place ~200 feet below the surface five miles out from Little Sable Point between Ludington, Michigan and Pentwater, Michigan.  None of the 32 (some sources cite 33) hands survived.  In total the storm took two vessels and their entire crews (Davock, and Kinsman Steamer Anna C. Minch).  Several other vessels were damaged, or ran aground trying to escape the storm's fury.  Overall estimates state 59 sailors were lost in what would be the worst maritime disaster on the Great Lakes since the Great Storm of 1913.

==The Davock today==

The sunken hull of the Davock was discovered in May 1972, capsized in over 200 feet (60m) of water, off Little Sable Point Light, not far from the wreck of the SS Anna C. Minch, which went down in the same storm.  The light is located south of Pentwater, Michigan.[ref]
</ref>

==References==







