[[Monarchy of Belgium]]

CATEGORIES: Commons category with local link different than on Wikidata, Belgian monarchy, Lists of monarchs, Current monarchies

Monarchy in Belgium is constitutional and popular in nature. The hereditary monarch, at present Philippe, is the head of state and is officially called King of the Belgians ([tpl]lang-nl|Koning der Belgen[/tpl], [tpl]lang-fr|Roi des Belges|[/tpl], [tpl]lang-de|König der Belgier[/tpl]).

==Origins==

When Belgium became independent in 1830 the National Congress chose a constitutional monarchy as the form of government. The Congress voted on the question on 22 November 1830, supporting monarchy by 174 votes to 13. In February 1831, the Congress nominated Louis, Duke of Nemours, the son of the French king Louis-Philippe, but international considerations deterred Louis-Philippe from accepting the honour for his son.
Following this refusal, the National Congress appointed Erasme-Louis, Baron Surlet de Chokier to be the Regent of Belgium on 25 February 1831. Leopold of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha was designated as King of the Belgians by the National Congress
http://www.monarchie.be/history and swore allegiance to the Belgian constitution in front of Saint Jacob's Church at Coudenberg Palace in Brussels on 21 July. This day has since become a national holiday for Belgium and its citizens.

==A hereditary and constitutional system==

As a hereditary constitutional monarchy system, the role and operation of Belgium's monarchy is governed by the Constitution. The royal office of King is designated solely for a descendent of the first King of the Belgians, Leopold I.
Since he is bound by the Constitution http://www.dekamer.be/kvvcr/pdf_sections/publications/constitution/grondwetEN.pdf(above all other ideological and religious considerations, political opinions and debates and economic interests) the King acts as an arbiter and guardian of Belgium's unity and independence. Belgium's monarchs are inaugurated in a purely civil swearing-in ceremony. The words, "above all other ideological and religious considerations, political opinions and debates and economic interests", are not written in the Belgian constitution: nevertheless, they conform with its spirit.

===A constitutional monarchy from the beginning===

The Kingdom of Belgium was never an absolute monarchy. Nevertheless, in 1961, the historian Ramon Arango, wrote that the Belgian monarchy is not "truly constitutional".Ramon Arango, Leopold III and the Belgian Royal Question, The John Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1961, p.9.[tpl]clarify|date=February 2014[/tpl]

====Leopold I, Leopold II, Albert I====

Leopold I of Belgium was head of Foreign Affairs "as an ancien régime monarch", the foreign ministers having the authority to act only as ministers of the king.French: dirigeant personnellement les Affaires étrangères, comme un souverain d'Ancien Régime, en discutant toutes les questions importantes avec ses ministres, ceux-ci n'ayant d'autorité que pour autant qu'ils étaient ministres du roi...  Frans Van Kalken, in La Belgique contemporaine, Paris, Armand Colin, 1950, p. 43. Leopold I  quickly became one of the most important shareholders of the Société Générale de Belgique Pierre Lebrun P.Lebrun, Essai sur la révolution industrielle en Belgique, 1770-1847, Palais des Académies, Bruxelles, 2e édition, 1981.
In many circumstances Leopold's son, Leopold II of Belgium, publicly expressed opinion against that of the Government (on 15 August 1887, against Prime Minister Auguste Marie François Beernaert), or some MPs (again against Beernaert in 1905).Raymond Fusilier, Les monarchies parlementaires en Europe Editions ouvrières, Paris, 1960, p. 399. For Yvon Gouet this behavior was not in compliance with the parliamentary system.Yvon Gouet, De l'unité du  cabinet parlementaire, Dalloz, 1930, p. 232, quoted by Raymond Fusilier, p. 400.
Also, at the start of World War I, Albert I of Belgium stated he was in command of the Belgian army contrary to his Prime Minister Charles de Broqueville and, according to Raymond Fusilier, also against the Belgian Constitution Raymond Fusilier, Les monarchies parlementaires en Europe,  p. 424.  Luc Schepens wrote similar opinions: "The two main casualties of World War I are the Constitution and the parliamentary regime. The king had a role out of proportion with the spirit of the Constitution".French Les deux grandes victimes de la guerre 14-18 en Belgique semblent être la Constitution et la démocratie parlementaire. Et cela n'alla pas sans conséquences. Pendant la suite du règne d'Albert Ier, et également sous celui de Léopold III, le roi a exercé au sein du pouvoir exécutif un rôle hors de proportion avec ce qui avait été de coutume avant la Première Guerre mondiale (...) Ce n'est qu'après que cette situation s'est normalisée. in Albert I et le Gouvernement Broquville, Duculot, Gembloux, 1988, p. 230.  ISBN 2-8011-0464-7 For instance, on 17 May 1926, in a public letter, Albert stated he had faith in the Henri Jaspar government, before the Parliament passed a vote of confidence in this government.The king wrote : Pour vaincre les périls actuels, il faut faire trêve à tous dissentiments in Emmanuel Gérard, La démocratie rêvée, bridée et bafouée, 1918-1939, Editions Complexe, p. 109. ISBN 2-8048-0083-0

====Leopold III, Baudouin====

Louis Wodon (the chef de cabinet of Leopold III from 1934 to 1940), thought the King's oath to the Constitution implied a royal position "over and above the Constitution". He compared the King to a father, the head of a family, "Regarding the moral mission of the king," said Arango, "it is permissible to point to a certain analogy between his role and that of a father, or more generally, of parents in a family. The family is, of course, a legal institution as is the state. But what would a family be where everything was limited among those who compose it to simply legal relationships? In a family when one considers only legal relationships one comes very close to a breakdown in the moral ties founded on reciprocal affection without which a family would be like any other fragile association"Leopold III and the Belgian Royal Question, p. 31. According to Arango, Leopold III of Belgium shared these views about the Belgian monarchy.
In 1991, towards the end of the reign of Baudouin, Senator Yves de Wasseige, a former member of the Belgian Constitutional Court, cited four points of democracy which the Belgian Constitution lacks: 1. the King chooses the ministers, 2. the King is able to influence the ministers when he speaks with them about bills, projects and nominations, 3. the King promulgates bills, and, 4. the King must agree to any change of the ConstitutionYves de Wasseige, Le roi, la loi la liberté: inconciliables en démocratie? in Les faces cachées de la monarchie belge, TOUDI (n° 5/Contradictions (n° 65/66), 1991, ISBN 2-87090-010-4

===Constitutional, political, and historical consequences===

The Belgian monarchy was from the beginning a constitutional monarchy, patterned after that of the United Kingdom.Ramon Arango, Leopold III and the Belgian Royal  Question, p.9. Raymond Fusilier wrote the Belgian regime of 1830 was also inspired by the French Constitution of the Kingdom of France (1791-1792), the United States Declaration of Independence of 1776 and the old political traditions of both Walloon and Flemish provinces.Les monarchies parlementaires en Europe, Editions ouvrières, Paris, 1960, p. 350 "It should be observed that all monarchies have suffered periods of change as a result of which the power of the sovereign was reduced, but for the most part those periods occurred before the development of the system of constitutionnal monarchy and were steps leading to its establishment."Ramon Arango, p. 9. The characteristic evidence of this is in Great Britain where there was an evolution from the time when kings ruled through the agency of ministers to that time when ministers began to govern through the instrumentality of the Crown.
Unlike the British constitutional system, in Belgium "the monarchy underwent a belated evolution" which came "after the establishment of the constitutional monarchical system"R.Arango, p. 12. because, in 1830-1831, an independent state, parliamentary system and monarchy were established simultaneously. Hans Daalder, professor of political science at the Rijksuniversiteit Leiden wrote: "Did  such simultaneous developments not result in a possible failure to lay down the limits of the royal prerogratives with some precision - which implied that the view of the King as the Keeper of the Nation, with rights and duties of its own, retained legitimacy?" Hans Daalder, The monarchy in a parliamentary system, in Res Publica, Tijdschrift voor Politologie, Revue de Science Politique, Belgian Journal of Political Science, number 1, 1991, pp. 70-81, p. 74.
For Raymond Fusilier, the Belgian monarchy had to be placed - at least in the beginning - between the regimes where the king rules and those in which the king does not rule but only reigns. The Belgian monarchy is closer to the principle "the King does not rule" Raymond Fusilier, Les monarchies parlementaires - étude sur les systèmes de gouvernement en Suède, Norvège, Luxembourg, Belgique, Pays-bas, Danemark, Editions ouvrières, Paris, 1960, pp. 419-420. But the Belgian kings were not only "at the head of the dignified part of the Constitution".Bagehot, The English Constitution The Belgian monarchy is not merely symbolic, because it participates in directing affairs of state insofar as the King's will coincides with that of the ministers, who alone bear responsibility for the policy of government.R.Fusilier, pp. 419-420. French Elle n'est pas purement symbolique, car elle participe à la direction des affaires de l'Etat dans la mesure où sa volonté coïncide avec la volonté des ministres, lesquels seuls assument la responsabilité de la politique du gouvenement. For Francis Delpérée, to reign does not only mean to preside over ceremonies but also to take a part in the running of the State.French Le Roi règne. Pendant plus d'un siècle et demi (...) on ne s'est guère interrogé sur cette maxime. Ou bien on a cherché à lui donner un sens réducteur. Le Roi préside les Te Deum et les cérémonies protocolaires (...) Régner ne signifie pas suivre d'un oeil distrait les occupations du gouvernement (...) C'est contribuer (...) au fonctionnement harmonieux de l'Etat, in La Libre Belgique (April 1990) quoted by Les faces cachées de la monarchie belge, Contradictions, number 65-66, 1991, p. 27. ISBN 2-87090-010-4 The Belgian historian Jean Stengers wrote that "some foreigners believe the monarchy is indispensable to national unity. That is very naive. He is only a piece on the chessboard, but a piece which matters.French Certains étrangers croient - ils le disent souvent - que le maintien de l'unité belge tient à la personne du Roi. Cela est d'une grande naïveté. Il n'est qu'une pièce sur l'échiquier. Mais, sur l'échiquier, le Roi est une pièce qui compte., Jean Stengers, L'action du roi en Belgique depuis 1831, Duculot, Gembloux, 1992, p. 312. ISBN 2-8011-1026-4

==List of Kings of the Belgians==

To date all have belonged to the House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha.
Their family tree is:

==Title==

The proper title of the Belgian monarch is King of the Belgians rather than King of Belgium. The title King of the Belgians indicates a popular monarchy linked to the people of Belgium (i.e., a hereditary Head of State; yet ratified by popular will). Whereas King of Belgium would indicate standard constitutional or absolute monarchy linked to territory or state.[tpl]ref[/tpl] For example, in 1830, King Louis Philippe was proclaimed King of the French rather than  King of France. The Greek monarch was titled King of the Hellenes, indicating a personal link with the people, not just the state. Moreover, the Latin translation of King of Belgium would have been Rex Belgii, which from 1815 was the name for the King of the Netherlands. Therefore, the Belgian separatists (i.e. the founders of Belgium) chose Rex Belgarum.[tpl]ref[/tpl]
Belgium is the only current European monarchy that does not apply the tradition of the new monarch automatically ascending the throne upon the death or abdication of the previous monarch. According to Article 91 of the Belgian constitution, the monarch accedes to the throne only upon taking a constitutional oath before a joint session of the two Houses of Parliament.[tpl]cite web | url=http://www.dekamer.be/kvvcr/pdf_sections/publications/constitution/grondwetEN.pdf | title=The Belgian Constitution | publisher=Belgian Parliament | accessdate=July 21, 2013 | format=PDF[/tpl] The joint session has to be held within ten days of the death of the deceased or abdicated king. From the death or abdication of a monarch and the installation of his successor, the new Belgian monarch is required to take the Belgian constitutional oath, "I swear to observe the Constitution and the laws of the Belgian people, to maintain the national independence and the integrity of the territory," which is uttered in the three official languages: French, Dutch, and German.
Members of the Belgian Royal Family are often known by two names: a Dutch and a French one. For example, the current monarch is called 'Philippe' in French and 'Filip' in Dutch; the fifth King of the Belgians was 'Baudouin' in French and 'Boudewijn' in Dutch.
In contrast to King Philippe's title of "King of the Belgians", Princess Elisabeth is called "Princess of Belgium" as the title "Prince of the Belgians" does not exist. She is also Duchess of Brabant, the traditional title of the heir apparent to the Belgian throne. This title precedes the title "Princess of Belgium".
In the other official language of German, monarchs are usually referred to by their French names. The same is true for English with the exception of Leopold, where the accent is removed for the purpose of simplicity.
Because of the First World War and the resultant strong anti-German sentiment, the family name was changed in 1920 from Saxe-Coburg-Gotha to van België, de Belgique, or von Belgien ("of Belgium"), depending upon which of the country's three official languages (Dutch, French, and German) is in use. It is this family name which is used on the identity cards and in all official documents by Belgium's royalty (e.g. marriage licenses). In addition to this change of name, the armorial bearings of Saxony were removed from the Belgian royal coat of arms (see above). Other Coburgers from the multi-branched Saxe-Coburg family have also changed their name, such as George V of the United Kingdom, who adopted the family name of Windsor after the British Royal Family’s place of residence.

ImageSize = width:800 height:auto barincrement:20
PlotArea  = top:10 bottom:50 right:130 left:20
AlignBars = late
DateFormat = yyyy
Period     = from:1830 till:2013
TimeAxis   = orientation:horizontal
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:10 start:1830
Colors     =
  id:king   value:rgb(1,0.70,0) legend: king
  id:regent value:rgb(0.5,0.71,0.84)      legend: regent
Legend     = columns:4 left:150 top:24 columnwidth:100
TextData =
  pos:(20,27) textcolor:black fontsize:M
  text:"Title:"
BarData =
  barset:PM
PlotData=
  align:left fontsize:S shift:(3,-4) anchor:from width:15
  barset:PM
