[[Abdul Jerri]]

CATEGORIES: 1932 births, 20th-century American mathematicians, American Mathematical Society, American mathematicians, American people of Iraqi descent, American physicists, American University in Cairo faculty, Illinois Institute of Technology alumni, Iraqi mathematicians, Kuwait University faculty, Living people, Oregon State University alumni, Sultan Qaboos University faculty, Theoretical physicists, University of Baghdad alumni, Yarmouk University faculty

Dr. Abdul Jabbar Hassoon Jerri (July 20, 1932) is an Iraqi American physicist and mathematician, most recognized for his contributions to information theory in general, in particular to the understanding of the Gibbs phenomenon. He is an author of several popular books in his area, and has published over forty papers. Dr. Jerri's main research interests include the areas of Integral & Discrete Transforms, Sampling Expansion & its Error Analysis, Gibbs Phenomena, Transform-Iterative Methods for Nonlinear Problems, and Operational Sum Methods for Difference Equations.
AJ Jerri earned a B.Sc. in Physics at the University of Baghdad (1955) and
M.S. in Physics from Illinois Institute of Technology (1960) in Chicago where he continued to work within the research group (1960–63).  He also earned a Ph.D. in Mathematics from Oregon State University (1967) on the thesis On Extensions of the Generalized Sampling Theorem.
Dr. Jerri commenced his tenure with the faculty of the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science at Clarkson University in Potsdam, NY (1967), where he worked since, becoming Professor Emeritus (2008).Four Clarkson Faculty to be named Professor Emeriti
Dr. Jerri's career includes visiting positions at the American University in Cairo where he established the Study Programs in Mathematics and Computer Science (1972–74).  He was Director of the Mathematics Study Program at Kuwait University (1979–80).
Jerri is a double-awarded Fulbright Scholar at the  Sultan Qaboos University in Muscat, Oman (1997), and a second time, at the Yarmouk University in Irbid of Jordan (2001).
Jerri's main research areas have been integral transforms, discrete transforms, sampling expansions, Gibbs phenomena, transform-iterative methods for nonlinear problems, and operational sum methods for difference equations.faculty webpage
He is the Founding Executive Editor of Sampling Theory In Signal And Image Processing - An International Journal.Journal website

==References==


