[[Lucy May Barker]]

CATEGORIES: 1992 births, English film actresses, English stage actresses, Living people, People from Lincoln, England, Actresses from Lincolnshire, 21st-century English actresses

Lucy May Barker (born 4 April 1992) is a British stage and screen actress.

==Life and career==

She was born and brought up in Lincoln, Lincolnshire. Most notably, Barker played Ilse in the original London cast of the four-time Olivier Award-winning Spring Awakening which opened in February 2009 at the Lyric Hammersmith.Spring Awakening Initial Casting Announced: (www.playbill.com) The show transferred to the Novello TheatreSpring Awakening West End Transfer: (www.telegraph.co.uk) in March 2009, and ran until May 2009.
In the 2001-2003 tours of the musical Annie, Barker played the title role to critical acclaim.BBC.co.uk:  Annie Review) In 2009, she also appeared in the London premiere of the musical Zombie Prom at the Landor Theatre,Zombie Prom UK Premiere: (westend.broadwayworld.com) playing Ginger, and in The Impressions Show with Culshaw and StephensonThe Impressions Show: (www.bbc.co.uk) playing George, one of the Famous Five, with the comedian Jon Culshaw.
In 2010, Barker appeared at the Royal National Theatre playing Millie in Really Old, Like Forty Five,National Theatre, Really Old, Like Forty Five: (www.nationaltheatre.org.uk) a new play by Tamsin Oglesby. The play opened on 3 February, following previews from 27 January 2010, in the Cottesloe, and was directed by Anna Mackmin. The play also starred Gawn Grainger, Judy Parfitt and Marcia Warren.
Also in 2010, in the season at the Open Air Theatre, Regent's Park, Barker played Mercy Lewis in The Crucible, starring alongside Oliver Ford Davies, Emma Cunniffe, Susan Engel and Patrick Godfrey.
Barker returned to the Royal National Theatre to play the part of Marina (amongst others) in Mike Bartlett's new play, Earthquakes In London, directed by Rupert Goold'.Introducing Lucy May Barker : (www.officiallondontheatre.co.uk)
In late 2010, Barker filmed a small role in The Woman in Black, starring Daniel Radcliffe, and was also be seen on CBBC's show Scoop, with Shaun Williamson and Mark Benton, in early 2011.Lucy May Barker on Twitter: (www.twitter.com)
At the start of 2011, Barker toured the UK playing Clarissa in The Reluctant Debutante, with Jane Asher, Clive Francis and Belinda Lang.
Between 24 September and 5 November 2011, Barker played Johanna in Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street at the Chichester Festival Theatre, with Michael Ball as Sweeney Todd and Imelda Staunton as Mrs Lovett. The production is transferring to London's West End along with Lucy, opening at the Adelphi Theatre, 10 March 2012.

==References==

==External links==


