[[Speculative Fiction Group]]

CATEGORIES: Science fiction organizations, Persian science fiction, Persian literature

Speculative Fiction Group (Persian: گروه ادبیات گمانه‌زن) formerly known as Fantasy Academy (Persian:آکادمی فانتزی) is a Persian literature group whose main representation media is a website which is currently name Fantasy Academy (www.fantasy.ir). Speculative Fiction Group (SFG) is composed of a group of writers, researchers, translators and fan of Science-Fiction, Fantasy, Horror and Detective literary genres. The group is the governing body of the Persian Speculative Fiction Art and Literature Award, Shegetzar online magazine, Persian Speculative Encyclopedia and 'Persian SF&F Fanzine'.
Fantasy Academy group has an English portal for the main site and established a MediaWiki based Encyclopedia of science fiction and fantasy.Reference in Persian Wikipedia

==History==

SFG started as a fanzine club named Zirabious in early 2004 and later in 2005 after renaming to Fantasy Academy changed its approach to a more academic path and later became the sole reference for Persian speculative fiction specially science fiction, since there is still no group or organization working in this area. [tpl]Citation needed|date=November 2011[/tpl] In 2010 the group reformed again to separate the fan base from academic activities, and all of fan activities moved to a new website called Fanzine (Persian: فنزین).
Officially established in 2004, the group have founded on an earlier local private group called Seventh Dimension. Fantasy Academy has developed in several aspects considering its target genre since then. Primarily the main focus of the group was to introduce and localization of the two main sub-genres of speculative fiction: fantasy and science fiction. However, the other sub-genres including horror fiction has been added recently.
The main media of representation of the group has been Internet, but, there were some occasionally appearances in other media such as televisions, newspapers, magazines and exhibitions.
From the beginning, there were many branches which were related to main site and through the time, the branches have increased. Most influential branches could be mention as Encyclopedia, English Moon and a Gallery, all of them are heavily supported and depended to main site: fantasy academy. In 2008 when the then group Editor in Chief issued the copyright decree (currently no international copyright law is valid in Iran.), the Gallery closed down.
In 2008, there were extensive efforts to perform researches in the field of fantasy literature in Persian language and these efforts have formed the main new goal of the group by now.

==Group structure==

SFG is now combined of several subgroups each of them devoted to a part of activities. All groups work independently in their area, however has a good cooperation with the whole body.
