[[Stephen Barry]]

CATEGORIES: 1945 births, 2000 deaths, British theatre managers and producers

The British drama producer and artistic director Stephen Leon Reid Barry (4 July 1945 – 18 October 2000) was chief executive of two important Edinburgh theatres, the Festival and the King's, prime venues of the famed Edinburgh International Festival. In his short career, he also supervised artistic live-theatre rejuvenations at The Playhouse Theatre (Perth), Australia, the Lyceum Theatre (Sheffield) and the Theatre Royal, Bath. Allen, Paul Stephen Barry (obituary) The Guardian, London, 9 November 2000

==Early life==

Stephen was born in Welwyn Garden City. His father, Gerald, was editor of the News Chronicle, and his first contact with the theatre was through his mother, the actress Vera Lindsay. He was educated at Marlborough College and Manchester University. In 1973, he married Jacqueline LindsaySacks M A (ed) The WAY 79 Who is Who, Crawley Publishers, 1980, ISBN 0-949848-00-X, entry on p. 19 with whom he had one son and one daughter.

==Professional career==

Stephen Barry trained as a director with Bernard Miles at the Mermaid Theatre, served as assistant director at the Yvonne Arnaud Theatre, Guildford, and was a staff director at the National Theatre under Laurence Olivier at the Old Vic.
In 1974, aged 29, he took up his first artistic directorship for a theatre in Harrogate. Four years later, he accepted the challenge of rejuvenating The National Theatre at the Playhouse in Perth, Western Australia. In that role he created many very successful presentations including a season of Death of a Salesman with Warren Mitchell, and sellout performances of Pam Gems's musical Piaf with Judy Davis. He also commissioned and produced a controversial Dorothy Hewett play, The Man from Muckinupin for Western Australia's 150th anniversary (WAY '79). Supple A Review, Man from Muckinupin Australian Stage, 3 April 2009
In 1982, he returned to the UK to serve as artistic director with the Redgrave Theatre, Farnham until 1986, and then the Theatre Royal, Bath.

==References==


