[[Historical trauma]]

CATEGORIES: Anxiety disorders, Clinical psychology, Mental health, Stress

Historical trauma (HT), in social work, refers to cumulative emotional and psychological wounding, exceeding over an individual lifespan and across generations, caused by significant group traumatic experiences. The historical trauma response (HTR) is a constellation of features in reaction to this trauma. 
The HTR may include substance abuse as a vehicle for attempting to numb the pain associated with trauma. The HTR often includes other types of self-destructive behavior, suicidal thoughts and gestures, depression, anxiety, low self-esteem, anger, and difficulty recognizing and expressing emotions. Associated with HTR is historical unresolved grief that accompanies the trauma.Maria Yellow Horse Brave Heart "The historical trauma response among natives and its relationship to substance abuse: A Lakota illustration." Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 35(1)
Historical trauma is an example of transgenerational trauma. For example, a pattern of maternal abandonment of a child at a young age might be seen across three generations.Abrams, M. S. (1999). Intergenerational transmission of trauma: Recent contributions from the literature of family systems approaches to treatment. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 53(2), 225-231. Significant original research on the mechanisms of transmission of intergenerational violent trauma has been done by Daniel Schechter. His work builds on pioneers in this field such as: Judith Kestenberg, Dori Laub, Selma Fraiberg, Alicia Lieberman, Susan Coates, Charles Zeanah, Karlen Lyons-Ruth, Yael Danieli, Rachel Yehuda and others. Schechter's work has included the study of experimental interventions that may lead to changes of trauma-associated mental representations that can help intergenerational cycles of violence.Schechter DS, Myers MM, Brunelli SA, Coates SW, Zeanah CH, Davies M, Grienenberger JF, Marshall RD, McCaw JE, Trabka KA, Liebowitz MR (2006). Traumatized mothers can change their minds about their toddlers: Understanding how a novel use of videofeedback supports positive change of maternal attributions. Infant Mental Health Journal, 27(5), 429-448Schechter DS (2004). Intergenerational communication of violent traumatic experience within and by the dyad: The case of a mother and her toddler. Journal of Infant, Child, and Adolescent Psychotherapy, 3(2), 203-232.

==Treatment==

Treatment of HT must repair connections with others, self-image, values and beliefs. It takes the forms of individual counseling or therapy, spiritual help, and group or entire community gatherings are all important aspects of the healing process. It aims at renewal of hope, positive self-image and spiritual beliefs, renewal of family connections, and reaffirming one's place in the human community.Swinomish Tribal Mental Health Project. (2002). A Gathering of Wisdoms: Tribal Mental: A cultural Perspective. (2 Ed) Intergeneration Trauma in the Tribal Community (pp. 77-114). LaConner, WA: Swinomish Tribal Mental Health.
Particular attention is given to the needs and empowerment of people who are vulnerable, oppressed, and living in poverty. Social workers promote social justice and social change with and on behalf of clients, who include individuals, families, groups, organizations, and communities.
It depends on the social worker's understanding of cultural diversity, history, culture, and contemporary realities of clients.Weaver, H.N. (1999). Indigenous People and the Social Work Profession: Defining Culturally Competent Services. Social Work 44(3). 217-225.

==See also==

Cases:

==References==

==External links==


