[[Liar, Liar (1993 film)]]

CATEGORIES: 1993 television films, 1990s drama films, Canadian television films, English-language films, Film scores by Fred Mollin, Films about child abuse, Films shot in Vancouver

Liar, Liar is a 1993 Canadian drama television movie starring Vanessa King as a girl who accuses her father (Art Hindle) of molestation but no one in her family believes her. The film originally aired in January 1993 on CBC Television in Canada. 
It aired under the title Liar, Liar: Between Father and Daughter on CBS on June 22, 1993 in the United States. It was also released under the title Daddy's Little Secret in the United Kingdom.

==Plot==

One day at school, 11-year-old Kelly Farrow (Vanessa King)'s classmate tells about a relative who accused a family member of molestation and was sent to jail. Sometime later, after being "spanked" by her dad for locking her little brother in the bathroom, Kelly vows to make him pay. At school the next day, Kelly tells her teacher that her father Gil (Art Hindle) sexually abused her. Kelly speaks with authorities and they arrange to have her father arrested. When her family learns of the accusation, they don't believe her, with the exception of her younger brother Patrick. 
Though the authorities take action, Kelly's mother Mary (Rosemary Dunsmore) and sisters Jean "Nini" (Ashleigh Aston Moore) and Christina "Chrissy" (Janne Mortil) doubt Kelly, given her history of lying and bullying. People come to believe that Kelly is lying because her father is known to be strict in his punishments.
Kelly seems not to be telling the whole story, and when a newspaper article leaks that the incest victim is still a virgin, she tries to get people to believe her. When older sister Chrissy sees an interaction between her husband and Patrick in the bathroom, it opens up repressed memories from her childhood and she believes Kelly. Kelly tells Chrissy that she knew what their dad did to her, and it's revealed that Patrick is afraid of being locked in the bathroom because he too had been molested by their dad. 
In court, Chrissy defends her sister by telling the court of her own abuse. The judge apologises to Kelly, stating that just because she's a child doesn't make her a liar, and that the judge wants a full investigation into Patrick's and Chrissy's allegations. While Mary and Nini are shocked at the situation, Kelly walks out with Chrissy and Patrick, pleased that she was finally believed.

==Cast==

==Award nominations==

==External links==


