[[DASCOM]]

CATEGORIES: Computer printer companies

The DASCOM group was founded 1988 and is established in Hong Kong. In June 2009, DASCOM acquired the key assets of TallyGenicom AG and TallyGenicom Computerdrucker GmbH in order to establish its European operation, which is named DASCOM Europe. TallyGenicom’s U.S.-based assets were acquired by Printronix. 
Upon the acquisition, Dascom becomes one of the largest companies in the world focused exclusively on supplying computer printers, supplies and services to commercial and industrial applications under the brans Tally, Tally Dascom and TallyGenicom. The products are designed to meet the high requirements in market segments such as transportation, logistics, production, warehousing, trade and healthcare. Robust construction, high reliability and long life-cycle are established trademarks of DASCOM products.
As of today, DASCOM is a private conglomerate operating in an array of business focuses such as:
Developer, manufacturer and provider of enterprise printing solutions; System Integrator, Distributor, Service Provider of Unix Solutions; Service Provider of value-added services for various telecommunication carriers; Developer, manufacturer and provider of LED lighting solutions

==Operations==

DASCOM worldwide headquarters is in Hong Kong with manufacturing facilities located in Jiangmen, China.
The headquarters of DASCOM Europe is located in Ulm (Germany), supports sales operations in Europe, Middle East & Africa and was incorporated in June 2009. 
DASCOM Europe has subsidiaries in UK, France, Austria and a representative office in Russia.
The headquarters of DASCOM Asia Pacific is located in Singapore, supports sales operations for the South East Asia, India, Australia, New Zealand and North East Asia except Mainland China and was incorporated in September 2009.
DASCOM AP has subsidiaries in Malaysia and India.
The headquarters of DASCOM Americas is located in Waynesboro, Virginia, supports sales operations in USA, Canada and Latin America was incorporated in April 2010.
DASCOM Americas has subsidiary in Brazil.

==Products==

DASCOM manufacture and market a range of dot matrix, passbook, flatbed, mobile and thermal printers (including options, spares and consumables) under the "Dascom" brand in China and the 'Tally' and 'Tally Dascom' brand in the rest of the world. They also distribute and support TallyGenicom line printer and laser products.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


