[[SHINCOM]]

CATEGORIES: Royal Canadian Navy

SHINCOM, the Shipboard Internal Communications system, is an internal-use telephone system used on Canadian warships.
Built for use in a warship, SHINCOM includes redundancy systems to ensure that, in the case of damage, it can continue to be used.  Its role is vital in day-to-day operations, as well as in emergency situations.

==Components==

The SHINCOM system uses two controllers, one primary and the other backup.  The backup system only maintains critical systems, allowing it to be simpler and more robust.
In addition to normal telephone systems, SHINCOM controls the PA system, shore-line telephone, and evidence recording.
SHINCOM terminals (telephones) can be assigned priorities, allowing higher-priority systems to preempt lower-priority calls.  High priorities are generally assigned to damage-control headquarters, medical locations, and command, while low priorities are assigned to living and lounge areas.  Additionally, some terminals have programmable buttons which can be assigned functions by the SHINCOM control software.

==Interfaces==

The SHINCOM system interfaces with other shipboard communication systems.  All interfaces are acronyms ending with COM.

==Uses==

In addition to regular phoning, or the use of the interfaces listed above, SHINCOM includes two types of party lines.  A PNET, or Programmable Network, is a predefined list of terminals which can join a network by pressing a single button.  These are used for calls which are always made from a specific location, and include the docking network (between the bridge and all docking stations) and weapons networks (between the bridge, the operations room, and weapon positions).
The other party line is called a Meet-Me Network (MMN).  An MMN is assigned a phone number, and can be called from any location.  These are generally used for damage control, allowing command to dial in at one location, and reports to be made conveniently from any terminal near the damage incident.

