[[Javier Perianes]]

CATEGORIES: Spanish classical pianists, 1978 births, Living people, People from the Province of Huelva

Javier Perianes (born in 1978 in Nerva, Spain) is a classical pianist. He is a participant at many renowned festivals within Spain, including Santander, Granada, Peralada and San Sebastián. He has performed in distinguished concert series throughout the world, having made appearances in New York's Carnegie Hall, Concertgebouw Amsterdam, the Tchaikovsky Conservatory in Moscow, the Shanghai Conservatory, Madrid's Auditorio Nacional, Palau in Barcelona, recitals at the Ravinia and Gilmore International Festivals in Chicago, La Roque-d'Anthéron Festival in France and the Konzerthaus in Berlin.
He has been a frequent prize-winner at competitions, including First Prize and Gold Medal at the 42nd International Competition Premio Jaén de Piano; First Prize at the 8th International Piano Competition Fundación Jacinto e Inocencio Guerrero; and was a prize-winner at the 14th International Competition Vianna da Motta in Lisbon.
Javier Perianes has worked with leading conductors including Lorin Maazel, Daniel Barenboim, Zubin Mehta, Rafael Frühbeck de Burgos, Jesús López Cobos, Antoni Wit, Daniel Harding and Vasily Petrenko. Recent and forthcoming highlights include appearances with the Israel Philharmonic under Zubin Mehta, including a performance at the Lucerne Festival, the New World Symphony conducted by Michael Tilson Thomas, the London Philharmonic and Sao Paulo Symphony with Eduardo Portal, Tokyo Symphony Orchestra with Hiroshi Kodama, Warsaw Philharmonic, as well as recitals in Tokyo, Madrid’s Scherzo series, the Zurich Tonhalle and at the Moscow December Nights Festival.
Perianes has received critical acclaim for his recordings on Harmonia Mundi of Schubert's Impromptus and Klavierstücke, Manuel Blasco de Nebra’s keyboard sonatas and Mompou’s Música Callada. In September 2011 he released on this label a disc devoted to the music for piano by Manuel de Falla, including a live recording of Nights in the Gardens of Spain with the BBC Symphony Orchestra under Josep Pons.
Quote from the Michael Kennedy of the Sunday Telegraph regarding his Schubert CD (Harmonia Mundi):
"This young Spanish pianist proves himself a natural Schubertian in the Impromptus (D 899). He is beautifully recorded so that his playing can be fully appreciated. The disc also includes the Klavierstücke (D 946) and the less well-known Allegretto in C minor (D 915), a wonderful piece all the more compelling for being understated. Perianes's playing captures its magic to perfection."Sunday Telegraph (Schubert: Impromptus, Allegretto Harmonia Mundi HMI 987080) - Feb 2008

==References==

==External links==


