</ref> after which new Acts of the British Parliament did not apply to Canada, with some exceptions. These exceptions were removed by the [[Canada Act 1982]].<ref>
</ref>
From 1867, the Commons met in the same chamber until that was destroyed by fire in 1916. It relocated to the amphitheatre of the Victoria Memorial Museum—what is today the Canadian Museum of Nature, where it met until 1922. Since then, the Commons has sat in its current chamber.

==Members and electoral districts==

The House of Commons comprises 308 members (the number will rise to 338 in the next election), each of whom represents a single electoral district (also called a riding). The constitution specifies a basic minimum of 295 electoral districts, but additional seats are allocated according to various clauses. Seats are distributed among the provinces in proportion to population, as determined by each decennial census, subject to the following exceptions made by the constitution. Firstly, the "senatorial clause" guarantees that each province will have at least as many MPs as Senators. Secondly, the "grandfather clause" guarantees each province has at least as many Members of Parliament now as it had in 1985.
As a result of these clauses, smaller provinces and provinces that have experienced a relative decline in population have become over-represented in the House. Ontario, British Columbia, and Alberta are under-represented in proportion to their populations, while the other seven provinces (Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Quebec, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland and Labrador) are over-represented. Boundary commissions, appointed by the federal government for each province, have the task of drawing the boundaries of the electoral districts in each province. Territorial representation is independent of population; each territory is entitled to only one seat.  The calculation for the provinces is done with a base of 279 seats. The total population of the provinces (excluding the territories) is then divided by 279 to equal the electoral quotient.  The population of the province is then divided by the electoral quotient to equal the base provincial-seat allocation.Jackson & Jackson, Politics in Canada, Prentice Hall, Toronto, p 438 The "special clauses" are then applied to increase the number of seats for certain provinces, bringing the total number of seats (with the three seats for the territories) to 308.
The next redistribution of seats will occur subsequent to the 2011 census.
The Fair Representation Act (Bill C-20) was passed and given royal assent on December 16, 2011, and will effectively allocate fifteen additional seats to Ontario, six new seats each to Alberta and British Columbia, and three more to Quebec.
The following tables summarize representation in the House of Commons by province and territory:

==Elections==

General elections occur whenever Parliament is dissolved by the Governor General on the Queen's behalf. The timing of the dissolution has historically been chosen by the Prime Minister. The Constitution Act, 1867 provides that a Parliament last no longer than five years. Canadian election law requires that elections must be held on the third Monday in October in fourth year after the last election, subject to the discretion of the Crown.Canada Elections Act, Section 56.1(2). Campaigns must be at least 36 days long. Candidates are usually nominated by political parties. It is possible for a candidate to run independently, although it is rare for such a candidate to win. Most successful independent candidates have been incumbents who were expelled from their political parties (for example, John Nunziata in 1997) or who failed to win their parties' nomination (for example, Chuck Cadman in 2004). The most recent exception of this was the election of André Arthur in a Quebec City district in 2006. Most Canadian candidates are chosen in meetings called by their party's local association. In practice, the candidate who signs up the most local party members generally wins the nomination.
To run for a seat in the House, candidates must file nomination papers bearing the signatures of at least 50 or 100 constituents (depending on the size of the electoral district). Each electoral district returns one member using the first-past-the-post electoral system, under which the candidate with a plurality of votes wins. To vote, one must be a citizen of Canada and at least eighteen years of age.
Once elected, a Member of Parliament normally continues to serve until the next dissolution of Parliament. If a member dies, resigns, or ceases to be qualified, his or her seat falls vacant. It is also possible for the House of Commons to expel a member, but this power is only exercised when the member has engaged in serious misconduct or criminal activity. Formerly, MPs appointed to cabinet were expected to resign their seats, though this practice ceased in 1931. In each case, a vacancy may be filled by a by-election in the appropriate electoral district. The first-past-the-post system is used in by-elections, as in general elections.

==Perquisites==

The term "Member of Parliament" is usually used only to refer to members of the House of Commons, even though the Senate is also a part of Parliament. Members of the House of Commons may use the post-nominal letters "MP". The annual salary of each Member of Parliament is, as of 2010, $157,731;Indemnities, Salaries and Allowances, Members of the House of Commons, as of 1 April 2010. Retrieved on 2 December 2010. members may receive additional salaries in right of other offices they hold (for instance, the Speakership). MPs rank immediately below senators in the order of precedence.

==Qualifications==

Under the Constitution Act, 1867, Parliament is empowered to determine the qualifications of members of the House of Commons. The present qualifications are outlined in the Canada Elections Act, which was passed in 2000. Under the act, an individual must be an eligible voter, as of the day on which he or she is nominated, in order to stand as a candidate. Thus, minors and individuals who are not citizens of Canada are not allowed to become candidates. The Canada Elections Act also bars prisoners from standing for election (although they may vote). Moreover, individuals found guilty of election-related crimes are prohibited from becoming members for five years (in some cases, seven years) after conviction.
The act also prohibits certain officials from standing for the House of Commons. These officers include members of provincial and territorial legislatures (although this was not always the case), sheriffs, crown attorneys, most judges, and election officers. The Chief Electoral Officer and Assistant Chief Electoral Officer (the heads of Elections Canada, the federal agency responsible for conducting elections) are prohibited not only from standing as candidates, but also from voting. Finally, under the Constitution Act, 1867, a member of the Senate may not also become a member of the House of Commons and MPs must give up their seats when appointed to the Senate or the bench.

==Officers and symbols==

The House of Commons elects a presiding officer, known as the Speaker, at the beginning of each new parliamentary term, and also whenever a vacancy arises. Formerly, the Prime Minister determined who would serve as Speaker. Although the House voted on the matter, the voting constituted a mere formality. Since 1986, however, the House has elected Speakers by secret ballot. The Speaker is assisted by a Deputy Speaker, who also holds the title of Chair of Committees of the Whole. Two other deputies—the Deputy Chair of Committees of the Whole and the Assistant Deputy Chair of Committees of the Whole—also preside. The duties of presiding over the House are divided between the four officers aforementioned; however, the Speaker usually presides over Question Period and over the most important debates.
The Speaker controls debates by calling on members to speak. If a member believes that a rule (or Standing Order) has been breached, he or she may raise a "point of order", on which the Speaker makes a ruling that is not subject to any debate or appeal. The Speaker may also discipline members who fail to observe the rules of the House. When presiding, the Speaker must remain impartial. The Speaker also oversees the administration of the House and is Chair of the Board of Internal Economy, the governing body for the House of Commons. The current Speaker of the House of Commons is the Honourable Andrew Scheer, MP.
The member of the Government responsible for steering legislation through the House is Leader of the Government in the House of Commons. The Government House Leader (as he or she is more commonly known) is a Member of Parliament selected by the Prime Minister and holds cabinet rank. The Leader manages the schedule of the House of Commons, and attempts to secure the Opposition's support for the Government's legislative agenda.
Officers of the House who are not members include the Clerk of the House of Commons, the Deputy Clerk, the Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel, and several other clerks. These officers advise the Speaker and members on the rules and procedure of the House in addition to exercising senior management functions within the House administration. Another important officer is the Sergeant-at-Arms, whose duties include the maintenance of order and security on the House's premises and inside the buildings of the Parliamentary precinct. (The RCMP patrol Parliament Hill but are not allowed into the buildings unless asked by the Speaker). The Sergeant-at-Arms also carries the ceremonial mace, a symbol of the authority of the Crown and of the House of Commons, into the House each sitting.  The House is also staffed by parliamentary pages, who carry messages to the members in the Chamber and otherwise provide assistance to the House.
The Commons' mace has the shape of a mediaeval mace which was used as a weapon, but in brass and ornate in detail and symbolism.  At its bulbous head is a replica of the Imperial State Crown;[tpl]citation needed|date=October 2012[/tpl] the choice of this crown for the Commons' mace differentiates it from the Senate's mace, which has St. Edward's Crown[tpl]citation needed|date=October 2012[/tpl] at its apex. The Commons mace is placed upon the table in front of the speaker for the duration of the sitting with the crown pointing towards the prime minister and the other cabinet ministers, who advise the Queen and governor general and are accountable to this chamber (in the Senate chamber, the mace points towards the throne, where the Queen has the right to sit herself).
Carved above the speaker's chair are the Royal Arms of the United Kingdom.  This chair was a gift from the United Kingdom Branch of the Empire Parliamentary Association in 1921, to replace the chair that was destroyed by the fire of 1916, and was an exact replica of the chair in the British House of Commons at the time.  These arms at its apex were considered the royal arms for general purposes throughout the British empire at the time.  Since 1931, however, Canada has been an independent country and the Canadian Coat of Arms are now understood to be the royal arms of the Queen of Canada.  An escutcheon of what were the deputed Arms of Canada can be found next to the speaker's chair being held by a unicorn, on the opposition side, and a parallel escutcheon of the Arms of the United Kingdom can be found held by a lion, on the government side.
In response to a campaign by Bruce Hicks for the Canadianization of symbols of royal authority and to advance the identity of parliamentary institutions,[tpl]cite book|last=Hicks|first=Bruce|title= A ‘Call to Arms’ for the Canadian Parliament" (Canadian Parliamentary Review 23:4)[/tpl] a proposal that was supported by Speakers of the House of Commons John Fraser and Gilbert Parent, a Commons committee was eventually struck following a motion by MP Derek Lee, before which Hicks and Robert Watt, the first Chief Herald of Canada, were called as the only two expert witnesses, though Senator Serge Joyal joined the committee on behalf of the Senate.  Commons' Speaker Peter Milliken then asked the governor general to authorize such a symbol.  In the United Kingdom, the House of Commons and the House of Lords use the royal badge of the portcullis, in green and red respectively,[tpl]citation needed|date=October 2012[/tpl] to represent those institutions and to distinguish them from the government, the courts and the monarch.  The Canadian Heraldic Authority on 15 April 2008 granted the House of Commons, as an institution, a badge consisting of the chamber's mace (as described above) behind the escutcheon of the shield of the Royal Arms of Canada (representing the Queen herself, in whose name the House of Commons deliberates).[tpl]cite web| url=http://archive.gg.ca/heraldry/pub-reg/project-pic.asp?lang=e&ProjectID=1246&ProjectElementID=4484| last=Canadian Heraldic Authority| authorlink=Canadian Heraldic Authority| title=Public Register of Arms, Flags and Badges of Canada > House of Commons of Canada| publisher=Queen's Printer for Canada| accessdate=8 August 2010[/tpl]

==Procedure==

Like the Senate, the House of Commons meets on Parliament Hill in Ottawa. The Commons Chamber is modestly decorated in green, in contrast with the more lavishly furnished red Senate Chamber. The arrangement is similar to the design of the Chamber of the British House of Commons.[tpl]dead link|date=April 2014[/tpl] The seats are evenly divided between both sides of the Chamber, three sword-lengths apart (about three metres).[ref]
