[[Telesens]]

CATEGORIES: Telecommunications companies of the United Kingdom

Telesens International, a developer and supplier of software products and IT services primarily to the telecommunications market, headquartered in London and with a development center in Ukraine, was established in 1998.

==History==

Telesens International ltd. (London, UK) is one of the European leaders in the development, distribution and support of software systems across a variety of sectors. 
With its origin in telecommunications, the company was founded in 1998 at a time of rapid growth in the market. Anchored by its cutting-edge, high-performance technical solutions, Telesens soon became a major software development center for businesses in Europe, Asia and USA. 
Telesens International ltd. offers modern, scalable products for leading national and international telecom providers, such as Deutsche Telekom AG (Germany), Kyivstar (Ukraine), Ukrtelecom (Ukraine), Kazakhtelecom (Kazakhstan), as well as for small and medium sized telecommunication companies.
On the software services side, the company has performed bespoke projects for a diversity of markets. The verticals include telecommunications, sports and leisure, energy, healthcare, logistics and finance, whereas the horizontal markets comprise billing systems, CRM solutions, corporate information systems, E-Commerce solutions, enterprise application integration and IT Business process outsourcing.
The Telesens International ltd Development Center is based in the Ukraine. 
Telesens International officially opened an office in Hanoi (Vietnam) of its own newly created subsidiary, Telesens VN on the 27th of September. 

==Products==

The company mainly focuses on developing and promoting complex software solutions in the field of telecommunications on the markets of CIS, Europe and Asia. 
Company offer powerful and modern systems for large domestic and international carriers as well as for medium and small telecommunications companies and their clients. 
Tinterconnect (T-IC) is an interconnect billing system for settlements between carriers and telecommunication service providers. 
T-CPM is an interconnect billing system for content processing settlements between telecommunication operators and content providers. 
T-Roaming (T-R) is a roaming settlements system. 
T-TTM is a traffic trade management system. 
T-Factura is a system which enables to import mobile and fixed carriers’ bills in an electronic format and to process the detailed information about services. 
Company provide a wide range of services:
- Modifications of the supplied software products on demand of the customer;
- Technical support and administration of software products;
- Training of the Customer's staff;
- Business consulting.

==Solutions for the telecommunications industry (OSS / BSS domain)==

Telesens offers the following software solutions for the domain OSS/BSS:
T-Provisioning solution aimed for full automation of management of network services for all variants of network and information infrastructure of telecom operator services. 
Mediation Solution (T-Mediation) solution designed for specialized processing and transformation of large volumes of data and online transactions automatically for subsequent use by different target information systems (billing systems, data warehouses, sales management system, etc.). 
Payment Gateway (T-PGW) solution intended to organize a single point of receipt of payments from all sources of revenue with subsequent enrollment to subscribers personal accounts. 
Telesens Document Center (T-DC) is provided to integrate and standardize the generation, printing and e-mail distribution of customer documents due to the single platform of interaction with various existing information systems.  
Sales Online (T-SOL) solution that provides a flexible means of managing the sales process, customer service provisioning and support, management of marketing campaigns, recording of equipment and resources used to provide services. 
Company provide a wide range of services:
- Development of custom software solutions based on proven software platforms;
- Integration of software solutions in information and software infrastructure of the customer;
- Modification of implemented software solutions at the request of the customer;
- Technical support and administering of software solutions, including third parties.

==Management==

 Rubin Eduard  — CEO
Eduard Rubin has headed Telesens since its foundation in 1998. In 2005 Mr. Rubin became a PhD automated management systems and advanced information technologies; in 2006 was voted the best Ukrainian IT manager by Ernst & Young and in 2007 one of the top candidates for Entrepreneur of the Year Awards in two different nominations. In 2011 he was elected a Chairman of Kharkiv Branch Board of the European Business Association (EBA).
 Fedorenko Vladimir  — Director
Vladimir Fedorenko is a highly skillful and experienced IT-manager, working for the Telesens Company since its foundation and holding the office of the company technical director from 2004 to 2009. Mr. Fedorenko holds an extensive experience of international IT-projects implementation in the markets of telecommunication services, energy consumption and retail trade for customers from the UK, Israel and Germany; and possesses expertise and authority in new products development, international projects management and software development procedure organization.
 Natalya Gnesina  — Chief Financial Officer
Natalya Gnesina is an expert with 10 years of experience in both private and public financial management, budgeting, strategic planning and controlling. She has been working in Telesens since its foundation, being a Director of Finance since 2001. 
Natalya Gnesina graduated from National Technical University "Kharkiv Polytechnical Institute" in 1996 and from V.N. Karazin Kharkiv National University in 2003.

==External links==


