[[Extreme Element]]

CATEGORIES: Sports organisations of the United Kingdom

Extreme Element is a UK-based, online agency for extreme sports. The company was founded in 2006 by Tim Brickle with Al Gosling (CEO Extreme Group). The solely-online extreme sports agent is part of the Extreme Group and trades under the famous ‘EX’ of the Extreme brand. Ex Element operates from Hove, East Sussex and was initially established to cater for a niche in a market that is heavily dominated by generalist’ companies.
The company offers Extreme sport experiences in five different categories: Driving, Water, Air, Earth & Snow. The 1000+ extreme experiences include sports such as Skydiving, Track Driving, Bungee Jumping, Powerboating and many more activities considered to be ‘extreme.’
Extreme Element works on a gift voucher platform; where experiences are purchased and taken inside a defined validity period. In 2007, Extreme Element launched gift cards onto the high street and into the supermarket Sainsbury's, but these are no longer available as of 2009. 'Ex Element' as the company is also known differs from other activity providers in the gift voucher market by offering the option to ‘redeem’ a voucher against any of the sports offered, not just the one sport that the voucher was initially purchased for. Customers could also choose the ‘Ex Pack' up until November 2011, which contained a T-shirt and other merchandise to accompany the voucher.
In 2008, Extreme Element launched ‘Book&Go’, an on-site feature that allows customers to see the particular date or locations that are available for the experience they might be interested in booking. This changed the on site consumer experience for booking activities, as it allowed customers to get last minute bookings and aided activity providers in filling those hard to sell time slots. This booking service is only available with the voucher retailer; exelement.co.uk.
In September 2009, Extreme Element hosted the first annual ‘London Bungee Jump’ which took place next to Tower Bridge, London. The 26th and 27 September 2009 saw a record 297 people plummet 160 ft on the exclusive Bungee jump. The following event in 2010 saw Extreme Element awarded a Guinness World Record for 'The Most Bungee Jumps in 60minutes by One Person. The year 2009 also saw Extreme Element receive a new investor, Pascal Tiemann. The non-executive director brings in-depth experience from previous roles in The Tussauds Group and Legoland amongst others. 
In July 2011, Extreme Element Ltd. (and its assets including www.experiencedays.co.uk) was purchased by Robb Young and Michelle Geib, the owners of American gift company XperienceDays Inc.

Image:Londonbungeeexlement.jpg|Exclusive London Bungee

==Most Popular Experiences==

==Company history==

Started in 2006 by Tim Brickle & Al Gosling (CEO Extreme Group)
Launched gift cards in 2007 into Sainsbury’s & other high street retailers
• ‘Book&Go’ launched in 2008, allowing customers to book directly from the website, with visible allocated times & dates.
• 2009 Exclusive London Bungee Jump – Bungee Jump next to Tower Bridge saw a record 250 jumpers in one weekend.
• 2010 Exclusive London Bungee Jump – Guinness World Record for Most Bungee Jumps in 60 Minutes by One Person.
• 2011 Company Purchased by XperienceDays Inc.
Driving
Water
Air
Earth
Snow

