[[Mexico's Next Top Model (cycle 1)]]

CATEGORIES: Top Model series

Mexico's Next Top Model, Cycle 1 was a reality show hosted by supermodel Elsa Benitez, which aimed to find the next top fashion model. 
The winner received a US$ 100,000 contract, management and representation by Shock Modeling and a photo shoot for the cover and a six-page spread within Glamour magazine. Also a trip to San Francisco, a trip to London by Sedal and $20.000 by Sears.
The cycle featured 13 contestants. The destination during this cycle was Ixtapa, Mexico. 
The winner of the competition was 18 year-old Mariana Bayón from Torreón, Coahuila.

==Episodes==

===Episode 1===

First aired: October 1, 2009
The 20 semifinalists came to the Puebla's hotel La Purificadora and then they met Oscar Madrazo, Jo Lance and the famous top model and host Elsa Benitez. They did a photo shoot and showed his coach Oscar Madrazo how was their runway. They later went to meet individually with the panel of judges (Elsa Benitez, Oscar Madrazo and Jo Lance) to show how was their personality, and emerging conflicts among girls, which the judges said was the excess of Ana Laura and discrimination that Silvia suffered as a child for being Mulata. Then the girls got together and Oscar Madrazo told them he had envelopes with a picture of each of the 20 girls where it said if they were accepted or not, in this round 3 girls were eliminated.
After this, the girls celebrate the birthday of Nohemí and the next day they have their first photoshoot, and that will determine who will be the 13 finalists and who will go to live at the house in Mexico City. The girls were photographed as angels and then the judges deliberated and chose. In this second round, 4 more girls were eliminated.

===Episode 2===

First aired: October 8, 2009
The girls arrive at their new home in Mexico City and receive their first Elsa's Mail that tells them to prepare to leave early the next morning. The girls chose their beds and Yatzil is left out without a bed to sleep on and this flares a dispute between paulina, Andrea and Silvia. In the end, Ana Laura decides to share her bed with Yatzil (as seen at the beginning of episode 4).
The next day the girls came to Sears next to the Palace of Fine Arts, where they met Elsa, who introduces them to Glenda Reyna, the panel judge which gives the girls a critique, one by one, about their dress and overall appearance. Mariana received a lot of positive feedback from Glenda, she was praised for gaving the height, body figure and skin of a model, while Nohemí was criticized for being too short and Silvia for having a short torso. Then Elsa introduces Edgar Smolensky, Sears representative, who introduces the girls to the challenge of the week, which is to dress appropriately, with exclusive brands in just 10 minutes. Ana Laura and Paulina were criticized for their bad choices and lack of combining accessories while Silvia was severely criticized for not using her imagination and the fact that she stole the complete outfit from a mannequin, but ultimately Cecilia wins the challenge. Her prize is the outfit she chose, and three pieces chosen by the rest of the bunch.
In the photo shoot this week, Oscar Madrazo introduces girls to the photographer Tito Trueba and three dogs who would pose in the photo, where they have to portray a dog walker in sexy lingerie. Some girls struggle with handling three dogs while exposing their semi nude bodies on set.
At the panel of judges, Mauricio Olvera was the guest judge. María Fernanda, Veronica, Cecilia, Andrea and Ana Laura received good reviews, especially Veronica for showing a sexy sensual side while still remaining confident and Kathya and Yatzil fall into the bottom two: the first because she looks overposed, while the other for her lack of poses. At the end, Kathya was eliminated for showing vulgarity in her pose.

===Episode 3===

First aired: October 15, 2009
The girls arrived at the house and receive a farewell message from Kathya. The next morning, Oscar woke the girls and introduces M·A·C PR Jorge Rios, who would be the judge in this challenge, which consisted in showing what they can do with makeup counting only 5 minutes. Anelis, María Fernanda and Veronica were the best and Veronica won the challenge.
The girls arrived to a beauty salon where Elsa introduces them to the International Makeup Artist Alex Lopez, who reveals the girls, that they will have theirs makeovers. Most girls have trouble accepting their makeovers, especially Andrea who was complaining about her makeover and Oscar warned her that if she doesn't she will be placed out of the competition so she finally accepted the makeover. 
Back at the house, the girls are surprised by Sedal Hair products at their home, which of a token of their gratitude they receive a hair kit for hair treatment. The girls notice that Anelis was making fun of Andrea's new haircut and the girls start to bully Anelis for being rude to Andrea.
For the next photoshoot they meet up with Oscar and David Franco the (photographer this week), and they are told that they will be paired in two's for their next photoshoot and to lay down on fabric with a lot of prints and color and to try to stand out from the fabric while posing and creating strong facial expressions. 
At panel, Desiré Navarro, President of  Mexico's International Fashion Group, was the guest judge. Nohemí, Paulina and Andrea were the best during the photoshoot, Cecilia was praised for showing the right facial expressions and showing improvement from last week, while Ana was criticized for looking slightly fat in her photo. Veronica and Mariana were also criticized for being the most beautiful girls out of the bunch and to not use that to their advantage. At the end, despite delivering one of the best photos, Andrea lands in the bottom two for her bad attitude during makeovers. However the judges agreed that the lack of effort by Yatzil was just intolerable, and she was eliminated from the competition.

===Episode 4===

First aired: October 22, 2009
The challenge of the day leads to a circus where they are told that in this profession they should be able to tame, but this is not about lions or elephants, but rather about taming the runway and the public. The girls meet "JLo", a runway expert, who does not hesitate to tell them face-to-face the "right" way to do their jobs.
They played really tame their audience when they send them to march on a runway wearing the clothes of a young Mexican designer . At the end of the  Challenge, Isabel and Cecilia were praised for their strong walks, meanwhile Silvia was Criticized for her weak walk, and Andrea was severely judged on how she couldn't manage to walk without swinging her arm, but at the end of the day Cecilia won the challenge, winning a mini spread on Glamour Magazine. Isabel was angry at herself because someone else won the challenge. Isabel also mentioned to the girls that she should have won because she had previous experience from doing catwalks. This started a dispute between Isabel and Paulina.
Back at the house the girls receive Elsa mail giving them a hint that they will be upside down. For the next photoshoot they meet up with Oscar Madrazo and he gives them an insight on their next photoshoot challenge, where each contestant will be hanging from a harness, upside down dressed as Dolls. Most girls had complications but got used to the exposure.
Ana struggled at first during the session because she had the flu and she felt nausea. Most girls felt dizzy during the photoshoot, but most managed to pull off a decent photo. Andrea was complaining and was against the fact that she will be hung upside down, and Oscar was disappointed on her. Silvia, Nohemí and Anelis performed well during the photoshoot.
When the judges deliberate finally recognize the efforts and momentum of Silvia, who has always felt like the "Underdog" in the eliminations. The judges were amazed and shocked at Aneli's performance in the session, thus producing a stellar photo that would grace the pages of Vogue. Silvia, Anelis, Nohemí and Paulina produce the best photos of the bunch, while Andrea was Severely judged by judge, Glenda Reyna, for having an attitude of a Spoiled Snob, and being unprofessional, despite having a nice photo. Judges also criticized Cecilia's inability to maintain herself in the harness, which looked like she was really uncomfortable and lacked facial expressions. Veronica failed to deliver a decent photo and judges thought she was just relying on just pretty and Isabel just produced a lackluster photo, thus sending her packing.

===Episode 5===

First aired: October 29, 2009
Back in the house, Paulina tells Andrea, Silvia and Cecilia her impressions of them at the start of the competition, at the same time, they criticize Isabel, the most recently eliminated contestant.
A new Elsa Mail reports they were going to learn to pose that week. The day after, the girls arrive at the famous Etro boutique in Polanco where they watch Oscar and Jo posing as mannequins out in a window display. Then, they meet up with Andrea Ororica, the boutique manager and she tells the girl's that they will be posing in duos as this week's challenge. Cecilia was criticized for not using her accessorie the right way, and Mariana could  not manage to remain stable during her pose. Andrea Ororica (boutique owner), let the girls know that there will be another challenge in which the girls will compete in couples. The Couples were:
Their challenge was to pose in the windows of the boutique and before Oscar's mark they should change their poses, having a total of three poses. Andrea was criticized for her lack of poses, and Cecilia kept projecting the same poses, as well as Silvia who was stiff throughout the whole challenge. Jo, Andrea Ororica and Oscar praised Veronica's versatility and her graceful movements and Nohemís wide selection of poses and stable facial expressions, at the end Andrea Ororica announced the winner as Nohemí, her award was a $4,000 USDA dress from the boutique Etro, but also had to choose another girl, who would receive a Wallet, Nohemí chose Andrea to receive the second prize.
Back at the house, the girls make jokes about Silva and Verónica, due to their close friendship they have towards each other.
In this week's photoshoot, the girls had to pose as "La Catrina" a Mexican Death Symbol that portrays a wealthy woman of Class and power, but an haute couture version using the beautiful setting of a park. Ana Laura, Nohemí, Cecilia and Paulina, perform very well, and manage to capture the true essence of "La Catrina" meanwhile Fernanda, Verónica and Mariana, are considered the worst of the week,and Andrea and Anelís, didn't meet expectations nor portrayed "La Catrina" in an exceptional way.
At the panel of judges, Nohemí's and Ana Laura's photos are the best of the bunch, Nohemí was Praised for her stellar photo and her graceful body of language, and Ana's Strong Facial expressions,  and were congratulated, meanwhile Mariana, Verónica, Anelís and Fernanda were criticized because of their poor performance. Finally, Nohemí got the first call-out, and Anelís and Fernanda were in the bottom two. Anelís was there because she disappointed the judges after having one of the best photos each week, and Fernanda was there because she couldn't reflect her beauty in photos. Anelís got another chance, and Fernanda was sent home. For producing a lackluster photo despite her beauty.

===Episode 6===

First aired: November 5, 2009
As the Girls arrive at the top Model house, they receive a letter from Fernanda, and they all get very upset from her elimination, and they preferred Fernanda to stay over Anelis, because they dislike Anelis and her attitude. Later on, the girls have a drinking game at the house, doing body shots. Paulina got carried away with her drinking as usual and the girls started to notice that she can't handle her drinking.
The next day the girls arrive at the Nahuacatl, a Historic site Museum where Diego Rivera had his art Expositions. They meet up with Oscar and Female Model Paulina Flores where they discuss and practice how to show emotions with a mirror. For the challenge each and one of them had to evoke different personalities through photographs in a photobooth. Veronica, Andrea and Maríanna were severely criticized for their lack of versatility. The Challenge winners were Silvia, Paulina and Nohemí were they won a trip to Jolie Spa.
Back at the House, Ana took offense when Paulina called her fat, but she misunderstood, thus creating a dispute between Paulina and Ana. 
For this weeks photoshoot, the girls had to pose as Criminals taking their mug shots. Each were assigned different criminal stereotypes and had to portray it. Anelis, Ana and Veronica struggled to take good direction from the photographer. While the others did a good job at portraying their assigned character.
At panel, the judges were surprised at Marianas photo this week, and they praised her for finally taking a good photo. Cecilia was also praised for being creative and interacting with her prop, Nohemí delivered an exceotional photo as always and Andrea was praised for being photogenic. The judges severely criticized Veronica for not showing improvement this week, and Ana for not taking good direction from the photographer thus landing her and Anelis in the bottom two. Ana was eliminated for not portraying her character and descending performance, thus giving Anelis another chance.

===Episode 7===

First aired: November 12, 2009
Back at the House when the girls arrive, they receive Ana's letter. The girls complain about how Ana should have stayed instead of Anelis. The girls start Hating on Anelis, especially Cecilia and Mariana. The girls start to notice the close relationship between Veronica and Silvia, and start speculating that they might like each other. But Veronica denies and says that she has a boyfriend back at home.
Next day, the girls go to Polanco to Shock Model agency and meet up with Estela Saenz the Director of Shock Model agency in Mexico. She tells the contestants that they will be going on Go-sees meeting up with famous designers from  Mexico city. The girls are grouped by fours, Cecilia, Mariana, silvia and Anelis. Veronica, Nohemí, Andrea and Paulina are the other group. The designers love Veronicas look, and Cecilias High fashion look, while one of the designers commented that Silvia doesn't look like a model and her walk was very weak, and Andrea was crtized by her insecurities. 
The girls have trouble finding the designers, but at the end they meet up with Grypho head designer Mauricio Olvera and they all have a final runway to show off their assets. Cecilia was praised by her unique fresh look and Veronica was yet again performing a great job and acting professional. At the end of the day, Paulina, Veronica, Nohemí and Andrea won the Go see challenge, and Veronica was chosen as the Best one, as a prize they all get a rack of clothes from the designers.
Back at the House the girls yet again make fun of Veronica and Silvia for their love that they have going on, and Paulina crosses the line with her drinking and the girls start to notice, and Anelis and Paulina have a dispute over how Drinking can become a problem, especially for a model.
The next day the girls go to El Centro de los Espectaculos in the Arena Naucalpan, famous for "lucha Libre" Fresstyle wrestling, where the girls are terrified when they encounter a pack of Lucha Libre wrestlers in the ring. Oscar tells them that for the next Photoshoot they will be dressed as Very sophisticated woman while in the wrestling ring with a couple of professional wrestlers. Where some of the girls have trouble concentrating and keeping a right facial expression.
At Panel, the judges severely criticize most girls' performance this week. Mariana was Praised by the judges for delivering a High Fashion photo and with a lot of strength and showing great improvement from the last sessions. Cecilia, Paulina and Andrea were also praised for their stellar photos, but Paulina was judged on how she normally over poses and over thinks her performances. Silvia and Veronica land in the bottom two, Veronica because she has not showed any progress in the photoshoots despite her beauty, and Silvia because she lacked variety in her photos. At the end Elsa eliminated Silvia, giving Veronica another chance, thus believing in her potential.

===Episode 8===

First aired: November 19, 2009
When the girls arrive at the house, they receive a Video from Silvia, the previous eliminated contestant. Veronica, Nohemí, Mariana and Anelis start to cry as they watch the video, especially Veronica because she was very close to her. Cecilia and Mariana talk about how they were surprised how Anelis is still in the competition, and they question her position in the competition.
A new Elsa Mail reports that that this week the girls will be learning about acting. The next day they meet up with Freddy Garza, a Commercial Director who will be leading the girls to their next workshop about acting. Then later on that day, Freddy introduces the girls to famous Mexican actor and Icon Poncho Herrera a member from the famous Pop band RBD, whom which will be acting a short scene with the girls. Most girls perform well, but Mariana was criticized for showing her nerves, and Anelis wasn't performing at her best. At the end Poncho and Freddy chose Cecilia was the winner of the challenge, as a prize she received a shopping spree, and had an option to bring a friend along, and she chose Mariana to join her.
Drama happens back at the house, when Paulina, Cecilia and Mariana start to form a clique, while alienazing the other girls in the house. Then Paulina, Cecilia and Mariana start to Bully Andrea and begin influenzing her into drinking Tequila, and this causes a heated dispute between the girls, and Andrea verbally abuses Paulina calling her an alcoholic.
The next day they meet up with Oscar, Laura Ramirez the president of  Sedal  Hair care, and Mario Muñoz a movie director. Oscar informs the girls that they will be doing a commercial for Sedal Hair Care while reading the lines off a teleprompt and interact with the product and advertise it. Most girls do well on set, while some have difficulties reading the teleprompt, especially Andrea who talks fast during the session, and Oscar told her to slow down a bit, which causes her to perform bad.
At the Panel of judges, Nohemí, Mariana and Cecilia receive good reviews about their commercial, while Anelis, Veronica and Paulina were critiqued for producing lackluster commercials. Anelis was severely judged, because she has not showed improvement in the last 3 weeks and she didn't respond wisely when she was asked if she still wanted to remain in the competition. Veronica was also judged on how she wasn't acting natural during her commercial, and Paulina on how she was being over the top during her commercial, which lands her in the bottom 2 for the first time. The judges eliminate Anelis, for giving up and not showing ethusiasm in the competition.

===Episode 9===

First aired: November 26, 2009
When the girls arrived to the house after the elimination, they found a letter from Anelís, the last eliminated contestant. The letter was for only 3 girls: Nohemí, Verónica and Andrea. The other girls didn't receive a letter from her, neither did they care too much because for them, her elimination wasn't so painful.
On the next day, they went to a photo studio, there was Allan Fis doing a photoshoot with Aishlyn Derbez, a Mexican model. Then, he explained to them that the communication between the photographer and the model was very important in the industry. Then they had a challenge evaluated by Allan himself. They were divided in couples because one of them was going to be the photographer, and the other the model in the set. The couples were:
Nohemí, Mariana and Paulina made an exceptional job on set, but Andrea, Verónica and Cecilia had some problems in terms of directing. At the end of the challenge, Allan said there was gonna be only one winner, and he chose Paulina as the winner of the challenge. As a prize for her challenge, she was told that a special person will be meeting with her at the airport, which ended up being Paulina's husband, and they had Dinner together at a famous restaurant.
Later, when Paulina went back to the house, Mariana and her talked about arranging a party for Andrea, who was turning 21 the next day, and Cecilia, who was turning 22 the day after.
On the next day, the girls met up with Oscar Madrazo,in an empty field, as the setting for their next photoshoot. He told them they were gonna be doing a photoshoot with the Brazilian male model Guillerme Casali using a vehicle as a prop and portraying stuck in a traffic and portraying different interactions, but they had a very nice surprise when he told them the photographer for the shooting was Nigel Barker. 
During the photoshoot, Nigel liked Nohemí. Paulina was great but lacked her role to portray lust, Mariana was inconsistent, Andrea was too aggressive with the male model and Verónica didn't know how to use her great body to her advantage in the photoshoot. 
That night, when they arrived to the house, Mariana and Paulina prepared a party for Andrea and Cecilia, Andrea received a big pony doll piñata and Cecilia a big man doll. 
At the panel of judges, Allan told the girls they had to point out one by one and tell the judges who they thought was the girl with most potential and who was the girl with less potential. Verónica, Andrea, Paulina and Cecilia said the girl with most potential in the competition was Nohemí. Nohemí and Mariana said Cecilia was the second one in the competition with the most model potential. The girl that was labeled with the less potential was Mariana.
Later, the judges evaluated the photos, Paulina, Mariana and Nohemí were considered as the best photos of the week, Cecilia was severely criticized for not projecting face expressions throughout the session, both Andrea and Veronica had many problems with producing a variety in their photos. Veronica was severely judged on how she has not improved in the last five weeks of the competition, and not using her modelesque beauty to her advantage,thus landing her and Andrea in the bottom two this week, and the judges eliminated Verónica, because they were frustrated that she has not improved in her photoshoots in the competition, despite being the most modelesque looking out of the bunch.

===Episode 10===

First aired: December 3, 2009
The show starts, and Mariana is crying for the fact that she has been pointed out as the weakest in the competition by the other girls. Paulina tried to calm her down and tried to make her feel better. When the girls arrive at the house they receive a mail from Veronica, the girl who was recently eliminated. Then the girls receive an Elsa mail, reporting that they will be doing something for Glamour magazine.
Then the next day they meet with Mar Abascal, the Director for Glamour Magazine, and he explains to the girls that the winner of the competition will receive a fashion spread in the magazine. Then they meet Oscar at a bar where the girls watch the model Dinorah Cetina walking on the table from the bar. Then Oscar lets the girls know that they will be doing the same thing as their next challenge. The challenge was that the girls had to keep a fierce catwalk while balancing and dodging beer bottles and wine glasses, while wearing the clothes from the famous Mexican designer Jose María Torres, the lead designer from the brand "8". After the challenge the girls were evaluated. Cecilia and Nohemí received good reviews while Andrea was criticized for not improving her catwalk and she kept looking down, something a runway model should never do. Although stumbling and spilling a few wine glasses and showed confidence, Cecilia won the challenge, as a reward she received a private photoshoot session with Panel judge Allan Fis.
Back at the house the girls receive a pleasant surprise at the front door, the male models they met previously at the bar during the challenge, they were over for dinner and a few drinks, thus causing some drama in the house with Cecilia drinking a lot and messing around with one of the male models. When later on she reveals that she was very drunk and that she missed the presence of a man.
The next day the girls meet with Oscar for their next photoshoot, where they were introduced to the fashion photographer, Gregory Allen. For this weeks photoshoot, the girls had to perform a photoshoot poster for Telenovelas with famous Mexican actor Eric Elias . The girls were given different roles to portray.
During the session, Cecilia delivered her role, but was struggling with maintaining a relaxed face during the session, Paulina performed well and Mariana, Nohemí and Andrea all struggled to fit into their roles. Mariana was told by Oscar that she was modeling throughout the session and her role was not to model and Andrea was to afraid to show passion with the actor.
At the panel of judges, Paulina and Cecilia produced the best photos of the week. The judges praised Paulina for getting into her character and showing strong passion and sensuality in her photo. Cecilia was also praised for her stellar photo, but was slightly criticized for not showing a vulnerable and soft expression and that on most of her photos she gives strong facial expressions. While Andrea was criticized for her lack of professionalism on the set and Nohemí for not relaxing her body, not portraying her rock and roll photo and for not delivering a great photo as she usually does. The judges also noticed that Mariana failed to deliver a photo that portrays her role without modeling too much on the set. At the end Nohemí and Andrea landed in the bottom two, Nohemí for failing to portray her character, and Andrea for acting like a spoiled snob on set as usual. Elsa eliminated Andrea for lack of professionalism despite her being extremely photogenic.

===Episode 11===

First aired: December 10, 2009
When the girls arrive at the house they notice that they don't receive a letter from Andrea, the previous eliminated contestant. Most girls were not surprised at that. Later on, Nohemí was crying due to the fact that she was in the bottom two last week, for her weak performance. This causes Mariana and Cecilia to talk about Nohemí's inability to maintain confidence without beating herself down. Later on, the girls receive a surprise at the front door of their house, famous T.V conductor Rebeca de Alba, whom where she talks to the girls about the public press, and how to handle certain situations where they have to deal with self-esteem and competing with other models out in the industry. This makes Nohemí feel a lot better about herself.
The next day they meet up with Oscar, where he introduces the girls to Candela Ferro famous celebrity interviewer, whom which will be interviewing the girls as if they were Mexico's next top model as this weeks challenge. Nohemí, struggled to respond wisely, and Oscar judged her on how she couldn't manage to talk without using her hands. Paulina and Mariana were also judged on how they couldn't keep up with responding with legitimate answers, and Paulina was severely judged on how she kept on changing the topic, and Mariana kept talking about her personal life. At the end, Cecilia was the winner of the challenge, winning the privilege of stealing 50 percent more frames from one of her competitors for their next photoshoot, thus choosing Mariana who will have 50 percent less frames for this weeks photoshoot. Also as another prize, Cecilia won a trip for two at Playa del Carmen resort for 4 days and 4 nights.
Back at the house, during dinner the girls decide to point out each other's flaws in the competition. Paulina and Cecilia get into a heated dispute, while Nohemí once again feels insecure with her flaws and Mariana has difficulties struggling with the fact that everyone calls her only pretty. The next day, the girls arrive at the Casa Azul, Frida Kahlo's home of the famous Mexican painter where she lived 30 years, which is now a famous museum for display. The girls are given a tour of the Museum, and after the tour they are told that they will be doing a photoshoot inspired by Frida Kahlo.
Later they arrive at a set, where they meet up with Oscar who introduces them to famous Mexican photographer Ivan Aguirre, who will be this weeks photographer. The girls are told that for their photoshoot they are going to have to portray and evoke Frida Kahlo while painting on a white canvas which will be a self-portrait of their own face. Nohemí performed the best on set as usual, while Cecilia, Paulina and Mariana all struggled to get into character.
At the panel of judges, Elsa announces that the top three girls will be traveling to Ixtapa  for this cycles destination for the grand finale. The girls were asked why they should be Mexicos next top model. Most responded wisely. While evaluating their photos,  Nohemí was yet again praised by the judges for producing a stellar strong photograph, compare to her last photo which was deemed as the weakest. Cecilia was also praised for getting into character, but was judged on how it took her a long time to portray her character and how she had 50 percent more frames than the other girls. Mariana and Paulina both landed in the bottom two for having the weakest photos, Mariana for being too stiff, and Paulina for showing a bad angle of her face. Elsa eliminated Paulina despite being the most consistent in the competition, but was lacking potential.

===Episode 12===

First aired: December 17, 2009
When the top three finalists arrive at the top model house, they get ready and pack up for their trip to Ixtapa for the grand finale of the cycle. As the girls arrive at their destination where they stay at the resort La casa que canta where they will be doing a commercial for Sedal Hair Care. Before the commercial, Mariana feels dizzy and gets nausea before the filming. During the session, Nohemí performs a great job during her take, while Mariana and Cecilia both struggle to act natural during the filming of the commercial. 
After the filming they arrive at the beach where they meet up with Oscar and Allan Fis greets them into their next and final phtoshoot for the competition, where they have to jump on a trampoline while wearing dresses. The challenge of the photoshoot is that the girls have to jump in the air while keeping a soft facial expression. Mariana and Cecilia both struggled once again with keeping a soft face expression, Cecilia didn't have grace throughout the session and Mariana failed to deliver graceful movements. Nohemí once again nailed the session, producing many stellar takes and moving with grace, something the other girls failed to do.
later on the girls receive an Elsa mail that announces another elimination to determine the final two.
At the panel of judges, the judges deliberate the girls' performance this week, on the commercial and on the photoshoot. Nohemí was praised for producing a great commercial and a photograph. Cecilia was severely criticized for not acting natural in her commercial take, and for having a weak facial expression on her photograph, despite having great body of language. Mariana was praised for a great commercial when she was feeling sick, although she failed to deliver a great photograph and for being very stiff on the session. Nohemí produced a stellar commercial along with a graceful photograph. The judges were impressed with Nohemí's performance this week as well as throughout the whole competition, thus receiving a spot in the top 2. After a long and hard deliberation and decision,  Mariana and Cecilia land in the bottom 2 where they are both criticized on how they failed to deliver a good performance this week, therefore Cecilia was eliminated as the second runner-up of the competition. The judges felt that Cecilia was very monotone on her facial expressions, despite being one of the strongest and with the most consistency without ever appearing in the bottom two before. It was later revealed on a blog by Glenda that Mariana was originally going to be eliminated but production felt that a Nohemi and Cecilia final two would be too realistic.
After elimination, both Mariana and Nohemí were very exited to be in the final two, and the next challenge would be the final runway where they will be in a real fashion show with real fashion models where they get to walk in the most amazing attire. After the fashion show, both Mariana and Nohemí were congratulated by Elsa for doing a great job in the show and having strong catwalks. At the end of the fashion show, the girls arrive at the final judging, where they meet up with the panel of judges who will finally determine the winner of the competition. At panel, Nohemí was praised for her strong walk, and the judges were quite impressed with her improvement in her walk. Mariana was slightly criticized on how she was a bit stiff during her walk, although she looked gorgeous.
Next, the judges evaluated their work throughout the whole competition, Nohemí received critiques on how she's been showing the same facial expression throughout most of her photos, but she's been also praised for taking some of the most stunning photos in the competition and having the strongest portfolio. Mariana was praised for being versatile in most of her photos, but lacked body of language and was stiff in some of them despite having obvious beauty. After a long deliberation a debates the judges have made their final decision. When they call the girls back to panel, Elsa announces Mariana as the first winner of Mexico's next top model.

==Contestants==

(ages stated are at time of contest)
Top 20
(Contestants eliminated in the preliminary round of the competition)
Top 13
(Finalists)

==Summaries==

===Call-out order===

===Photo Shoot Guide===

===Makeovers===

===Post Top Model Career===

==External links==


