[[Green Line (MARTA)]]

CATEGORIES: Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority, Railway lines opened in 1992

The Green Line is a rapid transit line in the MARTA rail system.  It operates between Bankhead and Edgewood / Candler Park stations, running exclusively inside the Atlanta city limits.
The Green Line is a stub of the originally planned North Line, which would have served points north beyond Bankhead such as Northside Drive in Brookwood Hills, serving the Perry Homes projects along the way. But the line was only ever built as far as Bankhead.Atlanta: race, class, and urban expansion By Larry Keating
The Green Line was previously called the Proctor Creek Line until MARTA switched to a color-based naming system in October 2009.  The East-West Line, from its launch, was considered one line (denoted with the Blue Line color on old system maps) until 2006 when the West branch and the Proctor Creek branch were redesignated as the East-West Line (the current Blue Line) and the Proctor Creek Line (the current Green Line).
The rail line was part of the initial launch of MARTA rail service in 1979.  The first segment ran from the East Line segment from Georgia State to the Avondale stations upon the opening in June of that year.  By the end of 1979, it extended west to the Hightower station (now Hamilton E. Holmes) on the West Line segment, which serves as that station's terminus.  Although the North-South line was expanded throughout the 1980s, the East-West line did not see any extension since its opening until 1992 when the Proctor Creek branch of the line opened to its terminus at Bankhead station.  It finally extended to its current eastern terminus at Indian Creek the year after.
Now known as the Green Line, it shares trackage with its counterpart, the Blue Line, between just west of Ashby and Edgewood / Candler Park.
The Green Line service operates between Bankhead and Edgewood / Candler Park stations from 6:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m the again beginning at 3:00 p.m. until 9:00 p.m. on weekdays only, while it operates between Bankhead and King Memorial stations from 9:00 a.m. until 3:00 p.m.  On weekdays & on Saturday, Sunday & holiday, the Green Line operates between Bankhead and King Memorial stations all day until 9:00pm.
After 9:00 p.m., the Green Line service operates between Bankhead and Vine City stations only until the end of the service.

==Stations==

listed from west to east

==References==

==External links==


