[[Stefano Lentini]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, Living people, Italian guitarists, Italian composers, Italian folk musicians, Italian folk singers, Italian rock guitarists, Alumni of SOAS, University of London, Musicians from Rome, Italian film score composers

Stefano Lentini (born November 26, 1974) is an Italian composer and musician born in Rome, Italy. Lentini has released music and soundtracks of varying styles, from the electro-rock of Il sorteggio and the ethnic folk of Bakhita to the symphonic instrumentation of 84 Urne. Stefano Lentini collaborated to the soundtrack of The Grandmasters directed by Wong Kar Wai and premiered at Berlin International Film Festival on February 7, 2013. Lentini makes use of a variety of instruments, often playing many of them himself on the same track and writes music in various time signatures. He is considered part of the cross-chamber music, but his influences are very broad. His music has been likened to orchestral, ambient music, world music and aesthetically compared to the film music of Ennio Morricone and Alexandre Desplat. Lentini' music often has spiritual themes, and many songs draw inspiration from real stories.

==Biography==

Lentini' first instrument was the guitar, built by his grandfather with the doors of an antique wardrobe. Ever since he was young he dedicated himself to the composition and arrangement of music. He made his debut at the Folkstudio, a historic nightclub in Rome. He graduated in Cultural Anthropology and studied Ethomusicology in Rome and in London. He has collaborated with orchestras around the world: National Bulgarian Symphony Orchestra (BU), Orchestra di Roma (ITA), Mihail Jora Philarmonic Orchestra (RO), Digital Records Orchestra (ITA). His music is performed in Spain, Romania, Sweden, Ireland, Austria, Ukraine, Alaska, Mexico, USA and Poland.
A multi-instrumentalist, Stefano Lentini is known for his use of non-conventional tunes on guitar, but also plays electric bass, piano, drums, and several other instruments, often playing all of these on his albums through the use of multitrack recording. While in school, he studied the lute and flute, which he also plays on his albums. This multitude of instruments, including string orchestrations, figure prominently in his compositions, giving his music a symphonic sound.
Lentini currently lives in the countryside of Rome.

===Bakhita===

In 2008 Lentini has written and arranged the soundtrack for the two episode television-film Bakhita, directed by Giacomo Campiotti. He collaborated with The National Bulgarian Symphony Orchestra directed by Dejan Pavlov and other Italian and African musicians. The orchestra consisted of 24 violins, 10 violas, 8 cellos, 6 basses, 2 French horns, clarinet, oboe, harp and it was recorded at Sofia (Bulgaria) during May 2008. The true story of Bakhita, a Canossian nun of Sudanese origin, sanctified on October 1, 2000. In Africa, during her childhood she is kidnapped and sold as a slave by a Turkish general. Ten years later a rich Italian merchant, Federico Marin, saves her life and takes her back to his town village in Veneto, Italy. In spite of the difficult integration with the local farmers and the stormy family life of Marin, Bakhita discovers Christianity and joins the convent. Her "master", who sees her as his propriety, demands her back. Thanks to the intervention of a cardinal, however, the "Black mother" will be able to pursue her path of faith until her death on February 8, 1947.

===Il Sorteggio | The Draw===

Lentini has recently released the soundtrack for the last film of Giacomo Campiotti. Turin, 1977. The years of Terrorism. Tonino is a factory worker in the power press department of Fiat Mirafiori plant. He leads a modest yet dignified life and shares a passion for dancing with his girlfriend. Tonino is looking for a social and economic redemption. His life changes completely when he's drawn to be a jury member on the Red Brigades' trial. Tonino, aware of the danger deriving from this assignment and taken aback by the jury members' hemorrhage threatening the trial, must make a decision which will nevertheless profoundly change his existence.

===The Grandmaster===

Stefano Lentini has collaborated to the soundtrack of the film "The Grandmaster" directed by Chinese acclaimed director Wong Kar Wai. The Grandmaster is a Hong Kong-Chinese action drama film based on the life story of the Wing Chun grandmaster Ip Man. The film starred Tony Leung as Ip Man, Zhang Ziyi, Song Hye-kyo and Chang Chen. It was released on 8 January 2013 in China. It also was the opening film at the 63rd Berlin International Film Festival in February 2013. Lentini's "Stabat Mater" scores one of the main scene in the film, world acclaimed as "sublime", "powerful, "poetic" piece.

==Discography==

Collaborations:

==Filmography==

==References==

==External links==


