[[Salvi (caste)]]

CATEGORIES: Social groups of Rajasthan, Social groups of Gujarat, Hindu communities, Weaving communities of South Asia, Indian castes, Bania communities

The Salvi are a  caste found in the state of Rajasthan and Gujarat in India.People of India Rajasthan Volume XXXVIII Part Two edited by B.K Lavania, D. K Samanta, S K Mandal  & N.N Vyas pages 859 to 861 Popular Prakashan

==History and origin==

The Salvi trace their origin from the word Sal, which means a loom. They are said to have migrated from Gujarat to Malwa in the Middle Ages. The community is traditionally associated with the art of weaving. They speak Mewari among themselves.People of India Rajasthan Volume XXXVIII Part Two edited by B.K Lavania, D. K Samanta, S K Mandal  & N.N Vyas pages 859 to 861 Popular Prakashan
While in Gujarat, the  Salvi who are also known as the Patliwala or Patua, claim to have been brought from Maharashtra in the 11th Century by the Rajput rulers to Patan. They have been traditionally associated with silk weaving.People of India Gujarat Volume XXI  Part  Three edited by R.B Lal, P.B.S.V Padmanabham, G Krishnan & M Azeez Mohideen pages 1232-1235

==Present circumstances==

The community speak Mewari among themselves and Hindi with outsiders. They have two sub-divisions, the Marwari Salvi and Mewara Salvi, which are further sub-divided into smaller clans.
With the decline in their traditional occupation of weaving, they are now mainly a community of landless agricultural labourers. A small number are still involved with weaving, and make thick cotton clothes and turbans.  The Salvi are a Hindu community, their family goddess is Chamund Devi.People of India Rajasthan Volume XXXVIII Part Two edited by B.K Lavania, D. K Samanta, S K Mandal  & N.N Vyas pages 859 to 861 Popular Prakashan
The Salvi of Gujarat are split into two distinct groupings, the Jain Salvi and the Vaishnav Hindu. Each of these groups restrict their marriages within their respective religious groups. They have exogamous clans such as the Sanghvi, Tapadia, Kapadia, Dhara and Rawalia. These clans regulate the matrimonial alliances. The Gujarat Salvi consider themselves of Vaishya status. Most of the Gujarat Salvis have abandoned their traditional occupation and are now engaged in a number of trades. As small number continue with their traditional occupation which is silk weaving. The Gujarat Salvi speak Gujarati.People of India Gujarat Volume XXI  Part  Three edited by R.B Lal, P.B.S.V Padmanabham, G Krishnan & M Azeez Mohideen pages 1232-1235

==See also==

==References==


