[[Seoul National University of Science and Technology]]

CATEGORIES: Nowon District, Universities and colleges in Seoul, National universities and colleges in South Korea

Seoul National University of Science and Technology (SeoulTech) is one of Korea's national universities. The university originated from a Vocational Supplementary School established in 1910 by Emperor Gojong’s Royal Decree. Later the school was re-organized as Gyeongseong Public Industrial School, Gyeonggi Technical College, Gyeonggi Open Industrial University, and Seoul National University of Technology before it was finally reborn as Seoul National University of Science and Technology in September 2010 with celebrate the 100th anniversary of its foundation. The institution is also known as 'SeoulTech'.
Today SeoulTech is a large university housing six colleges, 32 departments, six graduate schools and a student enrolment of 14,000 people in a spacious campus of 500,000 square meters (124 acres). This is the 3rd largest campus out of universities in Seoul. The campus, formerly occupied by the engineering departments of Seoul National University, is in Nowon-gu in the northern part of Seoul.

==Colleges and schools==

College of Engineering
College of Information & Telecommunication
College of Energy and Biotechnology
College of Art & Design
College of Humanities & Social Sciences
College of Business & Technology 
There are also three professional graduate schools and three special graduate schools within the university. Aside from these, there are a number of specialist research institutes.

==Library==

The library at Seoul National University of Science and Technology has been operational since the foundation of Eoeudong Public Vocational Continuing School in April 1910. Today, the Library has 519,000 volumes, 7,800 e-books, 18,000 audiovisual materials, and 380 periodicals and academic journals published domestically and abroad.
The Central Library building, completed at the end of 2004, consists of three stories with an area of 9,281 m2 (2,807 pyeong). The first floor houses the library office, seminar rooms, Western archive, and information processing center. The second floor is occupied with Eastern archives and references, periodicals, and an academic journal room. The third floor houses a multimedia room, group study room, and reading room. The annex to Central Library, remodelled in 2011, is a  building with an area of 4,896.25 m2 (1,400 pyeong) that is equipped with a reference room, reference room for western books, room for study groups, notebook computer reading room and general reading room. The library has collected academic research works of the professors and the students for the past 100 years.

==Other support facilities==

Aside from the library there is also an Information and Computer Center; a Press and Broadcasting Center; a General Laboratory Building; a Business Incubation Center; an Educational Equipment Management & Technical Support Center; and an International Office/ Centre for International Exchange. Finally, there is an Institute for Language Education and Research staffed by twenty native-speaking English instructors.

==Scholarships==

About half of the student body benefit from a scholarship program which offers education at a comparatively low cost. The school’s current tuition only amounts to 40% of an average private university’s costs and 80% of tuition fees charged by other national universities. SeoulTech also has a number of funded international cooperation programs, and two joint degree programs with Northumbria University in the United Kingdom.

==The Institute for Language Education & Research==

The Institute for Language Education and Research (ILER) provides a variety of language programs to serve the University's English, Korean, Chinese and Japanese learning needs. The ILER has built a qualified, knowledgeable, and supportive faculty where collaboration is valued to design curriculum relevant for our particular students' needs. There are currently 26 full-time faculty positions. The ILER has a dedicated language center building which houses all needed facilities: professors' offices, administration offices, conference hall, conversation classrooms with round tables, etc. The ILER is a developing PLC (Professional Learning Community), focused on modernizing curriculum, expanding opportunities for research and publication, and fostering a spirit of intercultural exchange.

==History==

==References==

==External links==


