[[La Cha Ta]]

CATEGORIES: F(x) songs, 2009 singles, Dance-pop songs, Korean-language songs, S.M. Entertainment singles, Debut singles, Songs written by Kenzie (songwriter)

"La Cha Ta" (Korean title: 라차타; stylized as "LA chA TA") is the first single by a South Korean quintet pop girl band, f(x). It was released as a digital single on September 1, 2009, and distributed under the label of SM Entertainment. The song was written by Kenzie, who also penned many other songs of the label agency.
The song is included in the group's first repackaged album "Hot Summer" on June 14, 2011.

==Promotion==

===Teasers===

SM first released a teaser preview of the band via YouTube on August 24, 2009, introducing them as "Asia's Pop Dance Group." For five days, SM individually released information through news portals and posted pictures of each member on SM Town's official website, starting with Korean member Sulli on August 26, 2009, Taiwanese-American member Amber on August 27, 2009, Korean-American member Krystal on August 28, 2009, Korean member Luna on August 29, 2009, and lastly the Chinese member Victoria on August 30, 2009. The video teaser for the single and its music video was released on August 23, 2009.

===Broadcasting===

On September 1, 2009, the group's first single "La Cha Ta" was digitally released as well as through broadcasting on various music channels. Following their first live performance at the Samseong-dong Fashion Center on September 2, 2009, the music video was screened and released online the next day. The group's first broadcast performance of "La Cha Ta" was held at MBC's music show Show! Music Core on September 5, 2009.

===Music video===

The high definition music video for the single, released on September 3, 2009, featured the girls dancing on various theater-themed sets. They start by coming and getting off their pink car and dancing to the beat in front of a lighted theater entrance during a night. As the song starts, Victoria, Amber and Sulli enter the theater through the door while Luna and Krystal stay behind to sing first two verses respectively. Scene shifts to individual sets. Amber, dressed as a ringmaster is on a dark stage with fire pits in front, red carpet beneath and huge hanging doors as decors at the back. This reflects her name which means 'fire'. Victoria, wearing a formal pink dress and jewelry, is in a room with glittering mauve colored walls and posh pink and white hanging ornaments. Luna, wearing a golden dress, is walking up a black staircase leading to a crescent shaped shimmering golden seat, reflecting her name which means 'moon'. Sulli, dressed in casual form, is in a bed room with blue walls, red carpet and a large teddy bear hanging from the wall. Krystal, dressed in formal black, is in a room with many hanging crystals and mirrors at the back. As song proceeds, girls discover that their rooms are connected in a way or another and start greeting each other. As the song comes to an end the girls come out of the theater laughing and drive off in their car.

==External links==


