[[Abel Grimmer]]

CATEGORIES: 1570 births, 1620s deaths, Flemish Renaissance painters, People from Antwerp, Members of the Antwerp Guild of Saint Luke

Abel Grimmer (family name variations: 'Grimer' and 'Grimmaert') (c. 1570, Antwerp – c. 1620, Antwerp) was a Flemish late Renaissance painter, mainly of landscapes and, to a lesser extent, of architectural paintings.Larry Silver, Peasant Scenes and Landscapes: The Rise of Pictorial Genres in the Antwerp Art Market, University of Pennsylvania Press, 31 Jan, 2012

==Life==

Grimmer learned to paint from his father, the landscape painter Jacob Grimmer.  His father Jacob Grimmer had established a name for himself by imitating the work of Pieter Bruegel the Elder on small panel pictures and selling these on the market at low prices.
Abel Grimmer married Catharina Lescornet on 29 September 1591 and became a master of the Antwerp Guild of Saint Luke in 1592.Hans Devisscher. "Abel Grimmer." Grove Art Online. Oxford Art Online. Oxford University Press. Web. 24 Apr. 2014  He took over his father's workshop.  He worked his whole career in Antwerp.  The date of his death is not know exactly and is placed after 1620.

==Work==

He often signed and dated his panels.  His earliest dated work dates from 1586 and his latest dated work reads "162", so it is dated 1620 or later.Abel Grimmer at the Netherlands Institute for Art History [tpl]link language|nl|Middle Dutch[/tpl]   He is principally known for his paintings in small format of country scenes, sometimes with a biblical theme.  The works were at times in the form of roundels (i.e. in a round format).  Many of his paintings were dedicated to the Four Seasons or the Months of the Year. The paintings were sometimes inspired by or even copied from prints by Pieter Bruegel the Elder and Hans Bol. Abel's work generally shows a strong influence of Bruegel and Bol as well as of his own father’s work.  His series of the Twelve Months (dated 1592; held in the Chapelle Notre-Dame in Montfaucon-en-Velay) is an exact copy of Adriaen Collaert’s prints made after paintings by Hans Bol and published by Hans van Luyck in 1585.  The paintings Spring and Summer (Royal Museum of Fine Arts Antwerp) are almost exact copies of two prints by Pieter van der Heyden after designs by Pieter Bruegel the Elder.
Abel Grimmer's work is characterised by the simplification and systemisation of figures and landscapes. His landscapes show splendid colour harmonies and a certain linearity, through their slightly schematized compositions and their tendency to represent buildings as geometric shapes.  His work has been dismissed because of this simplification and it is reliance on the work of others.  However, it is this combination that enabled him to survive in the Antwerp marketplace.  He managed to be so prolific because he had streamlined his technique. Each pictorial area of his landscapes was composed in a single color with little or no modulation.  He applied minimal varnishing, which eliminated the effects of roundness and reflection.  This stylization and codification of established landscape formulas allowed him to make these works almost as inexpensive and widely available as prints.
Abel Grimmer also produced paintings of church interiors such as the Interior of a Gothic Church with a Franciscan Monk Preaching (sold by Sotheby’s in London on  9 March 1983).  His interest in perspective and the use of a golden light anticipate the work of the Dutch painter of church interiors Pieter Saenredam.  Earlier scholars suggested that Abel was also an architect on the basis of two autograph architectural drawings depicting respectively an elevation of the gable of Antwerp Cathedral and a church gable with a Gothic spire.  His paintings of interior views, such as A Ball (Wrotham Park, Hertfordshire) and Jesus in the House of Martha and Mary (Royal Museums of Fine Arts of Belgium) show Abel's interest in portraying interior space. Both works are clearly inspired by Hans Vredeman de Vries' who also painted a Jesus in the House of Martha and Mary (Royal Collection).Hans Vredeman de Vries' painting Jesus in the House of Martha and Mary at the Royal Collection He relied on other artists such as Frans Francken the Younger to paint the staffage.
A favourite theme of Abel Grimmer was the Tower of Babel of which he produced several versions, clearly inspired by Pieter Bruegel the Elder's treatment of the same subject.Abel Grimmer, The Tower of Babel at Richard Green

==References==

==External links==


