[[Polish songs (Chopin)]]

CATEGORIES: Compositions by Frédéric Chopin, Art songs, Polish songs, Classical musical works published posthumously

Although Frédéric Chopin is best known for his works for piano solo, among his extant output are 19 songs for voice and piano, set to Polish texts.

==Background==

Chopin wrote these songs at various times, from perhaps as early as 1827 when he was 17, to 1847, two years before his death.  Only two of them were published in his lifetime (Życzenie and Wojak were published in Kiev in 1837 and 1839 respectively).Kornel Michałowski and Jim Samson. "Chopin, Fryderyk Franciszek". Grove Music Online. Oxford Music Online. Retrieved 7 January 2011.Jim Samson
In 1857 the 17 then known songs were collected for publication by Julian Fontana as Op. 74, but they were not arranged in chronological order of composition within that opus. Due to censorship restrictions, he was only able to publish 16 of them initially.  These appeared in Warsaw as Zbiór śpiewów polskich Fryderyka Chopina (A Collection of Polish Songs by Frédéric Chopin), published by Gebethner & Wolff; and in Berlin as 16 Polnische Lieder, published by A M Schlesinger.  The 17th song, Śpiew z mogiłki (Hymn from the Tomb) was published separately in Berlin with a French title, Chant du tombeau.Hyperion
A further two songs were published in 1910.  Some references now include all 19 published songs in Op. 74. 
Chopin is known to have written a number of other songs that are now lost.  Some extant songs have been attributed to Chopin but are now considered spurious or doubtful.

==Texts==

All but one of the texts of the Chopin songs were original poems by his Polish contemporaries, with most of whom he was personally acquainted.  The sole exception is Piosnka litewska (A Lithuanian Song), which was set to a Polish translation by Ludwik Osiński of a Lithuanian song.  
Ten of them are by a friend of Chopin’s family, Stefan Witwicki, from his Piosnki Sielskie (Idylls, 1830).  (Chopin also dedicated his Mazurkas, Op. 41, to Witwicki.)  Three were by Józef Bohdan Zaleski.  Two were by Adam Mickiewicz.  Wincenty Pol's revolutionary Songs of Janusz (1836) inspired Chopin to write up to a dozen songs, but only one survives. Zygmunt Krasiński, a rival with Chopin for the affections of Delfina Potocka, was another poet who inspired Chopin to write a song. 
The songs have been translated into over a dozen languages, but they are most effective in their original Polish.  Various English titles have been applied to some of the songs.

==Recordings==

Those who have recorded the 17 songs of Op. 74, or all 19 known songs, include:
Other singers have recorded selected songs.

==Arrangements==

Chopin himself arranged the piano part of Wiosna as a piece for piano alone, Andantino in G minor, B. 117.  There exist five manuscript versions of this arrangement, dated between April 1838 and 1 September 1848.
Between 1847 and 1860, Chopin's friend Franz Liszt arranged six of the Op. 74 songs as piano transcriptions under the title Six Chants polonais, S.480, a set which has long been a concert and recording favourite.  The six are:
In this arrangement, Das Ringlein leads without a break into Bacchanal, and towards the end of the latter song, immediately before the coda, Liszt includes a short 6-bar reprise of the earlier song.

==List of Polish songs by Chopin==

==References==

==External links==


