[[David S. Guzick]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, University of Florida faculty, New York University alumni, 1952 births

David S. Guzick (born May 21, 1952) is an American university medical school dean and health system president. He is a native of Brooklyn, New York and currently resides in Gainesville, Florida.  

==Early Life and Education==

David S. Guzick was born in New York, New York in 1952, and grew up in Brooklyn, New York.  He graduated from New York University with a bachelor's degree of arts in economics in 1972.  He then was admitted to the New York University Medical Scientist Training Program where he received both his doctor of medicine and his doctorate in economics in 1979.  In 1982 he completed his residency at Johns Hopkins University in Obstetrics and Gynecology. He subsequently completed a fellowship in reproductive endocrinology at the University of Texas Health Science Center at Dallas (UTHSCD), under Director Paul MacDonald, M.D.  
While at UTHSCD, in 1984, he began the in vitro fertilization program in that institution. During his career as a clinician and researcher in reproductive endocrinology, Dr. Guzick developed mathematical and statistical models, and applied epidemiologic methods, to address clinical problems in reproductive medicine.  He was Principal Investigator on the NIH Reproductive Medicine Network at the University of Pittsburgh and the University of Rochester, and on other NIH grants involving infertility, endometriosis and Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome. With Evelyn Talbott, PhD, and other collaborators, Dr. Guzick conducted a long-term case-control study demonstrating increased cardiovascular risk among women with Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome.

==Professional Background==

In 1986, Dr. Guzick was recruited to the University of Pittsburgh as Professor and Director of Reproductive Endocrinology in the department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, where he remained until 1995.  From there he was recruited to the University of Rochester as Chair of Obstetrics and Gynecology from 1995 - 2002.  He was then appointed Dean of the University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry from 2002 through 2009. 
While Dean at the University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Dr. Guzick was instrumental in the awarding of the AAMC Outstanding Community Service Award in 2004 to the University of Rochester, oversaw a doubling of externally funded research to the School in general, and was Principal Investigator on a $40 million Clinical and Translational Science Award from the NIH National Center for Research Resources, the largest NIH award to the University of Rochester in its history.  Dr. Guzick was inducted into the Johns Hopkins Society of Scholars in 2004 and was elected to the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences in 2008.

==University of Florida Senior Vice President of Health Affairs==

David S. Guzick is the current Senior Vice President for Health Affairs at the University of Florida in Gainesville, Florida.1 In addition he also serves as President of UF Health. In this dual role, Dr. Guzick has responsibility for six University of Florida (UF) colleges that constitute the Health Science Center (the Colleges of Dentistry, Medicine, Nursing, Pharmacy, Public Health and Health Professions, and Veterinary Medicine), and also for the collaboration between these colleges and Shands HealthCare, which operates hospital systems in both Gainesville and Jacksonville, Florida. In this regard, Dr. Guzick serves as Chair of the Board of both UF Health Shands Hospital in Gainesville and UF Health-Jacksonville. Dr. Guzick is responsible for the educational, research and academic missions of the UF Health, which in total includes approximately 1400 faculty members, 22,000 employees and an annual budget of $2.8 billion.

==External links==


