[[St. Anselm's Church (Bronx, New York)]]

CATEGORIES: Religious organizations established in 1891, Byzantine Revival architecture in New York, Romanesque Revival architecture in New York, Religious buildings completed in 1918, Roman Catholic churches in New York, Churches in the Bronx, Gustave E. Steinback buildings, 1891 establishments in New York

The Church of St. Anselm is a Roman Catholic parish church under the authority of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, located at 685 Tinton Avenue in the Mott Haven neighborhood of the Bronx in New York City. It was established in 1891 and is staffed by the Order of Augustinian Recollects. Previously it was staffed by the Benedictine Friars.Remigius Lafort, S.T.D., Censor, The Catholic Church in the United States of America: Undertaken to Celebrate the Golden Jubilee of His Holiness, Pope Pius X. Volume 3: The Province of Baltimore and the Province of New York, Section 1: Comprising the Archdiocese of New York and the Diocese of Brooklyn, Buffalo and Ogdensburg Together with some Supplementary Articles on Religious Communities of Women.. (New York City: The Catholic Editing Company, 1914), p. 381.

==Building==

The present church was built 1918. The designs was credited to Gustave Steinback and his noted ecclesiastical architectural firm by the AIA Guide to NYC (1978) and according to Steinback's own claim to the American Institute of Architects for its registry filings. However, the AIA Guide to NYC (2010) has revised the architect of the design to Anton Kloster. Other guides have also attributed the work to Kloster.See Thomas J. Shelley, The Archdiocese of New York: the Bicentennial History, (New York: Archdiocese of New York / Strasbourg: Éditions du Signe, 2007), p.216, 219.Joe McMahon, Bronx Catholic "Saint Anselm, Tinton Avenue, Morrisania",  March 25, 2008, "This is an attempt to index references to The Bronx in "The Archdiocese of New York: the Bicentennial History," a marvelous 624-page book written by Thomas J. Shelley. The 2007 book may still be available at the St. Patrick Cathedral gift shop. The strength of this blog will be in the alphabetic list of labels to the right, or use the search box at top left. The blog format requires that entries move from recent to old. I continue to add photos and information." (Retrieved 11 May 2011) It is possible that Kloster worked for Steinback at the time.

==References==


