[[Monroe W. Hatch Jr.]]

CATEGORIES: American military personnel of the Korean War, American military personnel of the Vietnam War, United States Air Force generals, 1933 births, People from New Orleans, Louisiana, United States Naval Academy alumni, George Washington University alumni, National War College alumni, Living people, Recipients of the Air Medal, Recipients of the Air Force Distinguished Service Medal, Recipients of the Legion of Merit, Vice Chiefs of Staff of the United States Air Force, Recipients of the Defense Distinguished Service Medal

Monroe W. Hatch Jr. (born November 20, 1933) is a former General in the United States Air Force and the former Vice Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force.

==Biography==

===Early life===

Hatch was born in 1933, in New Orleans, Louisiana. He entered the United States Naval Academy in 1951 and graduated in 1955 with a bachelor of science degree.
Upon graduation from the academy, Hatch was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Air Force and assigned to the 3415th Technical Training Wing, Lowry Air Force Base, Colorado, for guidance officer training. In February 1956 he transferred to the 587th Tactical Missile Group at Sembach Air Base, West Germany, as a squadron guided missile officer. In February 1958 he entered pilot training at Graham Air Force Base, Florida, and continued training at Greenville Air Force Base, Mississippi, where he received his wings in January 1959. After B-47 Stratojet combat crew training, he was assigned to the 321st Bombardment Wing, McCoy Air Force Base, Florida. In July 1961 he transitioned to B-52 Stratofortresses and served as a pilot with the 42nd Bombardment Wing, Loring Air Force Base, Maine.[tpl]cite web|title=MONROE W. HATCH, JR. |url=http://www.anser.org/(S(drmipw45rmy2ummglqr20ijm))/bios/trustees/bios/hatchbio.html|publisher=Analytic Services Incorporated|accessdate=30 December 2010[/tpl]
He was assigned as a special projects officer and, later, programs officer in the Advanced Technical Division, Headquarters Strategic Air Command, Offutt Air Force Base, Nebraska, from July 1964 to April 1965. He then served as an operations staff officer in the Astronautics Technology and Applications Office, under the deputy chief of staff for plans. In June 1967 he attended the University of Oklahoma under the Air Force Institute of Technology program. While there he was elected to Tau Beta Pi and Sigma Gamma Tau honor societies.
He was assigned to Headquarters 7th Air Force, Tan Son Nhut Air Base, Republic of Vietnam, in June 1969, serving as a T-39 Sabreliner courier pilot and as 7th Air Force standardization and evaluation flight examiner.
In October 1970 Hatch was assigned to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Washington D.C., where he served as military assistant for strategic analysis in the Office of the Deputy Director for Strategic and Space Systems, Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering. He then attended the National War College from August 1973 until July 1974. After graduating, Hatch was assigned to the Aircraft Division, Directorate of Operational Requirements and Development, Headquarters United States Air Force, Washington D.C. After serving as deputy division chief, he became chief of the division in June 1976. In September 1978 he was assigned as deputy director for strategic forces, Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Research, Development and Acquisition.
He returned to Strategic Air Command headquarters in June 1979 as assistant deputy chief of staff of plans for operational requirements. In March 1981 he became commander of 14th Air Division, Beale Air Force Base, California. He was assigned to SAC headquarters in February 1982 and served as deputy chief of staff for plans until February 1983, when he became the command's chief of staff. Hatch was appointed inspector general of the Air Force in September 1984. In August 1985 he was assigned as vice commander in chief, Strategic Air Command, Offutt Air Force Base. He assumed his final duty as Vice Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force in February 1987. He retired on June 1, 1990.
After retirement, he became the executive director of the Air Force Association. He has also works in the private sector.

==Awards==

Awards earned during his career:

==References==


