[[St. Joseph's Chapel (Rhinecliff, New York)]]

CATEGORIES: Religious organizations established in 1862, 1975 disestablishments, Roman Catholic churches in New York, Closed churches in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, Churches in Dutchess County, New York, Gothic Revival architecture in New York, 1862 establishments in New York

The Chapel of St. Joseph is a former Roman Catholic parish church under the authority of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, located in Rhinecliff, Dutchess County, New York City. The parish was established as a parish in 1862 but around 1975 it became a mission of Good Shepherd Church (Rhinebeck, New York).Remigius Lafort, S.T.D., Censor, The Catholic Church in the United States of America: Undertaken to Celebrate the Golden Jubilee of His Holiness, Pope Pius X. Volume 3: The Province of Baltimore and the Province of New York, Section 1: Comprising the Archdiocese of New York and the Diocese of Brooklyn, Buffalo and Ogdensburg Together with some Supplementary Articles on Religious Communities of Women.. (New York City: The Catholic Editing Company, 1914), p.428.

==History==

Prior to 1862, Catholics is the area near Rhinecliff attended services in Rondout.Hasbrouck, Frank, ed. The History of Dutchess County New York, p645, S.A. Mathieu, Poughkeepsie, NY 1909
St.Joseph's was established in 1862 by Rev. Michael J. Skully, and included all the area between Poughkeepsie and Hudson, NY. serving mission locations in Hyde Park, St. Paul's Staatsburgh, Sacred Heart Barrytown, and Tivoli. The church was built in 1864.

==Pastors==

==Buildings==

The double-height painted timber church is designed in the native timber Gothic Revival style. The symmetrical five-bay double-height church has a three-stage tower fronting its forward gable, supporting a shingled needle spire. The tower and nave and flanked to both sides by five-bay lean-to aisles, which terminates distinguishing the final nave bay as the chancel. Windows are pointed stained-glass casements at aisle, and stepped to second stage tower. Rose window to third stage tower. Lozenge-shaped to clerestory.Official Website photos (accessed 5 February 2011) 

==References==


