[[Neil March]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, Living people, British composers, People from Hemel Hempstead, Alumni of Goldsmiths, University of London

Neil March (born 16 July 1963) is a British composer.

==Life==

Neil March is a British Composer and former Rock musician. He describes his work as Urban Art Music. In particular he makes liberal use of pre-recorded urban sound which he alters and turns into compositional sound sources to be played alongside notated music. He is partly influenced by Spectral Music.
During the 1980s and 90s Neil wrote for and performed with a number of bands and artists including MSQ whose song Modern World (co-written with long-time collaborator and friend Darren Hillier) was released to Europe-wide acclaim by Unicorn Records in 1989. MSQ later recorded for Bluebeat Records, a label owned by Buster Bloodvessel of Bad Manners. In 1997 he wrote and played on Acid Jazz band Junction 8's West Skyline EP. His final release in the Pop world was his most successful, the 2003 eponymously titled debut album by Smooth Jazz artist Kevin East although he has subsequently been involved with retrospective releases of material from that period.
In 2005 Neil returned to studying classical composition at Blackheath Conservatoire with Benjamin Rous. He then studied with David Sutton-Anderson, at Birkbeck, University of London in 2006/7. He and his wife Avril Anderson encouraged Neil to enter for a masters (mmus.) degree in music composition at Goldsmiths, University of London where he studied mainly with Roger Redgate from 2008 to 2010 as well as others including Dmitri Smirnov and musicologist Keith Potter. He has since undertaken PhD study there.
Neil's compositions have been involved in performances and presentations at a variety of venues including the Royal Festival Hall, the University of Middlesex, University of Cambridge, Guildhall School of Music and Drama, Senate House and the British School in Athens. His String Quartet Devolution was workshopped by the Allegri Quartet in 2012 and he has had his music performed in many countries, especially thanks to his collaborative relationship with dancer, pianist and researcher Marilyn Wyers
Neil's music is driven by a desire to reflect events in urban post-globalization society both through the structure and technical aspects of his work and via the use of recordings of actual urban sounds. He records these on a mobile phone and then uses a laptop to alter the frequencies and properties of sounds, using them both for harmonic or melodic purposes and for sound effects, a process he calls Urban Sound Manipulation (USM). He has also invented compositional devices designed to reflect urban features in an abstract manner such as Soundbite Form, Cycles of Transformation and Polyfluidity. Neil's music sometimes deploys a deconstructive element largely inspired by his interest in the philosopher Jacques Derrida.
Currently his music is published by his self-owned Hornetmuziq Press.

==List of compositions==

==Forthcoming==

==Discography==

==Forthcoming==


