[[Williamson trade-off model]]

CATEGORIES: Industrial organization, Competition law, Mergers and acquisitions, Markets (customer bases)

The Williamson trade-off model is a theoretical model in the economics of industrial organization which emphasizes the trade-off associated with horizontal mergers between gains resulting from lower costs of production and the losses associated with higher prices due to greater degree of monopoly power.Robert Beynon, "The Routledge critical dictionary of global economics", Taylor & Francis, 1999, p. 349
The model was first presented by Oliver Williamson, co-laureate of the 2009 Nobel prize in economics,All Laureates in Economic Sciences, Nobelprize.org in his 1968 paper "Economics as an Anti-Trust Defense: The welfare trade-offs" in the American Economic Review.Williamson, Oliver, "Economics as an Anti-Trust Defense: The welfare trade-offs", The American Economic Review, Vol. 58, No. 1 (March 1968), pp. 18–36 Williamson argued that ignoring efficiencies that may result from proposed mergers in antitrust law "fail(ed) to meet the basic test of economic rationality".Katalin Judit Cseres, "Competition law and consumer protection", Kluwer Law International, 2005, p. 139

==Basic idea of the model==

Suppose that a given industry is initially characterized by perfect competition and has a constant unit cost of production equal to c1 (assumed the same across all firms in the industry). Because of competition, the market price of the good produced will be equal to this unit cost, which means that firms in the industry earn normal profits, as captured by the producer surplus (the area below the market price, but above the supply/unit cost curve).
Suppose further that after a merger between firms in the industry takes place, unit costs fall to c2The change in overall social surplus of the market depends on whether the increase in producer surplus due to lower production costs is larger or smaller than the fall in consumer surplus due to higher prices. Note that it is theoretically possible that the fall in unit costs due to the merger could be sufficiently large that the post merger monopoly price ends up being lower than the pre merger competitive price in which case both producer and consumer surplus would increase. In that situation no trade-off exists and the merger is unambiguously beneficial to all market participants. More generally however, a horizontal merger can involve both costs and benefits.

==Applications in anti-trust policy==

One implication of the Williamson model is that the gains from cost reduction do not have to be "large" in order to outweigh the losses that result from higher prices.
This is because the welfare losses associated with the latter tend to be "second-order" (graphically, they're triangles), while the gains tend to be "first-order" (graphically, they're rectangles). What this means is that the gains from the merger would have to be very small, or alternatively, the demand for the good in question would have to be relatively quite inelastic for social surplus to decrease.
A broader conclusion of the model is that antitrust, or competition, policy should be "discretionary".C. L. Pass, Bryan Lowes, "Business and microeconomics: an introduction to the market economy", Routledge, 1994, p. 175-178 That is, government regulators who are faced with a proposed merger need to examine each proposal on a case by case basis. In some instances, the cost savings might make it worth the loss of competition, while in others they will not. This is in contrast to a "non-discretionary" policy where regulators set certain standards that any industry must meet - for example, that no firm has more than 20% market share. Then, they do not actually examine the potential gains or losses to consumer or producer surplus from a proposed merger, but only its impact on meeting the set standard - for example, whether or not the merger will increase a single firm's market share above 20%.
The model has been applied to the study of mergers in the US rail freight industry and the US food industry, among others.[ref]Ivaldi, Marc
and McCullough, Gerard, "Welfare Trade-Offs in US Rail Mergers", Centre for Economic Policy Research[/ref]Sanjib Bhuyan, "Impact of Vertical Mergers on Food Industry Profitability: An Empirical Evaluation" It has also been used in evaluation of actual antitrust laws by American legal scholar and judge Robert Bork.Richard Fink, "General and partial equilibruim theory in Bork's antitrust analysis", paper delivered at the Annual Western Economic Association International Conference, Las Vegas, Nevada, June 24–28, 1984 A regulatory approach based on the model was popular in the United States in the 1980s and influenced much antitrust legislation.Patrick A McNutt, "Signalling, Strategy and Management Type" Chapter 7, Antitrust & Public Policy

==Criticisms and limitations==

==Notes==

==References==


