[[Haggagovic]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 births, Living people, Egyptian activists

Ahmed Haggagovic  ([tpl]lang-ar|أحمد حجاجوفيتش[/tpl])  ([tpl]lang-ru|Ахмед Хаггагович[/tpl])  is an Egyptian Globe Trotter, Peace Activist and an inspiration for world youth, who has currently set foot in over 100 countries and more than 350 main cities around the world, in his mission to be the first human in history to set foot in every country in the world with a pronounced message of Freedom, Happiness and Peace .
While conducted official visits to world leaders and local community members, hundreds of universities, schools, youth organizations promoting his message to the world.
He has no Political or Religious agenda for his travels; he is just after uniting all man-kind without stereotypes.
Haggagovic carries the motto of "One World United,No racism,No Borders, and One World United in One Human."
Proving to everyone and specially youth that greatness is not this wonderful, elusive, godlike feature that only the special among us has it, It truly exists in all of us.

==Biography==

Ahmed Haggagovic was born in Cairo on 7 October 1984,  
a professional swimmer in Heliopolis Sporting Club in Cairo, Egypt from the age of 4 years, till now.
Graduated from the Ain Shams University with a BSc in Computer Science and Information Systems in 2007.

==Languages Spoken==

Arabic, Brazilian Portuguese, Portuguese, English, Spanish and French.

==Encouraged By==

Through his travels around the world in his mission to raise the Egyptian Flag, Haggagovic met and was encouraged by many famous politicians, religious Leaders, artists, ambassadors, many of them wrote on Haggagovic's big flag that he hold in all his travels, 
From the most important leaders Haggagovic met were, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva the 35th President of Brazil, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner the 55th and current President of Argentina, and many more world leaders and figures in all the countries he visited.
Haggagovic entered history as the last person to take the signature of the Pope Shenouda III the 117th Pope of Alexandria and the Patriarch of All Africa on the Holy Apostolic Seat of Saint Mark the Evangelist of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria. He was also the head of The Holy Synod of the Coptic Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria and the signature was signed on his flag on 7 March 2012 in the new Saint Mark's Coptic Orthodox Cathedral in Cairo. 
This meeting showed the support of the Pope Shenouda III to Haggagovic trips around the world and his message for Freedom, Happiness and Peace to all the world's nations.
Ahmed Haggagovic also met all the ambassadors of Egypt in the countries he visited (if any Egyptian embassy exists in the country).

==His Latest Trips==

In November 2012, he has visited Australia, and has raised the Egyptian flag in Melbourne's iconic locations. He has also met with several of the Egyptian-Australian community living in Melbourne, and has inspired many with his words.In 2012, He had finished his "Siberian Adventure" trip in Russia, as he raised the Egyptian flag in every place he pass in Russia from Moscow till the end of Siberia (in the north pole) and then he will pass across Mongolia and then cross all China till he cut his trip in Hong Kong mourning for the lives of the martyrs of the Port Said's Stadium massacre.
then he made a new trip called "Finding India" in his extraordinary trip to Asia, he passed by Japan, Korea, China, Hong Kong, Macau, Taiwan, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Burma, Nepal and finally India.

==His Current Trip==

Now he is in a new inspiring trip to Europe to be started in mid March 2013. no he is not, he is coming to AISMUN today (in CAIRO!)

==Haggagovic Official Carrier==

Haggagovic's official carrier is EgyptAir (Arabic: مصر للطيران, [tpl]transl|ar|DIN|Miṣr liṬ-Ṭayarān[/tpl]) is the flag carrier airline of Egypt and a member of Star Alliance.

==Haggagovic Communication Sponsor==

Haggagovic's Communicational sponsor worldwide is Mobinil (The Egyptian Company for Mobile Services).

==Passion Behind His Travel==

When he was four years old, a telepresenter asked him what he wanted to do when he grew up. "I answered I want to go to Japan. That was the farthest place I could imagine as a child. Even at that age I wanted to travel," says Haggagovic who wrote his dreams on a piece of paper as a teen which he still carries with him.
Pulling out the worn-out paper that he calls his 'dream list,' Haggagovic reads from it. "Meet someone that I haven't met in long years, spread happiness wherever I go, be a very close friend to someone I never met before, laugh until I cry, change the world, camp in the wild, go to Maldives Islands, travel on the top of a train in India, go to waterfalls and jump in the free rivers, skydive, learn new languages etc."
Today Haggagovic is not travelling around the world but he's travelling in the world, as he puts it. "I finished travelling around the world two years back. I went from Chile to Hong Kong and all of Asia. Now I'm travelling in the world on a very special trip spreading the message of freedom, happiness and peace - one world with no borders united in love," says Haggagovic, who can speak Portuguese, Arabic, English and a smattering of French.
During his globetrotting mission, Haggagovic has met a number of renowned personalities from various countries, including President of France, Brazil, Argentina etc. to name a few. During his trip Haggagovic wants to show that youth can make a change by highlighting Egypt's democratic movement last year.
Haggagovic cherishes his meeting with former Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lulada Silva who has inspired him the most. "He began as a shoeshine boy and a street vendor at the age of 12 and went on to become the President," exclaims Haggagovic.
The eldest of three siblings, Haggagovic has a worried mother back home. He's nowhere 'settled' in life, having quit his job and sold his apartment in Cairo to fund his trips abroad. "My mother wants me to have a regular life - a job, a family and kids. But I don't know when I can fulfil her dream as I don't know myself when that'll happen to me," says Haggagovic.
Hoping to become a goodwill ambassador for the United Nations during this peace mission, Haggagovic maintains that "as long as there are boundaries in your head, you would not see the world as one."
The main reason and message of his mission to travel to every country in the world is to inspire people and prove that every person must think in un-realistic way to make his dreams in life come true.
and to GET ONE FREE AND HAPPY WORLD UNITED ON LOVING EGYPT Based on FREEDOM, HAPPINESS and PEACE
WORLD WITHOUT STRANGERS ...WORLD WITHOUT HATE, RACISM ... WORLD UNITED ON LOVING EGYPT....
whatever your :
name, age, color, religion, city, country, family, origin, thoughts, job, anything ...  you are HUMAN .

==Achievements==

The first human to raise his country flag Egyptian Flag in more than 250 main cities, 107 countries till this moment, holding the Humanity message of  Freedom, Happiness and Peace, No racism Around The World to have a world united.
The First Egyptian to Call for HAPPINESS FRIDAY "CARNIVAL" in Tahrir Square to Bolster Egypt's Tourism.

==Quotes==

When asked about the idea of travelling around the world, Haggagovic said:
 
 "I'm not just proud to be Egyptian, I am making everyone who met me proud that he met an Egyptian."

"IT ALL BEGAN WITH A SCRATCH LIST

"I am Egyptian , i dreamed of a list of things to do,
and to open Egyptian Freedom and Happiness all over the world , i wrote it ,and i started doing it , 
however it is and whatever it takes ...what ever it costs ... 
You got a dream... You gotta protect it. People can't do somethin' themselves, they wanna tell you "you can't do it".

If you want somethin', go get it... you never know .
I will be raising the Egyptian Flag in all the countries around the world (if God will) . They told me it is too hard , too far, too steep, too dangerous, and too difficult.
But it's my PLANET .I will do it. You will soon see me waving the Egyptian Flag all over the planet or dead while travelling."

I am the first Egyptian ever to Ask for a HAPPINESS Friday Carnival in Tahrir Square , to support the Egyptian Tourism and Prove to the whole world that Egypt is the country of Freedom , Happiness , Peace , Safe ...

I wish all the Egyptians support me , specialy YOUTH ..." - Ahmed Haggagovic

==References to Ahmed Haggagovic==

Article in Youm 7 Egyptian Most viewed Online Jornal

Article in Youm 7 Egyptian Most viewed Online Jornal

Article in Metro Russian Jornal

Ahram Newspaper

Article in Youm 7 Egyptian Most viewed Online Jornal

Article in Youm 7 Egyptian Most viewed Online Jornal

Article in The Egyptian Mail Jornal the oldest English-language newspaper in the Middle East

Article in Rosalyousef Online Magazine

A Radio Interview with Haggagovic in Radio China 

Article in Masress Online News

Article in Ahram Al Shabab Magazine

Article in October Online Magazine

Article in ElBash Modawen Blog

==External links==


