[[Antônio Carlos Biscaia]]

CATEGORIES: 1942 births, People from Curitiba, Living people, Members of the Chamber of Deputies of Brazil, Workers' Party (Brazil) politicians

Antônio Carlos Silva Biscaia (born June 13, 1942, in Curitiba, Paraná) is former federal prosecutor and currently a politician from Brazil. He is affiliated to the Partido dos Trabalhadores (PT - Workers Party). He is a Professor of Criminal Procedural Law of the Universidade Cândido Mendes (UCAM).[tpl]pt icon[/tpl] Official website, accessed January 2, 2011

==Federal prosecutor==

Biscaia became known in the early 1990s as an uncorruptabe federal prosecutor taking on the bicheiros, the operators of the jogo do bicho ("the animals' game"), a popular illegal lottery in Rio de Janeiro.Brazilian Authorities Link Lottery to Political Corruption, Los Angeles Times, April 9, 1994For the details of the game, see Frossard, Denise. "Women in Organized Crime in Brazil", in Fiandaca, Giovanni (ed.). Women and the Mafia. Springer, 2007 The illegal lottery operators built a mafia-type association (known as the cupola do bicho), that controlled the illegal gambling business and shielded it from prosecution by corrupting authorities and police.Frossard 2007, pp. 186-189
In 1994, he oversaw a raid on the headquarters of the illegal lottery boss Castor de Andrade and discovered a log book registering regular bribes from the bicheiros to more than 100 people, including police officers, the judiciary and politicians, such as the former President of Brazil, Fernando Collor de Mello.… o Ministério Público apurou o envolvimento de "banqueiros" em mais de 130 homicídios relacionados com o jogo do bicho e comprovou o esquema de corrupção centralizado e dirigido por Castor de Andrade …, que contabilizou a propina a policiais civis e militares, servidores públicos, inclusive do Ministério Público e do Judiciário, e até a conhecidos políticos que receberam ajuda financeira para suas comprometidas campanhas eleitorais. (The public prosecutor found the involvement of the "bankers" in more than 130 homicides related to the animal game and proved the corruption scheme directed by Castor de Andrade …, which accounted for the bribing of civilian and military police, public servants, including prosecutors and the judiciary, and even prominent politicians who received financial aid for their electoral campaign.) [tpl]pt icon[/tpl] A volta dos bicheiros, by Antônio Carlos Biscaia, O Globo, March 22, 1998

==In politics==

Biscaia was a Federal Deputy for the Workers' Party (PT) in the periods 1999-2000, 2003–2007 and 2008-2010. He has been National Secretary of Justice and the Secretary for National Public Security (Secretaria Nacional de Segurança Pública - SENASP) from 2007-2008.
On September 29, 2009, Biscaia sponsored a new law in the Brazilian Congress, known as Ficha Limpa – meaning ‘clean slate’ in English. The law aims to permanently bar any person from running for any political office (in municipal, state or federal elections) who has any corruption charges or allegations pending against them. The law was a popular initiative by Movement to Combat Electoral Corruption (MCCE), an umbrella group consisting of over 43 like-minded organisations, but officially it will be recorded on his name. On June 4, 2010, the bill was signed and became law.Brazil's groundbreaking step to halt corruption, Al Jazeera, September 6, 2010

==Bibliography==

==References==

==External links==


