[[Shais Taub]]

CATEGORIES: Chabad-Lubavitch rabbis, American Hasidic rabbis, Living people

Shais Taub is an American rabbi and author."Rabbi Shais Taub bio" The Huffington Post. He writes about Jewish mysticism and is also known for his work in the field of addiction recovery.Parsons, Monique (March 12, 2009). "Inside Chabad's 'Jewish Recovery' Movement". NPR.

==Tanya==

Taub is an exponent of the foundational Chassidic spiritual text, Tanya, for which he composed Map of Tanya for Kehot Publication Society, as well as the curriculum for a survey course on Tanya for the Jewish Learning Institute.Cohen, Leon (Jan. 27, 2006). "Local rabbi provides map for foundational Chabad book". Wisconsin Jewish Chronicle.Cohen, Leon (Oct. 28, 2008). "Taub curriculum on Tanya being used throughout world". Wisconsin Jewish Chronicle.

==Work in the field of addiction==

In 2010, Taub authored the book God of Our Understanding: Jewish Spirituality and Recovery from Addiction, in which he asserts that ancient Jewish principles relate to 12-step treatment programs.Howard, Aaron (Nov. 18, 2010). "The addict in recovery – doing holy work". Jewish Herald-Voice. Publisher's Weekly called the book "a thoughtful counter to one criticism occasionally heard—that the 12 steps are implicitly Christian - and a singular and valuable resource for those in need."Publisher's Weekly (Dec. 13, 2010). "Religion review" Taub posits that drugs are the addict's solution rather than his problem, and that those people who turn to chemicals or other compulsive behaviors such as overeating or gambling are attempting to fill a spiritual void.The Oakland Press (Dec. 22. 2010). "Emotional sobriety is topic of presentation".
He has compared his work to that of Abraham J. Twerski, another Hasidic rabbi who has written extensively on addiction and who is also a Milwaukee transplant to Pittsburgh.The Jewish Chronicle (Dec. 3, 2010). "Local rabbi's book brings Jewish understanding to addiction recovery". Twerski endorsed God of Our Understanding, stating that the book "should be read by all clergy, therapists, people in recovery, people who should be in recovery, and their family members".Chabad.org (Nov. 2, 2010). "Bestseller Looks at Recovery With a Jewish Lens".  

==Influence beyond the Jewish world==

Following a February 2012 visit to the iconic Boys Town orphanage in Nebraska where Taub trained clinical staff on addiction treatment, The New York Times wrote about Taub's influence beyond the Jewish world, noting that "in saying overtly what the recovery movement often leaves deliberately ambiguous... Rabbi Taub has become a phenomenon. Even as he is anchored within the Hasidic world, he has transcended it, first by reaching unaffiliated and secular Jews and then, most unexpectedly, by finding an eager audience among Christians."Freedman, Samuel G. (February 12, 2012) "A Rabbi's Teachings on Recovery Find a Wide Audience". The New York Times. In that same article, Taub clarified his approach to teaching non-Jewish groups by saying, "It's not about interfaith ... I'm a Jew who's been able to study my tradition, and I have information, and I can be helpful to the extent I can share the information."

==Tailgate party==

He and former NFL lineman Alan Veingrad, who became a Chabad-Lubavitch adherent after his retirement,Dan Leach, "Leach's Lists: A Conversation With Former Super Bowl Champion Alan Veingrad", CBS Detroit, May 22, 2013. hosted a "kosher tailgate party" at Lambeau Field during the 2007 season.Glauber, Bill (Oct. 15, 2007). Have prayers and Packers, too". Milwaukee Journal Sentinel.

==Family==

Taub credits his father's work as influential in his decision to a pursue a career in addiction therapy."The Radical World of the Recovery Rabbi". The Fix. Accessed October 16, 2013. Taub currently resides with his wife and children in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania."Rabbi Shais Taub". Torah Café. Accessed June 12, 2013.

==Bibliography==

==References==


