[[Avi Moyal]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 births, Living people, Israeli Jews, Krav Maga practitioners, Wingate Institute faculty

Avi Moyal (born 1966) is an Israeli born Krav Maga practitioner and instructor. He is a co-founder and the current chairman and chief instructor of the International Krav Maga Federation (IKMF) and a former IDF officer. He is a married man and father of four and has been practicing Krav Maga since childhood. He has been instructing the art for over 25 years and teaches in the civilian, law enforcement, security and military sectors.
International Krav Maga Federation

==Krav Maga==

Avi's first became acquainted with Krav Maga at five years old. He remembers not knowing what the lesson was about and leaving there liking the 360 degrees technique.
Later on he realized that first lesson was taught by one of Krav Maga's renowned instructors, Expert Yaron Lichtenstein. At 10 years old he started training regularly at the local community center with Expert Aldema Shirinsky, with Expert Victor Bracha and later on with Expert Mickey Assulin.
Showing such proficiency and talent, Assulin recommended that Avi starts training at Eli Avikzar's club, the head of the AGUDA (association) at those times. As a child Avi travelled on his own twice a week to partake in lessons at Eli Avigzar's' renowned club in the city of Natanya, enabling him to climb higher in ranks, meet many gifted students who nowadays are the leading figures of Krav Maga and benefit from the direct guidance of Imi Lichtenfeld,Sde-Or, Imi the founder of Krav Maga.
In 1984 Avi passed an assistant instructor course, at 18 years old passed his first Expert level (Black Belt) test and so became the youngest Expert in the AGUDA's history.

==Avi & IDF Krav Maga==

During his active service in the IDF (Israeli Defense Force) Avi was enlisted to the Marine corps. He completed his officers training with honors, and served as platoon commander in a terror demolition unit. He acquired many combat hours, most of which behind enemy lines with various SWAT units. During his service he also provided VIP protection for a high ranking General and an intelligence officer and advised on demolition and mine use. After active duty, Moyal served as a reserved Platoon commander.

==Avi & IKMF - International Krav Maga Federation==

Once Military service was over, he returned to train directly with Imi Lichtenfeld, passing tests for Expert levels 2 & 3.
Parallel to that Moyal began working for the Wingate institute, Israel's national sports academy;  training and qualifying students in the field of self-defense. During those years he underwent the senior instructors' course for martial arts at the institute, and also received a business & marketing degree from a respected Israeli college.
Avi also collaborated with the Israeli government in varies issued, among which several special projects: developing Krav Maga educational programs and supervising their assimilations in Israeli school across the country; Advising the education & sports administry in his field of expertise, qualifying all physical education teachers country wide so they may teach Krav Maga to their pupils and many other leading projects.
Also in his professional record Avi conducted Krav Maga instructors courses worldwide. Due to terror attack on certain sectors in the Israeli society, Moyal was chosen by the Israeli government to develop specific techniques and teaching programs for woman's self-defense, Car rage defense and children's self-defense.
One of the advantages making Moyal as renowned and respected authority in his field is his vast "real time" experience, Since he is the only IKMF board member with proven IDF combat experience as an officer, who has also provided VIP protection in the civilian arena for famous figures in the entertainment business such as Michael Jackson.
Alongside with his role as IKMF chairman, Avi continues to instruct varied military units and security organizations globally always under Imi Lichtenfeld's' vision.

==References==


