[[Fern test]]

CATEGORIES: Medical tests, Gynaecology

Fern test refers to visualization of a characteristic fern-like pattern on a slide (pre-cleaned, saline free slides are required), viewed under low power on a microscope: 
1. a small amount of cervical mucus is allowed to air-dry on a clean, saline-free glass slide. In the presence of high levels of estrogen, just prior to ovulation, the cervical mucus forms fern-like patterns due to crystallization of sodium chloride on mucus fibers.  The Fern test is used to provide indirect evidence of ovulation and fertility, however this test does not predict the time of ovulation.  Ferning is due to the presence of sodium chloride in the mucus  under estrogen effect.  This pattern is known as arborization or 'ferning'.
When the influence of estrogen starts to decline while that of progesterone increases, the arborization pattern becomes ill-defined. It is completely absent during the pre- and postmen-strual phase (22nd day of cycle). Persistence of Ferning throughout menstrual cycle suggests an-ovulation (infertility). This is also true after menopause, and in autonomic ovarian failure. 
While the dried mucus is being examined for arborization, the leukocyte content of the mucus should also be assessed. Leukocytes are abundant during the early proliferative phase and luteal phase, but sparse at ovulation due to the influence of estrogen. Any deviation from this pattern is justification for a bacteriologic study, perhaps with a resistance test.
From http://www.euromedcenter.org.ge/eng/ginekologia_01.html
2. To verify the presence of amniotic fluid where membrane rupture is suspected,  ferning permits positive identification of amniotic fluid by its fern-type crystallization. It permits a rapid and certain differential diagnosis between leukorrhea, hydrorrhea, urinary incontinence and spontaneous amniotomy. The crystallization test was shown to be most reliable and the few sources of error are easily avoided. The test is inhibited by cellular debris or blood when it is in a concentration greater than 1:10. Centrifugation permits the reappearance of fern-leaf crystallization. The typical image resembles that of the crystallization of cervical mucus. However, amniotic fluid crystallizes on the entire smear, whereas mucus crystallizes in a linear fashion. Cervical mucus crystallization is normally absent during pregnancy. It may occur in cases of threatened abortion. The authors have performed the test in combination with a nitrazine paper test (turns blue in the presence of amniotic fluid) in a series of 192 patients. In their hands it has given nearly perfect results.
FROM: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1921960/
Marcel Ferron and Rolland Bilodeau
Copyright and License information ►

