[[Stranov]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures in the Central Bohemian Region, Castles in the Czech Republic, Renaissance Revival architecture in the Czech Republic, Museums in the Central Bohemian Region, Historic house museums in the Czech Republic

Stránov is castle in Czech Republic, placed in the Central Bohemian Region, original Middle Ages castle was reconstructed by Joseph Schulz to a neo-Renaissance look it has today.

==History==

In place of the present castle originally stood wooden fort, which is recalled in 1429 by Mr. Bohuněk from Stránov. In its place Jaros from Sovojovic built from 1463 to 1468 solid Gothic Castle, which was named Nový Stránov.
From 1545 to 1589 the castle was owned by famous family Berk of Dubé
In 1589, the owner of the castle become Charles from Biberštejn, the Imperial Council and the highest mint master Kingdom of Bohemia. Later the castle was getting new owner Michael Slavata from Chlum. During the role of family Biberštejn or Slavata castle was rebuilt in the Renaissance look.
Around the year 1642, owner become Jan from Lisau (a member of the Brandenburg nobility, he was promoted to the nobility for bravery in the Battle of Nördlingen and later to imperial commandant in the Cheb . His descendants after three generations declared to be the Czech nationality and called themselves as the Lords of Lisov.
After on the castle lived of Jan's son, Rudolf Adam from Lisov, with his wife Elizabeth Lidmila (great-granddaughter of the astronomer Tycho Brahe) and she spent many years of her life in the castle.
In 1746, by marriage the ruler of the castle become Jan Vaclav Příchovský from Prichovice. This Baroque Knight from the leading aristocratic family left around the castle manny visible traces – Stránov was rebuilt in Baroque style, the castle garden was added (which unfortunately disappeared), sandstone Baroque fountain was built in the castle courtyard and in 1767 St. Václav Church in front of the chateau (the author is a famous architect Philip Heger).
Since 1794, was owned by master Bedřich Václav Vojtěch Herites (people called him Herod), after his death Jan Herites, and until 1864 Knight Bedřich Neubauer.
Present romantic appearance was made in the neorenaissance rebuild in the late 19th century, which was performed in 1890–1894 on project designed by Joseph Schulz builder J. Mráz on order of Lady Marie from Valdštejn and Vartemberk.
The castle was in 1917 bought by the Škoda factories President and Senator in Parliament Joseph Šimonek, which was for a contribution to the development of industry promoted to the baron status. His son František Šimonek and his family lived on Stránov until castle was nationalized in 1950.
After the nationalization of the castle was used as a children's home (in front of the chateau was located Common Agricultural cooperation), which led to a corresponding all non-sensitive adjustments (toilets and washing facilities were built into the main corridors and state rooms, etc.).
Since 2003 is back in the hands of the Šimonek family. The castle was in 2004 for the first time in its history, opened to the public, together with partial reconstruction of the interiors and exteriors of the castle.
In summer, the castle hosts many cultural events.

==External links==


