[[Kelvin Han Yee]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), Living people, American male film actors, American male television actors, American people of Chinese descent, Male actors from San Francisco, California

Kelvin Han Yee is an American Actor. He has appeared in films such as Milk (as Gordon Lau), Bucky Larson: Born to Be a Star (as Vietnamese Crime Boss), Lucky You (as Chico Banh), The Island (as a Censor), So I Married an Axe Murderer (as Master Cho), Answers to Nothing (as an EMT), Sweet November (as Burly Man), Patch Adams, Life Tastes Good (as Max), Clint Eastwood's True Crime (as Zachary Platt), A Great Wall (as Paul Fang, the film was also the first American Feature Film to be shot in the People's Republic of China by MGM).
He is also known for his roles in TV Shows such as Hawaii Five-0 (as Chief of Police Mahaka), Criminal Minds, Eastwick, Crash (as Chun Soo Park), Lie to Me (as Ambassador Park Jung-Soo), Prison Break (as Company Surgeon), Entourage, The Mentalist (as Davis in the pilot episode as well as in the 2012 episode, "The Crimson Ticket"), Chuck (as Rashan Chen), Curb Your Enthusiasm, The Young and The Restless (as Dr. Jun), Accidentally on Purpose, 24 (as Craig Erwich), Sucker Free City, Days of Our Lives, The Bold and The Beautiful (as Dr. Ying), E-Ring (as Admiral Chin), Hawaii (as Detective Scott Chen) and Nash Bridges (as Dr. Fong, Gene Kwon and Gordon Chang).
Yee has also appeared in a number of independent film projects including Christian Filippella's Silver Case, as TC in Rob Nilsson's Chalk, as the "Wheeler Dealer Uncle" in Christine Yoo's Wedding Palace, as Lee Luke, Keye Luke's father in Timothy Tau's bio-pic on Keye Luke, as Mitch in Feodor Chin's Golden Boy, as Judge Simon Yee in Megan Lee's Music Video for "Destiny" (Directed by Timothy Tau), as the Police Chief known as "The Chief" in Timothy Tau's web series Quantum Cops and as "Uncle Wong" in Stephane Gauger's TV pilot about 1890 San Francisco Chinatown, Chinatown Squad, which was written by Feodor Chin.
Yee is a San Francisco, California native, and graduated from Lick-Wilmerding High School. He was also trained at the American Conservatory Theater. He was also the first Asian American Actor to join Ashland's Oregon Shakespeare Festival. He has also acted in and directed plays with the Berkeley Repertory Theatre, Boston's Huntington Theater, the San Jose Stage, the East West Players and The Lodestone Theatre Ensemble.Nelson Wong, AArisings: A-Profiler: Kelvin Han Yee, http://aarising.com/aprofiler/kelvinhanyee.htm

==Filmography==

==References==

==External links==


