[[The Entertainment Herald]]

CATEGORIES: VNU Business Media publications, Entertainment magazines, Professional and trade magazines, American magazines, Publications established in 1985, Publications disestablished in 1986

The Entertainment Herald was a unique bilingual publication serving as a bridge between film producers in the United States and England, and film distributors in Latin America. The Entertainment Herald was published between September 1985 and October 1986.A total of 13 issues were released. A complete collection can be found at the Cinemateca Argentina and Museo del Cine in Buenos Aires and the Alderman Library at the University of Virginia.

==History==

The Entertainment Herald was founded in 1985 during a worldwide period of expansion of the Home Video markets. The magazine supported itself with advertising revenues.  Its editorial offices were located at 6331 Hollywood Blv., Los Angeles, California.The Entertainment Herald. Vol. 1 Num. 12 August 1986. Page 1 The unique design that characterized The Entertainment Herald is credited to graphic Designer Oscar "Negro" DíazRetrospective Exhibit on Oscar Díaz at Biblioteca Nacional, Buenos Aires

==Editorial content==

The Entertainment Herald featured an array of articles, chronicles, charts, reviews, festival summaries, special reports, as well as interviews to celebrities, producers, directors and distributors such as Jon Voight,The Entertainment Herald. Vol. 1 Num. 1 September 1985. Page 42 "Jon Voight: A Portrait" by Eduardo Montes-Bradley Christian Halsey-Solomon, Menahem Golan, Andrew Vajna,The Entertainment Herald. Vol. 2 Num. 13 October 1986. Page 32. "Andrew Vajna: Portrait" by Eduardo Montes-Bradley Paul Mazursky, Michael Dudikoff, David Brown,The Entertainment Herald. Vol. 1 Num. 4 December 1985. Page 19. "An Interview with David Brown producer of Jaws" by Alejandro Chionetti Manuel Antin,The Entertainment Herald. Vol. 1 Num. 3 November 1985. Page 32. "Manuel Antin" by Marta Santelli Krzystof Zanussi, María Conchita Alonso.

==Advertising content==

==Notes==


