[[Satellite radio]]

CATEGORIES: International broadcasting, Digital radio, Satellite radio, Radio technology

Satellite radio is a radio service broadcast from satellites primarily to cars, with the signal broadcast nationwide, across a much wider geographical area than terrestrial radio stations.Edmund L. Andrews, “F.C.C. Plan For Radio By Satellite,” New York Times, October 8, 1992.Laurent Belsie, “Digital Audio Broadcasting Plays to Global Audience,” Christian Science Monitor, March 9, 1992. It is available by subscription, mostly commercial free, and offers subscribers more stations and a wider variety of programming options than terrestrial radio.Anita Jain, “Sirius Satellite Moves,” New York Sun, p. 11, October 29, 2002.
Satellite radio technology was inducted into the Space Foundation Space Technology Hall of Fame in 2002.“Satellite Radio Technology,” spacefoundation.org, 2002. Accessed May 1, 2013.

==History==

===United States===

Sirius Satellite Radio was founded by Martine Rothblatt, David Margolese and Robert Briskman.Matthew Herper, "From Satellites to Pharmaceuticals," Forbes, April 22, 2010.Steve Warren, Radio: The Book, Focal Press, 2004, p. 166. In June 1990, Rothblatt's shell company, Satellite CD Radio, Inc., petitioned the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to assign new frequencies for satellites to broadcast digital sound to homes and cars. The company identified and argued in favor of the use of the S-band frequencies that the FCC subsequently decided to allocate to digital audio broadcasting. The National Association of Broadcasters contended that satellite radio would harm local radio stations.
In April 1992, Rothblatt resigned as CEO of Satellite CD Radio and former NASA engineer Robert Briskman, who designed the company's satellite technology, was then appointed chairman and CEO."Robert Briskman appointed chairman and CEO," Satellite News, June 1, 1992.Bethany McLean, “Satellite Killed The Radio Star,” Fortune, January 22, 2001, pp. 94-100. Six months later, Rogers Wireless co-founder David Margolese, who had provided financial backing for the venture, acquired control of the company and succeeded Briskman. Margolese renamed the company CD Radio, and spent the next five years lobbying the FCC to allow satellite radio to be deployed, and the following five years raising $1.6 billion, which was used to build and launch three satellites into elliptical orbit from Kazakhstan in July 2000.Nancy Dillon, “Beaming Radio Into High-Tech Fast Lane,” New York Daily News, June 5, 2000.Christopher H. Sterling, Encyclopedia of Radio, Volume 1, Taylor & Francis, 2003, p. 750.Simon Romero, “XM Satellite Radio Completes Its Financing,” New York Times, July 10, 2000. In 1997, after Margolese had obtained regulatory clearance and "effectively created the industry," the FCC also sold a license to the American Mobile Radio Corporation,Simon Houpt, "Radio Flyer," Report on Business, September 2001, pp. 14-16. which changed its name to XM Satellite Radio in October 1998.“AMRC changes name to XM Satellite Radio,” XM Satellite Radio press release, New York, BBC Archive, November 16, 1998. XM was founded by Lon Levin and Gary Parsons, who served as chairman until November 2009.Vince Beiser, “Hotel Biz Zillionaire’s Next Venture? Inflatable Space Pods,” Wired, October 23, 2007.Kathy Shwiff, “Parsons Resigns as Chairman of Sirius XM Radio,” Wall Street Journal, November 12, 2009.
CD Radio purchased their license for $83.3 million, and American Mobile Radio Corporation bought theirs for $89.9 million. Digital Satellite Broadcasting Corporation and Primosphere were unsuccessful in their bids for licenses.“Revolutions in Radio,” PBS, May 4, 2005. Sky Highway Radio Corporation had also expressed interest in creating a satellite radio network, before being bought out by CD Radio in 1993 for $2 million.“Sirius Satellite Radio, Inc. History,” fundinguniverse.com. Accessed May 7, 2013. In November 1999, Margolese changed the name of CD Radio to Sirius Satellite Radio. In November 2001, Margolese stepped down as CEO, remaining as chairman until November 2003, with Sirius issuing a statement thanking him "for his great vision, leadership and dedication in creating both Sirius and the satellite radio industry.""David Margolese Steps Down as Sirius CEO," PRNewswire, October 16, 2001.
XM’s first satellite was launched on March 18, 2001 and its second on May 8, 2001.Kevin Bonsor, “How Satellite Radio Works,” HowStuffWorks. Accessed May 1, 2013. Its first broadcast occurred on September 25, 2001, nearly four months before Sirius.Steve Parker, “XM plus Sirius = Satellite Radio Monopoly,” Huffington Post, July 24, 2008. Sirius launched the initial phase of its service in four cities on February 14, 2002,“Sirius Begins Satellite Service,” Radio, February 14, 2002. expanding to the rest of the contiguous United States on July 1, 2002. The two companies spent over $3 billion combined to develop satellite radio technology, build and launch the satellites, and for various other business expenses. Stating that it was the only way satellite radio could survive, Sirius and XM announced their merger on February 19, 2007, becoming Sirius XM Radio.Kim Hart, “Satellite Radio Merger Approved,” Washington Post, July 26, 2008.Richard Siklos and Andrew Ross Sorkin, “Merger Would End Satellite Radio’s Rivalry,” New York Times, February 20, 2007. The FCC approved the merger on July 25, 2008, concluding that it was not a monopoly, primarily due to Internet audio-streaming competition.Olga Kharif, “The FCC Approves the XM-Sirius Merger,” Bloomberg Businessweek, July 25, 2008.

===Canada===

XM satellite radio was launched in Canada on November 29, 2005. Sirius followed two days later on December 1, 2005. Sirius Canada and XM Radio Canada announced their merger into Sirius XM Canada on November 24, 2010.Emil Protalinski, “XM and Sirius to finally merge in Canada,” techspot.com, November 25, 2010. It was approved by the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission on April 12, 2011."CRTC Approves Sirius XM Merger In Canada," All Access, April 12, 2011.
===Africa, Asia and Europe===	
WorldSpace was founded by Ethiopia-born lawyer Noah Samara in Washington, DC, in 1990,Alex Benady, “Clockwork meets satellite in a revolution for Third World radio,” The Independent, June 1, 1998. with the goal of making satellite radio programming available to the developing world.David S. Hilzenrath, “WorldSpace announces potential decommissioning of satellites,” Washington Post, March 18, 2010. On June 22, 1991, the FCC gave WorldSpace permission to launch a satellite to provide digital programming to Africa and the Middle East. WorldSpace first began broadcasting satellite radio on October 1, 1999, in Africa.Denise Caruso, “Digital Commerce,” New York Times, October 11, 1999. India would ultimately account for over 90% of WorldSpace’s subscriber base.Dilip Maitra, “WorldSpace India to shut shop on December 31,” Deccan Herald, December 24, 2009. In 2008, WorldSpace announced plans to enter Europe, but those plans were set aside when the company filed for bankruptcy: Chapter 11 in November 2008.Eric Pfanner, “As AM signal fades, Europe moves hesitantly to digital radio,” New York Times, January 11, 2009. In March 2010, the company announced it would be de-commissioning its two satellites (one served Asia, the other served Africa). Liberty Media, which owns 50% of Sirius XM Radio, had considered purchasing WorldSpace’s assets, but talks between the companies collapsed.Roger Collis, “The Frequent Traveler: Keeping in touch on the road through satellite radio,” New York Times, December 20, 2002.

===Japan and Korea===

MobaHo! was a mobile satellite digital audio/video broadcasting service in Japan, whose services began on October 20, 2004, and ended on March 31, 2009.Tim Conneally, "Toshiba to shut down mobile broadcast TV service," betanews.com, July 30, 2008.

==System design==

Satellite radio uses the 2.3 GHz S band in North America for nationwide digital audio broadcasting (DAB).“Satellite S Band Radio Frequency Table,” CSG Network, updated August 15, 20011. Accessed April 23, 2013. In other parts of the world, satellite radio uses the 1.4 GHz L band allocated for DAB.
Satellite radio subscribers purchase a receiver and pay a monthly subscription fee to listen to programming. They can listen through built-in or portable receivers in automobiles; in the home and office with a portable or tabletop receiver equipped to connect the receiver to a stereo system; or on the Internet.http://shop.siriusxm.com/
Ground stations transmit signals to the satellites, which are orbiting over 22,000 miles above the earth. The satellites send the signals back down to radio receivers in cars and homes. This signal contains scrambled broadcasts, along with meta data about each specific broadcast. The signals are unscrambled by the radio receiver modules, which display the broadcast information. In urban areas, ground repeaters enable signals to be available even if the satellite signal is blocked. The technology allows for nationwide broadcasting, so that, for instance US listeners can hear the same stations anywhere in the country.Kathleen Kingsbury, “Satellite radio captures ears of millions,” CNN, August 4, 2004. The strong signals from the satellites and repeaters may offer superior sound quality to that of AM and FM radio.Steve Gutenberg and Matthew Moskovciak, “Satellite Radio,” CNET, March 1, 2005.

==Content, availability and market penetration==

Satellite radio in the US offers commercial-free music stations, as well as talk, news and sports, some of which include commercials.http://www.siriusxm.com/channellineup In 2004, satellite radio companies in the United States began providing background music to hotels, retail chains, restaurants, airlines and other businesses.Nick Bunkley, “Satellite radio scores with exclusive programming, in-car deals,” USA Today, January 5, 2005.Barnaby J. Feder, “Tuning In to Music That People Tune Out,” New York Times, February 16, 2004. Sirius XM Music for Business is a cheaper alternative to the costlier Muzak, and it doesn’t come with a long-term commitment.http://www.siriusxm.com/siriusxmforbusiness On April 30, 2013, Sirius XM CEO Jim Meyer stated that the company would be pursuing opportunities over the next few years to provide in-car services through their existing satellites, including telematics (automated security and safety, such as stolen vehicle tracking and roadside assistance) and entertainment (such as weather and gas prices).Liana B. Baker, “New CEO to expand Sirius beyond satellite radio in cars,” Reuters, April 30, 2013.
As of April 2013, Sirius XM had 24.4 million subscribers.Georg Szalai, “Sirius XM Names Jim Meyer Permanent CEO, Boosts Subs, Profit in First Quarter,” Hollywood Reporter, April 30, 2013. This was primarily due to the company’s partnerships with automakers and car dealers. Roughly 60% of new cars sold come equipped with Sirius XM, and just under half of those units gain paid subscriptions. The company has long-term deals with General Motors, Ford, Toyota, Kia, Bentley, BMW, Volkswagen, Nissan, Hyundai and Mitsubishi.Trefis Team, “Can Sirius XM Tune In Big Subscriber Growth This Year?” Forbes, April 12, 2013. The presence of Howard Stern, whose show attracts over 12 million listeners per week, has also been a factor in the company’s steady growth.Jeff Bercovici, “Sirius XM’s Mel Karmazin: ‘I’m One of the Most Underpaid Executives in the History of Executive Payment’,” Forbes, April 3, 2012. As of 2013, the main competition to satellite radio is streaming Internet services, such as Pandora and Spotify.

==Satellite radio vs. other formats==

Satellite radio differs from AM or FM radio and digital television radio (or DTR) in the following ways. The table applies primarily to the United States.
² The sound quality with both satellite radio providers and DTR providers varies with each channel. Some channels have near CD-quality audio, and others use low-bandwidth audio suitable only for speech. Since only a certain amount of bandwidth is available within the licenses available, adding more channels means that the quality on some channels must be reduced. Both the frequency response and the dynamic range of satellite channels can be superior to most, but not all AM or FM radio stations, as most AM and FM stations clip the audio peaks to sound louder; even the worst channels are still superior to most AM radios, but a very few AM tuners are equal to or better than the best FM or satellite broadcasts when tuned to a local station, even if not capable of stereo. The use of HD-Radio technology can allow AM and FM broadcasts to exceed the quality of satellite. AM does not suffer from multipath distortion or flutter in a moving vehicle like FM, nor does it become silent as you go behind a big hill like satellite radio.
³ Some satellite radio services and DTR services act as in situ repeaters for local AM/FM stations and thus feature a high frequency of interruption.
4 Nonprofit stations and public radio networks such as CBC/Radio-Canada, NPR, and PRI-affiliated stations and the BBC are commercial-free. In the US, all stations are required to have periodic station identifications and public service announcements.
5 In the United States, the FCC regulates technical broadcast spectrum only. Program content is unregulated. However, the FCC has tried in the past to expand its reach to regulate content to satellite radio and cable television, and its options are still open to attempt such in the future. The FCC does issue licenses to both satellite radio providers (XM and Sirius) and controls who holds these licenses to broadcast.
6 Degree of content regulation varies by country; however, the majority of industrialized nations have regulations regarding obscene and/or objectionable content.

==See also==

==References==


