[[History of United States Navy ratings]]

CATEGORIES: United States Navy

The History of the United States Navy ratings spans more than 200 years of American History from the United Colonies of the 1775 era to the current age of the 21st century United States Navy.  Navy ratings in America were first created in 1775, during the American Revolutionary War, for use by the Continental Navy.  After securing independence, the fledgling United States was without an operational Navy for nearly in decade.  In 1787, the first three frigates of the United States were formally launched, bringing about new regulations concerning enlisted seaman ratingsHowarth, Steven. To Shining Sea: A history of the United States Navy 1776-1991. New York: Random House, 1991

==Continental Navy==

The structure, ranks, and enlisted ratings of the early Continental Navy were direct carryovers from the Royal Navy hierarchy of uniforms, ranks, and insignia.  The first American Naval ranks consisted of simply Captain, Lieutenant, and Midshipman.  Shipboard warrant officer ranks, such as Sailing Master, Boatswain, Carpenter, Gunner, and Purser, were also copied from the British system.
The earliest form of U.S. Navy enlisted ratings may be traced to the Petty Officers assigned as assistants to the shipboard warrant officers.  The oldest such rating, still in use today, is that of Boatswain's Mate.  The rating of Armourer was also in use as an assistant to the Gunner, as was the rating of Carpenter's Mate for members of the Ship's Carpenter's Crew.  Informally, the shipboard title of Yeoman was also frequently used, even though this would not be an official rating of the United States Navy until 1835.Naval Historical Society
The remainder of a Continental Navy ship's crew were simply referred to as "Seaman", who were "signed on" to the ship for the duration of a campaign and "paid off" once the ship had returned to the portNot until the 1850s did the U.S. Navy adopt the practice of a permanently assigned ship's company

==References==

==External links==

==Notes==



