[[Steven Graff]]

CATEGORIES: American classical pianists, Hunter College faculty, Juilliard School alumni, Living people, People from Chicago, Illinois

Steven Lewis Graff is a pianist and teacher of music in New York City.

==Early Years and Education==

Steven Graff was born in Chicago where he studied piano with the late Eloise Niwa and made his debut as a soloist with The Chicago Symphony Orchestra. He went on to study at The Juilliard School as a Petschek Scholarship student, where his teachers included Adele Marcus, Beveridge Webster and Herbert Stessin. He received a Doctorate of Musical Arts from The Graduate School of CUNY, with a doctoral thesis entitled Chopin performance tradition and its relationship to analysis.Ravinia Alters Lineup. Chicago Tribune July 17, 1986Music News. Los Angeles Times July 8, 1984[ref]Chopin performance tradition and its relationship to analysis by Graff, Steven Lewis, D.M.A., City University of New York, 1994, 123 pages; AAT 9431360
[/ref]Maurice Hinson. The pianist's bookshelf: a practical guide to books, videos, and other resources. Indiana University Press. 1998 p94 In 1986 he was a winner of the Juilliard School's eighth annual Gina Bachauer International Piano Scholarship Competition.Six young pianists have won the Juilliard School's eighth annual Gina Bachauer International Piano Scholarship Competition. New York Times. Section 2; Page 19, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk. August 3, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

==Performer==

Steven Graff has toured Norway, Japan and throughout the United States and Europe. He was a prizewinner in The Casadesus and Stravinsky International Competitions. He has given performances at Zankel, Weill and Stern Auditoriums at Carnegie Hall, and the Kaye Playhouse and Lang Hall at Hunter College, Alice Tully Hall and Merkin Hall ALLAN KOZINN. MUSIC REVIEW; An American Century (With Swiss). New York Times. March 23, 1999 in New York City, and his performances have been broadcast on New York radio stations WQXR and WNCN, and Chicago's WFMT. Graff has premiered new music and recorded contemporary works on the Centaur Records and Capstone Records Labels. Solo Concerto performances include the Hunter Symphony, The University of Arizona Orchestra at Flagstaff, The New York Symphonic Arts Ensemble, The Chicago Symphony Orchestra, The Chicago Chamber Orchestra, The Skokie Valley Symphony and The Northshore Philharmonia.Pianist Graff to perform here on Feb. 4. Lancaster New Era. Lancaster, Pa.: Jan 31, 2005. pg. 1'BrahmsFest' opens concert series. Lancaster New Era. Lancaster, Pa.: Oct 30, 1997. pg. 3Barbara Little. Renowned violinist to return to county. Intelligencer Journal. Lancaster, Pa.: Nov 15, 1999. pg. B.1Greenwich High singer wins choral society scholarship. Greenwich Time. Greenwich, Conn.: May 6, 2007. pg. B.5[ref]Greenwich Choral Society Presenting musical diversity.
Greenwich Time. Greenwich, Conn. Apr 25, 2007. pg. A.13[/ref] He has given lecture/recitals at The Gina Bachauer International Piano Foundation Fresno Bee - Sep 7, 1986Bachauer loosens up and throws a party. Salt Lake City Tribune. July 16, 2007 and at The Aloha International Piano Festival in Hawaii.TGIF. Honolulu Advertiser - Jun 16, 2006MOZART SONATA HELPS CLOSE WEEKLONG FESTIVAL. Honolulu Advertiser - Jun 19, 2006TGIF. Honolulu Advertiser - Jun 15, 2007 Steven Graff is a Steinway Artist.

==Teacher==

Mr. Graff serves on the faculty at New York's Hunter College and at The Macaulay Honors College of The City University of New York.He is a pianist at Metropolitan Montessori School.

==References==


