[[Francisco Coll García]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, Living people, Spanish composers

Francisco Coll (born in 1985 in Valencia) is a Spanish composer.

==Biography==

Francisco Coll studied trombone at the Joaquín Rodrigo Conservatoire of Music in Valencia and the Royal Conservatoire of Music in Madrid graduating with the Honour Prize. He studied composition at the Guildhall School of Music & Drama with Richard Baker with the support of the IVM Scholarship and the Guildhall Trust, and privately with Thomas Adès.http://www.fabermusic.com/Composers-Details.aspx?composerid=7 of Adès on Faber Music website He completed a Masters degree in composition with distinction in 2010, winning the Ian Horsburgh Memorial Prize for the best postgraduate composition, and currently he is fellow at Guildhall.
His first commission, "...Whose name I don't want to remember" (2005) for double brass quintet, was premiered in Avery Fisher Hall of the Lincoln Center of New York, by Canadian Brass and the brass section of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra. He won the International week of chamber music Prize for El juego lúgubre for two pianos (Montserrat, 2006), and the National Award "Valencia Crea" for La Ciudad Paranoica (2007) for ensemble of 10 players. He won the "Carmelo A. Bernaola" SGAE Prize for Cuando el niño era niño...(2008) for piano quartet. Aqua Cinereus (2006) for large orchestra, was premiered on the "Palau de la Musica", by the Philharmonic Orchestra of Valencia University conducted by Cristóbal Soler.  Óxido (2010), for soprano and ensemble was premiered at Wigmore Hall (London) under the baton of the composer. Hidden Blue (2009) for the London Symphony Orchestra was workshopped and recorded on October 5, 2009 as part of the LSO Discovery Panufnik Young Composers Scheme. Recently Coll has been chosen to represent Spain at the International Rostrum of Composers/UNESCO (Lisbon, 2010). He take a Composition Residency during the Aldeburgh Festival 2010. Current projects include a new piece commissioned by Los Angeles Philharmonic to be premiere at the Walt Disney Concert Hall in 2011, and an octet for members of the BBC Symphony Orchestra for broadcast on BBC Radio 3, and an other commission from the 2011 Aldeburgh Festival for the Barbirolli Quartet which will subsequently tour to the Verbier Festival, Switzerland. He is Composer in Association with the Jove Orquestra de la Generalitat Valenciana. Coll's music is published by Faber Music.
As trombonist he has collaborated with the Mediterraneo Symphony Orchestra, Filarmonía Orchestra, Grupo instrumental of Madrid, Torrent's City Symphony Orchestra, ...etc. And he was a member of the Youth Orchestra of the "Generalitat Valenciana" (JOGV), and the Valencia's University Philharmonic Orchestra. In 2005 he won "Vicent Galbis" interpretation Prize, and in 2007 he won young performers "Villa Castellnovo" Prize. Currently he is studying trombone at the Guildhall School of Music & Drama with John Kenny.
For more information visit his personal webpage: www.franciscocoll.com

==Works==

==Prizes==

==References==


