[[Sugandha Mishra]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 births, Indian female singers, Indian television presenters, Living people

Sugandha Mishra (born 23 May 1984 in Jalandhar, Punjab, India) is an Indian singer and television presenter. She was the finalist in the reality show Hero Honda - Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Singing Superstar.Zee TV: About Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Singing Superstar She also was a contestant on The Great Indian Laughter Challenge.
She was classically trained from her Grandfather The Legendary Pt. Shankar Lal Mishra, disciple of Ustaad Amir Khan Sahib. Sugandha is the 4th Generation of her family into singing and belongs to the Indore gharana.
She was university topper and a gold medalist and made a record of winning all the awards in music and mimicry at National Level youth festivals for 7 years consecutively.
She has a masters degree in music and is currently pursuing Doctorate in Music.
She started her career as a Radio Jockey in BIGFM92.7 for a prime time morning show.She has sung many jingles,bhajans and playback in documentaries,plays and short films.
She was the Third Runner-up in the Reality Show Zee Hero Honda - Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Singing Superstar.1 She was also a finalist of The Great Indian Laughter Challenge.
Sugandha, apart from giving voice to songs in Bollywood Movies like SHREE and Kamaal Dhamaal Malamaal, has also done many singing and Comedy shows and has also acted and hosted various Television shows. Appreciating her talent "The Legendary DILIP KUMAR JI", Sugandha was invited to perform on his 90th Birthday. 
She recently signed her first Bollywood Movie "Heropanti" under Sajid nadiadwala Grandson, one of the biggest production House.

==Television Shows==

---Playback---
Bollywood Movie-Kamal Dhamal Malamal-
Director Priyadarshan, Music Directors-Sajid Wajid
Bollywood Movie-Shree
Director-Rajesh Bachani,Music-Sanjay (talaash band)
---Debut as an actress in Bollywood movie----
"HEROPANTI"
under Sajidnandiadwala Grandson Production House

==References==

==External links==


