[[Deg language]]

CATEGORIES: Languages of Ghana, Gur languages

Deg (Degha) is a Gur (Gurunsi) language of Ghana, with a thousand speakers in Ivory Coast. Vagla is a related language.

==References==

MO (DEG)
The Dega people live within both the Brong Ahafo and Northern Regions of Ghana. The two regions are divided by the Black Volta River which also separates the two major towns that have paramount chiefs, New Longoro (Maantukwa) and Bamboi (Gbanboi). The entire Dega area used to be within the Ashanti Territory until the British colonial government created the Northern Territory in 1908 and used the Black Volta River as a boundary without due cognizance of the fact that one ethnic group had been divided over two territories. This demarcation resulted in protracted local political tension, especially between Bamboi and New Longoro.
Nevertheless, the same demarcation was used when after independence the Brong Ahafo Region was created. Dega Hare (Dega land) is therefore split between the Bole district in the Northern Region and the Wenchi and Kintampo districts in the Brong Ahafo Region. On the map of Ghana, the Dega are surrounded by Nafaana people on the West, Bono in the South and Gonja to the north. The entire area is estimated to be 1,700 sq km with about 46 villages comprising mainly mud and thatched houses. Some Dega migrated to the Jaman district and are in villages like Bonakire, Adadiem and Dokachina. Another group moved to settle in Cote d'Ivoire and live in villages like Dwoboi, Wireke and Zagala and the Dega in Ghana call them Lamoolatina (the people beyond the river). Those in Ghana too have various indigenous names.
The people call themselves Dega, meaning 'multiplying', 'spreading quickly' or 'fertility'. One person is called a Deg, the language is also known as Deg and they call their land Dega Hare. Other ethnic groups in Ghana know them as Mo and there are three theories behind the name Mo.
In 1893 the people of Nkoransa and Abease, now in the Brong Ahafo Region but then in the Ashanti Territory, were attacked by Asante when the Nkoransa Chief Nana Kofi Fa refused to pay tribute to the Asantehene, Agyeman Prempe Ill. The Dega were well known for their exploits in war and Nkoransa asked them for help. According to H.J. Hobbs, the Acting Provincial Commissioner of the British colonial government, "In this war, the Mos and Abeases fought for Nkronza and Banda for Asanti. The Nkronza and their allies were defeated at Sabule a Mo village". This war was also confirmed by a report that Perregant, a Basel missionary gave in 1894. When he reached Nkoransa he "found the whole of Nkoranza district in ruins, the majority of the Old population remaining in deep need, sore without even cloth for clothes". According to him, "the account of the issue leading to war is that the Nkoranzas refused the yearly tribute of 30 girls and young men". Even though Nkoransa and her allies were defeated, they sent a congratulatory message to Dega due to the gallant role they played in this battle, saying "Mo, Mo, Mo!", meaning thank you. This won them the name, Mofoo, an Akan word literally meaning, "The people who did well".
Doni-Kwame alludes to the fact that the name 'Mo' might have come from a Pantera prefix monoo. The Pantera people who call themselves Nafaana are a neighbouring group in the Brong Ahafo Region. Dega was famous for the production of large pots which were sold in the southern markets by the Pantera women. The Pantera women used to respond to greetings with words like "Mpange, Mo Maa", meaning, "You are welcome. Thank you, Madam". "Mpange, Mo no". "Welcome. Thank you father". Due to the frequent use of the word "mo", the Akans referred to their products as "Mo Kukuo", meaning mo pots. Later when it became known that the Dega people were the producers of the pots, the name was then used to describe them, hence the name, Mofoo.
The third theory is that the name came from the Dega word for the Black Volta
River, Moh. One of the major occupations of the Dega villages along the Black Volta is fishing. The Dega women would carry the fish to markets in Kintampo, Techiman and Wenchi and when asked where they got the fish from, their response was "Yedefiri Moh meaning we brought them from Moh. They used the Deg word for Black Volta because they did not know the Asante-Twi word. So anytime the Akan women saw the Dega women bringing fish to the market, they would point to them saying, "Mofoo no de adwene reba", meaning the Moh people are bringing fish.
From the research survey conducted, the most popular theory was the first. The
majority of respondents said that their ancestors got the name from the help they gave to Nkoransa during their battle with Asante. In some writings, the two names are put together as MoDega to describe the people and MoDeg, the language.
