[[KKXA]]

CATEGORIES: Classic country radio stations in the United States, Radio stations established in 2011, Radio stations in Washington (state), Snohomish, Washington

KKXA (1520 AM, "Classic Country 1520") is an American radio station licensed to serve the community of Snohomish, Washington.  The station's broadcast license is held by CAAM Partnership, LLC., an entity controlled by the Skotdal family. The KKXA studios are shared with sister station KRKO at the Key Tower building in downtown Everett, Washington.

==Programming==

KKXA broadcasts a classic country music format branded as "Classic Country 1520 KXA" to the greater Seattle metropolitan area. In addition to its music programming, KKXA is an affiliate of the Washington State University Cougar football and basketball network, and also carries Western Conference high school football and basketball.  Occasional Everett AquaSox baseball (Seattle Mariners affiliate) and Everett Silvertips hockey games are also aired on KKXA.

==History==

In January 2004, the Skotdal family applied to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) for a construction permit for a new broadcast radio station. The FCC granted this permit on March 16, 2011, with a scheduled expiration date of March 16, 2014. The Skotdal family won a comparative hearing before the Federal Communications Commission against mutually exclusive applicants hoping to place the signal in Hawaii, Whidbey Island, and on the Olympic Peninsula. The station was assigned the call sign "KKXA" by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) on March 28, 2011.
Known on-air as "KXA" as a tribute to pioneering radio station KXA (770 AM), the station began airing a loop of test audio in August 2011. KKXA broadcasts to the greater Seattle metropolitan area. On October 11, 2011, KKXA began regular broadcasting at 4:00 pm with a classic country format branded as "Classic Country 1520 KXA".  The first song was "Simple Man" by Charlie Daniels. The station received its broadcast license on November 4, 2011.
KKXA broadcasts with 50,000 watts of power during the day using an omni-directional antenna and 50,000 watts during critical hours and overnight utilizing a directional antenna.

==References==

==External links==


