[[Willem Jacob Herreyns]]

CATEGORIES: Baroque, 18th-century painters from the Southern Netherlands, 1743 births, 1827 deaths, People from Antwerp, Flemish painters

William Jacob Herreyns (alternative names: Guillaume Jacques Herreijns, Willem Jacob Herreijns, Guillaume Jacques Herreyns,  Willem Jacob Herrijns, Willem Jacob Herryns) (Antwerp, June 10, 1743 – Antwerp, August 10, 1827) was a Flemish painter.  He is regarded as one of the last painters in the tradition of the Baroque and the last follower of Peter Paul Rubens.

==Life==

William Herreyns was a scion of a family of artists. His father, Jacob III Herreyns, was a painter and decorator. His uncle Guillaume was a sculptor. He got his initial training from these relatives. Subsequently he studied at the Academy of Antwerp where Balthasar Beschey was one of his teachers. He completed his studies in 1764 and one year later he became one of the six director-teachers of the Academy as the replacement of Andries Cornelis Lens.  In 1767 Herreyns left the Academy and travelled.Guillaume Jacques Herreijns in Biographie Nationale, Volume 9, p. 288-291
Upon his return to Belgium in 1771 he went to live in Mechelen where he founded the local Academy in 1772.   He taught a few arts subjects in Mechelen until the 1792 invasion of Belgium by the French who proceeded to abolish the existing school system.  After the creation of the central schools by the French, he was appointed in 1795 a teacher of drawing at the central school of the department of Deux-Nèthes in Antwerp.  In 1797 he saved 328 paintings from the churches and monasteries that had been ordered closed by the French occupiers. Many of these paintings had in fact been stolen. He worked on the return of Rubens' paintings Our Lady with the parrot and The Madonna surrounded by Saints.
In 1800 Herreyns was appointed a teacher-director of the former Antwerp Academy, which had been renamed l'École spéciale de peinture, sculpture et architecture d'Anvers (Special school of painting, sculpture and architecture of Antwerp).  When the school was renamed an academy in 1804, Herreyns could maintain his position which he would hold until his death.Willem Jacob Herreyns at Mechelen mapt
In 1810 he got permission from Napoleon to set up a museum in the former Franciscan monastery in Antwerp. In 1815, 38 of the 63 pictures removed by the French were added to its collection.
His pupils included Jacobus Everhardus Josephus van den Berg, 
Ludwig Brüls, Hendrik de Cort, Guillaume Henri Franquinet, Jan Frans van Geel, 
Jozef Geirnaert, Pieter van Huffel, Joseph Jacops, Pierre Kremer, Peter Paul Joseph Noël, Cornelis & Gerard van Spaendonck, Jan Baptist & Martinus Gerardus Tetar van Elven, Henri Van der Poorten, Gustave Wappers, and Willem van der Worp.Willem Jacob Herreyns in the RKD  He also taught the young Antoine-Joseph Wiertz.

==Works==

Herreyns’ work was very highly regarded in his time.  During the Swedish king Gustav III's visit to Antwerp in 1780, he admired one of his works called The Purification of the Virgin, then in the Saint-Michael's Abbey, and immediately decided to appoint Herreyns as his court painter.  The Austrian Emperor Joseph II also praised his work during his visit to Mechelen.
Herreyns received many commissions from religious institutions in the province of Antwerp for which he painted large religious paintings.  In 1775 he was commissioned by the Jezuits in Mechelen to design a series of floats on the occasion of the celebrations for the thousandth anniversary of the city's patron saint Rumbold of Mechelen.  He designed the floats together with local sculptor Pieter Valckx and also designed the triumphal arches. Herreyns was also a celebrated portrait painter.
His educational influence now eclipses his reputation as a painter.  Herreyns is considered the last follower of the Flemish baroque tradition founded by Peter Paul Rubens. He was a good colorist (tending towards the dark and red) and a draughtsman with a precise line, but his work shows a certain coldness and lacks originality.
Herreyns' notable works include a Portrait of the painter Andries Cornelis Lens (after 1770), Godfrey, abbot of Tongerlo (1793) and John the Baptist in the Desert (1813). His work can be found in the Sint-Jan Baptist en Evangelist in Mechelen and the Royal Museum of Fine Arts in Antwerp.

==References==

==External source==


