[[The Mount Bakery]]

CATEGORIES: Restaurants in Washington (state), Restaurants established in 2001

The Mount Bakery is a café in Bellingham, Washington's Arts District at 308c West Champion Street. The restaurant was a pioneer in the area's Slow Food Movement. The café is well known for its devotion to the sport of bicycling, featuring bicycle-themed art, clothing and its annual live screening of the Tour de France which draws crowds of cycling enthusiasts each year to eat breakfast and watch the event unfold in the early hours of the morning.  

==History of the Bakery==

The restaurant was founded by Olivier Vrambout, a Belgian pastry chef, in February 2001."Fresh Belgian tastes fill downtown's Mount Bakery," The Bellingham Herald, May 20, 2001.  Vrambout had worked previously worked as the dessert chef at Boundary Bay Brewery, occasionally selling his pastries on the outskirts of the Bellingham Farmer's Market as well. Vrambout, known as Olivier or alternately Oliver, began the restaurant as a créperie, bakery and Belgian waffle shop, making waffles on his grandmother's waffle iron and keeping a European schedule, closed on Sundays and Mondays. The café has slowly expanded its offerings from desserts to breakfast and lunch and finally dinner. In 2008, Vrambout sold the restaurant"Early 2008 time of change for retailers," The Bellingham Herald, February 11, 2009. to early employee Vince Lalonde, a Bellingham artist and musician"Doowop (That Thing); Alamo Social Club details is soulful evolution," The Bellingham Herald, September 16, 2004. Vrambout went on to open a combination cafe and bicycle shop in Stillwater, Minnesota called The Bikery."The fresh aroma of baked goods...and bike tires?," The Stillwater Gazette, June 27, 2008. Under Lalonde, the restaurant opened a second location, Mount Bakery Fairhaven, at 1217 Harris Avenue in the Fairhaven Historic District, a neighborhood of Bellingham."Mount Bakery Expanding to Former Home of Fairhaven Pizza," The Bellingham Business Journal, July 7, 2011.

==Bicyclists, Bike Films, Bike Art and Bike Pride==

Bellingham is a pointedly bicycle friendly and bike-proud city."Welcome to Bellingham, Now Get a Bike!," FreeHub Magazine, Friendly Fronts.The Café has served, from the start, as a gathering place for bicyclists not only during the annual Tour de France showing but year round. The Café often hangs bike-themed art, sells bike-themed clothing and is a sponsor of Bellingham's Annual "Bike In" held in the Arts District. The Bike In features live music, a bike-themed movie by the district's Pickford Cinema, Mount Bakery foods and the annual Show & Shine, an arts and biking event at which people bring their bikes to show off and prizes are award for Best Vintage Bike, Best Decorated Bike and so on."A New Aroma Arrives in Fairhaven: Mount Bakery...and the Bellingham Bike-In on August 20," The Northwest Business Monthly Magazine, August, 2011.

==References==

==External links==


