[[Diya Aur Baati Hum]]

CATEGORIES: Indian television soap operas, Indian television series, 2011 Indian television series debuts, Star Plus television series, Television shows set in Rajasthan

[tpl]Use Indian English|date=May 2013[/tpl]

Diya Aur Baati Hum is an Indian television soap opera on the Star Plus channel. It started on 29 August 2011 and stars Anas Rashid and Deepika Singh as the main protagonists.

==Dubs==

This show is formally released in Hindi and is known as Diya Aur Bati Hum on Star Plus. It is also dubbed in Tamil and known as En Kanavan En Thozhan and in Telugu known as Ee Tharam Illalu. The series is also remade in Malayalam as Parasparam on Asianet, in Bangla as Tomay Amay Mile on Star Jalsha and in Kannada as Akashadeepa on Asianet Suvarna. It also airs on Pakistan's Urdu channel Urdu 1. The old episodes are also aired on STAR Utsav. The serial drama is also dubbed in Sinhala in Sri Lanka on Sirasa TV channel using the name Swapna. It also airs in Romania on Naţional TV as Destine Implinite.

==Plot==

Diya Aur Baati Hum is the story of Sandhya's struggles, as she dreams of becoming an Indian Police Service officer. She dreams to break the boundaries of her confined existence of middle class values. The story is also about Suraj, who is a self-made man. Suraj owns a famous sweet shop near his house.
Suraj and Sandhya get married under strained circumstances. Sandhya is not able to finish her graduation. Soon, she is part of the family she does not know. In this family she struggles with her strict mother-in-law who does not accept that her daughter-in-law could become a police officer. The story shows how a husband becomes his wife's strength and helps her to fulfil her dream. Now Sandhya is going for her training sessions. At first Bhabho, Suraj's mother, agreed to the training but now she doesn't want Sandhya to go as she realized that Sandhya could be posted anywhere in India.
Then Bhabho finds out that whoever gets the "best cadet" trophy can choose his/her posting location. Bhabho asks Sandhya to win this trophy and choose Pushkar as her posting location. Sandhya starts her training but feels tired and is unable to perform well because of back pain and fatigue. Suraj doubts that theses symptoms are because she might be pregnant. She does a pregnancy test and the results turn out to be positive. Bhahbo becomes very happy but Suraj considers him as the cause for Sandhya's training to stop. Sandhya applies for leave but she is denied leave because she does not have the proof that she is pregnant. She does a pregnancy test in the hospital and finds out that she was not pregnant. She continues her training. Now is the next step to their training. They have a cycling race and Mr.Roy is their trainer. He is impressed by Sandhya's potential. Sandhya chooses position no.28 for the race which is a really low position. Next day she finds out that her position has been changed from 28 to 18. She suspects her rival candidate Zakir to have manipulated the position. Sandhya does the race and comes first. Sandhya then comes to know that her position had been changed by Mr.Roy himself. He said that he had changed so that he could increase Sandhya's confidence. 
Now comes another challenge in Sandhya's life. Sandhya, being the eldest daughter in law of the Rathi family had to be present for Chavvi's wedding. But Officer Singh does not sanction her leave. She decides to quit the academy as she cannot compromise with her responsibility towards her family. Then Officer Singh comes up with a task for the cadets and the winner of the task can fulfil one wish of theirs. So, Sandhya takes this as a challenge. She performs well in the water pulling task and wins the STAR Performer trophy. She also gets to attend Chavvi's marriage. But challenges doesn't end therough the rifle shooting task, her biggest weakness – her poor eyesight comes in spot light. Sooraj decides to find a solution for Sandhya's poor vision. Like a supportive husband, Sooraj helps Sandhya win the task and overcome her weakness. Sandhya's next task in the academy is life threatening of Sky diving. She decides to overcome her fear of heights. Sooraj supports her. Sandhya chooses the highest altitude of 15000m and proves a winner. Officer agrima Singh feels proud of Sandhya. Now, Sandhya's is just a task away from fulfilling her dream of an IPS officer.

==Cast==

==References==

==External links==


