[[Achziv]]

CATEGORIES: Hebrew Bible places, National parks of Israel, Daher al-Omar fortifications, Protected areas of North District (Israel)

Achziv is a national park on the northern coast of Israel, 15 kilometers north of Acre, within the municipal area of Nahariya. It is a former town, settled for about three millennia. It was first settled in the Middle Canaanite (Bronze) II period by the Phoenicians.Achziv exhibit at the Hecht Museum In the Bible, it is described as falling within territory assigned to the tribe of Asher. An Arab village,  Az-Zeeb, was established on the site during the Mamluk period. Today Achziv is a national park.

==History==

Originally a Phoenician city (Ekdippa, Έκδιππα in Ancient Greek), it was assigned to the tribe of Asher (Josh. 19:29; Judg. 1:31)
"And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of Asher ... and the outgoings thereof are at the sea from the coast to Achzibh." Achziv (Cheziv) is mentioned in Jewish rabbinic writings, for example Midrash Vayikra Rabba 37:4. King David added the city into his Kingdom, but King Solomon returned it to Hiram as part of the famous pact. Additionally, Achziv is mentioned in the Babylonian Talmud, and by the relating Middle Age commentators, concerning the location of Achziv in regards to historical borders of Israel. During Sancheriv invasions, the Assyrians conquered the city. During the reign of the Seleucids, the border was established at Rosh HaNikra, just north to Achziv, making it a border city and under the control of Acre. A maritime city named Cziv, nine miles (14 km) north of Acre, is mentioned by Josephus Flavius, and later by Eusebius. During the Crusader period, the site was known as Casle Umberti.Institute of Archaeology, Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Remnants of ancient Achziv, now known as Tel Achziv, are located on a sandstone mound between two creeks, Kziv creek on the north and Shaal creek on the south, close to the border with Lebanon. 
The Arab village of Az-Zeeb  was established during the Mamluk and Ottoman periods, the houses erected using the stones of the Crusader castle. The villagers fled to Lebanon  during  the 1948 Arab–Israeli War. In 1946, The Jewish Resistance Movement attempted to blow up the railroad bridge over the creek at Achziv in an operation known as Night of the Bridges. A monument to the 14 soldiers killed there was erected on the site.

==Archaeology==

An ancient port was located on the coast, and another secondary port is located 700 m to the south.
Archeological excavations have revealed that a walled city existed at the location from the Middle Bronze period. History of Achziv goes back to the Chalcolithic period (4500-3200 BC).

==External links==

==References==


