[[Odoardo Borrani]]

CATEGORIES: 19th-century Italian painters, 20th-century Italian painters, People from Pisa, Tuscan painters, 1833 births, 1905 deaths

Odoardo Borrani (Pisa, 1833 – Florence, 1905) was an Italian painter associated with the Macchiaioli group.

==Biography==

The Borrani family moved from Pisa to Florence, where Odoardo enrolled at the Academy of Fine Arts in 1853, studying under Gaetano Bianchi, Giuseppe Bezzuoli, and Enrico Pollastrini. However, he became independent of the academic styles.
His first painting while at the Academy was titled Un veglione di maschere alla Pergola. In 1859, he paints a Lorenzo the Magnificent saves himself from being murdered in the sacristy of the Cathedral, an episode of the Pazzi Conspiracy. For this painting. Borrani was awarded the Gold medal by the contest of the Accademia of Florence. That same year, he joined the army and upon returning from the short campaign, he painted the Cadaver of Jacopo de' Pazzi and Michelangelo directs the fortification of Florence.Dizionario degli Artisti Italiani Viventi: pittori, scultori, e Architetti., by Angelo de Gubernatis. Tipe dei Successori Le Monnier, 1889, page 67.
It was with his new friends Telemaco Signorini and Vincenzo Cabianca that he took up painting from life and came into contact with the Macchiaioli group gravitating around the Caffè Michelangiolo. He served as a volunteer in the Second Italian War of Independence in 1859 and in 1862, together with Giuseppe Abbati, Silvestro Lega, Raffaello Sernesi and Signorini, went to work in the countryside outside Florence near Piagentina, the town from which this group of artists takes its name. It was also in 1862 that he first spent the summer at Castiglioncello, as the guest of the critic Diego Martelli. The gallery set up with Lega in 1875 to promote younger artists soon went out of business. He worked in later years as a teacher, ceramic decorator and graphic artist for L’Illustrazione Italiana.
Also among his works are La mietitura nella montagna Pistoiese; Speranze perdute (Lost Hope), Al Coro, Il richiamo del contingente (Rescue of the Contingent); Le primizie; L' Arno (The Arno); Il torrente Mugnone; In attesa del pittore; Interno della church of Santa Monica; Firenze il 9 gennaio 1878; La vigilia della Sagra ; La sterpata di San Rossore; Cammelli in riposo; Una Vestale Cristiana; Il ritorno sotto le armi; Fate la carità; L'Estasi di Santa Teresa (Ecstasy of St Teresa); Un mattino sul torrente Magnolie which was exhibited at the Esposizione di Roma; Un pensiero mondano (A Mundane Thought); Antica porta a Pinti avanti la demolizione; La Cosacela presso Firenze; La Nonna (The Grandmother); Una Monaca; In cerca di documenti; Episodio di Carnevale; Mi chiama?; La mia cucina (My Kitchen); Goldoni; Maria Stuarda (Mary Stuart); Un alabardiere (Halbadier); San Giovanino; Costumi fiorentini del 1500; Contadina Romana; Mezza figura di bambina col gatto; Al mio studio; Curiosità; Gioie materne; La mietitura nelle maremme toscane; L'annegato; L'analfabeta (The Illiterate) ; Il regalo al padrone (Gift to the Godfather); Teco vegliar m'è caro; I prepativi per la festa; Per l'acqua'; Motivo dal vero'' ; and as well as many watercolors and portraits.De Gubernatis, page 67-68.

==References==

==Other projects==


