[[Cultural currency]]

CATEGORIES: Women's rights

Woman and girls who equip themselves with tools necessary for varied ways of knowing, other than through the cultural norms ascribed by way of patterned social conditioning, create cultural currency. This ascent to cultural currency promotes mobility and widened participation in otherwise non-traditional female spheres of influence.
Cultural currency as a non-quantifiable asset or resource to society, in reality can only be observed in the most recent decades. Synonymous to human rights,woman's rights and national security issues have only recently become recognised such as   peacebuilding processes, that enhance understanding of the diverse insecurities facing women. In the International Woman's Summit 2013 Hillary Clinton notes in her speech that, "woman and girls are not a sub-human species and do not belong on the periphery in international relations or national security issues". This alludes to the notion that woman must become peripatetic in all domains of politics and human relations.
The reality of is, that only in the last couple of generations has woman's suffrage become significantly unfettered, and the concurrence of all genders as agents of change been noticed. The more open and advanced ways of woman and girls participating has thus allowed for these mobility mechanisms, to break the shackles of patriarchal constraints. With this shift life then becomes balanced and more social and economical wealth is acquired for society as a whole. Where woman cannot engage and participate within the entirety of the nations affairs there is significant social loss at the aggregate level.http://theatlantic.com/sexes/archive/2013/04/the-hillary-doctrine-womans-rights-are-a-national-security-issue/274770/
The ascent of woman whom become integrated into positions of power are becoming more influential and crucial to the progress of societal change. The accumulation of cultural currency can be accredited in part, to rights which have been asserted through doctrines such as CEDAW  The Committee on Elimination of Discrimination Against Women  The ratification of such one of a kind initiatives, ensures conscious effort from its participants to adhere to the legally binding implications which safeguard against discrimination of any type. Implicit within national reports are the provisions that correlate with its actions.http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/ Compliance with these policies represents the states firm commitment to end all discrimination of women.
“Discrimination": The unjust or prejudicial treatment of different categories of people, especially on the grounds of race, age, or sex. It is any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the effect or purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition of an individual.Specifically, enjoyment or exercise by women, irrespective of their marital status, on the basis of equality of men and women; human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field”.
Parties whom accede to the convention take specific scrutiny, so that women may savor in all equitable and most appropriate realizations accorded by the convention.Allowing for full gratification of all human rights and fundamental freedoms.

==References==


