[[Lindy Remigino]]

CATEGORIES: 1931 births, Living people, Athletes (track and field) at the 1952 Summer Olympics, American sprinters, Olympic track and field athletes of the United States, Olympic gold medalists for the United States, Sportspeople from Queens, New York, Manhattan Jaspers and Lady Jaspers, Olympic medalists in athletics (track and field)

[tpl]MedalCountry|the [tpl]USA[/tpl][/tpl]
Lindy John Remigino (born June 3, 1931) is an American track and field athlete, the 1952 Olympic 100 m champion.

==Life and career==

Remigino was born in Elmhurst, Queens, New York.Biography and Olympic Results at Sports Reference  He was named after aviator Charles Lindbergh.
In 1952 he won the ICAAAA 220 championship in 1952, then placed close second to Morgan State's sprinter, Art Bragg, at the US Olympic Trials. The expected main American contender for the Olympic title, Jim Golliday, was injured and did not qualify. 
In Helsinki, one of the leading American sprinters, Art Bragg, was injured prior to the Games, leaving two Americans, Dean Smith and Remigino to qualify for the final.
Out of the blocks, John Treloar took a step ahead, but Remigino the eventual Olympic champion and several more quickly picked him up, with Jamaica's Herb McKenley lagging well behind. By the 80 m mark, Remigino held that big lead: however, in his excitement at sight of the advancing tape, he pitched forward in a virtual lean. He therefore decelerated in the lean, and, as McKenley came quickly, at the tape no one was certain who won. The officials, however, agreed to give gold medal to Remigino. The finish was one of the closest in Olympic history with the first four given the same time, 10.4, with the fifth and sixth runners only 0.1 behind in 10.5.
Across Europe that Summer, Remigino defeated McKenley several times more at 100, while McKenley defeated the new "World's Fastest Human" one time in the 200 m race. In Oslo, Norway, Remigino won in 10.2 s which would have equaled the 100-meters world-record, but an out of place wind-o-meter meant the time could not be ratified. His official best time was 10.4 s.
In 1953, Remigino won both ICAAAA sprint championships. In 1955 he placed second to Bobby Morrow in the 100 US Nationals.
After his running career, Remigino became a high school coach. His Hartford Public High School teams won 31 state titles in his 43 year career.

==References==


