[[Digital Skills Academy]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in the Republic of Ireland, 2008 establishments in Ireland, Education in Dublin (city)

Digital Skills Academy is a training organisation based in the Digital Hub, located in former buildings of the Guinness Brewery complex in Dublin's Liberties.Digital Skills Academy Digital Biscuit. It was founded in 2008 to provide training in Computing and Digital Media for people wish to up-skill in these disciplines, its programmes are validated and awarded by the Dublin Institute of Technology.Digital Skills Academy By Fergal Gallagher, www.digitaltimes.ie, August 1, 2012.
In 2011 the DIT and Digital Skills academy signed an initial three year agreement to develop and deliver new digital media programmes, commencing with the WebElevate course.DIT and Digital Skills Academy sign Partnership Silicon Republic, August 2, 2011.
Some of the programmes are delivered part-time to facilitate job seekers and those employed, some of the programmes are NFQ Level 8 such as WebElevateWebelevate The Digital Hub. and WebInnovate. In 2013 the webelevate will be available as a Level 7 BSc degree in Digital Technology and Design .
The Level 6 WebActivate programme is delivered on a full-time basis. Most of the courses have an Industry placement or Industry project as a component of the course.
A number of the Academys programmes are delivered in locations outside Dublin such as Cork ( St. John's Central College), Port Laoise Education Centre and Monaghan Education Centre.
A number of the courses such as Webelevate and Webinnovate are available though the Irish governments Springboard initiative.Digital Skills Academy www.springboard.ie
The WebActivate and TechActivate courses are available as part of the Momentum Initiative,Momentum Skills - Momentum Official Website. which is administered by FAS.
October 2013 seen the Digital Skills Academy (DSA) announce an academic collaboration with Mexican University, El Instituto Tecnológico y de Estudios Superiores de Occidente (ITESO),Education Claire Murphy, Herald.ie, 22 October 2013. which would see them jointly delivering a number of technological programmes in Mexico.Digital Skills Academy signs academic agreement with Mexican university www.businessandleadership.com, 21 October 2013.

==External links==

==References==


