[[Constantius Chlorus]]

CATEGORIES: 250 births, 306 deaths, Caesar emperors, Constantinian dynasty, Flavii, Valerii, Ancient Romans in Britain, British traditional history, Deified Roman emperors, 3rd-century Roman emperors, 4th-century Roman emperors, Imperial Roman consuls, Equestrian commanders of vexillationes

Constantius I ([tpl]lang-la|Marcus Flavius Valerius Constantius Herculius Augustus[/tpl];Martindale, pg. 227"Marcus Flavius Valerius Constantius", "Valerius Constantius", "Gaius Valerius Constantius", and "Gaius Fabius Constantius" have been found on inscriptions, while Aurelius Victor (Caes 39:24) implied it may have been Julius Constantius 31 March c. 250[tpl]spaced ndash[/tpl]25 July 306), commonly known as Constantius Chlorus,From the Greek [tpl]lang|grc|χλωρός[/tpl], meaning pale/yellow-greenish was Roman Emperor from 293 to 306. He was the father of Constantine the Great and founder of the Constantinian dynasty. As Caesar he defeated the usurper Allectus in Britain and campaigned extensively along the Rhine frontier, defeating the Alamanni and Franks. Upon becoming Augustus in 305, Constantius launched a successful punitive campaign against the Picts beyond the Antonine Wall.W.S. Hanson "Roman campaigns north of the Forth-Clyde isthmus: the evidence of the temporary camps" However, Constantius died suddenly in Eburacum (York) the following year. His death sparked the collapse of the tetrarchic system of government inaugurated by the Emperor Diocletian.

==Life==

===Early career===

Born in Dardania,Roman Colosseum the Historia Augusta claimed Constantius was the son of Eutropius, a noble from northern Dardania, in the province of Moesia Superior, and Claudia, a niece of the emperors Claudius II and Quintillus.Historia Augusta, Life of Claudius 13 Modern historians suspect this maternal connection to be a genealogical fabrication created by his son Constantine I,Southern, pg. 172 and that his family were of humble origins.Martindale, pg. 227  His father, however, might have been the brother of Eutropia, wife of Maximian.
Constantius was a member of the Protectores Augusti Nostri under the emperor Aurelian and fought in the east against the secessionist Palmyrene Empire.Potter, pg. 288  While the claim that he had been made a dux under the emperor Probus is probably a fabrication,Martindale, pg. 228Historia Augusta, Life of Probus 22:3 he certainly attained the rank of tribunus within the army, and during the reign of Carus he was raised to the position of Praeses, or governor, of the province of Dalmatia.Odahl, Charles Matson. Constantine and the Christian Empire. New York: Routledge, 2004. p.16  It has been conjectured that he switched allegiances to support the claims of the future emperor Diocletian just before Diocletian defeated Carinus, the son of Carus, at the Battle of the Margus in July 285.Potter, pg. 280
In 286, Diocletian elevated a military colleague, Maximian, to the throne as co-emperor of the western provinces,Southern, pg. 142 while Diocletian took over the eastern provinces, beginning the process that would eventually see the division of the Roman Empire into two halves, a Western and an Eastern portion.  By 288, his period as governor now over, Constantius had been made Praetorian Prefect in the west under Maximian.DiMaio, Constantine I Chlorus; Canduci, pg. 119  Throughout 287 and into 288, Constantius, under the command of Maximian, was involved in a war against the Alamanni, carrying out attacks on the territory of the barbarian tribes across the Rhine and Danube rivers.Southern, pg. 142  To strengthen the ties between the emperor and his powerful military servant, in 289 Constantius divorced his wife (or concubine) Helena, and married the emperor Maximian’s daughter, Theodora.Potter, pg. 288; Canduci, pg. 119

===Elevation as Caesar===

By 293, Diocletian, conscious of the ambitions of his co-emperor for his new son-in-law, allowed Maximian to promote Constantius in a new power sharing arrangement known as the Tetrarchy.Southern, pg. 145  Diocletian divided the administration of the Roman Empire into two halves, a Western and an Eastern portion. Each would be ruled by an Augustus, supported by a Caesar. Both Caesars had the right of succession once the ruling Augustus died.
At Milan on March 1, 293, Constantius was formally appointed as Maximian’s Caesar.Birley, pg. 382 He adopted the names Flavius ValeriusSouthern, pg. 147 and was given command of Gaul, Britannia and possibly Hispania. Diocletian, the eastern Augustus, in order to keep the balance of power in the imperiumSouthern, pg. 145 elevated Galerius as his Caesar, possibly on May 21, 293 at Philippopolis.  Constantius was the more senior of the two Caesars, and on official documents he always took precedence, being mentioned before Galerius.Southern, pg. 147  Constantius’ capital was to be located at Augusta Treverorum.
Constantius’ first task on becoming Caesar was to deal with the Roman usurper Carausius who had declared himself emperor in Britannia and northern Gaul in 286.  In late 293, Constantius defeated the forces of Carausius in Gaul, capturing Bononia.Birley, pg. 385  This precipitated the assassination of Carausius by his rationalis Allectus, who assumed command of the British provinces until his death in 296.
Constantius spent the next two years neutralising the threat of the Franks who were the allies of Allectus,Southern, pg. 149 as northern Gaul remained under the control of the British usurper until at least 295.Birley, pg. 387  He also battled against the Alamanni, achieving some victories at the mouth of the Rhine in 295.Birley, pgs. 385-386  Administrative concerns meant he made at least one trip to Italy during this time as well.Southern, pg. 149  Only when he felt ready (and only when Maximian finally came to relieve him at the Rhine frontierSouthern, pg. 150) did he assemble two invasion fleets with the intent of crossing the English Channel. The first was entrusted to Asclepiodotus, Constantius’ long serving Praetorian Prefect, who sailed from the mouth of the Seine, while the other, under the command of Constantius himself, was launched from his base at Bononia.Birley, pg. 388  The fleet under Asclepiodotus landed near the Isle of Wight, and his army encountered the forces of Allectus, resulting in the defeat and death of the usurper.Aurelius Victor, Liber de Caesaribus, 39  Constantius in the meantime occupied London,Potter, pg. 292 saving the city from an attack by Frankish mercenaries who were now roaming the province without a paymaster. Constantius massacred all of them.Southern, pg. 150
Constantius remained in Britannia for a few months, replaced most of Allectus’ officers, and the British provinces were probably at this time subdivided along the lines of Diocletian’s other administrative reforms of the Empire.Birley, pg. 393  The result was the division of Upper Britannia into Maxima Caesariensis and Britannia Prima, while Flavia Caesariensis and Britannia Secunda were carved out of Lower Britannia. He also restored Hadrian’s Wall and its forts.Birley, pg. 405
Later in 298, Constantius fought in the Battle of Lingones (Langres) against the Alamanni. He was shut up in the city, but was relieved by his army after six hours and defeated the enemy.Eutropius, Breviarum 9.23 He defeated them again at Vindonissa (Windisch, Switzerland),UNRV History: Battle of the Third Century AD thereby strengthening the defenses of the Rhine frontier.  In 300, he fought against the Franks on the Rhine frontier,Southern, pg. 152 and as part of his overall strategy to buttress the frontier, Constantius settled the Franks in the deserted parts of Gaul to repopulate the devastated areas.Birley, pg. 373  Nevertheless, over the next three years the Rhine frontier continued to occupy Constantius’ attention.Southern, pg. 152
In 303, Constantius was confronted with the imperial edicts instituted by Diocletian dealing with the persecution of Christians. The campaign was avidly pursued by Galerius, who noticed that Constantius was well-disposed towards the Christians, and who saw it as a method of advancing his career prospects with the aging Diocletian.Potter, pg. 338  Of the four Tetrarchs, Constantius made the least effort to implement the decrees in the western provinces that were under his direct authority,Potter, pg. 339; Southern, pg. 168 limiting himself to knocking down a handful of churches.DiMaio, Constantine I Chlorus

===Accession as Augustus and death===

Between 303 and 305, Galerius began maneuvering to ensure that he would be in a position to take power from Constantius after the passing of Diocletian.Potter, pg. 344  In 304, Maximian met up with Galerius, probably to discuss the succession issue and Constantius either was not invited or could not make it due to the situation on the Rhine.Southern, pg. 152  Although prior to 303 there appeared to be tacit agreement between the Tetrarchs that Constantius’s son, Constantine and Maximian’s son Maxentius were to be promoted to the rank of Caesar once Diocletian and Maximian had resigned the purple,Potter, pg. 340 by the end of 304 Galerius had convinced Diocletian (who in turn convinced Maximian) to appoint Galerius’s nominees Severus and Maximinus Daia as Caesars.Southern, pg. 152
Diocletian and Maximian stepped down as co-emperors on May 1, 305, possibly due to Diocletian's poor health.  Before the assembled armies at Milan, Maximian removed his purple cloak and handed it to Severus, the new Caesar, and proclaimed Constantius as Augustus. The same scene played out at Nicomedia under the authority of Diocletian.Potter, pg. 342  Constantius, notionally the senior emperor, ruled the western provinces, while Galerius took the eastern provinces. Constantine, disappointed in his hopes to become a Caesar, fled the court of Galerius after Constantius had asked Galerius to release his son as Constantius was ill.Southern, pg. 169; Canduci, pg. 119  Constantine joined his father's court at the coast of Gaul, just as he was preparing to campaign in Britain.Southern, pg. 170; Eutropius, Breviarum 10.1; Aurelius Victor, Epitome de Caesaribus 39; Zosimus, Historia Nova 2
In 305 Constantius crossed over into Britain, travelled to the far north of the island and launched a military expedition against the Picts, claiming a victory against them and the title Britannicus Maximus II by 7 January 306.Birley, pg. 406  After retiring to Eboracum (York) for the winter, Constantius had planned to continue the campaign, but on 25 July 306, Constantius died. As he was dying, Constantius recommended his son to the army as his successor;Potter, pg. 346 consequently Constantine was declared emperor by the legions at York.Eutropius, Breviarum 10.1–2; Canduci, pg. 126

==Family==

Constantius was either married to, or was in concubinage with, Helena, who was probably from Nicomedia in Asia Minor.Eutropius, Breviarum 9.22; Zosimus, Historia Nova 2; Exerpta Valesiana 1.2 They had one son, Constantine.
In 289 political developments forced him to divorce Helena. He married Theodora, Maximian's daughter. They had six children:

==Legend==

===Christian legends===

As the father of Constantine, a number of Christian legends have grown up around Constantius. Eusebius's Life of Constantine claims that Constantius was himself a Christian, although he pretended to be a pagan, and while Caesar under Diocletian, took no part in the Emperor's persecutions.Eusebius, Vita Constantini 1.13–18 His first wife, Helena, claimed to find the True Cross.

===British legends===

Constantius's activities in Britain were remembered in medieval British legend. According to Geoffrey of Monmouth's History of the Kings of Britain (1136), Constantius was sent to Britain by the Senate after Asclepiodotus, here a British king, was overthrown by Coel of Colchester. Coel submitted to Constantius and agreed to pay tribute to Rome, but died only eight days later. Constantius married Coel's daughter Helena and became king of Britain. He and Helena had a son, Constantine, who succeeded to the throne of Britain when his father died at York eleven years later.Geoffrey of Monmouth, Historia Regum Britanniae 5.6 The identification of Helena as British had previously been made by Henry of Huntingdon,Henry of Huntingdon, Historia Anglorum 1.37 but has no historical validity: Constantius had divorced Helena before he went to Britain.

==Sources==

===Primary sources===

===Secondary sources===

==References==

==External links==


