[[Jean Chrétien]]

CATEGORIES: Jean Chrétien, Prime Ministers of Canada, Members of the Order of Merit, Leaders of the Liberal Party of Canada, Liberal Party of Canada MPs, Members of the House of Commons of Canada from Quebec, Deputy Prime Ministers of Canada, Canadian Ministers of Finance, Canadian Ministers of Indian Affairs and Northern Development, Canadian autobiographers, Companions of the Order of Canada, Members of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada, Lawyers in Quebec, French Quebecers, Canadian Queen's Counsel, People from Shawinigan, 1934 births, Living people, Leaders of the Opposition (Canada), Séminaire Sainte-Marie alumni, Université Laval alumni, Canadian Secretaries of State for External Affairs, Canadian people of French descent, Canadian corporate directors, Directors of Toronto-Dominion Bank, Canadian Roman Catholics, People with a speech impediment

Joseph Jacques Jean Chrétien (born January 11, 1934), PC, OM, CC, QC, known commonly as Jean Chrétien ([tpl]IPA-fr|ʒɑ̃ kʁetjɛ̃[/tpl]) was the 20th Prime Minister of Canada. He served in the position for over ten years, from November 4, 1993 to December 12, 2003.
Born and raised in Shawinigan, Quebec, Chrétien is a law graduate from Université Laval. He was first elected to the Canadian House of Commons in 1963. He served in various cabinet posts under prime minister Pierre Trudeau, most prominently as Minister of Justice, Minister of Finance, and Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development. He also served as deputy prime minister in John Turner's short-lived government. He became leader of the Liberal Party of Canada in 1990, and led the party to a majority government in the 1993 federal election. He was re-elected with further majorities in 1997 and 2000.
Chrétien was strongly opposed to the Quebec sovereignty movement and supported official bilingualism and multiculturalism. He won a narrow victory as leader of the federalist camp in the 1995 Quebec Referendum, and then pioneered the Clarity Act to avoid ambiguity in future referendum questions. He also advanced the Youth Criminal Justice Act in Parliament. Although his popularity and that of the Liberal Party were seemingly unchallenged for three consecutive federal elections, he became subject to various political controversies in the later years of his premiership. He was accused of inappropriate behaviour in the Sponsorship Scandal, although he has consistently denied any wrongdoing. He also became embroiled in a protracted struggle within the Liberal Party against long-time political rival Paul Martin. He resigned as prime minister in December 2003, and left public life.

==Early life==

Chrétien was born on January 11, 1934, in Shawinigan, Quebec, as the 18th of 19 children (10 of whom did not survive infancy)[ref]
 [tpl]Dead link|date=April 2014|bot=RjwilmsiBot[/tpl][/ref] to Wellie Chrétien and Marie (née Boisvert). As a young boy his father made him read the dictionary. As a young man, Chrétien was well known for his love of violence, and as someone who relished his reputation as a local tough guy who was most happy when punching out his fellow students.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 pages 50-52 One of Chrétien's classmates recalled that he was much feared on the account of his "atrocious temper".Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 page 23. Chrétien attended Séminaire Saint-Joseph de Trois-Rivières and studied law at Université Laval. As a student at Trois-Rivières, Chrétien later recalled that his best day at that school was his first day when he attacked without provocation another student taller than himself, leading him to proudly remember that: "I really socked it to him bad. In front of everybody!".Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 page 51 Chrétien recalled that his assault was meant to send the message to the other students: "Don't mess with Chrétien!". He later made light of his humble origins, calling himself "le petit gars de Shawinigan",[tpl]cite paper |author=Jean Chrétien |title=Notes by Prime Minister Jean Chrétien, Shawinigan, Quebec |publisher=Privy Council Office |date=October 6, 1995 |url=http://www.pco-bcp.gc.ca/default.asp?Language=E&Page=archivechretien&Sub=Speeches&Doc=speeches1995100665_e.htm |accessdate=2006-12-05[/tpl] or the "little guy from Shawinigan". In his youth, he suffered an attack of Bell's palsy, permanently leaving the left side of his face partially paralyzed.(2000-11-28.) "Jean Chrétien: Veteran fighter." BBC News website. Retrieved 2009-05-12. Chrétien used this in his first Liberal leadership campaign, saying that he was "One politician who didn't talk out of both sides of his mouth." He is also deaf in one ear.[tpl]cite news|last=Gray|first=Jeff|title=Jean Chrétien: Ambition or arrogance?|url=http://v1.theglobeandmail.com/series/election/leaders/chretien.html|accessdate=1 November 2012|newspaper=The Globe and Mail|location=Toronto[/tpl] 
On September 10, 1957, he married Aline Chainé. They have two sons (Hubert and Michel Chrétien) and one daughter (France).

==Early political career==

Chrétien practised law at the Shawinigan firm of Alexandre Gélinas and Joe LafondMartin, Chrétien, pp. 104-05 until he was first elected to the Canadian House of Commons as a Liberal from the riding of Saint-Maurice–Laflèche in the 1963 election. He represented this Shawinigan-based riding, renamed Saint-Maurice in 1968, for all but eight of the next 41 years. Early in his career, Chrétien was described by Dalton Camp as looking like the driver of the getaway car, a condescending assessment which stuck with him, and which was often cited by journalists and others throughout his career, and usually considering his eventual success.
After re-election in the 1965 election, he very briefly served as parliamentary secretary (junior minister) to Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson in 1965 and then starting in 1966 served for a more substantial period of time as the parliamentary secretary to Minister of Finance, Mitchell Sharp. Sharp was to serve as Chrétien's mentor and patron, and it was largely through Sharp's influence that Chrétien rose up the ranks.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 page 183. Like his mentor Sharp, Chrétien was identified with the right wing of the Liberal Party in the 1960s, and it was not until the 1970s that Chrétien first started to become identified with the left-wing of the Liberals.McWhiney, Edward Chrétien Politics and the Constitution 1993-2003, Vancouver: Rosedale Press, 2003 page 31 Sharp was quoted as saying about his protégé in an interview with Peter C. Newman:  "Jean is not accustomed to reading as much as I am or you are, and therefore we tend to judge him on that sort of basis. We read all sorts of things; Chrétien doesn't. Chrétien's reading is limited. He has an instinctive approach, and faced with a problem, he's always comes out with sensible answers, and that's why I say he never has to eat his words".Newman, Peter C. The Secret Mulroney Tapes Toronto: Vintage Canada, 2006 page 355.  He was selected for appointment as Minister of National Revenue in January 1968 by Pearson, making him a junior minister in the cabinet. During the 1968 Liberal leadership race, Chrétien fought hard on behalf of his mentor Sharp, who aspired to lead the Liberal Party.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 pages 184-185 Only at the last moment when it become clear that Sharp had no hope of winning the Liberal leadership just before the convention and after Sharp withdrew from the race, did Chrétien followed Sharp in swinging his support behind the man who eventually won the race, Pierre Trudeau.
thumb|left|Chrétien, second from right as a minister in Lester Pearson's Cabinet in 1967. From left to right, Pierre Trudeau, John Turner, Chrétien, and Pearson. All four men would eventually serve as Prime Minister.  After the June 1968 election, he was appointed Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development largely because of the influence of Sharp, who had persuaded Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau that Chrétien was worthy of a senior portfolio in the cabinet. Trudeau and Chrétien were never close or even friendly as the gulf between the intellectual Trudeau and the decidedly non-intellectual Chrétien was too wide, but Trudeau did value Chrétien as an extremely loyal and competent minister, and as a "tough guy" trouble-shooter who could handle difficult assignments.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 280-281. Chrétien was never a member of Trudeau's inner circle, but his status as the "enforcer" of the Trudeau government meant he often played a key role in executing the policy decisions of the Trudeau government. Chrétien's most notable achievement at Indian Affairs was the 1969 White Paper, a proposal to abolish the Indian Act.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 pages 196-197 The paper was widely opposed by First Nations groups, and later abandoned.
During the October Crisis, Chrétien told Trudeau to "act now, explain later", when Trudeau was hesitant to invoke the War Measures Act. 85% of Canadians agreed with the move. In the 1972 election, Chrétien, who was frightened by a near-defeat in 1968, had a friend Antonio Genest win the Progressive Conservative nomination, and then run a deliberately inept campaign in order to ensure his re-election.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 pages 228-230. In 1974, he was appointed President of the Treasury Board; and beginning in 1976, he served as Minister of Industry, Trade and Commerce. In 1977, following the resignation of Finance Minister Donald MacDonald, Chrétien succeeded him. He was the first francophone Minister of Finance, and remains one of only three francophones to have held that post. Chrétien's time at Finance highlighted his "enforcer" status, namely as someone who often helped to execute Trudeau's policies, but who rarely helped Trudeau to make policy.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 pages 262-266. During his time at Finance, Trudeau completely excluded Chrétien from any role in making financial policy, instead expecting Chrétien to simply carry out the policies that he and his advisors at the PMO had decided beforehand without consulting Chrétien at all. In 1978 Trudeau announced in a press interview $2 billion in cuts without bothering to inform Chrétien beforehand about what he had decided to do, who was left looking clueless in the resulting press interview.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 pages 265-266. Chrétien found this experience so humiliating that he seriously considering resigning in protest.

==Minister of Justice and Energy Minister==

The Liberals lost the federal election of May 1979 to a minority Conservative government led by Joe Clark. When Pierre Trudeau regained power in February 1980, he appointed Chrétien Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Canada. In this role, he was a major force in the 1980 Quebec referendum, being one of the main federal representatives "on the ground" during the campaign. His fiery and emotional speeches would enthrall federalist crowds with his blunt warnings of the consequences of separation. During the 1980 referendum, Chrétien fiercely fought behind the scenes with the leader of the Quebec Liberals, Claude Ryan, who served as the chairman of the non committee about the best course to follow, with Ryan favoring a more Quebec nationalist message as opposed to Chrétien's unabashed Canadian nationalist message.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 pages 281–282. He also served as Minister of State for Social Development and Minister Responsible for Constitutional Negotiations, playing a significant role in the patriation struggle of 1980–81 which led to the Constitution of Canada in 1982. He was the chief negotiator of what would be called the "Kitchen Accord", an agreement which led to the agreement of nine provinces to patriation. His role in the dealings, however, would not be forgotten in his native province of Quebec, which did not ratify the Constitution Act of 1982 (although the Supreme Court of Canada ruled that Quebec was bound by it). In 1982, Chrétien was appointed Minister of Energy, Mines and Resources. As Energy Minister, Chrétien was in charge of enforcing the National Energy Program (NEP), a role that helped to make him a hate figure in Alberta.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 pages 314–315  Chrétien himself was doubtful about the value of the NEP, saying at the time of his appointment as Energy Minister that "We've got to back off on the NEP without destroying our credibility" but upon learning that Trudeau and his right-hand man, Finance Minister Marc Lalonde, were in favor of continuing the NEP, Chrétien decided to fall in line rather than risk his chances of one day winning the Liberal leadership.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 pages 314–316. Chrétien's battles with Alberta premier Peter Lougheed over the NEP helped to confirm his disdain for provincial politicians whom he saw as petty people only interested in their own provinces at the expense of the nation.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 page 318.

==1984: Chrétien's first bid for the Prime Ministership==

After Trudeau announced his retirement in early 1984 as Liberal Party leader and Prime Minister, Chrétien sought the leadership of the Liberal Party of Canada. The experience was a hard one for Chrétien, as many of his longtime Cabinet allies supported the bid of John Turner who was viewed as the more electable candidate, much to Chrétien's intense disappointment.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 page 333. During the 1984 leadership race in the spring of 1984, Chrétien ran as the defender of the Trudeau era and promised to continue all of Trudeau's policies, unlike Turner who promised a break with Trudeau.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 pages 331-332. During the leadership race, Chrétien presented himself as a folksy leftish populist who mocked Turner as a right-wing Bay Street snob out of touch with ordinary people.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 page 332. Chrétien argued contra Turner that the national deficit was not a problem, saying in a speech that "We have to use the deficit to keep the dignity of our people". Through Chrétien ran the arguably better campaign, attracting larger and more enthusiastic crowds than anything that Turner ever managed, the fact that most of the Liberal Party establishment had rallied to Turner when he announced his candidacy in March 1984 as the most candidate perceived as the most electable proved to be an insurmountable handicap for Chrétien.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 pages 331-336. Two leading power-brokers within the Liberal Party, Marc Lalonde and Senator Keith Davey aka "the Rainmaker"  backed Turner in 1984 as they considered Chrétien to be too "downmarket" and viewed Turner, the glamorous "golden boy" jock-scholar untainted by involvement with Trudeau in his unpopular last years as the best one to win the election. Chrétien was thought to be a dark horse until the end, but lost on the second ballot to Turner at the leadership convention that June. Iona Campagnolo would ominously introduce Chrétien as, "Second on the ballot, but first in our hearts." Chrétien believed that he would win the 1984 leadership race right up to the moment that Turner won, and took his defeat very badly when it came.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 pages 336-339. When Chrétien did finally lose to Turner, he saw himself as the victim of a monstrous injustice-believing that Turner had only won through backroom machinations to cheat him out of what he saw as being rightfully his-and proved to be incapable of forgiving Turner for defeating him.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 pages 339-340.
Turner personally appointed him Deputy Prime Minister, and selected him for appointment by the Governor General as Secretary of State for External Affairs (foreign minister).
After winning the leadership race, Turner wanted a reconciliation with Chrétien in order to lead a united party into the coming general election, and asked Chrétien for what terms could a reconciliation be forged. Chrétien, angry about losing the leadership race, asked for terms that he knew that Turner could never give him, demanding that he be appointed Quebec lieutenant with control of patronage and organization in Quebec, a position that Turner had already promised to give to André Ouellet in exchange for backing him in the leadership race.Simpson, Jeffery "The Vincible Liberals" pages 15-28 from The Canadian General Election of 1984: Politicians, Parties, Press and Polls edited by Alan Stewart Frizzell & Anthony Westell, Ottawa: Carleton University Press, 1985 page 23 Chrétien's demand to be appointed Quebec lieutenant proved to be impossible to meet as it would force Turner to break his promise to Ouellet, and so Turner compromised by creating a troika to run Liberal operations in Quebec comprising Chrétien, Ouellet and Lalonde. The troika was a sham, and during the 1984 general election, the three members of the troika spent more time feuding with one another than in combating the Conservatives. Chrétien's demand for the Quebec lieutenancy was not the only thing that divided him from Turner. As almost immediately, Chrétien and Turner clashed over the issue of an early election. Chrétien advised Turner not to ask the Governor-General to dissolve Parliament, but rather keep Parliament in session for the fall of 1984 in order to give the government a record to run on for a winter election in early 1985 (an election had to be called no later than February 1985 as the last election was in February 1980).Weston, Greg Reign of Error, Toronto: McGraw-Hill Ryerson, 1988 page 73. Turner for his part believed that a boost in the polls after he become Prime Minister in late June 1984 justified asking for Parliament to be dissolved for an election in September 1984, so Chrétien's advice was disregarded.Weston, Greg Reign of Error, Toronto: McGraw-Hill Ryerson, 1988 pages 73-75 Relations between the two were strained, especially after the Liberals were severely defeated in the 1984 election. He was one of only 17 Liberal MPs elected from Quebec (the party had won 74 out of 75 seats in 1980). He was also one of only four MPs from the province elected from a riding outside Montreal.

==The 1986 Leadership review and after==

Chrétien was a major focal point of dissatisfaction with Turner, with many polls showing his popularity. His 1985 book, Straight from the Heart, recounted his early life in Shawinigan, his years spent in the Canadian House of Commons as both a Member of Parliament and Cabinet Minister, and his failed 1984 leadership bid. It was an instant best-seller. In a 1985 interview, Frank Moores told Peter C. Newman:  "I was down fishing with Chrétien last week, and he really hates Turner with a passion. He might be interested in joining the Tories if Turner is re-elected Liberal leader, although it would take a lot of discussion."Newman, Peter C. The Secret Mulroney Tapes Toronto: Vintage Canada, 2006 page 354  Ed Broadbent later recalled that Chrétien harboured a marked degree of animosity towards Turner and that "I noticed that any negative comment Chrétien could make about John Turner in the lobbies, he would do it. I didn't like that".Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Viking: Toronto, 2003 page 12.
In February 1986, Chrétien whose relations with Turner were very poor, resigned his seat and left public life for a time. On 27 February 1986, Chrétien accompanied by his special executive assistant Jean Carle went to Turner's office to hand in his resignation.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984 - 2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press page 52 Turner forced Chrétien to wait a considerable period of time, during which Carle broke down in tears while Chrétien was visibly angry when Turner finally received them, making for a tense and barely civil meeting.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984 - 2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press pages 52-53 Chrétien's resignation was largely motivated by his desire to better organise against Turner in the leadership review due in the fall of 1986.Duffy, John Fights of our lives: elections, leadership and the making of Canada, HarperCollins: Toronto, 2002 page 321.  Now working in the private sector again, Chrétien sat on the boards of several corporations, including the Power Corporation of Canada subsidiary Consolidated Bathurst, the Toronto-Dominion Bank, and the Brick Warehouse Corporation. Though Chrétien professed to be retired from politics, he told reporters within days of his retirement that: "I will always be a politician. I love politics".Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 page 358. Crucially, Chrétien did not disband the campaign organization that he founded in 1984 which suggested that his retirement was always intended to be temporary. In November 1986 when the Liberals held a leadership review, Chrétien attempted to organise against Turner, which led to a bruising battle between fractions loyal to the two men.Duffy, John Fights of our lives: elections, leadership and the making of Canada, HarperCollins: Toronto, 2002 page 321. To topple Turner, Chrétien used Turner's penchant for heavy drinking to spread rumors that Turner was an alcoholic who was simply too drunk most of the time to effectively lead the Liberals to power.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 page 359. Chrétien formally claimed to be neutral on the question of the leadership review of Turner's management of the Liberal Party, but behind the scenes Chrétien lobbied as many Grit MPs and senators as possible for their support in bringing down Turner.Martin, Lawrence Chrétien: The Will to Win, Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1995 pages 360-361. Two Liberal leading power-brokers Marc Lalonde and Senator Keith Davey aka "the Rainmaker" both backed Turner in 1984, and in the aftermath of the 1984 election, Lalonde and Davey decided they had made a huge mistake with Turner, which they were determined to rectify in 1986 by installing Chrétien as the leader best able to return the Liberals to power. The intense emotions stirred up by the 1986 leadership review were well-illustrated when Chrétien arrived to vote in the review, which led a "chaotic melee" on the convention floor at the Ottawa Convention Centre as pro-Turner and pro-Chrétien Liberals fought one another with their fists, and led to the police being called to end the violence.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984 - 2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press page 86 Turner won the leadership review by the mass signing up of immigrants as "instant Liberals" who provided a loyal bloc of delegates. It is quite likely that without the support of the "instant Liberals", Turner would had lost the leadership review as many within the Liberal Party were deeply angry at him for losing the 1984 election. Many Liberals believed if only Chrétien had won the 1984 convention instead of Turner, that they would not have lost the 1984 election, or at least not as badly.
The Chrétien-Turner feud was only just the beginning of Liberal in-fighting. Mulroney's two signature policies of the late 1980s, namely free trade with the United States and the Meech Lake accord had badly fractionised the Liberals in ways that cut across traditional left-right lines, which was at least part of Mulroney's intention in introducing them, to use them as wedge issues to unite the PC base and divide the Liberals.Duffy, John Fights of our lives: elections, leadership and the making of Canada, HarperCollins: Toronto, 2002 pages 320-324 The Liberal strategist John Duffy illustrated how badly Meech and free trade had fractionized the Liberals by pointing out the positions on each of four prominent Liberals of the late 1980s, namely the leftist Sheila Copps (anti-free trade, pro-Meech), the rightist Don Johnston (pro-free trade, anti-Meech), rightist Raymond Garneau (pro-free trade, pro-Meech) and the leftist Lloyd Axworthy (anti-free trade, anti-Meech).Duffy, John Fights of our lives: elections, leadership and the making of Canada, HarperCollins: Toronto, 2002 pages 322-323 This was to be the context of Chrétien's return to politics in 1990.
In April 1988, a group of Liberal MPs who had strongly supported Chrétien in 1984 and in 1986 attempted to depose Turner as party leader, a coup that misfired, but still had the effect of damaging Turner's leadership.Brooke, Jeffery Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984-2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 pages 63-64. Speaking about the repeated attempts to depose Turner as a leader in favor of Chrétien in the 1980s, David Collenette stated in an interview that "A lot of things were going on which I don't even want to talk about". Chrétien's status as an alternative leader-in-waiting again came to the fore in mid-October 1988 in the middle of the 1988 election, when several senior Liberals such as Senator Michael J. L. Kirby and André Ouellet were caught thinking aloud that the best way to win the election was to depose Turner and install Chrétien as the new leader, a "crazy plan born of panic" according to the Liberal strategist John Duffy that came to nothing, but nonetheless showed how widespread the feeling had become that only Chrétien could win the Liberals power again.Duffy, John Fights of our lives: elections, leadership and the making of Canada, HarperCollins: Toronto, 2002 page 335.

==Winning the Liberal leadership, 1990==

After Turner's resignation as leader in 1990, Chrétien announced he would run for the party leadership at the June 1990 Liberal leadership convention in Calgary, Alberta. At a press conference in Ottawa on 23 January 1990, Chrétien declared that he would run to be Liberal party leader, proudly stating to the assembled reporters that this day would be remembered as the beginning of the "Chrétien era" in Canada.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 10.
Chrétien's principal opponent, Paul Martin, was generally seen as the ideological heir to John Turner, while Chrétien was the ideological heir to Trudeau. The fact that most of the Liberals who supported Turner in the 1980s supported Martin in 1990 confirmed Chrétien's disdain for Martin, whom he saw as a Bay Street "big shot" like Turner.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking 2003, page 11. Patrick Lavelle, who ran Chrétien's campaign in Ontario later stated in an interview: "I don't think Chrétien had any warm feelings about Martin-ever!".Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking 2003, page 17.
The most controversial issue facing Canada in the first half of 1990 was the Meech Lake Accord. The Meech Lake accord of 1987 proposed a set of constitutional amendments that would have seen a significant devolution of federal powers to the provinces and a clause that would have recognized Quebec as a "distinct society" within Canada. Chrétien had announced in a speech in January 1990 that he was an opponent of Meech Lake, but stated that he would support the accord with amendments such as scrapping the controversial "distinct society" clause as written, instead have the preamble to the constitution declare that Quebec was a “distinct society” and adding in a new clause saying if any conflict arose between the constitutional recognition of Quebec as a “distinct society” and the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, the latter would always prevail.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 15. The “distinct society” clause theoretically could have been the basis of a wide-ranging devolution of federal power as potentially it could have empowered the Quebec government to pass any law short of secession to protect the “distinct society”, which is why the “distinct society” clause was so popular in Quebec while arousing such passionate opposition amongst many quarters in English Canada. Chrétien's proposed amendments would have meant that the constitution would have recognized Quebec as a “distinct society” while effectively gutting any attempt to use the constitutional recognition of Quebec as a “distinct society” to grant special powers to Quebec. In private, Chrétien was opposed to Meech, but as the accord was extremely popular in Quebec, to run as an out-and-out opponent of Meech was judged to be too risky politically, hence Chrétien's conditional opposition to Meech Lake.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 pages 15 & 21. Meech placed Chrétien in a difficult position as it was very popular in Quebec while being loathed by the Trudeau wing of the Liberals whose support Chrétien also needed.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 21. Chrétien had tried to avoid talking about Meech as much as possible as it was a minefield issue for him, and instead stuck to generalities about national unity.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 pages 20-21. Martin by contrast had declared himself an unconditional supporter of Meech Lake as it was, and was quite willing to talk about his support for Meech.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 20.
Chrétien's key campaign man was Jim Karygiannis who became a living legend within the Liberal Party due to his ruthlessness.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 18. Chrétien told Lavelle that what he wanted was "A tough guy. A guy who could go on a search-and-destroy mission, who could do a kamikaze raid for our side", and decided that Karygiannis was that man.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 18. At a meeting to select Liberal delegates for the Kitchener-Waterloo riding, Martin's supporters attempted to call on the pay phones as many potential Martin supporters as possible to come to the meeting, which led Karygiannis to put chewed gum into all of the pay phone coin slots, and thereby won Kitchener-Waterloo for Chrétien. At another delegate selection meeting, Karygiannis verbally attacked a pro-Martin Liberal official with such rage that the man was hospitalized for angina. Karygiannis specialised in signing up immigrants to serve as delegates for Chrétien, and personally signed up himself 9, 500 immigrants as Chrétien delegates between January–June 1990, leading one pro-Martin official to lament that "We were getting Greeked. And if we weren't getting Greeked, we were getting Sikhed". Karygiannis later boosted in an interview that "I signed up anything that moved".  Chrétien is said to praised have Karygiannis with the remark "Whatever it takes to win, Jimmy, whatever it takes to win".Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 19. In large part because of Karygiannis and his team, by late April 1990 Chrétien had signed up 1, 500 delegates to Martin's 500 delegates, making him the clear front-runner.
A key moment in that race took place at an all-candidates debate in Montreal on 2 June 1990, where the discussion quickly turned to the Meech Lake Accord, which had emerged as the major policy issue that divided Martin and Chrétien. At the debate on 2 June 1990, Martin attempted to force Chrétien to abandon the latter's nuanced position on Meech Lake and speak out for or against it, arguing that his position of opposing Meech Lake as it is, but with willing to support with amendments was attempting to have it both ways.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 pages 22-23. When Chrétien refused to endorse Meech as it was, young Liberal delegates crowding the hall began to chant "vendu" ("sellout" in French) and "Judas" at Chrétien.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 23. In private, Chrétien was deeply enraged by the incident, and claimed that the delegates shouting vendu at him were actually Martin supporters from Toronto, charging that their poor French had betrayed that they were not from Quebec.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 24. Martin denied involvement in 'coordinating' any response from the floor, or a similar outburst by his supporters at the convention.
The differences between Martin and Chrétien on Meech Lake mirrored those between Turner, who had signed and voted for Meech Lake in 1987 and Trudeau who from his retirement had been a ferocious critic of Meech.John Geddes, "Meech Lake Ten Years After," Maclean's June 19, 2000. Retrieved 2006-12-20. The Canadian political scientist Brooke Jeffrey argued that the real divisions within the Liberal Party were not so much between right and left (through such divisions did exist), but rather between those wanted a strong federal government and those who did not.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984 - 2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 page x. There were "hard federalists" like Trudeau and Chrétien who favored a highly centralised federation with a powerful federal government and weak provincial governments as the best way of maintaining national unity vs. "soft federalists" like Turner and Martin who claimed that an over-mighty federal government would alienate people, especially in Quebec, and accordingly wanted a decentralised federation with federal power devolved down to the provinces.  One of Chrétien's aides David Zussman recalled about Chrétien's plans for the Confederation that: "I think he's a centralizer. He sees a very vigorous role for the federal government".Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 59. Ultimately, Chrétien defeated Martin on the first and only ballot. However, the Meech Lake question irreversibly damaged Chrétien's reputation in his home province.

==Leader of the Official Opposition==

As his victory at the convention on 23 June 1990 occurred on the same day that the Meech Lake accord died, Chrétien was heavily criticized in the Quebec media for his opposition to Meech Lake. Photographs of Chrétien embracing Newfoundland Premier Clyde Wells, a prominent opponent of Meech at the convention attracted much negative comment in Quebec.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 26-27 His leadership was also shaken by the defection from the caucus of francophone MPs (and Martin loyalists) Jean Lapierre and Gilles Rocheleau, who claimed that they could not serve under the anti-Meech Chrétien and so left to join the newly founded Bloc Québécois. In a by-election for Laurier—Sainte-Marie on 13 August 1990, Chrétien's hand-picked candidate, Denis Coderre was badly defeated by the Bloc Québécois's Gilles Duceppe, costing the Liberals a riding that they had held since 1917; many attributed this to Chrétien's opposition to the Meech Lake Accord.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 30. Chrétien appeared indecisive in the Oka Crisis, having almost nothing to say about the stand-off at Oka for the first two months of the crisis, which began on 11 July 1990. When Chrétien finally did call a press conference about the Oka crisis on 23 September 1990, Chrétien declared that he could not answer certain questions about First Nations land claims because "I'm not a lawyer", which prompted widespread ridicule as Chrétien had been a member of the Quebec Bar Association since 1958.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984 - 2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 page 200.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 31. The federal Liberals were disorganized and dropped in the polls from 50% in June 1990 to 32% in September. Upon becoming Liberal leader, Chrétien appointed his friend Eddie Goldenberg as his chief of staff, and formed a leadership team comprising John Rae and David Zussman as his policy advisors, his "surrogate son" Jean Carle as his special executive assistant, George Radwanski as his speech-writer and Warren Kinsella as his Ontario advisor.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984 - 2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press page 198 All of the Chrétien leadership team that was created in 1990 were later to play prominent roles in the omnipotent Prime Minister's Office (PMO) during Chrétien's time as Prime Minister.
In September 1990 Chrétien seeing a chance to make a strong impression on public opinion after a shaky start as a leader reaped a major windfall after Mulroney introduced an unpopular Goods and Services Tax (GST), which Chrétien decided to vigorously oppose.Tanguay, Brian "Canada's Political Parties in the 1990s" page 217-239 from Canada: The State of the Federation, 1998 edited by Harvey Lazar & Tom McIntosh, Kingston: Queen's University, 1999 page 233. Chrétien's decision to oppose the GST in 1990 was taken for reasons of political expediency rather than for principle, namely that Chrétien needed an issue to oppose the government on that would allow him to connect with the public; sources close to Chrétien were later to claim that he had wanted to support the GST bill, but had been forced by his caucus against his will to oppose it.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 32.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984 - 2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 pages 201-202. At a Liberal event in the fall of 1990, Chrétien stated that if he became Prime Minister "the Mulroney GST will disappear", going on to say "I am opposed to the GST. I have always been opposed to it. And I will be opposed to it, always".Tanguay, Brian "Canada's Political Parties in the 1990s" page 217-239 from Canada: The State of the Federation, 1998 edited by Harvey Lazar & Tom McIntoshpage, Kingston: Queen's University, 1999 page 233. To capitalise on widespread public dislike on the proposed GST, Chrétien ordered the Liberal-dominated Senate to defeat the GST bill in late September 1990, leading Mulroney on 27 September 1990 to appoint 8 Conservative senators to give the Tories a majority using a never before used section of the Constitution Act, the so-called "Deadlock Clause".Joyal, Serge Protecting Canadian Democracy: The Senate You Never Knew, Montreal: McGill-Queen's Press, 2003 page 162. At that point, Chrétien ordered the Liberal senators to filibuster the GST bill, reducing the Senate to scenes of chaos for well over a month.Joyal, Serge Protecting Canadian Democracy: The Senate You Never Knew, Montreal: McGill-Queen's Press, 2003 pages 162-163. On 24 October 1990, a poll revealed that the Liberals had fallen behind the New Democrats, which Chrétien admitted in an interview might had something to do with the scenes of obstructionist, often childish behavior by the Liberal senators.Joyal, Serge Protecting Canadian Democracy: The Senate You Never Knew, Montreal: McGill-Queen's Press, 2003 page 163. Finally on 13 December 1990, the Conservative senators changed the procedure rules in the Senate to break the Liberal filibuster and passed the GST bill.[ref]
