[[Ptolemy Philadelphus (son of Cleopatra)]]

CATEGORIES: Ptolemaic dynasty, Antonii, Cleopatra, Ancient people, People from Antioch, 36 BC births, 29 BC deaths, Roman-era Egyptians, Hellenistic Egyptians

Ptolemy Philadelphus ([tpl]lang-el|Πτολεμαῖος ὁ Φιλάδελφος[/tpl], "Ptolemy the brother-loving", August/September 36 BC – 29 BC) was a Ptolemaic prince and was the youngest and fourthThe Life of Rome's First Emperor: Augustus, Anthony Everitt, p. 157 child of Greek Ptolemaic Queen Cleopatra VII of Egypt, and her third with Roman Triumvir Mark Antony. Ptolemy was of Greek and Roman heritage. He was born in Antioch, Syria (this part of ancient Syria, is now a part of modern Turkey).Cassius Dio, Roman History 49.32.4 Ptolemy was named after the original Ptolemy II Philadelphus (the second Pharaoh of the Ptolemaic dynasty) and Cleopatra’s intention was recreating the former Ptolemaic Kingdom. In late 34 BC, at the Donations of Alexandria, Ptolemy was made ruler of Syria, Phoenicia and Cilicia.Plutarch, Antony 54.6-9; Cassius Dio, Roman History 49.41.1-3; Livy, periochae 131.
His parents Josephus, 15.4.2; suggests that Philip, Cleopatra's fourth child, was quite possibly the product of Cleopatra's love affair with King Herod during Marc Antony's absence.
were defeated by Octavian (future Roman Emperor Augustus) during the naval battle at Actium, Greece in 31 BC. The next year, his parents committed suicide as Octavian and his army invaded Egypt.
Octavian took him and elder siblings Alexander Helios and Cleopatra Selene II from Egypt to Italy. Octavian celebrated his military triumph in Rome, by parading the three orphans in heavy golden chains in the streets of Rome. The chains were so heavy they could not walk, prompting reactions of sympathy from the Romans.Cassius Dio, Roman History 51.21.8 (who only says that Alexander Helios and Cleopatra Selene participated in the triumph, but does not mention Ptolemy Philadelphus). The three siblings were taken by Octavian and given to Octavia Minor, Octavian’s second elder sister and the siblings' father Mark Antony's former wife.Plutarch, Antony 87.1; Cassius Dio, Roman History 51.15.6; Suetonius, Augustus 17.5
The fate of Ptolemy Philadelphus is unknown. Plutarch states that the only child that Octavian killed out of Antony’s children was Marcus Antonius Antyllus. The ancient sources do not mention any military service or political career, if he was involved in any scandals, any marriage plans or any descendants, and if he survived to adulthood, it would have been mentioned. Ptolemy probably died from illness in the winter of 29 BC, but this is not verified.

==Ancestry==

 
  Ancestors of Ptolemy Philadelphus 
 
 
 

==Notes==

==Sources==


