</ref> Through Chrétien and Gagliano both denied any wrongdoing at Canada Lands, Gagliano resigned to accept the patronage post of ambassador to Denmark after the Holy See had reportedly vetoed his attempt to be appointed ambassador to the Vatican.<ref>Martin, Lawrence ''Iron Man'', Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 347.</ref> On January 15, 2002, the Industry Minister [[Brian Tobin]] resigned suddenly from the Cabinet to retire to private life. In latter 2001, Tobin had come up with a $1 billion plan for connecting all of Canada to a broadband Internet network, a plan that raised furious objections from Martin, who baulked at the cost.<ref name="Martin, Lawrence page 349">Martin, Lawrence ''Iron Man'', Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 349.</ref> Tobin believed that he had his friend Chrétien behind his Internet project.<ref name="Martin, Lawrence page 349"/> [[Eddie Goldenberg]] of the PMO-who was one of Chrétien's closest advisors—also happened to have visceral dislike of Tobin, and saw the broadband issue as the perfect chance to "screw" Tobin.<ref>Martin, Lawrence ''Iron Man'', Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 349-350.</ref> Goldenberg persuaded Chrétien to drop his support for Tobin's scheme, and then humiliate Tobin by issuing a "mini-budget" that did include the $1 billion Tobin had requested.<ref name="Martin, Lawrence pages 349-351">Martin, Lawrence ''Iron Man'', Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 349-351.</ref> Hurt and humiliated by being "screwed" by Goldenberg, Tobin then resigned from public life.<ref>Martin, Lawrence ''Iron Man'', Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 350.</ref> Tobin's resignation eliminated Martin's most serious rival for the Liberal succession, and deprived Chrétien of the one minister who might had been able to rally support behind him in the leadership battles later in 2002.<ref name="Martin, Lawrence pages 349-351"/> The same month saw Chrétien force [[Herb Gray]] into retirement for no discernible reason.<ref name="Martin, Lawrence page 352">Martin, Lawrence ''Iron Man'', Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 352.</ref> Gray had been a Liberal party steward for decades, serving in the cabinets of every prime minister since Pearson and a Chrétien loyalist, so the forced retirement of Gray without offering him a major patronage post offended many within the Liberal Party.<ref name="Martin, Lawrence page 352"/>
By early 2002, the long-simmering feud with Martin came to a head. A particular concern that had badly strained relations between the Prime Minister and the Finance Minister by early 2002 was Martin's control of the Liberal Party apparatus, especially his control over the issuing of membership forms, which he reserved largely for his own supporters.Brooke, Jeffrey Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984 - 2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 page 367. In January 2002, Brian Tobin complained to Chrétien that the Liberal Party machinery had been "captured" by Martin's followers to the extent that it was now virtually impossible for anyone else to sign up their own followers.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984 - 2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 page 367. This posed a major problem for Chrétien as the Liberals were due to hold a leadership review in February 2003 and owing to Martin's control of the party machinery that it was quite possible that Chrétien would win by such a slim margin that it would be humiliating or even lose the leadership review.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984 - 2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 page 363. In January 2002, an incident occurred which was to greatly damage Chrétien's relations with the Liberal caucus. After Chrétien reorganized the Cabinet in late January 2002, the Liberal M.P. Carolyn Bennett criticised Chrétien at a caucus meeting for not appointing more women to the Cabinet.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 355. Chrétien exploded with rage at Bennett's criticism, saying that as a mere backbencher she did not have the right to criticise the Prime Minister in front of the caucus, and attacked her with such fury that Bennett collapsed in tears.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 356. Health Minister Anne McLellan recalled in an interview that: "He just blew up. Right off the Richter scale!".Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 356. Even after Bennett had broken in tears and was so distraught that she could no longer stand, Chrétien gave no mercy and continued to shout abuse at her, leading Intergovernmental Affairs minister Stéphane Dion to conclude that Chrétien wanted to stop his outburst, but was so angry at Bennett that he could not bring himself to do so.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 356. Bennett claimed that the Prime Minister's outburst was due to the influence of his communications director, Françoise Ducros, saying that "Francie was probably telling him what a bitch I was" in pressing for more female ministers (Ducros and Bennett were known to very much dislike each other).Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 357. After the meeting had ended, much of the Grit caucus went over to offer support for Bennett while pointedly ignoring Chrétien while the same night Paul Martin and his wife took Bennett and her husband out to dinner at one of Ottawa's more expensive restaurants as consolation.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 357. The Liberal M.P. Bonnie Brown was one of the few MPs who defended Chrétien's tongue-lashing of Bennett, saying "at every single cocktail party she was at, Carolyn Bennett was bad-mouthing the Prime Minister", suggested that Bennett only criticised Chrétien because he refused to appoint her to the Cabinet, and that "You can't have people in your Cabinet who don't have respect. He's very big on respect". The Bennett incident convinced much of the Liberal caucus that Chrétien had become a power-crazed bully, and that it was time for the Liberals to have a new leader. Reflecting their displeasure with Chrétien, in early February 2002 the Liberal caucus elected as their chairman, the outspoken pro-Martin M.P. Stan Keyes (who had already openly mused in 2001 about how it was time for Chrétien to go), who defeated the pro-Chrétien M.P. Steve Mahoney.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 358. Chrétien had expected Mahoney to win, and was reported to be shocked when he learned of Keyes's victory, which now given Martin control of the caucus.
The major controversy of the later Chrétien years was the Sponsorship Scandal, which involved more than $100 million distributed from the Prime Minister's Office to Quebec's federalist and Liberal Party interests without much accountability.CBC News Auditor General's 2004 Report, Auditor General Report. On 8 May 2002, the Sponsorship scandal broke when the Auditor-General, Sheila Fraser, issued a report accusing Public Works bureaucrats of having broken "just about every rule in the book" in awarding $1.6 million to the Montreal ad firm Groupaction Marketing Inc. The money awarded to Groupaction in three dubious contracts appeared to have disappeared, and the firm had a long history of donating to the Liberals. Opposition critics further suggested that the Public Works minister at the time, Alfonso Gagliano, whom Chrétien had praised as a great patriot, was not just a mere by-stander to questionable contacts associated with the sponsorship program that Fraser had identified. In response to the public outrage, Chrétien argued in speech in Winnipeg that all this was necessary to stop Quebec separatism and justified by the results, stating that: "Perhaps there was a few million dollars that might have been stolen in the process. It is possible. But how many millions of dollars have we saved the country because we have re-established the stability of Canada as an united country? If somebody has stolen the money, they will face the courts. But I will not apologize to Canadians."Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 359. Chrétien's argument that he had nothing to apologize for in regards to the sponsorship program, and his apparent condoning of  corruption as justified by the results of saving Canada fared poorly with the Canadian public, which increasingly started to perceive the Prime Minister as an autocratic leader with a thuggish streak. A poll taken later in May 2002 showed that over half of Canadians believed that the Chrétien government was corrupt.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 361.
May 2002 also saw the revelation that the new public works minister, Don Boudria, had spent the weekend of 16–17 March 2002 at an estate owned by Claude Boulay, the president of Groupe Everest advertising firm that head received $55 million in contracts from the public works ministry, apparently for free.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 361–362 Only after the story of Boudria's stay at the Boulay estate broke in May did Boulay cash an $800 cheque from Boudria that was dated 16 March 2002; many found this to be too convenient, and opposition critics suggested that the cheque had been post-dated to explain away what would otherwise have been a major ethical violation on the part of Boudria.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 362 Boudria was forced to resign on 26 May, to be replaced with Ralph Goodale. An additional scandal broke later in May 2002 when it was revealed that the Defense Minister Art Eggleton had rewarded a contract worth $36, 500 to research mental illness amongst former soldiers to his former lover Maggie Maier without tender while at the same time the Defense Ministry had already hired a team of experts to research the same subject. As Eggleton was a Paul Martin supporter, Chrétien promptly fired him on 27 May 2002 following a ruling from Howard Wilson that Eggleton had broken conflict-of-interest rules. Some such as the columnist Don Martin believed that Wilson’s swift running against the Martinista Eggleton was suspicious with Martin writing Wilson had within a day ruled that Eggleton had broken conflict-of-interest rules while Martin wrote: “But what would you call the prime minister’s chat with a Crown corporation banker to bail out a hotel linked to a golf course he may still have an interest in? Funny, ethics counsellor Howard Wilson was in a “see no evil” monkey mode on that score”.Martin, Lawrence ‘’Iron Man’’, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 362
In late May 2002, Chrétien tried to curtail Martin's by-then open campaign for the leadership of the party by delivering a lecture to Cabinet to stop raising money for leadership bids within the Liberal Party. At what was described as a "stormy" Cabinet meeting on 30 May 2002, Chrétien stated that he intended to serve out his entire term, and ordered the end of all leadership fundraising.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984 - 2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 page 372. Martin left his cabinet on 2 June 2002. Martin claimed that Chrétien dismissed him from Cabinet, while Chrétien said that Martin had resigned. In his memoirs, Chrétien wrote that he regretted not having fired Martin a few years earlier. In the aftermath of Martin's departure from the Cabinet, there occurred an angry caucus meeting on 5 June 2002 with much of the caucus came out in support of Martin; demanded that he fire his much hated communications director Françoise Ducros, who many MPs claimed was impossible to work with, leading to a chorus of MPs chanting "Bring back Peter, bring back Peter" (a reference to Ducros's predecessor Peter Donolo); and several pro-Martin M.Ps asked forthright for Chrétien to resign.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 373-375. Liberal MP Dan McTeague told Chrétien that "You made a decision for Paul Martin. You should make the same decision for yourself".Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 374. Many of the MPs accused the PMO of riding roughshod over them, and accused the prime minister of being a bully.Martin, Lawrence ‘’Iron Man’’, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 374 Liberal MP Carolyn Parrish recalled about that caucus meeting that she could not believe that "these ungrateful sons of bitches", as she called the pro-Martin MPs, would attack Chrétien at a caucus meeting so openly. For Chrétien's reaction, Parrish stated: "His face was evil. His eyes were like a shark's eyes", and she could not understand why he didn't walk out, saying "Any other person would have, especially knowing that most of those assholes telling you this couldn't get elected dog catcher if they weren't on a Liberal ticket riding on your coattails".
Martin's departure generated a severe backlash from Martin's supporters, who controlled much of the party machinery, and all signs indicated that they were prepared to oust Chrétien at a leadership review in February 2003. To win the leadership review, Chrétien formed a team in early June 2002 comprising his close associates John Rae, David Collenette, Jean Carle, and David Smith who were ordered to sign up as many Chrétienist Liberals as possible for the leadership review.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 381. The open split, which was covered extensively on national media, increasingly painted Chrétien as a lame duck. During the summer of 2002, a number of backbencher Liberal MPs associated with Martin started to openly criticise Chrétien's leadership, calling on him to resign now or suffer the humiliation of losing the leadership review.Jeffrey , Brooke Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984 - 2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 pages 375–376. In July 2002, the Martinista Liberal M.P. Liza Frulla told a Montreal radio station that there would be "general relief" within the caucus if Chrétien were to resign immediately. As the feud heated up, Chrétien stated at a speech in Toronto: "I remember in 1993 that we had a star all summer, that we would later call a shooting star. She had a summer job. It was Kim Campbell", and went on to compare Campbell to Martin.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984 - 2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 page 382. Martin replied that "It's been a long time since he's called me a star, shooting or otherwise". Chrétien asked Jim Karygiannis, who had so effective in signing up supporters for him in 1990 to repeat that performance, only to be told by Karygiannis that Chrétien had never rewarded him by appointing him to the Cabinet as he asked for many times over the years, had not even returned his phone calls to set up a meeting to discuss his possible appointment to the Cabinet and that he was now a Martin man.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking 2003 page 383. Chrétien tried to change Karygiannis's mind by calling up his dying father in Greece to wish him well to no avail.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking 2003 page 383. Karygiannis then called a press conference on 13 July 2002 where he called for Chrétien to retire "with dignity", rather than risk a potentially divisive leadership review.[tpl]cite web|url=http://www.karygiannismp.com/dignity.html|title=Avoid convention bloodbath former loyalist tells PM|date=July 13, 2002|last=Harper|first=Tim|publisher=Toronto Star|accessdate=2006-07-24[/tpl] Thomas Worrall Kent, a Liberal elder statesman closely associated with Pearson and Trudeau, stated in an interview that Chrétien was surrounded by sycophants at the PMO, and had lost touch with Canadians. Kent went on to say: "You tend, of course to get surrounded by toadies who won't say anything other than you're wonderful...The present Cabinet is looking pathetic in those terms". Kent ended the interview by sharply asking how loyal Chrétien had been to Turner. Shortly afterwards, Liberal Party president Stephen LeDrew secretly met with Chrétien to inform him that if the leadership review did take place, Chrétien would be doing well if he obtained the support of 20% of the delegates, and urged him to resign to avoid having his career end that way. After less than half the caucus committed to support him in August 2002 by signing a letter indicating their support for the Prime Minister in the up-coming leadership review, Chrétien announced that he would not lead the party into the next election, and set his resignation date for February 2004. Martin was not happy with the 2004 departure date, preferring that Chrétien retire at the end of 2002, but considered it better if Chrétien were to retire than having to defeat him at the 2003 leadership review, which would have been more divisive and would have established the ominous precedent of a Prime Minister being ousted by his own party for no other reason other that someone else wanted the job.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 391
In October 2002, Lawrence MacAulay was forced to resign as Solicitor General following a ruling from the ethics counselor Howard Wilson that MacAulay had broken conflict-of-interest rules by lobbying the government to fund a police training scheme at Holland College, which was headed by his brother.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 399. Both Chrétien and his close associate man Eddie Goldenberg saw the charges against MacAulay as absurd, with Chrétien telling Wilson "Do you want us to be eunuchs in our jobs?" On 21 November 2002, Chrétien's communications director Françoise Ducros was overheard by Robert Fife saying about President Bush "What a moron!", who reported the remark in the next day's edition of The National Post.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Viking: Toronto, 2003 page 402. The next day, Chrétien told the press that Bush was a friend and "He's not a moron at all", leading to headlines in the press such as "Chrétien denies Bush is a moron". Chrétien was highly reluctant to fire Ducros, who was one of his most loyal supporters. That Ducros was especially hated by the Martin fraction of the Liberals was another reason why Chrétien did not wish to fire Ducros, despite the media storm she had provoked. Finally, under strong pressure from the American government, which had quietly made it clear that the continued presence of Ducros would not help Canadian-American relations, Chrétien dismissed Ducros on 26 November 2002.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Viking: Toronto, 2003 page 403 Ducros's successor as communications director, Jim Munson, was a former journalist and a better-liked personality, which led to a marked improvement in the Chrétien government's relations with the media in its last year.
Chrétien's government did not support the US-led 2003 invasion of Iraq. His reasoning was that the war lacked UN Security Council sanction; while not a member of the Security Council, Canada nevertheless attempted to build a consensus for a resolution authorizing the use of force after a short (two to three-month) extension to UN weapon inspections in Iraq. (Critics also noted that, while in opposition, he had also opposed the first US-led Gulf War, which had been approved by the UN Security Council and in 1999 supported NATO air strikes against Serbia, which had no Security Council approval.) In order to avoid damaging relations with the United States, Chrétien agreed to another and more larger deployment of Canadian troops to Afghanistan on 12 February 2003 in order to prove that Canada was still a good American ally, despite opposing the upcoming Iraq war.[ref]
