[[Edward Benson (bishop)]]

CATEGORIES: 1829 births, 1896 deaths, 19th-century Anglican archbishops, Alumni of Trinity College, Cambridge, Archbishops of Canterbury, Bishops of Truro, Cardiovascular disease deaths in Wales, Fellows of Magdalene College, Cambridge, Masters of Wellington College, Berkshire, People educated at King Edward's School, Birmingham, People from Birmingham, West Midlands, People from Crowthorne, People with bipolar disorder, Burials at Canterbury Cathedral

[tpl]Portal|Anglicanism[/tpl]
Edward White Benson (14 July 1829 – 11 October 1896) was the Archbishop of Canterbury from 1883 until his death.

==Life==

Edward White Benson was born in Highgate, Birmingham, the son of a Birmingham chemical manufacturer of the same name. He was educated at King Edward's School, Birmingham and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA (8th classic) in 1852.[tpl]acad|id=BN848EW|name=Benson, Edward White[/tpl]
Benson began his career as a schoolmaster at Rugby School in 1852, and was ordained deacon in 1852 and priest in 1857. In 1859 Benson was chosen by Prince Albert as the first Master (headmaster) of Wellington College, Berkshire, which had been built as the nation's memorial to the Duke of Wellington. Benson was largely responsible for establishing Wellington as a public school, closely modelled on Rugby School, rather than the military academy originally planned.
From 1872 to 1877 he served as Chancellor of Lincoln Cathedral, and first Bishop of Truro from 1877–82. He founded Truro High School for GirlsAmy Key Clarke, The Story of Truro High School, the Benson Foundation. Truro: Oscar Blackford, 1979 in 1880.
In 1883 he was appointed Archbishop of Canterbury. While at Canterbury, to avoid the prosecution before a lay tribunal of Edward King, Bishop of Lincoln, under the Public Worship Regulation Act 1874 for six ritual offences he heard the case in his own archiepiscopal court which had been inactive since 1699.
Chadwick, Owen The Victorian Church (Part II) Adam & Charles Black(1980) p.354 In his judgement (often called "the Lincoln Judgement"), he found against the Bishop on two points, with a proviso as to a third that, when performing the manual acts during the prayer of consecration in the Holy Communion service, the priest must stand so that they can be seen by the people.   Benson also tried to amalgamate the two Convocations and the new houses of laity into a single assembly.  In 1896 it was established that they could 'unofficially' meet together.Chadwick, Owen The Victorian Church (Part II) Adam & Charles Black(1980) p.365  In September of the same year, the papal apostolic letter Apostolicae Curae was published and Benson had started to work on a reply before his sudden death of a heart attack while attending Sunday service in St. Deiniol's Church, Hawarden, Wales on October 11, 1896 on a visit to former Prime Minister William Gladstone. Three days later his body was put on the train at Sandycroft station to be returned to London.An article about the Archbishop's passing on the Flintshire website where he was buried at Canterbury Cathedral, in a magnificent tomb located at the western end of the nave.
His devotion to Saint Cyprian bore posthumous fruit with the publication of Cyprian, his life, his times, his work the following year.Cross & Livingstone The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church OUP(1974) art."Benson, Edward White"

==Legacy==

Benson is best remembered for devising the Festival of Nine Lessons and Carols, an order first used in Truro Cathedral on Christmas Eve, 1880. Considerably revised by Eric Milner White for King's College Cambridge, this service is now used every Christmas around the world.
Benson told Henry James a simple, rather inexpert story he had heard about the ghosts of evil servants who tried to lure young children to their deaths. James recorded the hint in his Notebooks and eventually used it as the starting-point for his classic ghost story, The Turn of the Screw.
In 1914, a boarding house at Wellington College was named after him. Benson House carries the emblem of a blue Tudor Rose, and is situated outside of the main College.

==Personal life==

Benson married his distant cousin Mary Sidgwick, the sister of philosopher Henry. The couple had six children. Their fifth child was the novelist E. F. Benson, best remembered for his Mapp and Lucia novels. Another son was A. C. Benson, the author of the lyrics to Elgar's "Land of Hope and Glory" and master of Magdalene College, Cambridge. Their sixth and youngest child, Robert Hugh Benson, became a minister of the Church of England before converting to Roman Catholicism and writing many popular novels. Their daughter, Margaret Benson, was an artist, author, and amateur Egyptologist. None of the children married; and some appeared to suffer from mental illnesses, possibly  bipolar disorder. After the archbishop's death, his widow set up household with Lucy Tait, daughter of the previous Archbishop of Canterbury, Archibald Campbell Tait;Vicinus, Martha (2004). Intimate Friends: women who loved women (1778–1928). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-85563-5. and a full-length biography of her was published in 2011, casting light on the Bensons' domestic life.
He is buried in a vault in St Augustines Chapel under a north-west tower of Canterbury Cathedral.

==Further reading==

==References==

==External links==


