[[IBook]]

CATEGORIES: PowerPC Macintosh computers, Macintosh laptops, Macintosh computers by product line, 1999 introductions

The iBook is a line of laptop computers sold by Apple Computer from 1999 to 2006. The line targeted entry level, consumer and education markets, with lower specifications and prices than the PowerBook, Apple's higher-end line of laptop computers.
Three distinct designs of the iBook were introduced during its lifetime. The first, known as the "Clamshell", was influenced by the design of Apple's popular iMac line at the time. It was a significant departure from previous portable computer designs due to its shape, bright colors, incorporation of a handle into the casing, lack of a hinged cover over the external ports, and built-in wireless networking. Two years later, the second generation abandoned the original form factor in favor of a more conventional, rectangular design. In October 2003, a third iteration was released that added a PowerPC G4 chip and a slot-loading drive.
Apple replaced the iBook line with the MacBook in May 2006 during Apple’s transition to Intel processors. The MacBook has also evolved into different models, such as the MacBook Pro targeting high performance and the MacBook Air targeting the entry level, consumer ultrabook-market.
They were also a major name for education, with Henrico County Public Schools being the first of many school systems in the USA to distribute one to every student.

==iBook G3 ("Clamshell")==

In the late 1990s, Apple was trimming its product line from the bewildering variety of intersecting Performa, Quadra, LC, Power Macintosh and PowerBook models to a simplified "four box" strategy: desktop and portable computers, each in both consumer and professional models. Three boxes of this strategy were already in place: The newly introduced iMac was the consumer desktop, the Blue and White G3 filled the professional desktop box, and the PowerBook line served as the professional portable line. This left only the consumer portable space empty, leading to much rumor on the Internet of potential designs and features. Putting an end to this speculation, Steve Jobs unveiled the iBook G3 during the keynote presentation of Macworld Conference & Expo, New York City on June 21, 1999.
The design was clearly influenced by Apple's consumer desktop, the iMac. In fact, one of the marketing slogans for the iBook was "iMac to go". The clamshell design also echoed the eMate 300. Apple continued its trend of using transparent colored plastics for the shell, and released the iBook clamshell series in several colors, starting with Blueberry and Tangerine; (later in the series, Apple added Indigo, Graphite, and Key Lime). However, unlike the iMac, the iBook did not use pinstripes.
Like the iMac, the iBook G3 had a PowerPC G3 CPU, and no legacy Apple interfaces. USB, Ethernet, modem ports and an optical drive were standard. The ports were left uncovered along the left side: a cover was thought to be fragile and unnecessary with the iBook's new interfaces, which lacked the exposed pins of earlier connectors. When the lid was closed, the hinge kept it firmly shut, so there was no need for a latch on the screen. The hinge included an integrated carrying handle. Additional power connectors on the bottom surface allowed multiple iBook G3s to be charged on a custom-made rack. The iBook G3 was the first Mac to use Apple's new "Unified Logic Board Architecture", which condensed all of the machine's core features into two chips, and added AGP and Ultra DMA support.
The iBook was the first mainstream computer designed and sold with integrated wireless networking.Wi-Fi: Apple to leap ahead again - MAC.BLORGE  On the iBook's introduction, Phil Schiller, Apple's VP of Marketing, held an iBook while jumping off a height as data from the computer was transferred to another in order to demonstrate the wireless networking capability. The display bezel contained the wireless antenna, which attached to an optional internal wireless card. Lucent helped create this wireless capability which established the industry standard. Apple released the AirPort Wireless Base Station at the same time.
There was heated debate over many things such as the aesthetics, features, weight, performance, and pricing.http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?file=/chronicle/archive/1999/10/21/BU85766.DTL&type=tech_articleThe Mac Observer-Hey Apple? Can You Make My iBook Charcoal Gray?  To provide good impact protection, the iBook was larger and heftier than the PowerBook of the time, and yet had lower specifications. Standard features like PC card slots were absent. Speculated features such as touch-screens and an ultra-long battery life were absent. The iBook gained the label "Barbie's toilet seat", due to the distinctive design.REVIEW / iBook looks less different / This time, internal features distinguish Apple's notebook - SFGate Nevertheless, this same design made the iBook G3 unmistakable in movies and television shows.
The iBook was a commercial success.Apple's Climb Back to Success, 1999 to 2001 The line continually received processor, memory, hard disk upgrades, and new colors. FireWire and video out were later added. The design was discontinued in May 2001, in favor of the new "Dual USB" iBooks.
Compared to follow-up iBook and PowerBook notebook computers, the Clamshell iBook proved to be the more reliable model.MacInTouch Special Reports: iBook and PowerBook Reliability The original iBook is on exhibition at the London Design Museum and the Yale University Art Gallery.iBook 1999 + PowerMacG4 - Design, Architecture and Fashion - Design Museum LondonYale University Art Gallery - eCatalogue - iBook G3 Vestiges of design ideas first adopted in the iBook G3 can still be seen today: moving interface ports from the back to the sides and leaving them uncovered, omitting a latch for the computer's lid and providing color options and an eye-catching design intended to be seen with the computer open.

===Models===

===Expandability and upgrades===

The original iBook's only customer-serviceable parts were the memory (RAM) and AirPort card, accessed via two slots under the keyboard. No other modifications were possible in-warranty. There was no PCMCIA port for additional expansion capabilities. 40 screws needed to be removed to access the hard disk. The optical drive, however, can be accessed much more easily, requiring only 11 screws and one standoff to be removed. Later on, some users transplanted a 1024×768 LCD from the more recent white iBook into a clamshell iBook.The iBook Modification Project. Accessed on March 25, 2009
All clamshell iBooks shipped with Mac OS 8.6 or 9.0. All clamshell iBooks supported Mac OS X v10.0-v10.3.9. Mac OS X v10.4 "Tiger", which requires a Firewire port, can also be installed, though only on the late-model iBook G3 FireWire/SE (366/466 MHz). It is possible to use third-party software such as XPostFacto to install version 10.4 on earlier clamshell iBooks.

==iBook G3 Dual USB ("Snow")==

Apple debuted the next-generation iBook G3 at a press conference in Cupertino, California on May 1, 2001. The previous bold colors and bulky form-factor were abandoned, as was the handle, the latchless design and the additional power connectors on the bottom surface.
The resulting iBook was available in white only (hence the name "Snow"), and incorporated transparent polycarbonate in its casing. It was 30% lighter, and occupied less than half of the volume of the model it replaced, being smaller in all 3 dimensions. Despite that, it added an extra USB port and a higher resolution screen. Apple claimed the compact design did not sacrifice durability, saying it was “twice as durable” as the previous model.
With this revision, Apple began transitioning to translucent and white polycarbonate casings in most of its consumer line, such as the iMac and the eMac. In contrast, most of its professional products used an anodized aluminum finish. Near the end of its run, the Snow iBook G3 case became opaque and white instead of translucent white and magnesium.

===Models===

==iBook G4 ("Snow")==

Apple added a PowerPC G4 chip to the iBook line on October 23, 2003—finally ending Apple’s use of the PowerPC G3 chip. A slot-loading optical drive replaced the disc tray. The iBook G4 also features an opaque white case finish and keyboard, and a plastic display hinge.

===Models===

===Expandability and upgrades===

The iBook keyboard lifts up, allowing installation of the AirPort (wireless) card and additional memory. This gives the keyboard a "spongy" effect, especially in PowerPC G3 models with the translucent keyboard. The "sponginess" was corrected in the PowerPC G4 models.
Accessing the hard disk drive is complex and time-consuming, involving partial disassembly of the unit and the removal of over 20 different-sized screws.
The memory in the iBook G4 is covered by a removable Airport card, and accessible by removing the RAM shield with a Phillips 00 screwdriver. While some of the earlier models (e.g., 800 MHz and 933 MHz) have a specified 640 MB RAM limit, it is possible to have a total of 1.12 GB of RAM installed (128 MB built-in, plus a 1 GB SO-DIMM ), or 1.25 or 1.5 GB in the later models with 256 or 512 MB of RAM soldered to the logic board.

==Notes==

==Quality issues==

In late November 2003, a number of iBook G3 users reported display problems with their laptops. In December 2003, a group of users headed by Michael Johnson and Bill Owen sought to file a class action suit against Apple. In response, Apple initiated the "iBook Logic Board Repair Extension Program" in January 2004, which covered the expense of repairing affected iBooks for three years.OSnews — iBook Issues? You're Not Alone,2004-01-03Apple.com — Expanded iBook Logic Board Repair Extension Program FAQ In June 2004, the Repair Extension Program was expanded to cover "all White G3 iBooks".Apple.com — Expanded iBook Logic Board Repair Extension Program FAQiBook Logic Board Repair Extension Program Expanded to All White G3 iBooks, announcement dated late June 2004, found in web archives of apple support forums.
The iBook G4 suffers from display problems similar to those of the iBook G3, but was not covered by the repair extension program. Owners of iBooks that required expensive repairs for these problems submitted new class action lawsuits in December 2006."Law Suits report in Boston Globe"
On May 2, 2007, the Danish Consumer Board published an extensive report"iBook G4 Logic Board issue report made under the authority of the Danish Consumer Board""Danes prove Apple iBook G4 has a defect - The INQUIRER" made by an external party concerning the Apple iBook G4 logic board issue. A press release"Press release about the iBook G4 logic board issue made by the Danish Consumer Board" referred to the global consequences this could have for possible guarantee claims.

==References==

==External links==


