[[Útgarða-Loki]]

CATEGORIES: Giants, Jötnar

In Norse mythology, Útgarða-Loki (Anglicized as Utgarda-Loki and Utgard-Loki) was the ruler of the castle Útgarðr in Jötunheimr. He was one of the Jötnar and his name means literally "Loki of the Outyards," to distinguish him from Loki, the companion of Thor.

==Prose Edda==

According to the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning, Thor, Þjálfi and Loki, during their travel to Útgarðr, unwittingly settle for the night and sleep in the glove of a giant named Skrýmir ("Big-looking"Lindow (2001:273).), an incident for which Thor is ridiculed in several poems of the Poetic Edda. The giant accompanies them on their travel and tricks their food from them. Starved and in rage, Thor tries to kill Skrýmir while the giant sleeps, but fails because the giant magically shields himself behind a mountain.
Once Thor and his fellows arrive at Útgarða-Loki, a castle so tall that they must bend back their necks to see its roof, Útgarða-Loki challenges them with several contests, all based on magical delusions. Loki participates in an eating contest against fire personified. Þjálfi competes in running against the mind of Útgarða-Loki. Thor first tries to empty a drinking horn connected to the sea, then tries to lift Jörmungandr in the appearance of a cat, and finally, in rage, wrestles with Elli, Old Age personified.
Despite their failures in the contests, Útgarða-Loki now treats them respectfully. As they leave the castle the next morning, Útgarða-Loki says:
On hearing this, Thor grabs his hammer and prepares to strike, when Útgarða-Loki and his castle magically disappear, leaving only a beautiful prairie.

==Gesta Danorum==

In Gesta Danorum a ship meets strong winds and sacrifices are made to various gods to obtain favorable weather, including to one called Utgarthilocus. With vows and propitiations to him a beneficial spell of weather is obtained. Later an expedition to the land of the giants comes upon this figure.
As a proof of their accomplishments, the men bring back a hair pulled from the giant's beard, stinking so harshly that several men drop dead on smelling it.
Apart from the name of the giant there is little that reminds of Snorri's Útgarða-Loki. The bound giant figure is more reminiscent of the bound Loki who likewise lies chained and tortured in a cave.

==Popular culture==

The Danish animated film Valhalla (Peter Madsen and others, 1984) is based on the Útgarða-Loki story from the Prose Edda. Útgarða-Loki serves as the villain and Elli is described as his mother.
In the Marvel Comics continuity, Utgard-Loki is an enemy of Thor.
Utgarda-Loki also makes an appearance as the final boss in the video game Ragnarok Odyssey
Skrymir also appears in the Buffy the Vampire Slayer novel "Spike and Dru: Pretty Maids All In A Row."

==Notes==

==References==


