</ref> and contacted [[Arthur C. Clarke]] regarding the possibility of adapting his novel ''[[The Deep Range]]''.<ref>Ward, ''Out of the Unknown'', p. 25.</ref>
In March 1965, Shubik travelled to New York to negotiate rights with authors whose works she was considering, to seek ideas from US television, and to obtain more science fiction anthologies from US publishers. The trip to New York would become an annual event for Shubik during her time on Out of the Unknown. During her visit she met with US science fiction editors and also with Isaac Asimov, who granted permission for two of his stories to be adapted on the condition that they could only be shown in the UK – sales to foreign territories were not allowed.Ward, Out of the Unknown, p. 26.
On her return to London, Shubik learned that she had been appointed producer and story editor for the new anthology series. She obtained the services of George Spenton-Foster as her associate producer. Spenton-Foster was a science fiction fan and his wide experience of BBC television production proved invaluable to Shubik. By this stage, Shubik had found the twelve scripts she needed for the series: ten episodes would be adaptations of stories by John Wyndham ("Time to Rest" and its sequel "No Place Like Earth", dramatised together as “No Place Like Earth”); Alan Nourse ("The Counterfeit Man"); Isaac Asimov ("The Dead Past" and Sucker Bait); William Tenn ("Time in Advance"); Ray Bradbury ("The Fox and the Forest"); Kate Wilhelm ("Andover and the Android"); John Brunner ("Some Lapse of Time"); J.G. Ballard ("Thirteen to Centaurus") and Frederik Pohl ("The Midas Plague"). Two original stories - “Stranger in the Family” by David Campton and “Come Buttercup, Come Daisy, Come...?” by Mike Watts - were also commissioned. Among those commissioned to adapt the stories were a few notable names in television writing: Terry Nation, creator of the Daleks for Doctor Who and later Survivors and Blake's 7, adapted Bradbury's "The Fox and the Forest" while Troy Kennedy Martin, co-creator of Z-Cars, adapted Pohl's "The Midas Plague".
A title for the series had not been decided when production began. Names including Dimension 4, The Edge of Tomorrow and From the Unknown were considered before settling on Out of the Unknown. The title music was composed by Norman Kay and the title sequence was created by Bernard Lodge. It was intended from an early stage that, as with Boris Karloff on Out of this World, each story would be introduced by a regular host. Christopher Lee and Vincent Price were approached but weren't available and the idea was dropped. The episode “Some Lapse of Time” is notable for having Ridley Scott, future director of such films as Alien, Blade Runner and Gladiator, as designer.
Out of the Unknown made its debut on Monday, 4 October 1965 at 8:00pm on BBC2 with Wyndham's “No Place Like Earth” selected as the opening story. Science fiction and fantasy was popular on television with Doctor Who, The Avengers, Thunderbirds, The Man from UNCLE and Lost in Space all notable hits at the time. Out of the Unknown, however, would offer more adult, cerebral fare. Initial audience and critical reaction was mixed but improved as the series went on with “Andover and the Android” (“It's not until intelligence, humour and gaiety break into television that you notice what tasteless pap we've been living on”Ward, Out of the Unknown, p. 120. - Daily Mail) and “Some Lapse of Time” (“It was not surprising to hear from Late Night Line Up that there had been many complimentary telephone calls after the play ... it left the viewer with the disconcerting feeling that there was more than a grain of truth in its fantasy”Ward, Out of the Unknown, p. 131. - Birmingham Evening Mail and Dispatch) proving particularly popular with audiences and critics alike. BBC2 Controller David Attenborough praised the “overall professionalism that has become a hallmark of the series”.Ward, Out of the Unknown, p. 33. By the end of its first run, Out of the Unknown was the most popular drama on BBC2 after the imported Western The Virginian.Ward, Out of the Unknown, p. 32.

==Series two==

In parallel with preparing for the second series of Out of the Unknown, Shubik was tasked with producing another anthology series – Thirteen Against Fate, adaptations of short stories by Maigret creator Georges Simenon. To assist her, Shubik was assigned a script editor – initially Rodney Gedye and then, when Gedye left following clashes with Shubik,Ward, Out of the Unknown, p. 153. Micheal Imison. As with series one, finding suitable stories for adaptation remained a problem. On her annual visit to New York, Shubik placed an advertisement looking for stories in the Science Fiction Writers Association Bulletin. One author who answered the advertisement was Larry Eisenberg, whose stories The Fastest Draw and Too Many Cooks were commissioned. Two further adaptations, of E.M. Forster’s The Machine Stops and Mordecai Roshwald’s Level 7 (dramatised as “Level Seven”), were scripts that had been offered, without success, to film studios for some years. Another script, adapting Colin Kapp’s Lambda 1, had been commissioned for series one but shelved due to technical considerations about how it could be realised; when special effects designer Jack Kine indicated that he had a solution to the technical challenges the script was brought back into production for series two. Five further adaptations were commissioned - John Rankine’s The World in Silence, Henry Kuttner’s The Eye, Frederik Pohl’s Tunnel Under the World and Isaac Asimov’s Satisfaction Guaranteed and Reason (dramatised as “The Prophet”). Three original stories – “Frankenstein Mark II” by Hugh Whitemore, “Second Childhood” by Hugh Leonard and “Walk's End” by William Trevor – were also commissioned.
In response to Kenneth Tynan’s use of the word “fuck” on the satirical programme BBC-3, Sydney Newman issued directives to his producers regarding language and content. In the case of Out of the Unknown, this led to particular attention being paid to the scripts for “Second Childhood” (about reawakening of sexual desire when an elderly man undergoes a rejuvenation process) and “Satisfaction Guaranteed” (about a woman taking a robot as a lover).
Series two was broadcast on Thursday nights at 9:30pm, beginning on 6 October 1966 with the episode, “The Machine Stops”. The new series was promoted in listings magazine Radio Times with a front cover of “The Machine Stops”’ star Yvonne Mitchell and an article previewing the upcoming episodes, written by Michael Imison. The two most notable productions of the series were “The Machine Stops” and “Level Seven”. “The Machine Stops”, directed by Philip Saville, was a particularly challenging production – later described by Shubik as “the most complex and technically demanding script I have ever had in my hands ”Shubik, Play for Today, p. 126. – requiring large and complex sets (including construction of one with a working monorail).[ref]
