[[Bṛhaspati]]

CATEGORIES: Graha, Rigvedic deities, Hindu gods

Bṛhaspati ([tpl]lang-sa|बृहस्पति[/tpl], "lord of prayer or devotion",Monier-Williams, also "he is the chief offerer of prayers and sacrifices, and therefore represented as the type of the priestly order, and the Purohita of the gods with whom he intercedes for men" often written as Brihaspati or Bruhaspati) also known as Deva-guru (guru of the gods), is a Hindu god and a Vedic deity. He is considered the personification of piety and religion, and the chief 'offerer of prayers and sacrifices to the gods' (Sanskrit: Purohita), with whom he intercedes on behalf of humankind.
He is the guru of the Devas (gods) and the nemesis of Shukracharya, the guru of the Danavas (demons). He is also known as Ganapati (leader of the group planets), and Guru (teacher), the god of wisdom and eloquence, to whom various works are described, such as the Barhaspatya sutras.
He is described as of yellow or golden color and holding the following divine attributes: a stick, a lotus and beads. He presides over 'Guru-var' or Thursday.Coleman, Charles. Mythology of the Hindus, p. 133
In astrology, Bṛhaspati is the regent of Jupiter and is often identified with the planet.

==In Hinduism==

Image:HinducosmoMap2.svg|thumb|right|150px|alt=Click! Dhruva, Saptarishi, Shani, Bṛhaspati, Budha, Shukra, Chandra, Vivasvan, Garbhodaksayi Vishnu
rect 172 2 277 31 w:Dhruva
rect 171 96 259 122 w:Saptarishi
rect 174 148 239 179 w:Shani
rect 170 198 258 222 w:Bṛhaspati
rect 171 256 242 278 w:Budha
rect 177 282 240 298 w:Shukra
rect 177 317 221 333 w:Chandra
rect 177 332 212 349 w:Vivasvan
rect 101 375 261 398 w:Garbhodaksayi Vishnu

Bṛhaspati is the son of Rishi Angiras (according to the Rig Veda 4.40.1)  and Surupa according to the Shiva Purana. He has two brothers named Utathya and Samvartana, and has three wives. His first wife, Shuba, gave birth to Bhanumati, Raaka, Archishmati, Mahamati, Mahishmati, Sinivali, and Havishmati, his seven daughters. His second wife, Tara, gave birth to seven sons and a daughter. Through Bṛahspati's third wife, Mamata, he had two sons, Kacha and Bharadwaja.
Bṛhaspati attained the position of preceptor of the Devas by performing penances on the banks of Prabhas Tirtha. Lord Shiva granted him this position, as well as his position as one of the Navagrahas (Nine Planets).
There is a wide debate whether Kacha was Bṛhaspati's offspring or his brother. But the Mahabharata states that Kacha was his brother. All Brahmins belonging to the Bharadwaja Gotra are believed to be his descendants.

==In astrology==

In Jyotisha (Hindu astrology), Bṛhaspati is the name for the planet Jupiter, which is one of the Navagraha (the nine planets) . He is also known as Guru, Cura and Devaguru. Bṛhaspati is considered to be the most beneficial sign of any of the planets. Bṛhaspati rules over the signs Dhanu (Sagittarius) and Meena (Pisces), he is exalted in Karka (Cancer) and in his fall in Makara (Capricorn). The Sun, Moon and Mars are considered friendly to Bṛhaspati, Mercury is hostile and Saturn is neutral.
Bṛhaspati in Vedic astrology is considered to be of the element ether (space) or  Akasha Tattva (i.e. Akasha = Space/Sky/Aether; Tattva = Essence/Category/Truth). This element indicates vastness, growth and expansion in a person's life. Bṛhaspati also represents the balance of past karma, religion, philosophy, knowledge and issues relating to offspring. He is concerned with education, teaching and the dispensation of knowledge. Humans with Jupiter dominating in their horoscope could grow fat as life progresses and their empire and prosperity increases; and diabetes is an ailment directly related to this sign. According to traditional Hindu astrology, worship or propitiation of Bṛhaspati or Guru (Jupiter) results in cure from ailments affecting the stomach and helps ward off sins.
Bṛhaspati is lord of three Nakshatras or lunar mansions: Punarvasu, Vishakha and Purva Bhadrapada. The following items are associated with Bṛhaspati: his color is yellow, his metal is gold, and his gemstones are yellow topaz and yellow sapphire. The season associated with him is winter, direction is north-east and his element is ether or space.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


