[[Chespirito]]

CATEGORIES: 1929 births, Chespirito actors, Living people, Mexican male film actors, Mexican male comedians, Mexican composers, Mexican people of Spanish descent, Mexican songwriters, Mexican male television actors, National Autonomous University of Mexico alumni, Male actors from Mexico City, Musicians from Mexico City

Roberto Gómez Bolaños (born in Mexico City, in February 21, 1929), more commonly known by his pseudonym Chespirito,[tpl]cite book |title=Mexican cinema: reflections of a society, 1896-1980 |last=Mora |first=Carl J. |page=162 |year=1989 |publisher=University of California Press |isbn=9780520043046 [/tpl] is a Mexican screenwriter, actor, comedian, film director, television director, playwright, songwriter, and author internationally known for writing, directing, and starring in the Chespirito, El Chapulín Colorado, and El Chavo del Ocho television series.

==Life and work==

Before becoming an actor, Gómez was an amateur boxer. He studied engineering at the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (National Autonomous University of Mexico). He wrote a number of plays, and contributed dialogue for scripts of films and television shows in Mexico, as well as some character acting work before he became famous. His stage name, "Chespirito", was given to him by a producer during Gómez Bolaños' first years as a writer and was concocted from the diminutive form of the Spanish pronunciation of the name of William Shakespeare or Shakespierito, meaning "Little Shakespeare" or "Little Shakespeare Boy".
Chespirito was discovered as an actor while he was waiting in line to apply for a job as a writer and soon he began writing and starring in his children comedy shows. Chespirito's first show was Los Supergenios de la Mesa Cuadrada, a sketch comedy show that premiered in 1968; the show also starred Ramón Valdés, María Antonieta de las Nieves and Rubén Aguirre. Los Supergenios was later renamed Chespirito y la Mesa Cuadrada and later Chespirito; characters like El Chavo, El Chapulín and Dr. Chapatín were introduced in this show (1972, 1970 and 1968; respectively).
His best known roles were in the shows El Chavo and El Chapulín Colorado, both series premiered in 1973 and were based on sketches of the same name from Los Supergenios. The shows were produced by Mexican TV network Televisa, and aired in 124 countries. Other shows produced by and starring Chespirito were the short-lived La Chicharra from 1979, and a second version of Chespirito from 1980–1995.
In El Chavo, Chespirito played an 8-year-old boy who often took refuge inside a wooden rain barrel in a Mexican neighborhood, and in El Chapulín Colorado he played a good-hearted superhero who gets involved in humorous situations. The Simpsons creator Matt Groening has declared that he created the Bumblebee Man character after watching El Chapulín Colorado in a motel on the United States–Mexico border.
El Chavo and El Chapúlin Colorado have turned into cultural icons all over Latin America and the United States and have also aired in more than one-hundred countries. He also starred in Mexican movies such as El Chanfle and El Chanfle 2.
Chespirito is also noted as a musical composer. He started writing music as a hobby, and most of his early musical work was related to his comedy work, particularly featured in occasional Chapulín Colorado or Chavo del Ocho special episodes. Later works include the theme songs for various Mexican movies and telenovelas, such as Alguna Vez Tendremos Alas and La Dueña. A comedy song by Chespirito, "Churi Churi Fun Flais", was slightly referenced by Puerto Rican rap duo Calle 13 in a pairing with fellow rapper Voltio, on their song "Chulin Culin Chunfly" (which used the made-up word "Culin", a reference to the female derriere, in substitution of the second "Churi").
He is also the creator of the theater comedy Once y Doce (Eleven and Twelve), the most successful theater comedy in Mexican history; it is still played occasionally.

===Actor===

===Films===

===Writer===

===Composer===

==Recent years==

On November 19, 2004, after 27 years together, he married actress and longtime companion Florinda Meza, who starred as Doña Florinda in El Chavo. After show production was stopped for El Chavo and El Chapulín, both toured Mexico and the rest of Latin America and the United States with different plays, sometimes playing the characters that made them famous.
On November 26, 2003, Chespirito and Florinda Meza received the keys to the city of Cicero, Illinois.
Chespirito and Edgar Vivar once received an award from a Laurel and Hardy fan club for performing the funniest impersonation of Laurel and Hardy in Latin America. This impersonation was made during an episode of El Chapulín Colorado.
During the 2000 and the 2006 Presidential electoral campaigns in Mexico he openly supported the PAN (Partido Acción Nacional, National Action Party) in a TV commercial urging people to vote for this party just like him.
In 2006, he started a campaign against the legalization of abortion in Mexico City. He also wrote the books El Diario de El Chavo del Ocho ("Diary From the Kid from Number 8"), ...Y También Poemas ("...And Poems Too") and Sin Querer Queriendo: Memorias ("Accidentally on Purpose: Memoirs").
In 2008, he went to Peru to present himself as Chespirito in the auditorium of the Colegio San Agustín of Lima.
In 2009, he was also honored by the Colombian TV-channel RCN in which he received the keys of the municipality of Soacha; more than 20,000 people attended the homage.
On November 12, 2009, he was admitted to a Mexico City hospital. According to his son, Roberto Gómez Fernandez, Chespirito had prostate complications, which required a simple surgery to treat.
In 2012, Chespirito was honored by his friends and former cast members, putting an end to many rumors that the comedian was dying. Even so, former colleagues such as Edgar Vivar expressed their concern publicly for Chespirito's poor health.
Two themes from Jean-Jacques Perrey, "The Elephant Never Forgets" and "Baroque Hoedown" were used as the main themes for El Chavo del Ocho and El Chapulin Colorado. A 2009 lawsuit by the composers against him and Mexican multimedia conglomerate Televisa was settled in 2010, as a compensation for the network's non-payment of the use of these melodies.

==References==

==External links==



