[[Out of the Unknown]]

CATEGORIES: BBC television dramas, Fantasy television series, British science fiction television programmes, British anthology television series, British supernatural television programmes, Lost BBC episodes, 1965 British television programme debuts, 1971 British television programme endings

Out of the Unknown is a British television science fiction anthology drama series, produced by the BBC and broadcast on BBC2 in four series between 1965 and 1971. Each episode was a dramatisation of a science fiction short story. Some were written directly for the series, but most were adaptations of already published stories.
The first three years were exclusively science fiction, but that genre was abandoned in the final year in favour of horror/fantasy stories. A number of episodes were wiped during the early 1970s, as was standard procedure at the time. A large number of episodes are still missing but some do turn up from time to time; for instance, Level Seven from series two, originally broadcast on 27 October 1966 was returned to the BBC from the archives of a European broadcaster in January 2006.

==Origins==

Irene Shubik began her career working on educational films for Encyclopædia Britannica Inc in Chicago. Returning to London, she joined ABC Television as a story editor on the anthology series Armchair Theatre, under producer Sydney Newman in 1960. Shubik had been a science fiction fan since college, and in 1961 approached Newman with a proposal to create a science fiction version of Armchair Theatre. This became Out of this World, a sixty-minute anthology series hosted by Boris Karloff that ran for thirteen episodes between June and September 1962. Many of the episodes were adaptations of stories by writers including John Wyndham, Isaac Asimov and Philip K. Dick.

==Series one==

Shubik began work and soon found that finding science fiction stories suitable for adaptation was a difficult task. She later recalled “I had to read hundreds of stories to pick a dozen. You have no idea how difficult some of these authors are to deal with, and it seems a special thing among SF writers to hedge themselves behind almost impossible copyright barriers, even when they have got a story that is possible to do on television. So many you can't. Either the conception is so way out you would need a fantastic budget to produce it, or the story is too short, too tight to be padded out to make an hour's television”.Ward, Out of the Unknown, p. 31. When working on Out of this World Shubik had made a valuable contact in John Carnell, a key figure in British science fiction publishing. He was the founder of science fiction magazine New Worlds and agent for many of Britain's science fiction writers. Carnell was able to suggest stories and authors for Shubik to consider. Shubik received copies of science fiction anthologies from British publishers and also sought advice from many authors including Frederik Pohl, Alfred Bester and Robert Silverberg.  The latter two admitted to Shubik that they had run into similar difficulties in finding suitable material for television adaptation. Shubik considered asking Nigel Kneale if he would write a new Quatermass story for the series,[ref]
