[[Augustinians]]

CATEGORIES: Augustinian Order, Roman Catholic monastic orders, Canons Regular, Mendicant orders, Roman Catholic friars, Members of Christian religious orders, Christian religious orders established in the 11th century, Christian religious orders established in the 13th century

The  term Augustinians, named after Saint Augustine of Hippo (354–430), applies to two separate and unrelated types of Catholic religious orders:
(1) Several mendicant Orders of friars, who lived a mixed religious life of contemplation and apostolic ministry and follow the Rule of St. Augustine, a brief document providing guidelines for living in a religious community.  The largest and most familiar, originally known as the Hermits of Saint Augustine (O.E.S.A. - Ordo Eremitarum sancti Augustini) and also as the Austin friars, is now simply referred to as the Order of Saint Augustine (O.S.A.).
Two other Orders, the Augustinian Recollects and the Discalced Augustinians, were once part of the Augustinian Order under a single Prior General. The Recollect friars, founded in 1588 as a reform movement of the Augustinian friars in Spain, became autonomous in 1612 with their first Prior General, Enrique de la Sagrada. The Discalced friars became an independent religious congregation with their own Prior General in 1592, and were raised to the status of a separate mendicant Order in 1610.http://oadnet.webs.com/storia.htm
(2) Various congregations of clerics, known as canons regular, who also follow the Rule of St. Augustine, and embrace the evangelical counsels and lead a semi-monastic life, while remaining committed to pastoral care, appropriate to their primary vocation as priests. They generally form one large community, which might serve parishes in the vicinity, and are organized into autonomous religious congregations, which normally are distinct by region.
There are also Augustinian orders within the Anglican Communion.

==The Augustinian Friars==

From the 2008 Constitutions of the Order of Saint Augustine, we read:-
The Order of Saint Augustine is composed of the following:
In addition to these three branches, the Augustinian family also includes other groups:
a)  Religious institutes, both male and female, formally aggregated to the Order by a decree of the Prior General (this would include the Augustinians of the Assumption, the Sisters of St Rita, etc.)
b)  Other groups of lay Augustinians
c)  Lay faithful affiliated to the OrderRule and Constitutions, Order of St. Augustine, Rome, Augustinian General Curia, 2008
The Augustinian, or Austin, friars (O.S.A.), are a mendicant order. As consecrated religious, they pray the Liturgy of the Hours throughout the day. This Latin Rite Order, while a contemplative Order, differs from traditional monastic Orders in three ways:  1) They do not take vows of stability, meaning that they can live in one house (called a friary or sometimes a monastery) typically for several years before being moved into a different community of the Order. 2) They are engaged in apostolic activity, such as mission work, education, prison ministries, etc. The Order is under the supervision of a Prior General in Rome, and as an international Order they are divided into various Provinces throughout the world, with each Province being led by a Prior Provincial; (3) As an Order, they have a special commitment to corporate poverty as opposed to simply the poverty professed by the individual friar. While this is not currently legislated as it was in the origins of the Order, this is to be a distinguishing mark of their lives as a community.
As is typical of most Catholic religious orders, the Augustinians wear a religious habit, consisting of three pieces: a tunic, a cincture, and a shoulder cape with hood.  The tunic and shoulder cape may be black or white (white typically being reserved among the professed friars for tropical locations, and where Dominican friars are not present, so as to avoid confusion), and a black cincture. Novices of the Order wear a white tunic and hooded cape with a black cincture. When white is used by professed friars, however, a scapular is added to the habit, which is the same as the Dominican habit, thus the possible confusion. This is due to St. Dominic's origins as a canon regular.
As consecrated religious, Augustinians profess the evangelical counsels of chastity, poverty, and obedience. They follow the Rule of St. Augustine, written sometime between 397-403, for a monastic community Augustine founded in Hippo (modern day Algeria), and which takes as its inspiration the early Christian community described in the Acts of the Apostles, particularly Acts 4:32:  "The community of believers was of one heart and mind, and no one claimed that any of his possessions was his own, but they had everything in common." (NAB).
By decree of the Holy See, the Augustinian Order is granted exempt status, which places it under the direct dependence of the Pope, meaning that bishops have no jurisdiction with regards to the internal affairs of the Order.See BONIFATIUS PP. VIII, Sacer Ordo vester, 21.I.1298; Inter sollicitudines nostras, 16.I.1302, en Bullarium, 44-45. 50-52. CLEMENS PP. VI, Ad fructus uberes, 19.VIII.1347, Ibid., 64-65. Lumen Gentium 45.

===History of the Friars===

The Augustinian friars came into being as part of the mendicant movement of the 13th century, a new form of religious life which sought to bring the religious ideals of the monastic life into an urban setting which allowed the religious to serve the needs of the People of God in an apostolic capacity.  At this time there were a number of eremitical groups living in such diverse places as Tuscany, Latium, Umbria, Liguria, England, Switzerland, Germany, and perhaps France.  In 1243 the Tuscan hermits petitioned Pope Innocent IV to unite them all as one group.  Innocent IV issued the Bull Incumbit Nobis on 16 December 1243, an essentially pastoral letter which, despite its brevity, basically served as the magna carta initiating the foundation of the Order as it is known today.  This papal bull exhorted these hermits to adopt "the Rule and way of life of the Blessed Augustine," to profess this Augustinian manner of life in a way that they themselves would decide with regards to specific charism and apostolate, and to elect a Prior General.  The bull also appointed Cardinal Riccardo Annibaldi as their supervisor and legal guide.  The importance of this man in the foundation of the Order cannot be overstated.See Rano, Balbino, O.S.A., Augustinian Origins, Charism, and Spirituality, Villanova, Augustinian Press, 1994, 29
These Tuscan hermits came together for a general chapter in March 1244, as decreed by the Bull Praesentium Vobis, a chapter presided over by Cardinal Annibaldi.  At this chapter the Order formally adopted the Rule of St. Augustine, to follow the Roman office with the Cistercian psalter, and to hold triennial elections of the Prior General.  The first Prior General was Friar Matthew, followed by Adjutus and Philip. In the Papal Bull Pia desideria, issued 31 March 1244, Pope Innocent IV formally approved the foundation of the Order.
In 1256 Innocent's successor Alexander IV called together various other hermit groups from around the world and ultimately joined them to this existing Augustinian Order.  From June to July 1255 he issued 22 bulls of instruction, encouragement, and protection of the young Order.  His bull Cum Quaedam Salubria summoned all the hermits of St. Augustine and St. William to send two representatives to Rome for a General Chapter, again to be held under the supervision of the kindly Cardinal Annibaldi, and during this Chapter the following groups of hermits, inter alia, were amalgamated to the Order, which up to then had only consisted of the groups of the Tuscan hermits: the two Orders of St. William the Hermit (the Malevale and MonteFavale communities), the Brittin, and the Bonites (named after St. John the Good).  This historical union has subsequently been referred to as the Grand Union of 1256.  At this Chapter Lanfranc Settala, the leader of the Bonites, was elected Prior General.  This 12-year-old religious Order of friars now consisted of 100 or more houses.
On 22 August 1256 the Italian Williamites, unhappy with the arrangement of the Grand Union, left the Order and adopted the Rule of St. Benedict.
This early time in the Order's history was characterized by a great devotion to learning, to study, to prayer, to service of the poor, and to defense of the Pope and the Church - a particular charism of the Order rooted in the fact that it is the only Order in the history of the Church to be founded directly by the Pope. The great 14th-century Augustinian historian, friar Jordan of Saxony, O.S.A., in his work The Life of the Brothers, writes:http://augnet.org/default.asp?ipageid=758&iparentid=757

==External links==


