[[Spectre (comics)]]

CATEGORIES: Characters created by Jerry Siegel, Comics characters introduced in 1940, DC Comics superheroes, DC Comics angels, DC Comics characters who use magic, DC Comics fantasy characters, DC Comics cosmic entities, DC Comics titles, Fictional ghosts, Fictional mass murderers, Golden Age superheroes, Horror comics, Judeo-Christian mythology in comics, Fictional personifications of death, Fictional characters who can change size

The Spectre is a fictional character, a superhero who has appeared in numerous comic books published by DC Comics. The character first appeared in a next-issue ad in More Fun Comics #51 (Jan. 1940) and received his first story the following month, #52 (Feb. 1940). He was created by Jerry Siegel and Bernard Baily, although several sourcesGreenberger, Bob, "Of Ghostly Guardians and Resurrections," The Spectre vol. 2, #1 (April 1987), DC Comics, ("letter" column).Thomas, Roy, "Secrets Behind the Origins Dept.", Secret Origins (2nd series) #15, June 1987, DC Comics (sidebar to letter column, second page).Bails, Jerry, "Foreword", The Golden Age Spectre Archives Volume 1, 2003, DC Comics, p. 6. attribute creator credit solely to Siegel, limiting Baily to being merely the artist assigned to the feature.

==Publication history==

===Golden Age version===

The Spectre debuted in More Fun Comics #52 (Feb. 1940) when hard-boiled cop Jim Corrigan, on his way with Clarice to his engagement party, was murdered by being stuffed into a barrel (which was then filled with cement) and drowned. His spirit was refused entry into the afterlife however, instead being sent back to Earth by an entity referred to only as "The Voice", to eliminate evil . He saw his body when he appeared at the bottom of the waterfront.
The Spectre begins by seeking bloody vengeance against Corrigan's murderers in a grim, supernatural fashion. One of them turned to a skeleton upon touching him.after that initial adventure, Jim Corrigan creates his signature costume, breaks off his romance with Clarice, and continues to be Jim Corrigan , assuming the secret identity of the Spectre whenever he is needed. Offered a chance
to give up his perhaps impossible mission of eliminating all evil, he turns it down . This origin story took 3 issues.
The Spectre is eventually awarded charter membership in the first ever superhero team, the Justice Society of America in All Star Comics. Jim Corrigan is resurrected in More Fun #75 (Jan. 1942), after which the Spectre's ghostly form enters and emerges from him, though he also functions independently. Occasionally, the Spectre was subjected to "occult occurrences" such as dislocation an hour back in time, with no explanation.
During the mid-1940s, the popularity of superhero comics began to decline and the Spectre was reduced to playing the role of guardian angel to a bumbling character called "Percival Popp, the Super Cop", who first appeared in More Fun #74 (Dec. 1941). When Corrigan enlisted in the military and departed to serve in World War II, in More Fun #90 (April 1944), the Spectre became permanently invisible, becoming a secondary player in his own series. The feature's final installment was in issue #101 (Feb. 1945), and the Spectre made his last appearance in the superhero group the Justice Society of America at roughly the same time in All Star Comics #23 (Winter 1944–1945).

===Silver Age version===

In the mid-1950s and 1960s Silver Age of Comic Books, DC Comics editor Julius Schwartz had the Spectre revived and returned to the role of an avenging undead spirit, beginning in Showcase #60 (Feb. 1966). Under writer Gardner Fox and penciller Murphy Anderson, his power was vastly increased and at times he approached the level of omnipotence. A 1987 magazine retrospective on the character said this revival had been initially announced as a team-up with Doctor Mid-NiteStewart, Alan, "The Lives and Deaths of Jim Corrigan, Alias...The Spectre: Part One of a Hero History", Amazing Heroes #112, 1 March 1987, Fantagraphics p.32. After a three-issue try-out in Showcase, the Spectre appeared in the superhero-team comic Justice League of America #46–47 (Sept–Oct 1966) in that year's team-up of the titular group and its 1940s predecessors, the Justice Society of America (which had also been written by Fox). A few months later, he co-starred with the Silver Age Flash in The Brave and the Bold #72 (July 1967). The Spectre was given his own title, premiering with a cover date of December 1967, while almost simultaneously making a second appearance in The Brave & the Bold #75 (Jan. 1968), this time teamed with Batman. In The Spectre, the creative credits varied widely over the 10 issues published, with perhaps the most notable participant being a then-newcomer to comics, future industry art legend Neal Adams, who drew issues #2–5 (and also wrote #4–5). For its final two issues, the comic became in effect a horror anthology, with the title character being little more than a host/narrator in several short stories.The Spectre title suffered from the same problem that vexed the Golden Age series: writing meaningful stories using a character who was virtually omnipotent. The end to this era came in Justice League of America #83 (Aug. 1970), when, at the climax of another JLA/JSA crossover, the Ghostly Guardian (as DC nicknamed the character) appeared to be destroyed. His cameo at a JSA meeting in the previous issue spawned fan speculation about how he got from there to being imprisoned in a crypt, as found and freed by Doctor Fate in JLA #83Burkett, Cary, "Speculations on The Spectre," Amazing World of DC Comics #16, December 1977, DC Comics, p. 40.).

===Bronze Age version===

In the 1970s, DC revived the Spectre in the superhero anthology series Adventure Comics. Beginning with the 12-page "The Wrath of ... the Spectre" in issue #431 (Feb. 1974).[tpl]cite book|last=McAvennie|first= Michael|last2=Dolan|first2=Hannah, ed.|chapter= 1970s|title = DC Comics Year By Year A Visual Chronicle|publisher=Dorling Kindersley |year=2010 |isbn= 978-0-7566-6742-9 |page=159 |quote =The Spectre re-materialized in the pages of Adventure Comics.  This time, However, he brought along an all-out wrathful disposition, delivering punishments that not only fit the crimes, but arguably exceeded them. Michael Fleisher and Jim Aparo's run lasted only ten issues, yet it was widely regarded as some of their finest work, and the character's seminal period.[/tpl] writer Michael Fleisher,Initially, in collaboration with artist Russell Carley, who provided art breakdowns for Fleisher's scripts, (see, for instance House of Mystery #218 (Oct. 1973): "The Abominable Ivy") and other Fleisher 1973–1974 stories at the Grand Comics Database and artist Jim Aparo, he produced 10 stories through issue #440 (July 1975)Michael Fleisher at the Grand Comics Database that became controversial for what was considered gruesome, albeit bloodless, violence. Comics historian Les Daniels commented that the Spectre had
In the series' letter column, some fans indicated uneasiness with this depiction. In issue #435 (Oct. 1974), Fleisher introduced a character that shared their concerns, a reporter named Earl Crawford. The series was canceled with scripts written but not yet drawn. Several years later, these remaining chapters were penciled by Aparo, lettered and inked by others, and published in the final issue of Wrath of the Spectre, a four-issue miniseries in 1988 that reprinted the ten original Fleisher-Aparo stories in its first three issues, and three newly drawn stories.Sanderson, Peter, "The Wrath Against...The Spectre", The Wrath of the Spectre #3 (July 1988), inside covers Fleisher had stated in 1980 that only two scripts were left undrawn.Catron, Michael, "The Blessed Life of Michael Fleisher: An Interview with the Man Who Stuffed Jonah Hex," The Comics Journal, June or May (first on cover, second on contents page, indicia states monthly frequency) 1980, Fantagraphics, p. 51.
The Spectre also made a guest appearance in the "Doctor Thirteen" feature in Ghosts #97–99 (Feb.-April 1981), and would go on to periodic guest appearances in such other DC titles as The Brave and the Bold, DC Comics Presents and All-Star Squadron.
A new Spectre series was planned for 1986, with Steve Gerber as writer and Gene Colan as penciler. However, Gerber missed the deadline for the first issue so that he could watch the last day of shooting on the Howard the Duck film, and DC cancelled the series in response.[tpl]cite news | author = Zimmerman, Dwight Jon | date = September 1986 | title = Steve Gerber (part 2) | work = Comics Interview | issue = 38 | pages = 6–19 | publisher = Fictioneer Books[/tpl]
Among the many changes made to DC Comics' characters during the latter half of the 1980s following the Crisis on Infinite Earths miniseries, the Spectre fought the Anti-Monitor largely depowered. Prior to this, the Spectre is revealed to be guarding an entrance to Hell in a Swamp Thing Annual story by writer Alan Moore and artists Stephen R. Bissette and John Totleben. Then, in the conclusion to Moore's "American Gothic" serial in the regular Swamp Thing comic, the Spectre is defeated by the Great Evil Beast. Next, in the Last Days of the Justice Society of America special, the Spectre fails to resolve a situation and is punished by God for his failure.
In his fourth solo series and second self-titled comic, the Spectre, under writer Doug Moench, Corrigan became the central figure in this story of an occult-oriented private detective agency. The Spectre's powers were significantly reduced here, with even the act of emerging from Corrigan's physical body being painful to both. This run ended with issue #31 (Nov. 1989). A few months after this, the Spectre has a cameo in writer Neil Gaiman's The Books of Magic, a four-issue miniseries starring many DC occult characters.

===Modern Age version===

Three years after the cancellation of the Doug Moench version, the Spectre was again given his own series, this time written by writer and former theology student John Ostrander, who chose to re-examine the Spectre in his aspects as both the embodied Avenging Wrath of the Murdered Dead and as a brutal 1930s policeman.
Ostrander placed the Spectre in complex, morally-ambiguous situations that posed certain ethical questions, one example being: What vengeance should be wrought upon a woman who killed her abusive husband in his sleep? Other notable dilemmas included, among others:
Ostrander also added several new concepts into the Spectre's history: He revealed that the Spectre was meant to exist as the embodiment of the Wrath of God, and Jim Corrigan was but the latest human spirit assigned to guide him while he existed on Earth. It was also shown that the Spectre was a fallen angel named Aztar who had participated in Lucifer's rebellion, but then repented, and that serving as the embodiment of God's anger was its penance.
Furthermore, the Spectre was not the first embodiment of God's anger, but was the replacement for the previously-minor DC character Eclipso. Ostrander chose to portray this as a distinction between the Spectre's pursuit of vengeance and Eclipso's pursuit of revenge. In a historical context, Eclipso was responsible for the biblical Flood, while the Spectre was the Angel of Death who slew the firstborn Egyptian children. Spectre and Eclipso have battled numerous times through history but neither entity can be fully destroyed.
Artist Tom Mandrake created, in about 55 of the 62 issues, a version of The Spectre, the likes of which had never been seen, at times becoming almost a horror epic in the tradition of 1950s E.C. horror comics.
The Spectre has also played a pivotal role in the Crisis on Infinite Earths and Zero Hour storylines. In both cases, in the final struggle against the main villain (the Anti-Monitor and Parallax, respectively) the Spectre was the only hero capable of standing against the villains directly, allowing the other heroes time to put a plan into action that would destroy the villains once and for all.
Although all of these versions are usually considered to be from the Earth-Two of the Pre-Crisis DC multiverse, the same continuity started during the Golden Age, an Earth-One version of The Spectre was shown to team up with Batman and Superman on a few occasions.

===Hal Jordan, Spirit of Redemption===

Eventually, Corrigan's soul finds peace. He relinquishes the Spectre and goes on to the afterlife. The role of the Spectre is later assumed by Hal Jordan, the spirit of the former Green Lantern, during the Day of Judgment storyline written by Geoff Johns, when a fallen angel attempts to gain the Spectre's power. Corrigan is asked to come back, but refuses as he has found peace. The Spectre chooses Jordan as his new host because Jordan seeks to atone for his universe-threatening actions as the villainous Parallax. His next appearance was in a four-part story arc in Legends of the DC Universe #33–36. In the series The Spectre vol. 4, written by J. M. DeMatteis, Jordan bends the Spectre's mission from one of vengeance to one of redemption, and making appearances elsewhere in the DC Universe, such as advising Superman during the "Emperor Joker" storyline or helping Wally West keep his family safe by erasing public knowledge of his true identity.
The 2001 Green Arrow story "Quiver" (written by Kevin Smith) and the final Supergirl story arc, "Many Happy Returns" (by Peter David), revealed that the Spectre (Hal Jordan) is aware of the Crisis on Infinite Earths. He is one of the few DC Universe characters with this knowledge.
After The Spectre vol. 4 was cancelled, Jordan was forced to return, temporarily, to the Spectre's mission of vengeance, following a confrontation between the new Justice Society of America and the Spirit King, who had managed to "resurrect" the ghosts of all those the Spectre had damned to Hell when his attempt to turn the Spectre's mission to redemption weakened his hold on the damned until Hal 'accepted' his original mission of vengeance. In Green Lantern: Rebirth, written by Johns, the Spectre's decision of choosing Jordan as his host was retconned into being not because of Jordan's worthiness, but as an effort to destroy the Parallax entity, which was infecting Jordan's soul. After the Spectre was able to purge the Parallax from Jordan, he departed in order to move onto the next recipient of the spirit.

===Day of Vengeance===

With no human host, the Spectre becomes unstable and goes on a vengeance-fueled rampage. Not only is he killing murderers, he also kills people for minor crimes, such as petty theft. His lack of a human host deprives him of the ability to effectively judge the sins in their appropriate context. As detailed in Day of Vengeance, Jean Loring is transformed into the new Eclipso. She goes after the Spectre and seduces him into removing all magic in the DC Universe. Eclipso explains to the Spectre that all things that follow the rules of the physical universe follow God's law. Anything that breaks those rules also breaks God's law and is therefore evil. Consequently, as magic breaks the rules of the physical universe, it is an originating source of tremendous evil (this line of logic makes sense to the unstable Spectre). The Spectre destroys magical constructs, institutions that teach magic, and magical dimensions. In one such dimension, his acts include the mass murder of over 700 battle-hardened magicians. His actions cause havoc to some of the more powerful magic-based characters:
The Spectre also destroys the magic-fueled kingdom of Atlantis (the home of Aquaman) during his rampage.
In the Day of Vengeance: Infinite Crisis Special, the Spectre kills Nabu, the last of the Great Lords of the Ninth Age and the Presence's attention is finally drawn into action. The Spectre is once again forced into a human host, stopping his mad rampage. Nabu reveals before dying that originally he and the other Lords had been working towards forming the perfect host for the Spectre, but those plans are cut short.
The text of the story is unclear on who the Great Lords were. Nabu (introduced in 1942 as the powerful entity responsible for Kent Nelson becoming Doctor Fate) was one of the Lords of Order. The Spectre had apparently killed the others, along with their counterparts the Lords of Chaos, with the exception of Mordru and Amethyst (whom he battled on Gemworld). Amethyst is among those gathered by the Phantom Stranger to aid in rebuilding the Rock of Eternity, and survives into the Tenth Age.
Alexander Luthor also revealed that he was indirectly responsible for the Spectre's actions in Day of Vengeance. Under Alexander Luthor's orders, Psycho-Pirate gave Eclipso's diamond to Jean Loring making her manipulate the Spectre so that magic could be undone and used as fuel for Luthor's Multiverse tower.

===Crispus Allen===

In Gotham Central #38, Crispus Allen is killed by a corrupt policeman coincidentally named Jim Corrigan (not the same Corrigan formerly associated with the Spectre). While Allen's body is in the morgue, the Spectre is forced against his will to enter Crispus Allen, taking Allen as his new host.Infinite Crisis #4 (March 2006)

===Blackest Night===

During the Blackest Night event, Black Hand reveals that the Spectre must be moved out of the way in order for the universe to be at peace. For that he uses the Black Lantern Pariah, who unleashes more black rings which latch themselves onto Crispus' body, turning him into a Black Lantern and sealing the Spectre inside its host. Changing into a giant version, the Black Lantern Spectre declares that it wants Hal Jordan back.Blackest Night #2 (Aug. 2009) The Phantom Stranger and Blue Devil work together in an attempt to distract the Black Lantern Spectre from seeking out Hal Jordan. The Phantom Stranger manages to temporarily free the real Spectre, only for the Black Lantern to repress it again and, discarding the Stranger and Blue Devil, leaves to carry out its intention to cast vengeance on Hal Jordan.Phantom Stranger #44 (Jan. 2010)
In Coast City, Hal Jordan encounters the Black Lantern Spectre. Using the real Spectre's power to protect itself, it is rendered immune to the combination of emotional lights that usually destroy Black Lanterns. Knowing that the Spectre is afraid of Parallax, Jordan allows himself to be possessed by the fear entity once more in order to stop him. The powers of the Spectre also become an interest to the Red Lantern Corps leader Atrocitus, as he senses the Spectre's real nature despite being influenced by the black ring: an embodiment of rage and vengeance. Atrocitus desires to harness the spirit's power for his corps and his own vengeance against the Guardians of the Universe.Green Lantern vol. 4, #50 (Jan. 2010) Parallax tears into the Black Lantern's body, freeing the real Spectre and destroying the facsimile. Atrocitus attempts to turn the Spectre into his own rage entity but fails, the Spectre telling him that "he is God's rage" and of the true rage entity, and warning him not to trifle with it. Parallax then attempts to destroy the Spectre, who uses his own fear of the entity coupled with the love Carol Ferris feels for Hal, to separate Parallax from its host. The Spectre then confronts Nekron, the master of the Black Lanterns, but discovers that Nekron is without a soul and is thus immune to his powers. The Spectre is then removed from the battlefield by Nekron to parts unknown.Green Lantern vol. 4, #51 (Feb. 2010)

===Brightest Day===

The Spectre resurfaces, again with Crispus Allen as its host, in the hills of Montana on the trail of the Butcher, the Red Lantern entity.Green Lantern vol. 4, #55 (Aug. 2010) The Spectre confronts Atrocitus once again when the two locate the Butcher, who is about to possess a man whose daughter had been killed by a death row inmate. Despite the Spectre's attempts to stop it, the Butcher succeeds, killing the criminal. The Butcher then attempts to possess Atrocitus, revealing that Atrocitus had a wife and children who were killed in the Manhunters' attack. With the Spectre's help, Atrocitus wards off the Butcher and imprisons it within his power battery. The Spectre attempts to judge the man that the Butcher possessed, but Atrocitus argues that his method of judgment is flawed. The Spectre calls off his judgment and is unable to judge Atrocitus, discovering that his mission is a "holy" one, although he warns Atrocitus that this will not last forever.Green Lantern vol. 4, #61 (Feb. 2011)

===The New 52===

Jim Corrigan is a Gotham City Police Detective whose fiancee is kidnapped, He is guided by the Phantom Stranger on the instructions of The Voice. He leads Jim Corrigan to the abandoned warehouse where she is being kept, but this turns out to be a trap. Jim Corrigan and his girlfriend are killed by the kidnappers and he is then transformed into The Spectre who accuses the Phantom Stranger of betraying him.  As the Spectre is about to attack the Phantom Stranger, The Voice intervenes and sends the Spectre off to inflict his wrath on those who are more deserving of the Spectre's wrath.Phantom Stranger (vol. 4) #0 (November 2012)
It is revealed "The Voice" chose him like he did the Stranger to be "the mirror of his desire for justice" (though Corrigan believes in vengeance) and imbued him with divine powers. Jim returns to work as a police detective in Gotham City but his rage causes him to practice vengeance rather than justice in his alter ego as the Spectre.  The Phantom Stranger attacks Corrigan's police precinct, convinced that Corrigan was the one who kidnapped his family out of revenge.
After the two exchange blows physically and verbally, "The Voice" himself intervenes in the form of a Scottish Terrier (his sense of humor) and informs the Stranger of his mistake, setting him on the right path. "The Voice" also sets Corrigan straight on his duty, making him realize he is meant to exact justice, not wrath.

==Powers and abilities==

The Spectre has all the abilities a god would have including, but not limited to, manipulation of time and space, control over all matter, invulnerability, and limitless strength.  For example, if he wished to wipe someone from existence, such as killing a bank robber with a tornado of dollar bills, he can so will it.  Virtually anything he wishes to do to those he judges is possible.  He has no discernible weakness other than needing a human host to be able to be a fair judge, although he has been tricked before by Psycho Pirate and Eclipso.  The Spectre is immune to most damage, although he can be hurt by powerful magic.  Though he is widely considered to be the most powerful superhero in terms of abilities, The Spectre does not harm the innocent (unless being tricked into doing so).  Usually immune to control effects, in the Blackest Night story arc Atrocitus attempted to enslave him with a red ring but The Spectre cast it off, stating that his fury comes from a higher power and cannot be controlled by a mortal (His corruption by the Black Lantern Corps was only possible as the black rings were controlling Crispus Allen, the Spectre's current host, rather than the Spectre himself).

==Weaknesses==

==Other versions==

===Kingdom Come===

In the four-issue Elseworlds miniseries Kingdom Come, The Spectre is just Jim Corrigan a once human soul imbued with angelic powers by God. In a near apocalyptic world the Spectre takes a preacher named Norman McCay through the events of a possible future of the DC Universe. Here, Spectre is to determine who is responsible for an impending apocalyptic event. However, here his "faculties are not what they once were", and he is said to need an outside perspective to properly judge the events they witness.
A conversation between McCay and Deadman reveals that, with the passing of time, Corrigan has become further and further removed from humanity now only wearing his cloak to cover an otherwise nude body (Similar to Doctor Manhattan). He is reminded by McCay of his humanity to see things through the perspective as the man he once was and decides nobody is to blame. Corrigan becomes a member of McCay's congregation and they become friends.
In the epilogue set in a superhero-themed restaurant, expresses irritation that the meal named after him, "Spectre platter", is a mix of spinach and cottage cheese.

===Miscellaneous===

==Collected editions==

===Jim Corrigan===

===Crispus Allen===

==In other media==

===Television===

===Film===

===Video games===

==Reception and awards==

The character won the 1961 Alley Award as the Hero/Heroine Most Worthy of Revival and the 1964 Alley Award for Strip Most Desired for Revival.
IGN ranked the Spectre as the 70th greatest superhero of all time.[tpl]cite web | url=http://www.ign.com/top/comic-book-heroes/70 | title=IGN's Top 100 Comic Book Heroes | publisher=IGN | accessdate=May 11, 2011[/tpl]

==References==

==External links==


