[[Newport-on-Tay]]

CATEGORIES: Burghs, Towns in Fife, Post towns in the DD postcode area

Newport-on-Tay is a small town in the north-east of Fife in Scotland, acting as a commuter suburb for Dundee. The Fife Coastal Path passes through Newport.

==History==

The town was established near the endpoint of one part of a ferry route that itself was started in the 12th century.
In 1715 a new pier and inn were built, the work being funded by the Guilds of Dundee which resulted in the settlement being called "New Dundee". Thomas Telford built a new harbour in the 1820s, and the town expanded and grew into a commuter suburb of Dundee as the prosperous jute manufacturers, industrialists and the middle and upper working class of Dundee established fashionable residences in Newport.
Newport-on-Tay formerly had two railway stations - the East and West stations. Both stations (and the Tayport-Dundee branch line) closed in 1969, having lost much of their business following the opening of the Tay Road Bridge in 1966.  In fact, trains had ceased to run beyond Newport-on-Tay East station to Tayport on 22 May 1966 so that the railway line could be breached to build the bridge's southern approach road. The Dundee - Newport ferry also closed promptly later in 1966 on the opening of the Tay Road Bridge.  However, the ferry terminal buildings and slipways still survive at the foot of Boat Hill as a boat repair yard.

==Archaeology==

An excavation carried out by Headland Archaeology Stronach, S., Sheridan, A. and D. Henderson (2006), Tayside and Fife Archaeological Journal, 12, pp. 1-13. in the farm of North Straiton near Newport-on-Tay uncovered part of a Bronze Age cremation cemetery and a line of postholes. Five human cremations were found in a group of scattered disposal pits.  Around 25m away was a line of postholes, one of which was also associated with cremated human bone. Radiocarbon dates from the features indicated that they had been created in the Bronze Age, from around 1700 to 2000 BC.
The line of posts was substantial and may have been associated with the cremations rather than a building or fence. It is possible that the posts may have been memorials or markers close to the pyre used to burn the dead. Part of a quern stone and some burnt animal bone suggested that the cremation ceremony also involved preparing food. A collection of pottery was found with the cremations. This included a complete accessory vessel and fragments from a larger decorated pot that covered it.

==Present==

Newport currently has a population of about eight thousand, mostly residing in stone houses built before World War II. The town centre comprises two main streets where may be found a small variety of shops and two public houses.  The town has one primary school, Newport Primary, with older pupils attending secondary school in St Andrews, Cupar, or at the nearest independent school, the High School of Dundee.
Public bus routes are the 77 to Dundee, 96 to St Andrews, 42 to Cupar, the X54 to Edinburgh via Glenrothes and Dunfermline and the X42 to Kirkcaldy via Ladybank Newport is twinned with Zolotarevo, Ukraine 
There are five churches:

==References==

==External links==


