[[Dragør Municipality]]

CATEGORIES: Municipalities in Capital Region of Denmark, Municipalities of Denmark, Metropolitan Copenhagen, Dragør Municipality

Dragør Kommune is a municipality (Danish, kommune) in Region Hovedstaden on the southern coast of the island of Amager just east of Zealand (Sjælland) in eastern Denmark.  The municipality covers an area of 18.14 km², and has a total population of 13,917 (2013).  Its mayor is Allan Holst, a member of the Social Democrats (Denmark).

==1970 Danish Municipal Reform==

Not until four years after the 1970 Danish Municipal Reform on 1 April 1974 two new municipalities were formed in Copenhagen County, namely Dragør Municipality, formed by the merger of Dragør (an independent parish from 1 April 1954) and Store Magleby parishes  and Høje-Taastrup Municipality, which from that date also included Sengeløse parish (which - as an already existing parish - was also made an independent municipality from 1 April 1970 until 31 March 1974; but it was considered too small to remain as an independent municipality). The inhabitants would have preferred to remain as independent municipalities. Store Magleby, which was larger in area than Dragør, had a large number of subdivisions (Danish (singular): parcel;udstykning) with owner-occupied homes built on the boundary with Dragør before the merger.
Because the voters of Store Magleby and Sengeløse were almost exclusively owner-occupiers, who voted center-rightwing, whereas Høje-Taastrup Municipality and Dragør Municipality to a large extent consisted of tenants who rented their apartments and who voted center-leftwing, there were heated debates and reluctance among the voters of Store Magleby and Sengeløse about joining the new municipalities. This was because the center-rightwing voters would be in a minority at elections for their local councils.

==Parishes==

Dragør parish is surrounded by Store Magleby parish to the north, south, and west and the strait of Øresund to the east, and Dragør parish thus does not border the neighboring Tårnby municipality. Dragør parish has an area of only 156 hectares (1.56 square km;0.6 sq mi), 8.6% of Dragør municipality's area, as opposed to Store Magleby parish's 1602 hectares, the latter accounting for more than 88% of Dragør municipality's area. A part of Copenhagen airport accounts for 56 hectares, 3% of Dragør municipality, which is outside of parish jurisdiction and taxation. With 4144 people recorded as living there on 1 January 2013, Dragør parish has a population density of 2656 persons per square km (6880/sq mi), Store Magleby parish with 9737 people has a density of 607.8 persons per square km (1574.2/sq mi). Thirty-six persons were recorded as not having a fixed address.

==Overview==

The main town is Dragør. The seat of the town hall is Store Magleby, which easily can house such a large building.
Its only neighboring municipality is Tårnby to the north.  To the east and south is the Øresund, the strait that separates Zealand and Amager from Sweden. To the southwest is Køge Bay (Køge Bugt).
The geography of Dragør municipality was not affected as the result of nationwide Kommunalreformen ("The Municipality Reform" of 2007) on January 1, 2007.

==Economy==

Prior to its dissolution, Maersk Air had its headquarters in Dragør in the municipality."Maersk Air Headquarters." Maersk Air. 2 April 2003. Retrieved on 9 January 2010. When it existed, Sterling Airlines had its head office at Copenhagen Airport South in Dragør."Contact." Sterling Airlines. Retrieved on 13 February 2011. "Head office Sterling Airlines A/S Copenhagen Airport South 2791 Dragoer Denmark."

==References==

==External links==


