[[Eudora Welty]]

CATEGORIES: 20th-century American novelists, American women novelists, American photographers, American short story writers, American women writers, American women photographers, Works Progress Administration workers, People of the New Deal arts projects, Guggenheim Fellows, National Humanities Medal recipients, National Book Award winners, Pulitzer Prize for Fiction winners, 1909 births, 2001 deaths, Deaths from pneumonia, Infectious disease deaths in Mississippi, People from Jackson, Mississippi, Alumni of Peterhouse, Cambridge, Mississippi University for Women alumni, Columbia Business School alumni, University of Wisconsin–Madison alumni, Writers from Mississippi, Women short story writers

Eudora Alice Welty (April 13, 1909 – July 23, 2001) was an American author of short stories and novels about the American South. Her novel The Optimist's Daughter won the Pulitzer Prize in 1973. Welty was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom, among numerous awards including the Order of the South.  She was the first living author to have her works published by the Library of America.  Her house in Jackson, Mississippi has been designated as a National Historic Landmark and is open to the public as a house museum.

==Biography==

Eudora Welty was born in Jackson, Mississippi on April 13, 1909, the  daughter of Christian Webb Welty (1879–1931) and Mary Chestina (Andrews) Welty (1883–1966). She grew up with younger brothers Edward Jefferson and Walter Andrews."Eudora Welty Biography". PBS.org. Retrieved November 28, 2011. Eudora’s mother was a schoolteacher. Eudora soon developed a love of reading, reinforced by her mother who believed that "any room in our house, at any time in the day, was there to read in, or to be read to".Welty, p. 841 Her father, who worked as an insurance executive, was intrigued by gadgets and machines and inspired in Eudora a love of all things mechanical. She later would use technology for symbolism in her stories and would also become an avid photographer, like her father.Johnston, Carol Ann. "Mississippi Writer's Page: Eudora Welty". MWP: University of Mississippi. Retrieved November 28, 2011.
Near the time of her high school graduation, Eudora moved with her family to a house built for them at 1119 Pinehurst Street, which would remain her permanent address until her death. Wyatt C. Hedrick designed the Welty's Tudor Revival style home, which is now known as the Eudora Welty House."House". Eudora Welty Foundation. Retrieved November 28, 2011.
From 1925 to 1927, Welty studied at the Mississippi State College for Women, then transferred to the University of Wisconsin to complete her studies in English Literature. She studied advertising at Columbia University at the suggestion of her father. Because she graduated at the height of the Great Depression, she struggled to find work in New York. Soon after she returned to Jackson in 1931, her father died of leukemia. She took a job at a local radio station and wrote about Jackson society for the Tennessee newspaper Commercial Appeal.Makowsky, pp. 341–342 In 1935, she began work for the Works Progress Administration. As a publicity agent, she collected stories, conducted interviews, and took photographs of daily life in Mississippi. It was here that she observed the Southern life and human relationships that she would later use in her short stories.Marrs, p. 52 During this time she also held meetings in her house with fellow writers and friends, a group she called the Night-Blooming Cereus Club. Three years later, she left her job to become a full-time writer.
In 1936, she published "The Death of a Traveling Salesman" in the literary magazine Manuscript, and then proceeded to publish stories in several other notable publications, including The New Yorker.Marrs, p. 50 She solidified her place as an influential Southern writer when she penned her first book of short stories, A Curtain of Green. Her new-found success won her a seat on the staff of The New York Times book review as well as a Guggenheim Fellowship grant that allowed her to travel to France, England, Ireland, and Germany."House". Eudora Welty Foundation. Retrieved November 28, 2011. While abroad, she spent some time as a resident lecturer at Oxford and Cambridge. In 1960, she returned home to Jackson once again to care for her elderly mother and two brothers.Makowsky, p. 342
She continued to write, and won a Pulitzer Prize for Fiction in 1973 for her novel, The Optimist's Daughter. She also published a collection of photographs depicting the Great Depression titled "One Time, One Place" in 1971. She then lectured at Harvard University and eventually turned the speeches into a three-part book entitled One Writer's Beginnings. She continued to live in her family house in Jackson until her death from natural causes on July 23, 2001.Makowsky, p. 341  She is buried in Greenwood Cemetery in Jackson.  On her headstone is a quote from The Optimist's Daughter: "For her life, any life, she had to believe, was nothing but the continuity of its love." http://www.findagrave.com/cgi-bin/fg.cgi?GRid=23294&page=gr

==Photography==

While Welty worked as a publicity agent for the Works Progress Administration, she took photographs of people from all economic and social classes in her spare time. From the early 1930s, her photographs show Mississippi's rural poor and the effects of the Great Depression.T.A. Frail, "Eudora Welty as Photographer", Smithsonian magazine, April 2009. Retrieved 20 May 2013. Collections of her photographs were published as One Time, One Place (1971) and Photographs (1989). Her photography was the basis for several of her short stories, including "Why I Live at the PO", which was inspired by a woman she photographed ironing in the back of a small post office. Although focused on her writing, Welty continued to take photographs until the 1950s.Rosenberg, Karen. (January 14, 2009.) "Eudora Welty's work as a young writer: Taking pictures". The New York Times. Retrieved May 26, 2009.

==Writing career and major works==

Welty's first short story, "Death of a Traveling Salesman", was published in 1936. Her work attracted the attention of author Katherine Anne Porter, who became a mentor to Welty and wrote the foreword to Welty's first short story collection, A Curtain of Green, in 1941. The book established Welty as one of American literature's leading lights and featured the stories "Why I Live at the P.O.", "Petrified Man", and the frequently anthologized A Worn Path. Excited by the printing of Welty's works in publications such as The Atlantic Monthly, the Junior League of Jackson, of which Welty was a member, requested permission from the publishers to reprint some of her works.  She eventually published over forty short stories, five novels, three works of nonfiction, and one children's book.
The short story "Why I Live at the P.O." was published with two others in 1941 by The Atlantic Monthly.Marrs, p. 70 It was republished later that year in Welty's first collection of short stories, A Curtain of Green. The story is about Sister, and how she becomes estranged from her family and ends up living at the post office where she works. Seen by critics as quality Southern literature, the story comically captures family relationships. Like most of her short stories, Welty masterfully captures Southern idiom and places importance on location and customs.Hauser, Marianne. (November 16, 1941.) "A Curtain of Green". The New York Times. Retrieved November 28, 2011. "A Worn Path" was also published in The Atlantic Monthly and A Curtain of Green.  It is seen as one of Welty's finest short stories, winning the second place O. Henry Award in 1941.Makowsky, p. 345
Welty's debut novel, The Robber Bridegroom (1942), deviated from her previous psychologically-inclined works, presenting static, fairy-tale characters. Some critics suggest that she worried about "encroaching on the turf of the male literary giant to the north of her in Oxford, Mississippi-William Faulkner",Makowsky, p. 347 and therefore wrote in a fairy-tale style instead of a historical one. Most critics and readers saw it as a modern Southern fairy-tale and noted that it employs themes and characters reminiscent of the Grimm Brothers' works.Hauser, Marianne. (November 1, 1942.) "Miss Welty's Fairy Tale". The New York Times. Retrieved November 28, 2011.
Immediately after the murder of Medgar Evers in 1963, Welty wrote Where Is the Voice Coming From?. As Welty later said, she wondered, "Whoever the murderer is, I know him: not his identity, but his coming about, in this time and place. That is, I ought to have learned by now, from here, what such a man, intent on such a deed, had going on in his mind. I wrote his story—my fiction—in the first person: about that character's point of view".Welty, p. xi Welty's story was published in The New Yorker soon after de la Beckwith's arrest.
Winner of the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction, The Optimist's Daughter (1972) is believed by some to be Welty's best novel. It was written at a much later date than the bulk of her work. As poet Howard Moss wrote in The New York Times, the book is "a miracle of compression, the kind of book, small in scope but profound in its implications, that rewards a lifetime of work". The plot focuses on family struggles when the daughter and the second wife of a judge confront each other in the limited confines of a hospital room while the judge undergoes eye surgery.
Welty gave a series of addresses at Harvard University, revised and published as One Writer's Beginnings (Harvard, 1983). It was the first book published by Harvard University Press to be a New York Times Best Seller (at least 32 weeks on the list), and runner up for the 1984 National Book Award for Nonfiction.[ref]
"Welty Book is First Harvard U. Best Seller", Edwin McDowell, The New York Times, March 13, 1984, page C16.[/ref][ref]
"Three Writers Win Book Awards", The New York Times, November 16, 1984, page C32.[/ref]
In 1992, she was awarded the Rea Award for the Short Story for her lifetime contributions to the American short story. Welty was a charter member of the Fellowship of Southern Writers, founded in 1987. She also taught creative writing at colleges and in workshops. She lived near Jackson's Belhaven College and was a common sight among the people of her hometown.

==Literary criticism featuring Welty's fiction==

Eudora Welty was a prolific writer who created stories in multiple genres. Throughout her writing are the recurring themes of the paradox of human relationships, the importance of place (a recurring theme in most Southern writing), and the importance of mythological influences that help shape the theme.[tpl]Citation needed|date=April 2013[/tpl]
Welty's interest in the conflicting relationships between individuals and their communities, according to the writer herself, stems out of her natural abilities as an observer.Welty, p. 862 Perhaps the best examples can be found within the short stories in A Curtain of Green. "Why I Live at the P.O." comically illustrates the conflict between Sister and her immediate community, her family. This particular story uses lack of proper communication to showcase the underlying theme of the paradox of human connection. Another case in point is Miss Eckhart of The Golden Apples, who is considered an outsider in her town. Welty shows that this piano teacher’s independent lifestyle allows her to follow her passions, but also highlights Miss Eckhart's longing to start a family and to be seen by the community as someone who belongs in Morgana. As is apparent, her stories are often characterized by the struggle to retain identity while keeping community relationships.
Place is vitally important in arguably every story Welty has ever written. Welty believed that place is what makes fiction seem real, because with place comes customs, feelings, and associations. Place answers the questions, "What happened? Who's here? Who's coming?" Place is a prompt to memory; thus the human mind is what makes place significant. This is the job of the storyteller. “A Worn Path” is one short story that proves how place shapes how a story is perceived. Within the tale, the main character, Phoenix, must fight to overcome the barriers within the vividly described Southern landscape as she makes her trek to the nearest town. "The Wide Net" is another of Welty’s short stories that uses place to define mood and plot. The river in the story is viewed differently by each character. Some see it as a food source, others see it as deadly, and some see it as a sign that "the outside world is full of endurance".Welty, p. 220
Welty is noted for using mythology to connect her specific characters and locations to universal truths and themes. Examples can be found within the short story "A Worn Path", the novel Delta Wedding, and the collection of short stories The Golden Apples. In "A Worn Path", the character Phoenix has much in common with the mythical bird. Phoenixes are said to be red and gold and are known for their endurance and dignity. Phoenix, the old Black woman, is described as being clad in a red handkerchief with undertones of gold and is undeniably noble and enduring in her difficult quest for the medicine her grandson needs to live. In "Death of a Traveling Salesman", the husband is comparable to Prometheus. He comes home after bringing fire to his boss and is full of male libido and physical strength. Another common mythological reference is that of Medusa, who is used in "The Petrified Man" and other stories to represent powerful or vulgar women. Locations can also allude to mythology, as Welty proves in her novel Delta Wedding. As Professor Veronica Makowsky from the University of Connecticut writes, the setting of the Mississippi Delta has "suggestions of the goddess of love, Aphrodite or Venus-shells like that upon which Venus rose from the sea and female genitalia, as in the mound of Venus and Delta of Venus".Makowsky, p. 349 The title The Golden Apples is also a mythological reference referring to the difference between people who seek silver apples and those who seek golden apples. It is originally from W.B. Yeats' "The Song of the Wandering Aengus", and for Welty's purposes, serves to illuminate the two types of attitudes people, specifically her characters, can take about life.Makowsky, p. 350

==Honors==

"National Book Awards – 1983". National Book Foundation. Retrieved 2012-01-26.  (With essay by Robin Black from the Awards 60-year anniversary blog.)[/ref][ref]
Welty's Collected Works won the 1983 award for paperback Fiction.  From 1980 to 1983 in National Book Awards history there were dual hardcover and paperback awards in most categories. Most of the paperback award-winners were reprints, including this one.[/ref]
"Distinguished Contribution to American Letters". National Book Foundation. Retrieved 2012-03-11.  (With acceptance speech by Welty.)[/ref]Marrs, p. 547

==Short story collections==

==Novels==

==Autobiographical essays==

==Commemoration==

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==


