Loy's silent film roles were mainly those of vamps or femme fatales, and she frequently portrayed characters of Asian or Eurasian background in films such as ''[[Across the Pacific (1926 film)|
Across the Pacific]], A Girl in Every Port, The Crimson City, The Black Watch, and The Desert Song, which she later recalled "...kind of solidified my exotic non-American image."Kotsilibas-Davis and Loy 1987, p. 66. It took years for her to overcome this stereotype, and as late as 1932 she was cast as a villainous Eurasian half-breed in Thirteen Women. She also played a sadistic Chinese princess in The Mask of Fu Manchu, opposite Boris Karloff. Prior to that, she appeared in small roles in The Jazz Singer and a number of early lavish Technicolor musicals, including The Show of Shows, The Bride of the Regiment and Under a Texas Moon''. As a result, she became associated with musical roles, and when they began to lose favor with the public, her career went into a slump.
In 1934, Loy appeared in Manhattan Melodrama with Clark Gable and William Powell. When gangster John Dillinger was shot to death after leaving a screening of the film at the Biograph Theater in Chicago, the film received widespread publicity, with some newspapers reporting that Loy had been Dillinger's favorite actress.Kotsilibas-Davis and Loy 1987, p. 97.

===Rise to stardom===

After appearing with Ramón Novarro in The Barbarian, Loy was cast as Nora Charles in the 1934 film The Thin Man. Director W. S. Van Dyke chose Loy after he detected a wit and sense of humor that her previous films had not revealed. At a Hollywood party, he pushed her into a swimming pool to test her reaction, and felt that her aplomb in handling the situation was exactly what he envisioned for Nora.Kotsilibas-Davis and Loy 1987, p. 88. Louis B. Mayer at first refused to allow Loy to play the part because he felt she was a dramatic actress, but Van Dyke insisted. Mayer finally relented on the condition that filming be completed within three weeks, as Loy was committed to start filming Stamboul Quest.Kotsilibas-Davis and Loy 1987, pp. 88–89. The Thin Man became one of the year's biggest hits, and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Film. Loy received excellent reviews and was acclaimed for her comedic skills. She and her costar William Powell proved to be a popular screen couple and appeared in 14 films together, one of the most prolific pairings in Hollywood history. Loy later referred to The Thin Man as the film "that finally made me... after more than 80 films".Kotsilibas-Davis and Loy 1987, pp. 88–91.thumb|100px|left|After the Thin Man
Her successes in Manhattan Melodrama and The Thin Man marked a turning point in her career and she was cast in more important pictures. Such films as Wife vs. Secretary (1936) with Clark Gable and Jean Harlow and Petticoat Fever (1936) with Robert Montgomery gave her opportunity to develop comedic skills. She made four films in close succession with William Powell: Libeled Lady (1936), which also starred Jean Harlow and Spencer Tracy, The Great Ziegfeld (1936), in which she played Billie Burke opposite Powell's Florenz Ziegfeld, the second "Thin Man" film, After the Thin Man with Powell and James Stewart, and the romantic comedy Double Wedding (1937). She also made three more films with Clark Gable. Parnell was a historical drama and one of the most poorly received film of either Loy's or Gable's careers, but their other pairings in Test Pilot and Too Hot to Handle (both 1938) were successes.
During this period, Loy was one of Hollywood's busiest and highest paid actresses, and in 1937 and 1938 she was listed in the annual "Quigley Poll of the Top Ten Money Making Stars", which was compiled from the votes of movie exhibitors throughout the U.S. for the stars that had generated the most revenue in their theaters over the previous year."The 2007 Motion Picture Almanac, Top Ten Money Making Stars." Quigley Publishing Company. Retrieved: July 11, 2007.
By this time Loy was highly regarded for her performances in romantic comedies and she was anxious to demonstrate her dramatic ability, and was cast in the lead female role in The Rains Came (1939) opposite Tyrone Power. She filmed Third Finger, Left Hand (1940) with Melvyn Douglas and appeared in I Love You Again (1940), Love Crazy (1941) and Shadow of the Thin Man (1941), all with William Powell.
With the outbreak of World War II, Loy all but abandoned her acting career to focus on the war effort and work closely with the Red Cross. She was so fiercely outspoken against Adolf Hitler that her name appeared on his blacklist. She helped run a Naval Auxiliary Canteen and toured frequently to raise funds.
She returned to films with The Thin Man Goes Home (1945). In 1946 she played the wife of returning serviceman Fredric March in The Best Years of Our Lives (1946). In later years, she considered this her proudest acting achievement. Throughout her career, she championed the rights of black actors and characters to be depicted with dignity on film.
Loy was paired with Cary Grant in David O. Selznick's comedy film The Bachelor and the Bobby-Soxer (1947). The film co-starred a teenage Shirley Temple. Following its success she appeared again with Grant in Mr. Blandings Builds His Dream House (1948), and with Clifton Webb in Cheaper by the Dozen (1950).

===Later career===

After 1950, Loy's film career continued sporadically.  In 1952 she starred in the Cheaper by the Dozen sequel, Belles on Their Toes. She played opposite Montgomery Clift and Robert Ryan in Lonelyhearts (1958), Dore Schary's adaptation of Nathanael West's classic 1933 novel Miss Lonelyhearts. In 1960, she appeared in Midnight Lace and From the Terrace, but was not in another film until 1969 in The April Fools. In 1965 Loy won the Sarah Siddons Award for her work in Chicago theatre.
In 1974 she was a supporting actress in Airport 1975.  Loy played Mrs. Devane, a heavy drinking woman, imbibing in Jim Beam & Olympia Beer mixed together.  She played a foil to Sid Caesar. Alongside the film starred fellow silent film star Gloria Swanson.  
In 1978 she appeared in the film The End as the mother of the main character played by Burt Reynolds. Her last motion picture performance was 1980 in Sidney Lumet's Just Tell Me What You Want. She also returned to the stage, making her Broadway debut in a short-lived 1973 revival of Clare Boothe Luce's The Women.
In 1981 she appeared in the television drama Summer Solstice Erickson, Hal. "Summer Solstice (1981)." The New York Times, 2010. Retrieved: December 20, 2011. which was Henry Fonda's last performance. Her last acting role was a guest spot on the sitcom Love, Sidney, in 1982.

==Personal life==

Loy was married and divorced four times:
Loy had no children of her own, though she was very close to her first husband Arthur Hornblow's children. After leaving Sargeant, she moved to 23 East 74th Street in Manhattan's Upper East Side.Leider 2011, p. 288.
There were rumors that Myrna Loy had affairs with:
Even before Loy became a staunch Democrat, one of her biggest fans was Franklin D. Roosevelt, who invited her to the White House early in his administration, Brands 2008, p. 318. and she soon became a personal friend of Eleanor Roosevelt.Shipman, David. "Obituary: Myrna Loy." The Independent, December 16, 1993.
Regarding religion, Loy stated in a 1970 interview that she was a Methodist.Interview, Day at Night, 1970

==Later years==

In later life, she assumed an influential role as Co-Chairman of the Advisory Council of the National Committee Against Discrimination in Housing. In 1948 she became a member of the U.S. National Commission for UNESCO, the first Hollywood celebrity to do so."Myrna Loy." Hollywood.com. Retrieved: December 24, 2010. 
Loy had two mastectomies in 1975 and 1979 for breast cancer."Myrna Loy." Movietome.com. Retrieved: December 24, 2010.Her autobiography, Myrna Loy: Being and Becoming, was published in 1987. The following year, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Kennedy Center in 1988.
Although Loy was never nominated for an Academy Award for any single performance, after an extensive letter writing campaign and years of lobbying by screenwriter and then-Writers Guild of America, West board member Michael Russnow, who enlisted the support of Loy's former screen colleagues and friends such as Roddy McDowall, Sidney Sheldon, Harold Russell and many others, she received a 1991 Academy Honorary Award "for her career achievement". She accepted via camera from her New York home, simply stating, "You've made me very happy. Thank you very much." It was her last public appearance in any medium.

==Death==

Myrna Loy died on December 14, 1993, in New York City at age 88. She was cremated in New York. The ashes were interred at Forestvale Cemetery in Helena, Montana."About Myrna Loy." Myrna Loy Center. Retrieved: October 3, 2009 
For her contribution to the film industry, Myrna Loy has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6685 Hollywood Boulevard.

==Legacy==

A building at Sony Pictures Studios, formerly MGM Studios, in Culver City is named in her honor."Sony Pictures Studios: Studio Lot Map." sonypicturesstudios.com. Retrieved: December 24, 2010. A cast of her handprint and her signature are in the sidewalk in front of Theater 80, on St. Mark's Place in New York City."Village Sidewalk." forgotten-ny.com.Retrieved: December 24, 2010.
In 1991, the Myrna Loy Center for the Performing and Media Arts opened in downtown Helena, Montana, the capital of Montana, not far from Loy's hometown. Located in the historic Lewis and Clark County Jail, it sponsors live performances and alternative films for under-served audiences.

==Filmography==

==References==

===Notes===

===Bibliography===

==External links==


