[[Rated R (Queens of the Stone Age album)]]

CATEGORIES: Queens of the Stone Age albums, 2000 albums, Albums produced by Chris Goss, Albums produced by Josh Homme, Interscope Records albums, Universal Deluxe Editions, English-language albums

Rated R (also called R or Rated X on vinyl) is the second studio album by American rock band Queens of the Stone Age, released on June 6, 2000 on Interscope Records. Rated R was a critical and commercial success and became the band's breakthrough album. It peaked at number 16 on the Top Heatseekers and reached high positions on charts worldwide. The album has been certified gold in the United Kingdom. Three singles were released from it: "The Lost Art of Keeping a Secret", "Feel Good Hit of the Summer" and "Monsters in the Parasol", with the first helping Queens of the Stone Age reach mainstream popularity. 
Rated R is the band's first album to feature bass guitarist Nick Oliveri and vocalist Mark Lanegan.

==Overview and background==

The band began work on Rated R after touring in support of its previous album, Queens of the Stone Age, released in 1998. As a whole, the album contains numerous references to drugs and alcohol. This is particularly prominent on the opening track, "Feel Good Hit of the Summer", which mostly consists of the repeated line "Nicotine, valium, vicodin, marijuana, ecstasy and alcohol" followed by "c-c-c-c-c-cocaine". The MPAA's "R-rated" symbol features on the album's cover, along with the text "RESTRICTED TO EVERYONE, EVERYWHERE, ALL THE TIME". Keeping with this theme, the album's liner notes contain warning messages for each song, in the style of the warning messages given to parents on video and DVD boxes: "Auto Pilot", for example, contains "Alcohol and Sleep Deprivation".Liner notes Also, the album cover is based on MPAA's rating bumper that was shown in the 70's and 80's. Ironically, the title and subtext was meant as a jab at record label Interscope, whose persistence that some of the albums themes would be too controversial and warrant a PMRC warning sticker actually allowed the band to sell the album without one by circumventing all censorship policies.
"Monsters in the Parasol" originally appeared on a Desert Sessions album, Volume 4: Hard Walls and Little Trips, under the slightly different title of "Monster in the Parasol". "Tension Head" is a re-recording of the song "13th Floor", which originally appeared on Mondo Generator's debut album Cocaine Rodeo.
The drum, bass, guitars and vocals to the song "Quick and to the Pointless" were recorded simultaneously in just one take. Nick Oliveri's vocal performance was originally intended to be a scratch vocal, but the band liked it so much that this original recording remained on the finished song. There are also 2 verses in Dutch.josh homme talking about quick and to the pointless - YouTube
Josh Homme has stated that his favorite song from the album is "I Think I Lost My Headache", which he describes as being about "Paranoia... when you think something strange is going on, and everyone around you is so adamant about telling you it's fine... but then you start thinking 'Wouldn't that be exactly what you'd say if you didn't want me to know, and there is something going on?' And so it's kind of about that paranoid mentality which maybe I have sometimes."josh homme talking about i think i lost my headache - YouTube The song switches between a standard 4/4 time signature and the unconventional 15/8.
Rated R also marked the first appearance of guest vocalist Mark Lanegan of Screaming Trees, who has appeared on every Queens album since. Lanegan sang lead vocals on "In the Fade" and provided backing vocals for "Auto Pilot", "Leg of Lamb" and "I Think I Lost My Headache".

==Release and reception==

Rated R was the band's breakout album in the UK. Upon its release in June 2000, the album peaked at number 16 on the Top Heatseekers album chart. It granted Queens of the Stone Age recognition in the United Kingdom and has been certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry.

Steve Huey from Allmusic said "R is mellower, trippier, and more arranged than its predecessor, making its point through warm fuzz-guitar tones, ethereal harmonies, vibraphones, horns, and even the odd steel drum. That might alienate listeners who have come to expect a crunchier guitar attack, but even though it's not really aggro, R is still far heavier than the garage punk and grunge that inform much of the record. It's still got the vaunted Arizona-desert vibes of Kyuss, but it evokes a more relaxed, spacious, twilight feel, as opposed to a high-noon meltdown. Mark Lanegan and Barrett Martin of the Screaming Trees both appear on multiple tracks, and their band's psychedelic grunge - in its warmer, less noisy moments - is actually not a bad point of comparison."
Rated R included the hit single "The Lost Art of Keeping a Secret", which was released in the summer of 2000 and became arguably the band's most recognizable and popular song at its time of release. Not only did its music video receive mild airplay on music television, the song was featured in the Entourage episode "I Love You Too" (from Season 2).  It was also the only single from the album to get a chart position, reaching number 21 on the Mainstream Rock charts, number 36 on the Modern Rock charts and number 31 on the UK Singles Chart.
Rhapsody called it the best rock album of the decade on its "Rock’s Best Albums of the Decade" list."Rock’s Best Albums of the Decade" Retrieved 12 January 2010.
Rolling Stone named it 82nd best album of the decade.

==Track listing==

All tracks by Joshua Homme and Nick Oliveri, except where noted. Lead vocals by Homme, except where noted.

===Bonus tracks===

===Special edition===

The UK only special edition of the album included a bonus disc, titled Rated U, which was also separately issued as the "Feel Good Hit of the Summer" single. Along with "Feel Good Hit of the Summer" and its video, it featured three newly recorded songs.

===2010 re-issue===

In an interview with NME, Josh Homme revealed plans of a re-issue of Rated R which would feature B-side recordings and live performance from Reading Festival.Queens Of The Stone Age to reissue 'Rated R' album | News | NME.COM It was released on August 3, 2010.Amazon.com: Rated R - Deluxe Edition: Queens of the Stone Age: Music
Added to the original album is a second disc with six B-sides and the band's summer 2000 Reading Festival concert - featuring nine previously unreleased songs, including live versions of Rated R's "Feel Good Hit of the Summer", "The Lost Art of Keeping a Secret", "Better Living Through Chemistry" and "Quick and to the Pointless".
The B-sides are "Ode To Clarissa", "You're So Vague", covers of Romeo Void's "Never Say Never" and the Kinks' "Who'll Be The Next in Line", a live version of the album's "Monsters in the Parasol", a song originally from Josh Homme's side project, The Desert Sessions, and a re-recording of "Born To Hula", an early song from Kyuss/Queens of the Stone Age EP. The other Reading Festival tracks are concert takes on "Ode To Clarissa", three songs from the band’s debut album ("Regular John", "Avon" and "You Can't Quit Me, Baby"), and "You Think I Ain't Worth a Dollar, But I Feel Like a Millionaire", another track originally by The Desert Sessions, which was also present on their third album, Songs for the Deaf.

==Personnel==

==Charts==

===Album===

===Singles===

===Certifications===

==References==


