[[William F. Marquat]]

CATEGORIES: 1894 births, 1968 deaths, United States Army generals, American expatriates in the Philippines, Recipients of the Distinguished Service Cross (United States), Recipients of the Distinguished Service Medal (United States), Recipients of the Silver Star

William Frederic Marquat (March 17, 1894 – May 29, 1960) was a Major General in the US Army. Prior to his service in the military, Marquat was a reporter for The Seattle Times. Prior to the Japanese invasion of 1941, Marquat served with the Office of the Military Advisor to the Commonwealth Government of the Philippines, as the chief engineering advisor.

==Early life==

Marquat was born on March 17, 1894, in St. Louis, Missouri to William and Sara (Layden) Marquat. He died on May 30, 1968. (according to the Marquat Memorial Library.)

==Marquat library==

The Marquat Library was formed, in 1969, at Fort Gordon, Georgia, at the US Army Civil Affairs School. The library was moved, in 1973 when the school moved to Fort Bragg, North Carolina.

==Military career==

AWARDS AND CITATIONS (Listed from the Military Times Hall of Valor):
Distinguished Service Cross - for actions during WWII
2 - Army Distinguished Service Medals - for actions during WWII
1 - Army Distinuished Service Media - for actions during the Cold War
Silver Star - for actions during the Korean War
Citation: The President of the United States of America, authorized by Act of Congress, July 9, 1918, takes pleasure in presenting a Bronze Oak Leaf Cluster in lieu of a Second Award of the Silver Star to Major General William Frederic Marquat (ASN: 0-6533), United States Army, for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity in action against the enemy while serving as Anti-Aircraft Officer for the United Nations Command in Korea during the period 29 September to 4 October 1950. Following the restoration of the capital of the Republic of Korea to its President and before the Seoul area was free of enemy activity, General Marquat, completely disregarding his own safety, toured the region by vehicle to obtain first-hand information vital to planning effective anti-aircraft installations necessary to forestall surprise enemy air attacks. Later, in anticipation of increased enemy air activity, General Marquat traveled over terrain harassed by sniper fire and endangered by land mines to inspect anti-aircraft installations. His personal concern for his troops, aggressive actions in ground surveillance, and presence in the forward areas inspired his units to a high degree of efficiency and contributed materially to the United Nations effort in Korea. General Marquat's inspirational courage and his unfaltering devotion to duty as a leader upholds the highest traditions of the military service.


