[[Robert Capa]]

CATEGORIES: 1913 births, 1954 deaths, War photographers, Operation Overlord people, Journalists killed while covering military conflicts, Hungarian emigrants to the United States, Magnum photographers, Photography in China, Photography in the Soviet Union, Photography in Spain, Photography in Vietnam, Hungarian Jews, Hungarian expatriates in France, Hungarian photojournalists, American people of Hungarian-Jewish descent, Landmine victims, Social documentary photographers

Robert Capa (born Friedmann Endre;[tpl]cite web|url=http://www.emlekev.hu/evfordulok_2004_2010/2004/highlight/article/D888_ismerteto_03.html|title=Capa, Robert|accessdate=2009-02-18[/tpl] October 22, 1913 – May 25, 1954) was a Hungarian war photographer and photojournalist who covered five different wars: the Spanish Civil War, the Second Sino-Japanese War, World War II across Europe, the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, and the First Indochina War. He documented the course of World War II in London, North Africa, Italy, the Battle of Normandy on Omaha Beach and the liberation of Paris.
In 1947, Capa co-founded Magnum Photos in Paris with David "Chim" Seymour, Henri Cartier-Bresson, George Rodger and William Vandivert. The organization was the first cooperative agency for worldwide freelance photographers.

==Career==

He was born Endre Friedmann to Dezső and Júlia Friedmann-Berkovits in Nagykapos, Kingdom of Hungary, now Veľké Kapušany, Slovakia October 22, 1913. Deciding that there was little future under the regime in Hungary after Word War I, he left home at 18.
Capa originally wanted to be a writer; however, he found work in photography in Berlin and grew to love the art. In 1933, he moved from Germany to France because of the rise of Nazism,and persecution of Jewish journalists and photographers, but found it difficult to find work as a freelance journalist. He had to conceal his Jewish name (Friedmann), and adopted the name "Robert Capa" around this time. Cápa ("shark") was his nickname in school and he felt that it would be recognizable and American-sounding, since it was similar to that of film director Frank Capra. He found it easier to sell his photos under the newly adopted "American"-sounding name. Over a period of time, he gradually assumed the persona of Robert Capa (with the help of his girlfriend Gerda Taro, who acted as an intermediary with those who purchased the photos taken by the "great American photographer, Robert Capa"). Capa's first published photograph was of Leon Trotsky making a speech in Copenhagen on "The Meaning of the Russian Revolution" in 1932.Linfield, Boston Review

===Spanish Civil War and Chinese resistance to Japan===

From 1936 to 1939, Capa worked in Spain, photographing the Spanish Civil War, along with Gerda Taro, his companion and professional photography partner, and David Seymour."New Works by Photography’s Old Masters", New York Times, April 30, 2009 In 1938, he traveled to the Chinese city of Hankow, now called  Wuhan, to document the resistance to the Japanese invasion.Stephen R. MacKinnon includes photographs by Robert Capa, in Wuhan, 1938: War, Refugees, and the Making of Modern China (Berkeley: University of California Press,  2008).   
In 1936, Capa became known across the globe for the "Falling Soldier" photo long thought to have been taken in Cerro Muriano on the Cordoba Front. It was thought to be of a Workers' Party of Marxist Unification (POUM) militiaman who had just been shot and was falling to his death, and was long considered an iconic image of the war. Scholars have debated the authenticity of this photograph.  A Spanish historian later identified the dead soldier as Federico Borrell García, from Alcoi (Alicante), but this identification has been disputed. 
On 3 February 2013 an investigative documentary broadcast by Japan's NHKNHK、沢木耕太郎推理ドキュメント「運命の一枚〜“戦場”写真　最大の謎」（2013年2月3日放映） reported research carried out by Kotaro Sawaki沢木耕太郎 「キャパの十字架」『文藝春秋』2013年1月号 claiming that Gerda Taro should be acknowledged as the real photographer. The photo was published shortly after her death. Making use of computer analysis of this and other photographs taken at the time, Sawaki claimed to have identified the precise location and that the soldier merely lost his footing on the rough slope during a practice charge made (with Mauser rifles clearly not ready to fire) before any fighting took place in the area. However, a recording of Capa describing precisely how he took the photograph was released by Magnum and can be heard in a radio interview Capa on the photograph

===World War II===

At the start of World War II, Capa was in New York City, having moved there from Paris to look for work, and to escape Nazi persecution. During the war, Capa was sent to various parts of the European Theatre on photography assignments. He first photographed for Collier's Weekly, before switching to Life after he was fired by Collier's. He was the only "enemy alien" photographer for the Allies. During July and August 1943 Capa was in Sicily with American troops, near Sperlinga, Nicosia and Troina. The Americans were advancing toward Troina, a strategically located town which controlled the road to Messina (Sicily's main port to the Italian mainland). The town was fiercely defended by the Germans, in an attempt to evacuate all German troops. Robert Capa's pictures show the Sicilian population's sufferings under German bombing and their happiness when American soldiers arrive. One notable photograph from this period shows a Sicilian peasant indicating the direction in which German troops had gone, near Sperlinga. On 7 October 1943 Robert Capa was in Naples with Life reporter Will Lang Jr., and there he photographed the Naples post office bombing.Slightly Out of Focus, Henry Holt and Company, New York, 1947, p.104.

===Omaha beach===

Probably his most famous images,  The Magnificent Eleven, are a group of photos of D-Day. Taking part in the Allied invasion, Capa was with the second wave of American troops on Omaha Beach.  The men storming Omaha Beach faced some of the heaviest resistance from German troops inside the bunkers of the Atlantikwall.  While under constant fire, Capa took 106 pictures, but all but eleven were destroyed in a photo lab accident back in London.Simon Kuper, "Interview: John Morris on his friend Robert Capa", Financial Times, 31 May 2013. Retrieved 1 June 2013.

===Russia and Israel===

In 1947 Capa traveled to the Soviet Union with his friend, the American writer John Steinbeck. He took photos in Moscow, Kiev, Tbilisi, Batumi and among the ruins of Stalingrad. Steinbecks account of their journey, A Russian Journal, (1948) was illustrated with Capa's photos.
In 1947, Capa founded the cooperative venture Magnum Photos in Paris with Henri Cartier-Bresson, William Vandivert, David Seymour, and George Rodger. It was a cooperative agency to manage work for and by freelance photographers, and developed a reputation for the excellence of its photo-journalists. In 1952, he became the president.
Capa toured Israel after its founding. While there, he took the numerous photographs that accompanied Irwin Shaw's book, Report on Israel.

===First Indochina War and death===

In the early 1950s, Capa traveled to Japan for an exhibition associated with Magnum Photos. While there, Life magazine asked him to go on assignment to Southeast Asia, where the French had been fighting for eight years in the First Indochina War.
Although a few years earlier he had said he was finished with war, Capa accepted and accompanied a French regiment with two Time-Life journalists, John Mecklin and Jim Lucas. On May 25, 1954 at 2:55 p.m., the regiment was passing through a dangerous area under fire when Capa decided to leave his Jeep and go up the road to photograph the advance. About five minutes later, Mecklin and Lucas heard an explosion; Capa had stepped on a landmine. When they arrived on the scene, he was alive but his left leg had been blown to pieces, and he had a serious wound in his chest. Mecklin called for a medic and Capa was taken to a small field hospital, where he was pronounced dead on arrival. [tpl]Citation needed|date=February 2009[/tpl]
He is buried in plot #169 at Amawalk Hill Cemetery (also called Friends Cemetery), Amawalk, Westchester County, New York. Along with his mother, Julia, and his brother, Cornell Capa.

==Personal life==

Capa was born into a Jewish family in Budapest,"Robert Capa", Jewish History, Hungary where his parents were tailors. At the age of 18, Capa moved to Vienna, later relocated to Prague, and finally settled in Berlin: all cities that were centers of artistic and cultural ferment in this period. He started studies in journalism at the German Political College, but the Nazi Party instituted restrictions on Jews and prohibited them from colleges. Capa relocated to Paris, where he adopted the name ’Robert Capa’ in 1934. At that time, he had already been a hobby-photographer.
In 1934 "André Friedman", as he still called himself then, met Gerda Pohorylle, a German Jewish refugee. The couple lived in Paris where André taught Gerda photography. Together they created the name and image of "Robert Capa" as a famous American photographer. Gerda took the name Gerda Taro and became successful in her own right. She travelled with Capa to Spain in 1936 intending to document the Spanish Civil War. In July 1937, Capa traveled briefly to Paris while Gerda remained in Madrid. She was killed near Brunete during a battle. Capa, who was reportedly engaged to her, was deeply shocked and never married.
In February 1943 Capa met Elaine Justin, then married to the actor John Justin. They fell in love and the relationship lasted until the end of the war. Capa spent most of his time in the frontline. Capa called the redheaded Elaine "Pinky," and wrote about her in his war memoir, Slightly Out of Focus. In 1945, Elaine Justin broke up with Capa; she later married Chuck Romine.
Some months later Capa became the lover of the actress Ingrid Bergman, who was touring in Europe to entertain American soldiers.[ref]
