[[The Last Detail]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 films, 1970s comedy-drama films, American films, American comedy-drama films, Buddy films, Columbia Pictures films, English-language films, Films based on novels, Films directed by Hal Ashby, Films set in Boston, Massachusetts, Films set in New Hampshire, Films set in New York City, Films set in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Films set in Virginia, Films set in Washington, D.C., Military humor in film, Road movies, United States Navy in films

The Last Detail is a 1973 American comedy-drama film directed by Hal Ashby and starring Jack Nicholson, with a screenplay adapted by Robert Towne from a novel of the same name by Darryl Ponicsan.  The film became known for its frequent use of profanity. It was nominated for three Academy Awards.

==Plot==

U.S. Navy petty officers Billy "Badass" Buddusky (Jack Nicholson) and Richard "Mule" Mulhall (Otis Young), are awaiting orders in Norfolk, Virginia when they are assigned a shore patrol detail escorting young sailor Larry Meadows (Randy Quaid) to Portsmouth Naval Prison near Portsmouth, New Hampshire. Meadows has drawn a stiff eight-year sentence for the petty crime of trying to steal $40 from a collection box of his C.O.'s wife's favorite charity. Despite their initial resentment of the detail, the oddly likeable Meadows begins to grow on the two Navy "lifers" as they escort him on a train ride through the wintry north-eastern states; particularly as they know what the Marine guards are like at Portsmouth and the grim reality facing their young prisoner. As the pair begin to feel sorry for Meadows and the youthful experiences he will lose being incarcerated, they decide to show him a good time before delivering him to the authorities.
With several days to spare before they are due in Portsmouth, the trio stop off at the major cities along their route to provide bon-voyage adventures for Meadows. However, in Washington, their first endeavor ends in failure when they are denied drinks at a bar as Meadows is too young. Instead Buddusky gets a few six-packs allowing them all to get drunk in a hotel room. When Meadows passes out on the room's only real bed, the other two let him stay there and take the uncomfortable roll-away beds for themselves. In Philadelphia they seek out Meadows's mother, only to find her away for the day and the house a pigsty, cluttered with empty whiskey bottles. They take him ice skating at Rockefeller Center in New York City. Buddusky tells Mulhall, "the kid is 18, he will be out of prison at 26," they take Meadows to a brothel in Boston, to lose his virginity. In between, they brawl with Marines in a public restroom, dine on "the world's finest" Italian sausage sandwiches, chant with Nichiren Shōshū Buddhists, and open intimate windows for each other in swaying train coaches. Meadows pronounces his several days with Badass and Mule to be the best of his whole life.
When they finally arrive in frozen Portsmouth, Meadows has a final request – a picnic – so they buy some hot dogs and attempt a frigid barbecue in the crunching snow. With time running out, the docile Meadows then gets up and slowly walks out across the park, as if he's stretching his legs. As Meadows shows Buddusky, he has learned the Semaphore Flag signals, Buddusky reads "BRAVO YANKEE BRAVO YANKEE End of Message" (By by as in "Bye bye"). Meadows suddenly bolts in a last-ditch effort to run away, forcing Buddusky to chase after him. On catching the young sailor, Buddusky pistol-whips him fiercely with his .45 Colt. Buddusky and Mulhall then brusquely take Meadows to the naval prison, where he is suddenly taken off their hands and marched off to be processed without a word. Ironically, given Buddusky's expectation of the brutality awaiting Meadows at the hands of the Marine guards, the duty officer at the prison (a young second lieutenant wearing an Annapolis ring), while executing the paperwork for the prisoner transfer, angrily berates Buddusky and Mulhall for beating Meadows (his facial wounds from Buddusky's pistol-whipping being plainly visible), telling them that such conduct may be alright for the Navy but would not be tolerated by the Marines. The duty officer then asks if Meadows had tried to escape, to which they reply he had not to avoid getting Meadows into more trouble. The lieutenant finally notices that their orders were never officially signed by the master-at-arms in Norfolk, stating they had effectively "never left yet". At which point Mulhall and Buddusky ask to speak to the XO (Executive Officer) and the young marine officer relents.
With their duty completed, the pair stride away, angrily complaining about the duty officer's incompetence – in the wake of his rebuke, he'd momentarily forgotten to keep his copy of the paperwork – and hoping that their orders will come through when they get back to Norfolk.

==Cast==

==Production==

Producer Gerry Ayres had bought the rights to Darryl Ponicsan's novel in 1969. After returning from the set of Drive, He Said, Robert Towne began adapting the novel.Biskind 1998, p. 174. The screenwriter tailored the script for close friends Jack Nicholson and Rupert Crosse. In adapting the novel, Towne removed Buddusky's "closet intellectualism and his beautiful wife".[ref]
