[[Swissair]]

CATEGORIES: Airlines established in 1931, Airlines disestablished in 2002, Defunct airlines of Switzerland, Former IATA members, Swissair

Swissair, S.A./AG (Schweizerische Luftverkehr"World Airline Directory." Flight International. 28 March-3 April 2000. 102[tpl]dead link|date=June 2011[/tpl].) was the national airline of Switzerland.
It was formed from a merger between Balair and Ad Astra Aero (To the Stars), in 1931.[tpl]cite web | author= | title=About Swissair Facts and Figures: | url=http://www.swissair.com/aboutus/swissair/facts.htm| archiveurl=http://web.archive.org/web/19990219220801/www.swissair.com/aboutus/swissair/facts.htm | publisher=Swissair | year=1999 |archivedate=1999-02-19 | accessdate=2008-08-30[/tpl] For most of its 71 years, Swissair was one of the major international airlines and known as the "Flying Bank" due to the financial stability of the airline, causing it to be regarded as a Swiss national symbol and icon. The airline thrived into the 1980s, when it was one of the "big four" Western European airlines. It was headquartered at Zurich Airport and in Kloten.
In 1997 the Swissair Group was renamed SAirGroup (although it was again renamed Swissair Group in 2001), with four subdivisions:  SAirlines (to which Swissair, Crossair, Balair and FlightLease belonged), SAirServices, SAirLogistics and SAirRelations.
After the expansive "Hunter strategy" in the late 1990s and after the economic downturn following the September 11 attacks, Swissair's assets dramatically lost value, grounding the already-troubled airline in October 2001.Hermann, A., & Rammal, H. G. (2010). The grounding of the "flying bank". Management Decision, 48(7), 1048-62. The airline was kept alive until 31 March 2002 by the Swiss Federal government.
On 1 April 2002 successor airline Swiss International Air Lines was founded on the base of former Crossair, taking over most of the routes, planes and staff of the former Swissair. Today, The SAirGroup company still exists and is in the process of being liquidated. Swiss International Air Lines was taken over by the German airline Lufthansa in 2005.http://www.accc.gov.au/content/index.phtml/itemId/695792/fromItemId/751043 Lufthansa - proposed acquisition of Swiss International Air Lines - Australian Competition Commission

==History==

===Founding years===

On March 26, 1931, Swissair - Schweizerische Luftverkehr AG (German: Swissair - Swiss Air Transport) was founded through the fusion of the airlines Ad Astra Aero (founded in 1919) and Balair (1925). The founding fathers were Balz Zimmermann and the Swiss aviation pioneer Walter Mittelholzer. In contrast to other airlines, it did not receive support from the government. The name "Swissair" was the proposal of Dr. Alphonse Ehinger, president of the directorial board of the Balair, although "Swissair" was first deemed "un-Swiss". In the first operational year 64 people were employed including ten pilots, seven radio operators and eight mechanics. In total, their planes offered 85 seats and operation was maintained only from March to October. The route network had a length of [tpl]convert|4203|km|mi[/tpl].
On April 17, 1932 Swissair bought two Lockheed Orions, making them the second European airline to use American planes, after the Czech operator CSA purchased a Ford Trimotor in 1930. The Orion was the fastest commercial airplane of its time and was put to use on the "Express line", Zurich-Munich-Vienna. This led Lufthansa to ask Heinkel for a model that could top the Orion's speed, leading to the Heinkel He 70. In 1933, the first trans-Alpine route was introduced in 1933: Zurich-Milan.
For the first time in Europe, flight attendants were employed aboard the Curtiss Condor beginning in 1934. Nelly Diener, first flight attendant of Europe, became world-famous. She lost her life after just 79 flights in a crash near Wurmlingen, Germany, on July 27, 1934. The cause of the crash was material fatigue.
In 1936, Douglas DC-2s were acquired and London was added to the route network. In 1937, the bigger Douglas DC-3 was bought. In the same year, both founding fathers died: Walter Mittelholzer during mountaineering in the Steiermark, Austria, and Balz Zimmermann succumbed to an infectious disease.
On August 27, 1939, days before World War II broke out, the airspace over Germany and France was closed. Swissair was forced to suspend service to Amsterdam, Paris and London. Two days later, Swissair service was closed completely. Of 180 employees, 131 had to serve in the army. In spite of the war, some routes were re-introduced, such as Munich, Berlin, Rome and Barcelona. In 1940, an invasion of Switzerland was feared, and Swissair moved their operations to the Magadino plains in Ticino. Operations were suspended definitively in August 1944, when a Swissair DC-2 was destroyed in Stuttgart during an American bombing raid.
On July 30, 1945 Swissair was able to resume commercial aviation.This section was translated from the article "Swissair" in the German-language Wikipedia, version http://de.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Swissair&oldid=57102269

===Ascension===

In 1947 the rise of shareholder capital to 20 million Swiss Francs enabled long haul flights to New York, South Africa and South America with Douglas DC-4s. The modern Convair 240, the first Swissair plane with a pressurized cabin, was used for short- and medium range flights from late 1948. The first DC-4 flight to New York was routed via Shannon and Stephenville (Newfoundland) on May 2, 1947 and actually ended in Washington, DC, due to fog at New York's LaGuardia Airport. The total elapsed time was 20 hours and 55 minutes.
The public, including the federal government, the states of Switzerland (Cantons), municipalities, the Swiss Federal Railways and the Swiss postal services took over 30.6% of the shares and enabled Swissair to get a credit of 15 million Swiss Francs to purchase the airline's first two Douglas DC-6B airliners for delivery in 1951. By that act, Swissair became the national flag carrier of Switzerland. The new pressurised aircraft were to replace the DC-4 on transatlantic routes.
In 1948 the airport in Dübendorf, which served as the base of Swissair, was relocated to Zurich-Kloten. Military aviation continued in Dübendorf. The next year Swissair plunged into a financial crisis because of a sudden devaluation of the British Pound because fares, except traffic to the United States, were calculated in British currency. At that time, the traffic to England made up 40 percent of Swissair's revenues.
In June 1950 Walter Berchtold, manager of Swiss Federal Railways, was elected to the directorial board of Swissair and served as the director. Until 1971 he coined the corporate culture of Swissair. He grasped the importance of corporate image and corporate identity, and after the example of BOAC's "Speedbird", he introduced the arrow-shaped Swissair logo. Giving  flight personnel a distinct uniform was also an important point. At the time flight attendants' uniforms resembled the gray-blue ones of the Swiss Women's Army Corps, so Berchtold introduced ones in a modish marine blue. Swissair put a veritable fashion competition of Europe's airlines into motion.

In 1952 the cabin layout on northern trans-Atlantic routes was changed to one with a first and a tourist class. First class had comfortable chairs in which one could sleep, given the name "Slumberettes". Those sleeping chairs were soon succeeded by beds, modeled after the U.S. Pullman railway wagons. Two adjacent seats were moved toward each other and formed a lower berth. The wall panel could be folded downward, forming the upper berth in which the other person could sleep. A year later tourist class was introduced on Europe flights.
In 1953 Swissair, with the city of Basel, founded a charter Company called Balair, reusing the name of one of its predecessors, a company which initially used older Swissair aircraft to fly to holiday destinations.
As the first European customer, Swissair bought the Douglas DC-7C which enabled them to perform non-stop flights to the United States. For shorter-range routes, the Convair Metropolitan was used.
In 1957 the Far East was added to the route network; direct flights to Tokyo had intermediate stops in Athens, Karachi, Bombay, Bangkok and Manila. In the same year, Swissair helped Aristotle Onassis to form the new Greek airline, Olympic Airways.
While competitors first looked at turboprop airplanes to replace their piston-engined craft, Swissair introduced jet airplanes directly. Together with SAS, Swissair bought Douglas DC-8s which were delivered beginning in 1960. For medium and short range routes the Sud Aviation Caravelle was purchased. The aircraft were maintained together with SAS, and also manuals for operation and maintenance were co-written.
Swissair was one of the few companies worldwide to buy Convair 990 "Coronado" aircraft in 1962 for their medium and long range routes. Although the machines did not fulfill contractual specifications at first, they were liked by employees and customers. They operated on the airline's routes to South America, West Africa and the Middle and Far East.
1966 saw the introduction of the Douglas DC-9. This type developed into the backbone of the short- and medium-range routes, and, after convincing Douglas, on behalf of Swissair the Douglas Corporation offered a stretched variant: the DC-9-32. For the first time, Swissair was the launching customer of an aircraft type.
In 1971 Armin Baltensweiler took over as the president of the directorial board and ran the enterprise for over two decades. In the same year, the first Boeing 747-200 Jumbo-Jet was acquired, and in the next year the first McDonnell Douglas DC-10-30 followed. Both types shaped the long-haul fleet until the 1990s. Again, the specifications of both aircraft were developed in collaboration with SAS. Also in 1972, Switzerland introduced a prohibition of night flights, which led to the cessation of cheaper night fares.
Swissair was the second airline to offer service to the People's Republic of China, introducing service to Beijing and Shanghai in 1975. In the same year, Swissair was the launch customer for the DC-9-51. In 1977 Swissair was the launch customer for the third DC-9 type, the DC-9-81 variant, now called the MD-80. Armin Baltensweiler had traveled to a meeting of McDonnell-Douglas' directorial board in St. Louis to convince them to further stretch the fuselage of the DC-9-51. Baltensweiler was called the "Father of the MD-80".
In 1979 Swissair was the first company to order the Airbus A310-200 and the jumbo jet variant with a stretched upper deck, the Boeing 747-300. Also, the Fokker 100 short range aircraft and the three-engined MD-11 were aircraft for which Swissair was the launch customer.
1983 saw the replacement of the older DC-9s by MD-83s.
Since the 1960s Swissair was a world leader in the development of cargo reservation systems (CRS). PARS and CARIDO were examples for booking passenger seats and freight space.

==="The flying bank"===

After the 1960s, air traffic increased quickly and allowed many airlines – many of which were quasi-monopolists on their routes – to yield high revenues. Especially Swissair profited from its excellent reputation as a quality airline and from the fact that the political neutrality of Switzerland allowed the company to fly to exotic, but lucrative destinations in Africa and in the Middle East. In geographic terms, the central position of Switzerland in Europe helped it to generate revenue from transfer passengers. By the early 1970s, Swissair was thus called "The flying bank", appealing to the large hidden assets and the huge liquidity Swissair had. Secondary, the "flying bank" was the designation for a corporate group which cared more about financial management than about flying airplanes.
With the beginning of deregulation and liberalisation, airlines felt growing financial pressure. In 1978, Moritz Suter founded a regional airline named Crossair, which put Swissair under additional stress. To counter these changes, Swissair invested their large financial reserves into takeovers and into flight-related trades like baggage handling, catering, aircraft maintenance and duty-free stores. This strategy diversified economic risks at the expense of the core business of Swissair - commercial aviation.

===Concentration===

In regard to the furthering liberalisation of Europe's airline market, Swissair focused more on commercial aviation and extended its partnerships. As the first European airline, Swissair signed in 1989 a cooperation treaty with Delta Air Lines and Singapore Airlines to form the alliance "Global Excellence". In 1990, together with SAS, Austrian Airlines and Finnair, the "European Quality Alliance" was founded. The latter alliance was later renamed to "Qualiflyer".
Because of the weak economy, the Gulf War and its aftermath, and rising operational costs, many airlines lost money in 1990 and 1991. The ongoing liberalisation enforced the competition additionally, and Swissair lost 99 million Swiss Francs in the first half year, and so Swissair was not able to pay dividends to its shareholders – for the third time after 1951 and 1961. In the years 1991 and 1992 Swissair had to dissolve financial reserves to cushion the losses from the commercial aviation sector.
On January 1, 1991, commercial aviation in Europe was completely liberalized and the existing capacities led to an aggressive competition among the airlines. In a national referendum on December 6, 1992, Swiss citizens rejected taking part in the European Economic Area, EEA. This referendum was a significant disservice to Swissair, an airline with a minute domestic market: Its planes were not allowed to take up passengers during intermediate landings in EEA countries (e.g., Zurich - Frankfurt - New York), and Swissair was not allowed to offer tickets for sections that fully lie in EEA member countries (e.g., Zurich - Frankfurt - Paris). See also freedoms of the air.
Like other airlines of smaller countries, Swissair now was under significant pressure. More and more national airlines affiliated themselves with airline alliances in order to maintain a worldwide market presence. But in order to be interesting for American alliance partners, an airline must have a critical size in terms of passenger numbers. To meet that goal, in 1993 an alliance between Swissair, KLM, SAS, Lufthansa and Austrian Airlines was proposed. This project bore the name "Alcazar" (after the spelling of the IATA callsigns of the airlines involved on the project). But in various countries, this project was criticised. In Switzerland itself it was thought that the huge financial assets were too precious to merge Swissair with the other airlines.

===Hunter Strategy===

In the late 1980s, as well as throughout the early 1990s, Swissair tried to merge with Air France, Lufthansa, and British Airways in order to get access to a wider European market. Finally after deregulation, Swissair tried to expand beyond its home Swiss market; after the Alcazar project was cancelled, Swissair hoped to be a major force in European aviation.
In the 1990s Swissair initiated the controversial Hunter Strategy, a major expansion programme devised by the consulting firm McKinsey & Co. Using this strategy, Swissair aimed to grow its market share through the acquisition of small airlines rather than entering into alliance agreements. Swissair decided to acquire 49.5 percent of the very successful Italian charter airline Air Europe, the unprofitable Belgian flag carrier, Sabena, and significant stakes in the carriers Air Liberté, AOM, Air Littoral, Volare, LOT,
Turkish Airlines, South African Airways, Portugalia and LTU, and planned to acquire stakes in Aer Lingus, Finnair, Malév, as well as Brazilian carriers TAM and Transbrasil.[tpl]cite news|title=Swissair gets purchase approval|url=http://www.thefreelibrary.com/Swissair+gets+purchase+approval.-a061544648|accessdate=30 August 2012|newspaper=Airline Industry Information|date=17 April 2000[/tpl] In mid-2000 has been predicted that by these acquisitions, the loss of Swissair for the next three financial years between would be between CHF 3.25 billion and 4.45 billion. The management however maintained in classical restructuring, the Board approved the reorganization of LTU in the amount of approximately CHF 500 million. In addition, there were plans to take over Alitalia.
In summer 2000, the CEO Philippe Bruggisser came under public pressure, as the press published the financial situation of the group. Thus, the daily loss was Swissair and Sabena in each one million francs, and another million were lost every day at LTU and the French investments. The Board left the first time to calculate scenarios for phasing out the existing participations in other airlines. Swissair wanted to retire from their foreign investments. In January 2001 Bruggisser was summarily dismissed. Moritz Suter, founder of Crossair was, as the new CEO of SAirLines - nominated - so all Group airlines including Swissair. After only 44 days Suter resigned his position back.
In March 2001, two studies by consultants were presented to the Board, which showed the financial difficulties of SAirGroup. Then came the Directors resign. Only Mario Corti (manager), former CFO of Nestlé stayed behind.
The buying spree created a major cash flow crisis for parent company SAirGroup, and was exacerbated by the environment caused by the September 11 attacks. Unable to make payments to creditors on its large debt, and with the refusal of UBS AG to extend its line of credit on 2 October 2001, the entire Swissair fleet was abruptly grounded.[tpl]cite news | author=Staff writers | url=http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/1574658.stm | title=Swissair grounds all flights | work=BBC News | date=2001-10-02 | accessdate=2007-08-02[/tpl] Many blamed UBS for the fiasco, causing demonstrators to take to the streets with signs referring to UBS chairman, Marcel Ospel as "Bin Ospel" and redefining the bank's acronym, "UBS" as the United Bandits of Switzerland.
Two large bridge loans from the Swiss government were required to finance continuation of flight operations.  This notwithstanding, with the resumption of flight service, it was necessary for flight crews to carry large sums of cash to purchase fuel at foreign airports.BUSINESS | State warned against buying Swissair. BBC News (2001-10-05). Retrieved on 2013-08-20.

===Grounding===

On 1 October 2001, the public was informed in a press conference about the project "Phoenix" and announced that a payment delay was sought for parts of the group. However, continuation of service  was secured by the Swiss federal authorities, as they were willing to pay half of the loan.
2 October 2001 saw an increased necessity for strong liquidity, as all suppliers insisted on cash payments of outstanding invoices following the request of payment delay announced the day before. Cash reserves of Swissair filed on this day were barely sufficient enough just to carry out the first morning flights. During the morning, fuel suppliers refused to fuel the waiting aircraft. Other accounts were consolidated on the one hand because of the prior termination of the cash pooling facility from the UBS, on the other hand due to the threat of favoritism regarding debts. The banks refused a credit increase before the sales proceeded, and insisted on a formal referral validity of the sale agreement.
At 15:45, CEO Mario Corti announced a cessation of flight operations due to the security risks caused by the crossing of the Flight Duty Regulations. This led to thousands of stranded passengers around the world, including flight crews. Their corporate credit cards were blocked by the banks, with some hotels expelling the crews, and having them return home at their own expense. In addition, all tickets sold were voided.
Crossair shares were only reissued on the evening of 2 October was the rewriting of Crossair shares, with their purchase price not arriving until the following day - the setting of flight operations - into the SAirLines account.
4 October 2001 saw demonstrations by former Swissair employees before the UBS presentation held in Glattbrugg, and the following day saw demonstrations in Bern's Federal Square.
Around the same time, SAirGroup's stake in Crossair was sold to the Swiss banks UBS and Credit Suisse. Furthermore, the reborn Crossair took over various assets of former Swissair, including its employees, aircraft and most European routes. Swissair and the SAirGroup were handed over to the liquidation firm of Jürg Hoss Liquidators, and ceased operations on 31 March 2002. Crossair was renamed Swiss and officially took over Swissair's intercontinental routes on April 1, 2002, officially ending 71 years of Swissair Service.

===Transition phase===

On 5 October, commercial flights on most routes were gradually resumed thanks to a federal emergency loan of over CHF 450 million. This happened partly to ensure the accessibility of Switzerland as a business location, as well as to establish a basis for the creation of Swiss. The prevention of a complete collapse of Swissair, avoided the collapse of the other airline-related businesses in the group.
