  from:2015 till:2016 shift:($dx,$dy) color:IND text:[[Zubin Mehta]]

Boskovsky, concertmaster of the orchestra 1936–1979, conducted the Vienna New Year's concerts from 1955–1979. In 1980, Lorin Maazel became the first non-Austrian conductor of the concert. The practice of choosing a different star conductor every year (and occasional star soloists) began in 1987 after seven appearances in a row by Maazel. Members of the orchestra voted to rotate conductors. This may have occurred with the telecasts going worldwide, perhaps to make the audio and video recordings more marketable. The first of these rotating stars was Herbert von Karajan, an Austrian, then 78 and in frail health.

==Audience==

The concert is popular throughout Europe, and more recently around the world. The demand for tickets is so high that people have to pre-register one year in advance in order to participate in the drawing of tickets for the following year. Some seats are pre-registered by certain Austrian families and are passed down from generation to generation.
The event is televised by the Austrian national broadcasting service ORF – from 1989 to 1993, 1997 to 2009, and again in 2011 under the direction of Brian Large – and relayed via the European Broadcasting Union's Eurovision network to most major broadcasting organizations in Europe. On 1 January 2013, for example, the concert was shown on ZDF in Germany, France 2 in France, BBC Two in the United Kingdom, Rai 2 in Italy, La 1 in Spain, and TVP2 in Poland, among many other channels.
Outside Europe it is also shown on PBS in the United States (beginning in 1985, as part of the performing arts anthology Great Performances), CCTV in China since 1987, NHK in Japan since 1973, KBS in South Korea, and SBS in Australia. Since 2006, the concert has also been broadcast to viewers in several African countries (Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Swaziland, Zambia and Zimbabwe). In Latin America the concert is shown in Chile by La Red, and in Guatemala, Ecuador and Bolivia. Indonesia's MetroTV broadcasts the concert although it is delayed by 4–5 days.
The concert is also broadcast live by many radio stations in Europe, the United States, and around the world.

==Commercial recordings==

Decca Records made the first of the live commercial recordings, with the January 1, 1979 digital recording (their first digital LP releases) of the 25th anniversary of the New Year's Concert with Willi Boskovsky conducting the Vienna Philharmonic.

==Fashion statements==

For the concerts in 2013-14, Dame Vivienne Westwood was invited to create the costumes for the ballet dancers; she received a stunning success.Tanz das Jahr - Das Shooting, Der Standard, Dezember 30, 2013  Westwood  hired four upcoming Viennese artists - Maria Ziegelböck as photographer, Wolfgang Lindenhofer for hair styling, Christine Sutterlüty and Monika Leuthner for make-up.

==Other New Year's concerts in Vienna==

The Vienna Hofburg Orchestra's traditional New Year's Eve Concert takes place on December 31 in the halls of the Hofburg Palace. The program features the most famous waltz and operetta melodies by Johann Strauss, Emmerich Kálmán, Franz Lehár and opera arias by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart."The Vienna Hofburg Orchestra New Year's Eve Concert", Vienna Hofburg Orchestra

==References==

==External links==


