[[University of North London]]

CATEGORIES: London Metropolitan University, Universities in London, Education in Islington, Defunct universities and colleges in London, Educational institutions established in 1896, 1896 establishments in England

The University of North London was a university in the United Kingdom from 1992 to 2002.  On 1 August 2002, it merged with London Guildhall University to form London Metropolitan University. The former University of North London premises now form the new university's north campus, situated on Holloway Road and Highbury Grove in the London Borough of Islington. In 1996, the university celebrated its centenary year.

==Structure==

Under the board of governors, the university was arranged into four faculties each led by a dean and pro vice chancellor:—
Faculties organised undergraduate and postgraduate schemes within a university modular framework. An interdisciplinary undergraduate scheme for inter-faculty combined honours degrees was managed by the Academic Registry.
The Learning Centre library opened in 1994 and, in 1996, the Trades Union Congress library collections (established in 1922) transferred there.Trades Union Congress Library Collections London Metropolitan University (retrieved 1 March 2010)

===Vice chancellors===

The vice chancellor and chief executive was supported by the deputy vice chancellor (academic) and the deputy vice chancellor (research and development).
In 2000, the University awarded and honorary degree to The Most Reverend Desmond Tutu, Archbishop of Cape Town and primate of the Anglican Church of Southern Africa.
Following the merger with London Guildhall (formerly the City of London Polytechnic), London Metropolitan is the largest unitary university in London.

==History==

===Northern Polytechnic Institute===

The Northern Polytechnic opened in Holloway with aid from the City Parochial Foundation and substantial donations from the Worshipful Company of Clothworkers in 1896. Under the terms of its Royal Charter, its objective was "to promote the industrial skill, general knowledge, health and well-being of young men and women belonging to the poorer classes of Islington and to provide for the inhabitants of Islington and the neighbouring parts of north London, and especially for the Industrial Classes, the means of acquiring a sound General, Scientific, Technical and Commercial Education at small cost."Floud, Roderick and Glynn, Sean (eds.) London Higher: The Establishment of Higher Education in London (pp. 204 and 212) London: The Athlone Press, 1998 By 1911, five-year University of London evening degrees were available.  The modernist Cecil Stephenson was appointed Head of Art in 1923 and, from 1925, courses were recognised by the Royal Institute of British Architects.

===North Western Polytechnic===

The North Western Polytechnic was eventually opened by HRH The Prince of Wales (later King Edward VIII) at Prince of Wales Road, Kentish Town in 1929. The Polytechnic later acquired premises at St. Pancras, Highbury (Ladbroke House) and Nos. 207–225 Essex Road. Concentrating on social sciences, humanities and arts, by 1967, when the printing department transferred to the London College of Printing (a founding member of the London Institute),History of London College of Communication University of the Arts, London (retrieved 21 February 2010) the North Western was the largest polytechnic in London.

===Polytechnic of North London===

The Polytechnic of North London was founded by the 1971 merger of the Northern and North Western polytechnics. Its first Director was Terence Miller, former principal of the University of Rhodesia.Shotgun Marriage: A Profile of the North London Polytechnic Education + Training Vol. 13, No. 5 (pp. 150-152) May 1971 Until the passing of the Education Reform Act 1988, it came under the control of the  Inner London Education Authority, part of the then Greater London Council.  Degree awarding authority resided with the former Council for National Academic Awards until the polytechnic, a pioneer of widening participation and access to higher education, was granted university status under the Further and Higher Education Act 1992.
After leaving Oxford in 1964, the renowned historian A. J. P. Taylor lectured at the Polytechnic until his death in 1990.Hughes-Warrington, Marnie Fifty Key Thinkers on History (p. 305) London: Routledge, 2000
In 1984, Patrick Harrington, a prominent member of the National Front, and deputy editor of NF News, and also a university student, was the subject of protests by students who picketed and boycotted his lectures, arguing that his presence made life intolerable for ethnic minority students.Kirkwood, Richard "Changing Audiences, Changing Contexts – Reflections on 37 years with students looking at ‘Race’ issues" in Farrar, Max and Todd, Malcolm (eds.) Teaching 'race' in social sciences – new contexts, new approaches (cap. 1) The Higher Education Academy subject network for Sociology, Anthropology and Politics, 2006 Disputing this, Harrington obtained an injunction which the protesters, backed by the students' union, ignored.Searchlight magazine, June 1984 At one stage the President of the National Union of Students, Phil Woolas, reported that the Polytechnic was "simply not functioning any more," with lecturers defying the courts by refusing to give names of students on demonstrations.Beckett, Francis BNP student faces boycott The Guardian, 21 May 2002 Two student leaders were sent to prison for 16 days for contempt of the court order preventing them from barring Harrington and the Secretary of State for Education, Sir Keith Joseph, threatened to close the Polytechnic down.The Times, 29 November 1984
In December, David MacDowall, then Director, resigned after pressure from the Inner London Education Authority to make a complaint against Harrington for remarks he made in a radio interview. ILEA said the remarks were racist, which Harrington denied.The Times, 8 December 1984 In his resignation letter, Dr. MacDowall admitted that he had acted "in a totally fascistic manner" over the issue and wished "all the picketing students the best of luck with their campaign."Copsey, Nigel Anti-Fascism in Britain (p. 156) London: Macmillan, 2000 Harrington subsequently faced a disciplinary hearing for a television interview in which, in line with NF policy, he questioned the right of black people to citizenship.The Times, 15 and 19 December 1984 In January 1985, with a new Director, John Beishon, in post and final examinations approaching, the Polytechnic, students' union and Harrington agreed a deal in which his classes would be taught separately in another building.The Times, 8 and 12  January 1985 He eventually graduated with a degree in philosophy.Milman, David Educational Conflict and the Law (pp. 114-116) Beckenham:Croom Helm, 1986 Dr. Beishon remained at PNL for three years.Price, Christopher John Beishon: Managing change in a turbulent student world The Guardian, 1 May 2001

==See also==

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==


