[[Wavenumber]]

CATEGORIES: Wave mechanics, Concepts in physics

In the physical sciences, the wavenumber (also wave number) is the spatial frequency of a wave, either in cycles per unit distance or radians per unit distance. It can be envisaged as the number of waves that exist over a specified distance (analogous to frequency being the number of cycles or radians per unit time).
Because of the use of this term in applied physics, including spectroscopy, often the reference distance should be assumed to be cm.  For example, a particle's energy may be given as a wavenumber in cm−1, which strictly speaking is not a unit of energy. However if one assumes this corresponds to electromagnetic radiation, then it can be directly converted to any unit of energy, e.g. 1 cm−1 implies 1.23984×10−4 eV and 8065.54 cm−1 implies 1 eV.NIST Reference on Constants, Units and Uncertainty (CODATA 2010), specifically 100/m and 1 eV. Retrieved April 25, 2013.
In multidimensional systems, the wavenumber is also the magnitude of the wave vector.

==Definition==

It can be defined as either
For electromagnetic radiation in vacuum, wavenumber is proportional to frequency and to photon energy. Because of this, wavenumbers are used as a unit of energy in spectroscopy. In the SI units, wavenumber is expressed in units of reciprocal meters (m−1), but in spectroscopy it is usual to give wavenumbers in reciprocal centimeters (cm−1). The angular wavenumber is expressed in radians per meter (rad·m−1).

==In wave equations==

For the special case of an electromagnetic wave in vacuum, where vp = c, k is given by
where E is the energy of the wave, ħ is the reduced Planck constant, and c is the speed of light in a vacuum.
For the special case of a matter wave, for example an electron wave, in the non-relativistic approximation:
Here p is the momentum of the particle, m is the mass of the particle, E is the kinetic energy of the particle, and ħ is the reduced Planck's constant.
Wavenumber is also used to define the group velocity.

==In spectroscopy==

where λ  is the wavelength of the radiation.
The historical reason for using this quantity is that it proved to be convenient in the analysis of atomic spectra. Wavenumbers were first used in the calculations of Johannes Rydberg in the 1880s. The Rydberg–Ritz combination principle of 1908 was also formulated in terms of wavenumbers. A few years later spectral lines could be understood in quantum theory as differences between energy levels, energy being proportional to wavenumber, or frequency. However, spectroscopic data kept being tabulated in terms of wavenumber rather than frequency or energy, since spectroscopic instruments are typically calibrated in terms of wavelength, independent of the value for the speed of light or Planck's constant.
For example, the wavenumbers of the emissions lines of hydrogen atoms are given by
where R is the Rydberg constant and ni and nf are the principal quantum numbers of the initial and final levels, respectively (ni is greater than nf for emission).
A wavenumber can be converted into energy E via Planck's relation:
It can also be converted into frequency via
In colloquial usage, the unit cm−1 is sometimes referred to as a "wavenumber",[ref]See for example,
 |year=2001
 |title=Absorption and the dimensionless overlap integral for two-photon excitation
