[[Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics]]

CATEGORIES: Concepts in physics, Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics

In statistical mechanics, Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics describes the average distribution of non-interacting material particles over various energy states in thermal equilibrium, and is applicable when the temperature is high enough or the particle density is low enough to render quantum effects negligible.
where:
Equivalently, the particle number is sometimes expressed as

==Applications==

Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics may be used to derive the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution (for an ideal gas of classical particles in a three-dimensional box), however they apply to other situations as well. Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics can be used to extend that distribution to particles with a different Energy–momentum relation, such as relativistic particles (Maxwell–Jüttner distribution). In addition, hypothetical situations can be considered such as particles in a box with different number of dimensions (four-dimensional, two-dimensional, etc.).

==Limits of applicability==

Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics are often described as the statistics of "distinguishable" classical particles. In other words the configuration of particle A in state 1 and particle B in state 2 is different from the case where particle B is in state 1 and particle A is in state 2. This assumption leads to the proper (Boltzmann) statistics of particles in the energy states, but yields non-physical results for the entropy, as embodied in the Gibbs paradox.
Technically speaking, however, there are no real particles which have the characteristics required by Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics.
Indeed, the Gibbs paradox is resolved if we treat all particles of a certain type (e.g., electrons, protons, etc.) as indistinguishable, and this assumption can be justified in the context of quantum mechanics. Once this assumption is made, however, the particle statistics change.
Quantum particles are either bosons (following instead Bose–Einstein statistics) or fermions (subject to the Pauli exclusion principle, following instead Fermi–Dirac statistics).
Both of these quantum statistics approach the Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics in the limit of high temperature and low particle density, without the need for any ad hoc assumptions. The Fermi–Dirac and Bose–Einstein statistics give the energy level occupation as:
It can be seen that the condition under which the Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics are valid is when
Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics are particularly useful for studying gases, whereas Fermi–Dirac statistics are most often used for the study of electrons in solids. Bose–Einstein statistics are important for blackbody radiation. Note however that none of these statistics are general, as they all assume that the particles are non-interacting (they all assume a static ladder of energy states).

==Derivations of Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics==

Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics can be derived in various statistical mechanical thermodynamic ensembles:[tpl]cite isbn|9780486638966[/tpl]
In each case it is necessary to assume that the particles are non-interacting, and that multiple particles can occupy the same state and do so independently.

===Derivation from microcanonical ensemble===

Suppose we have a container with a huge number of very small particles all with identical physical characteristics (mass, charge, etc.). Let's refer to this as the system. Assume that though the particles have identical properties, they are distinguishable. For example, we might identify each particle by continually observing their trajectories, or by placing a marking on each one, e.g., drawing a different number on each one as is done with lottery balls.
The particles are moving inside that container in all directions with great speed. Because the particles are speeding around, they possess some energy. The Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution is a mathematical function that speaks about how many particles in the container have a certain energy.
and because not even a single object is to be left outside the boxes, implies that the sum made of the terms Na, Nb, Nc, Nd, Ne, ..., Nk must equal N, thus the term (N - Na - Nb - Nc - ... - Nl - Nk)! in the relation above evaluates to 0!. (0!=1) which makes possible to write down that relation as
to write:
This is essentially a division by N! of Boltzmann's original expression for W, and this correction is referred to as correct Boltzmann counting.
Finally
In order to maximize the expression above we apply Fermat's theorem (stationary points), according to which local extrema, if exist, must be at critical points (partial derivatives vanish):
or, differentiating and rearranging:
Boltzmann realized that this is just an expression of the second law of thermodynamics. Identifying dE as the internal energy, the second law of thermodynamics states that for variation only in entropy (S) and particle number (N):
Note that the above formula is sometimes written:
Alternatively, we may use the fact that
to obtain the population numbers as
where Z is the partition function defined by:

===Derivation from canonical ensemble===

In the above discussion, the Boltzmann distribution function was obtained via directly analysing the multiplicities of a system. Alternatively, one can make use of the canonical ensemble. In a canonical ensemble, a system is in thermal contact with a reservoir.  While energy is free to flow between the system and the reservoir, the reservoir is thought to have infinitely large heat capacity as to maintain constant temperature, T, for the combined system.
Next we recall the thermodynamic identity (from the first law of thermodynamics):
which implies, for any state s of the system
where Z is an appropriately chosen "constant" to make total probability 1. (Z is constant provided that the temperature T is invariant.) It is obvious that
where, with obvious modification,
this is the same result as before.
Comments on this derivation:

==See also==

==References==

==Bibliography==


