[[Helene Kröller-Müller]]

CATEGORIES: 1869 births, 1939 deaths, 19th-century German people, 20th-century German people, 20th-century Dutch people, German art collectors, Dutch art collectors, Dutch people of German descent, People from Essen

Helene Kröller-Müller, (11 February 1869 – 14 December 1939) was one of the first European women to put together a major art collection.
She was born Helene Emma Laura Juliane Müller at [tpl]ill|de|Essen-Horst[/tpl], Essen, Germany, into a wealthy industrialist family. Her father, Wilhelm Müller, owned Wm. H. Müller & Co., a prosperous supplier of raw materials to the mining and steel industries.Joshua Levine (21 May 2009), The Vision Quest of Helene Kroller-Muller Forbes Magazine. She married Dutch shipping and mining tycoon Anton Kröller in 1888 and used both surnames in accordance with Dutch tradition.
She studied under Henk Bremmer in 1906-1907. As she was one of the wealthiest women in the Netherlands at the time, Bremmer recommended that she form an art collection. In 1907, she began her collection with the painting Train in a Landscape by Paul Gabriël. Subsequently, Helene Kröller-Müller became an avid art collector, and one of the first people to recognise the genius of Vincent van Gogh. She eventually amassed more than 90 van Gogh paintings and 185 drawings, one of the world's largest collections of the artist's work, second only to the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam. She also bought more than 400 works by Dutch artist Bart van der Leck, but his popularity did not take off like van Gogh's.Sheila Farr (May 23, 2004) How a museum founder helped turn van Gogh into an international icon The Seattle Times.
Kröller-Müller also collected works by modern artists, such as Picasso, Georges Braque, Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Fernand Léger, Diego Rivera, Juan Gris, Piet Mondrian, Gino Severini, Joseph Csaky, Auguste Herbin, Georges Valmier, María Blanchard, Léopold Survage and Tobeen. However, Bremmer advised her not to buy A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte by Georges Seurat, which turned out to be an important icon of 20th-century art. She did purchase however Le Chahut by Seurat, another icon in the history of modern art.Catalogus van de schilderijen verzameling van Mevrouw H. Kröller-Müller, Samensteller H.P. Bremmer, Published 1921 in 'S-Gravenhage (in Dutch) Also, she steered away from artists of her native Germany, whose work she found "insufficiently authoritative."Sheila Farr (May 23, 2004) How a museum founder helped turn van Gogh into an international icon The Seattle Times.
On a trip to Florence in June 1910, she conceived the idea of creating a museum-house.Joshua Levine (May 21, 2009), The Vision Quest of Helene Kroller-Muller Forbes Magazine. From 1913 onwards parts of her collection were open to the public; until the mid-1930s her exhibition hall in The Hague was one of the very rare places where one could see more than a few works of modern art.Helene Kröller-Müller and the breakthrough of modern art University of Groningen - Institute of Biography. In 1928, Anton and Helene created the Kröller-Müller Foundation to protect the collection and the estates. In 1935, they donated to the Dutch people their entire collection totaling approximately 12,000 objects, on condition that a large museum be built in the gardens of her park.Alan Riding (12 March 2003), Glimpses Into van Gogh's Imagination; Two Dutch Museums Offer Fresh Angles on a Favorite Son New York Times. Held in the care of the Dutch government, the Kröller-Müller Museum was opened in 1938 near the town of Otterlo in the Netherlands.  Due to the threat of war, plans for a lavish museum were never implemented, but once the war was over it was possible to construct the relatively understated but well-lit modern exhibition extension, opened in 1977, that now houses much of the collection.

==See also==

==Further reading==

==References==


