[[Federated state]]

CATEGORIES: Administrative divisions, Lists of country subdivisions, States, Decentralization, Constitutional state types

A federated state (which may be referred to as a state, a province, a canton, a Land, etc.) is a territorial and constitutional community forming part of a federal union.The Australian National Dictionary: Fourth Edition, pg 1395. (2004) Canberra. ISBN 978-0-19-551771-2. Such states differ from sovereign states, in that they have transferred a portion of their sovereign powers to a federal government.Constitution of the United States of America: Tenth Amendment, Reserved Powers Importantly, when states choose to federate, they lose their standing as persons of international law. Instead, the federal union as a single entity becomes the sovereign state, the person of international law.Crawford, J. (2006). The Creation of States in International Law. Oxford, Clarendon Press. A federated state holds administrative jurisdiction over a defined geographic territory and is a form of regional government.
In some cases, a federation is created from a union of political entities, which are either independent, or dependent territories of another sovereign entity (most commonly a colonial power).Examples are Australia and the United States. In other cases, federated states have been created out of the regions of previously unitary states.This occurred in Belgium in 1993. The Belgian regions had previously devolved powers. Once a federal constitution is formed, the rules governing the relationship between federal and regional powers become part of the country's constitutional law and not international law.
In countries with federal constitutions, there is a division of power between the central government and the component states. These entities - states, provinces, cantons, Länder, etc. - are partially self-governing and are afforded a degree of constitutionally guaranteed autonomy that varies substantially from one federation to another.For instance, Canadian provinces and Swiss cantons possess substantially more powers and enjoy more protection against interference and infringments from the central government than most non-Western federations. Depending on the form the decentralization of powers takes, a federated state's legislative powers may or may not be overruled or vetoed by the federal government. Laws governing the relationship between federal and regional powers can be amended through the federal constitution and state constitutions.

==List of constituents by federation==

The "federated units" in the table below have inherent governmental authority in the federation's constitutional system, while the "other units" are delegated authority by the federal government or are administered directly by it.
 indicates federal capital (or federated units that contain it)
 actively disputed by other sovereign state(s) and/or international community

==See also==

==Notes==

==References==


