[[Octavia E. Butler]]

CATEGORIES: 1947 births, 2006 deaths, African-American novelists, American science fiction writers, African-American writers, American feminist writers, American women novelists, African-American feminists, California State University, Los Angeles alumni, Clarion Workshop, Hugo Award winning writers, MacArthur Fellows, Nebula Award winners, Science Fiction Hall of Fame inductees, Science fiction fans, Women science fiction and fantasy writers, Writers from Seattle, Washington, Postmodern feminists, Postmodern writers, Afrofuturist writers, 20th-century American novelists, 21st-century American novelists, Feminist science fiction

Octavia Estelle Butler (June 22, 1947[tpl]spaced ndash[/tpl]February 24, 2006) was an American science fiction writer. A multiple-recipient of both the Hugo and Nebula awards, Butler was one of the best-known women in the field. In 1995, she became the first science fiction writer to receive the MacArthur Fellowship, nicknamed the Genius Grant.

==Early life and education==

Butler was born and raised in Pasadena, California. Since her father Laurice, a shoeshiner, died when she was a baby, Butler was raised by her grandmother and her mother (Octavia M. Butler) who worked as a maid in order to support the family. Butler grew up in a struggling, racially mixed neighborhood.AA Registry.com profile on Octavia Butler. According to the Norton Anthology of African American Literature she was "an introspective only child in a strict Baptist household" who was "drawn early to fiction magazines such as Amazing, Fantasy and Science Fiction, and Galaxy and soon began reading all the science fiction classics."Norton Anthology of African American Literature, p.2515.
Octavia Jr., nicknamed Junie, was paralytically shy and a daydreamer, and was later diagnosed as being dyslexic. She began writing at the age of 10 "to escape loneliness and boredom" and was 12 when she began a lifelong interest in science fiction.Voices. "I was writing my own little stories and when I was 12, I was watching a bad science fiction movie called Devil Girl from Mars," she told the journal Black Scholar, "and decided that I could write a better story than that. And I turned off the TV and proceeded to try, and I've been writing science fiction ever since."[tpl]Wayback |date=20091027103606 |url=http://geocities.com/sela_towanda/essay.htm |title=Essay [/tpl].
After getting an associate's degree from Pasadena City College in 1968 Pasadena.edu, she next enrolled at California State University, Los Angeles. She eventually left CalState and took writing classes through UCLA extension.
Butler would later credit two writing workshops for giving her "the most valuable help I received with my writing" SFWA:
She remained, throughout her career, a self-identified science fiction fan, an insider who rose from within the ranks of the field.Fowler, Karen Joy. "Remembering Octavia Butler: The great African-American science fiction writer saw herself as a reclusive outsider, but to her peers she was a beloved insider". Salon, March 17, 2006.
Butler moved to Seattle, Washington, in November 1999. She described herself as "comfortably asocial—a hermit in the middle of Seattle—a pessimist if I'm not careful, a feminist, a Black, a former Baptist, an oil-and-water combination of ambition, laziness, insecurity, certainty, and drive."[ref]
