</ref>  Together, Basil and Gregory went to [[Constantinople]] for further studies, including the lectures of [[Libanius]]. The two also spent almost six years in [[Athens]] starting around 349, where they met a fellow student who would become the emperor [[Julian the Apostate]].<ref>Ruether (1969), pp. 19, 25.</ref><ref>Rousseau (1994), pp. 32–40.</ref> Basil left Athens in 356, and after travels in [[Egypt]] and [[Syria]], he returned to Caesarea, where for around a year he practiced law and taught rhetoric.<ref name =R1994-1>Rousseau (1994), p. 1.</ref>
Basil's life changed radically after he encountered Eustathius of Sebaste, a charismatic bishop and ascetic.Hildebrand (2007), pp. 19–20. Abandoning his legal and teaching career, Basil devoted his life to God. A letter described his spiritual awakening:

===Annesi===

After his baptism, Basil traveled in 357 to Palestine, Egypt, Syria and Mesopotamia to study ascetics and monasticism.Quasten (1986), p. 205.Encyclopaedia Britannica (15th ed.) vol. 1, p. 938. He distributed his fortunes among the poor, then went briefly into solitude near Neocaesarea of Pontus (mod. day Niksar, Turkey) on the Iris. Basil eventually realized that while he respected the ascetics' piety, the solitary life did not call him.Merredith (1995), p. 21. Eustathius of Sebaste, a prominent anchorite near Pontus, had mentored Basil. However, they also eventually differed over dogma.St. Basil the Great in Catholic Encyclopedia: "In 373 ... Eustathius of Sebaste (became) a traitor to the Faith and a personal foe"
Basil instead felt drawn toward communal religious life, and by 358 he was gathering around him a group of like-minded disciples, including his brother Peter. Together they founded a monastic settlement on his family's estate near Annesi Encyclopaedia Britannica (15th ed.) vol. 1, p. 938. (modern Sonusa or Uluköy, near the confluence of the Iris and Lycos Riversmod. Yeşilırmak and Kelkit Çayi rivers, see Rousseau (1994), p. 62.). His widowed mother Emmelia, sister Macrina and several other women, joined Basil and devoted themselves to pious lives of prayer and charitable works (some claim Macrina founded this community).The New Westminster Dictionary of Church History: The Early, Medieval, and Reformation Eras, vol.1, Westminster John Knox Press, 2008, ISBN 0-664-22416-4, p. 75.
Here Basil wrote about monastic communal life. His writings became pivotal in developing monastic traditions of the Eastern Church.Attwater, Donald and Catherine Rachel John. The Penguin Dictionary of Saints. 3rd edition. New York: Penguin Books, 1993. ISBN 0-14-051312-4. In 358, Basil invited his friend Gregory of Nazianzus to join him in Annesi.Rousseau (1994), p. 66. When Gregory eventually arrived, they collaborated on Origen's Philocalia, a collection of Origen's works .Merredith (1995), pp. 21–22. Gregory then decided to return to his family in Nazianzus.
Basil attended the Council of Constantinople in 360. He at first sided with Eustathius and the Homoiousians, a semi-Arian faction who taught that the Son was of like substance with the Father, neither the same (one substance) nor different from him.Meredith (1995), p. 22. The Homoiousians opposed the Arianism of Eunomius but refused to join with the supporters of the Nicene Creed, who professed that the members of the Trinity were of one substance ("homoousios"). However, Basil's bishop, Dianius of Caesarea, had subscribed only to the earlier Nicene form of agreement. Basil eventually abandoned the Homoiousians, and emerged instead as a strong supporter of the Nicene Creed.

===Caesarea===

In 362, Bishop Meletius of Antioch ordained Basil as a deacon. Eusebius then summoned Basil to his city and ordained him as presbyter of the Church there in 365. Ecclesiastical entreaties rather than Basil's desires thus altered his career path.
Basil and Gregory Nazianzus spent the next few years combating the Arian heresy, which threatened to divide Cappadocia's Christians. In close fraternal cooperation, they agreed to a great rhetorical contest with accomplished Arian theologians and rhetors.McGuckin (2001), p. 143. In the subsequent public debates, presided over by agents of Valens, Gregory and Basil emerged triumphant. This success confirmed for both Gregory and Basil that their futures lay in administration of the Church. Basil next took on functional administration of the Diocese of Caesarea. Eusebius is reported as becoming jealous of the reputation and influence which Basil quickly developed, and allowed Basil to return to his earlier solitude. Later, however, Gregory persuaded Basil to return. Basil did so, and became the effective manager of the diocese for several years, while giving all the credit to Eusebius.
In 370, Eusebius died, and Basil was chosen to succeed him, and was consecrated bishop on June 14, 370.Meredith (1995), p. 23 His new post as bishop of Caesarea also gave him the powers of exarch of Pontus and metropolitan of five suffragan bishops, many of whom had opposed him in the election for Eusebius's successor. It was then that his great powers were called into action. Hot-blooded and somewhat imperious, Basil was also generous and sympathetic. He personally organized a soup kitchen and distributed food to the poor during a famine following a drought. He gave away his personal family inheritance to benefit the poor of his diocese.
His letters show that he actively worked to reform thieves and prostitutes. They also show him encouraging his clergy not to be tempted by wealth or the comparatively easy life of a priest, and that he personally took care in selecting worthy candidates for holy orders. He also had the courage to criticize public officials who failed in their duty of administering justice. At the same time, he preached every morning and evening in his own church to large congregations. In addition to all the above, he built a large complex just outside Caesarea, called the Basiliad, which included a poorhouse, hospice, and hospital, and was regarded at the time as one of the wonders of the world.
His zeal for orthodoxy did not blind him to what was good in an opponent; and for the sake of peace and charity he was content to waive the use of orthodox terminology when it could be surrendered without a sacrifice of truth. The Emperor Valens, who was an adherent of the Arian philosophy, sent his prefect Modestus to at least agree to a compromise with the Arian faction. Basil's adamant negative response prompted Modestus to say that no one had ever spoken to him in that way before. Basil replied, "Perhaps you have never yet had to deal with a bishop." Modestus reported back to Valens that he believed nothing short of violence would avail against Basil. Valens was apparently unwilling to engage in violence. He did however issue orders banishing Basil repeatedly, none of which succeeded. Valens came himself to attend when Basil celebrated the Divine Liturgy on the Feast of the Theophany (Epiphany), and at that time was so impressed by Basil that he donated to him some land for the building of the Basiliad. This interaction helped to define the limits of governmental power over the church.
Basil then had to face the growing spread of Arianism. This belief system, which denied that Christ was consubstantial with the Father, was quickly gaining adherents and was seen by many, particularly those in Alexandria most familiar with it, as posing a threat to the unity of the church.[ref]
