[[Footrot Flats]]

CATEGORIES: Comic strips started in the 1970s, Comics about dogs, New Zealand comic strips

Footrot Flats was a comic strip written by New Zealand cartoonist Murray Ball.  It ran from 1975 until 1994 in newspapers around the world, though the unpublished strips continued to be released in book form until 2000. Altogether there are 27 numbered books (collecting the newspaper strips, with additional material), a further 8 books collecting the Sunday newspaper strips, and 5 smaller 'pocket' books of original material, plus various related publications. There was also a stage musical, an animated feature film called Footrot Flats: the Dog's Tail Tale, and even a theme park in New Zealand. The strip reached its peak of popularity in the mid-1980s, with the books selling millions of copies in Australasia. At various times, Ball cited different reasons for quitting the strip, including the death of his own dog, and his displeasure with the direction of New Zealand politics. [tpl]Citation needed|date=April 2009[/tpl]
The cartoon was based around the life of Wal Footrot's sheepdog, called "Dog", on their farm Footrot Flats, and the other characters, human and animal, that came into their lives. The Dog's thoughts are voiced in thought bubbles, though he is clearly "just a dog" rather than the heavily anthropomorphised creatures sometimes found in other comics or animation. The humour was based around the foibles of the characters, which many, particularly farmers themselves, found easy to recognise around them. There was much "humour in adversity", making fun of the daily struggle that permeates farming life. The depictions of the animals are quite realistic and detailed, with a dose of comic anthropomorphism superimposed without spoiling the farming realism.

==Main characters==

The characters are invariably known by their nicknames, such as Cooch, Pongo, Rangi, and Aunt Dolly. However, Aunt Dolly never uses the nicknames and always addresses them by their proper, full names.

==Minor characters==

==Sport==

Sport plays a major part in Footrot Flats. Wal plays all sorts of sports including cricket, golf, fishing, rugby union, tennis and many more. The dog often plays with Wal and an ongoing joke in the strip is how Wal can never beat his little brother Rex in any sport. 
Wal plays for the Raupo rugby club as a hooker and is often seen playing and training in the strip. At one point Wal was replaced by a younger man as he was getting too old, but the younger player wasn't as good. The final few strips ever drawn involve an unlikely chain  of events which culminate in Wal somehow scoring a try against a touring international rugby side. Wal also acts as coach to the Raupo team of young footballers (with Rangi being one of its more prominent members and the Dog serving as mascot duty which he takes very seriously, often blaming himself if the team loses).
In the cricket season Wal plays for an unknown team as an all-rounder, although he is sometimes pictured as the wicket keeper. Cooch often plays cricket with Wal and so does the dog, usually fielding in the slips or in the covers (wherein the dog's Alias of 'The Scarlet Manuka' sometimes comes into play, as the Dog steals the cricket balls to 'rescue' them from persecution). 
Cooch also plays golf with Wal who has a homemade course on his farm. Cooch is better than Wal at golf, even though the course is very hard (the first hole is a par 14). When they do play on a real course Cooch usually wins. Wal claims that the trees are on Cooch's side. 
Wal also occasionally plays tennis with Cheeky Hobson and fights for her affections with Nigel Erkstine, another member of the tennis club. The dog is usually the ball boy. 
Wal and Cooch frequently fish in various ways: whitebaiting, long line fishing, and most often floundering. 
Other sports that get mentioned in Footrot Flats are boxing, polo, soccer, squash, and shooting.

==List of publications==

Main series
Pocket books
Combined collections
Murray Ball Collector's Trilogy
Misc
Miscellaneous Merchandise 
included...(but was not limited to) some of these....

==See also==

==Notes==

==External links==


