[[Dark nebula]]

CATEGORIES: Dark nebulae, Nebulae, Cosmic dust

A dark nebula is a type of interstellar cloud that is so dense that it obscures the light from the background emission or reflection nebula (e.g., the Horsehead Nebula) or background stars (e.g., the Snake Nebula). (The term absorption nebula has also been applied to these phenomenon.) The extinction of the light is caused by interstellar dust grains located in the coldest, densest parts of larger[tpl]clarify|date=February 2009|what size is larger? Over 3 solar masses maybe? Do dust grains also cause extinction in smaller, Bok globule-size, clouds?[/tpl] molecular clouds. Clusters and large complexes of dark nebulae are associated with Giant Molecular Clouds. Isolated small dark nebulae are called Bok globules. Like other interstellar dust/material, things it obscures are only visible using radio waves in radio astronomy or infrared in infrared astronomy.
Dark clouds appear so because of submicrometre-sized dust particles, coated with frozen carbon monoxide and nitrogen, which effectively block the passage of light at visible wavelengths. Also present are molecular hydrogen, atomic helium, C18O, CS, NH3 (ammonia), H2CO (formaldehyde), c-C3H2 (cyclopropenylidene) and a molecular ion N2H+ (diazenylium), all of which are relatively transparent. These clouds are the spawning grounds of stars and planets, and understanding their development is essential to understanding star formation.James Di Francesco et al., 2002, "Abundances of Molecular Species in Barnard 68", The Astronomical Journal, 124, 2749ESO - eso9934 - Secrets of a Dark Cloud
The form of such dark clouds is very irregular: they have no clearly defined outer boundaries and sometimes take on convoluted serpentine shapes. The largest dark nebulae are visible to the naked eye, appearing as dark patches against the brighter background of the Milky Way like the Coalsack Nebula and the Great rift.  These naked-eye objects are sometimes known as dark cloud constellations and take on a variety of names.
In the inner outer molecular regions of dark nebula important events take place, such as the formation of stars and masers.

==See also==

==Notes==


