[[Berliner Gramophone]]

CATEGORIES: Defunct record labels of the United States, Record labels established in 1889, Record labels disestablished in 1924, Defunct record labels of Canada

Berliner Gramophone – discs identified with "E. Berliner's Gramophone" as the logo –  was the first flat disc record label in the United States. Its records were played on Emile Berliner's invention, the Gramophone, and therefore were not cylinders as were more common in the recording industry of the 1890s.

==History==

Emile Berliner received U.S. patents nos. 372,786 and 382,790 on the Gramophone on November 8, 1887 and May 15, 1888 respectively.Emile Berliner and the Birth of the Recording Industry at the Library of Congress This was still before the organization of the North American Phonograph Company, which first produced cylinder recordings for public use and thus, Berliner's flat disc record is roughly contemporary with the exploitation of the cylinder medium, though it took longer for Berliner to exploit production of flat discs in America. Although based in Washington D.C., Berliner's first joint venture was undertaken in Germany in 1889 with the manufacturer Kammer & Reinhardt, a maker of toys.The British Library's Kammer & Reinhardt gramophone from the 1890s The Kammer & Reinhardt machine utilized 5" celluloid discs, and some machines and discs were exported to England. A recording, likely made by Berliner himself in 1890, of "Twinkle, Twinkle Little Star" is the oldest recording in the BBC Library and was once touted as the oldest in the world, though this has since been dis-proven.Norris McWhirter & Ross McWhirter – The Guinness Book of World Records 1974 Edition Bantam Books, 1974 The Kammer & Reinhardt venture did not last very long, though there is no information as to just how long.
In the early 1890s, Berliner attempted to found his first American company, the American Gramophone Company, in New York City, but it fell apart before issuing a single machine or disc. Raymond Wile, "Etching the Human Voice: The Berliner Invention of the Gramophone", ARSC Journal Vol. 21/1, 1990 Back in Washington, D.C., Berliner tried again under the moniker of the United States Gramophone Company and began to manufacture machines and 7" hard rubber discs in 1894. In 1895, the composition of the discs changed to shellac, and remained so ever after. Shellac remained the main compound for producing recordings until vinyl records – initially for children's records and radio-only discs – were introduced in the 1930s.Arcane Radio Trivia – "The Transcription Disc" http://tenwatts.blogspot.com/2006/05/transcription-disc.html Beginning in 1896, Berliner's gramophones were made by Philadelphia-based machinist Eldridge Johnson, who added a spring motor to the previously hand-turned machine. Berliner also opened an office in New York City, staffed by Frank Seaman and O.D. LaDow and organized as the National Gramophone Company. 
Master recordings were made onto zinc plates, which were then electroplated and a negative-image 'mother' made from them to stamp discs. A major reversal of Berliner's fortunes occurred when the mastering plant in Washington D.C. burned down on September 29, 1897, destroying a hundred unissued masters and all of his record manufacturing equipment. "The Gramophone Business" in Emile Berliner and the Birth of the Recording Industry, American Memory Site, Library of Congress http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/berlhtml/berlgramo.html#TG Within a few months, however Berliner was up and rolling again, with some record production aspects moved to Philadelphia. 
As the popularity of the gramophone began to pick up, Berliner found himself having to deal with infringers on his patents. In 1898, Berliner shut down at least two firms that were leaching off his business models and, in the first case, products. In 1899, Berliner discovered that Frank Seaman was behind a machine called the Zonophone that seemed an exact replica of the Gramophone. Furious, Berliner cut off all supply to New York, which proved a fatal error. Seaman countersued for breach of contract, and in June 1900 the court granted an injunction against Berliner and United States Gramophone Company. Though he would attempt in several proceedings afterward to have the injunction overturned, it was allowed to stand, and compelled Emile Berliner's exit from the gramophone business in America.Supreme Court Appelate Division, Eugene V. Daly against Frank Seaman http://books.google.com/books?id=JecfgI3C8GsC&pg=PP3&dq=O.D.+LaDow&source=gbs_selected_pages&cad=3#v=onepage&q=O.D.%20LaDow&f=false
Berliner transferred his patents to Eldridge Johnson, who then changed the name over the door to his own, though Berliner retained a share in the new company. In March 1901, Johnson registered the name Victor Talking Machine Company and launched the brand later in the year. By 1905 had regained the lead in the American flat disc record business,Roland Gelatt, The Fabulous Phonograph, MacMillan Publishing Company; Second Revised Edition edition (April 1977) whereas by 1906, Seaman's Zonophone was placed on a receiver's index.Supreme Court Appelate Division, Eugene V. Daly against Frank Seaman http://books.google.com/books?id=JecfgI3C8GsC&pg=PP3&dq=O.D.+LaDow&source=gbs_selected_pages&cad=3#v=onepage&q=O.D.%20LaDow&f=false

==Foreign Interests==

In 1895, comic Billy Golden introduced Berliner to Fred Gaisberg,Jerrold Northrop Moore – Sound Revolutions: A Biography of Fred Gaisberg, Founding Father of Commercial Sound Recording. Sanctuary Publishing; 2nd edition edition (August 1, 1999) who, with Barry Peter Owen – a trusted associate within the National Gramophone Company – helped to establish Berliner's overseas interests. Although the German partnership with Kammer and Reinhardt had long ended, Berliner still held patents in Germany and England. In 1898, Owen founded the Berliner subsidiary in England which eventually took the name of Gramophone & Typewriter Ltd.; in 1931, this was one of the companies that was folded into EMI. That same year, Gaisberg established Berliner's German subsidiary as Deutsche Grammophon; this was the longest lasting company in history under its original charter, until finally being acquired by Universal Music Group in 1999. Gaisberg also founded a Berliner subsidiary in St. Petersburg, Russia in 1901.
E. Berliner Gramophone of Canada was established in 1899. It was first located in the Aqueduct Street building of Northern Electric in Montreal, and commenced marketing records and gramophones the following year. In 1904, the company received its charter as the Berliner Gram-o-phone Company of Canada. Early recordings were imported from masters recorded in the United States until a recording studio in Montreal was established in 1906. 
The Berliner name as a record label lasted longest in Canada. In 1918, Emile Berliner's son Herbert Berliner left Berliner Gram-O-Phone and founded the Compo Company.Compo Company Ltd.. The Canadian Encyclopedia. Retrieved on 2013-07-16. Herbert's younger brother, Edgar, continued as chief executive of Berliner Gram-o-phone. In 1924, Canadian Berliner was bought out by USA's Victor and became Victor Talking Machine Company of Canada. Emile Berliner died in 1929 – the same year RCA bought out Victor – and Edgar Berliner resigned from Canadian RCA in 1930.
Berliner Gram-o-phone's facilities in Montreal, a complex of buildings at 1001 rue Lenoir and 1050 rue LaCasse in the St-Henri district, became home to RCA Victor Canada over the next several decades,CAPS 2003 APN. Capsnews.org. Retrieved on 2013-07-16. developing and producing such high-tech products as microwave radio relay systems, communication satellites, television broadcast equipment, etc. Since the dissolution of RCA in 1986, the Lenoir building has been turned into a multi-use office/commercial building, but the Lacasse facility is now The Emile Berliner Museum,Travel guide to museums and galleries in Canada | Virtual Museum of Canada Find a Museum. Virtualmuseum.ca (1996-01-24). Retrieved on 2013-07-16. documenting the history of the man, his company and the building complex. The historic Studio Victor located there is still an active recording studio.http://homepage.mac.com/studiovictor/English%20Web%20Site/index_English.html

==Legacy and Preservation==

Although Berliner Records were short – only between 90 and 100 seconds of audio could comfortably fit onto their 7" discs – the range of material covered was far greater than that employed by the cylinder companies of the 1890s. Naturally, Berliner was well supplied with the typical band and comic selections commonly found on cylinders, but also branched out into piano music, ragtime, speeches, sermons, instrumental solos and some ethnographic material on a greater scale than his competitors. From the first, Berliner's European subsidiaries were deeply invested in opera and classical music, only indirectly exploited by American cylinder companies, at least in the 1890s.
Documenting the output of American Berliner has proved a daunting task, as original records are scarce collector's items and the company employed a strategy of numbering that seems to make little sense. Although referred to commonly as "Berliner matrices", they are not true matrix numbers, but release numbers concerned with conserving the same number per selection even if a given title was re-recorded by another artist. Subsequent re-recordings are usually given a letter suffix, usually "W-Z" for early releases.The Online Discographical Project: Early Series Thankfully the recording date is usually inscribed or stamped in the label area, but as Berliner did not employ paper labels sometimes the information is difficult to read. After the 1897 fire, a new series was begun which placed a zero before the number and expanded the letter codes back to "A."The Online Discographical Project: Berliner Discs, Later "0" Prefix Series Berliner's foreign matrices employed entirely different strategies, and many to most of those have been documented by discographer Alan Kelly.
In 2014, the EMI Archive Trust announced an online initiative that would collect information on Berliner records worldwide. They have what appears to be the largest concentration of Berliner records in one place, numbering close to 18,000 items and largely collected by Fred Gaisberg in the early years of the company.The EMI Archive Trust – The Berliner Project Another large concentration of Canadian Berliners are held by the National Library of Canada, which has set up the Virtual Gramophone on the web to provide access to them, though their focus is primarily on Canadian artists.National Library of Canada: The Virtual Gramophone

==Berliner recording artists==

Some of the notable artists who recorded for Berliner include:

==See also==

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==


