[[Clodia]]

CATEGORIES: 95 BC births, Ancient Roman women, 1st-century BC Romans, Year of death unknown, Claudii, Clodii

Clodia (born Claudia, c. 95 BC or c. 94 BCSchwabe, Ludwig. Quaestiones Catullianae (Gissae, 1862), 59.), nicknamed Quadrantaria, and often referred to in scholarship as Clodia Metelli ("Clodia the wife of Metellus"), was one of three known daughters of the patrician Appius Claudius Pulcher and either Caecilia Metella Balearica, or her cousin, Caecilia Metella daughter of Lucius Caecilius Metellus Diadematus.T. P. Wiseman, Celer and Nepos, The Classical Quarterly, New Series, Vol. 21, No. 1 (May, 1971), pp. 180-182
It is not certain, if, out of three Appius' daughters, she was the eldest or the middle one. It is only known that she was not the youngest sister.
She is not to be confused with her niece, Clodia Pulchra, who was briefly married to Octavian.
Like many other women of the Roman elite, Clodia was very well educated in Greek and Philosophy, with a special talent for writing poetry[tpl]Citation needed|date=June 2013[/tpl]. Her life, immortalized in the writings of Marcus Tullius Cicero and also, it is generally believed, in the poems of Gaius Valerius Catullus, was characterized by perpetual scandal.

==Life==

Along with her brother Publius Clodius Pulcher, she changed her patrician name to Clodia, with a plebeian connotation. 
Clodia was married to Quintus Caecilius Metellus Celer, her first cousin, with whom she had a daughter Caecilia Metella. The marriage was not a happy one. Clodia engaged in several affairs with married men (possibly including the poet, Catullus - see below) and slaves, becoming at the same time a notorious gambler[tpl]Citation needed|date=June 2013[/tpl] and drinker[tpl]Citation needed|date=June 2013[/tpl]. Arguments with Metellus Celer were constant, often in public situations. When Metellus Celer died in strange circumstances in 59 BC, Clodia was suspected of poisoning her husband.
As a widow, Clodia became known as a merry one, taking several lovers. Clodia maintained several other lovers, including Marcus Caelius Rufus, Catullus' friend. This particular affair would cause an immense scandal. After the relationship with Caelius was over in 56 BC, Clodia publicly accused him of attempted poisoning. The accusation led to a murder charge and trial. Caelius' defence advocate was Cicero, who took a harsh approach against her, recorded in his speech Pro Caelio. Cicero had a personal interest in the case, as her brother Publius Clodius was Cicero's most bitter political enemy. Cicero accused Clodia of being a seducer and a drunkard in Rome and in Baiae and alluded to the persistent rumours of an incestuous relationship with Clodius. Cicero stated that he "would Caelius' accusers still more vigorously, if I had not a quarrel with that woman's Clodia's husband—brother, I meant to say; I am always making this mistake. At present I will proceed with moderation... for I have never thought it my duty to engage in quarrels with any woman, especially with one whom all men have always considered everybody's friend rather than any one's enemy."Cicero Pro Cael. 13,32 translation C.D. Yonge He declared her a disgrace to her family and nicknamed Clodia the Medea of the Palatine. (Cicero's marriage to Terentia suffered from Terentia's persistent suspicions that Cicero was conducting an illicit affair with Clodia.)
After the trial of Caelius, in which Caelius was found not guilty, little or possibly nothing is heard of Clodia, and the date of her death is uncertain. In 44 BC, Cicero refers to a Clodia. Either she or a sister was still alive in 44 BC,Cicero ad Att. 14.8.1 but the lack of female personal names (praenomina) in Latin makes it difficult to specify whether this refers to her or a sister.

==Identification with Lesbia==

The poet Catullus wrote several love poems concerning a frequently unfaithful woman he called Lesbia, identified in the mid-second century AD by the writer Apuleius (Apologia 10) as a "Clodia." This practice of replacing actual names with ones of identical metrical value was not uncommon in Latin poetry of that era. In modern times, the resulting identification of Lesbia with Clodia Metelli, based largely on her portrayal by Cicero, is usually treated as accepted fact, despite occasional challenges. A recent article by the Roman historian Suzanne Dixon argues against not only the Lesbia/Clodia identification but also the notion that 'Lesbia' refers to a historical woman at all.Suzanne Dixon, Reading Roman Women (London: Duckworth, 2001), 133–156 (chapter 9, "The Allure of 'La Dolce Vita' in Ancient Rome").
The predominant view, however, identifies Clodia with Lesbia primarily on the basis of Catullus 79.1-2:Garrison, Daniel. The Student's Catullus (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1995), 154. Other affinities exist, though, and major reference works on the classical world admit the identification. cf. Hornblower, Simon, ed. The Oxford Classical Dictionary (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996), 350; Cancik, Hubert, ed. Der Neue Pauly (Stuggart: Metzler, 1996), s.v. "Clodia".
''Lesbius est pulcher. Quid ni? Quem Lesbia malit 

quam te cum tota gente, Catulle, tua.

Sed tamen hic pulcher vendat cum gente Catullum

si tria notorum suavia reppererit.
Lesbius is beautiful. Why not? And Lesbia prefers him 

to you and your whole tribe, Catullus.

But let this beautiful man sell Catullus along with his tribe

if he finds three kisses from people he knows.
"Pulcher," the Latin word for "beautiful" (see line 1 above), is also the cognomen of Clodia's brother, Publius Clodius Pulcher. This is the only one of Catullus' poems in which a character named "Lesbius," the masculine form of the name, appears and Lesbia is present in close proximity. Accusations of incest (as here) against the brother and sister also appear in Cicero.Cic. Cael. 30-8, e.g., though elsewhere in the speech itself, as well as the corpus. Reading Publius Clodius Pulcher for "Lesbius" makes one element of the poem a pun on his name and another a reminder of one of the political attacks Cicero aimed at P. Clodius Pulcher.

==Clodia in popular culture==

==See also==

==References==

==Further reading==


