[[Panarchy]]

CATEGORIES: Anarchist theory, Forms of government, Systems theory, Political science theories

Panarchy is a conceptual term first coined by the Belgian philosopher, economist, and botanist Paul Emile de Puydt in 1860, referring to a specific form of governance (-archy) that would encompass (pan-) all others.P. E. de Puydt, Panarchy, first published in French in the Revue Trimestrielle, Bruxelles, July 1860.  The Oxford English Dictionary lists the noun as "chiefly poetic" with the meaning "a universal realm," citing an 1848 attestation by Philip James Bailey, "the starry panarchy of space". The adjective panarchic "all-ruling" has earlier attestations.Ben Jonson, The Alchemist II.v.15:  Ars sacra, Or chrysopoeia, or spagyrica, Or the pamphysic, or panarchic knowledge alchemy  In the twentieth century the term was re-coined separately by scholars in international relations to describe the notion of global governance and then by systems theorists to describe non-hierarchical organizing theories.

==Freely choosing government==

In his 1860 article "Panarchy" de Puydt, who also expressed support for laissez-faire economics, applied the concept to the individual's right to choose any form of government without being forced to move from their current locale. This is sometimes described as "extra-territorial" (or "exterritorial") since governments often would serve non-contiguous parcels of land. De Puydt wrote:
De Puydt described how such a system would be administered:
De Puydt’s definition of panarchy was expanded into a political philosophy of panarchism. It has been espoused by anarchist or libertarian-leaning individuals, including especially Max NettlauMax Nettlau, Panarchy, A Forgotten Idea of 1860, 1909. and John Zube.Ehrlich, Howard J. 1996. Reinventing Anarchy, Again. AK Press. p. 131John Zube, The Gospel of Panarchy, 1986.
Le Grand E. Day and others have used the phrase "multigovernment" to describe a similar system.[ref]Le Grand E. Day, The Theory of Multigovernment,
1969-1977.[/ref]  Another similar idea is Functional Overlapping Competing Jurisdictions (FOCJ) promoted by Swiss economists Bruno Frey and Reiner Eichenberger.

==Global Society==

James P. Sewell and Mark B. Salter in their 1995 article "Panarchy and Other Norms for Global Governance” define panarchy as “an inclusive, universal system of governance in which all may participate meaningfully." They romanticize the term by mentioning the “playful Greek god Pan of sylvan and pastoral tranquillity, overseer of forests, shepherd of shepherds and their flocks. It thus connotes an archetypal steward of biospheric well-being."Etymology of Panarchy on P2pFoundation.Net quoting from James P. Sewell and Mark B. Salter, "Panarchy and Other Norms for Global Governance: Boutros-Ghali, Rosenau, and Beyond", Global Governance, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 373-382, 1995.
David Ronfeldt and John Arquilla, in their work on Netwar, which they describe as an emergent form of low intensity conflict, crime, and activism, that: "The design is a heterarchy, but also what might be termed a 'panarchy.'"Ronfeldt and Arquilla, In Athena’s Camp:  Preparing for Conflict in the Information Age, Rand Institute, p.280, 1997.
Paul B. Hartzog writes in "Panarchy: Governance in the Network Age": “Panarchy is a transdisciplinary investigation into the political and cultural philosophy of ‘network culture.’ The primary fields of relevance for panarchy are world politics (international relations), political philosophy/theory, and information technology. Panarchy also draws on insights from information/communications theory, economics, sociology, networks, and complex systems."Paul B. Hartzog, "Panarchy: Governance in the Network Age", Master's Essay, University of Utah at Panarchy.com.
In Paul B. Hartzog's work, the term "panarchy" emerges at the intersection of three core concepts: 1) ecology and complex systems, 2) technology, and 3) politics.  The "pan" of ecological thinking draws on the Greek-god Pan as a symbol for wild and unpredictable nature.  The "pan" of technology refers to the Personal Area Network
( A personal area network is the interconnection of information technology devices within the range of an individual person ) that merges human beings into an interconnected global social web.  The "pan" of politics refers to the "inside/outside" distinction, and how, in an era of global challenges and global governance, the frame-of-reference for a global social has no outside.

==Systems theory==

Systems theory is an interdisciplinary field of science which studies the nature and processes of complex systems of the physical and social sciences, as well as in information technology.  Lance Gunderson and C. S. Holling, in their book Panarchy: Understanding Transformations in Systems of Humans and Nature also simultaneously coined the term, saying:
The publisher describes the book’s theory thusly:
In Panarchy Gunderson and Holling write:

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


