[[Eddie Rickenbacker]]

CATEGORIES: 1890 births, 1973 deaths, American aviators, American military personnel of World War I, American people of World War II, American World War I flying aces, American people of Swiss-German descent, American founders of automobile manufacturers, United States Army Medal of Honor recipients, Automotive pioneers, Aviation history of the United States, Burials at Green Lawn Cemetery, Columbus, Ohio, Eastern Air Lines, Indianapolis 500 drivers, International Motorsports Hall of Fame inductees, National Sprint Car Hall of Fame inductees, People from Columbus, Ohio, People from New York City, Recipients of the Croix de Guerre (France), Recipients of the Distinguished Service Cross (United States), Survivors of aviation accidents or incidents, Articles containing video clips, United States Army Air Forces officers, National Aviation Hall of Fame inductees, Mackay Trophy winners, AAA Championship Car drivers, Motorsports Hall of Fame of America inductees, World War I recipients of the Medal of Honor

Edward Vernon Rickenbacker (October 8, 1890 – July 23, 1973) was an American fighter ace in World War I and Medal of Honor recipient. With 26 aerial victories, he was America's most successful fighter ace in the war. He was also a race car driver and automotive designer, a government consultant in military matters and a pioneer in air transportation, particularly as the longtime head of Eastern Air Lines.

==Early life==

He was born Edward Rickenbacher (without a middle name) in Columbus, Ohio to German-speaking Swiss immigrants. From childhood, he loved machines and experimented with them, encouraged by his father's words: "A machine has to have a purpose".
In what was to become one of the defining characteristics of Rickenbacker's life, he nearly died many times in events ranging from an early run-in with a horse-drawn carriage, to a botched tonsillectomy, to airplane crashes. His first life-threatening experience occurred when he was in the "Horsehead Gang". He lived near a mine, and they decided to ride a cart down the slope. It tipped over and almost crushed them.
According to Rickenbacker's autobiography, at age thirteen, his schooling ended in grade seven after the accidental death of his father on August 26, 1904.Rickenbacker 1967, p. 17.  However, according to Eddie Rickenbacker: An American Hero in the Twentieth Century, by W. David Lewis, his father died after an altercation with another man in Columbus.  Rickenbacker found jobs to help support the family, but driven by an intense admiration for machines, Rickenbacker taught himself as much as he could, including enrolling in a correspondence course in engineering. He aggressively pursued any chance of involvement with automobiles. Rickenbacker went to work at the Columbus Buggy Company, eventually becoming a salesman.
Rickenbacker became well known as a race car driver, competing in the Indianapolis 500 four times before World War I, and earning the nickname "Fast Eddie".[ref]
