[[Frogner]]

CATEGORIES: Boroughs of Oslo

Frogner is a borough and an exclusive residential and retail district in the West End of the city of Oslo, Norway. In addition to traditional Frogner, the borough incorporates Bygdøy, Uranienborg and Majorstuen. The borough is named after Frogner Manor, and the famous Frogner Park is now found on the site of the manor. In Oslo, and indeed in Norwegian popular culture, Frogner occupies a similar position as London's Knightsbridge, and has the highest real estate prices in the entire country.Frogner-leilighetene dyrest i landet, Dine Penger

==The name==

The borough is named after the old Frogner Manor. The Norse form of the name was Fraunar (plural form). The name is probably derived from the word frauð 'manure' - and then with the meaning 'fertilized fields'.
See also Frogn and Tøyen.

==History==

The area became part of the city of Oslo (then Christiania) in 1878. The borough was originally the ground and property of Frogner Manor, a splendid 18th-century country estate now housing the Oslo City Museum. The Frogner Park (Frognerparken) includes the famous Vigeland Sculpture Park.
The major part of Frogner consists of houses built around 1900. Frogner was then a part of the city for the affluent, a status it has retained.

==Districts==

Traditional districts of Oslo belonging to the borough are:

==Frogner in modern times==

On the Bygdøy peninsula are located the Viking ship Museum, Norsk Folkemuseum (Norwegian Museum of Cultural History), the Maritime Museum, the Kon-Tiki Museum and the ship Fram, used by Roald Amundsen for his Antarctic expedition. The royal estate Bygdøy kongsgård and the little palace of Oscarshall are also located here. Bygdøy is also a recreational area for Oslo's citizens with several public beaches.
On January 1, 2004, the previous borough of Uranienborg-Majorstuen and Bygdøy-Frogner were merged with Frogner, creating the current, larger borough.
Frogner area is dominated by villa buildings and parks. It is one of the most expensive districts in Oslo due to the central location, proximity to parks, marinas and pretty architecture. It is also an embassy area.

==Museums==

The Bygdøy peninsula - a short ferry journey from the city center - boasts several museums, the best of which are the Viking Ship Museum (Vikingskipshuset) and the Kon-Tiki Museum.
The Viking Ship Museum houses three spectacular examples of 9th and 10th century Scandinavian sea vessels - including the fully intact Oseberg ship - which were used as high status tombs. A collection of Viking weapons, utensils and talismans, buried with the ships, is also on display.
The Kon-Tiki Museum is named after the raft on which Norwegian adventurer Thor Heyerdahl crossed the Pacific Ocean in 1947. Alongside the raft, the museum houses various artefacts related to Heyerdahl's other expeditions and a changing program of temporary exhibitions explores his life and work.
Oslo City Museum is situated at Frogner Manor in the Vigeland park (Frognerparken). It is a museum of cultural history with one of the largest collections of paintings in Norway. The history of Oslo is illustrated by thematic exhibitions showing, among other things, the development of Oslo and the city's cultural and commercial activities.
The Vigeland Museum, named for the artist behind the park’s enormous collection of sculptures, is where Gustav Vigeland lived and worked for nearly two decades. It is located in Frogner Park. It is the world's largest sculpture park made by a single artist, and is one of Norway's most popular tourist attractions. The park is open to visitors all year round. The unique sculpture park is Gustav Vigeland's lifework with more than 200 sculptures in bronze, granite and wrought iron. Vigeland was also in charge of the design and architectural layout of the park. The Vigeland Park was mainly completed between 1939 and 1949. Most of the sculptures are placed in five units along an 850 meter long axis: The Main gate, the Bridge with the Children's playground, the Fountain, the Monolith plateau and the Wheel of Life.

==Noteworthy buildings==

The main building at Frogner Manor dates back to approximately 1790. Historical interiors from the late 18th century. Today the building is part of Oslo Museum. Frogner Manor (Frogner Hovedgård) is located on a former estate in an area that became part of today's borough of Frogner in Oslo, Norway. The estate is now the site of Frognerparken.
Frogner Church (Norwegian: Frogner kirke) is a church in the Frogner borough of the city of Oslo, Norway. The congregation is part of the Church of Norway, the country's state church.

==Frogner park==

Frognerparken is the biggest park in the central parts of Oslo. It is a popular recreational area for both its neighbours and people from other parts of Oslo. On a nice summer day, the park is full of people; here you can go for a run, walk the dog, have a picnic or barbecue, play badminton or just do some sunbathing. Frognerparken has Norway's biggest collection of roses; a total of 14,000 plants of 150 different species.
Frogner Stadium and Frogner Open-Air Bath is located in one corner of the park, towards Majorstua. In the corner by Frogner plass, you find Frogner Manor House and Oslo City Museum. As a part of Frognerparken, you will also find Vigelandsparken (Vigeland Sculpture Park), Oslo's most visited attraction. Frognerparken has a summer-open café and a restaurant. And children can play in Norway's biggest playground, located between the main gates and Frogner Manor House.

==Sports and recreation==

The Frogner Skating Rink is found at Frogner Stadion, which lies to the north of Oslo city centre. Frogner Stadion is located in Frogner Park, one of the most popular recreational areas in Oslo. It is a large open air rink that is free of charge to all visitors. It is maintained only during the winter season. Many Norwegians own their own skates, but if, by chance, you have none with, you can hire skates at the site. Skating lessons are available here if these are required

==Food and entertainment==

Frogner is home to some of Oslo's best restaurants - including Feinschmecker, Alex Sushi and Bagatelle. There is also a range of charming cafés offering simpler food. There are many bars: Champagnerian is a chic spot for evening drinks.

==References==

==External links==


