[[Encyclopedia Galactica]]

CATEGORIES: Foundation universe, Fictional encyclopedias, Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, Science fiction themes

The Encyclopedia Galactica is a fictional or hypothetical encyclopedia of a galaxy-spanning civilization, containing all the knowledge accumulated by a society with quadrillions of people and thousands of years of history. The name evokes the exhaustive and imperialistic aspects of the real-life Encyclopædia Britannica.

==Asimov's Encyclopedia Galactica==

The concept and name of the Encyclopedia Galactica first appeared from Isaac Asimov (1920–1992) in his short story "Foundation" (Astounding Science Fiction, May 1942), later republished as "The Encyclopedists" in the short-story collection Foundation (1951). Asimov's Encyclopedia Galactica was a compendium of all knowledge then available in the Galactic Empire, intended to preserve that knowledge in a remote region of the galaxy in the event of a foreseen galactic catastrophe. The Encyclopedia is later revealed to be an element in an act of misdirection, with its real purpose being to concentrate a group of knowledgeable scientists on a remote, resource-poor planet, with the long-term aim of revitalizing the technologically stagnant and scientifically dormant empire. Originally published in a physical medium, it later becomes computerized and subject to continual change.
Asimov used the Encyclopedia Galactica as a literary device throughout his Foundation series, beginning many of the book sections or chapters with a short extract from the Encyclopedia discussing a key character or event in the story.

==Later instances==

Various authors have invoked the Encyclopædia Galactica in both science and science fiction. The first may have been author Frank Holby's short story "The Strange Case of the Missing Hero" in the July 1942 issue of Astounding Science Fiction which featured Sebastian Lelong, editor of the Encyclopedia. Another example is its use by Carl Sagan (1934–1996) in his 1980 book Cosmos, and his documentary video series of the same name, to refer to a text where hypothetical extraterrestrial civilizations could store all of their information and knowledge. It was also a common fixture in previous incarnations of the Legion of Super-Heroes comic books,Encyclopaedia Galactica and has appeared in the Star Wars Expanded Universe"HoloNet News: Duros Dispute Encyclopedia" and Superman comics set in the future."The Secret Origin of the Golden Age Superman". p 2. Roy Thomas, Wayne Boring, and Jerry Ordway
In the series by Douglas Adams, The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy (1979), he frequently contrasted the Galactica, in his fictional universe, with the apparently more popular Guide. For example, the introduction to the first book notes:

In Arthur C. Clarke's and Gentry Lee's novel Rama II (1989), Nicole des Jardins says to Richard Wakefield, "Just think, the sum of everything all human beings know or have ever known might be nothing more than an infinitesimal fraction of the Encyclopædia Galactica."
The Encyclopædia Britannica distributed a series of five video documentaries entitled Encyclopædia Galactica in 1993, with the titles “The Inner Solar System”, “The Outer Solar System”, “Star Trekking”, “Discovery”, and “Astronomy and the Stars”. The videos were produced by York Films of England.Encyclopaedia galactica. National Library of Australia.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


