[[Jefferson Davis]]

CATEGORIES: 1808 births, 1889 deaths, 19th-century American Episcopalians, American military personnel of the Mexican–American War, American people of English descent, American people of the Black Hawk War, American people of Scottish descent, American people of Welsh descent, American pro-slavery activists, Burials at Hollywood Cemetery (Richmond, Virginia), Burials at Metairie Cemetery, Confederate States of America political leaders, Democratic Party United States Senators, Heads of state of former countries, Heads of state of unrecognized or largely unrecognized states, Historians of the American Civil War, Jefferson College (Mississippi) alumni, Jefferson Davis family, Members of the United States House of Representatives from Mississippi, Mississippi Democrats, People from Christian County, Kentucky, People of Mississippi in the American Civil War, Pierce administration cabinet members, Recipients of American presidential pardons, Slave owner, Stateless people, Transylvania University alumni, United States Army officers, United States Military Academy alumni, United States Secretaries of War, United States Senators from Mississippi, Zachary Taylor family, Jefferson Davis Parish, Louisiana, Jefferson Davis County, Mississippi, Jeff Davis County, Georgia, Jeff Davis County, Texas

Jefferson Finis Davis (June 3, 1808 – December 6, 1889) was an American soldier and statesman, and was the President of the Confederate States of America during the entire Civil War, 1861 to 1865. He took personal charge of the Confederate war plans but was unable to find a strategy to defeat the larger, more powerful and better organized Union. His diplomatic efforts failed to gain recognition from any foreign country. At home he paid little attention to the collapsing Confederate economy; the government printed more and more paper money to cover the war's expenses, leading to runaway inflation.
Davis was born in Kentucky and grew up on plantations in Mississippi and Louisiana. He graduated from the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and fought in the Mexican–American War as the colonel of a volunteer regiment. He served as the United States Secretary of War under Democratic President Franklin Pierce, and as a Democratic U.S. senator from Mississippi. His plantation in Mississippi depended on slave labor, like many Southern plantations. As a senator, he argued against secession, but did agree that each state was sovereign and had an unquestionable right to secede from the Union. Davis lost his first wife to malaria after three months of marriage, and the disease almost killed him as well. He had six children with his second wife, but only two survived him. He suffered from ill health for much of his life.
Historians tend to attribute many of the Confederacy's weaknesses to President Davis.Cooper 2008, pp. 3–4. His preoccupation with detail, reluctance to delegate responsibility, lack of popular appeal, feuds with powerful state governors, favoritism toward old friends, inability to get along with people who disagreed with him, neglect of civil matters in favor of military ones, and resistance to public opinion all worked against him.[ref]
