[[Thomas Stothard]]

CATEGORIES: 1755 births, 1834 deaths, 18th-century English painters, 19th-century English painters, English engravers, English illustrators, Royal Academicians

Thomas Stothard (17 August 1755 – 27 April 1834) was an English painter, illustrator and engraver.

==Life and work==

Stothard was born in London, the son of a well-to-do innkeeper in Long Acre, London.  A delicate child, he was sent at the age of five to a relative in Yorkshire, and attended school at Acomb, and afterwards at Tadcaster and at Ilford, Essex. Showing talent for drawing he was apprenticed to a draughtsman of patterns for brocaded silks in Spitalfields. In his spare time, he attempted illustrations for the works of his favourite poets. Some of these drawings were praised by Harrison, the editor of the Novelist's Magazine.  Stothard's master having died, he resolved to devote himself to art.
In 1778 he became a student of the Royal Academy, of which he was elected associate in 1792 and full academician in 1794. In 1812 he was appointed librarian after serving as assistant for two years. Among his earliest book illustrations are plates engraved for Ossian and for Bell's Poets. In 1780, he became a regular contributor to the Novelist's Magazine, for which he produced 148 designs, including his eleven illustrations to Peregrine Pickle and his graceful subjects from Clarissa and Sir Charles Grandison.
From 1786, Thomas Fielding, a friend of Stothard's and engraver, produced engravings using designs of Stothard, Angelika Kauffmann, and of his own. Arcadian scenes were especially esteemed. Fielding realized these in colour, using copper engraving, and achieved excellent quality. Stothard's designs had an exceptional aesthetic appeal.
He designed plates for pocket-books, tickets for concerts, illustrations to almanacs, and portraits of popular actors. These are popular with collectors for their grace and distinction. His more important works include illustrations for:
His figure-subjects in Samuel Rogers's Italy (1830) and Poems (1834) demonstrate that even in old age, his imagination remained fertile and his hand firm.
Art historian Ralph Nicholson Wornum estimated that Stothard's designs number five thousand and, of these, about three thousand were engraved. His oil pictures are usually small. His colouring is often rich and glowing in the style of Rubens, who Stothard admired. The "Vintage," perhaps his most important oil painting, is in the National Gallery. He contributed to John Boydell's Shakespeare Gallery, but his best-known painting is the "Procession of the Canterbury Pilgrims," in Tate Britain , the engraving from which, begun by Luigi and continued by Niccolo Schiavonetti and finished by James Heath, was immensely popular. The commission for this picture was given to Stothard by Robert Hartley Cromek, and was the cause of a quarrel with his friend William Blake. It was followed by a companion work, the "Flitch of Bacon," which was drawn in sepia for the engraver but was never carried out in colour.
In addition to his easel pictures, Stothard decorated the grand staircase of Burghley House, near Stamford in Lincolnshire, with subjects of War, Intemperance, and the Descent of Orpheus in Hell (1799–1803); the library of Colonel Johnes' mansion of Hafod,  in North Wales, with a series of scenes from Froissart and Monstrelet painted in imitation of relief Coxhead 1906, p.12 (1810) and the cupola of the upper hall of the Advocates' Library, Edinburgh (later occupied by the Signet Library), with Apollo and the Muses, and figures of poets, orators, etc. (1822). He prepared designs for a frieze and other sculptural decorations for Buckingham Palace, which were not executed, owing to the death of George IV. He also designed a shield presented to Duke of Wellington by the merchants of London, and executed a series of eight etchings from the various subjects that adorned it.[tpl]harvnb|Chisholm|1911[/tpl]
He married Rebecca Watkins in 1783. They had eleven children, six of whom  -  five sons  and one daughter  -  survived infancy.Coxhead 1906, p.6 They lived in Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, until 1794, when they moved to a house  at 28 Newman Street, of which Stothard had bought the freehold.Coxhead 1906, p.8 His wife died in 1825.Coxhead 1906, p.15 His sons included Thomas, accidentally shot dead in about 1801;Coxhead 1906, p.10  and the antiquarian illustrator Charles Alfred Stothard, who also predeceased his father Coxhead 1906, p.14 and Alfred Joseph Stothard, medallist to George IV.Coxhead 1906, p.18
He was elected an Associate of the Royal Academy in 1792 and full Academician in 1794. In 1812 he was appointed librarian to the Academy, having serving as assistant for two years.

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==


