[[Border]]

CATEGORIES: Borders

Borders define geographic boundaries of political entities or legal jurisdictions, such as governments, sovereign states, federated states and other subnational entities. Some borders—such as a state's internal administrative border, or inter-state borders within the Schengen Area—are open and completely unguarded. Other borders are partially or fully controlled, and may be crossed legally only at designated border checkpoints and border zones may be controlled. Some, mostly contentious, borders may even foster the setting up of buffer zones.

==Definitions==

In the past, many borders were not clearly defined lines, but were neutral zones called marchlands. This has been reflected in recent times with the neutral zones that were set up along part of Saudi Arabia's borders with Kuwait and Iraq (however, these zones no longer exist)[tpl]Citation needed|date=May 2011[/tpl]. In modern times, the concept of a marchland has been replaced by that of the clearly defined and demarcated border.  For the purposes of border control, airports and seaports are also classed as borders. Most countries have some form of border control to restrict or limit the movement of people, animals, plants, and goods into or out of the country. Under international law, each country is generally permitted to define the conditions that have to be met by a person to legally cross its borders by its own laws, and to prevent persons from crossing its border when this happens in violation of those laws.
Some borders require presentation of legal paperwork like passports and visas, or other identity documents to cross borders. To stay or work within a country's borders aliens (foreign persons) may need special immigration documents or permits that authorise them to do so.  Having such documents (i.e., visa and passport) however does not automatically guarantee that the alien will be allowed to cross to the other side of the border.
Moving goods across a border often requires the payment of excise tax, often collected by customs officials.  Animals (and occasionally humans) moving across borders may need to go into quarantine to prevent the spread of exotic or infectious diseases.  Most countries prohibit carrying illegal drugs or endangered animals across their borders.  Moving goods, animals or people illegally across a border, without declaring them, seeking permission, or deliberately evading official inspection constitutes smuggling.
In regions where smuggling, migration, and infiltration are a problem, many countries fortify borders with fences and barriers and institute formal border control procedures.  Some borders are only signposted.  This is common in countries within the European Schengen Area and on rural sections of the Canada–United States border.  Borders may even be completely unmarked, a common occurrence with remote or forested borders. In many areas, like Africa these are called Porous Borders.  Migration within territorial borders, and outside of them, represented an old and established pattern of movement by people in African countries, who were in search of work, food, and who were maintaining ties with kin who had moved across the previously porous borders of their homelands.  When the colonial frontiers were drawn, Western countries attempted to obtain a monopoly on the recruitment of labor in many African countries, which altered the practical and institutional context in which the old migration patterns had been followed, and some might argue, are still followed today. The frontiers were particularly porous from the point of view of the physical movement of migrants, and people living in borderland communities easily maintained transnational cultural and social networks.

==Classification of borders==

Political borders are nonphysical fiat boundaries imposed on the world through human agency.Robinson, Edward Heath. Reexamining Fiat, Bona Fide and Force Dynamic Boundaries for Geopolitical Entities and their Placement in DOLCE Applied Ontology 2012 7: pp. 93–108 This means that although a political border may follow a river or mountain range neither the river nor the mountain range is the border. Nevertheless, border are often classified by whether or not they follow certain physical features on the earth.

===Natural borders===

Natural borders are geographical features that present natural obstacles to communication and transport. Existing political borders are often a formalization of these historical, natural obstacles.
Some geographical features that often constitute natural borders are:
Throughout history, technological advances have reduced the costs of transport and communication across these natural borders. This has reduced the significance of natural borders over time. As a result, political borders that have been formalized more recently — such as those in Africa or Americas — typically conform less to natural borders[tpl]citation need|date=August 2013[/tpl] than very old borders — such as those in Europe or Asia — do. States whose borders conform to natural borders are, for similar reasons, more likely to be strong nation states.

===Geometric borders===

Geometric boundaries are formed by arcs or lines (such as lines of latitude or longitude) regardless of the physical and culture features of the earth. Political boundaries of this kind can often be found around the states that developed out of African colonial holdings.

===Relict borders===

A relict border is one that no longer functions and therefore may no longer be a legal boundary at all. However, the former presence of the boundary can still be seen in the landscape. For instance, the boundary between East and West Germany no longer exists, however it can still be seen because of historical markers on the landscape and continues to be a cultural and economic division in Germany today.

==Maritime borders==

A maritime border is a division enclosing an area in the ocean where a nation has exclusive rights over the mineral and biological resources,VLIZ Maritime Boundaries Geodatabase, General info; retrieved 19 November 2010 encompassing maritime features, limits and zones.Geoscience Australia, Maritime definitions; retrieved 19 November 2010  Maritime borders represent the jurisdictional borders of a maritime nationUnited States Department of State, Maritime boundaries; retrieved 19 November 2010. and are recognized by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Maritime borders exist in the context of territorial waters, contiguous zones, and exclusive economic zones; however, the terminology does not encompass lake or river boundaries, which are considered within the context of land boundaries.
Some maritime borders have remained indeterminate despite efforts to clarify them.  This is explained by an array of factors, some of which illustrate regional problems.Valencia, Mark J. (2001). [tpl]Google books|ZhXN8ILQCnIC|Maritime Regime Building: Lessons Learned and Their Relevance for Northeast Asia, pp. 149-166.|page=149[/tpl]

==Border economics==

The presence of borders often fosters certain economic features or anomalies. Wherever two jurisdictions come into contact, special economic opportunities arise for border trade. Smuggling provides a classic case; contrariwise, a border region may flourish on the provision of excise or of import–export services — legal or quasi-legal, corrupt or legitimate. Different regulations on either side of a border may encourage services to position themselves at or near that border: thus the provision of pornography, of prostitution, of alcohol and/or of narcotics may cluster around borders, city limits, county lines, ports and airports. In a more planned and official context, Special Economic Zones (SEZs) often tend to cluster near borders or ports.
Even if the goods are not perceived to be undesirable, states will still seek to document and regulate the cross-border trade in order to collect tariffs and benefit from foreign currency exchange revenues.Pavanello, Sara 2010. Working across borders - Harnessing the potential of cross-border activities to improve livelihood security in the Horn of Africa drylands. London: Overseas Development Institute Thus, there is the concept unofficial trade in goods otherwise legal; for example, the cross-border trade in livestock by pastoralists in the Horn of Africa. Ethiopia sells an estimated $250 to $300 million of livestock to Somalia, Kenya and Djibouti every year unofficially, over 100 times the official estimate.
Human economic traffic across borders (apart from kidnapping), may involve mass commuting between workplaces and residential settlements. The removal of internal barriers to commerce, as in France after the French Revolution or in Europe since the 1940s, de-emphasises border-based economic activity and fosters free trade. Euroregions are similar official structures built around commuting across boundary.

==Politics==

