[[Infanterie Greift An]]

CATEGORIES: 1937 books, German-language literature, Infantry, History books about World War I, Military strategy books, Personal accounts of World War I, Erwin Rommel

Infanterie Greift An (known as Infantry Attacks in English), is a classic book on military tactics written by German Field Marshal Erwin Rommel about his experiences in World War I. Rommel describes his Stoßtruppen (shock troops) tactics, which used speed, deception, and deep penetration into enemy territory to surprise and overwhelm. Throughout the book, Rommel reports assigning small numbers of men to approach enemy lines from the direction in which attack was expected. The men would yell, throw hand grenades and otherwise simulate the anticipated attack from concealment, while attack squads and larger bodies of men sneaked to the flanks and rears of the defenders to take them by surprise.  These tactics often intimidated enemies into surrendering, thus avoiding unnecessary exertion, expenditure of ammunition, and risk of injury.
Infanterie Greift An was first published in 1937 and helped to persuade Adolf Hitler to give Rommel high command in World War II, although he was not from an old military family or the Prussian aristocracy, which had traditionally dominated the German officer corps. Infanterie Greift An was printed in Germany until 1945. By then, about 500,000 copies had been published. 
In 1943, an abridged version titled, more simply, "ATTACKS!" was released by the US military for officers' tactical study.
Rommel's book, written as a day to day journal of his World War I exploits, was used throughout the West as a resource for infantry tactical movements. General George S. Patton was among the many influential military leaders reported to have read "Infantry Attacks".Patton, G. S. : War As I Knew It, page 166. Mariner Books, 1995.
Rommel planned to write a successor called Panzer Greift An (in English: Tank attacks) about tank warfare, and gathered much material during the North Africa Campaign. However, he died before completing this work.

==References in Popular Culture==

The book was referred to in the 1970 film Patton, when George S. Patton yells, "Rommel, you magnificent bastard, I read your book!" The movie states that Rommel was defeated partially due to his unfiltered military tactics and Patton's "guts."Memorable Quotes from Patton, imdb.com. Retrieved January 20, 2007. However, in the scene where Patton is woken by his aides with news that Rommel's attack is in progress, the camera focuses on a book on Patton's bedside table which is entitled "The Tank in Attack", a book which Rommel had planned to write but never completed.

==Translations==

The first English translation was published by The Infantry Journal in the United States.  The translator was Lieutenant Colonel Gustave E. Kidde without permission from Rommel, according to the foreword to the 1995 edition published by Stackpole Books.

==Notes==


