[[Book of Jarom]]

CATEGORIES: Books of the Book of Mormon

The Book of Jarom is one of the books that make up the Book of Mormon. According to the text it was written by Jarom, a descendant of the prophet Nephi.
The Book of Jarom is very short, only fifteen verses covering the years 399-361 BCE. Jarom was the son of Enos, and the grandson of Jacob, and the great-grandson of Lehi. He kept the commandment of his father to preserve the plates, and in turn he commanded his son Omni to preserve the plates. In the meantime, he scribbled these few verses on them.
He declares that he would not write his prophesies and revelations because there is nothing he could add to the plan of salvation that his forefathers didn't already write first. Besides, there wasn't enough room left on these plates to write very much. But Jarom recommends that his readers go to the other plates that have all the records of the wars between the Nephites and Lamanites.
Jarom says most of the Nephites have stiff necks (like a stubborn ox who won't turn), but God is merciful to them and he has not destroyed them yet. And there are even some Nephites who do not have stiff necks, and they have communion with the Holy Spirit.
Despite having stiff necks, the Nephites have grown in population and keep the law of Moses. Jarom says the Lamanites vastly outnumbered the Nephites, loved murder, and would even drink the blood of animals. The Nephites withstood numerous assaults by the Lamanites, and fortified their cities against them. The essence of what Jarom wrote is that the Nephites did decide to obey the commandments of God and they did not get wiped off the face of the Earth as his father feared they would. 

==Keepers of the Record==

The record, or a book written on sheets of gold, is passed down from one generation to another. Nephi, the writer of First and Second Nephi, forged the plates to keep a record of the history of his people, to write down prophecies and spiritual teachings, and make a record of Jesus Christ. 
Nephi passed them to his brother Jacob (Jacob 1:1-4)  
Jacob passed them to his son Enos (Jacob 7:27) 
Enos passed them to his son Jarom (Jarom 1:1) 
See Omni for more generations

==External links==


