[[Horatio Nelson Jackson]]

CATEGORIES: 1872 births, 1955 deaths, University of Vermont alumni, Physicians from Vermont, American military physicians, People in the automobile industry, People from Burlington, Vermont, American military personnel of World War I, Recipients of the Distinguished Service Cross (United States), Recipients of the Purple Heart medal, Recipients of the Croix de Guerre 1914–1918 (France), Légion d'honneur recipients, Burials in Vermont

Horatio Nelson Jackson (March 25, 1872 – January 14, 1955) was a physician and automobile pioneer. In 1903, he and driving partner Sewall K. Crocker became the first people to drive an automobile across the United States.

==Early life and medical career==

Born in Toronto, Canada to American parents, Jackson graduated from the University of Vermont in 1893, became a physician, and practiced in Brattleboro and Burlington, Vermont. He was married to Bertha Richardson Wells, the daughter of William Wells, a Medal of Honor recipient and one of the richest men in Vermont as a partner in Wells, Richardson & Co., manufacturer of Paine's Celery Compound, a popular patent medicine.

==Cross-country drive==

===Wager and preparation===

Besides his medical practice, Jackson was a 31-year-old auto enthusiast who differed with the then-prevailing wisdom that the automobile was a passing fad and a recreational plaything. While in San Francisco's University Club as a guest on May 18, 1903, he agreed to a $50 wager ($1299 in 2013 dollars) to prove that a four-wheeled machine could be driven across the country.  He accepted even though he did not own a car, had practically no experience driving, and had no maps to follow. Jackson and his wife planned to return to their Burlington, Vermont home in a few days, and both had been taking automobile driving lessons while in San Francisco. She returned home by train, allowing him to take his adventure by automobile.
Having no mechanical experience, Jackson convinced a young mechanic and chauffeur, Sewall K. Crocker, to serve as his travel companion, mechanic, and backup driver.  Crocker suggested that Doctor Jackson buy a Winton car.  He bought a slightly used, two-cylinder,[tpl]cite book|last=Stein|first=Ralph|title=The American Automobile|publisher=Random House[/tpl] 20 hp[tpl]cite book|last=Kimes|first=Beverly|title=standard catalog of American Cars 1805-1942|year=1996|publisher=Krause publications|isbn=0-87341-428-4[/tpl] Winton, which he named the Vermont, after his home state, bade his wife goodbye, and left San Francisco on May 23, carrying coats, rubber protective suits, sleeping bags, blankets, canteens, a water bag, an axe, a shovel, a telescope, tools, spare parts, a block and tackle, cans for extra gasoline and oil, a Kodak camera, a rifle, a shotgun, and pistols.[tpl]cite book|last=Duncan|first=Dayton|title=Horatio's Drive Americans First Road Trip|year=2003|publisher=Alfred A. Knopf|location=United States of America|isbn=0-375-41536-X|edition=First|coauthors=Burns, Ken[/tpl]
Heeding the failed attempt by automobile pioneer Alexander Winton (founder of the Winton Motor Carriage Company, which manufactured Jackson's car) to cross the deserts of Nevada and Utah, Jackson decided to take a more northerly route.  A route through the Sacramento Valley and along the Oregon Trail also allowed them to avoid the higher passes in the Rocky Mountains.

===Journey===

The car was transported by ferry from San Francisco to Oakland and points eastward.  But only fifteen miles into the journey, the car blew a tire.  Jackson and Crocker replaced it with the only spare they had, in fact, the only right-sized spare tire they could find in all of San Francisco.
The second night of their journey, they replaced the side lanterns, having discovered on the first night that they were too dim, with a large spotlight mounted on the front of the Vermont. They stopped early in Sacramento to accomplish this.  The duo was assisted in Sacramento by bicyclists who offered them road maps.  Jackson was unable to buy a new tire, but purchased some used inner tubes.
Going northwards out of Sacramento, the noise of the car covered the fact that the duo's cooking gear was falling off.  They were also given a 108-mile misdirection by a woman so that she could send them to the spot where her family could see an automobile.
The rough trek towards Oregon required them to haul the car across deep streams with the block and tackle.  Somewhere along this route, Jackson lost his glasses. Stuff continued to be lost, including two of Jackson's glasses. They were also forced to pay a $4 ($103.92 in 2013 dollars) toll by an entrepreneur in order to cross his property on a "bad, rocky, mountain road" as Jackson described it. When their tires blew out they were required to wind rope around the wheels.  Jackson did manage to find a telegraph office and wired back to San Francisco for replacement tires to be transported to them along the journey.
Reaching Alturas, California, Jackson and Crocker stopped to wait for the tires.  They offered locals rides in the car in exchange for a "wild west show".  When the tires failed to materialize, however, they continued on after a three-day wait.
On June 6, the car broke down, and they had to be towed to a nearby ranch by a cowboy.  Crocker made repairs, but a fuel leak caused them to lose all of their available gasoline, and Jackson rented a bicycle to travel 25 miles to Burns, Oregon for fuel.  After suffering a flat tire on the bicycle, he returned with four gallons fuel (which Jackson complained cost him "nearly twenty dollars"), and they returned to Burns to fill up.
On June 9, outside of Vale, Oregon, the Vermont ran out of oil.  Jackson walked back to the last town to get oil, only to discover eventually that they had been stopped only a short distance outside of Vale.  The next day they arrived in Ontario, Oregon, where supplies waited for them.
Somewhere near Caldwell, Idaho, Jackson and Crocker obtained a dog, a Pit Bull named Bud. As it turns out, Jackson had wanted a dog companion since Sacramento. Newspapers at the time gave a variety of stories of how Bud was acquired, including that he was stolen; in a letter to his wife, Nelson said a man sold him the dog for $15 ($389.70 in 2013 dollars).  It turned out that the dusty alkali flats the travelers encountered would bother Bud's eyes so much (the Vermont had neither a roof nor windshield) that Jackson eventually fitted him with a pair of goggles.  At one point, Bud drank bad water and became ill, but survived.
At this point, the trio became celebrities.  The press came out at every stop to take their picture and conduct interviews.  At Mountain Home, Idaho, citizens warned them that the Oregon Trail was not good further east, so Jackson and Crocker veered off their original course along the southern edge of the Sawtooth Mountains.  At Hailey, Idaho, Crocker wired the Winton Company for more parts.
On June 16, somewhere in Idaho, Jackson's coat, containing most of the travelers' money, fell off and was not found. At their next stop, Jackson had to wire his wife to send them money to Cheyenne, Wyoming. Between June 20 and 21, all three of them got lost in Wyoming, and went without food for 36 hours before finding a sheepherder who gave them a meal of roast lamb and boiled corn. Before reaching Cheyenne, however, the car's wheel bearings gave out, and Crocker had to talk a farmer into letting them have the wheel bearings of his mowing machine.
The travelers eventually reached Omaha, Nebraska on July 12.  From there on, they were able to use a few paved roads, and their trip was much easier. The only mishap happened just east of Buffalo, New York, when the Vermont ran into a hidden obstacle in the road and Jackson, Croker, and Bud were thrown from the car. They arrived in New York City on July 26, 1903, sixty-three days, twelve hours, and thirty minutes after commencing their journey in San Francisco, in the first automobile to successfully transit the North American continent.Rafferty, Tod, The Complete Illustrated Encyclopedia of American Motorcycles, Philadelphia, PA: Courage Books (1999), p. 22: The first transcontinental crossing by any type of motor vehicle was by George A. Wyman, who crossed the continent solo on a motorized bicycle in fifty-one days, arriving in New York on July 6, 1903, twenty days ahead of Jackson and Crocker.  Their trip expended over 800 gallons of gasoline.
After leaving New York City Jackson joined his wife and drove home to Vermont.  About 15 miles from home his car once again broke down.  His two brothers came and offered to help him get going again, each driving his own automobile.  Shortly after returning to the road, both of his brothers' vehicles broke down, and Jackson offered to tow them both with the Vermont.  Upon reaching the threshold of Jackson's garage, the Vermont's drive chain snapped, one of the few original parts never replaced during the entire journey.
(One of Jackson's brothers was Hollister Jackson, who was serving as Lieutenant Governor of Vermont when he died in the Great Flood of 1927.)John J. Duffy, Samuel B. Hand, Ralph H. Orth, editors, The Vermont Encyclopedia, 2003, page 169

==Later life==

Jackson eventually settled in Burlington, Vermont, with his wife Bertha and Bud the dog.  He was active in several businesses, including a granite manufacturing company owned by his brother.  A longtime member of the Vermont National Guard, when World War I broke out, Jackson was considered too old, but he contacted former President Theodore Roosevelt (whom he had met at some point in Burlington), through whose influence Jackson was placed on active duty as a Captain in the Medical Corps.Granite, Marble & Bronze, Monument Men Join the Colors, July 1917, page 36  While serving with the 79th Infantry Division as a Major he was wounded at the Battle of Montfaucon during the Meuse-Argonne Offensive.Poughkeepsie Daily Eagle, Three Transports in with Men and Supplies, December 30, 1918
Jackson's awards included the Distinguished Service Cross, Purple Heart, Croix de Guerre (France), and France's Legion of Honour.University of Vermont, University of Vermont Notes, Volumes 14-16, 1920, page 166Lemuel Bolles, American Legion Weekly, The Nine Commandments], January 6, 1922, page 12
Following the war, he became a Colonel in the Officer Reserve Corps, and was one of the founders of the American Legion.  He twice ran for Governor of Vermont, and owned a newspaper, a bank and radio station WCAX (now WVMT). Ironically, at one point he was ticketed for exceeding the 6 mph speed limit in Burlington.
Jackson died in Burlington on January 14, 1955 and was buried in Burlington's Lakeview Cemetery.

==The Vermont==

Today, Jackson's Winton, the Vermont, is preserved in the Smithsonian Institution, Washington DC, which Jackson gave to them in 1944.

==Documentary==

Documentary film maker Ken Burns produced a film, Horatio's Drive, for PBS.  The film is based on the book of the same name by Dayton Duncan.  Tom Hanks provided the voice-over narration for Horatio Nelson Jackson.  The film features many old songs, framed by a popular number from 1914 called "He'd Have to Get Under — Get Out and Get Under (to Fix Up His Automobile)".

==References==

==External links==


