[[Ground pangolin]]

CATEGORIES: Pangolins, Myrmecophagous mammals, Mammals of Africa, Fauna of the Sahara, Mammals of Sudan, Mammals of Ethiopia, Fauna of East Africa, Mammals of Kenya, Mammals of Tanzania, Mammals of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mammals of South Africa, Mammals of Namibia, Mammals of Angola, Mammals of Zambia

The ground pangolin (Manis temminckii), also known as Temminck's pangolin or the Cape pangolin, is one of four species of pangolins which can be found in Africa, and the only one in southern and eastern Africa. The animal was named for the Dutch zoologist Coenraad Jacob Temminck.
With the exception of the underside, it is covered in extremely hard scales. When threatened, it usually will roll up into a ball thus protecting its vulnerable belly. The scales on the tail can also be used as blades to slash at attackers.
The ground pangolin can grow to a length of about 1 m, with the tail typically between 30 and 50 cm. It has a disproportionately small head, powerful hindlegs, and small forelegs. Capable of walking on two legs, the ground pangolin walks on its hindlegs when searching for food while using its forelegs and tail for balance.
Like other pangolin species it is largely nocturnal, although it is also entirely terrestrial, and usually found in savanna or open woodland. It is well adapted to a diet of ants and termites, possessing a keen sense of smell and a very long (up to 50 cm) sticky tongue that extends deep into its abdominal cavity. Although it is capable of digging its own burrow, the ground pangolin prefers to occupy those abandoned by warthogs or aardvarks or to lie in dense vegetation, making it even more difficult to observe.
The ground pangolin is listed as Least Concern by the IUCN Red List: “This species is widespread, locally abundant and present in numerous protected areas. Although it is hunted, and likely declining locally in some regions, the rate of decline is not believed to be sufficient to warrant listing in Near Threatened or a threatened category.”

==Image gallery==

Steppenschuppentier2.jpg | Ground pangolin in the wild in South Africa.
Steppenschuppentier1a.jpg | Ground pangolin defensive posture.
The Children's Museum of Indianapolis - ground pangolin - detail2.jpg | Detail of ground pangolin scales.
The Children's Museum of Indianapolis - ground pangolin - detail1.jpg | Detail of ground pangolin foot and claws.

==References==

==Sources==


