[[University Athletic Association of the Philippines]]

CATEGORIES: 1938 establishments in the Philippines, Student sport in the Philippines, University Athletic Association of the Philippines, Organizations established in 1938, ABS-CBN Corporation

The University Athletic Association of the Philippines (UAAP), established in 1938, is a sports association of eight universities in the Philippines. Each year, teams from these universities play in 15 sports.

==History==

In 1924 seeing the need to regulate collegiate sports and set general athletic policies, Dr. Regino Ylanan (the University of the Philippines Physical Education Director) met with representatives of Ateneo de Manila (Jesuit fathers John Hurley, S.J. and Henry A. McCullough, S.J.), De La Salle College, San Beda College, National University, University of Manila, University of Santo Tomas, and Institute of Accounts (now Far Eastern University) to discuss possibilities of forming an athletic organization, which eventually became the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA).
In 1930, the University of the Philippines sponsored an experimental meet of the "Big 3" of the league (NU, UP, UST) on basketball, football, baseball, volleyball, swimming, track and field, relays, and tennis.
The following year (1931), the NCAA Board of Directors divided the meet into three divisions to put competition on a fairer basis and to stimulate athletics among a greater number.
In March 1932, NU, UP and UST  formally seceded from the NCAA. Led by UP's Candido C. Bartolome, NU's Leon Tirol and UST's Fr. Silvestre Sancho, the move was made to put competitions on equal footing, to increase amateur athletic competitions and to separate the universities from the college members of the league. On April 6, the "Big 3 League" is born. On August 14, the "Big 3" Association is inaugurated with a meet that starts with basketball. Other events were swimming, baseball, relays, track and field, volleyball, tennis and soccer.  
In 1935, UP did not participate in the "Big 3 League" because of mass intramurals at the state university. NU and UST held the meet with FEU (formerly Institute of Accounts) taking UP's place.
In 1938, the University of the Philippines Alumni Association and the Philippine Amateur Athletic Federation (PAAF), then the highest sports body in the country, encouraged the original "Big 3 League" and FEU to form a permanent sports association—the University Athletic Association of the Philippines. Events included were basketball, women's volleyball, baseball, football, swimming and track and field. UP bagged three titles (volleyball, baseball, track and field). UST was tops in football and swimming and FEU triumphed in basketball.
In 1941, the outbreak of World War II hindered the staging of the 1941–1942 UAAP with UST failing to complete its term. UAAP competition was not held from 1942 to 1946 due to the Japanese occupation of the country which resulted in the closure of educational institutions. The UAAP competition resumed in 1947.
In 1952, Adamson University, Manila Central University, University of the East and University of Manila were granted two-year probationary membership to the UAAP. After the two-year probationary period, UE was permanently accepted into the league in 1954. The other three universities (Adamson, MCU and UM) were dropped from the UAAP due to their inability to comply with the UAAP requirements. 
In 1970, Adamson University reapplied for admission to the league with a two-year probationary period and in 1974, Adamson successfully hosted the 1974–1975 athletic season paving the way for its permanent membership into the league.
In 1978, the UAAP admitted Ateneo de Manila University into the league while De La Salle University joined in 1986.

==Media==

==Seal==

The UAAP seal features the university colors of the eight member-schools of the league in a circular formation. It also bears the year when the league was established, 1938, in the center.
The seal changes every season where the university colors of the season host is placed on the very top. Nonetheless, the arrangement of the colors never changes.
The colors of University of the Philippines (green and maroon), University of Santo Tomas (gold and white), Far Eastern University (gold and green), and National University (gold and blue) come first, clockwise. These are followed by the colors of Ateneo de Manila University (blue and white), De La Salle University (green and white), Adamson University (blue and white), and University of the East (red and white).

==Member schools==

Following is a list of those universities with their team designations.
Notes:

===Membership timeline===

DateFormat = yyyy
ImageSize = width:500 height:auto barincrement:20
Period = from:1938 till:2016
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal
PlotArea = right:o left:0 bottom:50 top:0
Colors = id:barcolor
 id:line             value:pink
 id:bg               value:white
BarData = 
 #barset name MUST begin with a number
  barset:1FEU
  barset:1NU
  barset:1UP
  barset:1UST
  barset:1Adamson
  barset:1MCU
  barset:1UE
  barset:1UM
  barset:1Ateneo
  barset:1LaSalle
PlotData=
 width:15 textcolor:black shift:(5,-5) anchor:from
  barset:1FEU
