[[Burning Flipside]]

CATEGORIES: Burning Man, Festivals in Texas

Burning Flipside (or Flipside) is an annual alternative arts and performance festival staged in Central Texas near Austin. Modeled on and loosely associated with Burning Man, Flipside is one of several Regional Burns around the USA.
Burning Flipside was started in 1998 by Burning Man participants from Texas. Lasting five days during the Memorial Day weekend, it is significantly smaller than Burning Man, with 2,007 tickets sold in 2007, compared to about 50,000 participants for Burning Man. Participants build a temporary city called Pyropolis; all of the structures in this city are dismantled and removed at the end of the event. The main structure, the "effigy", is burned the last night, as are many other pieces of art around Flipside.
The limited liability company which sells the tickets to Flipside, Austin Artistic Reconstruction, LLC prohibits all commercial use of photographs, video, film or any other medium taken at Burning Flipside without written permission.Burning Flipside Survival Guide, 2008. retrieved on 2010-01-22. Therefore, media from Flipside is inherently non-free content. This prohibition on commercial use of imagery appeared as early as 1999.
Many of the core values of Burning Flipside are borrowed from Burning Man, and Flipside uses the same terms, namely:Terdiman, Daniel. "In Seattle, a spark of Burning Man." CNET News. Retrieved from  on 2010-01-22. Archived by WebCite at http://www.webcitation.org/5mzDzfWut
Art Installations -- Flipside community members bring art to the event for display, including large free-standing works, fire art, and interactive pieces.
Theme camps -- Groups of participants who build a structure or area for public entertainment with an underlying theme. (Example: Casineaux Camp - A camp with a Casino Theme with real gambling style games, but using donated prizes and fake coins.)
Performances -- Flipside has a number of performance spaces that are used by musicians, theatre groups, DJs, pageants, and interactive performances.
Similar to Burning Man's Black Rock Rangers, the Pyropolis Rangers mediate disputes and maintain security at the event; they wear a similar khaki uniform, and attempt to be non-intrusive to other participants. Unlike Burning Man, however, the event is not regularly patrolled by law enforcement, although they arrive quickly in the event of an emergency.
Flipside has some other differences from Burning Man. Flipside's location is in a private camp area in the wooded, grassy Texas Hill Country, unlike the extremely flat, very dusty dried lake bed in Black Rock Desert where Burning Man is held. The Texas Hill Country features creeks, swimming holes, and tree-covered groves that make camping a more comfortable experience than the harsh high Nevada desert. Flipside is slightly more strict about the vending rule: the only thing sold is ice. The smaller size of the event creates a sense that one could meet everyone, as part of a temporary community that encompasses all the event participants. Almost every participant of Flipside, including the event's organizers, pay to get in regardless of how much time they put in volunteering. The only exceptions Austin Artistic Reconstruction makes are four free tickets: two to the designer of the sticker, and two to the designer of the ticket.
Additionally, unlike Burning Man where the central effigy of a glowing neon man stays essentially unaltered from year to year (with alteration to its base and other design elements), the Flipside effigy changes radically with each event. For example, participants built and burned a 6-armed, cowboy hat-wearing Hanuman effigy in 2004, a rocket ship at the 2005 event, and a chalice at the 2006 event.

==Event history==

"Burning Man Texas" was held in June 1998 by George Paap. It had 30 attendees, and featured the burning of a straw man built on site. Burning Flipside (named by Melody Byrd in Prost's backyard) began in 1999.
From 1998 through 2005, the event was held at Recreation Plantation ([tpl]coord|30.118830|-98.180544|display=inline[/tpl]), a private campground in neighboring Dripping Springs, Texas. Having outgrown that space, the event moved to a larger property in 2006, Flat Creek Crossing ([tpl]Coord|30.283342|-98.205479|region:US_type:landmark|display=inline[/tpl]). While this location allowed for potential future growth, the land is also more primitive, lacking in amenities such as flush toilets, although showers were built by participants prior to the 2007 event. Due to the presence of large cliffs, scorpions, mountain lions, and other hazards, some believe that the land is more dangerous than even the Black Rock Desert.[tpl]dead link|date=September 2010[/tpl] In 2010 the event moved to Apache Pastures near San Gabriel, Texas and Rockdale, Texas. The endemic pecan trees offered shade and participant created trails provided access to the San Gabriel River, a larger body of water than was present at Flat Creek Crossing.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


