[[Nazca]]

CATEGORIES: Archaeological sites in Peru, Populated places in the Ica Region

Nazca (sometimes spelled Nasca) is a city and system of valleys on the southern coast of Peru. It is also the name of the region's largest existing town in the Nazca Province, and the name applied to the Nazca culture that flourished in the area between 100 BC and AD 800. This culture was responsible for the Nazca Lines and the ceremonial city of Cahuachi; they also constructed an impressive system of underground aqueducts, named Puquios, that still function today.
Nazca is the capital of the Nazca Province located in the Ica District of the Ica region of Peru.
On November 12, 1996, at 11:59 a.m. local time (16:59 GMT) there was an earthquake of magnitude 6.4 with its epicenter at 7.7 km into the sea, which almost completely destroyed the city of Nasca and its surroundings. Because it occurred during the day, there were only 14 fatalities, but 1,500 people were injured and around 100,000 left homeless. Almost all old brick houses were destroyed, but within 12 years Nasca has been completely rebuilt.
Since 1997, Nazca has been the location of a major Canadian gold mining operation. The people who were living on the land for the last 2000 years did not have a property title to the land, so they were displaced without legal problems. Since then, there have been attempts to legalize poor citizens' ownership of their land and their fixed property, in response to Hernando de Soto's research on the poor.

==Climate==

Nazca is one of the most arid regions in the world with an average annual precipitation of a meager 4 millimeters. Nazca's weather is controlled by the Humboldt's Current, which carries water from the Antarctica up the west coast of South America.
This cold ocean water cools the marine air and limits the accumulation of moisture within clouds; as a result, though clouds and fog are able to form, there is little rain and the region is exceptionally arid.
Nazca temperatures range from 10 to 32°C with an average daily high of 21°C. Summer months from November to March are dry, sunny, and hot. During the winter from June to August, fog from the coast rolls over the hills to keep temperatures in the moderate range, however the intense sun makes daylight hours seem warmer than the registered temperature.[tpl]cite book |title=Discovering Nazca Peru |author=Ted E Barker |date=October 2011 |ISBN=978-1480220379 [/tpl]

==History==

There are two versions of the Spanish foundation. According to the writings of chroniclers, it was founded on October 28, 1548, commissioned by Pedro de la Gasca, peacemaker by Alonso de Mendoza. The other version says that it was founded by Viceroy García Hurtado de Mendoza, 5th Marquis of Cañete, in 1591.
Nazca was also known for producing a grape brandy, similar to pisco, with consumption intended for slaves, and the local people called it Nazca. It also said this was the first grape brandy (pisco) at Hacienda Cahuachi for African American slave owners of this estate.
In colonial history, there were farms as the Ingenio San Juan and San Javier property of the Jesuit College of Cuzco, which were made of wood carving works, grape cultivation, wine processing for Catholic worship, and two beautiful churches in these places. In 1767 the expulsion of King Charles III of Spain, these properties were available to the Crown, and owned by a comendero.
Nazca Patriots received the Liberating Expedition of General Don Jose de San Martin on October 14, 1820, after the Battle of Nasca escape. Two days earlier, on October 12 the General Juan Antonio Álvarez de Arenales, from Ica, was sent to the South in pursuit of the royal troops of Colonel Manuel Quimper getaways from Ica, as its second and chief of staff of the Division de la Sierra, the Argentine Manuel Rojas Argerich Lieutenant Colonel in command of 250 men: 110 infantry and 140 cavalry.
The town of Nasca was established on August 29, 1821, and later on July 2, 1855 it was elevated to district and then it became a province on January 23, 1941.
Nasca, is as it is called today, is a dry, why in time of the Incas was a formidable work of hydraulic engineering, water trayento Heights in underground branches, called aqueducts, which serve to present, to irrigate farmland and for home use.

==Nazca lines==

The Nazca culture is famous for their desert line drawings. On the ground level they cannot be discerned, but from a higher elevation they form coherent nature drawings, usually of animals. Nazca Lines are geometric shapes kilometers of lines and large drawings of animal figures (some as big as a football field), built on the desert floor.

==Airport==

Nazca has a small airport, the Maria Reiche Neuman Airport, used mainly for touristic flights over the Nazca lines.

==References==


