[[Richard Ratcliffe]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing, 1485 deaths, Knights of the Garter, English military personnel killed in action, High Sheriffs of Westmorland, Male Shakespearean characters, Knights banneret of England

Sir Richard Ratcliffe, KG (died 1485) was a close confidant of Richard III of England.

==Biography==

Ratcliffe came from a gentry family in the Lake District, and became a companion of Richard when the latter was still Duke of Gloucester (1461–83). He was one of Richard's trustees in the lordship of Richmond, and was named steward of Barnard Castle. Richard, while Duke of Gloucester, knighted Ratcliffe during the Scottish campaigns, at the same time creating him a knight banneret.Ross, Charles. Richard III. 1981
During the seizure of power by Richard III, Ratcliffe was chosen to return to the north and organize an army to help the Protector, as Richard III was then titled. Some sources name Ratcliffe as the person who gave the orders to execute Anthony Woodville, 2nd Earl Rivers (beheaded Jun 1483).
When Richard became king he gave Ratcliffe a number of offices, including the currently attainted hereditary High Sheriff of Westmorland, and made him a Knight of the Garter. He also received a large grant of lands, including much that had belonged to the Courtenay Earls of Devon. After the rebellion of 1483 he was given a very large number of forfeited estates. As a result he had an income larger than most Barons.
In July 1484, William Collingbourne, a Tudor agent, tacked up a lampooning poem to St. Paul's Cathedral, which mentions Ratcliffe among the three aides to King Richard, whose emblem was a white boar:
He had married Agnes Scrope, daughter of Henry Scrope, 4th Baron Scrope of Bolton, one of the great barons in the north of England. The "Catte" above refers to William Catesby.  The "dogge" here refers to a Lovell family heraldic symbol.Robert Fabyan, The New Chronicles of England and France in two Parts (London, 1811), p. 672.Fields, Bertram. Royal Blood: Richard III and the Mystery of the Princes. 2000 The poem was interpolated into Laurence Olivier's film Richard III, a screen adaptation of William Shakespeare's play.
Richard Ratcliffe was one of the two councilors (the other was William Catesby) who are reputed to have told the king that marrying Elizabeth of York would cause rebellions in the north.Weir The Princes in the Tower p. 211-212
He died at the Battle of Bosworth Field.
Ratcliffe appears in Shakespeare's play Richard III as a minor character who executes Rivers, Grey, and Vaughn.Boyce Shakespeare A to Z p. 532

==Notes==

==References==


