[[Nueva Vizcaya]]

CATEGORIES: Nueva Vizcaya, Provinces of the Philippines, States and territories established in 1841, 1841 establishments in the Philippines

Nueva Vizcaya (English: New Biscay) is a province of the Philippines located in the Cagayan Valley region in Luzon. Its capital is Bayombong. It is bordered by, clockwise from the north, Ifugao, Isabela, Quirino, Aurora, Nueva Ecija, Pangasinan, and Benguet.

==Etymology==

The name Nueva Vizcaya derives from the name given at the time to the western Basque territories of Spain, or less likely from the province of Biscay (called Vizcaya in Spanish) itself.

File:The carved columns of dupax.jpg|Columns in the cathedral of St. Vincent Ferrer of Dupax
File:PSM V77 D532 Ilongot men and woman of oyao nueva vizcaya.png|Ilongot tribe from Oyao in Nueva Vizcaya
File:Ph seal nueva vizcaya.png|Insignium of Nueva Vizcaya
File:The Largest Rizal Shrine in the World.jpg|Monument of Rizal
File:NuevaVizcaya&EcijaArchjf6178 18.JPG|Gateway Arch 
File:Bayombong,NuevaVizcayaCathedraljf0001 01.JPG|Cathedral in Bayombong
File:Dupax del Sur Church.jpg|Dupax Church

==History==

The province of Nueva Vizcaya used to be a territory of the vast Cagayan Valley which was once an integral political unit with one governor. In 1839, then-Governor Luis Lardizabal issued an order transforming Nueva Vizcaya into a politico-military province upon the advice of the alcalde mayor of Cagayan. The order was approved by a Royal Decree on April 10, 1841. The province had its first taste of civil governance in 1902 when it was organized by the Philippine Commission.
The present territory of Nueva Vizcaya was the result of changes emanating from the formal creation of the province of Isabela in May 1865, wherein a great portion of its northern territory was ceded to the newly-born province. In 1908, the organization of the province of Ifugao further reduced the area of Nueva Vizcaya which was forced to give up its northwest territory. The survey executed by the Bureau of Lands in 1914 further caused the diminution of its area and reduced again upon the enactment of the Administrative Code of 1917.
In 1942, Japanese troops occupied Nueva Vizcaya. Filipino and American troops liberated the province in 1945.
In 1971, with the passage of Republic Act No. 6394, Quirino, which was then a sub-province of Nueva Vizcaya, was separated from its mother province and made into a regular province.
Since Nueva Vizcaya's birth as a province, traces of the culture and customs of its early settlers—the Ilongots (Bugkalot), Igorots, Ifugaos, Isinais, and the Gaddangs—can still be seen. The influx of civilization and the infusion of modern technology to the life stream of the province induced many immigrants from adjacent provinces to migrate to this province.
The history of organized religion in the province of Nueva Vizcaya dates back to the year 1607 when the Dominican Order arrived at the hinterlands of the province to preach their beliefs. It was not until 1609, however, that the first settlement of a religious order was established in the southern half of the province. In 1702, a convent was erected in Burubur at the foot of the Caraballo mountains in Santa Clara, which is now a barangay of the town of Aritao. It was on this site that the first mass in Nueva Vizcaya was celebrated and the first baptism of a Christian convert was held.
Every last week of May, Nueva Vizcaya celebrates the Ammungan festival (formerly Panagyaman festival), a week-long affair culminating on May 24, the province's foundation day.

==Geography==

The province has a total land area of 4,378.80 square kilometers, which accounts for 16.30% of the total land area of Region II. It is composed of 15 municipalities, with Bayombong as the provincial capital and major educational center, Bambang and Solano as the major commercial centers, and Kayapa as the summer capital and "vegetable bowl" of the province. Nueva Vizcaya lies approximately 268 kilometers north of Metro Manila and can be reached by land via the Cagayan Valley Road (Maharlika Highway).
With forest land, agricultural areas and grasslands occupying a wide swath of the province, it does not come as a surprise that Nueva Vizcaya is an ideal site for extensive agricultural activity. Its main crops are rice, corn, vegetables, pineapple, banana, coffee, coconut, oranges and other fruit trees. The first time that an actual live photo of the worcester buttonquail was taken occurred in Nueva Vizcaya in early 2009. 
In mining, the province faces bright prospects. According to the Bureau of Mines and Geo-Sciences, deposits of metallic minerals which can be exploited are copper, gold, molybdenum and pyrite. Non-metallic deposits include red clay, white clay and limestone. Sand and gravel are the most abundant deposits in the province.

===Subdivisions===

Nueva Vizcaya is subdivided into 15 municipalities.

==Tourist Attractions==

This landlocked province is famous for its high quality citrus fruits. Unsurprisingly, this has given it the nickname of “Citrus Capital of the Philippines.”
Buy handicrafts and interesting processed food like ginger tea, powdered chili and preserved fruit jams and jellies at Santa. Fe Road.

==Demographics==

==Economy==

On January 11, 2008, the Cagayan Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) stated that tilapia (species of cichlid fishes from the tilapiine cichlid tribe) production grew and Cagayan Valley is now the Philippines’ tilapia capital (Saint Peter’s fish). Production supply grew 37.25% since 2003, with 14,000 metric tons (MT) in 2007. The recent aquaculture congress found that the growth of tilapia production was due to government interventions: provision of fast-growing species, accreditation of private hatcheries to ensure supply of quality fingerlings, establishment of demonstration farms, providing free fingerlings to newly constructed fishponds, and the dissemination of tilapia to Nueva Vizcaya (in Diadi town). Former cycling champion Lupo Alava is a multi-awarded tilapia raiser in Bagabag, Nueva Vizcaya. Also, Nueva Vizcaya Gov. Luisa Lloren Cuaresma also entered into similar aquaculture endeavors in addition to tilapia production.Abs-Cbn Interactive, Cagayan Valley country’s tilapia capital

==Government==

Nueva Vizcaya has one congressional district, although there has been a longtime proposal to divide the province into two congressional districts: "North District," comprising the northern municipalities; and "South District," composed of the southern towns.

==Education==

Nueva Vizcaya has two universities:

==References==

==External links==


