[[Jacques Collin de Plancy]]

CATEGORIES: 1793 births, 1881 deaths, French occultists, 19th-century occultists

Jacques Albin Simon Collin de Plancy (Plancy-l'Abbaye, 28 January 1793 –Paris, 1881) was a French occultist, demonologist and writer; he published several works on occultism and demonology.Les Mille et un jours J Stouff - 2010 - biblioweb.hypotheses.org "C'est sans doute la raison pour laquelle, il fut demandé à Jacques Collin de Plancy (1793-1881) qui ne connaissait par l'Orient, mais était expert en esprits et démons de toute sorte, d'en rédiger une introduction."Françoise Lavocat, Pierre Kapitaniak, and Marianne Closson, eds. Fictions du diable: Littérature et démonologie de saint Augustin à Léo Taxil. Françoise Lavocat, H Kallendorf - Renaissance Quarterly, 2008 - JSTOR "... Finally, Jean Céard examines the lingering hold that the demonology of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries exerted upon the imaginations of the later Romantics, as exemplified by authors such as Jacques Collin de Plancy, who “rediscovered” earlier demonologists. ..."
He was born Jacques Albin Simon Collin on 28 (in some sources 30) January 1793 in Plancy (presently Plancy-l'Abbaye) son of Edme-Aubin Collin and Marie-Anne Danton, sister of Georges-Jacques Danton who was executed the year after Jacques was born.Revue de Champagne et de Brie: Histoire, biographie, archaéologie Léon Frémont, Georges Hérelle - 1880 "Jacques Collin, connu en littérature sous le nom de Collin de Plancy, naquit à Plancy, le 30 janvier 1794. Il était fils de Edme- Aubin Collin et de Marie-Anne Danton, et par cette dernière neveu du fameux Danton. Il commença ses études chez ... He later added the aristocratic "de Plancy" himself - an addition which would later cause accusations against his son in his career as a diplomat. He was a free-thinker influenced by Voltaire. He worked as a printer and publisher in Plancy-l'Abbaye and Paris. Between 1830 and 1837, he resided in Brussels, and then in the Netherlands, before he returned to France after having converted to the Catholic religion.
Collin de Plancy followed the tradition of many previous demonologists of cataloguing demons by name and title of nobility, as it happened with grimoires like Pseudomonarchia Daemonum, and The Lesser Key of Solomon among others. In 1818 his best known work, Dictionnaire Infernal, was published. In 1863 were added some images that made it famous: imaginative drawings concerning the appearance of certain demons. In 1822 it was advertised as: 
It is considered a major work documenting beings, characters, books, deeds, and causes which pertain to the manifestations and magic of trafficking with Hell; divinations, occult sciences, grimoires, marvels, errors, prejudices, traditions, folktales, the various superstitions, and generally all manner of marvellous, surprising, mysterious, and supernatural beliefs.
By the end of 1830 he ostensibly became an enthusiastic Catholic—to the confusion of his former admirers and detractors.
In 1846, he published a two volume work entitled Dictionnaire Sciences Occultes et des Idées superstitieuses,[tpl]cite web|url=http://www.esoterika.org/index.php?telechargements |title=Téléchargements |publisher=Esoterika.org |date= |accessdate=2012-06-19[/tpl] another listing of demons. The set cost 16 francs.
Jacques Collin de Plancy was the father of Victor Emile Marie Joseph Collin de Plancy (1853–1924) who for nearly a decade starting in 1884 served as French Minister to Korea and whose collected art works and books became part of the core of the Korean collections of the French Bibliothèque Nationale and the Musée Guimet in Paris.François Roudaut, Le Fonds Collin de Plancy à la Bibliothèque de Troyes M Milner - Romantisme, 1995 - persee.fr ... Le fonds Collin de Plancy est constitué par les livres et documents donnés en 1923 à la Bibliothèque municipale de Troyes, en exécution du legs de Victor Collin de Plancy, orientaliste et diplomate, fils du polygraphe Jacques Collin de Plancy, qui est surtout connu comme ..."

==Bibliography==

==References==

==External links==


