[[Sydney Trains T set]]

CATEGORIES: CityRail, Double-decker EMUs, Electric multiple units of New South Wales, Sydney Trains

The Tangara (an Aboriginal word meaning to go) is a class of electric multiple unit operated by Sydney Trains in Sydney, Australia. The Tangaras were delivered between 1988 and 1995, and are third-generation trains.The four generations of electric rolling stock CityRail

==Design==

A Tangara is a double-deck four-car set, with the two outer cars being driving control trailers fitted with one pantograph each and the middle two cars being non-control motor cars. They are equipped with air conditioning and chopper control.
Two subclasses of Tangara were built, the suburban sets targeted as T sets, and outer-suburban sets targeted as G sets. The T sets replaced the first generation of Sydney's electric rolling stock.
Unlike most other CityRail trains the seats on the T sets are fixed, meaning that half the seats face backwards.
The G sets differed from the T sets in having yellow front panels, round green door buttons, high-backed reversible seats, toilets, fresh water dispensers and luggage racks.
Set G7 was fitted with an AC drive system for evaluation purposes with the existing DC stock and compatibility with signalling and communication systems on the network. G7 was scrapped in 2005 at Maintrain, Auburn after the Waterfall train disaster, as all four cars were beyond repair.

==Delivery==

In July 1986 the Government of New South Wales awarded A Goninan & Co a contract for 450 carriages."Tangara Contract" Railway Digest September 1986 page 273 In 1993 it was decided that the last 80 carriages of the order would be built to a modified design to operate peak-hour services on services to Wyong, Port Kembla and Dapto."A Goninan & Co" Railway Digest October 1993 page 417 In 1996 five spare driving trailers were ordered."A Review of Electric Multiple Unit rolling stock" Railway Digest September 1996 page 32
The first train was unveiled at Sydney Central in December 1987,"Tangra Preview" Railway Digest February 1988 page 49 entering service in April 1988. The final T set was delivered in February 1994 and the final G set in October 1995."450th Tangara Delivered" Railway Digest December 1995 page 6
The cars built were:

==In service==

When first introduced, the T sets were fitted with passenger door release handles to prevent loss of air conditioning at stations. These were later disconnected (and later removed) due to passengers not getting used to opening the doors for themselves when needed. The seats originally had fabric upholstery, but this was gradually replaced by blue vinyl. They were also fitted with front destination displays although these have rarely worked.
Since 2003, all Tangaras have been updated with a new CityRail corporate appearance. This involved the fitting of yellow panels on the front, yellow painted passenger doors and the end carriages receiving yellow paint surround for the benefit of visually impaired passengers.http://www.nsw.gov.au/projects/major-makeover-tangara-fleet Blue and yellow stripes along the bottom of the carriages were replaced by a single yellow stripe and new fuzzy CityRail logos were placed on the driving cars.
In 2010 a program to refresh the Tangara interiors was announced. The upgrades include reconfigured seating next to the vestibule area, new seating upholstery and handrails; as of 2013 this has not yet been completed.Tangara fleet to get make-over CityRail Xpress edition 127 28 April 2010
In July 2013 Sydney Trains rearranged the seating on the upper and lower decks on two carriages as a trial on the Western and North Shore lines, with 16 less seats, a 3x2 seats was replaced by 2x2 in one carriage while in the other carriage there are double seats on one side and a bench style seating on the other"All change as RailCorp is disbanded" Sydney Morning Herald 1 July 2013
The following Tangara carriages have been scrapped due to accidents:
The following are replacement carriages:
Driving trailer car D6127 and motor car N5127 were both involved in the Wentworthville train derailment on 27 December 1989, Cityrail's first major accident involving the Tangara fleet. D6127 was written off, having collided with the platform. N5127 was sent to Dunheved on the Ropes Creek line for training fire fighters."A Review of Electric Multiple Unit Rolling Stock" Railway Digest September 1994 page 32

===Conversion of G sets to T sets===

In February 2003 a contract was awarded to United Group Rail to construct 41 CityRail H set carriages (10 four car trains, plus 1 spare car). These new trains have a very similar level of passenger amenity to the G sets and can be seen as a continuation of the design. In April 2005 an additional 81 carriages were ordered.[tpl]cite web|url=http://www.railcorp.info/about_railcorp/oscars|title=OSCAR project|publisher=RailCorp|accessdate=15 October 2011[/tpl]
In late 2005 15 V set carriages were suddenly withdrawn due to the discovery of corrosion in their underframes. G sets began to operate more off-peak Intercity services to Port Kembla, Kiama, and Wyong to cover for the withdrawn V sets.
H sets started entering service in December 2006, leading to a change in the role of the G sets. From 2007 the G sets were progressively redeployed to suburban services, providing extra capacity on high-demand existing services such as on the Western line and allowing new services to be introduced. By 2008 G sets were often used on peak suburban services that extend into intercity areas, such as services to Springwood (via the Western line).
In 2009, the conversion of G sets to T sets began, to improve their suitability for suburban working as H sets took over their outer suburban duties. Conversion work consisted of the removal of toilets and their replacement with additional seating. Other work included the installation of new handrails and hangers and the recoding of cars and sets. G4 was the first to be converted (into T104). In 2010 sets being converted started receiving a full refurbishment.

==Lines serviced==

The Tangaras operate on most Sydney Trains suburban lines.
Usual routes:

==4D==

A train bearing strong resemblance to a Tangara, known as the 4D, was built by A Goninan & Co in 1991 for the Public Transport Corporation.Double Deck Development and Demonstration (4D) Train Vicsig Although outwardly similar to the Tangaras it was mechanically very different being built to be compatible with the Comeng trains operated in Melbourne. It was included in th
e sale of Hillside Trains to Connex Melbourne in August 1999. It wasn't successful and after spending large periods out of service, was withdrawn in December 2002 and stored at Newport Workshops.
The 4D was bought by CityRail for parts before being scrapped in March 2006 at Sims Metal, Brooklyn.

File:D6234.jpg|D6234's vestibule prior to refurbishment
File:T set original seating.JPG|T set upper deck with original seating fabric
File:CityRail-Tangara-int-upper.jpg|T set upper deck prior to refurbishment with seats recovered in vinyl
File:CityRail-Tangara-int-lower.jpg|T set lower deck prior to refurbishment with seats recovered in vinyl
File:Refurbished Tangara upper deck.JPG|Upper deck of a refurbished T set
File:Refurbished Tangara lower deck.JPG|Lower deck of a refurbished T set
File:G set upper deck.jpg|Upper deck of a G set prior to refurbishment
File:Tangara G Set Lower Deck.jpg|Lower deck of a G set carriage prior to refurbishment
File:Ex G set refurb upper deck.JPG|Upper deck of a refurbished ex G set
File:Ex G set refurb lower deck.JPG|Lower deck of a refurbished ex G set
File:Cityrail ex G Set vestibule.jpg|Refurbished vestibule of an ex G set. The luggage racks above the seats, designed for longer distance travel, were not removed when the train was converted to a T set.

==References==

==External links==

==Further reading==


