[[Culture of Guyana]]

CATEGORIES: Guyanese culture

Guyanese culture reflects the influence of African, Indian, Amerindian, Chinese, Portuguese, Dutch and British cultures.Ali, Arif (ed). Guyana. London: Hansib, 2008Smock, Kirk. Guyana: the Bradt Travel Guide. 2007.
Guyana is one of a few mainland territories of South America that is considered to be a part of the Caribbean region. Guyanese culture shares many commonalities with the cultures of islands in the West Indies, particularly in the coastal regions of the country (where the majority of the population is concentrated).  In the last few decades with the opening of the interior and a highway into Brazil there have been a movement of people and the influence of Brazilian culture, in the south of the country. Because Guyana was once a British colony, there are many cultural influences that live on, particularly in the use of language, where British terms are used, some dating back to the 17th century. The country is also still riddled with Dutch place names from when the country was various separate Dutch colonies.

==Cultural events==

==Literature and theatre==

Popular Guyanese authors include Wilson Harris, Jan Carew, Denis Williams and E. R. Braithwaite. Braithwaite's memoir To Sir With Love details his experiences as a black high school teacher in the poor East End of London. An early Guyanese born author was Edgar Mittelholzer, who became more well known while living in Trinidad and England. He is well known for his works that include Corentyne Thunder and a three novel set known as the Kaywana Trilogy, the latter focusing on one family through 350 years of Guyana's history.
Other notable writers who have made a significant contribution to Guyanese literary culture includes Fred D'Aguiar, David Dabydeen, Martin Carter, Jan Carew, and Dennis Adonis, whose literary works includes seventeen published books that have been translated into at least six different languages.
Although the beginning of theatre in 19th century Georgetown was European, in the early 20th century a new African and Indian Guyanese middle-class theatre emerged. In the 1950s there was an explosion of an ethnically diverse and socially committed theatre. Despite an economic depression, there was a struggle to maintain theatre post-1980. Serious repertory theatre was highlighted by Carifesta and the Theatre Guild of Guyana.A History of Theatre ihn Guyana 1800–2000, Frank Thomasson. ISBN 1-84523-045-0 Wordsworth McAndrew has been prominent in Guyanese theatre since the 1960s.

==Music and visual arts==

Guyana's musical tradition is a mix of African, Indian, European, and some Latin elements. The most popular type of music is Calypso and its off shoots and mixes, like in other parts of the Eastern Caribbean. The various types of popular music include reggae, calypso, chutney, Soca, local Guyanese soca-chutney and Bollywood film songs (or Indian music). Due to globalization sounds from neighbouring countries can be beard such as Merengue, Bachata, Salsa, with Reggaeton being the most popular.From Caroni Gyal To Calcutta Woman: A History Of East Indian Chutney Music In The Caribbean by Rajendra Saywack December 1999, Thomas Hunter College http://www.saxakali.com/caribbean/Hemchandra1.htm Popular Guyanese performers include Billy(William) Moore, Terry Gajraj, Mark Holder, Eddy Grant, Dave Martins & the Tradewinds, Aubrey Cummings and Nicky Porter. Among the most successful Guyanese record producers are Rohit Jagessar, Eddy Grant, Terry Gajraj and Dave Martin.
Visual art takes many forms in Guyana, but its dominant themes are Amerindian, the ethnic diversity of the population and the natural environment. Modern and Contemporary visual artists living in, or originally from, Guyana include Stanley Greaves, Ronald Savory, Philip Moore, Donald Locke, Frank Bowling, Hew Locke, Roshini Kempadoo, George Simon and Aubrey Williams.

==Film==

The story of the cinema in Guyana goes back to the 1920s when the Gaiety, probably British Guiana's first cinema, stood by the Brick dam Roman Catholic Presbytery in Georgetown, and showed Charlie Chaplin-type silent movies. After the Gaiety burnt down around 1926, other cinemas followed, such as the Metro on Middle Street in Georgetown, which became the Empire; the London on Camp Street, which became the Plaza; and the Astor on Church and Waterloo Streets, which opened around 1940.
The Capitol on La Penitence Street in Albouystown had a rough reputation. The Metro pole was on Robb and Wellington Streets; the Rial to, which became the Rio, on Vlissengen Road; the Hollywood was in Kitty; and the Strand De Luxe on Wellington Street, was considered the luxury showplace.
Cinema seating was distinctly divided. Closest to the screen, with rows of hard wooden benches, was the lowly Pit, where the effort of looking upwards at the screen for several hours gave one a permanent stiff neck. The next section, House, was separated from the Pit by a low partition wall. House usually had individual but connected wooden rows of seats that flipped up or down. Above House was the Box section, with soft, private seats and, behind Box, Balcony, a favorite place for dating couples. These divisions in the cinema roughly represented the different strata existing in colonial society.
Guyanese has produced several feature films over the years, including the International Award winner Guiana 1838, a film by Guyanese-born, US based writer and director Rohit Jagessar that depicts the arrival of indentured Indian servants to the Caribbean in 1838 following the 1834 abolition of slavery in the British Empire, was released in 2004.

==Architecture==

Guyana's historic architecture reflects the country's British colonial past. Even current houses when made of wood also still emulates aspects of the style. Many of the buildings in Georgetown and New Amsterdam were built entirely of local woods.

==Sports==

The major sports in Guyana are cricket and football (soccer). Guyana plays as part of West Indies team for international cricket. Minor sports include beach cricket, netball, rounders, lawn tennis, basketball, table tennis, boxing, squash, and a few others.
Guyana played host to international cricket matches as part of the 2007 Cricket World Cup. The new 15,000-seat Providence Stadium, also referred to as Guyana National Stadium, was built in time for the World Cup and was ready for the beginning of play on March 28. At the first international game of CWC 2007 at the stadium, Lasith Malinga of the Sri Lankan team performed a helmet trick or double hat-trick (four wickets in four consecutive deliveries).

==Cuisine==

Guyanese cuisine is very similar to the rest of the Caribbean. The food reflects the ethnic makeup of the country and its colonial history, and includes African, Creole, East Indian, Portuguese, Amerindian, Chinese and European (mostly British) influences and dishes.The food is diverse and includes dishes such as curry and roti, and Cookup Rice, the local variation on the Caribbean rice and peas/Beans and Rice. The one pot meal while not the national dish is one of the most cooked dishes. With its various versions, according to what type of meat, peas and other ingredients available, is a true reflection of the country.
Dishes have been adapted to Guyanese tastes, often by the addition of spices. Unique preparationsGuyana Outpost; Guyanese recipes include Pepperpot, a stew of Amerindian origin made with cassareep (a bitter extract of the cassava), hot pepper and seasoning. Other favourites are  cassava bread, stews, and Metemgie, a thick rich soup with ground provision, coconut milk and large dumplings, eaten with fried fish or chicken. Homemade bread-making, an art in many villages, is a reflection of the British influence that includes pastries such as cheese rolls, pine (pineapple) tarts, and patties.
Curry is widely popular in Guyana and includes most types of meat that can be curried including chicken, seafood, goat, lamb, and even duck. Guyanese sty]] is another dish that is an almost everyday affair in most homes.
Caribbean ground provisions (known colloquially as provisions) are part of the staple diet and include cassava, sweet potato, edoes and others. There is an abundance of fresh fruits, vegetables and seafood on the coast.
Most individuals use fresh fruit to make their own beverages, which are called "local drink". Popular homemade drinks are lime water (like lemonade), mauby, made from the bark of a tree; sorrel drink, made from hibiscus;http://www.jamaicanteas.com/article-about-sorrell.html ginger beer (made from ginger root), and peanut punch.
Fresh fish and seafood are an integral part of the Guyanese diet especially in the rural areas and small villages along the coast. Popular fish types include gilbaka, butter fish. tilapia, catfish, and hassa. The crab soups with okra from the Berbice coastal region resemble the Louisiana Creole soups like gumbo.
Many Guyanese make local drinks and food at Christmas.  Some local food certain to be served are  Guyana pepperpot, garlic pork, black cake,fruit cake and breads. Popular local drinks are   Maubi,Ginger Beer, Sorrel, and many other drinks made from local fruits.  Some of the local drinks and food require advance preparation. For example The making of a black cake is done many months in advance because the fruits that are incorporated into the cake are soaked in rum or wine for many months to intense the flavor.  Then at the time of baking the cake the preserved fruit is added to the cake.  Local drinks such as Maubi,Ginger beer and Sorrel are fermented and require a setting(pre-preparation) period prior to making.  The advance preparation is part of the exciting pre-preparation for Christmas celebrations.
Guyanese style Chinese food and fried chicken are the most popular restaurant and take-out items, and are found in the bigger towns.  Popular Chinese dishes include lo mein, chow mein, and Chicken in the ruff (fried rice with Chinese-style fried chicken).

==Folklore==

The Guyanese folklore is similar to the Caribbean folklores, mixed with African Indian, Amerindian, and Portuguese beliefs.

==Language==

English is the main language, and Guyana is the only English speaking country in South America, though many people in neighboring Suriname speak it. British English is taught in school and used in Government and business. Guyanese creole, a pidgin of 17th century English and African words, is used at home and on the street. It is the same as creoles spoken in the Eastern Caribbean such Barbados, Trinidad and Tobago, and St. Vincent but with different accent or emphasis on how the words are pronounced.
There are also a very small amount of trace words words form the extinct Dutch Creoles, and French. Depending on the race of the person and location, the accent and sprinkling of other words can also change. An example of this would be an Indo Guyanese who would use a word or two words left over from when they spoke Hindi.
As time passes, British terms and phrases for things are being substituted for American ones, due the American Influence. Where once people would have said flats as in England, the term apartment is now being used by some people.

==Religion==

Many religions are practiced in Guyana, the main ones being Christianity, Hinduism, and Islam.
Most Guyanese practice Hinduism

==References==

===Reference bibliography===

==External links==


