[[Black box theory]]

CATEGORIES: Metatheory of science, Systems science

Black box theories are things defined only in terms of their function.Definition from Answers.comdefinition from highbeam The term black box theory is applied to any field, philosophy and science or otherwise where some inquiry or definition is made into the relations between the appearance of something (exterior/outside), i.e. here specifically the things black box state, related to its  characteristics and behaviour within (interior/inner).Black box theory applied briefly to Isaac NewtonUsage of term Specifically, the inquiry is focused upon a thing that has no immediately apparent characteristics and therefore has only factors for consideration held within itself hidden from immediate observation. The observer is assumed ignorant in the first instance as the majority of available data is held in an inner situation away from facile investigations. The black box element of the definition is shown as being characterised by a system where observable elements enter a perhaps imaginary box with a set of different outputs emerging which are also observable.Physics dept, Temple University, Philadelphia

==Origin of term==

The term black box was first recorded used by the RAF of approximately 1947 to describe the sealed containment used for apparatus of navigation, this usage becoming more widely applied after 1964.online etymology dictionary The identifier is therefore applied to objects known as the flight data recorder (FDR) and cockpit voice recorder (CVR). These function to record the radio transmissions occurring within an airplane, and are particularly important to persons who engage into an inquiry into the cause of a plane crashing, where the plane is caused to become wreckage. These boxes are in fact coloured orange in order that they be more easily located.howstuffworkscpaglobal

==Examples==

Considering a black box that could not be opened to "look inside" and see how it worked, all that would be possible would be to guess how it worked based on what happened when something was done to it (input), and what occurred as a result of that (output). If after putting an orange in on one side, an orange fell out the other, it would be possible to make educated guesses or hypotheses on what was happening inside the black box. It could be filled with oranges; it could have a conveyor belt to move the orange from one side to the other; it could even go through an alternate universe. Without being able to investigate the workings of the box, ultimately all we can do is guess.
However, occasionally strange occurrences will take place that change our understanding of the black box. Consider putting in an orange in and having a guava pop out. Now our "filled with oranges" and "conveyor belt" theories no longer work, and we may have to change our educated guess as to how the black box works.

==Uses==

One of the black box theories uses is as a method to describe/understand psychological factors in fields such as marketing where applied to an analyses of consumer behaviour.Institute for working futures part of Advanced Diploma in Logistics and Management. Retrieved 11/09/2011Black-box theory used to understand Consumer behaviour Marketing By Richard L. Sandhusen. Retrieved 11/09/2011designing of websites Retrieved 11/09/2011
The black box theory of consciousness, which states that the mind is fully understood once the inputs and outputs are well defined,the Professor network and generally couples this with a radical skepticism regarding the possibility of ever successfully describing the underlying structure, mechanism, and dynamics of the mind.

==See also==

==References==


