[[Science and technology in China]]

CATEGORIES: Research institutes in China, Science and technology in the People's Republic of China, History of science and technology in China, Chinese nationalism

Science and technology in China has in recent decades developed rapidly. The Chinese government has placed emphasis through funding, reform, and societal status on science and technology as a fundamental part of the socio-economic development of the country as well as for national prestige. China has made rapid advances in areas such as education, infrastructure, high-tech manufacturing, academic publishing, patents, and commercial applications and is now in some areas and by some measures a world leader. China is now increasingly targeting indigenous innovation and aims to reform remaining weaknesses.

==History==

China was a world leader in science and technology until the early years of the Qing Dynasty. Chinese discoveries and Chinese innovations such as papermaking, printing, the compass, and gunpowder (the Four Great Inventions) contributed to the economic development in Asia and Europe. Chinese activity started to decrease in the fourteenth century. Unlike in Europe scientists did not attempt to reduce observations of nature to mathematical laws and they did not form a scholarly community with criticisms and progressive research. There was an increasing concentration on literature, arts, and public administration while science and technology were seen as trivial or restricted to limited practical applications.Donald D. DeGlopper, Chapter 9 - Science and Technology, A Country Study: China, Library of Congress, http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/cntoc.html The causes of this Great Divergence continue to be debated. One factor is argued to be the imperial examination system which removed the incentives for Chinese intellectuals to learn mathematics or to conduct experimentation.Justin Yifu Lin, "Demystifying the Chinese Economy", 2011, Cambridge University Press, Preface xiv, http://assets.cambridge.org/97805211/91807/frontmatter/9780521191807_frontmatter.pdf
After being defeated repeatedly by Western nations in the 19th century, Chinese reformers began promoting modern science and technology as part of the Self-Strengthening Movement. After the Communist victory in 1949 science and technology research was organized based on the model of the Soviet Union. It was characterized by a bureaucratic organization led by non-scientists, research according to the goals of central plans, separation of research from production, specialized research institutes, concentration on practical applications, and restrictions on information flows. Researchers should work as collectives for society rather than as individuals seeking recognition. Many studied in the Soviet Union which also transferred technology. The Cultural revolution, which sought to remove perceived "bourgeois" influences and attitudes, caused large negative effects and disruptions. Among other measures it saw the scientific community and formal education attacked, intellectuals were sent to do manual labor, universities and academic journals were closed, most research ceased, and for nearly a decade China trained no new scientists and engineers.
After Mao Zedong's death, S&T was established as one of the Four Modernizations in 1976. The new leader Deng Xiaoping, and architect of the Chinese economic reform, was a strong promoter of S&T and reversed the policies of the Cultural revolution. The Soviet inspired system was then gradually reformed. Media began promoting the value of S&T, scientific thinking, and scientific achievement. The third and fourth generations of leaders came almost exclusively from technical backgrounds.
The State Council of the People's Republic of China in 1995 issued the "Decision on Accelerating S&T Development" which described planned Science & Technology development for the coming decades. It described S&T as the chief productive force and affecting economic development, social progress, national strength, and living standards. S&T should become closely associated with market needs. Not only Soviet style institutes should do research but also universities and private industries. State institutions should form joint ventures with Chinese or foreign venture capital in order for S&T developments to reach the industry. S&T personal should become more occupationally mobile, pay should be linked to economic results, and age and seniority should become less important for personal decisions. Intellectual property rights should be respected. Information exchange should improve and there should be competition and open bidding on projects. The environment should be protected. Chinese indigenous S&T in certain key areas should be especially promoted. Public officials should improve their understanding of S&T and incorporate S&T in decision making. Society, including Communist Party youth organizations, labor unions and the mass media, should actively promote respect for knowledge and human talents.US Embassy Beijing November 1996 report, "PRC State Council Decision on Accelerating S&T Development."
During the last 30 years China concentrated on building physical infrastructure such as roads and ports. One policy during the last decade has been to ask for technology transfer in order for foreign companies to gain access to the Chinese market. China is now increasingly targeting indigenous innovation.

==Techno-nationalism==

China, as well as other Asian nations, sees science and technology as vital for achieving economic and political goals as well as national prestige. Lacking indigenous technological intellectual property and innovation are seen as key national problems. Premier Wen Jiabao in 2006 stated that "Without independent innovation China would be unable to claim an equal place in the world or achieve national honor".
Despite the Chinese economic reforms, the Chinese state, as also is the case in several other Asian nations, continues to heavily direct both the public and the private economy and research by means such as national plans, regulations, taxes, and subsides. Developing and prioritized industries and research are protected and guided. There are systemic efforts to replace foreign technology and intellectual properties with indigenous. Foreign companies are given many incentives for technology transfer and for moving R&D to China. At the same time the technological abilities of the indigenous companies are supported in various ways. The importance of the nationalistic top-down governance as compared to the importance of other factors, such as the economic liberalization, for the rapid progress of Chinese S&T is uncertain. There is a potential for conflict and opposing, foreign nationalistic policies if problems for foreign companies and nations are blamed on Chinese economic and scientific advances and Chinese nationalistic policies.hDavid Kang and Adam Segal, The Siren Song of Technonationalism, March 2006, Far Eastern Economic Review, http://www.feer.com/articles1/2006/0603/free/p005.html
Nationalism and nationalistic achievements have been seen as becoming the main ideological justifications and societal glue for the regime as Marxism loses influence. Some science and technology mega-projects has been seen as questionable trophy projects done for propaganda purposes with Chinese state-controlled media being filled with reports of Chinese achievements.Jayshree Bajoria, Nationalism in China, April 23, 2008, http://www.cfr.org/china/nationalism-china/p16079IAIN MILLS , China Chooses 'Mega-Events' Over Structural Reforms, 19 NOV 2010, World Politis Review, http://www.worldpoliticsreview.com/articles/7097/china-chooses-mega-events-over-structural-reforms

==Gross Domestic Expenditures on Research and Development==

Between 2000 and 2008 Gross Domestic Expenditures on Research and Development (GERD) rose by an average of 22.8% annually which increased the share of GERD to GDP from 0.9% to 1.54%. China aims to increase this to 2.5% by 2020. In 2008 82.76% went to experimental development, 12.46% to applied research, and 4.78% to basic research. Business enterprises contributed 59.95% of GERD in 2000 and 73.26% in 2008. Spending by enterprises is predominantly on experimental development.UNESCO Science Report 2010, Chapter 18 China, 2010, UNESCO, http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0018/001899/189958e.pdf China aims to increase basic research's share to 15% by 2020.
The research firm Battelle estimates that China's R&D expenditures will exceed that of the United States in 2023."2012 Global R&D Funding Forecast", Battelle, http://www.battelle.org/ABOUTUS/rd/2012.pdf

==Institutions==

The State Council of the People's Republic of China is the top administrative organ in China. Immediately below it are several ministries and ministry level organisations involved with various aspects of science and technology.James Wilsdon and James Keeley, China: The next science superpower?, The Atlas of Ideas:Mapping the new geography of science, 2007, Demos, http://www.naider.com/upload/82_china_final.pdf The State Council Science and Education Leading Group, consisting of the leaders of the major science bodies, attempts to organize the national policy. Efficiency of overall coordination has been questioned with various agencies seen as having overlapping missions and rivalries for resources and sometimes engaging in wasteful duplication.
The Ministry of Science and Technology of the People's Republic of China, formerly the State Science and Technology Commission, is the body primarily responsible for science and technology strategy and policy. It also administers national research programs, S&T development zones, and international cooperation. The Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China oversees education as well as research institutes at universities. Several other ministries such as the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of the People's Republic of China, the Ministry of Health of the People's Republic of China, and the Ministry of Agriculture of the People's Republic of China are also involved in S&T.
The National Planning Office of Philosophy and Social Sciences directs planning for social sciences and philosophy.
The Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) is the most prestigious professional science organization in China with China's scientific elite being members. It directs many research institutes, research programs, graduate training programs, and gives influential advice. The Chinese Academy of Engineering (CAE) gives important advice but unlike the CAS does not have research institutes of its own.  The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS) has a similar role to CAS for social sciences and philosophy. There are also many more narrow academies such as the Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences.
The National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) gives grants to individual researchers after peer-review.
The People's Liberation Army General Armaments Department directs military R&D.
The national scientific and academic organizations affiliated to the China Association for Science and Technology are also important forces in scientific and technological research.
Research is carried out by governmental research institutes, in higher learning institutions, and by private enterprises.
Local governments have become increasingly important in R&D funding and may now contribute up to half of government spending. Intense rivalry for research and high-tech industry has been argued to sometimes create wasteful subsidized overcapacity, dispersal of efforts better centralized in a few localities, and poorly judged bureaucratic subsidizing of technologies that soon become out-dated.Vivek Wadhwa, Why China's Chip Industry Won't Catch America's, September 3, 2009 Bloomberg BusinessWeek, September 3, 2009

==National programs==

China's national R&D programs include:
The major national programs receive 15-20% of government R&D spending. They fund research, after a stated competitive proposal procedure, in universities, institutes, and enterprise. Important project may receive funding from several programs. The programs are argued to have had a large effect but have also been involved in scandals, corruption, fraud, accused of producing derivative works with few innovations, and claimed to ignore merit in selecting projects in favor of cronyism. China is trying to improve the efficiency by measures such as more peer-review and evaluations.China’s Program for Science and  Technology Modernization: Implications for American Competitiveness Prepared for THE U.S.-CHINA ECONOMIC AND SECURITY REVIEW COMMISSION, CENTRA Technology, Inc, http://www.uscc.gov/researchpapers/2011/USCC_REPORT_China's_Program_forScience_and_Technology_Modernization.pdf

==Economic and Technological Development Zones==

Based on the success of the Special Economic Zones of the People's Republic of China, China has created Economic and Technological Development Zones. They have the purposes of building up high-tech industries, attracting foreign investment, increasing exports, and improve the regional economy. They are considered to have been very successful and have been expanded from an initial fourteen to fifty-four.Economic and Technological Development Zones, china.org.cn, http://www.china.org.cn/english/SPORT-c/76751.htm

==Education and R&D personnel==

In the first participation of Chinese student in an international student assessment test, the 2009 Programme for International Student Assessment, 15-years-old students from Shanghai ranked first in all of the three categories: mathematics, science, and reading. The Chinese students scored particularly well compared to other nations in mathematics. One explanation for the Chinese results may be a culture emphasizing education and competitive examinations and more time spent studying in part due to less participation in activities such as sports. Teaching have become a higher status occupation. Also, industrialized Shanghai which has done important educational reforms may not be representative for the rest of China. While there was no evidence of cheating or technical problems with the testing, Shanghai which attracts many immigrants from the rest of China may have allowed particularly good students to study in the city and the students may have been told that the test was important for China's image. The OECD director of the testing, Andreas Schleicher, said that the results were expected to produce astonishment and had been examined for accuracy by international experts after the OECD received the Shanghai scores. He also said that the results "refute the commonly held hypothesis that China just produces rote learning" and "Large fractions of these students demonstrate their ability to extrapolate from what they know and apply their knowledge very creatively in novel situations".Sam Dillon, Top Test Scores From Shanghai Stun Educators, December 7, 2010, New York Times, http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/07/education/07education.html?_r=3&pagewanted=1
China has become of the world's biggest sources for research and development personnel. Between 2000 and 2008, the number of engineers and scientists more than doubled to 1.59 million. Relative to population size this is still low compared to major developed nations like the United States and Japan but the gap is rapidly closing. The number of doctorate awards in science and engineering have increased tenfold since the early 1990s.Dieter Ernest, China's Innovation Policy Is A Wake-Up Call For America, Analysis From The East-West Center, No. 100, May 2011, http://www.eastwestcenter.org/fileadmin/stored/pdfs/api100.pdf The number of students in general at universities increased from 1 million to 5.4 million during the 1998-2007 period.  In 2009 alone, China produced over 10,000 Ph.D. engineering graduates, and as many as 500,000 BSc graduates in engineering, mathematics, information technology, and computer science – more than any other country."Desperately seeking math and science majors". CNN, 29 July 2009. Retrieved 2012-04-09.
The C9 League, pitched as China's Ivy League, is an alliance of nine elite Chinese universities which receive a high amount of national research funding and produce a large share of national research output.
Chinese universities contribute an unusually large share of patents. The universities receive about half of R&D money from private enterprises.
Eight out of nine members of the Politburo Standing Committee of the Communist Party of China have engineering degrees."2011 Global R&D Funding Forecast",Battelle, http://www.battelle.org/aboutus/rd/2011.pdf
2.25 million students have studied abroad since 1978. 340,000 were studying abroad in 2011 which was an increase by 20% over the previous year. In total 818,400 have returned to China with this occurring in particular in recent years. 186,200 returned to China in 2011 which was an increase by 38% over the previous year. China offers several benefits for high-achieving foreign educated Chinese who return to China. Students are now also returning because increased job opportunities unlike previously when many stayed abroad due lack of jobs in China.Dan Thomas, Number of returning Chinese students up 38%,  Mar 21, 2012, The Pie News, http://thepienews.com/news/number-of-returning-chinese-students-up-38/ A 2009 study found that only 10% of Chinese students plan to stay in the United States due to visa restrictions, fear of lack of job opportunities, and belief that US growth will lag behind average world growth rates. 52% believed that the best job opportunities were in China which was in marked contrast with earlier surveys. 74% felt that the best days of China's economy was coming. 68% intended to start businesses.Losing the World’s Best and Brightest: America’s New Immigrant Entrepreneurs, Part V, Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, http://www.kauffman.org/research-and-policy/losing-best.aspx When they return, foreign educated students often provide crucial science and technology knowledge, management skills, and innovation abilities for scientific research and industry. The senior management in high-tech companies are often foreign educated.Vivek Wadhwa, Committee on the Judiciary of the United States House of Representatives Subcommittee on Immigration Policy and Enforcement, October 5, 2011

==Chinese diaspora==

Overseas Chinese, as is the case for other diasporas and their homelands, have contributed significantly to China's development. They have been seen as an important channel for  bringing trade, investment, and modern technology to China by both commercial activities and public non-profit cooperation.Teo Victor, Technonationalism, Development and the Chinese Diaspora in East Asia:  An Exploratory Study, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, The 4th International Conference of Institutes & Libraries for Overseas Chinese Studies  May 9–11,Guangzhou,China

==Industrial espionage==

One of the objectives of Chinese intelligence activity abroad is alleged to be industrial espionage as well gaining military technology. Also private companies have been accused of espionage. Intelligence agencies suspect that thousands of Western companies may have been affected by data breaches that can be traced back to China.Michael A. Riley and Ashlee Vance , China Corporate Espionage Boom Knocks Wind Out of U.S. Companies, Mar 15, 2012, Bloomberg,

==International cooperation==

The China Internet Information Center stated in a 2005 article that China had inter-governmental cooperative S&T agreements with 96 nations, cooperative  S&T programs with 152 nations and regions, and participated in more than 1,000 international S&T cooperative organizations. NGO international exchanges and cooperative activities had increased.  The China Association for Science and Technology and related organizations as well as the National Natural Science Foundation of China participated in many cooperative international organizations. Chinese researchers held 281 leading posts on international organizations' expert committees and held 293 executive member-director or higher level positions.International Cooperation in Science and Technology, China.org.cn, http://www.china.org.cn/features/china2005/2005-09/23/content_1142234.htm

==Technology transfer and R&D by multinational corporations==

In the early 1980s foreign companies began transferring technology by licensing agreements and sales of equipment. Later in the 1980s many multinational corporations started transferring technology by entering into joint ventures with Chinese companies in order to expand in China. China in the 1990s introduced increasingly sophisticated regulations of foreign investment by which access to the Chinese market was traded for technology transfer. The entry of China into the World Trade Organization in 2001 required this practice stop but critics argue that it continues. Chinese critics have argued such technology transfer may be useful for catching up but does not create new, cutting edge technologies.
China has increasingly encouraged multinational corporations to create R&D centers in China. Chinese critics have argued that foreign owned R&D mainly benefits foreign companies and removes many talented Chinese researchers from indigenous companies and institutions. Chinese supporters have argued that the foreign R&D serves as a role model and encouragement for indigenous companies and creates skilled communities from which labor and knowledge can easily flow to indigenous companies. In 2010 there were 1,200 such R&D centers and 400 out the Fortune 500 corporations had created such R&D centers. Corporations have argued that this is a necessity in order to adapt products for the local requirements of the Chinese market as well as it being essential for maintaining global competitiveness to make use the many available Chinese engineers and scientists. China is now ranked first when multinational corporations are asked in which nation future R&D centers are most likely to be located.

==Innovation==

A 2005 report found serious shortcomings to China’s national innovation system. There were problems with services to help turn S&T work into results and the allocation of national funding to support S&T was far from optimal. Sometimes researchers became short-sighted if they get too close to the market. Another serious problem was that companies facing severe competition looked first to purchase foreign technology rather than investing in developing technology and technology development capacity at home in China. Many of the patent applications came from medium sized enterprises (70%) since small enterprises invest little in research."Issues in Building a National Innovation System" in 2005 High Technology Development Report (Gao Jishu Fazhan Baogao) from the Chinese Academy of Science (Kexue Chubanshe, Beijing 2005). China's hierarchical, top-down society where authority is greatly respected and feared has been argued to stifle creative debate.
China in a 2006 report outlined policies for improving innovation. They include 20 large megaprojects in areas such as nanotechnology, high-end generic microchips, aircraft, biotechnology, and new drugs. This is combined with a more bottom-up approach on a Silicon Valley model consisting of small start-ups, venture capital, and cooperation between industry and universities.Adam Segal, China's Innovation Wall, September 28, 2010, Foreign Affairs, http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/66753/adam-segal/chinas-innovation-wall
It has also been argued that China is the world leader in making small, innovative improvements to existing designs. One example is continual improvements to the design of power supplies making them gradually smaller, less expensive, and more energy efficient. This may not create completely new products or create headlines but may be more important for creating employment.Tom Hancock, Chinese innovation: world beating, but boring,  February 13, 2012, Smartplanet, http://www.smartplanet.com/blog/global-observer/chinese-innovation-world-beating-but-boring/3958Dan Breznitz and Michael Murphree, Run of the Red Queen, Government, Innovation, Globalization, and Economic Growth in China 2011 , Yale University Press, http://yalepress.yale.edu/yupbooks/book.asp?isbn=9780300152715

==Procurement==

The central Chinese government, a large buyer of high-tech products, in 2009 proposed controversial policies demanding that companies selling to it promote Chinese innovation and that the products sold are free of foreign intellectual property. The most controversial parts were later withdrawn but local Chinese governments continue to use procurement to encourage indigenous innovation.

==Intellectual property==

Effective protection of intellectual property has been seen as weak. There has been an increasing recognition of that this discourages indigenous innovation and efforts has been made to strengthen the system.
China has been accused of not protecting foreign intellectual property and tacitly allowing such technologies to be copied and claimed to be Chinese intellectual property.

==Patents==

China in 2011 became the nation with highest amount of filled patent applications. However, this reflects in part that the government gives companies incentives for filing patent applications regardless of if eventually granted. The percentage of patents applications in China filed by Chinese companies rose from less than 52% in 2006 to nearly 73% in 2010. World Intellectual Property Office data shows that Chinese companies have also become more important regarding patents overseas with Chinese companies now being on place two and four regarding number of patent applications filed by individual companies. China aims to transform the economy from "Made in China" to "Designed in China" and from contract manufacturing to having brand name companies with resulting improved profit margins.China tops U.S, Japan to become top patent filer, Lee Chyen Yee, Wed Dec 21, 2011 8:15am EST, Reuters, http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/12/21/us-china-patents-idUSTRE7BK0LQ20111221
The relative proportion of granted patents is lower with China being behind Japan and the United States when measuring the number of granted patents at the patent offices of the US, Japan, the EU, South Korea, and China (who together administer about 75% of the world's patents). However, China is now granted about twice as many patents as South Korea or the EU while five years ago China was granted about the same amount as each of these regions.

==Standards==

To encourage innovation and avoid foreign intellectual property China has been developing indigenous technical standards. One example is the TD-SCDMA 3G standard. Critics have seen is as costly and delaying 3G introduction while supporters argue that it has increased technical abilities and experience which has increased Chinese competitiveness regarding 4G. Time-Division Long-Term Evolution is being implemented as China's indigenous 4G standard.

==Academic publishing==

The Royal Society in a 2011 report on academic publishing stated that in share of English scientific research papers the United States was first followed by China, the UK, Germany, Japan, France, and Canada. The report predicted that China would overtake the United States some time before 2020, possibly as early as 2013. China's scientific impact, as measured by other scientists citing the published papers the next year, is smaller although also increasing.China poised to overhaul US as biggest publisher of scientific papers, Alok Jha, Monday 28 March 2011, The Guardian, http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2011/mar/28/china-us-publisher-scientific-papers An analysis of ISI Web of Knowledge data found that China had increased its share of the 1% of most highly cited science articles from 1.85% in 2001 to 11.3% in 2011. By 2014 China could surpass Germany and the UK and be ranked second after the United States. The share of the United States declined from 64.3% to 50.7% during the same ten-year period.A 2009 study of Chinese social science studies in the Social Sciences Citation Index found a slow increase until 1999. The 1999-2007 period saw a very rapid increase. However, in 2007 China still only contributed 1.39% of the studies and mainland China only surpassed Hong Kong in 2006. Economics & business had larger share than social, political & communication science and psychology. The low share of social sciences compared to natural sciences may reflect that this is a common pattern in Asian nations, that Chinese social scientists publish in national journals not included in the Index and have less career incitements regarding publishing in international journals, and that state ideology and control is more important for social sciences than natural sciences. In China natural sciences are administered by the Ministry of Science and Technology while social sciences are administered by the National Planning Office of Philosophy and Social Sciences which may hinder inter-disciplinary collaboration.[tpl]cite doi|10.1007/s11192-007-2068-x[/tpl]
Articles published in China related to basic medial science and clinical research and indexed by PubMed increased on average by 31.2% and 22% each year between 2000 and 2009. Randomized clinical trial were about 1/3 of clinical research articles. However, in 2009 this still represented only 1.5% of worldwide clinical research articles and 1.7% of worldwide randomized clinical trials. Clinical research education for medical students and the involvement and the supporting environment for medical doctors regarding clinical research have shortcomings.[tpl]cite doi|10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60017-2[/tpl]
Science-Metrix, a Canadian data-analysis company, predicted that in 2010 China would publish as many natural sciences and engineering peer-reviewed papers as the United States. In 2015 China is predicted to publish as many papers as the US across all fields. In 2030 China is predicted to surpass the US in life and social sciences.Debora MacKenzie, "Iran showing fastest scientific growth of any country", New Scientist, 2:52 18 February 2010, http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn18546-iran-showing-fastest-scientific-growth-of-any-country.html
There are 8,000 journals and 4,600 in scientific fields. Almost all Chinese science organisations publish their own journal. The government owns or supports most journals with only a small number being privately owned. The "publish or perish" system has been argued to contribute to many low quality journals and articles that are infrequently cited and also to plagiarism and fraud. The Chinese government has put into place stricter regulations, punished or terminated some journals, and aims increase quality control and peer evaluation of journals as well as to create five to ten large publishing groups.Yojana Sharma, CHINA: Crackdown on sub-standard journals, 27 February 2011 Issue No:160, University World News, As part of the reforms, in 2012 the China Association for Science and Technology, which oversees 1,050 journals, in a declaration listed various forms of misconduct, plagiarism, and fraud and as well,  the penalties for perpetrating them such as written warnings, blacklisting, contacting the researcher's home institution or funding agencies, or public disclosure. It has also been seen as important by increasing pressure on other journals and by informing editors who may not know that some actions such as favoring researchers based on personal relations are unacceptable. China also plans to give substantial financial incentives to top journals based on factors such as their Chinese and international impact factor. It has been questioned if this will have an effect on the many poor quality journals who in return for money help researchers fill their institutional requirements for published papers.[tpl]cite doi|10.1038/nature.2012.10509[/tpl]

==State owned enterprises==

Chinese state owned enterprises are owned by a variety of actors such as local governments and governmental agencies. They may benefit from advantages not available for smaller, more innovative firms which have been seen as problematic. In 2010 state owned enterprises won many biddings for renewable energy projects since they did not have worry about paying off investments for several decades and could ignore risks and costs. The owners may attempt to protect their enterprises from competition by regulations or otherwise use their influence in an unfair manner which may stifle more innovative, private competitors. Private enterprises surpassed stated owned enterprises during the 2002-2007 period regarding rapidity of increase of research spending, patent applications, and R&D laboratories. The number of research scientists and engineers increased rapidly in private enterprises while they declined in state owned enterprises.

==Corruption==

Concerned about corruption in Chinese science,See for example the mid March 2006 issue of China Newsweek 中国新闻周刊 "A SARS-like Epidemic of Corruption in Higher Education and Science", 9 June 2006: Vol. 312. no. 5779, pp. 1464–1466. some Chinese scientists, including Professor Liu Ming 刘明 of Zhejiang University in his 2005 book Critique of the Academic Evaluation System 学术评价制度批判, argue that interference from government officials and university bureaucrats makes peer review far less effective in China than it could be. The time scientists spend cultivating politically influential people is lost to scientific research. Liu argues that the command economy mentality of measuring everything by the numbers combined with pervasive political interference results in a great waste of money, human talent as well as considerable corruption in Chinese science.Liu Ming, Critique of the Academic Evaluation System 学术评价制度批判 Changjiang Wenyi Chubanshe, 2005. A 2008 investigation into a certification for high-tech enterprises allowing large tax breaks and other advantages found that more than 70% of the enterprises had gained this under questionable circumstances and an investigation of a sample found that 73% did not pass the requirements.

==Awards==

The State Science and Technology Prizes, including the State Preeminent Science and Technology Award, are the highest honor in People's Republic of China in science and technology, in order to recognize citizens and organizations who have made remarkable contributions to scientific and technological progress, and to promote the development of science and technology.

==Specific areas==

===Electronics and information technology===

In 2009 China manufactured 48.3% of the world's televisions, 49.9% of mobile phones, 60.9% of personal computers, and 75% of LCD monitors. Indigenously made electronic components have become an important source of recent growth.  The Chinese software industry in 2010 had a higher than 15% share of the world's software and information service market and had been growing by an average 36% each year during the previous decade. Chinese IT companies have been moving away from narrow downstream services and products to having a full range. China, with the active support of the Chinese government, is a leading pioneer in Internet of Things technology.Gang Qiu, The Rise of China's IT Industry,  January 1, 2012, SERI Quarterly, http://readperiodicals.com/201201/2562864021.html#b
According to the China Internet Network Information Center there were 505 million Internet users in November 2011. 37.7% of the population were internet users. The number of microblog users had increased by more than 100 million during the past six months to more than 300 million.http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/01/11/us-china-internet-idUSTRE80A0LD20120111, Wed Jan 11, Reuters, http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/01/11/us-china-internet-idUSTRE80A0LD20120111 In 2011 23% of the world's internet users were Chinese which was more than twice the share of any other nation.TOP 20 COUNTRIES WITH THE HIGHEST NUMBER OF INTERNET USERS, Miniwatts Marketing Group, http://www.internetworldstats.com/top20.htm China in 2012 aimed to double its e-commerce market by 2015 and become the world's largest.Tuo Yanna, E-commerce to make even bigger gains, 2012-03-28, China Daily, http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/cndy/2012-03/28/content_14927728.htm
In 2012 China surpassed one billion mobile phone accounts although the number of users is likely smaller since the same person may be using multiple accounts. 100 million accounts had been added since the previous year. The number of 3G accounts nearly doubled to 144 million. The number of fixed line subscriptions declined to 284 million.China's mobile phone subscriptions top a billion, Mar 30, 2012, AFP, http://news.yahoo.com/chinas-mobile-phone-subscriptions-top-billion-110100464.html

===Supercomputing===

Supercomputing in China has expanded rapidly. Supercomputing affects the possibility to do cutting edge research in many areas such as design of pharmaceuticals, cryptanalysis, natural resource exploration, climate models, and military technology. In 2011 China had 74 of the 500 biggest supercomputers while a decade earlier it had none. China is developing the capacity to manufacture the components domestically and plans to be the first to build an exascale supercomputer. China may also be planning to create much more powerful large-scale distributed supercomputing by connecting its supercomputer centers together.Dan Lyons, In Race for Fastest Supercomputer, China Outpaces U.S., Nov 28, 2011, The Daily Beast, http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek/2011/11/27/in-race-for-fastest-supercomputer-china-outpaces-u-s.html Tianhe-1 was for a period in 2010-2011 the world's fastest supercomputer.[ref]
