[[Raoul Vaneigem]]

CATEGORIES: 1934 births, Living people, People from Lessines, Continental philosophers, Belgian philosophers, Belgian anarchists, Belgian writers in French, Free University of Brussels alumni, Situationists, Critics of work and the work ethic, Walloon people

Raoul Vaneigem ([tpl]IPA-nl|raˈul vɑnˈɛiɣəm|lang[/tpl]; born 1934) is a Belgian writer and philosopher. He was born in Lessines (Hainaut, Belgium). After studying romance philology at the Free University of Brussels (now split into the Université Libre de Bruxelles and the Vrije Universiteit Brussel) from 1952 to 1956, he participated in the Situationist International from 1961 to 1970. He currently resides in Belgium and is the father of four children.
Vaneigem and Guy Debord were two of the principal theoreticians of the Situationist movement. Vaneigem's slogans frequently made it onto the walls of Paris during the May 1968 uprisings. His most famous book, and the one that contains the most famous slogans, is The Revolution of Everyday Life (in French Traité de savoir-vivre à l'usage des jeunes générations).
According to the website nothingness.org,  "The voice of Raoul Vaneigem was one of the strongest of the Situationists. Counterpoised to Guy Debord's political and polemic style, Vaneigem offered a more poetic and spirited prose. The Revolution of Everyday Life (Traité de savoir-vivre à l'usage des jeunes générations), published in the same year as Debord's The Society of the Spectacle, helped broaden and balance the presentation of the SI's theories and practices. One of the longest SI members, and frequent editor of the journal Internationale Situationniste, Vaneigem finally left the SI in November 1970, citing their failures as well as his own in his letter of resignation. Soon after, Debord issued a typically scathing response denouncing both Vaneigem and his critique of the Situationist International."www.nothingness.org, which also has additional biographical material. See also www.notbored.org. 
After leaving the Situationist movement Vaneigem wrote a series of polemical books defending the idea of a free and self-regulating social order. He frequently made use of pseudonyms, including "Julienne de Cherisy," "Robert Desessarts," "Jules-François Dupuis," "Tristan Hannaniel," "Anne de Launay," and "Michel Thorgal." Recently he has been an advocate of a new type of strike, in which service and transportation workers provide services for free and refuse to collect payment or fares.
In 2009 Vaneigem was interviewed by Hans Ulrich Obrist for e-flux.In Conversation with Raoul Vaneigem accessed 8 August 2009

==Partial bibliography==

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==


