[[Richard Grenville (sea captain)]]

CATEGORIES: 1542 births, 1591 deaths, People from Buckland Monachorum, English explorers, English sailors, English military personnel killed in action, People of Elizabethan Ireland, People of the Tudor period, 16th-century English people, Grenville family, High Sheriffs of Cornwall, Members of the pre-1707 English Parliament for constituencies in Cornwall, English people of the Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604), English MPs 1571, English MPs 1584–85

thumb|Richard Grenville, portrait in Heroologia Anglica, London, 1620, inscribed: Rihardus Grenvilus Neptuni proles qui magni Martis alumnus Grenvilius patrias sanguine tinxit aquas ("Richard Grenville, a scion of Neptune, nourished by  Mars,... stained the waters with his blood"
Sir Richard Grenville (15 June 1542 – 10 September 1591) (alias Greynvile, Greeneville, Greenfield etc.) was an English Member of Parliament for Cornwall, Soldier, Sheriff of Cork from 1569–70, Armed Merchant Fleet Owner, Privateer, Sheriff of Cornwall in 1576–77, Colonizer, and explorer.  He took part in the early English attempts to settle the New World, and also participated in the fight against the Spanish Armada. He died in 1591 at the Battle of Flores, characteristically fighting against overwhelming odds, and refusing to surrender his ship to the far more numerous Spanish. He was the grandfather of Sir Richard Grenville, of English Civil War fame.

==Origins==

Richard Grenville was the eldest son and heir of Sir Roger Grenville (d.1545), who was Captain of the Mary Rose when it sank in Portsmouth Harbour in 1545, by his wife Thomasine Cole, daughter of Thomas Cole of Slade.Vivian, Heralds' Visitations of Cornwall Thomasine survived her husband and remarried to Thomas Arundell. The ancient Grenville family were lords of the manors of Bideford in Devon and of Stowe, Kilkhampton in Cornwall. He was a cousin of Sir Walter Raleigh and the privateer Sir Francis Drake.
Grenville's birthplace is believed to have been at Bideford. His father (who had pre-deceased his own father Sir Richard Grenville (c.1495-1550), MP for Cornwall in 1529History of Parliament biography) died when he was an infant, aged 3, and his mother remarried to Thomas Arundell of Clifton Arundell House, where Grenville spent much of his childhood.  At age 17 Grenville began law studies at the Inner Temple.

==Early career==

As a minor, Greynvile was elected to Parliament for Dunheved, Launceston, as Knight of the Shire 1562-63.
On 19 November 1562, aged 20, he was in an affray in the Strand, the parish of St. Clement Danes, London, in the company of his cousin, Nicholes Specott, gentleman with Lewis Lloyd and Edward Horseman their attendants. Upon encountering Sir Edmound Unton, Fulke Greville, Robert Bannister gentleman and Thomas Allen yeoman with their servants, in which he ran through with his sword Robert Bannister and left him to die. Greynvile and company were Outlawed for three months and then Pardoned for Public Duelling and Manslaughter, just in time to resume his seat in Parliament.[ref]
