[[Titus Oates]]

CATEGORIES: 1649 births, 1705 deaths, English perjurers, People associated with the Popish Plot, History of Roman Catholicism in Great Britain, Alumni of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, Alumni of St John's College, Cambridge, People from Oakham, People educated at Merchant Taylors' School, Northwood, Anti-Catholicism in England, Recipients of English royal pardons, English military chaplains, Royal Navy chaplains

Titus Oates (15 September 1649 – 12/13 July 1705) was an English perjurer who fabricated the "Popish Plot", a supposed Catholic conspiracy to kill King Charles II.

==Early life==

Titus Oates was born in Hastings and baptised at All Saints Church, Hastings the same year. His father, Samuel, was the rector of All Saints Church, Hastings in SussexPollock, John (1903). The Popish Plot: a study in the history of the reign of Charles II. London: Duckworth and Co.; p. 3. before becoming a Baptist during the Puritan RevolutionPollock, John p.5 and rejoining the Church of England at the Restoration.Alan Marshall, ‘Oates, Titus (1649–1705)’, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, Sept 2004 Oates was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, and St John's College, Cambridge.[tpl]acad|id=OTS667T|name=Oates, Titus[/tpl] Known as a less than astute student, he was ejected from both colleges. Although regarded as  "a great dunce", he did have a good  memory, which would be very useful when he fabricated the Plot.Pollock, John p. 5[tpl]Cite news | url = http://news.independent.co.uk/uk/this_britain/article335175.ece  | title = Are these the 10 worst Britons? | date = 14 September 2007 | accessdate =14 September 2007 | work = The Independent[/tpl] A few months later, he became an Anglican priest and Vicar of the parish of Bobbing in Kent. During this time Oates was charged with perjury having accused a schoolmaster in Hastings of sodomy. Oates was put in jail, but escaped and fled to London.
In 1677 he got himself appointed as a chaplain of the ship Adventurer in the English navy.Kenyon, J.P.  The Popish Plot Phoenix Press reissue 2000 pp.54-5 He was soon accused of buggery (i.e., sodomy, which was a capital offence in England at the time) and spared only because of his clergyman's status.Kenyon pp.54-5
After the navy, he joined the household of the Catholic Henry Howard, 7th Duke of Norfolk as an Anglican chaplain. On Ash Wednesday in 1677 he was received into the Catholic Church.[tpl]CathEncy|wstitle=Oates's Plot[/tpl] Oddly, at the same time Oates agreed to co-author a series of anti-Catholic pamphlets with Israel Tonge, whom he had met through his father Samuel, who had once more reverted to the Baptist doctrine.Alan Marshall, ‘Tonge, Israel (1621–1680)’, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, Sept 2004
He is described by Dryden in Absalom and Achitophel thus—[tpl]cite web|url=http://www.archive.org/stream/popishplotstudyi00polluoft/popishplotstudyi00polluoft_djvu.txt |title=Full text of "The Popish plot; a study in the history of the reign of Charles II" |publisher=Archive.org |date= |accessdate=21 June 2010[/tpl]

==Contact with the Jesuits==

Oates was involved with the Jesuit houses of St. Omer (in France) and the Royal English College at Valladolid, Spain (like many diocesan seminaries of the day, this was a Jesuit-run institution). Oates was admitted to the course in Valladolid by the support of Richard Strange, despite a lack of basic competence in Latin. He later claimed, falsely, that he had become a Catholic Doctor of Divinity. Thomas Whitbread took a much firmer line with Oates than had Strange and, in June 1678, expelled him from St. Omer.John Kenyon, The Popish Plot (2d ed., 1985), p. 58.
When he returned to London, he rekindled his friendship with Israel Tonge. Oates explained that he had pretended to become a Catholic to learn about the secrets of the Jesuits and that, before leaving, he had heard about a planned Jesuit meeting in London.

==The Fabricated Popish Plot==

Oates and Tonge wrote a lengthy manuscript that accused the Catholic Church authorities in England of approving an assassination of Charles II. The Jesuits were supposedly to carry out the task. In August 1678, King Charles was warned of this alleged plot against his life by the chemist Christopher Kirkby, and later by Tonge. Charles was unimpressed, but handed the matter over to one of his ministers, Thomas Osborne, Earl of Danby; Osborne was more willing to listen and was introduced to Oates by Tonge.
The King's Council questioned Oates. On 28 September, Oates made 43 allegations against various members of Catholic religious orders — including 541 Jesuits — and numerous Catholic nobles. He accused Sir George Wakeman, Queen Catherine of Braganza's physician, and Edward Colman, the secretary to Mary of Modena, Duchess of York, of planning to assassinate Charles.
Although Oates may have selected the names randomly, or with the help of the Earl of Danby, Colman was found to have corresponded with a French Jesuit, which condemned him. Wakeman was later acquitted. Despite Oates' unsavoury reputation, his confident performance and superb memory made an impression on the Council. When he named "at a glance" the alleged authors of five letters supposedly written by leading Jesuits the Council were "amazed". As Kenyon remarks, it is surprising that it did not occur to the Council how easy this would be if Oates had written them all himself.The Popish Plot p.79
Others Oates accused included Dr William Fogarty, Archbishop Peter Talbot of Dublin, Samuel Pepys MP, and John Belasyse, 1st Baron Belasyse.  With the help of Danby, the list grew to 81 accusations. Oates was given a squad of soldiers and he began to round up Jesuits, including those who had helped him in the past.
On 6 September 1678, Oates and Tonge approached an Anglican magistrate, Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey. On 12 October, Godrey disappeared and five days later his dead body was found in a ditch at Primrose Hill; he had been strangled and run through with his own sword. In September, Oates and Tonge had sworn an affidavit in front of Godfrey detailing their accusations. Oates exploited this incident to launch a public campaign against the "Papists" and alleged that the murder of Godfrey had been the work of the Jesuits.
On 24 November 1678, Oates claimed the Queen was working with the King's physician to poison the King. Oates enlisted the aid of "Captain" William Bedloe, who was ready to say anything for money. The King personally interrogated Oates, caught him out in a number of inaccuracies and lies, and ordered his arrest. However, a few days later, with the threat of a constitutional crisis, Parliament forced the release of Oates, who soon received a state apartment in Whitehall and an annual allowance of £1,200.
Oates was heaped with praise. He asked the College of Arms to check his lineage and produce a coat of arms for him and subsequently received the arms of a family that had died out. Rumours surfaced that Oates was to be married to a daughter of Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury.
After nearly three years and the execution of at least 15 innocent men, opinion began to turn against Oates. The last high-profile victim of the climate of suspicion was Oliver Plunkett, Archbishop of Armagh, who was executed on 1 July 1681. William Scroggs, the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales, began to declare more people innocent, as he had done in the Wakeman trial, and a backlash took place.

==Aftermath==

On 31 August 1681, Oates was told to leave his apartments in Whitehall, but he remained undeterred and even denounced the King and the Duke of York. He was arrested for sedition, sentenced to a fine of £100,000 and thrown into prison.
When James II acceded to the throne in 1685, he had Oates retried and sentenced for perjury, stripped of clerical dress, imprisoned for life, and to be "whipped through the streets of London five days a year for the remainder of his life."Pincus, Steve (2009). 1688: The First Modern Revolution. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.; p. 153. Oates was taken out of his cell wearing a hat with the text "Titus Oates, convicted upon full evidence of two horrid perjuries" and put into the pillory at the gate of Westminster Hall (now New Palace Yard) where passers-by pelted him with eggs. The next day he was pilloried in London and the third day was stripped, tied to a cart, and whipped from Aldgate to Newgate. The next day, the whipping resumed. The presiding judge was Judge Jeffreys who stated that Oates was a "shame to mankind". So severe were the penalties that it has been suggested that the aim was to kill Oates by ill-treatment, as Jeffreys and his colleagues openly regretted that they could not impose the death penalty.
Oates spent the next three years in prison. In 1689, upon the accession of William of Orange and Mary, he was pardoned and granted a pension of £260 a year, but his reputation did not recover. The pension was later suspended, but in 1698 was restored and increased to £300 a year. Oates died on 12 or 13 July 1705, by then an obscure and half-forgotten figure.

==References==

==External links==


