[[Canal]]

CATEGORIES: Canals, Coastal construction, Water transport infrastructure, Bodies of water

Canals and navigations are man-made channels for water, which are generally both referred to in the vernacular as 'canals'. The main difference between them is that a navigation parallels a river and shares its drainage basin, while a canal cuts across a drainage divide.

==Types of artificial waterways==

In more technical terms, a navigation is in part made of a series of channels nearly parallel to the valley gradient and stream bed of an unimproved river, and which always shares the drainage basin of the river. So for a vessel, it consists of a path using the calm parts of the river itself as well as improvements forming a man-made channel alongside the river traversing the same changes in height and displacement (location). A true canal is a channel that cuts across a drainage divide (ridge line), making a navigable channel connecting two different drainage basins (valleys). Thus it generally requires levees, dikes, bridges and excavated channels as well as a water supply and dams and locks, and is not simply a navigation channel parallel to a river channel.

==Structures used in artificial waterways==

Engineered improvements that are needed in navigations are also common to canals, so both use structures such as: weirs and dams to raise river water levels to usable depths; looping descents to create a longer gentler channel around a stretch of rapids or falls; locks to allow riverine traffic such as barges or ships to ascend/descend; and combinations of such engineered paths. Canals, since they cut across drainage divides, are technically more difficult and in general will need other sorts of improvements—such as viaducts and aqueducts—to bridge waters over streams, roads, and ways to keep water in the channel. In effect, most commercially important canals, such as the Pennsylvania Canal and others of the first half of the 19th-century were a little of each type; using rivers in long stretches, and divide crossing canals in others, so could cross mountains as the Pennsylvania Canal connected Pittsburgh to Philadelphia across the Allegheny Mountains. This is true as well of today's existing commercial canal.

==Types of canals==

There are two broad types of canal:
