[[Taste bud]]

CATEGORIES: Gustatory system, Tongue

Taste buds contain the receptors for taste. They are located around the small structures on the upper surface of the tongue, soft palate, upper esophagus and epiglottis, which are called papillae.Discovery News, October 26, 2010 These structures are involved in detecting the five (known) elements of taste perception: salty, sour, bitter, sweet, and umami. A popular myth assigns these different tastes to different regions of the tongue; in reality these tastes can be detected by any area of the tongue. Via small openings in the tongue epithelium, called taste pores, parts of the food dissolved in saliva come into contact with taste receptors. These are located on top of the taste receptor cells that constitute the taste buds. The taste receptor cells send information detected by clusters of various receptors and ion channels to the gustatory areas of the brain via the seventh, ninth and tenth cranial nerves.
On average, the human tongue has 3,000–10,000 taste buds.Encyclopædia Britannica. 2009. Encyclopædia Britannica Online.

==Types of papillae==

The majority of taste buds on the tongue sit on raised protrusions of the tongue surface called papillae. There are four types of papillae present in the human tongue:
Taste buds are only present in circumvalate, fungifoam papilae and soft palate.mcq in anatomy by prof deepthi nanayakkara and prof malkanthi chandrasiri volume 1 head and neck 99th mcq
Salts, sweet, sour and umami tastes causes depolarization of the taste cells, although different mechanisms are applied. 
Bitter causes an internal release of Ca2+, no external Ca2+ is required.
The bud is formed by two kinds of cells: supporting cells and gustatory cells.
The supporting (sustentacular) cells are mostly arranged like the staves of a cask, and form an outer envelope for the bud. Some, however, are found in the interior of the bud between the gustatory cells.
The gustatory (taste) cells, a chemoreceptor, occupy the central portion of the bud; they are spindle-shaped, and each possesses a large spherical nucleus near the middle of the cell.
The peripheral end of the cell terminates at the gustatory pore in a fine hair filament, the gustatory hair.
The central process passes toward the deep extremity of the bud, and there ends in single or bifurcated varicosities.
The nerve fibrils after losing their medullary sheaths enter the taste bud, and end in fine extremities between the gustatory cells; other nerve fibrils ramify between the supporting cells and terminate in fine extremities; these, however, are believed to be nerves of ordinary sensation and not gustatory.
The average life of a taste bud is 10 days.

==See also==

==Additional images==

Image:Taste bud.svg|schematic drawing of a taste bud
Image:Smagsloeg.png|taste bud (nerve missing)

==References==

==External links==


