[[Cathedral Basilica of St. Joseph (San Jose, California)]]

CATEGORIES: Basilica churches in the United States, Roman Catholic churches in California, Roman Catholic cathedrals in the United States, Roman Catholic Diocese of San Jose in California, Buildings and structures in San Jose, California, National Register of Historic Places in Santa Clara County, California, Properties of religious function on the National Register of Historic Places in California, 1803 establishments in New Spain, Roman Catholic churches completed in 1885, 19th-century Roman Catholic church buildings in the United States, Roman Catholic congregations established in the 19th century, Visitor attractions in San Jose, California, Churches in Santa Clara County, California

The Cathedral Basilica of St. Joseph is a large Roman Catholic church located in Downtown San Jose.  The minor basilica is the cathedral for the Roman Catholic Diocese of San Jose in California. The basilica is named for Saint Joseph, patron saint of the universal church.
The original St. Joseph's Church was built on the site of the current basilica in 1803, and was the first non-mission parish built in California.  The original adobe structure was damaged by earthquakes in 1818 and 1822, and a new adobe church was built from  1835 to 1846. The second church was severely damaged by the 1868 Hayward earthquake, and work on the third church began in 1869.  The third church was destroyed by fire in 1875, and a temporary fourth church was built a few blocks away while the fifth and current church was being constructed.  The fifth church was dedicated by Joseph Alemany, Archbishop of San Francisco, in 1877 while construction continued.  The current portico was completed in 1884, and the large dome was finished in 1885.
In 1981, a major renovation project was begun at the church, which was to become the cathedral for the new Roman Catholic Bishop of San Jose.  In 1985, the church was elevated to a cathedral, pending completion of the restoration in 1990. It replaced Saint Patrick Proto-Cathedral Parish, located a few blocks away, as the cathedral of the diocese. The cathedral was made a minor basilica by Pope John Paul II in 1997.
The Cathedral Basilica of St. Joseph is listed as a California Historical Landmark and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.http://nrhp.focus.nps.gov/natregsearchresult.do?fullresult=true&recordid=89

==Gallery==

File:StJoseph1.jpg | From the baptismal font, looking up the nave to the altar.
File:StJoseph3.jpg | The south semitransept, from the altar
File:StJoseph4.jpg | The nave from the altar, showing the baptismal font, with organ loft above
File:StJoseph5.jpg | The altar from the top of the nave with the ambo and cathedra behind it
File:StJoseph6.jpg | The altar, from the north semitransept
File:Interior dome - Cathedral Basilica of Saint Joseph, San Jose, California - DSC03764.JPG | Interior of the large dome over the crossing

==External links==


