[[Arthur Judson Brown]]

CATEGORIES: 1856 births, 1963 deaths, People from Holliston, Massachusetts, American Christians, American Presbyterians, American Christian missionaries, American centenarians, American historians, American religious writers, Presbyterian missionaries, Christian missionaries in China, Christian writers, American sinologists, Commanders of the Order of the White Elephant, Gold crosses of the Order of George I

Arthur Judson Brown (December 3, 1856 – January 11, 1963) was an influential American clergyman, missionary and prolific author.
Brown was born in Holliston, Massachusetts, and was ordained as a Presbyterian minister in 1883. He preached in various cities throughout the United States, including Portland, Oregon and Oak Park, Illinois from 1883 to 1895. 
Often termed a "missionary statesman," Brown traveled throughout the world—most notably in China and other Asian countries. During the time he surveyed China, he wrote a seventeen-volume diary of what he'd seen and discovered.  Over time, Brown communicated with Roman Catholic, Jewish, and Greek Orthodox leaders, in addition to such influential Protestant clergymen as Henry Sloane Coffin, Nathan Söderblom, and John R. Mott. Brown himself received letters from five American Presidents and various other government officials. Booker T. Washington, John D. Rockefeller, Jr. (1839–1937), and John Wanamaker were among his famous American correspondents. In addition, members of European and Asian royalty, including Chinese general and emperor, Yuan Shih-kai, were in communication with Brown. 
Overall, Brown will be remembered as a pioneer in the ecumenical and world missionary movements of the 19th and 20th centuries and was an individual who was active in and out of the church. He served in a plethora of notable positions. The following is a lengthy chronology of Brown's achievements and activities. During this time Brown also preached at various churches.
Arthur Judson Brown died in New York City in 1963, 39 days after celebrating his 106th birthday. He was subsequently buried in Orange, New Jersey.

==Career chronology==

As noted, Brown was  appointed as a life elector for the Hall of Fame for Great Americans, serving from 1915–1963, a period of 48 years.

==Writings==

Brown is also remembered for his career as an author. In his 106 years of life, he authored numerous books. The following is a listing of Brown's works.

==See also==

==External links==


