[[Leonotis]]

CATEGORIES: Lamiaceae

Leonotis is a genus of flowering plants in the family Lamiaceae.Raymond M. Harley, Sandy Atkins, Andrey L. Budantsev, Philip D. Cantino, Barry J. Conn, Renée J. Grayer, Madeline M. Harley, Rogier P.J. de Kok, Tatyana V. Krestovskaja, Ramón Morales, Alan J. Paton, and P. Olof Ryding. 2004. "Labiatae" pages 167-275. In: Klaus Kubitzki (editor) and Joachim W. Kadereit (volume editor). The Families and Genera of Vascular Plants volume VII. Springer-Verlag: Berlin; Heidelberg, Germany. ISBN 978-3-540-40593-1 It comprises 9 species.  One of these, Leonotis nepetifolia, is native to tropical Africa and southern India. It is naturalized throughout most of the tropics. The other 8 species are endemic to southern Africa.Mattias Iwarsson and Yvette Harvey. 2003. "Monograph of the genus Leonotis (Pers.) R.Br. (Lamiaceae)". Kew Bulletin 58(3):597-645.
Leonotis was named by Robert Brown in 1810 in Prodromus Florae Novae Hollandiae et Insulae Van Diemen.Robert Brown. 1810. Prodromus Florae Novae Hollandiae et Insulae Van Diemen:504. (see External links below). The name means "lion's ear".
The type for the genus is the specimen of Leonotis ocymifolia that was originally described as Leonotis leonitis.Leonotis In: Index Nominum Genericorum. In: Regnum Vegetabile (see External links below). It is a specimen of Leonotis ocymifolia var. ocymifolia.

==Species==

Below is a list of names published in Leonotis. Most of them are obsolete, illegitimate, or synonymous with other names. The species recognized by Iwarsson and Harvey are marked with a number sign.

==Taxonomy==

Leonotis is a member of the subfamily Lamioideae. Leonotis might be paraphyletic or even polyphyletic because Leonotis leonurus is not closely related to the other species.Anne-Cathrine Scheen and Victor A. Albert. 2009. "Molecular Phylogenetics of the Leucas Group (Lamioideae; Lamiaceae)". Systematic Botany 34(1):173-181. In 2009, it was shown that Leonotis and 3 other genera are embedded in Leucas, a genus of about 100 species. If the 4 embedded genera were merged with Leucas, the expanded Leucas would have about 132 species.

==References==

==External links==


