[[MEChA]]

CATEGORIES: Mexican-American organizations, Student political organizations in the United States, Latino organizations, 1969 establishments in the United States, Anti-racist organizations in the United States, Organizations established in 1969

M.E.Ch.A. (Spanish: Movimiento Estudiantil Chican@ de Aztlán; "Chican@ Student Movement of Aztlán", the @ being a gender neutral inflection) is an organization that seeks to promote Chicano unity and empowerment through political action. The acronym of the organization's name is the Chicano word mecha, which is the Chicano pronunciation of the English word, "match," and therefore symbolic of a "fire, a spark."    ". The motto of MEChA is 'La Union Hace La Fuerza' (Unity makes strength).

==Origins in the 1960s==

MEChA began during the 1960s, empowered through the political movements of the time, especially the civil rights and Chicano Movement. The group coalesced out of several organizations which had formed during that turbulent decade and which came together at a conference in Denver. The Denver, Colorado-based Crusade for Justice, a civil rights and educational organization founded in the mid-1960s, concerned itself with the problems of the city's Chicano youth. One of the founding documents, "El Plan Espiritual de Aztlán", was drafted during this conference. This document reflects the sentiment of the Latino/Chicano youth during an era of a turbulent social climate (especially in the wake of violence experienced by Latino youth from the US military and police during the Zoot Suit Riots).
The Mexican American Youth Organization was founded in San Antonio, Texas in 1967.  It employed the tactics of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and later spurred the creation of the La Raza Unida Party.
The Brown Berets were a youth organization that agitated against police brutality in East Los Angeles. In 1968, they helped the United Mexican American Students (UMAS), Sal Castro, and other youth who met at the Piranya Cafe organize the East L.A. walkouts, called the Blowouts, a series of protests against unfair conditions in Los Angeles schools.
Following the Blowouts, a group of students, school administrators, and teachers formed the Chicano Coordinating Committee on Higher Education (CCCHE), a network to pressure the adoption and expansion of equal opportunity programs in California's colleges.
Rene Nuñez, an activist from San Diego, conceived a conference to unify the student groups under the auspices of the CCCHE.
In April 1969, Chicano college students held a nationwide conference at the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB). Many of the attendees were present at the First National Chicano Youth Liberation Conference hosted by Rodolfo "Corky" Gonzales' Crusade for Justice a month prior, and the Santa Barbara conference represented the extension of the Chicano Youth Movement into the realm of higher education.
The name "Movimiento Estudiantil Chicano de Aztlán" was already in use by a few groups, and the name was adopted by the conference attendees because of the importance of each of the words and as a means of transcending the regional nature of the multiple campus-based groups. Conference attendees also set the national agenda and drafted the Plan de Santa Bárbara, a pedagogic manifesto.
MEChA chapters first took root on California college campuses and then expanded to high schools and schools in other states. It soon became one of the primary Mexican-American organizations, hosting functions, developing community leaders, and politically pressuring educational institutions. MEChA was fundamental in the adoption of Chicano Studies programs and departments in academia.

==Organizational structure==

===Affiliated chapters===

MEChA exists as over 400 loosely affiliated chapters within a national organization. Typical activities of a MEChA chapters include educational & social activities, such as academic tutoring, mentorship, folklore and poetry recitals, exploring the way of life through an indigenous perspective bringing Chicano speakers to their campus, high school outreach, attending Statewide, Regional, & National Conferences. Many chapters are also involved in political actions, such as lobbying high school and university administrators for expanded Bilingual Education programs and Chicano-related curricula, the celebration of Mexican cultural traditions, as well as other Latin American holidays (such as Mexican Independence Day), Columbus Day protests, sit-ins, hunger strikes, boycotts, rallies, marches  and other political activism relating to civil rights, affirmative action, and immigration.

===National MEChA Constitution===

The National MEChA constitution was ratified on April 9, 1995 during the second annual National MEChA conference at the University of California, Berkeley (Cal). The document outlines four objectives:Movimiento Estudiantil Chicano de Aztlán National Constitution.
Since its adoption, the document has been amended five times:
During the 1999 National Conference at Phoenix College, MEChA adopted a document entitled The Philosophy of MEChA which affirmed the more moderate view that "all people are potential Chicanas and Chicanos", and that "Chicano identity is not a nationality but a philosophy".Philosophy of MEChA. In addition, The Philosophy of MEChA addressed the problem of outside organizations co-opting the legitimacy of MEChA to advance their own agendas, doing so by establishing guidelines to make local MEChA chapters more accountable to the national organization.

==Criticism==

A passage from MEChA's national website reads: ‘As Chicanas and Chicanos of Aztlán, we are a nationalist movement of Indigenous Gente that lay claim to the land that is ours by birthright. As a nationalist movement we seek to free our people from the exploitation of an oppressive society that occupies our land. Thus, the principle of nationalism serves to preserve the cultural traditions of La Familia de La Raza and promotes our identity as a Chicana/Chicano Gente.’National MEChA: The Philosophy of MEChA.
National MEChA: The Philosophy of MEChA. Such statements have led MEChA to be criticized by a variety of sources, including the National ReviewBUSTAWHERE?. and Michelle MalkinBustamante, MEChA and the media (archived). which alleges that MEChA is tinged with racist and separatist views. The Times Online has referred to MEChA as "a radical Mexican student organisation"[tpl]cite news| url=http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/world/article901496.ece | work=The Times | location=London | title=Rival in separatist row | first=Chris | last=Ayres | date=September 8, 2003 | archiveurl=http://web.archive.org/web/20081011192622/http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/world/article901496.ece|archivedate=October 11, 2008[/tpl] in describing the associations of California gubernatorial candidate Cruz Bustamante.  
Critics also point out the group's use of the word Aztlán: To many, this word calls to mind a mythical region comprising much of the Southwestern United States and as a result, some critics feel use of the phrase implies support for the controversial theory of reconquista. While MEChA supporters point out that the Aztlan mythology itself does not refer to reclaiming conquered lands, it simply describes the mythical home of the Aztec people. MEChA supporters do not acknowledge that the lands of the Southwest United States were actually the homelands of a multitude of Native tribes, none of which were Aztec, and that the Aztec never inhabited these lands. MEChA also does not acknowledge that the map they use to illustrate their myth of "Aztlan" has nothing at all to do with the Aztec tribe, since it is a map of Nueva Espania, lands stolen by the Spanish and claimed by the Spanish after they arrived in North America from Europe.  
Also controversial is the phrase "Por La Raza todo, Fuera de La Raza nada", which is often translated as "For the Race, everything, outside the Race, nothing", though this is disputed. Many critics of MEChA see this statement as ethnocentric and racist. This phrase appears in El Plan Espiritual de Aztlán as the official "slogan" of MEChA.  MEChA members themselves differ in their interpretations of "La Raza". While some use the term to strictly refer to only mestizos and Chicanos, others use it to mean all Hispanics and minorities. A possible origin of the phrase is the Cuban Revolution, which used the similar slogan "Por la revolución todo, fuera de la revolución nada!"
A 1998 MEChA youth conference at California Polytechnic State University (Cal Poly SLO) featured a printed program that introduced the school as "Cal Poly State Jewniversity". The program also referred to New York as "Jew York". When the Anti-Defamation League objected to the program, the Cal Poly MEChA organization issued a formal apology, a repudiation of the anti-Semitism and expelled those students who had been responsible for the production of the printed conference program.http://www.adl.org/98audit/campus.asp  MEChA has also been linked to La Voz de Aztlán (The Voice of Aztlan), a Chicano webzine that regularly publishes articles attacking Jews, Zionism, and Israel.[tpl]Citation needed|date=August 2010[/tpl] 
The National Council of La Raza has distanced itself from MEChA due to controversial allegations made by some of its members. In a public press release, NCLR declared, "NCLR freely acknowledges that some of the organization’s founding documents, e.g., Plan Espiritual de Aztlán, contain inappropriate rhetoric, and NCLR also acknowledges that rhetoric from some MEChA members has been extremist and inflammatory... NCLR has publicly and repeatedly disavowed this rhetoric".[ref]
