[[Assemblies of God Statement of Fundamental Truths]]

CATEGORIES: Assemblies of God, Charismatic and Pentecostal Christianity, Christian statements of faith, 1916 works, 1916 in religion, 20th-century Christian texts

The Statement of Fundamental Truths is a description of the 16 essential doctrines adhered to by the General Council of the Assemblies of God in the United States of America. These doctrines are heavily based on evangelical confessions of faith but differ by being clearly Pentecostal.Margaret M. Poloma and John C. Green, The Assemblies of God: Godly Love and the Revitalization of American Pentecostalism, (New York: New York University Press, 2010), p.7. Of the 16 articles, four are considered core beliefs "due to the key role they play in reaching the lost and building the believer and the church".Assemblies of God (USA), Our Core Doctrines, accessed December 21, 2010. They are the doctrines concerning salvation, the baptism in the Holy Spirit, divine healing, and the Second Coming of Christ. It was adopted in 1916 and has virtually remained unchanged.

==Contents==

Most of the statement reiterates basic tenets of evangelicalism while adding articles on "healing by the atonement" and tongues as "initial evidence" of baptism in the Holy Spirit. Article 12 concerns divine healing. The official church teaching is that Christ paid for all physical suffering with his atoning work and that as a consequence, when Christians  get sick they can be supernaturally healed by the Holy Spirit. Article 9 reflects a non-Wesleyan/holiness perspective on sanctification. Articles 13-16 deal largely with the subject of eschatology.  The Assemblies of God has a premillennial dispensationalist perspective on the future, including belief in the rapture and a literal earthly millennium. The following is a summary of the 16 Fundamental Truths:

==History==

The Assemblies of God was founded in 1914; however, it was not until 1916 that it reluctantly created the Fundamental Truths in response to several doctrinal controversies. The first controversy, referred to as the Finished work controversy, arose from disagreement over the second blessing and the practical meaning of holiness. The second or "Oneness" controversy questioned the baptismal formula, the doctrine of the Trinity, and the understanding of the process of salvation. The third one was over whether speaking in tongues was the "initial physical evidence" of Holy Spirit baptism or not. 
The outcome of these controversies, reflected in the Statement of Fundamental Truths, not only shaped the denomination but also shaped American Pentecostalism.Blumhofer, Edith L. (1993). Restoring the Faith: The Assemblies of God, Pentecostalism, and American Culture. Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-06281-0. Page 124. The 4th General Council of 1916 took a strong stand against the Oneness teaching and upheld the position that speaking in tongues was the initial evidence of baptism in the Holy Spirit. The Assemblies of God remains Trinitarian and continues to affirm the doctrine of initial evidence.

===Statement on Sanctification===

The position adopted in the Statement of Fundamental Truths regarding sanctification, however, was less clear. The men behind the formation of the Assemblies of God were Pentecostals who had come to the conclusion that holiness or sanctification was not a second blessing or a definite experience but instead a lifelong process. This idea of progressive sanctification was believed by many within the Assemblies of God; however, there were adherents who still held to the theology of the holiness movement.Blumhofer, p. 125. 
The original language on sanctification in the Fundamental Truths was a compromise between Wesleyan and non-Wesleyan members which allowed the two doctrines to coexist. Under the heading "Entire Sanctification, The Goal For All Believers", it read, "Entire sanctification is the will of God for all believers, and should be earnestly pursued by walking in obedience to God's Word".Assemblies of God USA (1916). Minutes of the General Council of the Assemblies of God, p. 11. Accessed January 1, 2011. The term "entire sanctification" is distinctly Wesleyan, but the statement actually called "for an ongoing, process of obedience in reliance on, and cooperation with the Holy Ghost".Dennis Leggett (1989), "The Assemblies of God Statement on Sanctification (A Brief Review by Calvin and Wesley)", Pneuma: The Journal of the Society for Pentecostal Studies 11, no. 2: p. 115.
In 1961, the General Council revised the statement significantly, giving it its current form. It eliminated some of the Wesleyan language, such as "entire". Stanley M. Horton, who served on the revision committee, stated that the committee "... felt that the word entire was ambiguous because we were using it with a different meaning than that promoted by holiness Pentecostals who taught a second definite work".Stanley Horton as quoted in Leggett, p. 115. While the current statement does represent the Assemblies of God's position more accurately, the denomination's teaching on sanctification remains ambiguous.

==References==

==External links==


