[[The New Statesman]]

CATEGORIES: 1980s British television series, 1990s British television series, 1987 British television programme debuts, 1994 British television programme endings, British political television series, ITV sitcoms, Television shows set in London, Television series by Yorkshire Television, English-language television programming, Television series by ITV Studios, Television series by FremantleMedia

The New Statesman is a British sitcom of the late 1980s and early 1990s satirising the Conservative government of the time. It was written by Laurence Marks and Maurice Gran at the request of, and as a starring vehicle for, its principal actor, Rik Mayall. 
The show's theme tune is an arrangement by Alan Hawkshaw of part of the Promenade from Pictures at an Exhibition by Russian composer Modest Mussorgsky.
The programme was made by the ITV franchise Yorkshire Television between 1987 and 1992, although the BBC made two special episodes; one in 1988, the other in 1994.

==Cast list==

==Characters==

===Alan Beresford B'Stard===

The main character was a selfish, greedy, dishonest, devious, lecherous, sadistic ultra-right-wing Conservative back bencher. The show was mostly set in B'Stard's antechambers in the Palace of Westminster and featured Piers Fletcher-Dervish as B'Stard's twittish upper-class sidekick. B'Stard shared a middle name with Norman Tebbit.
B'Stard was MP for the then fictional constituency of Haltemprice. In 1997, re-drawn boundaries led to the constituency of Boothferry in East Yorkshire being renamed "Haltemprice and Howden".  This seat's first incumbent was David Davis, a Conservative leadership candidate in 2001 and 2005. Goldsborough Hall, near Knaresborough, was used to portray his Yorkshire country residence and used as a backdrop for the opening photo sequences along with a few exterior shots in the first season including the scene where he tries to run over the gardener in his Bentley. The town of Knaresborough, North Yorkshire was used to film the opening election sequence in the first episode and roads around Goldsborough were used to shoot the police car chase from the first series where the policeman's gun backfires. Some city scenes were not filmed in London, but Leeds, with Leeds Town Hall used as the High Court.
Alan was the youngest MP at the age of 31, and was a distillation of the greed and callousness that were considered the hallmarks of new money Thatcherites. B'Stard was married to the devious Sarah, a vain, bisexual nymphomaniac who wanted nothing more than for Alan to die so she could become a rich widow. The couple cheated on each other in perpetuity but remained in a marriage of convenience; Sarah because of Alan's money and Alan because Sarah's father controlled the local Tory Party and held Alan's seat in his gift.
Alan's schemes grew wilder and more bold as the series progressed taking in bribery, murder and provoking Trade Union disputes to make a profit. Later, B'Stard would intentionally mismanage the Tory election campaign so Labour would be blamed for an economic crisis, stage his own assassination to bring back hanging (and make £1,000,000 in the process). In the last episode he creates splits in both the Tory and Labour Parties and names himself Lord Protector.
Whatever crises and scandals swirled around the evil B'Stard, he would always come up smelling of roses. When accused of engaging in sex acts with minors, Alan successfully sued The Times newspaper; when he plotted to get his hands on the stolen millions of Robert Maxwell who was hiding in Bosnia he was hailed as a humanitarian hero. Even when Alan was sentenced to death he managed to escape the noose and retain his position in Parliament. B'Stard's greatest triumph came when he managed to get himself released from incarceration in a Siberian gulag following his assassination attempt on Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev and returned to the UK a hero. Having lost his Westminster seat during his forced absence in Russia, Alan manages to procure himself a German seat in the European Union's parliament as well as getting Piers onto the European Commission, with the two of them proceeding to cause more havoc on the continent and further enhance Alan's reputation back home.   
B'Stard would habitually use others to aid his quest for money and power. Sidney Bliss, the local pub landlord (and a former hangman), was completely in his power in the hope of regaining his position. Many others – old Nazis, Cabinet Ministers and even Salman Rushdie — would regularly pay to buy his silence.
In the stage show it was revealed that Alan had been the architect of New Labour when he realised the Tories were done for (effectively ignoring the last episode of the series), picking a young guitar-playing hippie named Tony Blair and grooming him to be PM. B'Stard transformed Labour into a second Conservative Party, eradicating socialism and effectively running the country from his palatial office at Number 9 Downing Street. The show saw an older Alan, fabulously rich after orchestrating Black Wednesday, still up to his old tricks playing America and Al-Qaeda off each other in the hunt for weapons of mass destruction. By now, Alan is onto his fourth wife (Arrabella Lucretia B'Stard), although the show's first run saw Sarah still firmly in place.
Until very recently[tpl]when|date=September 2013[/tpl] Alan wrote a weekly opinion column in the Sunday Telegraph where he would detail his involvement in current events and even contributed to a Telegraph special of the Blair years where he hinted at being behind the deaths of John Smith, Mo Mowlam and Robin Cook. In the stage show, Alan's involvement in the death of David Kelly was also hinted at.
The newspaper column was written to suggest that the stage show was written by B'Stard himself to communicate his triumphs to the ordinaries. After Gordon Brown was named as Blair's successor, B'Stard's final column implied that, bored with the UK and unable to tolerate a Brown premiership, Alan would quit the country to take up a new position as Head of the World Bank, leaving the door open to a potential return. Other columns had implied that Alan had already begun to groom David Cameron, in preparation for the end of New Labour's era and an electoral return for the Conservatives.

===Sir Piers Fletcher-Dervish, Baronet===

B'Stard's sidekick in his machinations was the upper-class and old school (but incredibly dim-witted) Tory, Piers. Piers was essentially a very kind-hearted and hard-working MP, albeit one who rarely spoke in the house and was completely under Alan's control. Usually Piers was conned into Alan's schemes through trickery or bullying although he would inevitably cock up the simplest of instructions. It was even claimed that Piers only became a Barrister at Law and MP (for the Wiltshire seat of Devizes, in his family for generations) through the intervention of his Teddy bear. Even when Piers married the redoubtable Clarissa he remained in B'Stard's power despite occasional flashes of rebellion. It was Piers' intervention in Alan's fake shooting that led to B'Stard being sentenced to death and his ability as a lover that helped persuade Sarah to rescue Piers and abandon Alan in Siberia. Upon Alan's release from the gulag and return to the UK, Piers (tipped to become the next Chancellor of the Exchequer) lived in fear of the vengeful B'Stard. B'Stard exploited this fear to the full and even threatened Piers' newborn baby in order to get him to resign his seat to accommodate Sir Greville. In return however, Alan ensured that Piers rose to become European Commissioner for Internal Relations, but even in this exalted role Alan would hold the reins of power and used Piers' position to expand his fortunes.

===Sarah B'Stard===

Alan's vengeful, bisexual wife who equalled Alan in his capacity for adultery and deviousness. Sarah originally remained married to Alan purely for money but their relationship evolved as the series progressed. Though their hatred was always mutual, the dynamic in the couple's sexual relationship would often shift and change. In the first series Sarah could not contemplate sleeping with B'Stard although in the second it was Alan who tried to fight off his wife's attentions.
(In the first series, Sarah was having a lesbian affair with Alan's constituency agent and public relations manager, Beatrice Protheroe, whom she had known at school. After that, actress Marsha Fitzalan asked the screenwriters to take out this aspect of her character and she was instead shown sleeping with other men, which included threesomes.)
By the time of the fourth series, the couple had lapsed into a form of 'psychopathic revenge lust', regularly sleeping together despite attempts to do each other harm. When B'Stard was due to hang, Sarah invited the Minister for Law and Order home for sex rather than to pardon him and gleefully abandoned her husband in the frozen wastes of Siberia 'because she could'. Following Sarah and Alan's divorce (a sub-plot of the original stage show), Alan B'Stard's Sunday Telegraph column made reference to her 'coming over all dead'.

===Sir Greville McDonald===

Sir Greville was introduced in the final episode of series 2, portrayed as a corrupt Cabinet Minister who recruited an unwitting Piers as Junior Minister for Housing in order to 'nod through' some of his shadier housing projects. Sir Greville had his first dealings with B'Stard in this episode who implied he would expose him unless he agreed a similar arrangement for B'Stard, and thus became a suspect for the audience in Alan's shooting at the episode's climax. By the time of Alan's 'Miraculous recovery', Sir Greville had been promoted by Thatcher to Minister for Law and Order and negotiated with Alan for the return of the gallows (earning himself a finder's fee of £50,000). Sir Greville found it particularly amusing when B'Stard was sentenced to death and in fact spent the night of Alan's planned execution with the condemned man's wife.
Greville can be viewed as an older and more restrained version of B'Stard. Just as quick to make shady money and with somewhat sordid personal tastes but with a stronger respect for Parliamentary institutions and the Conservative Party itself. Greville in fact places the good of the Tory Party far above the good of the country and says as much in the last episode.
By series 3, Greville is Secretary of State for the Environment and has developed a love-hate relationship with B'Stard which eventually evolves into a mutual respect. Series 4 found Greville out of Parliament after the 1992 election when local voters disagreed with his decision to place a nuclear waste plant in the middle of his own constituency. After some persuasion from B'Stard, Greville takes over Piers' seat and becomes Secretary of State for European Affairs, thus ensuring a wealth of opportunities to connive with Alan in Europe. The last episode saw Greville split with Alan and become part of The Progressive Federalists who were soundly thrashed by Alan's New Patriotic Party at the polls.

===Sir Stephen Baxter===

An elderly backbench Conservative MP who shared the office with Alan and Piers during the first two series. Sir Stephen's morally uptight old-school attitude and respect for Parliamentary protocol meant that he contrasted sharply with the self-centred Alan and the clueless Piers, serving as further comic foil to bounce the two of them off. Despite being in Parliament for a very long time he has been resigned to the backbenches for many years after taking the fall in a scandal involving another minister who would go on to become Secretary of State for Wales. Alan has little respect for him and is more than willing to exploit Sir Stephen's helpful and professional nature for his own ends, including plagiarising one of Sir Stephen's speeches in the Commons in order to ensure that Alan's Private Member's Bill on arming the police would pass into law. He is last seen in Series 2 when, having already been alienated by the introduction of TV cameras and film crews into the House of Commons, Sir Stephen witnesses Piers inflating an blow-up Alan B'Stard doll in a suggestive manner. Sir Stephen gives Piers a stern telling-off before declaring that he "might as well accept that peerage" and then leaves the office, suggesting that he moved up to the House of Lords.

===Roland Gidleigh-Park===

Roland was Alan's despicable father-in-Law with whom B'Stard had to curry favour if he wanted to retain his seat due to Roland controlling the local Conservative Party. In some ways similar to Sir Greville, Roland is a much older but equally nasty version of B'Stard, albeit with an apparently genuine interest in the constituency. On several occasions, Roland threatens to have Alan de-selected due to the absolute lack of interest B'Stard displays in Haltemprice. Roland chastises B'Stard for not holding surgeries, not asking questions in the House and taking no interest in local industry and claims his control over the local Party is a perfect miniature of Thatcher's Cabinet and gives him the power to wreck B'Stard's career. Despite these seemingly genuine concerns for his locality, Roland on many occasions demonstrates his thorough nastiness. It is revealed that as the young Master of Ingleborough Colliery in 1926, he was prepared to use mustard gas on his workers to stave off the threat of revolution then dumped the gas under a primary school. He was even prepared to let B'Stard dump nuclear waste in the same location for the right price. Roland is particularly unpleasant towards the French (which he puts down to an unpleasant experience with a French woman called Giselle in 1940, the last time he touched anything French) and swears he will never use words again if he discovers them to have French origin. Roland also reveals his sinister nature by stating he turned down the chance to have Leon Brittan as MP for Haltemprice due to him being Jewish, and Sarah later reveals that he knew Hitler socially although they never discussed politics. Roland is seen in only series 1 but after Alan's shooting Sarah is seen on the phone to her father, the two of them asking each other if they were responsible for the crime.

===Norman/Norma Bormann===

Norman Bormann is Alan's accountant and personal confidante during the first series. He was on the run from the authorities who suspected him of dubious financial practices and was therefore forced to conduct his shady business with Alan in rather unconventional venues including an abandoned railway wagon and the back of an ambulance. Over the course of series 1 Norman gradually undergoes sex-change treatment in order to become a woman and 'kill Bormann off', charging Alan through the nose for his help in order to finance it. By the end of the series the change is virtually complete (up until the last episode he/she was still sporting a full mustache) but he/she still does the odd favour for Alan, including seducing the Secretary of State for Wales (while he was still technically a man) and posing as Alan's wife during dinner with an American fast-food tycoon. The new Norman is not seen again after the first series.

===Sidney Bliss===

Sidney is an elderly publican in Alan's Yorkshire constituency. He was once, however, Britain's last hangman (the character is reputedly modelled on Albert Pierrepoint), and as such is always encouraging Alan to propose bringing back hanging, in order to get his old job back. Sidney is also neurotic, suffering particularly from a fear of depths. Alan, however, always exploits his power over Sidney, and thus Sidney often acts as Alan's henchman, for example helping him dump nuclear waste in Roland's coal-mine. In the 1990 special, he is a central character when Alan does indeed help re-introduce hanging (though he does it more for personal profit than to help Sidney) and is the executioner who is told to execute Alan. However, his attempt to kill Alan fails.

===Bob Crippen===

Bob Crippen is a Labour MP who represents the deprived inner city constituency of Bramall and, like Alan, has a large majority.  He is Alan's main antagonist during the first two series and like Alan he is quick to anger.  Unlike Alan though he is honest, forthright and does his best by his constituents.  Bob worked his way up from working in a car-plant to being a trade union leader and then became an MP.  His socialist views contrast somewhat with Alan's far-right views.  Alan often outsmarts Bob, knowing that he can antagonise him into taking action that will further Alan's cause.  Bob however often accuses Alan of sinister motives to which he sometimes accidentally admits in the house.

==Political ideals==

Over the course of the series, stage shows and newspaper columns, Alan opined on numerous topics, most of which demonstrated his contempt for the working class and indeed anyone not of the political and financial elite (the ordinaries). During an argument with a constituent, B'Stard declared that he believed he was helping British industry by driving a Bentley and having his suits handmade by British craftsmen. B'Stard's arrogance even extended to stating that there was nothing wrong with the education system that couldn't be put right with £2,500 a term, and that NHS waiting lists could be abolished by shutting down the health service, thereby eradicating poor people and eliminating poverty. B'Stard continued this train of thought through his defection to New Labour when he was instrumental in arranging a postcode lottery for cancer treatment so that "only the right people get better".
Alan at one time proposed inverting the rallying cry of the American War of Independence by stating that "No representation without taxation" was a more fitting clarion call, believing people such as himself (the "enterprising, over-taxed minority") to be called on far too often to bail out other members of society. Alan used the same argument when proposing to cut off all social security payments to elderly people as he believes they should have considered how they would look after themselves instead of wasting their money on "ghastly holidays in Blackpool".
When being interviewed by Brian Walden, Alan readily consented that should he rule the UK, the rich would only pay tax on their cocaine, children would be forced to work in mills and the elderly and infirm would be left to die by the thousands.

==Audience reaction==

The sitcom was one of the most critically successful ITV comedy series of its day, and developed a strong following: the audience laughter was so loud and persistent that it apparently caused the show to overrun and the writers had to shorten the scripts to compensate. However, it was also regarded as very cruel and irreverent, treating all its subjects with black humour and violent slapstick. Rik Mayall said of the audience reaction he received "In the first series people were saying 'Gosh, isn't Rik Mayall good-looking?' but by the second they were saying 'Gosh, isn't Rik Mayall a good actor?' and that's all I ever really wanted."

==Episode list==

===Series 1===

===Special===

Comic Relief (5 February 1988) – Not technically an episode of The New Statesman, this was the first annual Red Nose Day telethon held by the Comic Relief charity. In the final skit, Alan takes a meeting with Margaret Thatcher.

===Series 2===

===Special===

Who Shot Alan B'Stard? (14 January 1990) – All of Britain is in shock at the attempted assassination of Alan, which has left him comatose and fighting for his life in the hospital. The attack has come at a crucial time in the debate over capital punishment: a vote on its restoration in the House of Commons is imminent and, while bookmakers had previously placed the odds of its passage at 100-to-1 against, it is now even money as to whether it will pass. On the day of the vote, the result is a perfect tie, 305 to 305, and it looks like the bill will fail. But at the last second, none other than Alan himself strides into the room and casts the crucial vote in favour.
In interviews after the vote, Alan claims that his seemingly miraculous recovery is the work of an Amazonian shaman, Chief Amlumi, and begins making the rounds of the talk shows touting his newest charity, Central Amazon Spiritual Healers (He asks for cheques to be "made out to CASH, for short"). He also persuades Parliament to bring back hanging and public executions and gives Sir Greville, who has been promoted to the newly created post of Minister for Law and Order, a kickback to gain the contract to construct the new gallows to be used throughout Britain. Sarah, of course, suspects that Alan has faked the whole thing to make money, and she's right: Alan soon descends on a local bookie to collect on the £10,000 bet he made that capital punishment would be reinstated, placed back when the odds were still 100-to-1 against.
Seeking to expose Alan's fraud and ruin his career, Sarah allies herself with Kerry Grout, a talk show host who exposes Alan's charity fraud during an interview, leading Alan to rashly threaten his life on live TV. That night, Piers, who has joined Sarah after learning that Alan has conned him out a £50,000 donation to the fake charity, sneaks into the office he shares with Alan and discovers the truth: that Alan paid a Basque nationalist mercenary to shoot at him with Piers' high-powered rifle while he was clad in a bulletproof vest. That night, Sarah calls Alan from a phone booth in the House of Commons lobby and lures him away from the office, while Piers and Kerry sneak in to film a piece demonstrating how Alan pulled off the hoax. During the demonstration, however, Piers accidentally shoots and kills Kerry with the rifle and then jumps out the window and into the Thames in panic.
An oblivious Alan soon arrives back on the scene and, not noticing Kerry's dead body, picks up the rifle just as a policeman arrives and arrests him for the murder. At his trial, both the policeman and Sarah perjure themselves, with the policeman claiming that Alan confessed to him and Sarah denying that she ever called Alan to get him out of his office. Alan tries to assert an insanity defence, calling Chief Amlumi to testify that the jungle drugs he used to heal Alan can cause hallucinations and delusions, but the prosecutor exposes Amlumi and his interpreter as a vaudeville tomahawk-throwing act. Piers, who survived his fall by landing on a ship bound for Thailand, finally arrives and testifies that he is the real killer, but the prosecutor discredits his claims by asking the jury to question whether a barrister and Member of Parliament could really be that stupid. Alan is convicted and slated to become the first man executed on his own gallows.
Alan's attempts to bribe his way out his sentence prove futile, and he is taken to the gallows to be hanged before a live TV audience. As the trapdoor opens, however, he is saved by his own greed: the subcontractor he used to build the gallows used balsa wood, rather than the promised mahogany, and the entire gallows collapses under Alan's weight. This event is taken as an act of God, and Alan receives a full pardon from the Crown.

===Series 3===

===Series 4===

===Special===

A B'Stard Exposed (30 December 1994) –  Alan B'Stard MP has returned to domestic Parliament following a Welsh by-election conspicuous by the absence of any opponents. They were found after polling day at the bottom of a coal mine. B'Stard is grilled by veteran broadcaster Brian Walden and reveals his vision for 21st century Britain – including a proposal to construct a Berlin Wall-inspired, thirty-feet high, electrified border control system named, 'B'Stard's Fence'. During the interview, Alan is also tricked into revealing his plans to create his own political party and later pays for Walden's silence.

===Stage show===

Episode 2006: The Blair B'Stard Project – Alan B'Stard has created New Labour after making billions on Black Wednesday, installing a failed singer as prime minister and secretly running the country from his bunker at number 9 Downing Street. The show sees Alan attempting to settle a divorce from his wife while playing Al-Qaeda and the Americans off each other in the hunt for weapons of mass destruction (which are being carefully hidden by Alan). Aided by his PPS Frank, the last socialist in the Labour Party and Flora, an ex-Young Conservative turned Blairite lackey, Alan arranges the fake kidnapping of Tony Blair and the ruining of Gordon Brown in order to place himself in ultimate power. The show ends with Alan being named Lord Protector with the declaration, "And Alan takes EVERYTHING".
ALAN B'STARD'S EXTREMELY SECRET WEAPON – The stage show returns, heavily re-written in late 2006, touring into 2007. Alan is plotting to become one of a shadowy elite of politicians who control the world's oil supplies.

===No2AV===

In 2011, the character of Alan B'Stard, again portrayed by Rik Mayall, was used in the campaign against introducing the AV system to UK Parliamentary elections, in an official television broadcast by NOtoAV. B'Stard appears as a party leader in the near future who, at a pre-general election conference, makes ridiculous promises to the public including the abolition of all taxes and free electricity. When his aides query how they will afford such policies, B'Stard gleefully explains that he won't have to, as when he gets elected, he can go into coalition and blame all the government's failings on his partners. He adds that under AV, even if people don't vote for him he'll probably be elected anyway. The advert ends with B'Stard entering Number 10 as prime minister, accompanied by another party leader, in a similar fashion to that of Conservative and Liberal Democrat leaders, David Cameron and Nick Clegg, a year earlier.

==Newspaper columns==

===The Sunday Telegraph===

Tying in with the original run of the stage show, British broadsheet newspaper The Sunday Telegraph ran a weekly opinion column penned by Alan B'Stard himself (in reality his creators, Marks and Gran). In it, Mr B'Stard writes as the founder of New Labour and effective ruler of the country, commenting on the week's events in politics, often referring to his frustrations with Tony and the rest of the cabinet. The column is written to suggest that the stage show is actually written by B'Stard himself as a method of communicating his achievements to 'the ordinaries'. One column mentioned how after Alan's divorce from his wife (a sub-plot of the original stage show), the ex-Mrs B'Stard "came over all dead".

===Daily Mail===

In May 2009, during the disclosure of expenses of British Members of Parliament, the right-wing tabloid Daily Mail published a "manifesto" as written by B'Stard (though actually written by Maurice Gran).[tpl]cite news|author= Gran, Maurice|date= 21 May 2009|url= http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-1185167/Greedy-Pah-Our-rotten-MPs-werent-claiming-nearly-ENOUGH-says-Alan-BStard.html|title=Greedy? Pah! Our rotten MPs weren't claiming nearly ENOUGH! says Alan B'Stard|work=Daily Mail|publisher=Associated Newspapers[/tpl]

===New Statesman magazine===

A bi-weekly opinion column began appearing in New Statesman magazine in 2010. As with the columns in The Sunday Telegraph and the Daily Mail, the articles are written as if by B'Stard himself as dictated to Marks and Gran. In these latest columns, B'Stard is now a Lord, (his final Sunday Telegraph piece seeing him leave the Commons and the country to become Head of the World Bank) but still commentating on current events.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


