[[Gadget and the Gadgetinis]]

CATEGORIES: Inspector Gadget, Television programs featuring anthropomorphic characters, English-language television programming, Television series by DIC Entertainment, Jetix

Gadget and the Gadgetinis is a Canadian/French TV series spinoff of the classic series Inspector Gadget, developed by DIC Entertainment in cooperation with Haim Saban's SIP Animation and released in 2002.  There are 52 episodes.

==Plot==

Gadget is now a lieutenant, and a member of an organization called "WOMP" (World Organization of Mega Powers). He is aided in his work by Penny (who is now twelve years old), as well as the new robot characters Digit and Fidget, the titular Gadgetinis invented by Penny, who essentially replace Brain the dog in this series (who is supposedly retired from active duty) and Chief Quimby (who now works as an informant for the head of WOMP) has been replaced with Col. Nozzaire, a former member of the French Foreign Legion.
The original creators of Inspector Gadget reunited for this series. Andy Heyward initiated the concept and was one of the executive producers; Jean Chalopin created/developed the show and wrote or co-wrote every episode; while Bruno Bianchi designed the main characters as well as directing and producing the series. Gadget & the Gadgetinis follows basically the same plot as the original series, with the clumsy Gadget attempting to fight crime while Penny and her helpers do all the work. Some details underwent major changes, though, for instance the villains. Doctor Claw (who in several stories was entirely replaced by other villains - in a few cases aliens) had relatives in some of the episodes.
While Brain and Chief Quimby are mostly absent from the show, they do appear in pictures in Gadget's house. Each also appears as a special guest, and only in one episode each. Brain appears in episode 36, No Brainer which reveals that, having been traumatized after years of pain while saving Gadget, he retired from crime-fighting to live in a riverside house. The mere mention of the word "gadget" is enough to drive him frantic. Chief Quimby appears in episode 45, Super Boss Gadget.
The French end credits to the series show a series of sketches of Penny going to visit Brain at his riverside home. The pair enjoy an emotional reunion.
Maurice LaMarche continued as Gadget's voice, reprising his role from the "Sunday Movie Toon", "Inspector Gadget's Last Case", as did Brian Drummond (Dr Claw) and Tegan Moss (Penny).
Jean-Michel Guirao composed the musical underscore, and the main title song for the English-speaking version was written and performed by Mike Piccirillo. However, the Canadian and French theme songs for "Gadgetinis" were explicitly different: The French version's theme, composed by Noam Kaniel and David Vadant, sounded very close to Shuki Levy and Haim Saban's original Inspector Gadget theme, and was in fact based on the original series' theme song. (The French end credits for the show state: "Musique des génériques: Noam Kaniel, David Vadant, K.I.A. productions. D'après le "Thème de l'Inspecteur Gadget". Musique originale de Haim Saban et Shuki Levy.") The reason this was possible - even though DiC Entertainment (which owned "Inspector Gadget") no longer had the rights to Levy and Saban's theme music - is probably that "Gadget and the Gadgetinis" was produced primarily by the French animation studio SIP Animation, owned by Haim Saban.

==Characters==

===Main characters===

Lt. Gadget
Gadget's appearance is somewhat different from his original self, as his hat and coat are now dark grey and his gloves are yellow. He is also seen wearing green sunglasses in most episodes. Voiced by Maurice LaMarche.
The Gadgetinis - Two small robots who resemble Gadget and aid him frequently on his missions. They were created by Penny and have the personalities of pre-teens. Like Gadget, they each have their own arsenal of hidden gadgets and devices, including video communicators in their chest-pieces.
Fidget
Digit
Penny
Like her original self, Penny still wears her hair in pigtails, except a little higher and while she originally had green eyes, they are now blue.  While nobody had anything against Penny's use of her gadgets in the original series, the people in this show nitpick Penny for being interested in computers (in "One Too Many Gadgets," a flight attendant takes away Penny's crime laptop, and in "Weekend At The Beach," Penny's friend Bridget criticizes Penny for "playing with computer games" when she was actually using her communication watch).
Colonel Nozzaire
General Sir
Doctor Claw

===Minor characters===

Ms. Miffet
Brain
Chief Quimby
William "Billy" Thaw
Maryland Claw

==References==

==External links==


