[[Edgemont (TV series)]]

CATEGORIES: 2001 Canadian television series debuts, 2005 Canadian television series endings, Canadian television soap operas, CBC network shows, Canadian children's television series, Teen dramas, High school television series, Television series set in Vancouver, Television series produced in Vancouver

Edgemont is a Canadian television series that aired from 2001 to 2005. It revolved around the everyday dealings of teenagers in Edgemont, a fictitious suburb of Vancouver, British Columbia. 
The 30-minute show delved into the lives of students at McKinley High School. The plots contained romance, intrigue, jealousy, and all the other elements associated with the adolescent and secondary school scene. They also explored various social issues, such as racism and homosexuality. 
Edgemont debuted January 4, 2001, on CBC Television, and aired its final episode on July 21, 2005. There were a total of 70 episodes during its five-season run; the fifth season was shown commercial-free on the CBC. The series was created by Ian Weir, who also served as executive producer along with Michael Chechik. It was shot in the basement of the CBC Studios in Downtown Vancouver.
The program became moderately successful in Canada, including Quebec where the series has been dubbed in French, and also aired in the United States (formerly) on the Fox Family Channel.  Today reruns air in the U.S. on some local stations, and nationally it airs Sunday mornings on Me-TV, as part of the network's E/I-mandated programming. It also aired in several other countries, including France.

==Plot==

The first season's plot centres on the relationship, and subsequent breakup, of Jen and Mark. Mark begins to pursue Laurel, and they begin a relationship in the second season. The relationship is rocky due to the very different goals of the two. Mark and Laurel eventually break off the relationship but attempt to remain friends. 
There are also many subplots, such as Anika's manipulation of her classmates and friends, Craig's various well-intentioned but ill-fated social projects, Shannon's sexuality crisis, the divorce of Mark, Travis, and Kat's parents, and the rise and fall of Chris's popularity. Many social issues, such as prejudice, divorce, sexuality, and teen pregnancy, are dealt with during the run of the series.

==Cast==

Myles died in a car accident shortly after the first season's filming was completed. The first episode of the second season was dedicated to him at the end credits.

==External links==


