[[Marcus Aurelius]]

CATEGORIES: Marcus Aurelius, 121 births, 180 deaths, 2nd-century philosophers, 2nd-century Roman emperors, Aelii, Annii, Aurelii, Deified Roman emperors, Hellenistic writers, Imperial Roman consuls, Nerva–Antonine dynasty, People from Rome, Philosophers of Roman Italy, Roman-era Stoic philosophers, Burials at mausoleums

Marcus Aurelius ([tpl]IPAc-en|ɔː|ˈ|r|iː|l|i|ə|s[/tpl]; [tpl]lang-la|Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Augustus[/tpl];In Classical Latin, Aurelius' name would be inscribed as MARCVS AVRELIVS ANTONINVS AVGVSTVS.[tpl]#tag:ref|He was originally named Marcus Annius Catilius Severus (or perhaps Marcus Catilius Severus).Dio 69.21.1; HA Marcus 1.9; McLynn, 24. When he married he took the name Marcus Annius Verus,Dio 69.21.1; HA Marcus 1.10; McLynn, 24. and when he was named emperor, he was given the name Marcus Aurelius Antoninus.|group=notes[/tpl] Espejo, 26 April 121 AD – Vienna, 17 March 180 AD) was Roman Emperor from 161 to 180. He ruled with Lucius Verus as co-emperor from 161 until Verus' death in 169. He was the last of the Five Good Emperors, and is also considered one of the most important Stoic philosophers.
During his reign, the Empire defeated a revitalized Parthian Empire in the East; Aurelius' general Avidius Cassius sacked the capital Ctesiphon in 164. In central Europe, Aurelius fought the Marcomanni, Quadi, and Sarmatians with success during the Marcomannic Wars, with the threat of the Germanic tribes beginning to represent a troubling reality for the Empire. A revolt in the East led by Avidius Cassius failed to gain momentum and was suppressed immediately.
Marcus Aurelius' Stoic tome Meditations, written in Greek while on campaign between 170 and 180, is still revered as a literary monument to a philosophy of service and duty, describing how to find and preserve equanimity in the midst of conflict by following nature as a source of guidance and inspiration.

==Sources==

The major sources for the life and rule of Marcus Aurelius are patchy and frequently unreliable. The most important group of sources, the biographies contained in the Historia Augusta, claim to be written by a group of authors at the turn of the 4th century, but are in fact written by a single author (referred to here as "the biographer") from the later 4th century (c. 395).Birley, Marcus Aurelius, 229–30. The thesis of single authorship was first proposed in H. Dessau's "Über Zeit und Persönlichkeit der Scriptoes Historiae Augustae" (in German), Hermes 24 (1889), 337ff.
The later biographies and the biographies of subordinate emperors and usurpers are a tissue of lies and fiction, but the earlier biographies, derived primarily from now-lost earlier sources (Marius Maximus or Ignotus), are much more accurate. For Marcus' life and rule, the biographies of Hadrian, Antoninus Pius, Marcus and Lucius Verus are largely reliable, but those of Aelius Verus and Avidius Cassius are full of fiction.Birley, Marcus Aurelius, 230. On the HA Verus, see Barnes, 65–74.
Tutor Fronto and various Antonine officials survives in a series of patchy manuscripts, covering the period from c. 138 to 166.Mary Beard, "Was He Quite Ordinary?", London Review of Books 31:14 (23 July 2009), accessed 15 September 2009; Birley, Marcus Aurelius, 226. Marcus' own Meditations offer a window on his inner life, but are largely undateable, and make few specific references to worldly affairs.Birley, Marcus Aurelius, 227. The main narrative source for the period is Cassius Dio, a Greek senator from Bithynian Nicaea who wrote a history of Rome from its founding to 229 in eighty books. Dio is vital for the military history of the period, but his senatorial prejudices and strong opposition to imperial expansion obscure his perspective.Birley, Marcus Aurelius, 228–29, 253.
Some other literary sources provide specific detail: the writings of the physician Galen on the habits of the Antonine elite, the orations of Aelius Aristides on the temper of the times, and the constitutions preserved in the Digest and Codex Justinianus on Marcus' legal work.Birley, Marcus Aurelius, 227–28. Inscriptions and coin finds supplement the literary sources.Birley, Marcus Aurelius, 228.

==Early life and career==

Marcus' family originated in Ucubi, a small town southeast of Córdoba in Iberian Baetica. The family rose to prominence in the late 1st century AD. Marcus' great-grandfather Marcus Annius Verus (I) was a senator and (according to the Historia Augusta) ex-praetor; in 73–74, his grandfather, Marcus Annius Verus (II), was made a patrician.HA Marcus 1.2, 1.4; Birley, Marcus Aurelius, 28; McLynn, 14.[tpl]#tag:ref|Cassius Dio asserts that the Annii were near-kin of Hadrian, and that it was to these familial ties that they owed their rise to power.Dio 69.21.2, 71.35.2–3; Birley, Marcus Aurelius, 31. The precise nature of these kinship ties is nowhere stated. One conjectural bond runs through Annius Verus (II). Verus' wife Rupilia Faustina was the daughter of the consular senator Libo Rupilius Frugi and an unnamed mother. It has been hypothesized Rupilia Faustina's mother was Matidia, who was also the mother (presumably through another marriage) of Vibia Sabina, Hadrian's wife.Codex Inscriptionum Latinarum 14.3579; Birley, Marcus Aurelius, 29; McLynn, 14, 575 n. 53, citing Ronald Syme, Roman Papers 1.244.|group=notes[/tpl] Verus' elder son—Marcus Aurelius' father—Marcus Annius Verus (III) married Domitia Lucilla.Birley, Marcus Aurelius, 29; McLynn, 14. thumb|Statue of young Marcus Aurelius from a private collection housed in the San Antonio Museum of Art
Lucilla was the daughter of the patrician P. Calvisius Tullus Ruso and the elder Domitia Lucilla. The elder Domitia Lucilla had inherited a great fortune (described at length in one of Pliny's letters) from her maternal grandfather and her paternal grandfather by adoption.Birley, Marcus Aurelius, 29, citing Pliny, Epistulae 8.18. The younger Lucilla would acquire much of her mother's wealth, including a large brickworks on the outskirts of Rome—a profitable enterprise in an era when the city was experiencing a construction boom.Birley, Marcus Aurelius, 30.
