[[Aline Chrétien]]

CATEGORIES: 1936 births, Fellows of the Royal Conservatory of Music, French Quebecers, Living people, People from Mauricie, The Royal Conservatory of Music alumni, Spouses of the Prime Ministers of Canada, Canadian university and college chancellors, Jean Chrétien, Canadian women academics, Women academic administrators

Aline Chrétien (born May 14, 1936) is the wife of Canada's twentieth Prime Minister, Jean Chrétien.
Born Aline Chaîné in Saint-Boniface-de-Shawinigan, Quebec, she married lawyer Jean Chrétien on September 10, 1957. They have two sons, Hubert and Michel Chrétien, and one daughter France Chrétien Desmarais.
Fluent in Italian, Spanish, English, and French, Aline Chrétien has been active in a number of charitable organizations over the years since her husband was first elected to the Canadian House of Commons in 1963.  In addition to her keen interest in languages, Madame Chrétien took piano courses during her 50s, and has become an advocate for The Royal Conservatory of Music in Toronto.
On November 5, 1995, an intruder, André Dallaire, broke into the Prime Minister's residence at 24 Sussex Drive, in Ottawa, Ontario. Awake next to her sleeping husband, Aline Chrétien confronted the intruder at their bedroom door. Seeing that he was armed with a large knife, she slammed the door and locked it, then woke her husband.
Her husband sought out her advice often.  Maclean's magazine in 1996 listed her first among his most influential advisors, saying "Never mind calling her the power behind the throne—she shares the seat of power.""The opinions the PM heeds," Maclean's, October 14, 1996, vol. 109, issue 42, p. 18-19.  In 2000, Allan Fotheringham in the same magazine described Jean and Aline Chrétien as the two "most powerful" politicians in Canada, above Eddie Goldenberg and Jean Pelletier.Allan Fotheringham, "Aline, the power player," Maclean's, December 11, 2000, vol. 113, issue 50, p. 68.
Jean Chrétien has publicly stated that she is his key advisor.  He once joked that Canada is run exclusively by women:  the monarch, the Governor General and the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court were all women, and Madame Chrétien was pulling the strings of the Prime Minister. He made similar jokes often, once telling a reporter that he did not know when the next election would be because he had not yet asked Aline. 
In her role as the prime minister's spouse, she went to the memorial of the victim of the W. R. Myers High School shooting in 1999, along with Alberta Premier Ralph Klein, Opposition Leader Preston Manning, and the Attorney General of Canada Anne McLellan.CBC.ca, "Canada grieves along with Taber," May 4, 1999, URL accessed December 19, 2006.  
On September 22, 2010, she was named as first-ever chancellor of Laurentian University, a bilingual educational institution in Sudbury, Ontario."Aline Chrétien named first chancellor of Laurentian University". Toronto Star, September 22, 2010.

==See also==

==References==

|-


