[[Roger de Quincy, 2nd Earl of Winchester]]

CATEGORIES: 1195 births, 1264 deaths, Earls in the Peerage of England, History of Galloway, Scoto-Normans, Christians of the Fifth Crusade

Roger de Quincy, 2nd Earl of Winchester (1195? – 25 April 1264[tpl]cite DNB|volume=47|wstitle=Quincy, Saer de|author=William Hunt[/tpl] His dates are given as 1195?-1265 at the beginning of the subarticle, but his death date is given as 25 April 1264 near the bottom of the page.Cawley, Charles. Medieval Lands: A prosopography of medieval European noble and royal families, "ROGER de Quincy (-25 Apr 1264, bur Brackley)") was a medieval nobleman who was prominent on both sides of the Anglo-Scottish border, as Earl of Winchester and Constable of Scotland.
He was the second son of Saer de Quincy, 1st Earl of Winchester, and Margaret de Beaumont.
He probably joined his father on the Fifth Crusade in 1219, where the elder de Quincy fell sick and died. His elder brother having died a few years earlier, Roger thus inherited his father's titles and properties. However, he did not take possession of his father's lands until February 1221, probably because he did not return to England from the crusade until then. He did not formally become earl until after the death of his mother in 1235.
Roger married Helen of Galloway (b.c1208), eldest daughter and co-heiress of Alan, Lord of Galloway. Without legitimate sons to succeed him, Alan's lands and dignities were divided between the husbands of his three daughters, so Roger acquired Alan's position as Constable of Scotland, and one-third of the lordship of Galloway (although the actual title of Lord of Galloway went through Helen's half-sister Devorguilla to her husband John I de Balliol), and part of the de Morville lands in Lauderdale.Stewart, John, LL.D., & Burnett, George, Lord Lyon, editors, "The Exchequer Rolls of Scotland", vol.1, 1264-1359, Edinburgh, 1878, pps:33 & 45.
The Galwegians rebelled under Gille Ruadh, not wanting their land divided, but the rebellion was suppressed by Alexander II of Scotland. Roger ruled his portion of Galloway strictly, and the Galwegians revolted again in 1247, forcing Roger to take refuge in a castle. Faced with a siege and little chance of relief, Roger and a few men fought their way out and rode off to seek help from Alexander, who raised forces to again suppress the rebellion.
In the following years Roger was one of the leaders of the baronial opposition to Henry III of England, although he fought for Henry against the Welsh in the 1250s and 1260s.
Following Ellen's death in 1245, Roger married Maud de Bohun, daughter of Humphrey de Bohun, 2nd Earl of Hereford, around 1250. Maud died only two years later, and Roger married his third wife, Eleanor de Ferrers, daughter of William de Ferrers, 5th Earl of Derby the same year.
Roger had three daughters by his first wife, but no sons. His subsequent marriages produced no issue. After his death his estates were divided between the daughters, and the earldom of Winchester lapsed. The three daughters of Roger and Helen of Galloway were:
He bore arms, different from his father's.

==References==

==Notes==


