[[Alveley]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Shropshire, Civil parishes in Shropshire

Alveley is a village and civil parish in south east Shropshire, England, along the Severn Valley on the east side of the River Severn. It has appeared in records dating back to AD50.
The current church (St. Mary's) is of Norman design, built in 1140 on the grounds of an earlier Saxon church (of which only a stone cross survives). It has a notable, although badly damaged, 14th Century mural of the Seven Deadly Sins.
In 1349 the Black Death is said to have killed 60% of the village population. A stone cross - The Buttercross - two miles outside the village dates back to the time of the Black Death when it was a place for food to be left for the village when it was quarantined.

==Coal mining and Country Park==

From 1937 to 1969 the village was an active coal mining community in conjunction with the neighbouring village of Highley across the River Severn. The first mineshaft was sunk in 1935 at Alveley Colliery, but production was possible for only thirty years and it closed leaving high unemployment and a ravaged landscape. An industrial estate was built immediately after the mine closure along with a proper landscape reclamation scheme in 1986 and the disused colliery and spoil tips were converted into the Severn Valley Country Park.
The landscape today consists of meadows, woods, ponds and wetlands with waymarked trails of short and longer lengths to encourage locals and visitors to explore the village's heritage fully. Every year a Miner's Memories Day is held at the Country Park Visitor Centre which permanently houses plenty of mine memorabilia along with a cafe and indoor viewpoint over the valley. This display includes miners' picks, spikes, crowbars, breathing equipment used in mines rescue, photos (often donated by local residents) and, very movingly, a certificate awarded to a local Alveley miner, who was surely representative of many, on achieving the milestone of "56 years service to the mine and his country". 
In 2006 a new footbridge linking Alveley and Highley was opened in the Country Park. This replaced the previous 1930s built structure, which had become unsafe. The bridge provides access from Alveley to the Country Park Halt on the Severn Valley Railway, which is situated on the Highley side of the river. The riverbank is popular with fishermen, and a number of local private pools further serve the western Midlands angling fraternity.

==The village==

Alveley has several historic pubs including the Three Horseshoes (1406), The Squirrel & The Royal Oak. With a population of around 2000 and five drinking establishments (if you include the Working Men's Club and Mill Hotel), Alveley has the notable statistic of one pub to every 400 residents.
The village is further served by a large primary school, post office, small supermarket/newsagent and a couple of other small shops and eateries.

==Cricket Club==

Alveley Cricket Club http://www.alveleycc.co.uk), was founded in 1908 and played at Coton Hall on the outskirts of the village, at the former home of general Robert E. Lee's ancestors. After World War II the club moved to play on the Recreation Ground in the heart of Alveley.
The club has invested heavily in its facilities, have a magnificent ground at Alveley Recreation Ground, and raised a potential player base of 100 people who regularly play cricket for the club. The club has always had a strong commitment to youth cricket and the continued growth in its junior section. So whether you are a potential junior or adult player it can accommodate players of all standards and ages who want to enjoy and gain success from the sport. 
Off the field the club has an active social calendar and regularly hold social events for all the family. Events include a 6 a side competition, barbecues, charity events as well as screening live sport in The Pavilion
Up to the middle of the 1970s friendly cricket was played before joining the Kidderminster League in 1989. The club now plays in the Worcestershire County League (Saturday) with friendlies played on a Sunday. As well as the two Saturday sides we run a midweek team who play in the Kidderminster League, the club also runs a highly successful junior section for children aged between 4 and 17 years.
The modern pavilion that was built in 1981 is helped by a beautiful ground. The Pavilion was extended in 2007 and is one of the best in any form of cricket.

==The countryside==

A small hamlet to the south-west of the village, Little London, is one of more than twenty-five settlements which share the capital city's name.  
The parish contains two other manors, besides the manor of Alveley, Kingsnordley and Astley.  Alan James Nicholls documented the Alveley parish in The History of Alveley, published 1994, ISBN 0-9523134-0-5.

==External links==


