[[Baron Braye]]

CATEGORIES: Baronies in the Peerage of England

Baron Braye, of Eaton Bray in the County of Bedford, is a title in the Peerage of England. It was created in 1529 for Sir Edmund Braye. The barony was created by writ, which means that it can descend through both male and female lines. He was succeeded by his son, the second Baron. He died from wounds received at the Battle of St Quentin in 1557. Lord Braye was childless and on his death the title fell into abeyance between his sisters. 
It remained in abeyance for 282 years until the abeyance was terminated in 1839 in favour of Sarah Otway-Cave, who became the third Baroness Braye. She was the wife of Henry Otway and only daughter of Sir Thomas Cave, 6th Baronet, of Stanford, grandson of Sir Thomas Cave, 3rd Baronet, of Stanford, and his wife the Hon. Margaret Verney, daughter of John Verney, 1st Viscount Fermanagh, great-great-grandson of Hon. Elizabeth Verney, second daughter of the first Baron Braye, and her husband Sir Ralph Verney. In 1819 she assumed by Royal license the additional surname of Cave.
When she died in 1862 the barony fell into abeyance between her four daughters. In 1879 the abeyance was terminated in favour of the last surviving daughter, Henrietta, the fourth Baroness. She was the wife of Reverend Edgell Wyatt-Edgell. She was succeeded by her fourth but eldest surviving son, the fifth Baron. In 1880 he assumed by Royal license the surname of Verney-Cave in lieu of Wyatt-Edgell. As of 2010 the title is held by his great-granddaughter, the eighth Baroness, who succeeded her father in 1985. She is the wife of Edward Henry Lancelot Aubrey-Fletcher, fourth son of Sir Henry Aubrey-Fletcher, 6th Baronet. They have no children. Lady Braye is heir-general of the Verney family (see the Earl Verney). 
The family seat is Stanford Hall near Lutterworth, Leicestershire.

==Barons Braye (1529)==

The co-heirs are the present holder's second cousins Linda Katherine Fothergill (b. 1930) and her sister, Theresa Beatrice Browne (b. 1934). They are granddaughters of the fifth Baron.

==See also==

==Notes==

==References==


