[[Ahmad ibn Rustah]]

CATEGORIES: 10th-century births, 10th-century deaths, Geographers of medieval Islam, Medieval Persian geographers, 10th-century geographers, Medieval Islamic travel writers, Persian explorers, Explorers of Asia, Iraqi school, 10th-century Iranian people

Ibn Rustah (in Persian: احمد ابن رسته اصفهانی - Aḥmad ebn Roste Eṣfahānī, also spelled Ibn Rusta, Ibn Ruste) was a 10th-century Persian explorer and geographer born in Rosta district, Isfahan, Persia.Ibn Rustah was identified with the writer ibn Dasta, by Mihály Kmoskó (1876–1931).http://www.arabcin.net/areen/areen_english/29/prespectives.htm 
He wrote a geographical compendium known as Book of Precious Records. The information on his home town of Isfahan is especially extensive and valuable. Ibn Rustah states that, while for other lands he had to depend on second-hand reports, often acquired with great difficulty and with no means of checking their veracity, for Isfahan he could use his own experience and observations or statements from others known to be reliable. Thus we have a description of the twenty districts (rostaqs) of Isfahan containing details not found in other geographers' works. Concerning the town itself, we learn that it was perfectly circular in shape, with a circumference of half a farsang, walls defended by a hundred towers, and four gates.
His information on the non-Islamic peoples of Europe and Inner Asia makes him a useful source for these obscure regions (he was even aware of the existence of the British Isles and of the Heptarchy of Anglo-Saxon England) and for the prehistory of the Turks and other steppe peoples.
He travelled to Novgorod with the Rus', and compiled books relating his own travels, as well as second-hand knowledge of the Khazars, Magyars, Slavs, Bulgars, and other peoples.
He wrote of tenth-century city of the Rus':
His impression of the Rus' is very favourable:
This is in contrast to the account of Ibn Fadlan, whose views on hygiene (based on Islamic teachings on cleanliness and Islamic medical knowledge) contrasted with that of the Rus'. He noted that while the Rus' combed their hair and washed daily, they did so from the same bucket of water (which disgusted him personally). Ibn Fadlan also notes that slaves were not mistreated by the Rus'.
Of ancient Croatia he wrote in the chronicle Al-Djarmi:
About a certain king of the Caucasus Ibn Rustah wrote:
He also traveled extensively in Arabia and is one of the early Persian explorers to describe the city of Sana'a. In his Book of Precious Records, he writes:

==Literature==

==Notes==


