[[Flag of Ghana]]

CATEGORIES: National symbols of Ghana, Flags of Africa

The flag of Ghana was designed and adopted in 1957 and was flown until 1959, and then reinstated in 1966. It consists of the Pan-African colours of red, yellow, and green, in horizontal stripes, with a black five-pointed star in the centre of the gold stripe. The Ghanaian flag was the first African flag after the flag of Ethiopia to feature these colours.
The black star was adopted from the flag of the Black Star Line, a shipping line incorporated by Marcus Garvey that operated from 1919 to 1922, and gives the Ghana national football team their nickname, the Black Stars.
The flag was designed by Theodosia Okoh. The red represents the blood of those who died in the country's struggle for independence from the United Kingdom, the gold represents the mineral wealth of the country, the green symbolises the country's rich forests and natural wealth, and the black star is the symbol of African emancipation.Mrs. Theodosia Salome Okoh at GhanaWeb
The flag's design influenced that of the flag of Guinea-Bissau (1973).

==National ensign==

Under terms of section 183 of Ghana's Merchant Shipping Act of 1963, the civil ensign is a red flag with the national flag in a black-fimbriated canton. In 2003, a new merchant shipping act was enacted, however, and this simply provides that "the National Flag of Ghana" is the proper national colours for Ghanaian ships.  No mention is made of other flags or other possible flags.
The naval ensign is a red St. George cross on white flag, with the national flag in  canton.

==Air force ensign and civil air ensign==

|}
The Ghana Air Force has its own ensign which incorporates the flag of Ghana. Civil aviation in Ghana is represented by the national civil air ensign. It is a standard light blue field with the Ghanaian flag in the canton. It is charged in the fly with either a red, yellow and green roundel (in the case of the military ensign) or black five-pointed star (in the case of the civil ensign). they have both been used since independence, and the subsequent founding of the Ghana Air Force in 1959.

==History==

|}
The flag adopted in 1957 was flown until 1959, when Ghana formed the Union of African States. The flag of the Union was modelled on Bolivia's flag, but with two black stars, representing the nations. In May 1959, a third star was added. Nowhere specified how the stars were arranged, and it was possible that they were arranged in a triangle, although the three-in-a-line formation (as shown here) is more likely.Union of African States at Flags of the World
In 1962, the Union became unstable and Ghana adopted a green, white and red tricolor, similar to the flag of Hungary but with a central black star. The original 1957 flag was reinstated in 1966.

==References==

==External links==

 

