[[Museum of Jurassic Technology]]

CATEGORIES: Museums established in 1987, Museums in Los Angeles, California, Culver City, California, Art museums in California

The Museum of Jurassic Technology is a museum located at 9341 Venice Boulevard in the Palms district of Los Angeles, California (although it has a postal address of Culver City because it is served by that city's post office).  It was founded by David Hildebrand Wilson and Diana Drake Wilson (husband and wife)David Wharton, "Weird Science : Palms' quirky Museum of Jurassic Technology offers curioser and curioser displays, likely to prompt more questions than they answer", Los Angeles Times, December 31, 1989. in 1988.Tony Perrottet, " The Museum of Jurassic Technology: A throwback to the private museums of earlier centuries, this Los Angeles spot has a true hodgepodge of natural history artifacts", Smithsonian, June 2011.
The museum calls itself "an educational institution dedicated to the advancement of knowledge and the public appreciation of the Lower Jurassic";"Introduction and Background" at Museum of Jurassic Technology official website (accessed 2012-10-10). the relevance of the term "Lower Jurassic" to the museum's collections is left uncertain and unexplained.Edward Rothstein, "Where Outlandish Meets Landish", The New York Times, January 9, 2012.  The museum's collection includes a mixture of artistic, scientific, ethnographic, and historic, as well as some unclassifiable exhibits, and the diversity of its offerings evokes the cabinets of curiosities that were the 16th century predecessors of modern natural history museums. The factual claims of many of the museum's exhibits strain credibility, provoking an array of interpretations from commentators. The museum was the subject of a 1995 book by Lawrence Weschler entitled Mr. Wilson's Cabinet of Wonder: Pronged Ants, Horned Humans, Mice on Toast, And Other Marvels of Jurassic Technology, which describes in detail many of its exhibits.  David Wilson received a MacArthur Foundation fellowship in 2001.MacArthur Foundation Fellows List, 2001"Jurassic Genius David Wilson: Offbeat Museum Curator Wins Prestigious 'Genius Grant'", NPR, October 27, 2001. The museum is also mentioned in the novel The Museum of Innocence, by Nobel-laureate Orhan Pamuk. 

==Overview==

The museum contains an unusual collection of exhibits and objects with varying and uncertain degrees of authenticity. New York Times critic Edward Rothstein described it as a "museum about museums", "where the persistent question is: what kind of place is this?"  Smithsonian magazine called it "a witty, self-conscious homage to private museums of yore . . . when natural history was only barely charted by science, and museums were closer to Renaissance cabinets of curiosity."  In a similar vein, The Economist said the museum "captures a time chronicled in Richard Holmes's recent book The Age of Wonder, when science mingled with poetry in its pursuit of answers to life's mysterious questions.""A cabinet of wonder: A Los Angeles museum filled with curio and mystery", The Economist, September 10, 2009. 
The museum's introductory slideshow recounts that, "In its original sense, the term, "museum" meant "a spot dedicated to the Muses, a place where man's mind could attain a mood of aloofness above everyday affairs." In this spirit, the dimly lit atmosphere, wood and glass vitrines and labyrinthine floorplan lead visitors through an eclectic range of exhibits on art, natural history, history of science, philosophy, and anthropology with a special focus on the history of museums, and the varieties of paths to knowledge. The museum attracts approximately 25,000 visitors per year.[tpl]Citation needed|date=October 2012[/tpl]
Over the years, the museum has expanded both in terms of its exhibitions as well as other public offerings. In 2005, the museum opened its Tula Tea Room, a Russian-style tea room where Georgian tea, cookies, and crackers are served to patrons. This room is a miniature reconstruction of the study of Tsar Nicolas II from the Winter Palace in St. Petersburg, Russia. The Borzoi Kabinet Theater screens a series of poetic documentaries produced by the Museum of Jurassic Technology in collaboration with St. Petersburg-based arts and science collective, Kabinet. The series of films entitled A Chain of Flowers draws its name from the quote by Charles Willson Peale: The Learner must be led always from familiar objects toward the unfamiliar, guided along, as it were, a chain of flowers into the mysteries of life. The titles of the films are Levsha: The Cross-eyed Lefty from Tula and the Steel Flea (2001), Obshee Delo: The Common Task (2005), Bol'shoe Sovietskaia Zatmenie: The Great Soviet Eclipse (2008), The Book of Wisdom and Lies (2011), and Language of the Birds (2012).

==Publications==

The museum produces a series of leaflets and books about museum exhibits including:
Many of these books are published in conjunction with the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Information.

==Exhibitions==

The museum maintains over 30 permanent exhibits including:
From 1992 to 2006, the Museum of Jurassic Technology's Foundation Collection was on display in their Tochtermuseum at the Karl Ernst Osthaus-Museum in Hagen, Germany. This exhibition was part of the Museum of Museums wing at the KEOM, which came into being under the stewardship of then-director Michael Fehr.[tpl]Citation needed|date=April 2011[/tpl]

==References==

==External links==


