[[Bedford Brown]]

CATEGORIES: 1795 births, 1870 deaths, United States Senators from North Carolina, North Carolina State Senators, Members of the North Carolina House of Representatives, People of North Carolina in the American Civil War, North Carolina Jacksonians, North Carolina Democrats, Democratic Party United States Senators

Bedford Brown (June 6, 1795 – December 6, 1870) was a Democratic United States Senator from the State of North Carolina between 1829 and 1840.

==Biography==

Bedford Brown was born in what now is Locust Hill Township, Caswell County, North Carolina. His parents were Jethro Brown and Lucy Williamson Brown. After attending the University of North Carolina for one year, Brown was elected to the North Carolina House of Commons. 
On July 13, 1816, Brown married Mary Lumpkin Glenn. The couple had seven children.
In 1828, upon the death of Bartlett Yancey, Jr., Brown was chosen in a special election to replace Yancey in the North Carolina Senate. Like Bartlett Yancey, Jr., before him, Brown was elected Speaker of the North Carolina Senate. 
In 1829, he was elected as a Jacksonian (the party that would become the Democratic Party) to succeed John Branch as a United States Senator from North Carolina.  In the Senate, he chaired several committees, including the Agriculture Committee.  Brown resigned his seat in 1840 due to a dispute with the state legislature.  He was elected to the state Senate again in 1842, before spending some years out of the state.
Leading up to the Civil War, Brown, a state senator again from 1858 to 1860, counseled in favor of North Carolina's remaining in the Union. However, after President Lincoln requested troops from North Carolina to serve in the Union Army, Brown, along with most of his colleagues, supported secession.
In 1868 Brown, still a Democrat, was again elected to the North Carolina Senate. However, the Reconstruction Republicans controlled the North Carolina Legislature and refused to seat Brown. He was replaced by Republican John W. Stephens.
Brown was buried on the grounds at Rose Hill just outside Yanceyville, North Carolina.

==Footnotes==

==Further reading==

==External links==


