[[Flowery Field]]

CATEGORIES: Geography of Tameside, Villages in Greater Manchester

Flowery Field is an area of Hyde, Greater Manchester, North West England.
It is a mainly residential area once dominated by Ashton Brothers Textile Mill.

==Cricket==

The area is home to Flowery Field Cricket Club, one of the foremost amateur clubs in the Tame Valley. They were champions of the Saddleworth and District Cricket League in 2003 and moved into the Lancashire County League for 2004. Their professional member, for the 2008 season, is Andrew Gleave who replaces long-serving Damien Eyre who remains at the club as an amateur player. An early member and very young player for Flowery Field Cricket Club was Warren Bradley who later played football for Manchester United and scored in the F.A. Cup.

==Education==

Schools in the area include Hyde Community College and Flowery Field Primary Schools and Nursery.
Hyde Technology school is the secondary school located in the area. It is especially noted for its ICT teaching. The school has just undergone a major re-development, with a new bigger school built on the original site. The building commenced in the summer of 2010 and is now complete.
Flowery Field infants and junior schools are also due a new combined building on the same site, work to start soon.

==Transport==

Flowery Field railway station is located on the Glossop/Hadfield Line, running from Manchester Piccadilly to Hadfield. It takes just 16 minutes to reach Manchester city centre, and the trains run regularly (approx 2 per hour) so is ideally suited for commuters.
There is also another Station called Hyde North which is a short distance away. Hyde North is a station which accommodates the Manchester Piccadilly to Rose Hill Marple line, which runs slightly less regularly than the Hadfield/Glossop line.
Buses include the 330 Stockport to Ashton via Hyde and Woodley, Greater Manchester. This service is run by Stagecoach Manchester and operates every 8 mins each way 7am - 9pm Monday to Saturday and every 15 mins each way on Sundays and evenings past 9pm.
343 Runs from Hyde to Stalybridge via Dukinfield. This service is run by Stagecoach Manchester and operates every 60 mins each way everyday from 6am - 10pm.
There are numerous other bus routes and services running throughout the region.

==Crime==

There has been some anti-social behaviour in the past. However the introduction of police community support officers from September 2005 has helped to combat this problem and crime now its at an all time low. The Hyde Youth and Community Centre is located in the west of the area and is open certain weekdays.

==Facilities==

Flowery Field Church is a beautiful Tudor Gothic style building, designed by the architect Thomas Worthington, and was completed in 1878. Thomas Ashton (who owned the cotton mill across the road) built the church at his own expense and donated it to the congregation as a sacred trust. During the build the congregation were tasked with raising £1000, which was a huge amount at that time. Upon completion Thomas Ashton then made a magnificent gesture by returning this sum on condition that the money be invested and the interest used to augment a Minister’s stipend. The church still has weekly services and an active social calendar, and is open to any denomination as a Free Christian Fellowship 'We uphold the right of everyone to practise the Christian faith in their own personal way'. 
There is also a local surestart/children's centre.

