[[Cavity magnetron]]

CATEGORIES: Electrical components, English inventions, Microwave technology, Radar, Vacuum tubes, World War II American electronics, World War II British electronics

The cavity magnetron is a high-powered vacuum tube that generates microwaves using the interaction of a stream of electrons with a magnetic field while moving past a series of open cavities. Electrons passing by the openings to the cavities cause the interior to fill with a radio signal, and by sizing the cavity appropriately, the signal will resonate at a selected frequency and cause a powerful signal to be generated. Unlike other tubed-based microwave devices, namely the klystron and traveling-wave tube (TWT), the magnetron is not an amplifier of an existing signal, it produces a microwave signal directly due to its internal physical arrangement.
The first form of magnetron tube, the split-anode magnetron, was invented by Albert Hull in 1920, but it wasn't capable of high frequencies and was little used.  Similar devices were experimented with by many teams through the 1920s and 30s. The modern 'resonant' cavity magnetron tube was invented by John Randall and Harry Boot in 1940 at the University of Birmingham, England.[tpl]cite web |title=The Magnetron |url=http://histru.bournemouth.ac.uk/Oral_History/Talking_About_Technology/radar_research/the_magnetron.html |date=1995–2009 |publisher=Bournemouth University |accessdate=23 August 2009[/tpl] The high power of pulses from their device made centimeter-band radar practical, with shorter wavelength radars allowing detection of smaller objects from smaller antennas. The compact cavity magnetron tube drastically reduced the size of radar sets[tpl]cite journal |last=Schroter |first=B. |date=Spring 2008 |title=How important was Tizard’s Box of Tricks? |journal=Imperial Engineer |volume=8 |pages=10 |url=http://www3.imperial.ac.uk/pls/portallive/docs/1/44009701.PDF |accessdate=2009-08-23 [/tpl] so that they could be installed in anti-submarine aircraft[tpl]cite web |title=Who Was Alan Dower Blumlein? |url=http://www.doramusic.com/Who%20Was%20Blumlein.htm |date=1999–2007 |publisher=Dora Media Productions |accessdate=23 August 2009[/tpl] and escort ships.
In the post-war era the magnetron became less widely used in the radar role. This was due to the fact that the magnetron's output changes from pulse to pulse, both in frequency and phase. This makes the signal unsuitable for pulse-to-pulse comparisons, which is widely used for detecting and removing "clutter" from the radar display.Eli Brookner, "From $10,000 Magee to $7 Magee and $10 Transmitter and Receiver (T/R) on Single Chip", IEEE The magnetron remains in use in some radars, but has become much more common as a low-cost microwave source for microwave ovens. In this form, approximately one billion magnetrons are in use today.Ma, L. "3D Computer Modeling of Magnetrons." University of London Ph.D. Thesis.'' December 2004. Accessed 2009-08-23.

==Construction and operation==

===Basic concept===

In a conventional vacuum tube, electrons are emitted from a heated cathode and are attracted to the anode due to the different electrical charge placed on the two plates. The components are normally arranged in line, at opposite ends of the tube, giving them their traditional cylindrical shape. In a diode the current can flow only from the cathode to the anode, providing rectification. A triode adds a control grid which allows the flow of current to be further controlled in magnitude as well as direction, and thereby provides an amplification function.[http://zipcon.net/~swhite/docs/physics/electronics/Valves.html "Electric Valves: Diodes, Triodes, and Transistors"
The idea of using a grid for control was heavily patented by Lee de Forest, and this caused considerable research into alternate concepts for tube designs that would avoid his patents. This led to experiments with tubes using magnetic fields instead of electrical ones, including the original magnetron. In this case the tube was arranged in the form of two concentric electrodes, typically with the cathode in the form of a metal rod in the center, and the anode as a cylinder around it. This arrangement was then placed between the poles of a horseshoe magnet."The Magnetron"
With no magnetic field present, the electrons will flow directly from the cathode to the anode, operating as a diode. In the presence of the magnetic field, the electrons will experience a force at right angles to their direction of motion, according to the right-hand rule."Magnetic Field & Right Hand Rule" In this case, the electron will follow a curved path between the cathode and anode. The curvature of the path can be controlled by varying either the magnetic field, as in an electromagnet, or by changing the electrical potential across the electrodes.
At very high magnetic field settings the electrons are forced back onto the cathode, preventing current flow. At the opposite extreme, with no field, the electrons are free to flow. There is a point between the two, the critical value or Hull cut-off magnetic field (and cut-off voltage), where the electrons just reach the anode. At fields around this point, the device operates similar to a triode. However, due to hysteresis and other effects, the control timing is not as fast as the electrostatic control in a conventional triode, and magnetrons saw limited use in conventional electronic designs.

===Microwave source===

It was noticed that when the magnetron was operating at the critical value that it would begin to give off radio frequency signals. This occurred because the path, when properly adjusted, would cause some of the electrons to circle between the cathode and anode. Due to an effect now known as synchrotron radiation, this causes the electron to radiate. The effect was not very efficient; eventually the electrons would hit one of the electrodes, and the number in the circulating state at any given time was a small percentage of the overall current.
It was also noticed that the frequency of the radiation was simply a function of the size of the tube, and even early examples were built that produced signals in the microwave region. When used in conventional oscillator and amplifier circuits, tube systems were limited to high frequency bands, with very high frequency systems becoming widely available in the late 1930s. Ultra-high and microwave regions were well beyond the ability for conventional circuits, and the magnetron was one of the only devices known to generate signals in this band.

===Split-anode magnetron===

The original magnetron was very difficult to keep operating at the critical value, and even then the number of electrons in the circling state at any time was fairly low. This meant that it produced very low-power signals. Nevertheless, as one of the only devices known to create microwaves, interest in the device and potential improvements was widespread.
The first major improvement was the split-anode magnetron, also known as a negative-resistance magnetron. As the name implies, this design used an anode that was split in two, creating two half-cylinders. When both were charged to the same voltage the system worked like the original model. But by altering the voltage of the two plates, the electron's trajectory could be modified so that they would naturally travel towards the lower voltage side. The plates were connected to a oscillator that reversed the relative voltage of the two plates at a given frequency.
At any given instant, the electron will naturally be pushed towards the lower-voltage side of the tube. The electron will then oscillate back and forth and the voltage changes. At the same time, a strong magnetic field is applied, stronger than the critical value in the original design. This would normally cause the electron to circle back to the cathode, but due to the oscillating electrical field, the electron instead follows a looping path that continues toward the anodes.
This looping motion greatly increased the output from any one electron, while at the same time allowing the tube to work at any field level just beyond the critical value, greatly improving the stability of the device. Unfortunately, the higher field also meant that electrons often circled back to the cathode, depositing their energy on it and causing it to heat up. As this normally causes more electrons to be released, this could sometimes lead to a runaway effect.

===Cavity magnetron===

The great advance in magnetron design was the cavity magnetron or electron-resonance magnetron, which works on entirely different principles. In this design the oscillation is created by the physical shaping of the anode, rather than external circuits or fields.
The key to the cavity magnetron was the cavity, a hole drilled into the anode at right angles to the cathode in the center. A small slot connected the cavity to  a center area, the "interaction space", with the cathode running down the middle. The parallel sides of the slot acted as a capacitor while the anode block itself provided an inductor analog. Thus, each cavity formed its own tuned oscillator, who's frequency was defined by the energy of the electrons and the physical dimensions of the cavity.
When the system is first energized, the magnetic field is set to a value well below the critical, so the electrons follow arcing paths towards the anode. When they strike the anode, they cause it to become negatively charged in that region. As this process is random, some areas will become more or less charged that the areas around them. The anode is constructed of a highly conductive material, almost always copper, so these differences in voltage cause currents to appear to even them out. Since the current has to flow around the outside of the cavity, this process takes time. During that time additional electrons will avoid the hot spots and be deposited further along the anode, as the additional current flowing around it arrives too. This causes an oscillating current to form as the current tries to equalize one spot then another."The Magnetron"
The oscillating currents flowing around the cavities, and their effect on the electron flow within the tube, causes large amounts of microwaves to be created in the cavities. The cavities are open on one end, so the entire mechanism forms a single larger microwave oscillator. A "tap", normally a wire formed into a loop, extracts microwave energy from one of the cavities. In some systems the tap wire is replaced by an open hole, which allows the microwaves to flow into a waveguide.
As the oscillation takes some time to set up, and is inherently random at the start, subsequent startups will have different output parameters. Phase is almost never preserved, which makes the magnetron difficult to use in phased array systems. Frequency also drifts pulse to pulse, a more difficult problem for a wider array of radar systems. Neither of these present a problem for some continuous-wave radars, nor for microwave ovens.

==Common features==

All cavity magnetrons consist of a hot cathode with a high (continuous or pulsed) negative potential created by a high-voltage, direct-current power supply. The cathode is built into the center of an evacuated, lobed, circular chamber. A magnetic field parallel to the filament is imposed by a permanent magnet. The magnetic field causes the electrons, attracted to the (relatively) positive outer part of the chamber, to spiral outward in a circular path, a consequence of the Lorentz force. Spaced around the rim of the chamber are cylindrical cavities. The cavities are open along their length and connect the common cavity space. As electrons sweep past these openings, they induce a resonant, high-frequency radio field in the cavity, which in turn causes the electrons to bunch into groups. (This principle of cavity resonator is very similar to blowing a stream of air across the open top of a glass pop bottle.) A portion of the field is extracted with a short antenna that is connected to a waveguide (a metal tube usually of rectangular cross section). The waveguide directs the extracted RF energy to the load, which may be a cooking chamber in a microwave oven or a high-gain antenna in the case of radar.
The sizes of the cavities determine the resonant frequency, and thereby the frequency of emitted microwaves. However, the frequency is not precisely controllable. The operating frequency varies with changes in load impedance, with changes in the supply current, and with the temperature of the tube. This is not a problem in uses such as heating, or in some forms of radar where the receiver can be synchronized with an imprecise magnetron frequency. Where precise frequencies are needed, other devices such as the klystron are used.
The magnetron is a self-oscillating device requiring no external elements other than a power supply.  A well-defined threshold anode voltage must be applied before oscillation will build up; this voltage is a function of the dimensions of the resonant cavity, and the applied magnetic field. In pulsed applications there is a delay of several cycles before the oscillator achieves full peak power, and the build-up of anode voltage must be coordinated with the build-up of oscillator output.L.W. Turner,(ed), Electronics Engineer's Reference Book, 4th ed. Newnes-Butterworth, London 1976 ISBN 0 408 00168, pages 7-71 to 7-77
Where there are an even number of cavities, two concentric rings can connect alternate cavity walls to prevent inefficient modes of oscillation. This is called Pi strapping because the two straps lock the phase difference between adjacent cavities at Pi radians (180°).
The magnetron is a fairly efficient device. In a microwave oven, for instance, a 1.1 kilowatt input will generally create about 700 watts of microwave power, an efficiency of around 65%. (The high-voltage and the properties of the cathode determine the power of a magnetron.) Large S band magnetrons can produce up to 2.5 megawatts peak power with an average power of 3.75 kW. Large magnetrons can be water cooled. The magnetron remains in widespread use in roles which require high power, but where precise frequency control is unimportant.

==Applications==

===Radar===

In radar devices, the waveguide is connected to an antenna. The magnetron is operated with very short pulses of applied voltage, resulting in a short pulse of high power microwave energy being radiated. As in all primary radar systems, the radiation reflected off a target is analyzed to produce a radar map on a screen.
Several characteristics of the magnetron's power output conspire to make radar use of the device somewhat problematic. The first of these factors is the magnetron's inherent instability in its transmitter frequency. This instability is noted not only as a frequency shift from one pulse to the next, but also a frequency shift within an individual transmitted pulse. The second factor is that the energy of the transmitted pulse is spread over a wide frequency spectrum, which makes necessary its receiver to have a corresponding wide selectivity. This wide selectivity allows ambient electrical noise to be accepted into the receiver, thus obscuring somewhat the received radar echoes, thereby reducing overall radar performance. The third factor, depending on application, is the radiation hazard caused by the use of high power electromagnetic radiation. In some applications, for example a marine radar mounted on a recreational vessel, a radar with a magnetron output of 2 to 4 kilowatts is often found mounted very near an area occupied by crew or passengers. In practical use, these factors have been overcome, or merely accepted, and there are today thousands of magnetron aviation and marine radar units in service. Recent advances in aviation weather avoidance radar and in marine radar have successfully implemented semiconductor transmitters that eliminate the magnetron entirely.

===Heating===

In microwave ovens, the waveguide leads to a radio frequency-transparent port into the cooking chamber.

===Lighting===

In microwave-excited lighting systems, such as a sulfur lamp, a magnetron provides the microwave field that is passed through a waveguide to the lighting cavity containing the light-emitting substance (e.g., sulfur, metal halides, etc.)

==History==

The first simple, two-pole magnetron was developed in 1920 by Albert HullAlbert W. Hull, "The effect of a uniform magnetic field on the motion of electrons between coaxial cylinders," Physical Review, vol. 18, no. 1, pages 31-57 (1921).  See also:  Albert W. Hull, "The magnetron," Journal of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, vol. 40, no. 9, pages 715-723 (September 1921). at General Electric's Research Laboratories (Schenectady, New York), as an outgrowth of his work on the magnetic control of vacuum tubes in an attempt to work around the patents held by Lee De Forest on electrostatic control.
Hull's magnetron was not originally intended to generate VHF (very-high-frequency) electromagnetic waves.  However, in 1924, Czech physicist August ŽáčekBiographical information about August Žáček: (1)  R. H. Fürth, Obituary: "Prof. August Žáček," Nature, vol. 193, no. 4816, page 625 (1962); and (2) "The 70th birthday of Prof. Dr. August Žáček," Czechoslovak Journal of Physics, vol. 6, no. 2, pages 204-205 (1956).  (For ref. (2), see:  http://resources.metapress.com/pdf-preview.axd?code=h05r1105157t7x38&size=largest .) (1886–1961) and German physicist Erich HabannBiographical information about Erich Habann:  Günter Nagel, "Pionier der Funktechnik.  Das Lebenswerk des Wissenschaftlers Erich Habann, der in Hessenwinkel lebte, ist heute fast vergessen" (Pioneer in Radio Technology.  The life's work of scientist Erich Habann, who lived in Hessenwinkel, is nearly forgotten today.), Bradenburger Blätter (supplement of the Märkische Oderzeitung, a daily newspaper of the city of Frankfurt in the state of Brandenburg, Germany), 15 December 2006, page 9.  See also:  Rainer Karlsch and Heiko Petermann, ed.s, Für und Wider "Hitlers Bombe":  Studien zur Atomforschung in Deutschland and Against "Hitler's Bomb":  Studies on atomic research in Germany (N.Y., N.Y.:  Waxmann Publishing Co., 2007), page 251 footnote. (1892–1968) independently discovered that the magnetron could generate waves of 100 megahertz to 1 gigahertz.  Žáček, a professor at Prague's Charles University, published first; however, he published in a journal with a small circulation and thus attracted little attention.A. Žáček, "Nová metoda k vytvorení netlumenych oscilací" method of generating undamped oscillations", Časopis pro pěstování matematiky a fysiky for the Cultivation of Mathematics and Physics, vol. 53, pages 378-380 (May 1924). (Available on-line (in Czech) at: http://dml.cz/bitstream/handle/10338.dmlcz/121857/CasPestMatFys_053-1924-3_4.pdf .) See also: A. Žáček, "Über eine Methode zur Erzeugung von sehr kurzen elektromagnetischen Wellen" a method for generating very short electromagnetic waves, Zeitschrift für Hochfrequenztechnik for High Frequency Technology, vol. 32, pages 172-180 (1928). A. Žáček, "Spojení pro výrobu elektrických vln" for production of electrical waves", Czechoslovak patent no. 20,293 (filed: 31 May 1924; issued: 15 February 1926). Available on-line (in Czech): http://spisy.upv.cz/Patents/FirstPages/FPPV0020/0020293.pdf . Habann, a student at the University of Jena, investigated the magnetron for his doctoral dissertation of 1924.Erich Habann, "Eine neue Generatorröhre" new generator tube, Zeitschrift für Hochfrequenztechnik, vol. 24, pages 115-120 and 135-141 (1924) Throughout the 1920s, Hull and other researchers around the world worked to develop the magnetron.W. Kaiser, "The Development of Electron Tubes and of Radar technology: The Relationship of Science and Technology," pp. 217 - 236 in O. Blumtritt, H. Petzold and W. Aspray, eds., Tracking the History of Radar, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 1994James E. Brittain, "The magnetron and the beginnings of the microwave age," Physics Today, vol. 38, pages 60-67 (1985).See for example: (1) Soviet physicists: (i) Abram A. Slutskin and Dmitry S. Shteinberg, oscillations in cathode tubes with the aid of a magnetic field", Zhurnal Russkogo Fiziko-Khimicheskogo Obshchestva of the Russian Physico-Chemical Society, vol. 58, no. 2, pages 395-407 (1926); (ii) Abram A. Slutskin and Dmitry S. Shteinberg, oscillations in two-electrode tubes", Ukrainski Fizychni Zapysky Journal of Physics, vol. 1, no. 2, pages 22-27 (1927); (iii) A. A. Slutzkin and D. S. Steinberg, "Die Erzeugung von kurzwelligen ungedämpften Schwingungen bei Anwendung des Magnetfeldes" generation of undamped shortwave oscillations by application of a magnetic field", Annalen der Physik, vol. 393, no. 5, pages 658-670 (May 1929). (2) Japanese engineers: Hidetsugu Yagi, "Beam transmission of ultra-short waves," Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers, vol. 16, no. 6, pages 715-741 (1928). Magnetrons are discussed in Part II of this article. See also: (i) Kinjiro Okabe, of intense extra-short radio waves by a split-anode magnetron (Part 3)", Journal of the Institute of Electrical Engineering of Japan, pages 284ff (March 1928); (ii) Kinjiro Okabe, "On the short-wave limit of magnetron oscillations," Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers, vol. 17, no. 4, pages 652-659 (1929); (iii) Kinjiro Okabe, "On the magnetron oscillation of new type," Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers, vol. 18, no. 10, pages 1748-1749 (1930). Most of these early magnetrons were glass vacuum tubes with multiple anodes. However, the two-pole magnetron, also known as a split-anode magnetron, had relatively low efficiency. The cavity version (properly referred to as a resonant-cavity magnetron) proved to be far more useful. In 1937-1940 a multi-cavity magnetron was built by the British physicist John Randall, together with a team of British coworkers, for the British and American military radar installations in World War II."Radar Recollections - A Bournemouth University/CHiDE/HLF project" by a similar multi-cavity magnetron built by Prof. W. E. Burcham
While radar was being developed during World War II, there arose an urgent need for a high-power microwave generator that worked at shorter wavelengths (around 10 cm (3 GHz)) rather than the 150 cm (200 MHz) that was available from tube-based generators of the time. It was known that a multi-cavity resonant magnetron had been developed and patented in 1935 by Hans Hollmann in Berlin.[tpl]patent|US|2123728|Hans Erich Hollmann/Telefunken GmbH: „Magnetron“ filed November 27, 1935[/tpl] However, the German military considered the frequency drift of Hollman's device to be undesirable, and based their radar systems on the klystron instead.  But klystrons could not at that time achieve the high power output that magnetrons eventually reached.  This was one reason that German night fighter radars were not a match for their British counterparts.W. Kaiser, "The Development of Electron Tubes and of Radar technology: The Relationship of Science and Technology," pp. 217 - 236 in O. Blumtritt, H. Petzold and W. Aspray, eds., Tracking the History of Radar, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 1994:229
In 1940, at the University of Birmingham in the United Kingdom, John Randall and Harry Boot produced a working prototype similar to Hollman's cavity magnetron, but added liquid cooling and a stronger cavity. Randall and Boot soon managed to increase its power output 100 fold. Instead of abandoning the magnetron due to its frequency instability, they sampled the output signal and synchronized their receiver to whatever frequency was actually being generated. In 1941, the problem of frequency instability was solved by coupling ("strapping") alternate cavities within the magnetron.  (For an overview of early magnetron designs, including that of Boot and Randall, see [tpl]cite journal|last=Willshaw|first=W. E.|coauthors=L. Rushforth, A. G. Stainsby, R. Latham, A. W. Balls, A. H. King|title=The high-power pulsed magnetron: development and design for radar applications|journal=The Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers - Part IIIA: Radiolocation|year=1946|volume=93|issue=5|doi=10.1049/ji-3a-1.1946.0188|url=http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=5299321&tag=1|accessdate=22 June 2012[/tpl])
Because France had just fallen to the Nazis and Britain had no money to develop the magnetron on a massive scale, Churchill agreed that Sir Henry Tizard should offer the magnetron to the Americans in exchange for their financial and industrial help (the Tizard Mission). An early 6 kW version, built in England by the General Electric Company Research Laboratories, Wembley, London (not to be confused with the similarly named American company General Electric), was given to the US government in September 1940. At the time the most powerful equivalent microwave producer available in the US (a klystron) had a power of only ten watts. The cavity magnetron was widely used during World War II in microwave radar equipment and is often credited with giving Allied radar a considerable performance advantage over German and Japanese radars, thus directly influencing the outcome of the war. It was later described by America as "the most valuable cargo ever brought to our shores".James Phinney Baxter III (Official Historian of the Office of Scientific Research and Development), Scientists Against Time (Boston: Little, Brown, and Co., 1946), page 142.
The Bell Telephone Laboratories made a producible version from the magnetron delivered to America by the Tizard Mission, and before the end of 1940, the Radiation Laboratory had been set up on the campus of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to develop various types of radar using the magnetron. By early 1941, portable centimetric airborne radars were being tested in American and British aircraft.[tpl]cite news|url=http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/6331897.stm |title=Briefcase 'that changed the world' |publisher=BBC News |author=Angela Hind |date=February 5, 2007 |accessdate=2007-08-16[/tpl] In late 1941, the Telecommunications Research Establishment in Great Britain used the magnetron to develop a revolutionary airborne, ground-mapping radar codenamed H2S. The H2S radar was in part developed by Alan Blumlein and Bernard Lovell.
Centimetric radar, made possible by the cavity magnetron, allowed for the detection of much smaller objects and the use of much smaller antennas. The combination of small-cavity magnetrons, small antennas, and high resolution allowed small, high quality radars to be installed in aircraft. They could be used by maritime patrol aircraft to detect objects as small as a submarine periscope, which allowed aircraft to attack and destroy submerged submarines which had previously been undetectable from the air. Centimetric contour mapping radars like H2S improved the accuracy of Allied bombers used in the strategic bombing campaign. Centimetric gun-laying radars were likewise far more accurate than the older technology. They made the big-gunned Allied battleships more deadly and, along with the newly developed proximity fuze, made anti-aircraft guns much more dangerous to attacking aircraft. The two coupled together and used by anti-aircraft batteries, placed along the flight path of German V-1 flying bombs on their way to London, are credited with destroying many of the flying bombs before they reached their target.
Since then, many millions of cavity magnetrons have been manufactured; while some have been for radar the vast majority have been for microwave ovens. The use in radar itself has dwindled to some extent, as more accurate signals have generally been needed and developers have moved to klystron and traveling-wave tube systems for these needs.

==Health hazards==

Among more speculative hazards, at least one in particular is well known and documented. As the lens of the eye has no cooling blood flow, it is particularly prone to overheating when exposed to microwave radiation. This heating can in turn lead to a higher incidence of cataracts in later life. A microwave oven with a warped door or poor microwave sealing can be hazardous.
There is also a considerable electrical hazard around magnetrons, as they require a high voltage power supply.
Some magnetrons have beryllium oxide (beryllia) ceramic insulators, which are dangerous if crushed and inhaled, or otherwise ingested. Single or chronic exposure can lead to berylliosis, an incurable lung condition. In addition, beryllia is listed as a confirmed human carcinogen by the IARC; therefore, broken ceramic insulators or magnetrons should not be directly handled.
Grindell Matthews described losing the sight in one eye while testing his "Death Ray" in the 1920s which lends credence to the theory that it was based on a primitive magnetron [tpl]citation needed|date=November 2013[/tpl] albeit based on trial and error rather than the scientific method.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


