[[Ed Sciaky]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 births, 2004 deaths, American radio personalities, Radio personalities from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

Edward Leon Sciaky (April 2, 1948 – January 29, 2004) was a disc jockey in Philadelphia.
He was born in New York City and raised in Philadelphia, where he graduated from Central High School, and then from Temple University where he majored in mathematics. Sciaky (pronounced SHOCK-ee) became known for promoting new talent, helping  establish the careers of scores of artists, most notably Bruce Springsteen, Billy Joel, David Bowie, Janis Ian, and Yes.Ed Sciaky, a Broadcast Pioneer
He was one of the first FM disc jockeys who thrived when given the chance to choose their own music and play music other than pop hits. Frequently, he would play lesser known songs that had personal meaning for himself or listeners. He was a good friend to many musicians who enjoyed his intelligent interviews and his knowledge of rock-n-roll. One of the biggest stars he was a part of was Billy Joel. Billy, 23, had just released his Cold Spring Harbor album and was looking for promotion for his album. He was featured on a Sigma Sound broadcast with Sciaky.
His shows would not only entertain listeners, but educate them, as well. Ed enjoyed being a disc jockey and he loved music. He would even talk to listeners if they called to ask questions about obscure artists or songs. It was this kind of personal touch that made him one of the most popular and respected FM disc jockeys of his time.
Sciaky's broadcasting career, all in the Philadelphia area, covered WRTI, WHAT, WXUR (in Media; unrelated to the modern WXUR), WDAS, WMMR, WIOQ, WYSP, WMMR (again), and finally WMGK.
Sciaky, a diabetic, was on kidney dialysis, and his right foot had been amputated in December 2002 as a result of complications from diabetes. While preparing to return home from New York after spending a weekend seeing Broadway shows with his wife, he died at Manhattan's Penn Station when he collapsed on the sidewalk from a massive heart attack. He was 55.
He left behind wife, Judy, and daughter, Monica.
The Broadcast Pioneers of Philadelphia http://www.broadcastpioneers.com posthumously inducted Sciaky into their Hall of Fame in 2005.

==References==


