[[Samuel Kirkland]]

CATEGORIES: 1741 births, 1808 deaths, American Christian missionaries, American Presbyterians, Missionary linguists, Presbyterian missionaries, Clergy in the American Revolution, Patriots in the American Revolution, Aboriginal title in New York, People from Norwich, Connecticut, Princeton University alumni, Hamilton College (New York) people, University and college founders

Samuel Kirkland (December 1, 1741 – February 28, 1808) was a Presbyterian minister and missionary among the Oneida and Tuscarora peoples of present-day western New York State.  
Kirkland graduated from Princeton in 1765.  In 1793 he founded the Hamilton-Oneida Academy (later Hamilton College) as a boys' school in central New York. 
A student of the Iroquoian languages, Kirkland lived for many years with the Iroquois tribes. He helped negotiate the land purchases that New York State made from the Iroquois after the American Revolutionary War, acquiring his own land in the process.

==Early life and education==

Samuel Kirkland was born on December 1, 1741, in Norwich, Connecticut. He was educated in common schools and at Princeton (then the College of New Jersey), where he graduated in 1765.  He was soon ordained as a Presbyterian minister and wanted to work with Native Americans.

==Career==

Kirkland began his missionary work as a protégé of Reverend Eleazar Wheelock in Connecticut at his Moor's Indian Charity School (later relocated to New Hampshire as Dartmouth College). The two parted company in 1770, but Kirkland had met Joseph Brant at the school, a Mohawk who became a war leader against the rebels during the American Revolutionary War. 
Kirkland moved to central New York, where he became a missionary to the Iroquois, especially the Oneida and Tuscarora located at the western end of the Mohawk River Valley.  He acted as an adviser and ambassador to the Iroquois during the American Revolutionary War.  At a time when four of the Six Nations allied with the British, he helped persuade the Oneida and Tuscarora to assist the American revolutionaries. Warfare in the Mohawk Valley caused widespread destruction in both the colonial frontier settlements and many Iroquois villages, as one side and another conducted retaliatory attacks. 
After the war, Kirkland maintained good relations with the Iroquois.  He helped negotiate treaties and keep peace between the Iroquois tribes, who were relocated to smaller reservations, and whites. He is considered by many[tpl]Who|date=November 2010[/tpl] to be the peacekeeper between the Iroquois and the settlers after the war, when settlers did not sufficiently distinguish between former allies and those nations who had been enemies and responsible for destruction. In addition, the wave of migration from New England brought many Yankees eager to acquire land, and they encroached on the Iroquois both before and after land purchases by the state.
Kirkland played a key role in organizing purchases of lands from the Oneida on behalf of New York state, in the process securing large parcels of the Oneida land for himself and his friends.Hauptman (2001), pp. 69–74. Kirkland's assistant James Dean was present at every land cession from the Oneida to the state of New York between 1785 and 1818.Hauptman (2001), p. 73 
Long interested in education, in 1793 Kirkland founded the Hamilton-Oneida Academy as a boys' school in central New York to meet demand from the many new European-American settlements. (This later developed as Hamilton College.) It was a time of the development of boys' schools throughout the state, followed in the nineteenth century by girls' schools.

==Marriage and family==

On September 20, 1769, Samuel Kirkland married Jerusha Bingham (1743–1788) in Windham, Connecticut.  They had several children, who grew up to have leadership positions with their families and in society.  Their son, John Thornton Kirkland (1770–1840) served as President of Harvard College from 1810 to 1828.  Their eldest daughter, Jerusha Kirkland, (1776-1862) married John Hosmer Lothrop (1769–1829). 
The Kirklands' granddaughter Frances Eliza Lothrop (1809-1893) married John Hiram Lathrop (1799–1866).  A graduate of Yale with a law degree, he became a teacher and, in 1840, the first President of the University of Missouri at Columbia. The couple were honored by a large memorial stained glass window in Grace and Holy Trinity Cathedral in Kansas City, Missouri, where descendants of both the Lathrops and the Kirklands are members of the Parish.

==Legacy and honors==

==Notes==

==References==


