[[Canadian pale]]

CATEGORIES: Flags of Canada, Heraldic ordinaries, Vexillology

In vexillology a Canadian pale is a centre band of a vertical triband flag (a pale in heraldry) that covers half the length of a flag, rather than a third in most triband designs. This allows more space to display a central image (common charge). The name was suggested by Dr. George Stanley, and first used by Elizabeth II of Canada proclaiming the new Canadian flag on 28 January 1965. Properly, the term should only apply to Canadian flags, though in general use the term is also used to describe non-Canadian flags that have similar proportions.
The classic Canadian pale is a square central panel occupying half of a flag with 1:2 proportions. However, vexillological usage applies it to any central band that is half the width of the flag, even if this renders it non-square. Though technically incorrect, the term Canadian pale is also used for flags which do not originate in Canada. The 3:5 proposed flag of Taiwan and the 7:11 flag of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines are both described as having a Canadian pale.
The Canadian pale is a popular feature of sub-national and municipal flags from Canada developed after 1965. A few examples can be found in the flag of the Northwest Territories, and the cities of Edmonton, Alberta; Cornwall, Ontario and Burlington, Ontario.
The term is sometimes used in an even looser sense to refer to any flag with a larger central panel, irrespective of whether or not it covers half the flag. By this looser description, the flag of Norfolk Island (stripes in a ratio of 7:9:7) and the flag of Iowa (ratio legally undefined, but usually the central stripe is less than twice that of the outer stripes) are sometimes considered to have a Canadian pale.
By analogy, any flag which has a central horizontal stripe that is half the height of the flag is sometimes said to have a Spanish fess.

==Heraldry==

In coats of arms, and heraldry in general, a 'Canadian pale' is what might well be referred to in South African heraldry as a 'broad pale' as its width is half that of the shield on which it is shown as opposed to the ordinary pale's third to a quarter. For an example see the coat of Macdonald, Canada.

==Flag gallery==

File:Flag of the Northwest Territories.svg|Flag of the Northwest Territories, Canada
File:Flag of Yukon.svg|Flag of Yukon Territory, Canada
File:Flag of Burlington, ON.png|Flag of Burlington, Ontario, Canada
File:Flag of Cornwall, Ontario.svg|Flag of Cornwall, Ontario, Canada
File:Flag of Hamilton.svg|Flag of Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
File:Flag of Taiwan proposed 1996.svg|Flag of Taiwan (Liu proposal, 1996)
File:Flag of Iowa.svg|Flag of Iowa, United States
File:Flag of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.svg|Flag of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
File:Flag of La Gomera.svg|Flag of the island of La Gomera (Canary Islands, Spain)

==See also==

==References==


