[[Gareth Thomas (actor)]]

CATEGORIES: 1945 births, Living people, Alumni of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, Male Shakespearean actors, Welsh male soap opera actors, Welsh male stage actors, Welsh male television actors

Gareth Thomas (born 12 February 1945) is a Welsh actor.
Thomas is best known for the part of Roj Blake in the dystopian science fiction television series Blake's 7, but has taken roles in many other films and television programmes, including Adam Brake in Children of the Stones.

==Background==

Thomas trained at RADA and is now an Associate Member. He has been twice nominated for a BAFTA for his performances in Stocker's Copper (BBC Play for Today) (1972) and Morgan's Boy (1984). 
Some of his other television appearances include The Avengers, Coronation Street, Z-Cars, Special Branch, Sutherland's Law, Public Eye, Star Maidens, Who Pays the Ferryman?, Bergerac, By the Sword Divided, The Citadel, Knights of God, Boon, London's Burning, Casualty, Taggart, Heartbeat, Sherlock Holmes, How Green Was My Valley, Torchwood and Midsomer Murders.
Thomas has also appeared on stage in many productions. Notable appearances include RSC productions of Twelfth Night, Othello and Anna Christie; English Shakespeare Company productions of Henry IV, Part 1 and Part 2 and Henry V; and King Lear, Educating Rita, Cat on a Hot Tin Roof, The Crucible, Equus and Déjà Vu. In 2010 Thomas gave an acclaimed performance as Ephraim Cabot in Desire Under the Elms at the New Vic Theatre.
In 2001 he appeared in Storm Warning, an audio drama based on Doctor Who by Big Finish Productions. He also played the part of Kalendorf in the Big Finish Productions Dalek Empire series. In 2006 he appeared as a guest star in the Doctor Who spin-off series Torchwood, in the episode "Ghost Machine". In 2012, Thomas returned to the role of "Roj Blake" in Big Finish Productions' Blake's 7: The Liberator Chronicles, a series of dramatic readings which take place during Series One before the death of Oleg Gan. Thomas stars as "Blake" in Counterfeit by Peter Anghelides and False Positive by Eddie Robson.
In 2013 he is appearing as Brother Cadfael in Middle Ground Theatre Company's adaption of The Virgin in the Ice by Ellis Peters.

==Personal life==

After many years living in the Scottish Borders, Thomas moved to Surrey in 2009.

==Filmography==

==External links==


