[[Cotton Green]]

CATEGORIES: Neighbourhoods in Mumbai

Cotton Green is a suburb of Mumbai, and a noted residential and commercial area east of Parel, in central Mumbai, 8 km north of Colaba. It is also the name of a railway station on the Mumbai suburban railway, which lies along the Harbour line, which is a part of the Central Railway.

==Etymology==

The station is probably named Cotton Green since barely a few metres from the railway station, facing east, is a huge beautiful Art Deco building of "Cotton Exchange" and a series of warehouses which used to store grains. So the name "Cotton Green" is derived from the words Cotton and Grains.

==History==

The Cotton Exchange Building was built in 1924 and used for trading in Cotton until the early 20th century. (Thanks to the American Civil war, which stopped the trade of American slave-labor cotton).  The building originally was in a minty green colour, today it stands tall in beige and brown around the edges and has been fully restored to its former glory. The building is a stunning example of engineering and has not needed any maintenance except replacement of glass windows which are shattered by cricket balls as children play cricket on roads around the building.

==Overview==

The railway station caters to the area called Kalachowki, Ferbandar and Ghodapdeo. Kalachowki is a big residential area consisting of a colony called Abhyudaya Nagar which has 43 MHADA-built (Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority) housing, intended those who worked in the textile mills in the area.
The colony has now turned into prime residential and commercial property, and is no longer owned by MHADA. Because of its proximity to Mumbai's prime central areas such as Dadar (15-minute drive) and Parel, Lower Parel and Worli (20–25 minutes' drive) 
Kalachowki also has another big colony called Labour Docks, which also belonged to MHADA. 
This area saw the development of numerous high-rise apartments (going up to 30 floors).

==External links==


