[[Duchenne de Boulogne]]

CATEGORIES: 19th-century French physicians, Electrotherapy, 19th-century French photographers, 1806 births, 1875 deaths, Faculty of the École des Beaux-Arts, History of psychiatry, French neurologists

Guillaume-Benjamin-Amand Duchenne (de Boulogne) (September 17, 1806, in Boulogne-sur-Mer – September 15, 1875, in Paris) was a French neurologist who revived Galvani's research and greatly advanced the science of electrophysiology. The era of modern neurology developed from Duchenne's understanding of the conductivity of neural pathways, his revelations of the effect of lesions on these structures and his diagnostic innovations including deep tissue biopsy, nerve conduction tests (NCS), and clinical photography.
Neurology did not exist in France before Duchenne and although many medical historians regard Jean-Martin Charcot as the father of the discipline, Charcot owed much to Duchennne, often acknowledging him as, "mon maitre en neurologie" (my master in neurology).McHenry, p. 282: "His interest in neurology, which was slow in evolving, was largely inspired by Duchenne, whom Charcot called his "master in neurology." 
The American neurologist Dr. Joseph Collins (1866–1950) wrote that Duchenne found neurology, "a sprawling infant of unknown parentage which he succored to a lusty youth."
His greatest contributions were made in the myopathies that came to immortalize his name, Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, Duchenne-Aran spinal muscular atrophy, Duchenne-Erb paralysis, Duchenne's disease (Tabes dorsalis), and Duchenne's paralysis (Progressive bulbar palsy). He was the first clinician to practise muscle biopsy, the harvesting of in vivo tissue samples with an invention he called, "l'emporte-pièce" (Duchenne's trocar).This device was described by Gowers as 'Duchenne's histological harpoon,' and by others as a 'miniature harpoon' - metonymy that alluded to his parentage by the sea. 
In 1855 he formalized the diagnostic principles of electrophysiology and introduced electrotherapy  in a textbook titled, De l'electrisation localisée et de son application à la physiologie, à la pathologie et à la thérapeutique. 
A companion atlas to this work titled, Album de photographies pathologiques, was the first neurology text illustrated by photographs.  Duchenne's monograph, Mécanisme de la physionomie humaine – also illustrated prominently by his photographs – was the first study on the physiology of emotion and was seminal to Darwin's later work.

==Biography==

