[[Treaty of Easton]]

CATEGORIES: 1758 in the Thirteen Colonies, French and Indian War, Pre-statehood history of Pennsylvania, Native American history of New Jersey, Iroquois, Lenape, Northampton County, Pennsylvania, Shawnee tribe, Treaties of indigenous peoples of North America, 1758 treaties, Treaties of the Kingdom of Great Britain

The Treaty of Easton was a colonial agreement in North America signed in October 1758 during the French and Indian War (Seven Years' War). Briefly, chiefs of 13 Native American nations, representing tribes of the Iroquois, Lenape (Delaware), Shawnee and others, agreed to be allies of the British colonies during the French and Indian War (Seven Years' War), already underway.  In return the governments of Pennsylvania and New Jersey recognized Native rights to hunting grounds in the Ohio Valley and settlements in the Ohio Country.  They promised not to establish additional settlements west of the Appalachian Mountains. 

==Scope of Native American nations==

Negotiations of more than a week were concluded on October 26, 1758, at a ceremony held in Easton, Pennsylvania between the British colonial governors of the provinces of Pennsylvania and New Jersey, and representatives of 13 Indian nations, including the Iroquois, who sent chiefs of three of their nations to ensure their domination of the Ohio Country region; the eastern and western Lenape (Delaware), represented by two chiefs and headmen; Shawnee and others. More than 500 Native Americans attended the outdoor ceremony, after lengthy negotiations to bring peace to the regions of Pennsylvania, New Jersey and the Ohio Country.Burton Kummerow,"Treaty of Easton gives sides new hope for peace", THE TRIBUNE-REVIEW, 19 Oct 2008, accessed 19 Mar 2010
Conrad Weiser served as an interpreter and arbitrator for the British colonial governments. The negotiations were held to hopefully resolve conflicts created by The Walking Purchase of 1737, which had lasting effects on the relationships between the Native Americans and the colonists. Attorney General of Pennsylvania, Benjamin Chew, Esq. attended the negotiations of the Treaty of Easton and documented the proceedings in his Journal of a Journey to Easton.Konkle, Burton Alva. (1932). Benjamin Chew 1722-1810: Head of the Pennsylvania judiciary system under colony and commonwealth. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 87.  
The treaty specified that the Native American nations would not fight on the side of the French against the British in the current war.  In return, Pennsylvania returned large blocks of land which the Iroquois had ceded a few years before; the British colonial governors promised to recognize Iroquois and other tribes' rights to their hunting grounds in the Ohio River valley; and to refrain from establishing colonial settlements west of the Allegheny Mountains after the conclusion of the war. This clause of the treaty contributed to the Crown's subsequent Proclamation of 1763, by which it attempted to reserve territory west of the Appalachians for Native Americans and prohibit European-American advancement into the area. In addition, colonial governor William Denny of Pennsylvania agreed to negotiate directly with the Lenape-Delaware again without Iroquois intervention and marked the agreement by rekindling a "council fire." The conference concluded on October 26, 1758 and in November, Governor Denny announced to the Pennsylvania Assembly that "a general peace was secured at Easton."Konkle, 1932, p. 87.
By the treaty, the Lenape ceded all remaining claims to land within the Province of New Jersey for the sum of one thousand Spanish dollars.  They received payment immediately.

==See also==

==Notes==

==External links==


