 | publisher = [[Intiqad]]
 | date = 28 February 2006
 | language = English (original Arabic)
}}
[/ref]

===Tiananmen Square controversy===

In 1997 he faced controversy on another front, as he publicly defended the Chinese government's (of which he is not a supporter, post-Mao) intervention during the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, on the grounds that it was a necessary action to preserve east-Asian stability. Responding to critics, he stated that the original student protests were in fact well-founded and directed at corruption and other ills in Chinese society, and that the Communist Party failed to respond constructively to their demands. The party's intransigent and non-cooperative attitude, as well as provocations from some demonstrators, aggravated the situation, and this eventually, and tragically, led to a crisis in which the state's stability was at stake. At this point, all other options than a violent resolution were blocked. Originally, he sympathized with the students, but in 1997, he had changed his view and now regarded the crackdown as a necessary evil to preserve Asian stability.
He stated that "I have now come to the conclusion that China in June 1989 was faced with a situation that could have evolved into a political meltdown; a Bosnia of gigantic proportions, and the risk of a new great war in the Pacific area. That is why I now feel that the intervention that time was necessary", and also that "the question can not be whether it was moral or immoral to shed blood on the square of Heavenly Peace in the summer of 1989, but whether it was necessary or not, to prevent a Bosnia in billion-size proportion, and a possible Pacific war. If it was necessary, as I now believe, then it was right and moral. If it was not necessary, then it was wrong and criminal."

===Same-sex marriages===

Myrdal was early on an activist for women's rights and argued in favor of the rights of gays and lesbians already in the 1950s. More recently, however, he has been criticized for his stance towards homosexuality, due to his opposition to same-sex marriages. Gay marriage became legal in Sweden in 2009. Opposing gay marriage is today a highly unorthodox thing to do on the Swedish left. He argues that marriage (as traditionally defined, between man and woman) is a "historically determined form of co-habitation" in this era, which has a crucial role in organizing social relations. He also presents marriage, in contemporary society, as a key support for children's rights, since—in his view—gay marriages and gay couple adoption rights will lead to a disintegration of the natural link between parenthood and childhood, to the detriment of children who will be disconnected from their roots.
In an article in Folket i Bild/Kulturfront, March 2012, he comments the accusations of homophobia after being questioned by a reporter from BBC why he was "against the homosexuals". He rejects such accusations and seems to slightly modify his earlier stands on same-sex marriage: "Same-sex marriage is not any stranger than mine and wife Gun's", since that marriage also was child-less. Without regretting his earlier opinions, he now claimed that he only was rejecting the fact that the law of same-sex marriage was a way of the state to interfere with the religious communities, but: "To call this objection to gay marriage is senseless."Folket i Bild/Kulturfront, No 3/2012 "Om könet och politiken", s 44–45: "Äktenskapet är – numera – en enkel juridisk form för att reglera inbördes ekonomi och arv och faderskap. Samkönade äktenskap är inte konstigare än mitt och Guns som av enkla skäl (hennes tioåriga sanatorietid) från början var medvetet barnlöst." (...) "Att kalla detta för motstånd mot homoäktenskap är vettlöst."

==External links==

==References==


