[[Kawasaki Ninja ZX-7R]]

CATEGORIES: Kawasaki motorcycles, Sport bikes, Motorcycles introduced in 1995

The Kawasaki ZX-7R was a sport bike made by Kawasaki from 1996 to 2003. It replaced the more race-oriented ZXR-750 in the 750cc supersports class. It remained largely unchanged through its production.
Between 1990 and 1995 in the US market the ZXR-750 and ZXR-750R were known as ZX-7 and ZX-7R respectively. Starting from 1996 Kawasaki dropped the ZXR name adopting the ZX-7R worldwide.

==Overview==

The ZX-7R was raced, gaining 12 AMA superbike championship victories. Kawasaki's Road Racing team riders were Eric Bostrom, Doug Chandler and Scott Russell.
The ZX-7R has a 749 cc in-line four-cylinder, four-stroke engine.
The frame used on the ZX-7R is a lightweight aluminum twin-spar item, designed using computer-aided design to optimize strength. The rear subframe was constructed using steel and aluminum, providing enough strength for a pillion passenger whilst keeping weight to a minimum. 
The swingarm used largely the same fabrication techniques to produce a hollow cast and pressed aluminum alloy hybrid swingarm, and the Uni-Trak rear suspension system features a predominantly lightweight alloy and aluminum construction. The Uni-Trak system was designed to provide a progressively stiffer damping and spring rate under compression. The rear suspension unit is fully adjustable in terms of damping, preload and compression. 
The front suspension found on the ZX-7R comprises a fully adjustable 43 mm inverted cartridge fork. 
Front brakes are 320 mm semi-floating front discs and Tokico six-piston calipers. Rear brakes feature a 230 mm disc with a twin-piston opposed caliper. 
The ZX-7RR differs from the road model with an adjustable head-stock angle, swing arm pivot, additional increased adjustability to the front and rear suspension, a solo cowl with a slightly different subframe, and 41 mm flat-slide carburetors. It also has a close ratio gear-box fitted as standard and Nissin front calipers.

==References==


