[[Ranunculus repens]]

CATEGORIES: Ranunculus, Flora of Africa, Flora of Asia, Flora of Europe, Flora of Estonia, Flora of Norway, Flora of the United Kingdom, Flora of Cornwall, Flora of the Isles of Scilly, Medicinal plants, Poisonous plants, Invasive plant species, Plants described in 1753

Ranunculus repens (creeping buttercup) is a flowering plant in the buttercup family, native to Europe, Asia and northwestern Africa.Flora Europaea: Germplasm Resources Information Network: Ranunculus repens It is also called Creeping Crowfoot and (along with Restharrow) Sitfast.Oxford English Dictionary entry for "Sit-fast":2. Sc.a. The plants restharrow and creeping crowfoot. 1808 JAMIESON, Sitfasts, restharrow. 1825 {emem} Suppl., Sitfast, Creeping Crowfoot, Ranunculus Repens.

==Growth==

It is a herbaceous, stoloniferous perennial plant growing to 50 cm tall. It has both prostrate running stems, which produce roots and new plants at the nodes, and more or less erect flowering stems. The basal leaves are divided into three broad leaflets 1.5–8 cm long, shallowly to deeply lobed, borne on a 4–20 cm long petiole; leaves higher on the stems are smaller, with narrower leaflets. Both the stems and the leaves are finely hairy. The flowers are bright golden yellow, 2–3 cm diameter, usually with five petals. The fruit is a cluster of achenes 2.5–4 mm long. Creeping buttercup has three-lobed dark green, white-spotted leaves that grow out of the node. It grows in fields and pastures and prefers wet soil.Blamey, M. & Grey-Wilson, C. (1989). Flora of Britain and Northern Europe. ISBN 0-340-40170-2Flora of NW Europe: Ranunculus repens

==Cultivation and uses==

Creeping Buttercup was sold in many parts of the world as an ornamental plant, and has now become an invasive species in many parts of the world.
Like most buttercups, R. repens is poisonous, although when dried with hay these poisons are lost. The taste of buttercups is acrid, so cattle avoid eating them. The plants then take advantage of the cropped ground around it to spread their stolons. Creeping buttercup also is spread through the transportation of hay. Contact with the sap of the plant can cause skin blistering.Plants for a Future: Ranunculus repens

==References==


