  | title= [[Defenders (comics)|The Defenders]]
  | volume= 1
  | issue= 8-11
  | date= September - December 1973
  | publisher= Marvel Comics
  | page= 
  | panel= 
}}[/ref]
After being seen in flashback, the character manages to reintegrate himself on Earth, but is recovering slowly to full strength. Together with sister Umar, Dormammu captures the elder goddess Gaea, and seeks revenge against the Scarlet Witch by kidnapping her, and her mentor Agatha Harkness, from her intended marriage to the android Avenger the Vision, but after Wanda and Harkness remove the heat needed for his regeneration, he seemingly accepts to depart to his own realm. In fact, Dormammu does not feel bound to hold this vow, due to not owing the Witch any favors, and almost immediately following attempts to destroy Doctor Strange and Clea, but is betrayed by Umar who steals his power, allowing the character to be banished from Earth. 
Dormammu tricks Strange into battling both the demon Ghost Rider and the Bounty Hunter in an unsuccessful attempt to kill the hero, and appears in the alternate universe story.

===1980s===

Dormammu acts as the envoy of Lord Chaos by playing King of the Norse gods Odin in a cosmic chess match that controls the universal balance of chaos and order. Umar attempts to rig the game in her brother's favor through manipulating Odin's son Thor, but it ultimately ends in a draw after the hero realizes this. 
Dormammu's agent Baron Mordo travels back in time to London in the year 1943, where he allies with the aristocrats Viscount Krowler and Sir Anthony Baskerville. Dormammu possesses Krowler, and begins to manifest on the Earth plane by absorbing power from the destruction wreaked during World War II, but is banished by Doctor Strange.Doctor Strange vol.2, #49-51 (1981-1982)
The character reappears during the "Inferno" storyline. Strange, following an arduous confrontation with Shuma-Gorath, heals through processes that takes him through various mystical realms. This allows Dormammu to attach himself to his foe, and possess the sorcerer’s body, which exempts him from the vow to not directly enter the Earth-realm. Summoning extraterrestrial sorcerers as his lieutenants, Dormammu vows to "burn" and replace the Celestials as the greatest power in the Earth's universe, but is distracted and tricked by Clea and Strange (his consciousness occupying a rat), while their ally Topaz exorcises Dormammu’s presence.

===1990s===

The character reconstitutes again, regains control of the Dark Dimension from Clea by subverting her will, and summons her parents, Umar and Orini, back from exile. However, Umar and sometimes-pawn Baron Mordo eventually decide to join forces with Clea and Doctor Strange. The enraged Dormammu threatens to completely destroy the "Dark Dimension" in retaliation, but Umar convinces him to accept a compromise as the ruler of a sub-realm, whereas his sister takes over rulership from Clea, with Mordo as her consort. Clea accepts to abdicate as a better temporary solution than seeing all of her people killed, but promises to return if Umar becomes a tyrant again. Dormammu finds that he has been tricked into being trapped as the ruler of the realm of the Mindless Ones.
 
After two brief appearances, Dormammu, in the guise of another Faltine, lures his niece Clea into gathering mystic allies among the Lords of the Netherworlds to depose her mother. This freed Dormammu to reclaim his realm, as he absorbs Umar and Mordo into himself, becoming more powerful than ever before, and he dismissively disintegrates the assembled entities. 
Strange, at the time weakened without support from the "Principalities", confronts Dormammu alongside his allies Clea, the Silver Surfer, Hulk, and the modern Ghost Rider, but they are unable to cause any damage to the villain, who is ecstatic with his victory and overwhelming power. Strange journeys into the core of Dormammu's essence and uses the Eye of Agamotto to strip away his self-delusion, and make him acknowledge that his thirst for chaos, power, and conquest are unworthy for a being of his stature, as a desperate gamble to make him see reason. Dormammu is momentarily shaken, and appears to be defeated, but it is shown to be a mirage. The villain gloats that he has not shown "one tenth" of his true power against the heroes, but that he now realizes that rulership of "one puny" universe is beneath his notice, as he now has far greater and "more interesting" ambitions, and contemptuously dismisses the "insignificant mortals".
The character observes the Guardians of the Galaxy - adventurers from the 31st century of Earth-691 - travel to the mainstream era of Earth-616. Now curious, Dormammu follows them back to their dimension, merges with his counterpart in this timeline, doubling his power, and attacks their headquarters, demanding the presence of the Doctor Strange of their time. Strange, now called the Ancient One, arrives with his disciple, the alien Krugarr, and battles Dormammu, assisted by the Guardians, the "Galactic Guardians", and the cosmic entity the Phoenix Force. Dormammu kills the elderly Strange, and almost overwhelms his other foes, but is defeated when Krugarr summons the spirit of Strange, and they channel the combined power of everyone in the assembly to banish Dormammu to his home dimension.
Dormammu appears as the guiding force behind an attack on the self-titled Goddess during the "Infinity Crusade" storyline. During The Flight of the Bones storyline the character is revealed as the instigator behind a series of spontaneous combustions of criminals and an attack on an ally of Strange by cultists.

===2000s===

Dormammu uses the demon lord Satannish (revealed as his creation) and warlock Nicholas Scratch to lead his armies to capture five of the inter-dimensional places of Hell, in a plot to eventually conquer all life and afterlife. Dormammu, however, is thwarted when the heroine Hellcat rallies the powers of Hell to weaken the character by engineering a complete absence of mystic flame. Dormammu also allies with the entity Mephisto to drive an attacking force out of their respective dimensions. 
Dormammu sends an army of Mindless Ones to attack the city of New York, and trick several prominent Marvel superheroes into unintentionally making him materialize on Earth by tricking them into combining dimensional energies in an attempt to dispel the Mindless Ones. Doctor Strange engages Dormammu in combat, and sends the hero Spider-Man back in time to a critical moment to stop his enemy from being able to re-enter Earth's universe, Spider-Man warning the heroes to delay in their attempts to stop the Mindless Ones long enough for the younger Strange to show up and banish them himself.[ref]The Spider-Man story "Happy Birthday" from:
