[[Frank Rosolino]]

CATEGORIES: 1926 births, 1978 deaths, American jazz trombonists, Cass Technical High School alumni, Musicians from Detroit, Michigan, Jazz musicians who committed suicide, Murder–suicides in the United States, Suicides by firearm in Los Angeles County, California, Bebop trombonists, American people of Italian descent, American people of Sicilian descent, American jazz musicians

Frank Rosolino (August 20, 1926 – November 26, 1978) was an American jazz trombonist.

==Biography==

Born in Detroit, Michigan, Frank Rosolino studied the guitar with his father from the age of 9. He took up the trombone at age 14 while he was enrolled at Miller High School where he played with Milt Jackson in the school's stage band and small group. Having never graduated, Rosolino joined the 86th Division Army Band during World War II.
Perhaps most influential of all was the street education Rosolino received after returning to Detroit following his period in the Army during which he sat in at the Mirror Ballroom or the Bluebird where other to-be-renowned musicians also congregated, the Jones brothers (Hank, Thad, and Elvin), Tommy Flanagan, Kenny Burrell, Paul Chambers and later at the 3 Deuces on 52nd Street in New York City with Charlie Parker. During these years Rosolino was also performing with the big bands of Bob Chester, Glen Gray, Tony Pastor, Herbie Fields, and perhaps most notably Gene Krupa and Stan Kenton. After a period with Kenton he settled in Los Angeles where he performed with Howard Rumsey's Lighthouse All-Stars (1954–1960) in Hermosa Beach."Frank Rosolino: Biography" AllMusic. Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, between nightclub engagements, Rosolino was active in many Los Angeles recording studios where he performed with such notables as Frank Sinatra, Sarah Vaughan, Tony Bennett, Peggy Lee, Mel Tormé, Michel Legrand, and Quincy Jones among others. He can also be seen performing with Shelly Manne's group in the film I Want to Live! (1958) starring Susan Hayward, and also in Sweet Smell of Success (1957) with Burt Lancaster and Tony Curtis. He was also a regular on The Steve Allen Show and a guest artist on The Tonight Show and The Merv Griffin Show. Rosolino was also a talented vocalist, renowned for his wild form of scat-singing. He recorded one vocal album, Turn Me Loose!, featuring both his singing and trombone playing. He can also be seen performing in the half hour syndicated program Jazz Scene USA, hosted by Oscar Brown, Jr. 
It was during the 1970s that Rosolino performed and toured with Quincy Jones and the Grammy Award winning group Supersax. 
Rosolino committed suicide after shooting his two sons in 1978.Feather, Leonard (2006). Liner notes to Free for All (CD, Specialty, 1991).

===As Leader===

===As a sideman===

With Georgie Auld
With Chet Baker

==References==

==External links==


