[[Dormammu]]

CATEGORIES: Comics characters introduced in 1964, Characters created by Stan Lee, Characters created by Steve Ditko, Marvel Comics characters who use magic, Marvel Comics principalities, Marvel Comics supervillains, Ultimate Marvel characters

Dormammu is a fictional character that appears in comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character first appeared in Strange Tales #126 (November 1964), and was created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko. 
Debuting in the Silver Age of comic books, Dormammu has appeared in six decades of Marvel publications, featuring prominently in the Doctor Strange titles and limited series as the recurring nemesis of the mystic hero. The character has also appeared in associated Marvel merchandise including animated television series, toys, trading cards, and video games.
In 2009, Dormammu was ranked as IGN's 56th Greatest Comic Book Villain of All Time.Dormammu is number 56 IGN. Retrieved 10-05-09.

==Publication history==

===Origin===

Dormammu first appeared in Strange Tales #126 - 127 (November - December 1964), but had in fact having already been mentioned, as was his realm the "Dark Dimension", in passing in the title. 
Writer Mike Conroy stated

After being established as the ruler of an alternate dimension (later described as the god-tyrant of its denizens),Excalibur v.3, #14 (2005) Dormammu became a perennial foe of Sorcerer Supreme Doctor Strange, who until this time had dealt almost exclusively with off-beat "one-off" mystical threats in Strange Tales #110 - 125 (July 1963 - October 1964). Strange's first encounter with Dormammu in the "Dark Dimension" also introduced Clea - eventually revealed to be the niece of the villain (like Clea's name, this was not initially revealed in Strange Tales #126 (November 1964) and the monstrous and imprisoned Mindless Ones.
Major appearances include starring in an epic fifteen issue storyline in Strange Tales #131 - 146 (April 1965 - July 1966); the discovery that Dormammu has a sister, Umar, and both are in fact mystical beings called Faltine in Strange Tales #150 (November 1966); teaming with fellow villain Loki to instigate the "Avengers-Defenders War" in Avengers #115 - 118 (September - December 1973) and Defenders #8 - 11 (September - December 1973); Thor  Annual #9 (1981); Doctor Strange, Sorcerer Supreme #1 - 2 (November 1988 & January 1989) and the limited series Doctor Strange: The Flight of the Bones #1 - 4 (February - May 1999) and Hellcat #1 - 3 (September - November 2000). 
After a major appearance in The Amazing Spider-Man #498 - 500 (October - December 2003), Dormammu became the patron of small-time villain the Hood in New Avengers #46 (December 2008).

==Fictional character biography==

===1960s===

Dormammu is first mentioned by Karl Amadeus Mordo, senior apprentice of the appointed "Sorcerer Supreme" the "Ancient One", who, in the entity's service, attempts to slowly weaken the sorcerer, but is stopped when his fellow pupil Stephen Strange manages to alert his master to the betrayal.
The character later appears in person when sending a messenger to boast his renewed intentions of conquering his universe before his aging adversary. In response, Doctor Strange travels to Dormammu's "Dark Dimension" as the Ancient One does not consider himself powerful enough to defeat Dormammu, and manages to overcome all supernatural servitors sent against him. Dormammu engages Strange in mystic combat and shows himself to be far more powerful, but, when drawing upon the realms energies, inadvertently weakens the barrier containing the horde of Mindless Ones. Since they threatened Dormammu's subjects, Strange helped his enemy to re-seal the juggernauts by letting power from his amulet flow into Dormammu. Indebted to Strange for his help, Dormammu ends the fight, and in return Strange demands a binding vow to never enter the "Earth realm" again and to not harm Clea. Dormammu complies, but gains a burning hatred against Strange for the humiliation. 
Dormammu uses a loophole to his oath by granting Mordo vast power, whereupon the sorcerer leads his minions on a lengthy hunt for Strange, and abduct the Ancient One as a bargaining chip. Dormammu's niece, Clea, assists Strange by weakening the barrier of the Mindless Ones, forcing her uncle to focus elsewhere. Dormammu learns of her betrayal, brings all three Earth sorcerers to a neutral realm, to let her see his disciple destroy Strange, and summons fellow "Lords of the Netherworlds" to watch the spectacle. When Strange begins to get an advantage against Mordo, Dormammu decides to face the sorcerer in a contest of pure hand-to-hand-combat. The physically stronger entity eventually falls to his foe's greater familiarity with martial arts. To Dormammu's humiliation, before the gathered Lords, Strange forces him to vow not to menace the Earth even by proxy. The villain strikes a parting blow by banishing Clea, and inciting another lord to attack Strange. 
In an apparent bid for power the character engages the universal embodiment, Eternity, in single combat, but is defeated and banished. 
Dormammu captures Clea, and overpowers and imprisons Strange, but after the sorcerer manipulates Umar to free him, and then surprises Dormammu by pushing him through a portal to the Earth. This makes the entity wither from the curse cast by his own power, when vowing to never enter the Earth realm, and he departs to his own plane.

===1970s===

Dormammu enters into an alliance with the Asgardian god Loki (adopted brother of the thunder god Thor) and tricks superhero teams the Avengers and Defenders into fighting each other for components of the artifact the Evil Eye. The Eye is reassembled, and allows Dormammu to merge his own universe with all the planets of the "regular" Marvel Universe without breaking his vow. Dormammu imprisons the traitorous Loki and effortlessly overwhelms all of his other opponents, leaving only the Scarlet Witch. When Loki escapes and distracts Dormammu, the Avenger casts a hex on the Eye that causes it to absorb Dormammu into itself, which costs Loki his sanity as a side-effect.[ref]"Avengers/Defenders War" from:
