[[Deej Fabyc]]

CATEGORIES: Australian performance artists, British performance artists, Living people, Video artists, Feminist artists, Installation artists, Contemporary artists, Southern Cross University alumni

Deej Fabyc is an Australian/British artist who works with what she calls a "forenzic biographical" type of art, with works in performance, performance installation, combined with drawing, video, photography and objects. Her work takes up the personal is political as read and does not differentiate between art and life. She has exhibited throughout Europe, the United States and Australia since 1982. She lives in London, England, and is the current visiting lecturer in Time Based Media at Sir John Cass Department of Art, Media & Design, London Metropolitan University.
Fabyc's work has been shown internationally in museums, galleries and artist-run spaces for the past 15 years. Her body of work addresses the psychological dimensions of the personal and political experience of trauma, a sense or ambivalence and 'schlock horror' permeates her work. Fabyc is also Founding Director of Elastic Residence in East London.
The name "Fabyc" is an acronym meaning "Family By Choice", and she has used this name since she was nineteen, as it gives her the freedom to make her work without worrying about it reflecting on her family.

==Biography==

Fabyc was born in London and spent her early childhood in London, Ljubljana, Ireland and Islip near Oxford, before travelling to Australia by boat as she was about to start secondary school. She attended six different secondary schools in both Australia and the UK and continued this trend with her university education. Initially she started a philosophy degree with Genevieve Lloyd at ANU in Canberra and attending "Act 2 performance festival", transferring to Canberra School of Art in 1982, where she was influenced by "Act 3 performance festival" which included Jill Orr & Aleks Danko; Phillip Institute of Technology in Melbourne 1983 recalling classes with John Dunkley Smith; completing her BFA at Southern Cross University in 1988 where she met Geoffrey Legge of Watters Gallery who asked her to come to Sydney and show her work to the new gallery Legge Gallery, who represented her work from 1989-94. The Artist was part of the underground feminist art collective JILLPOSTERS in Melbourne 1983-5. She was also involved in Megalo International Screenprint Workshop in Canberra as a community artist at this time having become interested in poster making from her time at the ANU and her participation in the occupation of the Vice-Chancellors residence in 1980. Fabyc went on to exhibit at a show called Fresh Art curated by Anne Loxley and Felicity Fenner and numerous other exhibitions in both Australia and internationally.

==Images==

==External links==


