[[Metrocenter Mall (Jackson, Mississippi)]]

CATEGORIES: Shopping malls established in 1978, Shopping malls in Mississippi, Buildings and structures in Jackson, Mississippi, Visitor attractions in Jackson, Mississippi

Metrocenter Mall is an enclosed shopping mall in South Jackson. The largest enclosed shopping mall in Mississippi,http://www.metro-marketplace.com/overview.php it is composed of 1,250,000 square feet of retail space on two levels.  Despite Metrocenter opening with four anchors, Burlington Coat Factory remains. After years of decay, the City of Jackson moved into the former Belk property. Metrocenter has one of two Burlington Coat Factory locations in Mississippi, and is located on the corner of Interstates 20 and 220, and U.S. Highways 49 and 80. In December of 2009, the City of Jackson purchased the former Dillard's property at Metrocenter as a part of their plan to redevelop the U.S. Highway 80 corridor. In July of 2010, the former Belk property had been sold to Retro Metro, LLC and mixed - use space is underway, consisting of offices, restaurants, and retail space on both levels. After years of being owned by Cannon Management and Jackson Metrocenter LTD, Metrocenter went into foreclosure in November of 2012 and was sold to Metrocenter Mall, LLC.

==History==

Metrocenter opened in March of 1978 with over 100 services and stores on two levels. The anchors were D.H. Holmes, Gayfers, McRae's, and Sears. D.H. Holmes had Potpourri Restaurant and McRae's had Widow Watson's. Metrocenter also had a Service Merchandise and a United Artists Theater as outparcels, and took away most of the business of Jackson Mall, which opened in 1969 with  JCPenney, Gayfers, and Woolco as its anchors, in North Jackson. Metrocenter enjoyed success even after Northpark Mall opened in Ridgeland, Mississippi in 1984.

==Former anchors==

D.H. Holmes was acquired by Dillard's in 1989 and Potpourri Restaurant closed, who later acquired Gayfers in 1999. McRae's was sold and rebranded to Belk in 2006. Sears was the only anchor to remain until its closure.

==Decline==

Metrocenter began to decline in 1999, when Dillard's acquired Mercantile Stores, the parent company of Gayfers, and closed its anchor. Dillard's closed its former D.H. Holmes property in 2006. McRae's and Sears then became the only anchors to remain. McRae's was acquired by and converted to Belk, and Widow Watson's turned into Brittyanna's. Metrocenter had experienced a steady pattern of vacancies. A significant reversal of the trend came in August of 2007, as Burlington Coat Factory opened in the first level of the former Gayfers property to great fanfare, drawing patrons more than ninety miles away. Statistics show traffic had increased at Metrocenter by as much as 3,000 cars per day. Demographics in the Jackson metropolitan area and the dangers of South Jackson have contributed to substantial vacancies. In June of 2009, Belk announced they would close Metrocenter's anchor in August of 2009 to focus on its properties at Northpark Mall and Dogwood Festival Market & Promenade in Flowood, Mississippi. The City of Jackson voted six to one to purchase the former Dillard's property for $39,500.00, hoping to spur a revitalization of South Jackson in December of 2009. The former Belk property was sold to Retro Metro, LLC and consists of the City of Jackson on the first level and mixed - use between offices, restaurants, and retail space on the second level in July of 2010. Watkins Partners announced intentions to move forward with Project Retro Metro in December of 2010 and started with the conversion of the former Belk property into a mixed - use of offices, restaurants, and retail space in January of 2011. David Watkins, president of Watkins Partners, said, "Metrocenter has plummeted." Despite many efforts to redevelop Metrocenter, Sears Holdings announced that over 100 Kmart and Sears properties would close, including Metrocenter's. Sears, the only anchor to remain, closed. Burlington Coat Factory remains.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


