[[Comma Johanneum]]

CATEGORIES: Biblical criticism, King James Only movement, Biblical phrases, 1st-century Christianity, Johannine literature, Trinitarianism, Christian terms, New Testament verses

The Comma Johanneum is a comma (a short clause) in the First Epistle of John ([tpl]bibleverse|1|John|5:7–8|KJV[/tpl]), the inclusion of which is a matter under great debate. This text is variously referred to as the Comma Johanneum, the Johannine Comma, the Heavenly Witnesses, 1 John 5:7 or 1 John v:7.  The question of the authenticity of the verse, with the phrase:
has been a major subject of debate from the 1500s to today.  The debate on 1 John 5:7 has also been a primary focus of discussions on the integrity of the New Testament documents and scribal fealty to the Bible text. The varying doctrinal and Christological interpretations of the verse have been a major part of these debates.

==Comma Johanneum displayed in English, Latin, and Greek==

The bold print is the Johannine Comma.
[tpl]spaces|8[/tpl]1 John 5:7-8 Authorized King James Version
Latin: quoniam tres sunt qui testimonium dant in caelo pater verbum et spiritus sanctus et hi tres unum sunt et tres sunt qui testimonium dant in terra spiritus et aqua et sanguis et tres unum sunt
Greek: οτι τρεις εισιν οι μαρτυρουντες εν τω ουρανω ο πατηρ ο λογος και το αγιον πνευμα και ουτοι οι τρεις εν εισιν και τρεις εισιν οι μαρτυρουντες εν τη γη το πνευμα και το υδωρ και το αιμα και οι τρεις εις το εν εισιν
Bible version without the Johannine Comma.
[tpl]spaces|8[/tpl] New American Standard:
Although technically the Comma refers to text that overlaps verses 7 and 8, it is common to refer to the text as verse seven, or 1 John 5:7. In versions without the Comma the verse ordering depends on the version. Most common is the method used by the NAS, which has the phrase "For...testify" as verse 7 and the rest "the Spirit...in agreement" as verse 8. The ASV and the ERV bring part of the traditional verse 6 down as verse 7. Weymouth splits the verses in another fashion.

==Bibles that include or omit Comma==

After Erasmus included the Comma in the 1522 edition of his Greek New Testament, it appeared in every later edition of the Greek New Testament that came to be called Textus Receptus. Thus the Comma is found in the most widely-used translations of the New Testament before 1881, when the English Revised Version was published without the Comma; but, from the early 18th century onwards, several individual translators omitted it.[tpl]#tag:ref|Early English versions that omitted the Comma were produced by Daniel Mace The New Testament in Greek and English, 1729; The Primitive New Testament, 1745 of William Whiston; A Liberal Translation of the New Testament, 1768 by Edward Harwood and also, in multiple editions starting in 1790, Translation of the New Testament, with notes by Gilbert Wakefield. The New Testament in an Improved Version, 1808 Thomas Belsham omits the verse, and the Paraphrastic translation of the Apostolical Epistles by Philip Nicholas Shuttleworth in 1829, followed by additional versions in the 1800s, including those of Edgar Taylor, Leicester Ambrose Sawyer, Robert Ainslee, George R. Noyes and Samuel Sharpe. Early paraphrases and commentaries that bypassed the heavenly witnesses were the short paraphrase-commentary section given by Isaac Newton and A Commentary on the three Catholick Epistoles of St. John by William Whiston in 1719.  Examples of new translations, commentaries, AV updates and paraphrase editions that maintained the Comma were those of Daniel Whitby in 1703 A Paraphrase and Commentary on the New Testament and John Wesley in 1755 Explanatory Notes on the New Testament and Thomas Haweis in 1795, A Transla­tion of the New Testament from the Original Greek.|group="n"[/tpl] Versions from this period which contain it include the Geneva Bible, the King James Version (KJV),[ref]The  Cambridge Paragraph Bible of the authorized English version'', published in 1873, and edited by noted textual scholar F.H.A. Scrivener, one of the translators of the English Revised Version, set the Comma in italics to reflect its disputed authenticity.  Few later Authorized Version editions retained this formatting.  The AV-1611 page and almost all AV editions use a normal font.
[/ref] Young's and both the Rheims New Testament and the Ronald Knox translations which are Roman Catholic.
Newer critical editions of the Greek text omitted the Comma as not part of the original and modern Bible translations based on them such as the New International Version (NIV), the New American Standard Bible (NASB), the English Standard Version (ESV), the New Revised Standard Version (NRSV) tend to either omit the Comma entirely, or place it in a footnote.NIV,NASB,ESV,NRSV translations In the Roman Catholic tradition, the Latin Nova Vulgata (New Vulgate), published in 1979 following the Second Vatican Council, based on the Critical Text and approved for liturgical use, does not include the Comma.Vulgata, Epistula I Ioannis. The Nova Vulgata has not been translated into English. Nor does the English-language New American Bible.''
The Comma is retained in recent translations based on the Textus Receptus such as the New King James.For fuller details of this group see King James Versions and derivatives
In the Greek Orthodox tradition, earlier translations into Modern Greek by Maximus Callipolites, printed in 1638 for Cyrillus Lucaris, and by Neophytus Vamvas completed in 1850, include the Comma in the text. The editions of the ZWH Brotherhood and Antoniades have the Comma in the main text in a smaller font.Maurice Robinson, posting to the textualcriticism forum, 5/26/96. The Antoniades edition has an editor's note questioning authenticity, noting that the verse "is retained upon the opinion of the Holy Synod."

==Origins==

===Omission theories (verse authentic)===

Those who believe the Johannine Comma is authentic attribute authorship to the apostle John.  They have diverse theories as to why the Comma dropped out of the Greek manuscript line and why most of the evidence is in Latin manuscripts and church writings. Often these proposed textual histories include homeoteleuton as the initial cause of the early variant.  In 1699 Louis Ellies Dupin discussed the possibility:
The commentary of Puritan scholar Matthew Henry added the difficulty and unlikelihood that a deliberate addition could be inserted into the text-line:
Anthony Kohlmann asked and answered the question, "what reason can you assign for so notable an omission in some old manuscripts?" Kohlmann pointed to homoeoteleuton and doctrinal motivations and included an analogy to another verse which some attempted to excise.Anthony Kohlmann answered as follows: "There are several ways of accounting for that omission and among others, it may be said, 1st, that this omission happened by the neglect of some ignorant copyists, who, after having written the first words of the 7th verse 'there are three, that give testimony,' by a mistake of the eyes, skipped over the remaining part of the text, and passed on to the immediately following text, where the same words recur; for such mistakes often take place in transcribing, especially when the two verses and the two periods begin and end with the same words. Another reason of this omission is given by the author of the prologue to the seven Catholic epistles ... (Vulgate Prologue section translation)... By these words he not obscurely alludes to the Marcionites or Arians, who designedly erased this verse from all the copies they could get into their hands; for they well understood that by that one testimony their cause was undone. With a like perfidy, St. Ambrose, (lib. iii de spiritu sancto cap. 10.) reproaches the Arians, who had expunged these words from the Scriptures: Because God is a Spirit, 'Which passage, says the holy doctor addressing the Arians, you so well know to be understood of the Holy Ghost, that you have erased it from the copies of your scriptures, and would to God! you had only expunged it from yours and not also from those of the church." Anthony Kohlmann, Unitarianism philosophically and theologically examined, 1821, p.173
An article on the KJV_Today website looks at the Johannine first epistle text and asserts that corruption in 1 John occurs in a number of doctrinally charged Christological verses, including full phrases. KJV_Today notes that 1 John 2:23b is lacking in the majority Byzantine Greek ms line, yet supported in the Vulgate. (And 1 John 2:23b also has a very similar proposed method of accidental original text dropping in homoeoteleuton.) 1 John 4:3 and 1 John 5:13 have phrase omissions mostly in minority, early Alexandrian mss. They also discuss a corruption in 1 John 5:6, and there are omission/addition questions in 1 John 2:7 with from the beginning and 1 John 1:7 Christ. (The word corruption can apply symmetrically from both positions, whether an omission or addition.) Thus, they say that textual accident and even potential manipulation were relatively frequent in 1 John.. "1 John has its fair share of early textual corruptions to demonstrate that passages were indeed altered for reasons of carelessness or infidelity ... One thing is certain: the text of 1 John underwent corruption long before the alleged 'fabrication' of the Comma.  With there being these other demonstrable examples of early textual corruptions, it is reasonable to suppose that the omission of the Comma was also an early textual corruption."KJV_Today Proof that the text of 1 John underwent early corruption 
Also those asserting authenticity of the Comma, followed by omission, often assert that the early church writers and internal evidences are undervalued by today's textual theories. Franz Pieper is an example from 20th-century scholarship. For Pieper the Cyprian citation is a key element leading to his acceptance of authenticity. Pieper disagrees with the Karl Ströbel claim,Zeitschrift, 1854, p.135-137 that the old codices must be the judge in textual criticism (given in Ströbel's review of the Sander book). Pieper says "a quotation from the Fathers is often of decisive importance".Christian Dogmatics, 1950, p. 241, trans. from German ed. c. 1920.
Another point raised in favor of authenticity is the difficulty of additions changing the Bible text-line, since additions are usually a conscious change or tampering, "First, to omit implies only excusable oversight, while to insert implies designed deceit and direct invention of a human statement as God's word."Matthew Poole summarized by George Whitefield Samson, The English revisers' Greek text: shown to be unauthorized, except by Egyptian copies discarded by Greeks, and to be opposed to the historic text of all ages and churches p. 76, 1882. and likely to be noted, caught and corrected, sounding foreign and unusual to the reader. While text dropped, by fatigue or homoeoteleuton, is a process that is common. And such changes require no conscious attempt at textual tampering, they are often accidental. In recent years the understanding that omission is more common that addition has received more attention in textual scholarship circle. Significant have been the studies of Peter M. Head and James Ronald Royse (and an earlier study by Gordon Fee on P66) on papyri. "Most fundamental is the support given to the conclusion that omission is more common than addition." Peter M. Head, Observations on Early Papyri of the Synoptic Gospels, especially on the 'Scribal Habits', Biblica, 1990, Vol.71 p. 246.  Royse and Head did not specifically apply their conclusions to many New Testament variants outside their study and likely join most modern scholars in opposition to Comma Johanneum authenticity. Whether accidental or deliberate tampering, such an omission is less visible than an addition.  The text is no longer there to jar the mind of the proof-reader, the scriptorium or the church in the next town. And thus the new variant can escape early detection and correction and be accepted into a stream of manuscripts. 

Another issue raised is the difficulty of positing a multi-stage (scribal commentary -> ms margin -> ms text) textual entrance, without any direct evidential support. This scenario is seen as having Ockham-style difficulties, being the more complex alternative. And proponents of authenticity see these difficulties as compounded by a combination of additional factors.  The sanctity of the scripture text meant that the scriptoriums and churches watched carefully for scribal additions.  Also the proposed late textual entry (as theorized by Ehrman and others) and the widespread early use of the Comma throughout the Latin church even in the 400s mitigate against the multi-stage theory.  The 400s is when we have the Council of Carthage and the Twelve Books on the Trinity and additional references.

===Addition theories (verse spurious)===

Those who believe the Johannine Comma is inauthentic view the text as either an accidental intrusion, which could be a margin commentary note that a later scribe mistakenly considered to be the original text,"The addition appears to rest on allegorical exegesis of the three witnesses in the text; it was probably written in the margin of a Latin MS and then found its way into the text; later still the order of the two sets of witnesses was inverted and the text was translated back into Greek and was included in a few Greek MSS." Ian Howard Marshall, The Epistles of John, p. 78 1978. or as a deliberate insertion or forgery.  The deliberate theory usually considers the motives to be doctrinal, to support Trinitarian doctrines.
Erasmus, looking at the Vulgate Prologue, which evidence had been emphasized by Stunica, implied that Jerome had been the source of the verse about which the Prologue speaks: "For who would have called him a forger and a falsifier, unless he changed the common reading of the place?"John Jortin, The Life of Erasmus, Vol 2, 1760 p.100, citing the Erasmus annotation on 1 John 5:7 when he included the verse in the 3rd edition. Erasmus "spoke of Jerome's violence, unscrupulousness, and frequent inconsistency, as the probable origin of this supposed interpolation in the Sacred text."Henry Thomas Armfield, The three witnesses, the disputed text in st. John, p. 70, 1883. Drummond quoted Erasmus more moderately than Armfield.Drummond quoting Erasmus: "It was not true that Jerome had said this passage had been corrupted by the heretics; and even if he had said so, Jerome was not infallible; on the contrary, he was a man of a warm and even violent temper, and often made assertions much more positively than facts seemed to warrant. Jerome's language, however, really implied that he had changed the public reading of the Church, and that accordingly the Latin must have previously agreed with the Greek." Robert Blackley Drummond, Erasmus; his life and character, p.331, 1873. And in other contexts the respect of Erasmus for Jerome is often noted, "The scholar saint (Jerome) appealed to Erasmus on many grounds..." Joseph M. Levine, The Autonomy of History: Truth and Method from Erasmus to Gibbon, p. 29, 1999.
Hugo Grotius contended that the verse had been added into the Johannine text by the Arians.. Henry Armfield on Grotius: "it was the opinion of Grotius that, so far from being apposite to the argument of the Greek Fathers, the text was introduced by the Arians, so that from the analogy of the adjoining verse they might argue that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost were one only in consent and not in essence." The Three Witnesses, the Disputed Text in St. John, 1883, p.36 About the Grotius view, Richard Simon wrote "... all this is only founded on conjectures: and seeing every one does reason according to his prejudices, some will have the Arians to be the authors of that addition, and others do attribute the same to the Catholicks."Richard Simon, A critical history of the text of the New Testament, 1689 p.123. Luther's pastor, John Bugenhagen, like Grotius, wrote of a conjectured Arian origin.
Isaac Newton took a similar approach as Erasmus, looking to Jerome as the principle figure in placing the Comma in the Bible. "Jerome, for the same end, inserted the Trinity in express words into his version" p. 185 "And the first upon record that inserted it, is Jerome... he altered the public reading"  An Historical Account of Two Notable Corruptions of Scripture The Recorder, 1803, Vol 2, p. 192-194 full text p.184-253, written by Newton c. 1690. Newton adds "till at length, when the ignorant ages came on, it began by degrees to creep into the Latin copies out of Jerome's version." p.197 which he places very late. "Afterwards the Latines noted his variations in the margins of their books; and thence it began at length to creep into the text in transcribing, and that chiefly in the twelfth and following centuries, when disputing was revived by the schoolmen." p. 192 "it was inserted into the vulgar Latin out of Jerome's version" p. 207. Nonetheless, Newton does go earlier than Jerome at the same time for origins, saying of the Tertullian reference in "Against Praxeas" VI. "So then this interpretation seems to have been invented by the Montanists for giving countenance to their Trinity. For Tertullian was a Montanist when he wrote this ; and it is most likely that so corrupt and forced an interpretation had its rise among a sect of men accustomed to make bold with the Scriptures. Cyprian being used to it in his master's writings"  Newton called the words of Tertullian and Cyprian an "interpretation so corrupt and stained". Apparently he saw a vector from their interpretation to a Jerome addition to scripture. Newton also thought that the Athanasius Disputation with Arius (Ps-Athanasius) "had been deeply influential on the subsequent attitude to the authenticity of the passage."Rob Iliffe,  Friendly Criticism: Richard Simon, John Locke, Isaac Newton and the Johannine Comma 2006, p. 143 in Scripture and Scholarship Newton's comment that from Matthew 28:19 "they tried at first to derive the Trinity" implies that for the conjectured interpolation, "the Trinity" was the motive.
Richard Simon believed the verse began in a Greek scholium, while Herbert Marsh posited the origin as a Latin scholium.William Craig Brownlee, On the Authenticity of 1 John v.7 Christian Advocate 1825, p. 167 Simon conjectured that the Athanasius exposition at Nicea was the catalyst for the Greek scholium which brought forth the text.Simon's conjecture: "The same thing hapned to those who caused to print St. Athanasius's Works, with a Table of the passages of Holy Scripture, which are quoted therein (apparently a reference to the Synopsis of Scripture). They have set down at large there, the seventh verse of the first chapter of the first epistle of St. John, as if that holy man had quoted that place after that manner....(Simon references the Disputation against Arius at Nicea) .. I make no question but that this explication of St. Athanasius was the occasion that some Greek scoliates placed in the margin of their copies the formentioned note, which afterwards was put in the text.  And that is more probable than what Erasmus thought concerning this matter, who was of opinion, that the Greek copies, which make mention of the witness of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, were more correct than the Latin copies. A critical history of the text of the New Testament, 1689, p.10. The Newton dissertation was written shortly after the Simon Critical History was published in English.
Richard Porson was a major figure in the opposition to the authenticity of the verse. His theory of spurious origin involved Tertullian and Cyprian, and also the interpretation by Augustine which led to a marginal note.  And, in the Porson theory, that marginal note was in the Bible text used by the author of the Confession of Faith at the Council of Carthage of 484 AD."As to the introduction of the spurious words into the text, Porson supposes that Tertullian, in imitation of the phrase, I and my Father are one, had said of the three Persons of the Trinity, which Three are One; that Cyprian, adopting this application of the words from Tertullian, said boldly, of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, it is written, And these Three are One; that in the course of two centuries, when this interpretation had been expressly maintained by Augustin and others, a marginal note of this sort, Sicut tres sunt qui testimonium dant in Caelo, Pater,&c, crept into the text of a few copies; that such a copy was used by the author of the Confession which Victor, the historian of the Council convened by Hunneric, has preserved ; and that such another was used by the historian of the books de Trinitate. The life of Richard Porson, M. A.: professor of Greek in the University of Cambridge from 1792 to 1808 by John Selby Watson  Charles Forster responded that the mystical interpretation of the earthly witnesses arose through Augustine, and that Clement of Alexandria shows us the interpretation of verse 8 at the time of Cyprian. New Plea, Charles Forster, footnote p. 52-55 Porson also considered the Vulgate Prologue as spurious, a forgery not written by Jerome, and this Prologue was responsible for the entrance into the Vulgate. "... Latin copies had this verse in the eighth century. It is then that we suppose it to have crawled into notice on the strength of Pseudo-Jerome's recommendation."Richard Porson, Letters to Travis, 1829, p.61.
Johann Jakob Griesbach wrote his Diatribe in Locum 1 Joann V. 7, 8 in 1806, as an Appendix to his Critical Edition of the New Testament. In the Diatribe, Griesbach "expresses his conviction that the seventh verse rests upon the authority of Vigilius Tapsensis."Thomas Turton, A Vindication of the Literary Character of Richard Porson, 1824, p.124. Griesbach: "Igitur comma controversum septimum praecipue, ne dicam unice, nititur testimonio, fide et auctoritate Vigilii Tapsensis, et librorum huic attributurum auctori, ante quem nemo clare id excitavit."
The 1808 Improved Version, with Thomas Belsham contributing, followed Griesbach on the idea of Tapsensis authority, combined with enhancing the forgery intimations of Gibbon. Thus came the theory that the verse was a forgery by Virgilius Tapsensis. This emphasis on Tapsensis (Thapsus) was echoed by Unitarians of the 1800s, including Theophilus Lindsey, Abner Kneeland, and John Wilson.
John Oxlee, in his journal debate with Frederick Nolan, accused the African Prelates Vigilius Tapensis and Fulgentius Ruspensis of thrusting the verse into the Latin manuscripts.John Oxlee, On the Heavenly Witnesses, Christian Remembrancer 1822, p. 135
William Orme, in the Monthly Review, 1825, conjectured Augustine as the source. "it is probable that the verse originated in the interpretation of St. Augustine. It seems to have existed for some time on the margins of the Latin copies, in a kind of intermediate state, as something better than a mere dictum of Augustine, and yet not absolutely Scripture itself. By degrees it was received into the text, where it appears in by far the greater number of Latin manuscripts now in our hands."John Selby Watson The life of Richard Porson 1861, p. 73That this was written by Orme can be seen by his reference in Memoirs of the Controvery, 1830, where he refers to "the present writer...". Also the "learned Critic" and "learned reviewer", who had "triumphantly met" the arguments.
Scrivener allowed for the authenticity of the Cyprian citation as a reference to the verse being in Cyprian's Bible.  To allow for this, Scrivener's theory of the source and timing of an interpolation can not be late, and his scenario did not give estimated dates or any names responsible. "the disputed words...were originally brought into Latin copies in Africa from the margin, where they had been placed as a pious and orthodox gloss on v. 8: that from the Latin they crept into two or three late Greek codices, and thence into the printed Greek text, a place to which they had no rightful claim."Scrivener, Plain Introduction, pp. 461-462, 1861.
Joseph Barber Lightfoot, who similarly worked on the Revision, included Origen as part of the origin. "not in the first instance a deliberate forgery, but a comparatively innocent gloss .... the spirit and the water and the blood—a gloss which is given substantially by S. Augustine and was indicated before by Origen and Cyprian, and which first thrust itself into the text in some Latin MSS .."Joseph Barber Lightfoot, On a Fresh Revision of the English New Testament, p.25, 1871.
Brooke Foss Westcott had a theory of verse origin and development which said of the Augustine reference in the City of God - "Augustine supplies the word 'Verbum' which is required to 'complete the gloss'". Even in 1892, in the third edition of The epistles of St John: the Greek text, with notes and essays, when Westcott acknowledged the newly discovered Liber Apologeticus Priscillian reference with verbum, the Augustine Verbum/gloss assertion remained in his book. And the assertion "there is no evidence that it was found in the text of St John before the latter part of the 5th century" also remained, alongside "The gloss which had thus become an established interpretation of St John's words is first quoted as part of the Epistle in a tract of Priscillian (c 385)".
Joseph Pohle, after asking "how did the text of the three heavenly Witnesses find its way into the Vulgate? All explanations that have been advanced so far are pure guesswork."  concludes "the Comma Ioanneum was perhaps found in copies of the Latin Bible current in Africa as early as the third century", and then considered Cassiodorus as responsible for inserting the verse into the Vulgate. Pohle, like Scrivener, allows that the Cyprian citation may well indicate that the verse was in his Bible. Although Pohle calls the Council of Carthage the "main argument" for authenticity, about Cyprian he notes "It is, as Tischendorf has rightly observed, by far the weightiest proof for the Comma Ioanneum. But it does not prove decisively that St. Cyprian used a New Testament text which contained the "Comma"; and if it did, it would by no means follow that the verse was written by St. John." William Laurence Sullivan argues contra the position of Elie Philippe in La Science Catholique, 1889, p. 238 that the Cyprian citation is "perhaps even peremptory" (conclusive, decisive). Sullivan asserts that if Cyprian's New Testament contained the Comma, the "probable inference would simply be that the interpolation is older than we thought." And that anyway, "this passage of the great African doctor does not suffice to prove that I John v-7 existed in his day." New York Review, The Three Heavenly Witnesses p.182, 1907.
In the early 20th century Karl Künstle helped to popularize a theory that Priscillian of Ávila (c. 350-385) was the author of the Comma.Earlier than the Künstle paper, Abbott Ambrose Amelli "unearthed ancient documents by means of which he believes he has succeeded in tracing the interpolation to a Priscillianist and therefore heretical source ; but before he is permitted to publish his results he has to await the pleasure of the Roman Inquisition." Austin West, Abbe Loisy and the Roman Biblical Commission, Contemporary Review, p.504, 1902 Vol 81. Similarly Charles Briggs wrote that Abbe Martin and Dom Amelli had "more or less guessed and propounded,— that the 'Comma' was composed in Spain, in 390 a.d., by the Heresiarch Priscillian, to propagate his Pan-Christian Heresy; and that this gloss, slightly retouched, then found its way, in part rapidly, into the Latin New Testament."  Charles Augustus Briggs and Friedrich von Hügel, The Papal Commission and the Pentateuch, p. 60, 1906. An example of the warm reception this theory of direct interpolation by Priscillian initially received is Caspar René Gregory, who wrote it "appears to have been put into the New Testament by Priscillian" Biblical World, The Greek Text in 1611, p.260, 1911. William Laurence Sullivan opined that while "the Comma fits into the Trinitarian heresy of Priscillian", he was "notoriously clever at expressing subtle heresy in apparently Catholic phraseology" and "is about to gain another title to an unfortunate immortality as the inventor of the text of the three heavenly Witnesses." New York Review, The Three Heavenly Witnesses p.182, 1907. One problem with Priscillian interpolation theories was that they make Priscillian guilty of a transparent forgery. Biblical Latin specialist John Chapman reacted sharply to the Priscillian interpolation idea "I do not at all agree with him (Künstle) that Priscillian actually interpolated the passage himself. He could hardly in that case have been so foolish as to quote it in his apology knowing that it would be declared apocryphal. He must have found it in his Bible..." Notes on the early history of the Vulgate Gospels, p. 163 1908. The theory held that "Priscillian interpolated ... in the first epistle of John so as to justify in this way his unitarian theories. The text was then retouched in order to appear orthodox, and in this shape found its way into several Spanish documents."Léon Labauche, God and man; lectures on dogmatic theology, 1916 p. 43 This idea of a Priscillian origin for the Comma had a brief scholarship flourish and then quickly lost support in textual circles. The Priscillian citation had been recently published in 1889 by Georg Schepps. Before the 1883 publication of Liber Apologetics Priscillian was only known through the writings of his opponents.  In 1905 Karl Künstle published Das Comma Ioanneum:auf seine herkunft untersucht a book that proposed that "the insertion of the comma into the text of the Epistle is due to Priscillian himself", as summarized by Alan England Brooke.  Brooke references four difficulties with the Künstle theory cited in the 1909 paper by Ernest Babut., The International critical commentary on the Holy Scriptures, Alan England Brooke, 1912, p. 160. The Priscillian origin theory does show up in net articles today.
Alan England Brooke, while theorizing that "the growth of that gloss can be traced back at least as early as
Cyprian"Alan England Brooke, Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Johannine Epistles, p. 198, 1912 also placed the Theodulfian recension of the Vulgate, after 800 AD, as a prime point whereby the verse first gained traction into the Latin text-lines. "It is through the Theodulfian Recension of the Vulgate that the gloss first gained anything like wide acceptance".ibid p.163.
Adolf Harnack in Zur Textkritik und Christologie der Schriften des Johannes "argues that the comma johanneum is the post-augustinian revision of an old addition to the text".The Harvard theological review, Volume 15, 1922, p. 159
Raymond Brown expresses a theory of verse development in which the writings of Tertullian and Cyprian (the sections that proponents consider Comma allusions) represented the "thought process" involved, that gave rise to the Comma. The words of the Comma "appear among Latin writers in North Africa and Spain in the third century as a dogmatic reflection on and expansion of the 'three that testify': 'the Spirit' is the Father 4:24; 'the blood' is the Son; 'the water' is the Spirit (Jn 7:38-39)."Raymond Brown, The Gospel and Epistles of John: A Concise Commentary p.120, 1988.
Walter Thiele allows for a Greek origin of the Comma, before Cyprian. Raymond Brown summarizes: "Thiele, Beobachtungen 64-68, argues that the I John additions may have a Greek basis, for sometimes a plausible early chain can be constructed thus: Cyprian, Pseudo-Cyprian, Augustine, Pseudo-Augustine, Spanish Vulgate (especially Isidore of Seville and Theodolfus)."Raymond Brown, Epistles of John, p.130, 1982.
Church historian Jaroslav Pelikan expresses the common scholarly view that the words (apparently) crept into the Latin text of the New Testament during the Early Middle Ages, "possibly as one of those medieval glosses but were then written into the text itself by a careless copyist. Erasmus omitted them from his first edition; but when a storm of protest arose because the omission seemed to threaten the doctrine of the Trinity, he put them back in the third and later editions, whence they also came into the Textus Receptus, 'the received text'."Jaroslav Pelikan, Whose Bible Is It? A Short History of the Scriptures, Penguin Books Ltd, 2005, p. 15Since all scholars agree that the verse was in the Bible of Priscillian in the 4th century, references to 'medieval' for origin are anachronistic. e.g. In the Anchor Bible, Epistle of John(1982) p. 782, Raymond Brown writes that "The Vandal movements in the fifth century brought North Africa and Spain into close relationship, and the evidence listed above shows clearly that the Comma was known in those two regions between 380 and 550". This date contradicts the idea of a medieval gloss origin.
Most New Testament scholars today believe that the Comma was inserted into the Old Latin text based on a gloss to that text, with the original gloss dating to the 3rd or 4th century, as expressed with some qualifications by Bruce Metzger.Bruce Metzger writes: "Apparently the gloss arose when the original passage was understood to symbolize the Trinity (through the mention of three witnesses: the Spirit, the water, and the blood), an interpretation that may have been written first as a marginal note that afterwards found its way into the text." A Textual Commentary of the Greek New Testament (2002/1971), p. 648. The summary of Daniel Wallace is short, beginning in the 300s AD with an unspecified homily: "The reading seems to have arisen in a fourth century Latin homily in which the text was allegorized to refer to members of the Trinity.  From there, it made its way into copies of the Latin Vulgate, the text used by the Roman Catholic Church."The Textual Problem in 1 John 5:7-8In another paper, Daniel Wallace gives this explanation: "The passage made its way into our Bibles through political pressure, appearing for the first time in 1522, even though scholars then knew as they do now that it was not authentic. The early church did not know of this text..." Misquoting Jesus: The Story behind Who Changed the Bible and Why Christian Research Journal, 2006, vol 29, #3.
These theories generally consider the verse as not in the Bible of Cyprian. The acceptance of the possibility of Cyprian reading the verse in his Bible impels a more difficult conjecture of very early interpolation, essentially before the Arian and Sabellian doctrinal battles.  Yet it is those doctrinal battles which are generally given as supplying the motive for the proposed interpolation.

====Forgery====

Most opponents of the Comma as inauthentic view the verse as having arisen by a sequence of events involving scribal difficulties and error. Often this is a staged understanding, beginning with an interpretation placed as a margin commentary.  The margin note is later erroneously brought into the text by a scribe who mistakenly thought the margin note indicated a superior alternate reading or correction. Those types of proposed scenarios are based on the limitations inherent in laborious hand-copying and do not have to impugn motives.
By contrast, the accusations of deliberate textual tampering and forgery for doctrinal purposes are based on scribes making deliberate changes away from the original text. A number of writers have theories of direct forgery as the motive for the insertion of the Comma into the text.  Some of these theories were developed after the 1883 Priscillian discovery  and fingered Priscillian as the culprit.
Voltaire wrote that the verse was inserted at the time of Constantine. "Lactantius ... It was about this time that, among the very violent disputes on the Trinity, this famous verse was inserted in the First Epistle of St. John: “There are three that bear witness in earth—the word or spirit, the water, and the blood; and these three are one.”.Voltaire, A Philosophical Dictionary: from the French, Volume 6, 1824 edition, p. 290.  Voltaire mixed up the two verses, as noted by John Hey, in his Lectures in Divinity, Vol 2, 1st ed in 1797, Appendix, "Concerning the Genuineness of 1 John v 7" p 281.
The accusation against the verse by Edward Gibbon in 1781, while stating "the Scriptures themselves were profaned by their rash and sacrilegious hands" stops short of a direct accusation of forgery by also discussing marginal notes and allegorical interpretation. In response to Gibbon, George Travis noted the lack of forgery accusations before the Reformation-era debate. "throughout the vast series of one thousand and four hundred years, which intervened between the days of Praxeas, and the age of Erasmus, not a single author whether Patripassian, Cerinthian, Ebionite, Arian, Macedonian, or Sabellian, whether of the Greek or Latin, whether of the Eastern, or Western church— whether in Asia, Africa or Europe, hath ever taxed the various quotations of this verse, which have been set forth in the preceding pages, with interpolation or forgery. Such silence speaks, most emphatically speaks, in favor of the verse, now in dispute. George Travis, Letters to Edward Gibbon, 1785, p.319-320 The value of this opposing "evidence from silence" became a part of the verse debate, Richard Porson responding in his letters Letters to Mr. Archdeacon Travis'', 1790, p 372
In 1813, Unitarian Thomas Belsham accused the verse of being an "impious forgery...spurious and fictitious".Thomas Belsham: "every man of learning and inquiry knows, that the famous text 1 John v. 7. "There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one," is an impious forgery: and to them it appears to be little less than blasphemy, to retain this forgery in a book which is represented to be inspired ... Unitarians, therefore, are ... discarding what they discover and conscientiously believe to be spurious and fictitious, that they conceive that they are by this conduct expressing the greatest possible veneration for them, and the unspeakable value which they set upon the pure, unadulterated Word of God." An address to the inquirers after Christian truth, 1813, p.4-5. Edward Nares replied to the Belsham claim "it is very rudely called 'an impious forgery,' which it has certainly never been proved to be." Remarks on the Version of the NT edited by the Unitarians, 1814, p. 248. Earlier, in 1804, the editor of the works of Ebionite Joseph Priestley, John Towill Rutt, called the verse a "pious fraud", Works, Vol 14, 1804, p.34 although the wording of Priestley himself had been measured and not of that accusatory nature. The 1808 'Improved Version' had the equivocal "Virgilius Tapsensis .. by him it is suspected to have been forged.", an accusation discarded when the Priscillian citation was discovered. In Calm Inquiry in 1817, Belsham had the verse as a "palpable forgery"A calm inquiry into the Scripture doctrine concerning the person of Christ, p. 333, 1817. and his student, Unitarian minister Israel Worsley, for more emphasis wrote of "a gross and a palpable forgery".Israel Worsley, An enquiry into the origin of Christmas-Day, 1820, p.66. The British Review reviewed the controversy and spoke of such phrases as "tokens of intellectual weakness ... culpable imbecility of mind". The Unitarian Controversy, 1821, p. 165.In the latter 1800s, notable was Robert Blackley Drummond, biographer of Erasmus.  Drummond referred to a "notable forgery" in Erasmus, his Life and Character, p. 318, 1873. And his The text concerning the Three Heavenly Witnesses: An interpolation was published by the British and Foreign Unitarian Association in 1862. Drummond also wrote in the Theological Review, including comments on the New Plea by Charles Forster. The editor of the Theological Review was Charles Beard, son of John Relly Beard. John in the 1870 Theological Review listed ten Unitarian New Testaments, all without the verse, and used the phrase "manifest forgery".
For the next decades, the forgery accusation was generally made outside the context of textual analysis, usually by Unitarians and freethinkers, such as Robert Taylor.Robert Taylor: "admitted on all hands to be forgeries ... Acts xx. 28.—1 Timothy iii. 10.—1 John v. 7.—These are admitted to be of the utmost importance, bearing on the most essential doctrines, yet are wilful and wicked interpolations.." The diegesis: being a discovery of the origin, evidences, and early history of Christianity, p.421, 1829. See also Syntagma of the Evidences, p.44, 1828 author of the Manifesto of the Christian Evidence Society. Everard Bierer took this approach "This bold interpolation shows conclusively what Trinitarian
fanaticism in the Dark Ages would do, and leaves us to imagine what renderings it probably gave to many other texts, and especially somewhat obscure ones on the same subject."Everard Bierrer, The Evolution of Religions, p. 290, 1906.
In 1888, Philip Schaff, church historian who worked on the American committee of the Revision, brought the accusation to the mainstream, "Erasmus .. omitted in his Greek Testament the forgery of the three witnesses".Philip Schaff. History of the Christian Church. A.D. 1-311., 1888, p. 412.
Charles Taze Russell in 1899 made his accusation specific and the forgery late: "the spurious words were no doubt interpolated by some over-zealous monk, who felt sure of the (Trinity) doctrine himself, and thought that the holy spirit had blundered in not stating the matter in the Scriptures: his intention, no doubt, was to help God and the truth out of a difficulty by perpetrating a fraud."Charles Taze Russell The Fact and Philophy of the Atonement, 1899, p. 61.
Frederick Cornwallis Conybeare was a textual scholar who wrote in 1910 a section specifically about "famous orthodox corruptions", including  "The text of the three witnesses a doctrinal forgery".F C. Conybeare,  of New Testament Criticism'', 1910, pp. 91-98. (title in Table of Contents). The section on the heavenly witnesses was followed by his accusation that "in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit" in Matthew 28:19 had similarly been "revised and interpolated by orthodox copyists" and that "we can trace their perversions of the text...expose the fraud." Conybeare also took textual positions that were related to his unusual position on the virgin birth.
Preserved Smith in 1920 called the verse "a Latin forgery of the fourth century, possibly due to Priscillian".Preserved Smith, The age of the reformation, 1920, p.564
Gordon Campbell, author of Bible: The Story of the King James Version 1611-2011 asserts that the Comma is "a medieval forgery inserted into Bibles to support a trinitarian doctrine that had been erected on a disconcertingly thin biblical base.".Gordon Campbell and Thomas N. Corns, John Milton: Life, Work, and Thought, 2008, p. 378. Similar in God: A Literary and Pictorial History, 2003.
The popularity of the modern "orthodox corruption" view of Bart Ehrman has increased the forgery claims, especially on the Internet.  Ehrman calls the Comma "the most obvious instance of a theologically motivated corruption in the entire manuscript tradition of the New Testament. Nonetheless, in my judgment, the comma's appearance in the tradition can scarcely be dated prior to the trinitarian controversies that arose after the period under examination."Bart Ehrman, The Orthodox Corruption of Scripture, 1996, p. 45. Ehrman posits his other corruptions as around the 2nd century, so Ehrman is considering the Comma as exceptional and placing the "appearance" of the Comma in the 300s or 400s, close to Priscillian's verse usage and citation as from John.

===Doctrinal issues, Trinitarianism, Unitarianism, Arianism===

Theories of both authenticity and spuriousness often interweave doctrinal and Christology concerns as part of their analysis of 'Origins', how the verse developed and was either dropped or added to Bible lines.
John Guyse gave a summary in the Practical Expositor that was a type of model for many of the later doctrinal expositions by those defending authenticity from a Trinitarian perspective.
Often those who oppose authenticity take the position that the Comma was included in the  Textus Receptus (TR) compiled by Erasmus of Rotterdam because of its doctrinal importance in supporting Trinitarianism. The passage is often viewed as an explicit reference to the Trinity of Father, Son and Holy Spirit, with notable exceptions.Exceptions to this common understanding include Johannes Bugenhagen (1485-1558), Pastor and student of Martin Luther, who called the verse an "Arian blasphemy", see Franz Posset. Hugo Grotius (1583-1645) in his NT Annotations considered the verse an Arian addition Neque vero Arianis ablatas voces quasdam, sed potius additas. And John Jones (Ben David) was a non-Trinitarian who defended the verse in the Monthly Review (1826). Others have considered the historical inclusion/omission debate to be far more nuanced as well. Edward Freer Hills (1912-1981) in the King James Version Defended Ch. 8, 1956 hypothesized that the verse may have been allowed to drop from the Greek line by Trinitarians who saw the verse as favorable to Sabellianism. See also Frederick Nolan (1784-1864) in Ch 6 of An Inquiry into the Integrity of the Greek Vulgate 1815. Nolan offers an explanation with similarities to the later Hills conjecture, including: "the orthodox were so far from having any inducement to appeal to this text, that they had every reason to avoid an allusion to it, as it apparently favored the tenets of their opponents ... Sabellianism ... absolutely derives support from the text of the heavenly witnesses".Inquiry, p.536-538 And "the preference shewn by the orthodox to the text of the earthly witnesses, over that of the heavenly, needs no palliation from the circumstance of the one text being unquestioned, and the other of doubtful authority, in the age when those points were debated." ibid p.551 Nolan thus claimed that "the negative argument adduced against 1 John v. 7. derives its entire strength from an inattention to the true state of that controversy, and the period for which it prevailed." ibid p.543 Thomas Turton, opposing verse authenticity, used this Nolan argument against the position of supporter Thomas Burgess, A Vindication of the Literary Character 1827, p. 257. And Henry Thomas Armstrong (1836-1898) in Chapter 4 of The three witnesses, the disputed text in st. John p. 29-37 (1883) offers an analysis of why orthodox Trinitarians could see the verse as unhelpful in doctrinal discussions, concluding that "to have arrayed the verse in the lines of their defence would have been simply a blunder in advocacy" (p. 37). The early usage by the non-Trinitarian Priscillian is also discordant to the common understanding, and led to the Karl Künstle theory that the verse was an non-Trinitarian Unionite  interpolation.
The issue of whether Trinitarian doctrine is supported by, and dependent on, the heavenly witnesses is an ongoing dispute. Theophilus Lindsay, a Unitarian who opposed the authenticity of the verse, wrote:
And some defenders of authenticity place doctrinal Christology issues as only auxiliary or secondary, considering the primary issue to be the integrity of scripture.  Nathaniel Ellsworth Cornwall wrote:

==Evidences==

===Absence in early authors===

The following early church writers are those whose utter silence on the Comma has been given special note by opponents of authenticity;  Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, Treatise on Rebaptism, Jerome, Augustine, Leo, also Origen, Cyprian and Athanasius. 

====Greek and Latin silences====

There are many Greek and Latin writers, also Syriac, who can be referenced as not showing awareness of the Comma. Adam Clarke in 1823 Observations on the Three Heavenly Witnesses compiled a Greek and Latin list of those he considered to be silent on the verse.  The writers require individual examination, and the significance of the verse evidence from silence by church writers varies. In the Principles of Textual Criticism, 1848, pp. 503–507 John Scott Porter wrote similarly, with information about the specific writings of the omitters. [ref]An example from Porter, referencing the 1707 analysis of John Mill: "Mill is equally explicit with regard to many of the Fathers
of the ancient Latin Church; for example, he admits that the following knew nothing of the three Heavenly Witnesses; the Author of the Treatise on the Baptism of Heretics, usually printed with the works of Cyprian; Novatian, in his book upon the Trinity; Hilary, who in his Twelve Books upon the Trinity, and other treatises against the Arians, accumulates together a great many quotations out of the sacred books, often less suitable to his purpose, but keeps a deep silence upon this text; Lucifer of Cagliari, in his book against Intercourse with Heretics; Phoeobadius in his book against the Arians; Ambrose, in his manifold writings against Arianism, in which he quotes the 6th and 8th verses at full length, but omits the 7th altogether; Jerome, who in his acknowledged works, never makes any mention of this clause. It is indeed insinuated that this passage was to be found in all the Greek MSS. though absent from all the Latin ones, in a Prologue to the Catholic Epistles, which pretends to have been written by Jerome; but Mill, Bengel, and others confess this prologue to be a forgery. Faustinus takes no
notice of the text in his work upon the Trinity against the Arians; Augustine, in his book against Maximin the Arian, turns every stone to find arguments from the Scriptures to prove that the Spirit is God, ... Eucherius of Lyons, in his Questions on the New Testament, repeats the same mystical explanation; Facundus of Hermiana, gives a similar gloss, and says the passage was so understood by Cyprian; Leo the Great, Junilius, Cerealis, and Bede, pass the 7th verse unmentioned.[/ref]

====Clement of Alexandria====

The comma is absent from an extant fragment of Clement of Alexandria (c. 200), through Cassiodorus (6th century), with homily style verse references from 1 John, including verse 1 John 5:6 and 1 John 5:8 without verse 7, the heavenly witnesses.
Another reference that is studied is from Clement's Prophetic Extracts:
is seen by someBengel, John Gill, Ben David and Thomas Burgess as allusion evidence that Clement was familiar with the verse.

====Tertullian====

Tertullian, in Against Praxeas (c. 210), supports a Trinitarian view by quoting John 10:30:
Tertullian's use of tres unum sunt has been seen by many commentators as supporting authenticity, a textual connection to 1 John 5:7. "It appears to me very clear that Tertullian is quoting I. John v. 7. in the passage now under consideration."Arthur Cleveland Coxe, Latin Christianity: Its Founder, Tertullian 1903, p.631 English on p. 621, left column, bottom. While many other commentators have argued against any Comma evidence here, most emphatically John Kaye's, "far from containing an allusion to 1 Jo. v. 7, it furnishes most decisive proof that he knew nothing of the verse".John Kaye, The Ecclesiastical History of the Second and Third Centuries, Illustrated from the Writings of Tertullian 1826. p. 550. Proponents of authenticity emphasize the corroborative nature of examining the evidences of the time as one unit, including the Cyprian quotes and the Old Latin mss. "... the testimony of these early fathers must stand and fall together; as St. Cyprian obviously follows his master Tertullian."Nolan, Inquiry, p. 297 Although Nolan does study the Praxeas citation in some depth independently. Daniel McCarthy, also referencing the views of Wetstein and Nicholas Wiseman, offers an exegesis that the three heavenly witnesses are implied by context.Daniel McCarthy, Epistles and Gospels of the Sunday, 1866, p.514. Georg Strecker comments cautiously "An initial echo of the Comma Johanneum occurs as early as Tertullian Adv. Pax. 25.1 (CChr 2.1195; written ca. 215). In his commentary on John 16:14 he writes that the Father, Son, and Paraclete are one (unum), but not one person (unus). However, this passage cannot be regarded as a certain attestation of the Comma Johanneum."
References from Tertullian in De Pudicitia 21:16 (On Modesty):
and De Baptismo:
have also been presented as verse allusions.Burgess, Tracts on the Divinity of Christ, 1820, pp.333-334. Irish Ecclesiastical Review, Traces of the Text of the Three Heavenly Witnesses, 1869 p. 274]

====Treatise on Rebaptism====

The Treatise on Rebaptism, placed as a 3rd-century writing and transmitted with Cyprian's works, has two sections that directly refer to the earthly witnesses, and thus has been used against authenticity by Nathaniel Lardner, Alfred Plummer and others.  However, because of the context being water baptism and the precise wording being "et itsi tres unum sunt", the Matthew Henry Commentary uses this as evidence for Cyprian speaking of the heavenly witnesses in Unity of the Church. And Arthur Cleveland Coxe and Nathaniel Cornwall consider the evidence as suggestively positive. Westcott and Hort also are positive. After approaching the Tertullian and Cyprian references negatively, "morally certain that they would have quoted these words had they known them" Westcott writes about the Rebaptism Treatise:

====Jerome====

The Catholic Encyclopedia of 1910 asserts that Jerome "does not seem to know the text".Catholic Encyclopedia Vol 8 of 15, Epistles of St John, Walter Drum, 1910 pp. 435-438, Chief Editor Charles George Herbermann. Online HTML for this section of the Catholic Encyclopedia at newadvent.org.  "Published 1910. New York: Robert Appleton Company. Nihil Obstat, October 1, 1910. Remy Lafort, S.T.D., Censor. Imprimatur. +John Cardinal Farley, Archbishop of New York". This is based on the theory that the Vulgate Prologue is not from Jerome.  Proponents of authenticity also contend that Jerome would be aware of the writings of Marcus Celedensis and Phoebadius of Agen.

=====Marcus Celedensis=====

Coming down to us with the writings of Jerome we have the statement of faith attributed to Marcus Celedensis, friend and correspondent to Jerome, presented to Cyrillus:

=====Phoebadius of Agen=====

Similarly, Jerome wrote of Phoebadius of Agen in his Lives of Illustrious Men. "Phoebadius, bishop of Agen, in Gaul, published a book Against the Arians. There are said to be other works by him, which I have not yet read. He is still living, infirm with age."Jerome, Lives of Illustrious Men, translated by Ernest Cushing Richardson, footnote: "Bishop 353, died about 392". William Hales looks at Phoebadius: "Phoebadius, A. D. 359, in his controversy with the Arians, Cap, xiv. writes,"
"Here, 1 John v. 7, is evidently connected, as a scriptural argument, with John xiv. 16."William Hales, Inspector, Antijacobin Review, Sabellian Controversy, Letter XII 1816, p. 590. Latin " Denique Dominus: Petam, inquit, a Patre meo et alium advocatum dabit vobis (Ibid., 16). Sic alius a Filio Spiritus, sicut a Patre Filius. Sic tertia in Spiritu, ut in Filio secunda persona: unus tamen Deus omnia, tres unum sunt. Phoebadius, Liber Contra Arianos 

Griesbach argued that Phoebadius was only making an allusion to TertullianGriesbach, Diatribe, p. 700, and his unusual explanation was commented on by Reithmayer.Introduction historique et critique aux libres de Nouveau Testament 1861, p.564.In dismissing Phoebadius in this fashion, Griesbach was following Porson, whose explanation began, "Phoebadius plainly imitates Tertullian...and therefore, is not a distinct evidence", Letters to Archdeacon Travis, 1790, p. 247.

====Augustine====

Augustine of Hippo has been said to be completely silent on the matter, which has been taken as evidence that the comma did not exist as part of the epistle's text in his time.Catholic Encyclopedia: "The silence of the great and voluminous Augustine and the variation in form of the text in the African Church are admitted facts that militate against the canonicity of the three witnesses." This argumentum ex silentio has been contested by other scholars, including Fickermann and Metzger."The silence of Augustine, contrary to prevailing opinion, cannot be cited as evidence against the genuineness of the Comma. He may indeed have known it" Annotated bibliography of the textual criticism of the New Testament p. 113 Bruce Manning Metzger, 1955. Metzger was citing S. Augustinus gegen das Comma Johanneum? by Norbert Fickermann, 1934, who considers evidence from a 12th-century Regensburg manuscript that Augustine specifically avoided referencing the verse directly.  The manuscript note contrasts the inclusion position of Jerome in the Vulgate Prologue with the preference for removal by Augustine. This confirms that there was awareness of the Greek and Latin ms. distinction and that some scribes preferred omission. Raymond Brown writes: "Fickermann points to a hitherto unpublished eleventh-century text which says that Jerome considered the Comma to be a genuine part of 1 John--clearly a memory of the Pseudo-Jerome Prologue mentioned above. But the text goes on to make this claim: 'St. Augustine, on the basis of apostolic thought and on the authority of the Greek text, ordered it to be left out.'" Epistles of John, 1982, p. 785.  In addition, some Augustine references have been seen as verse allusions. Augustine scholar Edmund Hill says about a reference in The Trinity - Book IX that "this allusion of Augustine's suggests that it had already found its way into his text".
The City of God section, from Book V, Chapter 11:
has often been referenced as based upon the scripture verse of the heavenly witnesses.e.g. Franz Anton Knittel, Thomas Burgess, Arthur-Marie Le Hir, Francis Patrick Kenrick, Charles Forster and Pierre Rambouillet George Strecker acknowledges the City of God reference: "Except for a brief remark in De civitate Dei (5.11; CChr 47.141), where he says of Father, Word, and Spirit that the three are one. Augustine († 430) does not cite the Comma Johanneum. But it is certain on the basis of the work Contra Maximum 2.22.3 (PL 42.794-95) that he interpreted 1 John 5:7-8 in trinitarian terms." 

Similarly, Homily 10 on the first Epistle of John has been asserted as an allusion to the verse:
Contra Maximinum has received attention especially for these two sections, especially the allegorical interpretation.
John Scott Porter writes "Augustine, in his book against Maximin the Arian, turns every stone to find arguments from the Scriptures to prove that tho Spirit is God, and that the Three Persons are the same in substance, but does not
adduce this text; nay, clearly shows that he knew nothing of it, for he repeatedly employs the 8th verse, and says, that by the Spirit, the Blood, and the Water—the persons of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, arc signified (see Contr. Maxim, cap. xxii.)"Principles of Textual Criticism, p. 506, 1820.
Thomas Joseph Lamy offers a different view based on the context and Augustine's purpose.Thomas Joseph Lamy The Decision of the Holy Office on the "Comma Joanneum" pp.449-483 American ecclesiastical review, 1897. Similarly Thomas Burgess.Thomas Burgess, A vindication of I John, V. 7, p.46, 1821. And Norbert Fickermann's reference and scholarship supports the idea that Augustine may have deliberately bypassed a direct quote of the heavenly witnesses.

====Leo====

In an epistle to Flavianus that was read at the Council of Chalcedon, Oct. 10, 451 AD,The Acts of the Council of Chalcedon, Vol 3, The Second Session, pp. 22-23, 2005, Richard Price, editor and published in Greek, the usage of 1 John 5 by Leo the Great (Pope Leo) has Leo moving in discourse from verse six to verse eight:
This epistle from Leo was considered by Richard Porson to be the "strongest proof" of verse inauthenticity "... the strongest proof that this verse is spurious may be drawn from the Epistle of Leo the Great to Flavianus upon the Incarnation."Richard Porson, Letters to Archdeacon Travis 1790 p.378 and went along with Porson's assertion that the verse was slow to enter into the Latin lines. Porson asserted that the verse "remained a rude, unformed mass, and was not completely licked into shape till the end of the tenth century."ibid p. 401 In response, Thomas Burgess points out that the context of Leo's argument would not call for the 7th verse. And that the verse was referenced in a fully formed manner centuries earlier than Porson's claim, at the time of Fulgentius and the Council of Carthage.Thomas Burgess, An introduction to the controversy on the disputed verse of st. John, 1835, p. xxvi And Burgess pointed out that there were multiple confirmations that the verse was in the Latin Bibles of Leo's day. Burgess argued, ironically, that the fact that Leo could move from verse 6 to 8 for argument context is, in the bigger picture, favorable to authenticity. "Leo's omission of the Verse is not only counterbalanced by its actual existence in contemporary copies, but the passage of his Letter is, in some material respects, favourable to the authenticity of the Verse, by its contradiction to some assertions confidently urged against the Verse by its opponents, and essential to their theory against it."ibid p.xxxi Today, with the discovery of additional Old Latin evidences in the 1800s, the discourse of Leo is rarely referenced as a significant evidence against verse authenticity.

===Early Church Writer evidences===

====Cyprian of Carthage====

=====Unity of the Church=====

The 3rd-century Church father Cyprian (c. 200-258), in writing on the Unity of the Church, Treatise I section 6 quoted John 10:30 and another scriptural spot:
The Catholic Encyclopedia concludes "Cyprian...seems undoubtedly to have had it in mind...".Et iterum de Patre et Filio et Spiritu Sancto scriptum est—Et hi tres unum sunt. Cyprian, De Unitate Ecclesiæ (On the Unity of the Church) IV. "Epistles of Saint John", Catholic Encyclopedia. Against this view, Daniel B. Wallace writes that since Cyprian does not quote the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit "this in the least does not afford proof that he knew of such wording".While mentioning the usage of Son instead of Word as a possible argument against Cyprian awareness of the Comma, Raymond Brown points out that Son "is an occasional variant in the text of the Comma" and gives the example of Fulgentius referencing "Son" in Contra Fabrianum and "Word" in Reponsio Contra Arianos, Epistles of John p. 784, 1982. And the fact that Cyprian did not quote the "exact wording ... indicates that a Trinitarian interpretation was superimposed on the text by Cyprian".Daniel B. Wallace, "The Comma Johanneum and Cyprian". In his position against Cyprian knowing of the Comma, Wallace is in agreement with the earlier critical edition of the New Testament (NA26 and UBS3) which considered Cyprian a witness against the Comma. This can be seen in The Greek New Testament(1966) UBS p. 824 by Kurt Aland.  In 1983 the UBS Preface p.x announced plans for a "thorough revision of the textual apparatus, with special emphasis upon evidence from the ancient versions, the Diatessaron, and the Church Fathers." The latest edition of UBS4 updated many early church writer references and now has Cyprian for Comma inclusion. This citation is in parenthesis, which is given the meaning that while a citation of a Father supports a reading, still it "deviates from it in minor details" UBS4, p. 36.
The Cyprian citation, dating to more than a century before any extant Epistle of John manuscripts and before the Arian controversies that are often considered pivotal in verse addition/omission debate, remains a central focus of Comma research and textual apologetics.  The Scrivener view is often discussed.[ref]Scrivener, while opposing verse authenticity, wrote in Plain Introduction in 1861 "it is surely safer and more candid to admit that Cyprian read v. 7 in his copies, than to resort to the explanation of Facundus, that the holy Bishop was merely putting on v. 8 a spiritual meaning". And then Scrivener placed mystical interpretation as the root of Comma formation "although we must acknowledge that it was in this way v. 7 obtained a place, first in the margin, then in the text of the Latin copies...mystical interpretation". In the 1883 edition Scrivener wrote "It is hard to believe that 1 John v. 7, 8 was not cited by Cyprian". Thus, Scrivener would be taking the position of a mystical interpretation by scribes unknown, working through the margin and later adding to the text, all before Cyprian. "they were originally brought into Latin copies in Africa from the margin, where they had been placed as a pious and orthodox gloss on ver. 8" p.654.  Under this possible scenario the Comma "was known and received in some places, as early as the second or third century" (p. 652 1883-ed) which, in the Scrivener textual economy, would be analogous to Acts 8:37.  Acts 8:37 has undisputed early citations by Irenaeus and Cyprian and yet is considered by Scrivener and most modern theorists as inauthentic.  Despite allowing an early textual formation for the Unity of the Church citation,  Scrivener quoted approvingly negative views of the Tertullian and Cyprian Jubaianum references. Scrivener also quoted Tischendorf about the weightiness of the Cyprian referencing gravissimus est Cyprianus de eccles. unitate 5.
[/ref] Westcott and Hort assert: "Tert and Cyp use language which renders it morally certain that they would have quoted these words had they known them; Cyp going so far as to assume a reference to the Trinity in the conclusion of v. 8"Westcott and Hort The New Testament in the Original Greek, p. 104, 1881.[ref]Bruce Metzger, who is used as the main source by many writers in recent decades, ignores the references entirely: "the passage ... is not found (a) in the Old Latin in its early form (Tertullian Cyprian Augustine)", A textual commentary on the Greek New Testament, p. 717, 1971, and later editions. James White references Metzger and writes about the possibility that "Cyprian .. could just as well be interpreting the three witnesses of 1 John 5:6 as a Trinitarian reference" A Bit More on the Comma 3/16/2006(White means 5:8). White is conceptually similar to the earlier Raymond Brown section: "There is a good chance that Cyprian's second citation, like the first (Ad Jubianum), is Johannine and comes from the OL text of I John 5:8, which says, "And these three are one," in reference to the Spirit, the water, and the blood. His application of it to the divine trinitarian figures need not represent a
knowledge of the Comma, but rather a continuance of the reflections of Tertullian combined with a general patristic tendency to invoke any scriptural group of three as symbolic of or applicable to the Trinity. In other words, Cyprian may exemplify the thought process that gave rise to the Comma." In a footnote Brown acknowledges "It has been argued seriously by Thiele and others that Cyprian knew the Comma". Epistles of John p. 784, 1982.[/ref]
In the 20th century, Lutheran scholar Francis Pieper wrote in Christian Dogmatics emphasizing the antiquity and significance of the reference.Two Francis Pieper extracts: "In our opinion the decision as to the authenticity or the spuriousness of these words depends on the understanding of certain words of Cyprian (p. 340)... Cyprian is quoting John 10:30. And he immediately adds: ‘Et iterum de Patre et Filio et Spiritu Sancto scriptum est: “Et tres unum sunt”’ (“and again it is written of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost: 'And the Three are One’”) Now, those who assert that Cyprian is here not quoting the words 1 John 5:7, are obliged to show that the words of Cyprian: ‘Et tres unum sunt’ applied to the three Persons of the Trinity, are found elsewhere in the Scriptures than 1 John 5. Griesbach counters that Cyprian is here not quoting from Scripture, but giving his own allegorical interpretation of the three witnesses on earth. "The Spirit, the water, and the blood; and these three agree in one." That will hardly do. Cyprian states distinctly that he is quoting Bible passages, not only in the words: ‘I and the Father are one,’ but also in the words: ‘And again it is written of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost.’ These are, in our opinion, the objective facts.” p.341 (1950 English edition). Similarly, Elie Philippe wrote "Le témoignage de saint Cyprien est précieux, peut-être même péremptoire dans la question." (The testimony of St. Cyprian is precious, perhaps even peremptory to the question.) La Science Catholique, 1889, p. 238. Frequently commentators have seen Cyprian as having the verse in his Latin Bible, even if not directly supporting and commenting on verse authenticity. .Henry Donald Maurice Spence, in Plumptre's Bible Educator wrote ".. there is little doubt that Cyprian, before the middle of the third century, knew of the passage and quoted it as the genuine words of St. John." James Bennett, in The Theology of the Early Christian Church: Exhibited in Quotations from the Writers of the First Three Centuries, with Reflections 41, p.136, 1841, wrote "the disputed text in John's First Epistle, v. 7, is quoted ... Jerome seems to have been falsely charged with introducing the disputed words, without authority, into the Vulgate; for Cyprian had read them in a Latin version, long before." Bennett also sees the "probability is strengthened" that the Tertullian reference is from his Bible. And Bennett rejects the Griesbach "allegorised the eighth verse" attempt "for they (Tertullian and Cyprian) here argue, as from express testimonies of Scripture, without any hint of that allegorical interpretation which, it must be confessed, the later writers abundantly employ". And the most emphatic position is taken by the modern Cyprian scholar, Ezio Gallicet of the University of Turin, in this book on Cyprian's Unity of the Church, La Chiesa: Sui cristiani caduti nella persecuzione ; L'unità della Chiesa cattolica p. 206, 1997. Gallicet, after referencing the usual claims of an interpolation from Caspar René Gregory and Rudolf Bultmann, wrote: "Dal modo in cui Cipriano cita, non sembra che si possano avanzare dubbi: egli conosceva il « comma giovanneo ». (Colloquially .. "there is no doubt about it, the Comma Johanneum was in Cyprian's Bible".) And some writers have seen the denial of the verse in the Bible of Cyprian as worthy of special note and humor. Arthur Cleveland Coxe, annotating Cyprian in the early church writings edition, wrote of the positions denying Cyprian referring the Bible verse in Unity of the Church, as the "usual explainings away" Ante-Nicene Fathers p.418, 1886. And Nathaniel Ellis Cornwall referred to the logic behind attempts to deny Cyprian's usage of the verse (Cornwall looks closely at Porson, Lange and Tischendorf) as "astonishing feats of sophistical fencing". The Genuineness of I John v. 7 p. 638, 1874.

=====Ad Jubaianum (Epistle 73)=====

The second, lesser reference from Cyprian that has been involved in the verse debate is from Ad Jubaianum 23.12. Cyprian while discussing baptism writes:
Knittel emphasizes that Cyprian would be familiar with the Bible in Greek as well as Latin. "Cyprian understood Greek. He read Homer, Plato, Hermes Trismegiatus and Hippocrates... he translated into Latin the Greek epistle written to him by Firmilianus...".Franz Anton Knittel New Criticisms on the Celebrated Text 1785 p. 34
UBS-4 has its entry for text inclusion as (Cyprian).

====Ps-Cyprian====

The Hundredfold Reward for Martyrs and Ascetics: De centesima, sexagesimal tricesimaPhilip Sellew, Critica Et Philologica, 2001, p. 94
speaks of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit as "three witnesses" and was passed down with the Cyprian corpus. This was only first published in 1914 and thus does not show up in the historical debate. UBS-4 includes this in the apparatus as (Ps-Cyprian). The use of parentheses is described as "these witnesses attest the readings in question, but that they also exhibit certain negligible variations which do not need to be described in detail." Kurt Aland, The Text of the New Testament, 1995, p. 243.

====Origen and Athanasius====

Those who see Cyprian as negative evidence assert that other church writers, such as Athanasius of Alexandria and Origen,Origen, discussing water baptism in his commentary on the Gospel of John, references only verse 8 the earthly witnesses: "And it agrees with this that the disciple John speaks in his epistle of the spirit, and the water, and the blood, as being one." never quoted or referred to the passage, which they would have done if the verse was in the Bibles of that era. The contrasting position is that there are in fact such references, and that "evidences from silence" arguments, looking at the extant early church writer material, should not be given much weight as reflecting absence in the manuscripts—with the exception of verse-by-verse homilies, which were uncommon in the Ante-Nicene era.

=====Origen Scholium on Psalm 123:2=====

In the scholium on Psalm 123 attributed to Origen is the commentary:
This has been considered by many commentators, including the translation source Nathaniel Ellsworth Cornwall, as an allusion to verse 7.The Church Review p. 625-641, 1874., The Genuineness of I John v. 7, Scholium on pp.634-635 Ellsworth especially noted the Richard Porson comment in response to the evidence of the Psalm commentary: "The critical chemistry which could extract the doctrine of the Trinity from this place must have been exquisitely refining".Richard Porson, Letters to Mr. Archdeacon Travis, p.234, 1790. Fabricius wrote about the Origen wording "ad locum 1 Joh v. 7 alludi ab origene non est dubitandum".Codex Apocryphus Novi Testamenti, p.544 first published in 1703.

=====Disputation of Athanasius with Arius at the Council of Nicea, Ps-Athanasius=====

Traditionally, Athanasius was considered to lend support to the authenticity of the verse, one reason being the Disputation with Arius at the Council of Nicea which circulated with the works of Athanasius, where is found:
Today, many scholars consider this a later work Pseudo-Athanasius, perhaps by Maximus the Confessor. Charles Forster in New Plea argues for the writing as stylistically Athanasius. In modern times, scholars on early church writings outside the textual battles are more likely to see the work as from Athanasius, or an actual account of an Athanasius-Arius debate. Examples are John Williams Proudfit Remarks on the history, structure, and theories of the Apostles' Creed 1852, p.58 and George Smeaton, The Doctrine of the Holy Spirit, 1882, p. 272 While the author and date are debated, this is a Greek reference directly related to the doctrinal Trinitarian-Arian controversies, and one that purports to be an account of Nicea when those doctrinal battles were raging. The reference was given in UBS-3 as supporting verse inclusion, yet was removed from UBS-4 for reasons unknown. 

The Synopsis of Scripture, often ascribed to Athanasius, has also been referenced as indicating awareness of the Comma.

====Priscillian and the Expositio Fidei====

=====Priscillian of Avila=====

The earliest quotation which some scholars consider a direct reference to the heavenly witnesses from the First Epistle of John is from the Spaniard Priscillian c. 380.
Theodor Zahn calls this "the earliest quotation of the passage which is certain and which can be definitely dated (circa 380)",Introduction to the New Testament, Vol. 3, 1909. a view expressed by Westcott, Brooke, Metzger and others. Westcott comments "The gloss which had thus become an established interpretation of St John's words is first quoted as part of the Epistle in a tract of Priscillian (c 385)" The Epistles of St. John p. 203, 1892.  Alan England Brooke "The earliest certain instance of the gloss being quoted as part of the actual text of the Epistle is in the Liber Apologeticus (? a.d. 380) of Priscillian" The Epistles of St. John, p.158, 1912. And Bruce Metzger "The earliest instance of the passage being quoted as a part of the actual text of the Epistle is in a fourth century Latin treatise entitled Liber Apologeticus". Textual Commentary on the Greek New Testament, p.717, 1971.  Similar to these are William Sullivan, John Pohle, John Seldon Whale, F. F. Bruce, Ian Howard Marshall and others.
And Georg Strecker adds context: "The oldest undoubted instance is in Priscillian Liber apologeticus I.4 (CSEL 18.6). Priscillian was probably a Sabellianist or Modalist, whose principal interest would have in the closing statement about the heavenly witnesses (“and these three, the Father, the Word, the Holy Spirit, are one”). Here he found his theological opinions confirmed: that the three persons of the Trinity are only modes or manners of appearance of the one God. This observation caused some interpreters to suppose that Priscillian himself created the Comma Johanneum. However, there are signs of the Comma Johanneum, although no certain attestations, even before Priscillian...".Georg Strecker, The Johannine Letters (Hermeneia); Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1996. ‘Excursus: The Textual Tradition of the “Comma Johanneum”’. In the early 1900s the Karl Künstle theory of Priscillian origination and interpolation was popular: "The verse is an interpolation, first quoted and perhaps introduced by Priscillian (a.d. 380) as a pious fraud to convince doubters of the doctrine of the Trinity."Preserved Smith Erasmus, A Study Of His Life, Ideals And Place In History, p.165, 1st ed. 1923. However, Priscillian is generally considered as non-Trinitarian. The Künstle idea was more nuanced. William Edie summarizes "To Priscillian, therefore, in all probability, must be attributed the origin of the gloss in this its original and heretical form. Afterwards it was brought into harmony with the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity by the omission of the words in Christo Jesu and the Substitution of tres for tria." The Review of Theology and Philosophy The Comma Joanneum p.169, 1906. The accusation of a Trinitarian heresy by Priscillian was not in the charges that led to the execution of Priscillian and six followers; we see this in the later 5th-century writings.

=====Expositio Fidei=====

Another complementary early reference is an exposition of faith published in 1883 by Carl Paul Caspari from the Ambrosian manuscript, which also contains the Muratorian (canon) fragment.
Edgar Simmons Buchanan,The Codex Muratorianus, Journal of Theological Studies, 1907 pp.537-545 points out that the reading "in Christo Iesu" is textually valuable, referencing 1 John 5:7.
The authorship is uncertain, however it is often placed around the same period as Priscillian.  Karl Künstle saw the writing as anti-Priscillianist, which would have competing doctrinal positions utilizing the verse.  Alan England BrookeAlan England Brooke, A critical and exegetical commentary on the Johannine epistles, 1912, pp.158-159 notes the similarities of the Expositio with the Priscillian form, and the Priscillian form with the Leon Palimpsest. Theodor ZahnTheodor Zahn, Introduction to the New Testament, Vol 3, 1909, p. 372 refers to the Expositio as "possibly contemporaneous" to Priscilian, "apparently taken from the proselyte Isaac (alias Ambrosiaster)".
John Chapman looked closely at these materials and the section in Liber Apologeticus around the Priscillian faith statement "Pater Deus, Filius, Deus, et Spiritus sanctus Deus ; haec unum sunt in Christo Iesu". Chapman saw an indication that Priscillian found himself bound to defend the Comma by citing from the "Unity of the Church" Cyprian section. "It seems plain that the passage of St, Cyprian was lying open before the Priscillianist author of the Creed (Priscillian himself?) because he was accustomed to appeal to it in the same way. In Priscillian's day St. Cyprian had a unique position as the one great Western Doctor." John Chapman, Notes on the Early History of the Vulgate Gospels, 1908, p.264

====Council of Carthage, 484 AD====

"The Comma ....was invoked at Carthage in 484 when the Catholic (anti-Arian) bishops of North Africa confessed their faith before Huneric the Vandal (Victor de Vita, Historia persecutionis Africanae Prov 2.82 3.11; CSEL, 7, 60)"Raymond Brown, The Epistles of John, the Anchor Yale Bible Commentary, 1982 p. 782.  The Confession of faith representing the hundreds of orthodox Bishopsabout four hundred bishops of Africa and Mauritania, together with others from Corsica and Sardinia, met in Carthage" Thomas Joseph Lamy, American Ecclesiastical Review, 1 John v 7, 1897 p.464 included the following section, emphasizing the heavenly witnesses to teach luce clarius (clearer than the light):

=====Books on the Trinity and Contra Varimadum=====

There are additional heavenly witnesses references that are considered to be from the same period as the Council of Carthage, including references that have been attributed to Vigilius Tapsensis who attended the Council.  Raymond Brown gives one summary:
 ...in the century following Priscillian, the chief appearance of the Comma is in tractates defending the Trinity. In PL 62 227-334 there is a work De Trinitate consisting of twelve books... In Books 1 and 10 (PL 62, 243D, 246B, 297B) the Comma is cited three times. Another work on the Trinity consisting of three books Contra Varimadum ... North African origin ca. 450 seems probable. The Comma is cited in 1.5 (CC 90, 20-21).Raymond Brown, Anchor Bible, Epistles of John pp. 782-783. 
One of the references in De Trinitate, from Book V.
These references are in the UBS apparatus as Ps-Vigilius.

The Contra Varimadum reference:
This is in the UBS apparatus as Varimadum. 

Ebrard, in referencing this quote, comments, "We see that he had before him the passage in his New Testament in its corrupt form (aqua, sanguis et caro, et tres in nobis sunt) ; but also, that the gloss was already in the text, and not merely in a single copy, but that it was so widely diffused and acknowledged in the West as to be appealed to by him bona fide in his contest with his Arian opponents."Biblical commentary on the Epistles of St John, 1850, p.326, "In Continuation of the Work of Olshausen ... translated (from the German) by W. B. Pope".

====Fulgentius of Ruspe====

In the 6th century, Fulgentius of Ruspe, like Cyprian a father of the North African Church, skilled in Greek as well as his native Latin, used the verse in the doctrinal battles of the day.

=====Contra Arianos=====

From Responsio contra Arianos "Reply against the Arians" Migne (Ad 10; CC 91A, 797).
Then Fulgentius discusses the earlier reference by Cyprian, and the interweaving of the two Johannine verses, John 10:30 and 1 John 5:7.

=====Contra Fabianum=====

Another heavenly witnesses reference from Fulgentius is in Contra Fabianum Fragmenta Migne (Frag. 21.4: CC 01A,797)

=====De Trinitate ad Felicem=====

Also from Fulgentius in De Trinitate ad Felicem:
Today these references are generally accepted as probative to the verse being in the Bible of Fulgentius. In the historic debate, Thomas Emlyn, George Benson, Richard Porson, Samuel Lee and John Oxlee denied these references as demonstrating the verse as in the Bible of Fulgentius, by a set of differing rationales. Henry Thomas Armfield reviews debate theories and history and offered his conclusion "Surely it is quite clear from the writings of Fulgentius, both that he had himself seen the verse in the copies of the New Testament; and that those with whom he argues had not the objection to offer that the verse was not then extant in St. John's Epistle." Armfield, The Three Witnesses, the Disputed Text, 1883, p.171.  Armfield also reviews the Facundus and Fulgentius comparison in depth.  Facundus and Fulgentius were often compared in their Cyprian references, with Facundus quoted in support of Cyprian being involved in a mystical interpretation.

=====Adversus Pintam Episcopum Arianum=====

A reference in De Fide Catholica adversus Pintam episcopum Arianum that is a Testimonia de Trinitate:
has been assigned away from Fulgentius to a "Catholic controvertist of the same age".Alban Butler, The lives of the fathers, martyrs, and other principal saints, Volume 1(1846) and is referenced by Karl Künstle as Pseudo-Fulgentius.

====Vulgate Prologue to the Canonical Epistles====

Many Vulgate manuscripts, including the Codex Fuldensis, the earliest extant Vulgate manuscript, contain the Prologue to the Canonical Epistles.  The Prologue reads as a first-person account from Jerome written to Eustochium, to whom Jerome dedicated his commentary on the prophets Isaiah and Ezekiel.  The internal evidence of the authorship is contested, with claims since the 1600s, after the heavenly witnesses verse debate began, that a forger pretended to be Jerome.
This translation is by Thomas Caldwell of Marquette University, as explained on the blog of Kent Brandenburg. Also available online is the Codex Fuldensis Latin.
This Prologue, its historical accuracy and textual significance, has been a major point in the Comma debate since its start at the times of Erasmus. At the time of the correspondence of Erasmus with Lee and Stunica, the Vulgate Prologue was the single principle early church writing evidence discussed. Evidences like Cyprian's Unity of the Church and the Council of Carthage were either unavailable or omitted in the dialog. Erasmus accepted this Prologue as from Jerome, and accused Jerome of falsifying the scripture. And its authenticity and authorship became an issue in the late 1600s, when a new theory came forth that the Prologue was spurious. This theory claimed that the Prologue was not created until hundreds of years after Jerome, by an unknown writer pretending to be Jerome "the preface has been commonly rejected by critics, and looked upon as an impudent forgery of the ninth century."Charles Vincent Dolman, Dublin Review Recent Evidences in Support of 1 John v.7., p. 428, 1887.When the theory was originally promulgated the earliest extant Vulgate with the Prologue was dated to no earlier than the 800s.  Raymond Brown indicates modern attributions for the conjectured Prologue authorship as "Vincent of Lerini (d. 450) and to Peregrinus (Künstle, Ayuso Marazuela), the fifth-century Spanish editor of the Vg." The Epistles of John pp.782-783, 1982. Westcott is among those who have contended that the actual purpose of the theorized forgery was specifically to bring the verse into the Latin Vulgate text line; it "seems to have been written with this express purpose".Brooke Foss Westcott, The Epistles of St. John, p. 205, 1905. And Raymond Brown implies verse acceptance as the motive for the Vulgate Prologue: "Jerome's authority was such that this statement, spuriously attributed to him, helped to win acceptance for the Comma.". Metzger makes no reference of the Prologue, even while referencing the absence of the verse in the Johannine epistle of Fuldensis in order to assert that Jerome's original edition did not have the verse. "The passage ... is not found ...in the Vulgate as issued by Jerome (codex Fuldensis a.d. 541-46 and codex Amiatinus before a.d. 716)".A textual commentary on the Greek New Testament, p. 717, 1971.
Major figures in the early dialogue from about 1650-1725 were John Selden, Christopher Sandius, John Fell, Richard Simon, Isaac Newton, Jean Leclerc, Jean Martianay and Augustin Calmet. The discovery in the Bible scholarship community in the latter 1800s that the Prologue was in the well-respected Codex FuldensisCodex Fuldensis. Novum Testamentum Latine, interprete Hieronymo, ex MS edited by Ernst Constantin Ranke, 1868. (while the Codex lacked the Comma in the text, an unusual discordance) contradicted many earlier forgery chronology scenarios. Fuldensis could be accurately dated as very close to 546 AD, much closer to the lifetime of Jerome 347-420. Fuldensis was a manuscript copied under the ecclesiastical leadership of Victor of Capua. In Nov. 1897, Thomas Joseph Lamy in the American Ecclesiastical Review, The Decision of the Holy Office on the Comma Johanneum , reviewed on pp. 72-74 the Vulgate Prologue. Lamy emphasized how Codex Fuldensis strengthened the case for Jerome's authorship of the Prologue.  Even before the Fuldensis discovery, Antoine Eugène Genoud in the Sainte Bible commentary described the reasons given for claiming a forgery as frivoles (i.e. frivolous). Sainte Bible en latin et en français, Volume 5, 1839, pp.681-682.

====Summaries of Latin evidences 400-550 AD====

Raymond Brown and Georg Strecker are two modern scholars available in English who reference the series of evidences above, at least briefly, and who point out that the verse references were frequently in Christological and Trinitarian controversies.  Strecker writes:
 Thus, although there is no clear attestation of the Comma Johanneum in the time before Priscillian, after him the addition is cited more frequently, most often in order to adduce a proof for the Trinity ­ contrary to Priscillian’s own ideas. As examples one may cite the twelve books De Trinitate and three books Contra Varimadum. Their authors and time of composition are unknown, but a date in the fifth century is probable. In addition one should mention the Historia persecutionis by Victor, the bishop of Vita in North Africa (ca. 485), as well as the Responsio contra Arianos by Fulgentius (10; CChr 91.93); and finally a prologue to the Catholic Letters from the period 550. 
By contrast, these verse expositions and commentary are bypassed in two frequently quoted scholarly sources, Bruce Metzger and the NETBible.

====Cassiodorus====

Cassiodorus wrote Bible commentaries, and was familiar with Old Latin and Vulgate manuscripts,Joseph Pohle in the The Divine Trinity: A Dogmatic Treatise accuses Cassiodorus of inserting the Comma into the Vulgate from early manuscripts. "The defense can also claim the authority of Cassiodorus, who, about the middle of the sixth century, with many ancient manuscripts at his elbow, revised the entire Vulgate of St. Jerome, especially the Apostolic Epistles, and deliberately inserted I John V, 7, which St. Jerome had left out." Divine Trinity, 1911 p. 38-39 seeking out sacred manuscripts.  Cassiodorus was also skilled in Greek. In Complexiones in Epistolis Apostolorum, first published in 1721 by Scipio Maffei, in the commentary section on 1 John, from the Cassiodorus corpus, is written:
Thomas Joseph Lamy describes the Cassiodorus section Lamy says that in going through 1 John 5 Cassiodorus "mystically interprets water, blood and spirit as three symbols concerning the Passion of Christ. To those three earthly symbols in terra, he opposes the three heavenly witnesses in coelo the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one God. Evidently we have here verse 7. Cassiodorus does not cite it textually, but he gives the sense of it. He puts it in opposition to verse 8, for he contrasts in coelo with in terra. The last words: Et hi tres unus est Deus can be referred only to verse 7, since Cassiodorus refers tria unum sunt of verse 8, to the Passion of Our Saviour... Maffei's conclusion is therefore justified when he says : Verse 7 was read not only in Africa, but in the most ancient and the most accurate Codices of the Roman Church, since Cassiodorus recommended to the monks to seek, above all else, the correct copies and to compare them with the Greek." and references that Tischendorf saw this as Cassiodorus having the text in his Bible. However, earlier "Porson endeavoured to show that Cassiodorius had, in his copy, no more than the 8th verse, to which he added the gloss of Eucherius, with whose writings he was acquainted."William Wright, Biblical hermeneutics, 1835, p.640.
Westcott in Notes on Selected Readings, 1882 p. 105 says that Cassiodorus paraphrased the verse. However, in The Epistles of St. John, 1886, p. 204 Westcott writes "...the language of Cassiodorus (c. 550) seems to me to show that he did not find the gloss in his text of St John, though he accepted it as a true interpretation of the apostle's words.", following Porson and Turton (as indicated in the 1883 edition).Shortly after the Maffei publication, in 1722, George Wade wrote of the significance of the Cassiodorus scholarship and reference: "And what have the Arians to say to this ? Is this a forged Piece of Cassiodorius ? No.  Did he read it only in some corrupted copies of his own Age. The Character of the man will let us suspect this. How pressing is he with those of his Monastery to make use of the very best M.S. and such as had been carefully collated with, and corrected by the Greek Text.; nay not only so, but that, in all doubtful places, they should be govern'd by the Authority of two or three ancient copies...... let us never hear more of this verse, being intruded into the version of St. Jerom. Tis evident from innumerable places of these Commentaries, that St. Jerom's was not the Translation he made Use of, but one a great deal older; and yet it no less evidently appears, that this Passage was found in it. A short inquiry into the doctrine of the Trinity, as it is laid down in Holy Scripture, p. 86, 1722. George Wade also looked closely at the question as to whether this was actually Cassiodorus using the Greek writing of Clement of Alexandria, from 200 AD, as indicated by the "learned Dupin".

====Isidore of Seville====

In the early 7th century, the Testimonia Divinae Scripturae et Patrum is often attributed to Isidore of Seville:
Arthur-Marie Le Hir asserts that evidences like Isidore and the Ambrose Ansbert Commentary on Revelation show early circulation of the Vulgate with the verse and thus also should be considered in the issues of Jerome's original Vulgate text and the authenticity of the Vulgate Prologue.Arthur-Marie Le Hir, Les Trois Témoins Célestes Études bibliques, 1869 pp.1-72 Cassiodorus has also been indicated as reflecting the Vulgate text, rather than simply the Vetus Latina. Some see Testimonia Divinae Scripturae as earlier than Isidore. "Most learned critics believe to be more ancient than St. Isidore". John MacEvilly An Exposition of the Epistles of St. Paul, 1875, p.424, M'Carthy: "The question of authorship is not, however, important in our controversy, provided the antiquity of the document be admitted"

====Ambrose Ansbert, Commentary on Revelation====

Ansbert refers to the scripture verse in his Revelation commentary:
"Ambrose Ansbert, in the middle of the eighth century, wrote a comment upon the Apocalypse, in which this verse is applied, in explaining the 5th verse of the first chapter of the Revelation".David Harrower, A Defence of the Trinitarian System, 1822 pp.43-44

===Middle Ages evidences===

====Fourth Lateran Council====

In the Middle Ages a Trinitarian doctrinal debate arose around the position of Joachim of Florence (1135-1202) which was different from the more traditional view of Peter Lombard (c. 1100-1160).  When the 4th Lateran Council was held in 1215 at Rome, with hundreds of Bishops attending, the understanding of the heavenly witnesses was a primary point in siding with Lombard, against the writing of Joachim.
The Council thus printed the verse in both Latin and Greek, and this may have contributed to later scholarship references in Greek to the verse. The reference to "some manuscripts" showed an acknowledgment of textual issues, yet this likely related to "and the three are one" in verse eight, not the heavenly witnesses in verse seven.As explained by Thomas Joseph Lamy, American Ecclesiastical Review, The Decision of the Holy Office, 1897, pp. 478-479. The manuscript issue for the final phrase in verse eight and the commentary by Thomas Aquinas were an influence upon the text and note of the Complutensian Polyglot.

====Latin commentaries====

In this period, the greater portion of Bible commentary was written in Latin.  The references in this era are extensive and wide-ranging.  Some of the better-known writers who utilized the Comma as scripture, in addition to Peter Lombard and Joachim of Fiore, include Gerbert of Aurillac (Pope Sylvester), Peter Abelard, Bernard of Clairvaux, Duns Scotus, Roger of Wendover (historian, including the Lateran Council), Thomas Aquinas (many verse uses, including one which has Origen relating to "the three that give witness in heaven"), William of Ockham (of razor fame), Nicholas of Lyra and the commentary of the Glossa Ordinaria.

====Greek commentaries====

Emanual Calecas in the 14th and Joseph Bryennius (c. 1350-1430) in the 15th century reference the Comma in their Greek writings.
The Orthodox accepted the Comma as Johannine scripture notwithstanding its absence in the Greek manuscripts line. The Orthodox Confession of Faith, published in Greek in 1643 by the multilingual scholar Peter Mogila specifically references the Comma. "Accordingly the Evangelist teacheth (1 John v. 7.) There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost and these three are one ..."The orthodox confession of the catholic and apostolic Eastern-Church, p.16, 1762. Greek and Latin in Schaff The Creeds of Christendom p. 275, 1877

====Armenia - Synod of Sis====

The Epistle of Gregory, the Bishop of Sis, to Haitho c. 1270 utilized 1 John 5:7 in the context of the use of water in the mass. The Synod of Sis of 1307 expressly cited the verse, and deepened the relationship with Rome.
Commentators generally see the Armenian text from the 1200s on as having been modified by the interaction with the Latin church and Bible, including the addition of the Comma in some mss.

====Manuscripts and special notations====

There are a number of special manuscript notations and entries relating to 1 John 5:7. Vulgate scholar Samuel Berger reports on MS 13174 in the Bibliothèque nationale in Paris that shows the scribe listing four distinct textual variations of the heavenly witnesses. Three are understood by the scribe to have textual lineages of Athanasius, Augustine and Fulgentius.Samuel Berger, Histoire de la Vulgate pendant les premiers siècles du moyen âge, 1893 pp. 103-105 The Franciscan Correctorium gives a note about there being manuscripts with the verses transposed.Johann Leonhard Hug Introduction to the New Testament, p. 475, 1827. The Regensburg ms. referenced by Fickermann discusses the positions of Jerome and Augustine. The Glossa Ordinaria discusses the Vulgate Prologue in the Preface, in addition to its commentary section on the verse. John J. Contrini in Haimo of Auxerre, Abbot of Sasceium (Cessy-les-Bois), and a New Sermon on I John v. 4-10 discusses a 9th-century manuscript and the Leiden sermon.

==Erasmus and the Textus Receptus==

The central figure in the 16th-century history of the Comma Johanneum is the humanist Erasmus,Grantley McDonald, "Raising the Ghost of Arius: Erasmus, the Johannine comma and Religious Difference in Early Modern Europe", PhD Dissertation, Universiteit Leiden, 2011. This paper is "Under embargo until 2013-02-15 pending publication" and his efforts leading to the publication of the Greek New Testament. The Comma was omitted in the first edition in 1516, the Novum Instrumentum omne : diligenter ab Erasmo Roterodamo recognitum & emendatum and the second edition of 1519. The verse is placed in the third edition, published in 1522, and those of 1527 and 1535.

===Ratio Seu Methodus and Paraphrase===

Erasmus included the Comma, with commentary, in his paraphrase edition, first published in 1520."For the Spirit too is truth just as the Father and the Son are. The truth of all three is one, just as the nature of all three is one, just as the nature of all three is one. For there are three in heaven who furnish testimony to Christ: the Father, the Word, and the Spirit. The Father, who not once but twice sent forth his voice from the sky and publicly testified that this was his uniquely beloved Son in whom he found no offence; the Word, who, by performing so many miracles and by dying and rising again, showed that he was the true Christ, both God and human alike, the reconciler of God and humankind; the holy Spirit, who descended on his head at baptism and after the resurrection glided down upon the disciples. The agreement of these three is absolute. The Father is the author, the Son the messenger, the Spirit the inspirer. There are likewise three things on earth which attest Christ: the human spirit which he laid down on the cross, the water, and the blood which flowed from his side in death. And these three witnesses are in agreement. They testify that he was a man. The first three declare him to be God." (p. 174)Collected Works of Erasmus - Paraphrase on the First Epistle of John Translator - John J Bateman And in "Ratio seu Methodus compendio perveniendi ad veram theologiam", first published in 1518, Erasmus included the Comma in the interpretation of John 12 and 13. Erasmian scholar John Jack Bateman, discussing the Paraphrase and the Ratio verae theologiae, says of these uses of the Comma that "Erasmus attributes some authority to it despite any doubts he had about its transmission in the Greek text."John Jack Bateman (1931-2011), editor. Opera omnia : recognita ed adnotatione critica instructa notisque illustrata, 1997, p. 252.

===Controversies===

The New Testament of Erasmus provoked critical responses that focused on a number of verses, including his text and translation decisions on Romans 9:5, John 1:1, 1 Timothy 1:17, Titus 2:13 and Philippians 2:6.  The absence of the Comma from the first two editions received a sharp response from churchmen and scholars, and was discussed and defended by Erasmus in the correspondence with Edward Lee and Lopez de Zúñiga (Stunica), and Erasmus is also known to have referenced the verse in correspondence with Antoine Brugnard in 1518. Stunica, one of the Complutensian editors, published in 1520 Annotationes Iacobi Lopidis Stunicae contra Erasmum Roterodamum in defensionem tralationis Noui Testamenti, which included half of a page on the heavenly witnesses. Later Erasmus correspondence on the verse included a letter to William Farel in 1524 in which Erasmus noted the lack of Greek manuscript support and the verse not being used in the Arian controversies. In 1531 Erasmus corresponded with Alberto Pio, a critic of Erasmus. The first two Erasmus editions only had a small note about the verse. The major Erasmus writing regarding Comma issues was in the Annotationes to the third edition of 1522, expanded in the fourth edition of 1527 and then given a small addition in the fifth edition of 1535.

===The 'Erasmus Promise'===

Erasmus is said to have replied to his critics that the Comma did not occur in any of the Greek manuscripts he could find, but that he would add it to future editions if it appeared in a single Greek manuscript. Such a manuscript was subsequently produced, some say concocted, by a Franciscan, and Erasmus, true to his word, added the Comma to his 1522 edition, but with a lengthy footnote setting out his suspicion that the manuscript had been prepared expressly to confute him. This Erasmus change was accepted into the Received Text editions, the chief source for the King James Version, thereby fixing the Comma firmly in the English-language scriptures for centuries.
Although the story of Erasmus' promise has been accepted as fact by scholars, repeated by even so eminent an authority as Bruce M. Metzger, Metzger later, on pg 291 (n2) of the (new) 3rd edition of The Text of the New Testament, writes:  "What is said on p. 101 above about Erasmus' promise to include the Comma Johanneum if one Greek manuscript were found that contained it, and his subsequent suspicion that MS. 61 was written expressly to force him to do so, needs to be corrected in the light of the research of H.J. de Jonge, a specialist in Erasmian studies who finds no explicit evidence that supports this frequently made assertion."Erasmus and the Comma Johanneum", Ephemerides Theologicae Lovanienses, lvi (1980)," pp 381-9.
In A History of the Debate over 1 John 5:7,8, Michael Maynard records that H.J. de Jonge, the Dean of the Faculty of Theology at Rijksuniversiteit (Leiden, Netherlands), a recognized specialist in Erasmian studies, refuted the myth of a promise in 1980, stating that Metzger's view on Erasmus' promise "has no foundation in Erasmus' work. Consequently it is highly improbable that he included the difficult passage because he considered himself bound by any such promise."
In a letter of June 13, 1995, to Maynard, de Jonge wrote:

===The 'Textus Receptus'===

The term Textus Receptus commonly refers to one of Erasmus's later editions or one of the works derived from them. The Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia, a Protestant reference published in 1914, offers a quote on the TR from Ezra Abbot (1819–1884), who worked with Philip Schaff on the American Revision committee translating from the Westcott-Hort text:
From a position of defending the Textus Receptus, Edward Freer Hills would consider this quote from Ezra Abbot as the "The Naturalistic, Critical View of the Textus Receptus" and summarized his overall understanding:

==History of modern study==

===Verse debate, 1500 to today===

"...the authenticity of this passage has been controverted, from the beginning of the 16th century, down to the present day ... no passage in the Bible has ever occasioned a dispute so violent and so general in the Church. Catholics, Lutherans, Calvinists, Socinians, in short all Religious Sects whatever, who appeal to the New Testament as authority, have taken part in the contest."Franz Anton Knittel New criticisms 1829, p.1
The history of the Comma in the centuries following the development of the Textus Receptus in the 1500s has been one of initial general acceptance as scripture, to a period of spirited debate, and then to the general modern scholarship rejection, with continued studies and limited exceptions.

====3 stages, up to early 1800s (Charles Butler analysis)====

In 1807 Charles ButlerCharles Butler Horae Biblicae, 1807 p. 257 described the dispute to that point as consisting of three distinct phases.

=====Phase 1, Erasmus and the Reformation era=====

The 1st phase began with the disputes and correspondence involving Erasmus with Edward Lee followed by Jacobus Stunica. And about the 16th-century controversies, Thomas Burgess summarized "In the sixteenth century its chief opponents were Socinus, Blandrata, and the Fratres Poloni; its defenders, Ley, Beza, Bellarmine, and Sixtus Senensis."Thomas Burgess A Letter to Mr. Thomas Beynon 1829, p. xii In the 17th century John Selden in Latin and Francis Cheynell and Henry Hammond were English writers with studies on the verse, Johann Gerhard and Abraham Calovius from the German Lutherans, writing in Latin.

=====Phase 2, Authenticity attacked and defended, Richard Simon into the 1700s, Newton, Mill and Bengel=====

The 2nd dispute stage begins with Sandius, the Arian around 1670. Francis Turretin published De Tribus Testibus Coelestibus  in 1674 and the verse was a central focus of the writings of Symon Patrick. In 1689 the attack on authenticity by Richard Simon was published in English, in his Critical History of the Text of the New Testament. Many responded directly to the views of Simon, including Thomas Smith,Thomas Smith, Integritas loci 1 Jo. V, 7, 1690; Friedrich Kettner,Kettner referred to the heavenly witnesses as "the most precious of Biblical pearls, the fairest flower of the New Testament, the compendium by way of analogy of faith in the Trinity." Conybeare, History of New Testament Criticism, 1910, p. 71. In 1697 Kettner wrote Insignis ac celeberrimi de SS. trinitate loci, qui I. Joh. V, 7. extat, divina autoritas sensus et usus dissertatione theol. demonstratus and in 1713 Vindiciae novae dicti vexatissimi de tribus in coelo testibus, 1 Joh. V, 7 and Historia dicti Johannei de Sanctissima Trinitate, I Joh.cap.V vers.7[James Benigne Bossuet,Bossuet, Instructions sur la version du N. T. R. Simon impr. à Trevoux, 1703, pp. 185-190. Bossuet also wrote in favor of the verse in correspondence with Newton's mathematical rival Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz.  Butler and Orme include Bossuet material. Johann Majus, Thomas Ittigius, Abraham TaylorAbraham Taylor, The True Scripture doctrine of the holy and ever-blessed Trinity, stated and defended, in opposition to the Arian scheme, pp. 31-58, 1727. On p. 32 Taylor lists 17 recent writings on the verse, against authenticity were by Simon, Jean le Clerc, Samuel Clarke and Emlyn. and the published sermons of Edmund Calamy.  There was the famous verse defenses by John Mill and later by Johann Bengel. Also in this era was the David Martin and Thomas Emlyn debate. There were attacks on authenticity by Richard Bentley and Samuel Clarke and William Whiston and defense of authenticity by John Guyse in the Practical Expositor. There were writings by numerous additional scholars, including publication in London of Isaac Newton's Two Letters in 1754, which he had written to John Locke in 1690. The mariner's compass poem of Bengel was given in a slightly modified form by John Wesley. [ref]
And, indeed, what the sun is in the world,
what the heart is in a man,
what the needle is in the mariner's compass,
this verse is in the epistle.".
(John Wesley, with appreciation to Bengelius, Explanatory Notes, 1754)[/ref]

=====Phase 3, Travis and Porson debate, 1800s scholarship=====

======Travis and Porson Debate======

The third stage of the controversy begins with the quote from Edward Gibbon in 1776 :
Followed by the response of George Travis that led to the Porson-Travis debate. In the 1794 3rd edition of Letters to Edward Gibbon, George Travis included a 42-part appendix with source references. Another event coincided with the inauguration of this stage of the debate: "a great stirring in sacred science was certainly going on. Griesbach's first edition of the New Testament (1775-7) marks the commencement of a new era."John William Burgon, Lives of Twelve Good Men, Volume 1 Martin Joseph Routh, the Learned Divine, p. 37, 1788. The Griesbach GNT provided an alternative to the Received Text editions to assist as scholarship textual legitimacy for opponents of the verse.

======Early 1800s scholarship======

Butler also mentions Michaelis and Herbert Marsh, along with Adam Clarke, leading up to the time of his publication.  Griesbach included his DiatribeGriesbach, Diatribe with his Greek New Testament which omitted the verse. Frederick Nolan, John Oxlee, William Hales, Thomas Burgess,In 1822 Thomas Burgess published Adnotationes Millii which compiled in one spot writings on the verse sections by John Mill, Wetstein, Bengel, John Selden, Matthaei, John Fell and others. Thomas Turton, William Brownlee and John Jones were among the major contributors in the third stage in the early 1800s. Also Franz Anton Knittel was translated into English by William Evanson and William Aldis Wright wrote a forty page Appendix that was added to his translation of Biblical Hermeneutics by Georg Friedrich Seiler. The principal language of the debate switched from the earlier Latin preponderance, to more English, and some German.

====Modern phases====

The next period, from approximately 1835 to 1990, was comparatively quiet, yet still vibrant.

=====1800s after major debate decades=====

Some highlights from this era are the Nicholas Wiseman Old Latin and Speculum scholarship, the defense of the verse by the Germans Sander, Besser and Mayer, the Charles Forster New Plea book which revisited Richard Porson's arguments, and the earlier work by his friend Arthur-Marie Le Hir,Arthur-Marie Le Hir. Les Trois Témoins Célestes Études bibliques, 1869, pp. 1-89. Discoveries included the Priscillian reference and Exposito Fidei.  Also Old Latin manuscripts including La Cava, and the moving up of the date of the Vulgate Prologue due to its being found in Codex Fuldensis. Ezra Abbot wrote on 1 John V.7 and Luther's German Bible and Scrivener's analysis came forth in Six Lectures and Plain Introduction. In the 1881 Revision came the full removal of the verse.Denounced by evangelist Thomas DeWitt Talmage in a speech covered in the New York Times "Taking up the Bible he turned to the fifth chapter of John, but passed it with the remark, 'I will not read that, for it has been abolished or made doubtful by the new revision.'The Revision Denounced; Strong Language from the Rev. Mr. Talmage, New York Times, June 6, 1881]. See also Peter Johannes Thuesen, In Discordance with the Scriptures: American Protestant Battles Over Translating the Bible 2002, p. 54. Daniel McCarthy noted the change in position among the textual scholars,Daniel McCarthy: ...the first to expunge v. 7. altogether (J. D. Michaelis gives that honor to an 'Anonymous Englishman' who published the N. T, Greek and English, London, 1729, with a text revised on the principles of 'common sense'), but his rash example was followed unhappily by the three ablest critics of our own day, Scholz, a Catholic Prof, in Bonn, Lachmann, and Tischendorf; and approved by Wegscheid, Michaelis, Davidson, Horne, Alford, Tregelles, &c; so that it may be truly said the current of Protestant opinion in England and Germany is now as strong against, as it was for the genuineness of the controverted words even within this century. The change is unaccountable when we bear in mind that the evidence for the verse, both negative and positive, has been increasing every day, whilst the arguments against its authenticity were brought out as fully by Erasmus as by any modern critic. The Epistles and Gospels of the Sundays, 1866, p. 512. The Anonymous Englishman is Daniel Mace. and in French there was the sharp Roman Catholic debate in the 1880s involving Pierre Rambouillet, Auguste-François Maunoury, Jean Michel Alfred Vacant, Elie Philippe and Paulin Martin.Adam Hamilton, Dublin Review, 1890, The Abbé Martin and 1 John v. 7, 1890 (pp. 182-91), puts the debate into English, Hamilton supporting authenticity, Martin the principal opponent. In Germany Wilhelm Kölling defended authenticity, and in Ireland Charles Vincent Dolman wrote about the Revision and the Comma in the Dulbin Review, noting that "the heavenly witnesses have departed".The Revision of the New Testament Dublin Review, 1981, pp. 140-43.

=====20th century=====

The 20th century saw the scholarship of Alan England Brooke and Joseph Pohle, the RCC controversy following the 1897 Papal declaration as to whether the verse could be challenged by Catholic scholars, the Karl Künstle Priscillian-origin theory, the detailed scholarship of Augustus Bludau in many papers, the Eduard Riggenbach book, and the Franz Pieper and Edward Hills defenses. There were specialty papers by Anton Baumstark (Syriac reference), Norbert Fickermann (Augustine), Claude Jenkins (Bede), Mateo del Alamo, Teófilo Ayuso Marazuela, Franz Posset (Luther) and Rykle Borger (Peshitta). Verse dismissals, such as that given by Bruce Metzger, became popular.Oft-repeated is  "that these words are spurious and have no right to stand in the New Testament is certain..." from Metzger's Textual Commentary on the Greek New Testament, 1971, p. 716. There was the fine technical scholarship of Raymond Brown. And the continuing publication and studies of the Erasmus correspondence, writings and Annotations, some with English translation. From Germany came Walter Thiele's Old Latin studies and sympathy for the Comma being in the Bible of Cyprian, and the research by Henk de Jonge on Erasmus and the Received Text and the Comma.

=====Recent scholarship to the 21st century=====

The last 20 years have seen a popular revival of interest in the historic verse controversies and the textual debate. Factors include the growth of interest in the Received Text and the Authorized Version (including the King James Version Only movement) and the questioning of Critical Text theories, the 1995 book by Michael Maynard documenting the historical debate on 1 John 5:7, and the internet ability to spur research and discussion with participatory interaction. In this period, King James Bible defenders and opponents wrote a number of papers on the Johannine Comma, usually published in evangelical literature and on the internet. In textual criticism scholarship circles, the book by Klaus Wachtel Der byzantinische Text der katholischen Briefe: Eine Untersuchung zur Entstehung der Koine des Neuen Testaments, 1995 contains a section with detailed studies on the Comma. Similarly, Der einzig wahre Bibeltext?, published in 2006 by K. Martin Heide. Special interest has been given to the studies of the Codex Vaticanus umlauts by Philip Barton Payne and Paul Canart, senior paleographer at the Vatican Library. Summarized with pictures on the web site KJVToday Umlaut in Codex Vaticanus, although the conclusion "an early scribe of Vaticanus at least knew of a significant textual variant here" is only one theory. Discussions have continued on the Evangelical Textual Criticism web site, the Yahoogroups textualcriticism forum and helpful is the web page of Wieland Willker, Codex Vaticanus Graece 1209, B/03 The Umlauts. The Erasmus studies have continued, including research on the Valladolid inquiry by Peter G. Bietenholz and Lu Ann Homza. Jan Krans has written on conjectural emendation and other textual topics, looking closely at the Received Text work of Erasmus and Beza. And some elements of the recent scholarship commentary have been especially dismissive and negative.David Charles Parker, while lauding the 1881 Westcott and Hort "purified text", writes of "the ridiculous business of the Johannine Comma" Textual Criticism and Theology, 2009, p. 324. Parker writes of "the presence in a few manuscripts, most of them Latin". The actual number is many thousands of manuscripts. Daniel Wallace comments that the verse "infected the history of the English Bible in a huge way", referring to a "rabid path". The Comma Johanneum in an Overlooked Manuscript, July 2, 2010 James White, even while engaging in discussions on the Puritanboard forums, wrote "I draw the line with the Comma. Anyone who defends the insertion of the Comma is, to me, outside the realm of meaningful scholarship, unless, I guess, they likewise support the radical reworking of the entire text of the New Testament along consistent lines ... plainly uninspired insertion." The Comma Johanneum Again March 4, 2006, also March 16, 2006. In an earlier day, Eberhard Nestle wrote that "The fact that it is still defended even from the Protestant side is interesting only from a pathological point of view." Introduction to the Textual Criticism of the Greek New Testament, 1901, p. 327, translation by William Edie 1899 German of the German pathologisches.

===Isaac Newton===

Isaac Newton (1643–1727), best known today for his many contributions to mathematics and physics, also wrote extensively on Biblical matters. In a 1690 treatise entitled An Historical Account of Two Notable Corruptions of Scripture, he summed up the history of the comma and his own belief that it was introduced, intentionally or by accident, into a Latin text during the 4th or 5th century, a time when he believed the Church to be rife with corruption:Newton Project, Newton's Views on the Corruptions of Scripture and the Church.

===Arguments against authenticity from 1808 "improved version"===

In the 1808 New Testament in an improved version, upon the basis of Archbishop Newcome's new translation, which did not contain the Comma Johanneum, the editors explained their reasons for rejecting the Textus Receptus for the verse as follows: "1. This text concerning the heavenly witnesses is not contained in any Greek manuscript which was written earlier than the fifteenth century. 2. Nor in any Latin manuscript earlier than the ninth century.The Freisinger Fragments, dated from the 5th to 7th centuries, were published in 1876 by Zeigler and were not known at the time of this list of negative evidences in 1808. Similarly, the 7th-century dating of Codex Legionensis was not assigned until 20th century. 3. It is not found in any of the ancient versions. 4. It is not cited by any of the Greek ecclesiastical writers, though to prove the doctrine of the Trinity they have cited the words both before and after this text 5. It is not cited by any of the early Latin fathers, even when the subjects upon which they treat would naturally have led them to appeal to its authority. 6. It is first cited by Virgilius Tapsensis, a Latin writer of no credit, in the latter end of the fifth century, and by him it is suspected to have been forged. The Priscillian citation was discovered and published in the latter 1800s, fully refuting this unusual conjecture of Virgilius Tapsensis forgery. And leading to new, albeit short-lived, theories of Priscillian as the verse author, as described in the article. 7. It has been omitted as spurious in many editions of the New Testament since the Reformation:—in the two first of Erasmus, in those of Aldus, Colinaus, Zwinglius, and lately of Griesbach. 8. It was omitted by Luther in his German version. In a commentary on the Epistle in later years, Luther relates to the heavenly witnesses as scripture: "This is the testimony in heaven, which is afforded by three witnesses—is in heaven, and remaineth in heaven. This order is to be carefully noted; namely, that the witness who is last among the witnesses in heaven, is first among the witnesses on earth, and very properly... (John) appeals to a twofold testimony :the one is in heaven, the other on earth.. this divine testimony is twofold. It is given partly in heaven, partly on earth:  that given in heaven has three witnesses, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: the other, given on earth, has also three witnesses; namely, the spirit, the water, and the blood." Knittel pp. 93-95 In the old English Bibles of Henry VIII, Edward VI, and Elizabeth, it was printed in small types, or included in brackets: but between the years 1566 and 1580 it began to be printed as it now stands; by whose authority, is not known."New Testament in an improved version, upon the basis of Archbishop Newcome's new translation, 1808, London, p. 563.

===Textual analysis summarized===

The Comma is not in the two oldest pure Vulgate manuscripts, Fuldensis and Amiatinus, although it is referenced in the Prologue of Fuldensis. Overall, it is estimated that over 95% of the thousands of Vulgate MSS. contain the verse.  The Vulgate was developed from Vetus Latina manuscripts, updated by Jerome utilizing the Greek fountainhead.
The earliest extant Latin manuscripts (m q l) supporting the Comma are dated from the 5th to 7th century. The Freisinger fragment'r' in the UBS-4 also 'it-q' and Beuron 64 are apparatus names today. These fragments were formerly known as Fragmenta Monacensia, as in the Handbook to the textual criticism of the New Testament, by Frederic George Kenyon, 1901, p. 178. and the Codex Legionensis (7th century), besides the younger Codex Speculum, New Testament quotations extant in an 8th- or 9th-century manuscript.
The Comma does not appear in the older Greek manuscripts. Nestle-Aland is aware of eight Greek manuscripts that contain the comma.NA26: mss 61, 629, 918, 2318, besides in mss. 88, 221, 429, 636 as later additions. The date of the addition is late, probably dating to the time of Erasmus.Catholic Encyclopedia: "in only four rather recent cursives — one of the fifteenth and three of the sixteenth century. No Greek epistolary manuscript contains the passage." In one manuscript, back-translated into Greek from the Vulgate, the phrase "and these three are one" is not present.[tpl]cite journal |last= Mann |first= Theodore H. |date= January–March 2001 |title= Translation Problems in the KJV New Testament |journal= Journal of Biblical Studies |volume= 1 |issue= 1 |issn= 1534-3057 |accessdate= 2011-09-15 |url= http://journalofbiblicalstudies.org/issue1.html |deadurl= yes |archiveurl= http://web.archive.org/web/20101101165542/http://journalofbiblicalstudies.org/issue1.html |archivedate= 2010-11-01 |postscript= [/tpl]
No Syriac manuscripts include the Comma, and its presence in some printed Syriac Bibles is due to back-translation from the Latin Vulgate. Coptic manuscripts and those from Ethiopian churches also do not include the verse, although these churches similarly have accepted the Comma into their modern print editions. UBS-4 indicates arm-mss in support of the verse, and also arm-mss against, indicating that some but not all Armenian manuscripts include the Comma.

===Roman Catholic Church===

The Roman Catholic Church at the Council of Trent in 1546 defined the Biblical canon as "the entire books with all their parts, as these have been wont to be read in the Catholic Church and are contained in the old Latin Vulgate." "On the Catholic side, the Comma appeared in both the Sixtine (1590) and the Clementine (1592) editions of the Vulgate, the latter of which became the official Bible of the Roman Catholic Church."Raymond Brown, Anchor Bible, Epistle of John Appendix IV: The Johannine Comma pp.776-787 (1982) Although the revised Vulgate contained the Comma, the earliest known copies did not, leaving the status of the Comma Johanneum unclear. On 13 January 1897, during a period of reaction in the Church, the Holy Office decreed that Catholic theologians could not "with safety" deny or call into doubt the Comma's authenticity. Pope Leo XIII approved this decision two days later, though his approval was not in forma specifica—that is, Leo XIII did not invest his full papal authority in the matter, leaving the decree with the ordinary authority possessed by the Holy Office. Three decades later, on 2 June 1927, Pope Pius XI decreed that the Comma Johanneum was open to dispute. "The declaration adds that there was no intention of stopping investigation of tbe passage by Catholic scholars who act in a moderate and temperate way and tend to think the verse not genuine; provided, however, that such scholars promise to accept the judgment of the Church which is by Christ's appointment the sole guardian and custodian of Holy Scripture (Enchiridion Bibttcum. Documenta Ecdesiastica Sacrum Scripturam Spectantia, Romae, apud Librarian! Vaticanam 1927, pp. 46-47)". Explanation given in Under Orders The Autobiography of William Laurence Sullivan, p. 186, 1945. Sullivan had written an article in 1906 opposing authenticity in the New York Review.

===Defenders of authenticity===

====King James Only====

In more recent years, the Comma has become relevant to the King-James-Only Movement, a largely Protestant development most prevalent within the fundamentalist and Independent Baptist branch of the Baptist churches.  Many proponents view the Comma as an important Trinitarian text.James H. Sightler The King James Bible is Inspired (2011) "The modern versions ... omit or cast doubt on I John 5:7. the most important Trinitarian verse in the Bible and the one verse most often attacked in history" The defense of the verse by Edward Freer Hills in 1956 as part of his defense of the Textus Receptus The King James Version Defended The Johannine Comma (1 John 5:7) was unusual due to Hills' textual criticism scholarship credentials.

====Received text and preservation====

In addition, defenders of the verse as Johannine scripture include many who highly regard the writers coming out of the Puritan movement and the Reformation era, such as Francis Turretin, Matthew Henry and John Gill. These men had defended the verse as scripture in their Latin, Greek Received Text, English and vernacular Bibles.  William Alleyn Evanson, writing the Preface to Knittel's New Criticisms p.xxx-xxxiii  expresses the stance that preservation should not be sacrificed on even one verse. Thomas Turton (as Clemens Anglicanus) wrote Remarks upon Mr. Evanson's preface and William Orme summarizes his counter-arguments to Evanson Memoir of the controversy, pp. 178-180.

==Commentary and interpretation==

There have been a wide variety of verse interpretations. This is true for those who accept as authentic as well as for those who offer commentary on the Johannine writings, the Epistle of 1 John, or the singular chapter five, with the Comma absent.
For those accepting the verse, one major issue is whether the unity is one of essence or testimony. Sometimes the commentaries include textual and internal analysis, often not. These quote extracts are the parts that emphasize exegesis and interpretation.

===John Calvin===

==Manuscript evidence==

Both Novum Testamentum Graece (NA27) and the United Bible Societies (UBS4) provide three variants. The numbers here follow UBS4, which rates its preference for the first variant as { A }, meaning "virtually certain" to reflect the original text. The second variant is a longer Greek version found in only four manuscripts, the margins of three others and in some minority variant readings of lectionaries. All of the hundreds of other Greek manuscripts that contain 1 John support the first variant. The third variant is found only in Latin, in one class of Vulgate manuscripts and three patristic works. The other two Vulgate traditions omit the Comma, as do more than a dozen major Church Fathers who quote the verses. The Latin variant is considered a trinitarian gloss,John Painter, Daniel J. Harrington. 1, 2, and 3 John explaining or paralleled by the second Greek variant.
The gradual appearance of the comma in the manuscript evidence is represented in the following tables:

==The grammar in 1 John 5:7-8==

In the verses quoted below, the three letters in brackets express the case, number and gender (in that order) of the preceding word. The first letter is either “n” for nominative or “a” for accusative or “g” for genitive or “d” for dative. The second letter is either “s” for singular or “p” for plural. The third letter is either “n” for neuter or “m” for masculine or “f” for feminine.
Johann Bengel,Johann Bengel (1687-1752), Page 145 in volume 5 of the 1873 English translation of the 1759 second edition of his 1742 book, The Gnomon of the New Testament Eugenius Bulgaris,Eugenius Bulgaris (1716-1806), a letter that Eugenius wrote in 1780 John Oxlee John Oxlee (1779-1854), pages 136, 138 and 260 in the 1822 (volume 4) edition of the Christian Remembrancer journal and Daniel Wallace Daniel Wallace (1952- ), footnote 44 (you may have to reload page 332 in order to view it) on page 332 in his 1996 book, Greek Grammar Beyond the Basics state that the articular (preceded by an article) participle οι μαρτυρουντες (the-ones bearing-witness) preceding the three articular nouns ΤΟ πνευμα και ΤΟ υδωρ και ΤΟ αιμα (THE Spirit spirit and THE water and THE blood) in 1 John 5:8 in the Received Text and in 1 John 5:7-8 in the Critical Text and Majority Text functions as a substantive and that it therefore must (and does) agree with the natural number and gender (plural masculine) of the idea being expressed (persons because the Spirit spirit and the water and the blood symbolize three persons personification), although they do not all agree on the identity of the three persons that are symbolized by those three nouns.
In contrast, Frederick Nolan Frederick Nolan (1784-1864), pages 257, 260 and 565 in his 1815 book, An Inquiry into the Integrity of the Greek Vulgate is the first person to claim that the articular participle οι μαρτυρουντες (the-ones bearing-witness) in 1 John 5:8 in the Received Text and in 1 John 5:7-8 in the Critical Text and Majority Text functions as an adjective that modifies the three subsequent articular nouns ΤΟ πνευμα και ΤΟ υδωρ και ΤΟ αιμα (THE Spirit spirit and THE water and THE blood) and that it therefore must (but does not) agree with the grammatical gender (neuter) of the first subsequent articular noun ΤΟ πνευμα  (THE Spirit spirit).
Nolan claims that the reason that this does not occur in 1 John 5:8 in the Received Text is that the articular participle  οι μαρτυρουντες (the-ones bearing-witness) in 1 John 5:8 in the Received Text is attracted in gender to the articular participle  οι μαρτυρουντες (the-ones bearing-witness) in 1 John 5:7 in the Received Text, and that this proves that John wrote 1 John 5:7 in the Received Text.
Nolan claims that the reason that this does not occur in 1 John 5:7-8 in the Critical Text or Majority Text is that the articular participle  οι μαρτυρουντες (the-ones bearing-witness) in 1 John 5:7 in the Critical Text and Majority Text agrees with the grammatical gender (masculine) of the first subsequent articular noun Ο πατηρ (THE Father) in the absent Johannine Comma, and that this proves that John wrote the Johannine Comma.
Robert Dabney Robert Dabney (1820-1898), page 221 in his 1871 article,  The Doctrinal Various Readings of the New Testament Greek, which originally appears on pages 191-234 in the 1871 (volume 22) edition of the Southern Presbyterian Review journal, and which also appears on pages 350-390 of Dabney’s 1890 book, Discussions Theological and Evangelical (pages 377-378 in the 1890 book corresponding to page 221 in the 1871 article) and Edward Hills Edward Hills (1912-1981), page 169 in his 1956 book, The King James Version Defended later promote Nolan’s claim.
As explained by Herbert Smyth, in order for an articular adjective (or articular participle) to agree with a subsequent noun, it must function as an adjective that modifies a subsequent noun (or nouns), and in order for that to occur, it must be in an article-adjective-noun (or article-adjective-noun-kai-noun) configuration and must agree in case, number and gender (all three) with the subsequent noun (if there is one noun) or first subsequent noun (if there are multiple nouns), in which the subsequent noun (or nouns) is anarthrous (not preceded by an article),Herbert Smyth (1857-1937), A Greek Grammar for Colleges (1920), sections 1018, 1019, 1020, 1030, 1154 and 1156 as in John 6:57, 1 Timothy 1:11 and Titus 2:13 (compare Revelation 6:14).
(Received Text) John 6:57 … ο ζων πατηρ …
6:57 … the living nsm Father nsm …
(Received Text) 1 Timothy 1:11 … του μακαριου θεου …
1:11 … of-the blessed gsm God gsm …
(Received Text) Titus 2:13 … την μακαριαν ελπιδα και επιφανειαν …
2:13 … the blessed asf hope asf and appearance asf …
Compare the adjective in Revelation 6:14.
(Received Text) Revelation 6:14 … και παν ορος και νησος  …
6:14 … and every nsn mountain nsn and island nsf …
It is grammatically impossible for an articular adjective or articular participle to function as an adjective that modifies a subsequent articular (as opposed to anarthrous) noun (or nouns), and therefore it is grammatically impossible for an articular adjective or articular participle to agree in any way (in case, number or gender) with any subsequent articular (as opposed to anarthrous) noun.
Therefore, the claim originally presented by Nolan and later promoted by Dabney and Hills is grammatically impossible.
If the subsequent noun (or nouns) is articular, then the articular adjective (or articular participle) functions as a substantive and agrees with the natural number and gender of the idea being expressed,Herbert Smyth (1857-1937), A Greek Grammar for Colleges (1920), sections 1021, 1022 and 1023 as in Matthew 23:23, 1 John 5:7 and 1 John 5:8 in the Received Text and in 1 John 5:7-8 in the Critical Text and Majority Text (compare 1 John 2:16).
The three subsequent articular nouns in Matthew 23:23, 1 John 2:16,  1 John 5:7 and 1 John 5:8 in the Received Text and in 1 John 5:7-8 in the Critical Text and Majority Text are appositional (added) articular nouns.
As Smyth explains, a subsequent noun (or nouns) that is added as a modifier (as if it were an adjective) to a preceding substantive to provide additional information is an appositional (added) noun (or nouns). It is required to agree in grammatical case with the preceding substantive to which it is added, but it is not required to agree in number with it, and it cannot agree in gender with it, because the gender of a noun (the appositional noun or nouns) is predetermined by the grammatical gender of the noun, which never changes.Herbert Smyth (1857-1937), A Greek Grammar for Colleges (1920), sections 916, 976, 979 and 1019 The grammatical gender of an appositional (added) noun (or nouns) has no bearing on the gender of any word that precedes or follows the appositional (added) clause.
(Received Text) Matthew 23:23 … τα βαρυτερα … (ΤΗΝ κρισιν και ΤΟΝ ελεον και ΤΗΝ πιστιν)  …
23:23 … the weightier-things for things because the judgment and the mercy and the faith are three things … (THE judgment asf and THE mercy asm and THE faith asf). …
(Received Text) 1 John 2:16 … παν το … (Η επιθυμια της σαρκος και Η επιθυμια των οφθαλμων και Η αλαζονεια του βιου) …
2:16 … every the-thing (distributive singular) for things because the lust and the lust and the pride are three things … (THE lust nsf of-the flesh and THE lust nsf of-the eyes and THE pride nsf of-the life) …
(Received Text) 1 John 5:7 … οι μαρτυρουντες … (Ο πατηρ Ο λογος και ΤΟ αγιον πνευμα) …
5:7 … the-ones bearing-witness for persons because the Father, the Word and the Holy Spirit are three persons … (THE Father nsm, THE Word nsm and THE Holy Spirit nsn) …
(Received Text) 1 John 5:8 … οι μαρτυρουντες … (ΤΟ πνευμα και ΤΟ υδωρ και ΤΟ αιμα) …
5:8 … the-ones bearing-witness for a person and things because the Spirit and the water and the blood are a person and two things / OR npm for persons because the Spirit and the water and the blood symbolize three persons (personification) … (THE Spirit spirit nsn and THE water nsn and THE blood nsn) ...
(Critical Text and Majority Text) 1 John 5:7 … οι μαρτυρουντες 8 (ΤΟ πνευμα και ΤΟ υδωρ και ΤΟ αιμα) …
5:8 … the-ones bearing-witness for a person and things because the Spirit and the water and the blood are a person and two things / OR npm for persons because the Spirit and the water and the blood symbolize three persons (personification) 8 (THE Spirit spirit nsn and THE water nsn and THE blood nsn) …
In stating that the articular participle preceding the three subsequent articular nouns functions as a substantive and that it therefore must (and does) agree with the natural number and gender of the idea being expressed, Bengel, Bulgaris, Oxlee and Wallace show that they know the difference between an adjectival (functioning as an adjective) articular participle (subsequent anarthrous nouns) and a substantival (functioning as a substantive) articular participle (subsequent articular nouns) and that they know what appositional (added) nouns are.
In claiming that the articular participle functions as an adjective modifying the three subsequent articular nouns and that it therefore must agree with the grammatical gender of the first subsequent articular noun, Nolan, Dabney and Hills show that they do not know those things.

==See also==

===Other disputed New Testament passages===

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==

==Further reading==


