[[Neapolitan language]]

CATEGORIES: Neapolitan language, Italo-Dalmatian languages, Languages of Campania, Languages of Calabria, Languages of Molise, Languages of Apulia, Languages of le Marche

Neapolitan (autonym: nnapulitano; [tpl]lang-it|napoletano[/tpl]) is the language of southern continental Italy, including the city of Naples. It is named not after the city, but after the Kingdom of Naples, which once covered most of this area and of which Naples was the capital. On October 14, 2008 a law by the Region of Campania stated that the Neapolitan language was to be protected."Tutela del dialetto, primo via libera al Ddl campano" ("Bill to protect dialect green lighted") from Il Denaro, economic journal of South Italy, 15 October 2008 Re Franceschiello. L'ultimo sovrano delle Due Sicilie It has been recognized by UNESCO as a language and a heritage. Neapolitan has had a significant influence on the intonation of Rioplatense Spanish, of the Buenos Aires region of Argentina.Colantoni, Laura, and Jorge Gurlekian. "Convergence and intonation: historical evidence from Buenos Aires Spanish", Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, Volume 7, Issue 02, August 2004, pp. 107-119, Cambridge Journals Online

==Distribution==

The Neapolitan dialects are distributed throughout most of continental southern Italy, historically united during the Kingdom of Naples and the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, specifically southern Lazio (Gaeta and Sora districts), southern Marche, Abruzzo, Molise, Basilicata, Campania (Naples), northern and central Apulia, and northernmost Calabria. The dialects are part of a varied dialect continuum, so the varieties in southern Lazio, Marche, Abruzzo, Molise, Apulia, Lucania and Calabria can typically be recognizable as regional groups of dialects. In eastern Abruzzo and Lazio the dialects give way to Central Italian dialects such as Romanesco. In central Calabria and southern Puglia, the dialects give way to the Sicilian language. Largely due to massive southern Italian migration in the 20th century, there are also numbers of speakers in Italian diaspora communities in the United States, Canada, Australia, Brazil, Argentina and Venezuela. However, in the United States traditional Neapolitan has had considerable contact with English, and is significantly different from contemporary Neapolitan spoken in Naples. English words are often used in place of Neapolitan words, especially among second-generation speakers.
The following dialects constitute Neapolitan; numbers refer to the map:Carta dei Dialetti d'Italia (Mapping of dialects of Italy) by Giovan Battista Pellegrini, 1977 (in Italian)
The southernmost regions of Italy—most of Calabria and southern Apulia, as well as Sicily—are home to Sicilian rather than Neapolitan.

==Classification==

Neapolitan is generally considered Italo-Dalmatian. There are notable differences among the various dialects, but they are all generally mutually intelligible. The language as a whole has often fallen victim to its status of "language without prestige"[tpl]Citation needed|date=April 2014[/tpl] even if it was commonly used in the court during the kingdom of Bourbons,"Io sono Napolitano; nato tra voi, non ho respirato altr'aria, non ho veduti altri paesi, non conosco altro suolo, che il suolo natio. Tutte le mie affezioni sono dentro il Regno: i vostri costumi sono i miei costumi, la vostra lingua la mia lingua, le vostre ambizioni mie ambizioni." Transl.: "I'm Neapolitan; born among you, I've not breathed another air, I've not seen others countries, I don't know any  other ground that the native ground. All my affects are in the Kingdom: your costumes are my costumes, your language is my language, your ambitions my ambitions." Words of King Francesco II delle Due Sicilie. Campolieti, Giuseppe Re Franceschiello. L'ultimo sovrano delle Due Sicilie, Mondatori, Italy, 2005 (in Italian) as well as boasting a rich literary tradition (Giambattista Basile, Eduardo De Filippo, etc.).
The Italian language and Neapolitan are of variable mutual comprehensibility, depending on factors both affective and linguistic. There are notable grammatical differences such as nouns in the neuter form and unique plural formation, and historical phonological developments that often obscure the cognacy of lexical items. Its evolution has been similar to that of Italian and other Romance languages from their roots in Spoken Latin. It has also developed with a pre-Latin Oscan influence, which controversially purported to be noticeable in the pronunciation of the d sound as an r sound (rhotacism), but only when "d" is at the beginning of a word, or between two vowels (e.g.- "doje" or "duje" (two, respectively feminine and masculine form), pronounced, and often spelled, as "roje"/"ruje", vedé (to see), pronounced as "veré", and often spelled so, same for cadé/caré (to fall), and Madonna/Maronna). Some think [tpl]Who|date=July 2010[/tpl] that the rhotacism is a more recent phenomenon, though.  Another purported Oscan influence (claimed by some [tpl]By whom|date=July 2010[/tpl] to be more likely than the previous one) is historical assimilation of the consonant cluster /nd/ as /nn/, pronounced nː (this generally is reflected in spelling more consistently) (e.g.- "munno" ('world', compare to Italian "mondo"), "quanno" ('when', compare to Italian "quando"), etc.), along with the development of /mb/ as /mm/ (e.g.- tammuro (drum), cfr. Italian tamburo), also consistently reflected in spelling. Other effects of the Oscan substratum are postulated too, although substratum claims are highly controversial.  In addition, the language was also affected by the Greek language. There have never been any successful attempts to standardize the language (e.g.- consulting three different dictionaries[tpl]Citation needed|date=May 2011[/tpl], one finds three different spellings for the word for tree, arbero, arvero and àvaro).
Neapolitan has enjoyed a rich literary, musical and theatrical history (notably Giambattista Basile, Eduardo De Filippo, Salvatore di Giacomo and Totò). Thanks to this heritage and the musical work of Renato Carosone in the 1950s, Neapolitan is still in use in popular music, even gaining national popularity in the songs of Pino Daniele and the Nuova Compagnia di Canto Popolare.
The language has no official status within Italy and is not taught in schools. The Università Federico II in Naples offers (from 2003) courses in Campanian Dialectology at the faculty of Sociology, whose actual aim is not teaching students to speak the language, but studying its history, usage, literature and social role. There are also ongoing legislative attempts at the national level to have it recognized as an official minority language of Italy. It is however a recognized ISO 639 Joint Advisory Committee language with the language code of nap.
For comparison, The Lord's Prayer is here reproduced in the Neapolitan spoken in Naples and in a northern Calabrian dialect, in contrast with a variety of southern Calabrian (part of Sicilian language), Italian and Latin.

==Alphabet and pronunciation==

The Neapolitan alphabet, like the Italian alphabet, is almost the same as the English alphabet except that it consists of only 22 letters.  It does not contain k, w, x, or y even though these letters might be found in some foreign words.  The pronunciation guidelines that follow are based on pronunciation of American English and these values may or may not be applicable to British English.
All Romance languages are closely related. Although Neapolitan shares a high degree of its vocabulary with Italian, the official language of Italy, differences in pronunciation often make the connection unrecognizable to those without knowledge of Neapolitan. The most striking phonological difference is the Neapolitan weakening of unstressed vowels into schwa (schwa is pronounced like the a in about or the u in upon). However it is also possible (and quite common for some Neapolitans) to speak standard Italian with a "Neapolitan accent"; that is, by pronouncing un-stressed vowels as schwa but by otherwise using only entirely standard words and grammatical forms. This is not Neapolitan proper, but a mere difference in Italian pronunciation.
Therefore, while pronunciation presents the strongest barrier to comprehension, the grammar of Neapolitan is what sets it apart from Italian. In Neapolitan, for example, the gender and number of a word is expressed by a change in the accented vowel, whereas in Italian it is expressed by a change in the final vowel (e.g. l'uongo'', ''longa''; Italian ''lungo, ''lung'''a; masc. "long", fem. "long"). These and other morpho-syntactic differences distinguish the Neapolitan language from the Italian language and the Neapolitan accent.

===Vowels===

While there are only five graphic vowels in Neapolitan, phonetically, there are eight.  The vowels e and o can be either "closed" or "open" and the pronunciation is different for the two.  The grave accent (à, è, ò) is used to denote open vowels, and the acute accent (é, í, ó, ú) is used to denote closed vowels.  However, accent marks are not used in the actual spelling of words except when they occur on the final syllable of a word, such as Totò, arrivà, or pecché and when they appear here in other positions it is only to demonstrate where the stress, or accent, falls in some words.

===Consonants===

===Digraphs and trigraphs===

==Grammar==

===Definite articles===

The Neapolitan definite articles (corresponding to the English word "the") are La (feminine singular), Lo (masculine singular) and Li (plural for both), but in reality these forms will probably only be found in older literature (along with Lu and even El), of which there is much to be found.  Modern Neapolitan uses, almost entirely, shortened forms of these articles which are:
Before a word beginning with a consonant:
These definite articles are always pronounced distinctly.
Before a word beginning with a vowel:
l’ or ll’ for both masculine and feminine; for both singular and plural.
Although both forms can be found, the ll’ form is by far the most common.
It is well to note that in Neapolitan the gender of a noun is not easily determined by the article, so other means must be used.  In the case of ’o which can be either masculine singular or neuter singular (there is no neuter plural in Neapolitan), when it is neuter the initial consonant of the noun is doubled.  As an example, the name of a language in Neapolitan is always neuter, so if we see ’o nnapulitano we know it refers to the Neapolitan language, whereas ’o napulitano would refer to a Neapolitan man.
Likewise, since ’e can be either masculine plural or feminine plural, when it is feminine plural, the initial consonant of the noun is doubled.  As an example, let's consider ’a lista which in Neapolitan is feminine singular for "list."  In the plural it becomes ’e lliste.
There can also be problems with nouns whose singular form ends in e.  Since plural nouns usually end in e whether masculine or feminine, the masculine plural is often formed by orthographically changing the spelling.  As an example, let's consider the word guaglione (which means "boy", or "girl" in the feminine form):
More will be said about these orthographically changing nouns in the section on Neapolitan nouns.
A couple of notes about consonant doubling:

===Indefinite articles===

The Neapolitan indefinite articles, corresponding to the English "a" or "an", are presented in the following table:

===Verbal conjugation===

In Neapolitan there are four finite modes: indicative, subjunctive, conditional and imperative, and three non-finite modes: infinitive, gerund and participle. Each mode has an active and a passive form. The only auxiliary verbs used in the active form is "Avè" (en. "to have", it. "avere"). For example we have: '  Aggio stato a Nnapule ajere', as in the English 'I have been in Naples yesterday', but in the Italian ' Sono stato a Napoli ieri' (the verb to be is used).

===Doubled initial consonants===

In Neapolitan, many times the initial consonant of a word is doubled.  This is apparent both in written as well as spoken Neapolitan.
Bear in mind, however, that when there is a pause after the "trigger" word, then the doubling does not occur (e.g. Tu sî gguaglione, are a boy where sî is a "trigger" word causing doubling of the initial consonant in guaglione but in the phrase ’A do sî, guagliò? are you from, boy? no doubling occurs).  It is also well to note that no doubling occurs when the initial consonant is followed by another consonant (e.g. ’o ttaliano Italian language, but ’o spagnuolo Spanish language, where ’o is the neuter definite article).

===Words which trigger doubling===

==See also==

==References==

==Additional sources==

==External links==


