[[Cecil Heftel]]

CATEGORIES: 1924 births, 2010 deaths, Hawaii Democrats, American entertainment industry businesspeople, United States Army soldiers, Members of the United States House of Representatives from Hawaii, Members of the Hawaii Board of Education, American Latter Day Saints, Arizona State University alumni, University of Utah alumni, People from Chicago, Illinois

Cecil Landau Heftel (September 30, 1924 – February 4, 2010), popularly known as Cec Heftel, was an American politician and businessman from Hawai'i.  He served in the United States House of Representatives from 1976 to 1986 for the First Congressional District, encompassing most of urban Honolulu.

==Early years==

Heftel was born in Chicago, Illinois in 1924 where he attended public schools. He then moved to Tempe, Arizona to study at the Arizona State University where he obtained his bachelor's degree in 1951. Heftel moved on to the University of Utah and New York University for graduate work. He settled in Honolulu and established Heftel Broadcasting. He owned KGMB-AM-FM-TV and several other television and radio stations across the country. From 1943 to 1946, Heftel left his business to serve in the United States Army.
In 1957 Heftel was a pioneer for what was then called Top 30 programming, when he purchased KIMN in Denver. In one of the nation's most competitive radio markets, KIMN became the dominant  #1 rated radio station. Heftel sold the station in 1960, returning to Hawaii, but once again in 1973 re-entered the mainland with the purchase of WHYI-FM, Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, identifying the station as Y-100. In 1974, Heftel hired consultant John Rook, who secured the services of Jackson, Mississippi programmer Bill Tanner, who crafted a Top 40 format described by Tanner as being "predictable unpredictability" that propelled the station to the top of the south Florida ratings, where it stayed for several years. The station was later sold by Heftel.
Cecil Heftel also purchased WJAS-AM in Pittsburgh which he later sold.
Heftel had a knack for getting in and out of station ownership in the 70's, 80's, and 90's. As broadcast revenues are tied to audience interest (ratings) and to advertising cycles, it can be a great business or a poor one. Heftel's mostly AM group of Top-40 stations was sold in the late seventies. The next group of stations Heftel purchased consisted of FM stations which were coming into their own in the early seventies. These were sold off in the 80's and included WZPL (move into Indianapolis) and WLLT (Cincinnati).
Heftel partnered with Scott Ginsburg for a time in 1986-1987 as H & G Communications. This group included WLUP AM/FM Chicago, stations in Miami, and other cities.
The last Heftel Broadcasting accumulation of stations consisted of NY, LA, Chicago, Dallas, Las Vegas, and Miami. These were taken over by Clear Channel Communications in a 1996 tender offer. This in turn was merged with Mac Tichenor's Tichenor Media System into a new Heftel Broadcasting. That changed its name to Hispanic Broadcasting Corp (now Univision Radio).

==Political career==

Upon returning to his business in Honolulu, Heftel decided to run for political office.  He became a delegate to the 1972 Hawai'i State Democratic Convention.  There, he was elected in caucus to become a delegate to the Democratic National Convention.  Four years later, he was elected to Congress from the First District and was reelected four more times.  While in office, Heftel was part of the U.S. fact-finding mission to the Philippines, largely responsible for the forced ouster of dictator Ferdinand Marcos. Heftel resigned on July 19, 1986 to run for governor, but lost the Democratic primary to John Waihee.  Heftel blamed the loss on a smear campaign against him.
In 1998, he briefly returned to the political realm, authoring a book, End Legalized Bribery, in which he attempted to prove that the current state of campaign finance corrupts politicians, prevents qualified individuals from running for office, and costs citizens billions of dollars in pork barrel spending and corporate welfare. The book also contained arguments in favor of a national Clean Elections law and mandatory free commercial airtime for political candidates.
After 18 years out of the spotlight, the 80-year-old Heftel made a successful return to elective politics by being elected in November 2004 to the state Board of Education for the Oahu-At Large seat.

==Death and legacy==

Heftel died on February 4, 2010 from natural causes in San Diego, California. He was 85. (Numerous websites claim he died February 5, but his widow says he died on February 4.[tpl]Citation needed|date=April 2010[/tpl])
On June 13, 2011, U.S. Rep. Colleen Hanabusa introduced legislation to designate the post office at 4354 Pahoa Avenue in Honolulu as the "Cecil L. Heftel Post Office Building".

==References==

==External links==


