[[Fender Jazzmaster]]

CATEGORIES: Fender electric guitars

The Fender Jazzmaster is an electric guitar designed as an upmarket sibling to the Fender Stratocaster. First introduced at the 1958 NAMM Show, it was initially marketed to jazz guitarists, but found favor among  surf rock guitarists in the early 1960s. Its appearance  is similar to the Jaguar, though it is tonally different.

==Features==

The contoured "offset-waist" body was designed for comfort while playing the guitar in a seated position, as many jazz and blues artists prefer to do.  A full 25½” scale length, lead and rhythm circuit switching with independent volume and tone controls, and a floating tremolo with tremolo lock, were other keys to the Jazzmaster's character. The tremolo lock can be manually activated to keep the entire guitar from going out of tune if one string breaks.  The Jazzmaster also had an extra-long tremolo arm. The bridge and tremolo construction is very different from that of the Stratocaster and gives the Jazzmaster a different resonance and generally less sustain.
The body is larger than that of other Fender guitars, requiring a more spacious guitar case.  The Jazzmaster had unique wide, white "soapbar" pickups that were unlike any other single coil. Jazzmaster pickups are often confused with Gibson's P-90 pickups. Although they look similar, they are constructed differently. Whereas the polepieces of the JM pickups are magnets, the P-90 has its magnets placed underneath the coil. The JM coil is wound flat and wide, even more so than the P-90. This is in contrast to Fender's usual tall and thin coils.  This "pancake winding" gives them a warmer tone without losing their single coil clarity.  The Jazzmaster has a mellower, jazzier tone than the Strat, although it was not widely embraced by jazz musicians.  Instead, rock guitarists adopted it for surf rock. The Ventures, The Surfaris, and The Fireballs were prominent Jazzmaster users.
One of the Jazzmaster's notable features is the pickup circuit featuring the unusual "roller" thumbwheel controls and slide switch at the upper neck end of the pickguard.  The slide switch selects between two different pickup circuits, the "lead" and "rhythm" circuits.  When the switch is in the lead position, the guitar's tone is controlled by the conventional tone and volume knobs and the pickup selector switch.  When it is in the rhythm position, it selects the neck pickup only, and the volume and tone are controlled by the two thumbwheels; the other controls are bypassed.  The intention was that this circuit would allow the performer to quickly switch to a "preset" volume and tone setting for rhythm playing.
The main aspect that deterred jazz players was the Jazzmaster's tendency to produce feedback, especially if the body cavity were left without magnetic shielding.[tpl]Citation needed|date=April 2014[/tpl]  More experimentally-minded rock artists like Sonic Youth and My Bloody Valentine later embraced this as a new way to color their music. As a concession to its more conservative audience, the Jazzmaster was the first Fender guitar carrying a rosewood fingerboard instead of maple. The fingerboard had clay dot position inlays and was glued onto a two-piece maple neck. The Jazzmaster initially came with a four-ply brown tortoise shell pickguard, although from 1958 to mid 1959 they came with a one-ply gold anodized pickguard.
Some early pre-production/prototype examples came with a one-piece maple neck, a rubber fingerboard and/or a black painted aluminum pickguard. Rosewood became a standard fretboard material on other Fender models around 1959. Binding was added to the Jazzmaster fretboard in 1965, and in 1966 the dot markings were replaced by pearloid blocks. An optional maple fingerboard with black binding and block inlays was briefly offered in the mid-1970s. Jazzmaster bodies have been constructed from ash, alder, and basswood over the years.
The Jazzmaster was officially discontinued in September 1980.Brosnac, Donald. Guitar History Volume #1 - Guitars Made by the Fender Company. Pg. 23. Bold Strummer, 1987 The Jazzmaster was re-introduced in 1984 as a 1962 reissue model from Fender's Japanese factory. The American Vintage Series version was introduced in 1999. In 2007 Fender announced plans for a 'thin skin' Jazzmaster reissue with vintage nitrocellulose finish. The finish on the AVRI series is also nitro, but a 'thin skin' has a thinner nitro coat than usual.
One of Jazzmaster's characteristics is its string resonance, appearing at several fret positions.[tpl]Citation needed|date=April 2014[/tpl]

==Influence==

Fender intended the Jazzmaster to represent a solid body alternative to the hollow body archtop guitars that were then ubiquitous among Jazz guitarists. As the Telecaster and Stratocaster had done in other popular musical genres, Fender hoped to initiate a revolution in Jazz guitar, at the expense of competitor Gibson. While the Jazzmaster never caught on among its intended audience, Jazzmasters were most successful in the burgeoning California-based surf music and instrumental rock scene of the late 1950s and early 1960s. Fender headquarters was located in Southern California, and Leo Fender himself actively solicited local players' input and guidance in designing the Jazzmaster's followup, the Jaguar.
Jazzmasters, along with Jaguars and their imitators, fell out of fashion among players during the 1970s largely due to their "old-fashioned" appearance and sonic characteristics. The 70s rock sound meant "fat" humbucker tone and lots of sustain, so guitarists gravitated toward the Gibson Les Paul and its copies. The Jazzmaster's short sustain and warm piano-like tone was not favored. Fender continued to offer the Jazzmaster as part of its product line until 1980, however many collectors believe actual production ceased around 1976, with guitars sold after that period representing unsold inventory. Due to the unwanted, pawn-shop status of the guitars, young musicians were able to purchase the instruments very cheaply, obtaining the high quality guitars for little money.
Just as Fender discontinued the Jazzmaster, Tom Verlaine of Television and Elvis Costello started giving the guitar a cult following. They were later embraced by the American indie rock scene. Sonic Youth are notorious for the hoard of Jazzmasters they acquired starting around 1985 while the guitars were still affordable, and for their unique customization jobs (e.g. Lee Ranaldo's "Jazzblaster" with Fender Wide Range pickups). Sonic Youth were also famous for playing on the strings below the tailed bridge (near the tailpiece) to get church-bell-like tones; this is sometimes referred to as 3rd bridge technique. Other bands, such as Yes picked behind the nut to achieve similar sounds (on other guitar models), but in a Guitar World interview, Sonic Youth rejected this practice as "art rock"[tpl]Citation needed|date=January 2009[/tpl]. Ranaldo even has a pickup mounted behind the bridge on one of his guitars.  With the increasing visibility of old Jazzmasters, and the prices of collectible Telecasters and Stratocasters soaring out of sight in the 1990s, Jazzmasters became highly valuable. Thefts of vintage Jazzmasters from Sonic Youth, Dinosaur Jr. and The Raveonettes in recent years illustrate this.  Sonic Youth had nine Jazzmasters stolen from them in July 1999.

===Notable players===

Robert Smith of The Cure used two Jazzmasters (which he named Black Torty & White Torty) for the majority of his band's early work. J Mascis of Dinosaur Jr. is a noted Jazzmaster devotee, and as of 2007 Fender produces a signature J Mascis Jazzmaster model. Mascis uses a Tune-o-matic bridge, however. The stock Jazzmaster continues to have a cultlike following in the shoegaze and dream pop community, which values the buzzing, otherworldly sounds made possible by Leo's bridge design. Kevin Shields of My Bloody Valentine uses them as his main guitars, and bandmate Bilinda Butcher used them in addition to her Jaguars. A closeup picture of a Jazzmaster is featured as the cover of their critically acclaimed album, Loveless (1991). One is also depicted on the cover of Band of Susans' Blessing And Curse EP (1987), although the band is more noted for their use of G&L guitars. Ric Ocasek, guitarist and lead singer of New Wave band The Cars, has used a mid-1970s model which he repainted pink.Musician, Player and Listener vol. 39, Amordian Press, January 1982 (His favorite guitar is an eight-year old Fender Jazzmaster, painted pink. "I used it on this record a lot, and I use it on every record, all the time,") A web link: http://dailyeventsbookpagethree.blogspot.com/2007/04/cars-musician-magazine-shake-it-up-1982.html
Canadian composer and experimental guitarist, Kyle Bobby Dunn, uses a custom built '62 reissue Jazzmaster with Nunley single coil pickups. Adam Franklin of Swervedriver also uses a sunburst Jazzmaster as his axe of choice. Robert Burås of Norwegian band Madrugada used a 1966 vintage Candy Apple Red Jazzmaster as his main guitar.  Ira Kaplan of Yo La Tengo favors a Jazzmaster as well as other vintage Fender guitars, often playing behind-the-back solos in concert. Nels Cline, solo artist and lead guitarist of Wilco since 2004, uses the Jazzmaster as his main guitar. Thom Yorke of Radiohead (on occasion) uses his vintage Jazzmasters for live performances and the studio recordings of "Airbag" and "Weird Fishes/Arpeggi". John Flansburgh of the group They Might Be Giants frequently plays a Candy Apple Red Jazzmaster. Steven Drozd of The Flaming Lips uses a '67 Jazzmaster. Dan Bitney of instrumental group Tortoise favours his 60's Jazzmaster. Jazzmasters are the signature instrument of Grant Nicholas of Feeder, who owns a large collection of the guitars.  Sune Rose Wagner and Sharin Foo of The Raveonettes both use Jazzmasters, and Sune is often seen playing a limited edition 1996 Ventures edition.
Stephen Malkmus, solo artist (formerly of the highly influential 90s indie rock group Pavement), has used his vintage Jazzmaster as a main guitar throughout his career, as did Greg Camp (formerly of Smash Mouth). Devon Portielje of Half Moon Run uses the Fender Jazzmaster as his primary touring guitar, and presumably recorded the bands debut album with it. Courtney Love of Hole also played a Jazzmaster in the early 1990s, and the guitar is featured in Hole's music video for "Miss World"; her Jazzmaster is now on display at the Hard Rock Cafe in New York City.Courtney Love (Hole) Jazzmaster Fender Guitar. Flickr. April 2007. Accessed 2012-07-03 J Mascis, Nels Cline, Tom Verlaine, Thurston Moore and Lee Ranaldo (of Sonic Youth) all performed at the "Jazzmaster 50th Anniversary Concert" at the Knitting Factory in New York on September 12, 2008.[ref]Grant Nicholas from Feeder also uses several different Jazzmasters. Some of which he himself has customized. Gavin Rossdale from the band Bush also uses Jazzmasters.
</ref><ref>
