[[Thambiluvil]]

CATEGORIES: Ampara District, Populated places in Eastern Province, Sri Lanka

Thambiluvil ([tpl]lang-ta|தம்பிலுவில்[/tpl]) is a coastal Town in the Eastern Province of Sri Lanka. It is approximately 8 miles south of Akkaraipattu along east coast. It was under Batticaloa district and now under Ampara district. Thambiluvilites are Tamils, mostly Hindus and their main source income is from farming. Since 1960, people choose educational based employments as alternative income. It is a famous place for the old Tamil cultures and Temples. 
Its inhabitants are bound by an ancient civil administration called 'Kuty' system which plays a major role in marriages and temple administration. A fact, the administrator or "Tharmakartta (Vannakkar)" of Sri Sithravelayutha Swami Kovil is being selected from one and only "Kandang Kuty". Requesting rain for cultivation, a traditional old game, "Kombu Murittal (or Murippu)" means breaking sharpely bent tree branches for conquer, was being played by two groups. One group is aligned with Kannaki Amman and other with Kovalan (Vadaseri). ...continue
It was severely affected by the Tsunami tidal waves of December 26, 2004. Because of the Tsunami, many people lost their relations and properties including houses, livestocks and paddy fields. Now the people are returning to their normal life with the help of the aid from government and NGOs. There is a famous temple of lord Murugan called 'sri sithravelayutha swami kovil'.
Thambiluvil National College (formerly known as Thambiluvil Madhya Maha Vidyalaya or TMMV) is one of the popular schools in the area.

==Temples==

==History==

Immemorial time:
Some old tales says that here was a big temple of lord Shiva worshipped by Yaksha king “Ravanan”(there were two Dravidian aborigines in ancient Sri Lanka- Yakshas & Nagas). Then it was prayed as a Murugan temple.
This region has most population of Nagas, So It was called as “Nagarmunai”. 600AD onwards, Sangamankandy was the capital of Nagarmunai & a king named Sangaman ruled this tract
100AD
Thambathi nallaal,a Chola princess did a pilgrimage to katirgamam with his husband Puvaneya gajabahu and got the friendship of Prasannasiddhu,the ruler of ancient Mattakalapu(which is called now as Veeramunai). He gave them the Unnarasukiri area (Ukanthai) to rule and live. Later on, their son Manuneya kajabahu(Mehavannan) reconstructed Murugan temple and hollowed a water resort, named it as “Thambathivil” in memory of his mother.(now that pond is called as “Raman kulam.”)
In those days Sagamam,Oorakkaiveli, Oorvasi kulam (Rufus Kulam), Kanchikudiyaru, Vilgamam and Sangamankandy had more population than Thambiluvil-Thampaddai-Thirukkovil. From 993AD, Murugan temple astounded by its august structures and constructions of Chola kings.
11th-12th centuries
In 1215AD, Kalinga Mahan,a rigid saivist monarch, from India, gained Ceylon and stilled the heathens and gave his hands to the people here. During his period, the name Thambathivil started to change as Thambiluvil by degrees. Thirukkovil port was known as “Thungahola pattinam.” The researches proved that the Lighthouse of Thungahola pattinam was in the area where the Thirunavukkarasu Nayanar Gurukulam had placed before Tsunami.
Till 15th Century
Ancient Nagarmunai territory was under the ruling of Jaffna Domain till 1450. During this Period ’Vannimais’, ruled this region as the deligates of the King. We could know that there were many Vannimai Kingdoms in Ancient Mattakalappu Area Like Panama, Addappallam, Pazhukamam etc.
After 15th Century
Thirukkovil temple was disintegrated by Portuguese during 15th Century Onwards.
Anyhow this tract was under the control of Kandy Domain till 1815. The English imported Industrial goods made with Coconut palm through Thirukkovil port also.
Nowadays, Thambiluvil is respected as mine of Art & Tamil Culture. At all costs, The future of our village is just hold to the young Citizens of its own. God forbid any evils!

==References==

==External links==


