[[Friend zone]]

CATEGORIES: Intimate relationships, Interpersonal relationships, Love

In popular culture, friend zone refers to a platonic relationship wherein one person wishes to enter into a romantic or sexual relationship, while the other does not.Oxford Dictionary,  friend zone, Accessed Jan. 22, 2014, "...a situation in which a friendship exists between two people, one of whom has an unrequited romantic or sexual interest in the other..." It is generally considered to be an undesirable or dreadedAmy Kaufman, Los Angeles Times, February 15, 2011, 'The Bachelor' recap: Girls get wild in Anguilla,  "...the dreaded friend zone..." situation by the lovelorn person.

==Application==

There are differing explanations about what causes a person to be placed in the friend zone by another. It might result from misinterpreted signals or from a fear that a deeper relationship might jeopardize the friendship. A Chicago Tribune writer suggested there were several cases in which someone might become relegated to the friend zone: (1) person A is not sufficiently attracted to person B, (2) person A misinterprets nonverbal cues from person B signaling their interest in deepening the relationship, (3) there is sexual repulsion (but not enough to block a friendship). In a friendship between the two people, being relegated to the friend zone can happen to either person. In another instance, a woman described her male friend, someone she was comfortable with as if he was one of her girlfriends, but their relationship became problematic when he wanted their relationship to develop romantically but she did not. One man compared the friend zone to being a "third wheel" and having only a platonic relationship with a woman. November 21, 2005, Susan King, Los Angeles Times, Following his life into the 'love zone', Accessed Jan. 22, 2014, "... I was the third wheel who would listen to all of her problems, and we would have platonic sleepovers like in the movie..."
Marshall Fine of The Huffington Post suggested that the friend zone is "like the penalty box of dating, when your only crime is not being buff and unobtainable." Dating adviser Ali Binazir described the friend zone as Justfriendistan, and wrote that it's a "territory only to be rivaled in inhospitability by the western Sahara, the Atacama, and Dante's Ninth Circle of Hell." Mastin Kipp of the Huffington Post described himself as always having girlfriends who were "girls" but were only his "friends", meaning there was no sex between them.
There is general agreement that once someone is in the friend zone, it is difficult to get out. Los Angeles Times, The Art of Getting By' review: As it turns out, some teenagers are awkward and shy, Accessed Jan. 22, 2014, "...about escaping teenage gloom or the friend zone..."

==In feminism==

Some feminist bloggers have argued that the friend zone is a misogynistic concept. They say that the friend zone is typically discussed in terms of a woman having an obligation to enter into a romantic relationship with any "nice guy" friend who is attracted to her. If the woman is not interested in a romantic relationship, she is painted as a bad person.http://www.themaneater.com/stories/2014/2/13/friend-zone-sexist/
Using the term "friend zone" places the blame on the person who does not return the affection, usually the woman, whereas using the term "unrequited love" assigns the source of the problem with the person who is unable to accept only friendship[tpl]Citation needed|date=April 2014[/tpl].

==Popular culture==

The term began as a reference to a television show called The Twilight Zone which featured normal people caught up in weird places or situations, and applied the sense of trapped and inexplicable frustration to a dating relationship.[tpl]says who?|date=February 2014[/tpl] It was popularized by a 1994 episode of the American sitcom Friends entitled "The One with the Blackout", where the character Ross Geller, who was lovesick for Rachel Green, was described by character Joey Tribbiani as being the "mayor of the friend zone". The question of whether a man can ever "escape the friend zone and begin dating one of his female friends" helped make the "geek dream couple" of Ross and Rachel storyline dramatically compelling, according to viewers. 
Since then, the friend zone concept has often been a plot element in television shows and films. The 2005 film Just Friends main character, played by Ryan Reynolds, reunited after ten years with his friend played by Amy Smart, who informs him that she loves him "like a brother", essentially dashing any hopes of him having her as a girlfriend. In May 2011, MTV had a show entitled FriendZone. In an interview with a national publication, a producer said:

==See also==

==References==


