[[Hollister Inc]]

CATEGORIES: Companies established in 1921

Hollister Incorporated is a medical supplies company founded in Chicago, Illinois, United States, by John Dickinson Schneider in 1921 and now headquartered in Libertyville, Illinois, since 1981.
Great-nephew Edward Maurice Hollister, Jr.,(born 1921) said that Schneider was an employee of  printer Franklin Cornelius Hollister(born in Omro, Wisconsin, in 1863) and his wife Jessie. They used a couple of apartments to print birth certificates for hospitals. They had no children. After Franklin died, Jessie sold the business to Schneider.
Franklin was among a family of printers with his brother William Cornelius Hollister(born in 1861), nephew Joseph Cornelius Hollister(born in 1892), and great-nephew Donald Roland Launius(born 1932). At one point companies by the names of Manz Printing and Hollister Bros. included some of the family members, including nephew Edward Maurice Hollister, Sr.(born 1888).
Another descendent of the family, Will Hollister, wrote the book "Dinner in the Diner", published in 1965.
Hollister Incorporated is an employee-owned global healthcare company, particularly focused on returning dignity, independence  and self-respect to those who may have undergone life-changing events; including cancer, colorectal disease and spinal-cord injury. Hollister provides solutions to health care professionals and individual patients/users in the fields of ostomy, fecal and urine incontinence and wound care products.
Hollister is well known for their Plastibell circumcision device.

==Facts==

Robert Fisk mentions Hollister in chapter 22 of his recent work The Great War for Civilisation when narrating an incident occurred in the afghan village Hachbirgit during the American-led invasion of Afghanistan in 2002; Hachbirgit villagers were arrested, interrogated and identified via Ident-A-Band Bracelet made by Hollister prior to their definitive release. Nowadays Hollister's wristband identification product line belongs to Precision Dynamics Corporation, as stated in Hollister's site.
Hollister Inc also has a plant operating in Ballina, County Mayo, Ireland, and Stuarts Draft, Virginia, United States.

==External links==


