[[Budweiser (Anheuser-Busch)]]

CATEGORIES: 1876 introductions, Anheuser-Busch beer brands

Budweiser  is a pale lager produced by Anheuser–Busch InBev. Introduced in 1876 by Adolphus Busch it has grown to become one of the highest selling beers in the United States, and is available in over 80 markets worldwide. It is made with up to 30% rice in addition to hops and barley malt., The Complete Guide to World Beer (2004), ISBN 1-84442-865-6 Budweiser is produced in various breweries located around the world. It is a filtered beer available in draught and packaged forms.

History

Adolphus Busch left Germany for the United States in 1857.  He settled in St. Louis, Missouri, where he eventually established his own brewing supply house.  In St. Louis, Busch also met and married a woman named Lilly Anheuser.  Lilly's father, Eberhard Anheuser, owned a small brewery that had been yielding lager beer for some time.  In 1864, Busch partnered with his father in-law to form what would eventually become the Anheuser-Busch Company.
Busch traveled extensively throughout Europe in order to observe and study the latest brewing techniques.  In the 1870s, Anheuser-Busch became the first American brewery to implement pasteurization, which greatly improved the shelf-life and transportability of its beers.  In the mid-1800s, most Americans preferred robust, dark ales.  Busch had encountered lighter lager beers during his travels and began brewing a light Bohemian lager.  Anheuser-Busch introduced this lager in 1876 under the brand name Budweiser.
Budweiser and Anheuser-Busch enjoyed two decades of growth before the onset of prohibition in 1920.  Anheuser-Busch had to suspend brewing of Budweiser during prohibition and launched a range of non-alcoholic products.
When prohibition came to an end in 1933, Anheuser-Busch began brewing Budweiser again.  During prohibition the palate of the beer consumer had changed due to the popularization of sweeter homemade and bootlegged brews.  The company dared consumers to drink Budweiser for five days, and if on the sixth day, they still preferred the taste of other beers, they could go back.
Growth was limited by economic conditions caused by the Great Depression, but thanks in part to the introduction of the metal can in 1936, Budweiser's sales began to climb again.
During World War II, the company diverted several resources to support the war effort and relinquished its West Coast markets to conserve rail car space. After the war, Budweiser and Anheuser-Busch entered into an era of rapid growth.
August A. Busch Jr. became president of Anheuser-Busch in 1946 and began the creation of a national network of breweries.  The first new brewery was opened in Newark, New Jersey in 1951, and was the first of nine to open over the course of the next 25 years.
Budweiser is available in over 80 markets.
After the 18 November 2008 InBev takeover, several cost-cutting measures that were implemented have, according to some sources, negatively affected the flavor of the beer. Whole rice grains have now been replaced by broken ones, and the high quality Hallertauer Mittelfrüh hop has been phased out. A former top AB InBev executive says the company saved about $55 million a year substituting cheaper hops in Budweiser and other U.S. beers for more expensive ones like Hallertauer Mittelfrüh.

Name origin and dispute

Budweiser trademark dispute is a dispute between American and European beer companies claiming trademark rights to the name "Budweiser".
In 1876, Adolphus Busch and his friend Carl Conrad, a liquor importer, developed a "Bohemian-style" lager, inspired after a trip to the region. Brewers in Bohemia (today's Czech Republic) generally named a beer after their town with the suffix "er." Beers produced in the town of Pilsen (today's Plzeň), for example, were called Pilsners. Busch and Conrad had visited another town, only  south of Pilsen, also known for its breweries: Budweis (or Böhmisch Budweis, today's České Budějovice). Beer has been brewed in Budweis since it was founded as Budiwoyz by king Ottokar II of Bohemia in 1245. The name Budweiser is genitive, meaning "of Budweis."
In most European countries American Budweiser is now not labelled as Budweiser but as Bud, and the name Budweiser refers to the original Czech beer, Budweiser Budvar, except for Sweden, Ireland and the United Kingdom, where both beers are sold as Budweiser.
Anheuser-Busch has a market share in the United States of 50.9% for all beers sold. This is primarily composed of Budweiser brands. In 2008 the Belgian-Brazilian beer giant InBev bought the majority of Anheuser-Busch stocks at $70 per share in an all-cash agreement, to create the largest brewing company in the world.

Marketing

Anheuser-Busch uses what is in many jurisdictions a legally-protected mark-of-origin indicating Czech provenance and humorous advertising campaigns to promote Budweiser, such as the "Real Men of Genius" radio and television commercials for Bud Light.
The Budweiser from Budějovice has been called "The Beer of Kings" since the 16th century. Adolphus Busch changed this slogan to "The King of the Beers". The Czech Budweiser is sold in some countries as Budejovicky Budvar but is known as Budweiser in many other countries throughout the world.
Some Bud advertising campaigns have entered the popular culture in the United States. They include a long line of TV advertisements in the 1990s featuring three frogs named "Bud", "Weis", and "Er", the Budweiser Ants, and a campaign built around the phrase "Whassup?".
Anheuser-Busch is known for its sport sponsorship, video game sponsorship (Tapper), and humorous advertisements. Advertising campaigns have also included lizards impersonating the "Bud-weis-er" frogs, and a team of Clydesdale horses commonly known as the Budweiser Clydesdales.
The Budweiser Clydesdale has become an iconic horse. In the Clydesdale Donkey commercial the donkey dreams of becoming a Clydesdale horse. The donkey does everything he can think of to try and become one of these horses. And finally when the day comes for his audition, he makes the cut and becomes what he has always dreamed. This commercial ended up being in the top five for the most memorable Budweiser commercials.Shikes, Jonathan "The five most memorable Budweiser Clydesdale commercials; the horses are leaving Fort Collins" West World Blogs, August 23, 2011
The Budweiser brand is promoted in motorsports, from Bernie Little's Miss Budweiser hydroplane boat to sponsoring the Budweiser King Top Fuel Dragster driven by Brandon Bernstein. Anheuser-Busch has sponsored the CART championship, and top NASCAR teams such as Junior Johnson, Hendrick Motorsports and DEI. Budweiser is the official beer of NHRA and was the official beer of NASCAR until 2007. In 2008, Anheuser-Busch became Kasey Kahne's primary sponsor, and has also sponsored many races, including the Budweiser Shootout, and previously The Bud at the Glen, Budweiser 500, and Budweiser 400. In 2011, Budweiser became the sponsor for Kevin Harvick.
Anheuser-Busch has placed Budweiser as an official partner and sponsor of Major League Soccer and Los Angeles Galaxy and was the headline sponsor of the British Basketball League in the 1990s, taking over from rival company Carlsberg. Anheuser-Busch has also placed Budweiser as an official sponsor of the Premier League and the presenting sponsor of the FA Cup.  For the 1996 Atlanta Olympics Budweiser was a proud sponsor and avid advertiser during the Olympic Games. During the celebration of the Centennial Olympic Games in Atlanta, Budweiser produced many commemorative collectibles and souvenirs that were very popular among crowds at the Games.  A primary Budweiser collectible was a 28-ounce Budweiser Atlanta Olympic Games Beer Stein.  The Beer Stein featured the Olympic Flame as a decoration on the Budweiser Beer Stein handle.    
In the early 20th century, the company commissioned a play-on-words song called Under the Anheuser Bush, which was recorded by several early phonograph companies. Popular music continues to be used in advertisements for Budweiser. Some commercials feature the song "Galvanize", by The Chemical Brothers.
In August 2009 Anheuser-Busch partnered with popular Chinese video-sharing site, Tudou. The contest encourages users to suggest ideas that include ants for a Bud TV spot set to run in February 2010 during the Chinese New Year.
In 2010, Budweiser launched an international entertainment property called Bud United.  Bud United's first efforts were centered around the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa.  The brand launched an online reality TV series called Bud House that followed the lives of 32 international football fans (one representing each nation in the World Cup) living together in a house in South Africa. Bud United's next project is another reality series called The Big Time.  Each episode of The Big Time will focus on a different vertical (Baseball, Soccer, Cooking etc.…) and will feature contestants competing for a chance to live their dreams.  The show is being cast through the Bud United Facebook page and will air in Q1 2012.
On November 5, 2012, Anheuser-Busch asked Paramount Pictures to obscure or remove the Budweiser logo from the film Flight, directed by Robert Zemeckis and starring Denzel Washington.

Containers and packaging

Containers

Over the years, Budweiser has been distributed in many sizes and containers. Until the early 1950s Budweiser was primarily distributed in three packages: kegs, 12-ounce bottles and quart bottles. Cans were first introduced in 1936, which helped sales to climb.
Packages are sometimes tailored to local customs and traditions. In St. Mary's County, Maryland,  ten ounce cans
Anheuser-Busch has introduced many can designs with co-branding and sports marketing promotional packaging. Today, most of these promotional programs are represented only on the 16 ounce aluminum bottle container. However, many MLB and NFL teams in the United States also promote 24 ounce cans marked with team logos.
Due to a dispute with the European Budweiser, American Budweiser is sold in most of European Union under the brand "Bud".

Bottle

The Budweiser bottle has remained relatively unchanged since its introduction in 1876. The top label is red and currently reads "Budweiser". The top of the main label is red with a white banner with a pledge on it, which has changed three times. Below the banner is a coat of arms of sorts, which features an Anheuser-Busch stylization. Below that is a large white box.

Cans

During the Prohibition Era, Budweiser encountered its first major obstacle to profit and growth.  As alcohol became illegal to sell and produce, all alcohol companies, including Budweiser, struggled to remain profitable.  Budweiser began producing non-alcoholic beverages during Prohibition to counter its ill effects.  Prohibition began in 1920, and lasted into the middle of the Great Depression in 1933.  These are two major setbacks that this company experienced.  Just as laws regarding prohibition were repealed, Budweiser was faced with more serious economic struggles, which made their success (like all other companies) very unlikely.  In attempt to re-stimulate interest in their beer, Budweiser executed a hugely successful marketing strategy of introducing beer cans for the first time in 1936.  This new packaging led to an increase in sales which lasted until the start of World War II in 1939.
Over the years, Budweiser has undergone various design changes to its can which are discussed in the table below.  Many of these changes are in response to market conditions and consumer tastes.  Since 1936, 12 major can design changes have occurred, not including the temporary special edition designs.  The table below describes each of the 12 major can designs.

=2011 can design marketing strategy=

Traditional Budweiser cans embodied a strong sense of American patriotism.  They were red, white, and blue in color, and had images of eagles near the label.  These cans also had a very classic appearance due to the cursive font and the Anheuser-Busch logo surrounded by wheat and barley.  Red, white, and blue, being the colors of the American flag, identified the cans strongly with the American market for this product.  Moreover, the eagles remind viewers of the Bald Eagle, America's national bird.  These facts strongly suggest that Budweiser was targeting a primarily American market.  In contrast to this previous design, the newest can takes on a much more modern appearance and eliminates blue as a main color in the design.  Red, white, and gold are the predominant colors on this new can, which makes the can look much less traditionally American, and much more modern.  On this new can, there are aspects that continue to resonate with an American market, such as the red and white colors, as these are two of the nation's primary colors.  The presence of the yellowish-gold color is not typically American, though, and is surprising to see in the can design of the self-proclaimed "Great American Lager."
This change in can design was very shocking for a brand that had remained relatively static since its beginning.  The new design was largely in response to the huge sales decline in recent years that is threatening to lose Budweiser its title as the best-selling beer in America.
Although the more modern design is intended for young male Americans, the new design, according to the vice president of Anheuser-Busch Frank Abernante, "is one of many steps in our quest to reinforce Budweiser's role as a truly global beer brand."  This statement means that the new design was intended for foreign markets as well.  In fact, Budweiser began selling its beer in Russia in 2010, and is currently expanding its operations in China.
Statistics show that China is the world's leading consumer of beer in terms of volume, which suggests that Budweiser is trying to capitalize on this market's potential in order to recover from these losses.  Currently, of the 15 Anheuser-Busch breweries outside of the United States, 14 of them are positioned in China, which shows how interested the company is in this growing market.  Budweiser is already the fourth leading brand in the Chinese beer market, and the company hopes that this new design change will push them further up the list as one of China's most dominant brands.
The company hoped that the new design would appeal to a younger crowd in the American market, while simultaneously gaining the interest of Chinese consumers.  Americans can continue to identify with the brand because the can is primarily red and white, which are dominant colors on the American flag.  In addition, Chinese consumers can identify with the brand because the red and gold colors in the new design are reminiscent of the Chinese flag.  This demonstrates how Budweiser is using the can to break into new markets with hopes to improve the company's overall revenue.

Beer

Budweiser is brewed using barley malt, rice, water, hops and yeast. It is lagered with beechwood chips in the ageing vessel which, according to Anheuser-Busch, creates a smoother taste.
Budweiser remains one of the world's lowest rated beers on notable rating sites such as BeerAdvocate.Edward McClelland, "The rise and fall of an American beer" Salon (magazine) July 17, 2008 Based upon sales, it is the second most popular American brewed pale lager among North American beer consumers.
Budweiser and Bud Light are sometimes advertised as vegan beers, in that their ingredients and conditioning do not use animal by-products. Some might object to the inclusion of genetically engineered rice and animal products used in the brewing process.  In July 2006, Anheuser-Busch brewed a version of Budweiser with organic rice, for sale in Mexico. They have yet to extend this practice to any other countries.
Anheuser-Busch was one of the few breweries during Prohibition that had the resources and wherewithal to convert to "cereal beer" production—malt beverage made with non-fermentables such as rice and unmalted barley and rye, and able to stay under the 0.5% limit established by the Volstead Act. Following the repeal of Prohibition in 1933, the major breweries continued to use unmalted cereal grains to provide the full body and mouthfeel of a "real" beer while keeping the alcohol content low.

Budweiser brands

In addition to the regular Budweiser, Anheuser-Busch brews several different beers under the Budweiser brand, including Bud Light and Bud Ice.
In July 2010 Anheuser-Busch launched Budweiser 66 in the United Kingdom. Budweiser Brew No.66 has 4% alcohol by volume, and is brewed and distributed in the UK by Inbev UK Limited.








