[[Bodmin Moor]]

CATEGORIES: Arthurian locations, Hills of Cornwall, Bodmin Moor, Bodmin, Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Cornwall, Sites of Special Scientific Interest notified in 1951, Natural regions of England, Important Bird Areas of England, Moorlands of Cornwall

Bodmin Moor ( in size, and dates from the Carboniferous period of geological history. 
Bodmin Moor is one of five granite plutons in Cornwall that make up part of the Cornubian batholith Charoy, B. (1986) Genesis of the Cornubian Batholith (South West England): the example of the Carnmenellis Pluton in: Journal of Petrology; 1986 Oxford: OUP (see also Geology of Cornwall).
The name 'Bodmin Moor' is relatively recent, being an Ordnance Survey invention of 1813. It was formerly known as Fowey Moor after the River Fowey which rises within it.; p. 72

Geography

Dramatic granite tors rise from the rolling moorland: the best known are Brown Willy, the highest point in Cornwall at . To the south-east Kilmar Tor and Caradon Hill are the most prominent hills. Considerable areas of the moor are poorly drained and form marshes (in hot summers these can dry out). The rest of the moor is mostly rough pasture or overgrown with heather and other low vegetation.
The moor contains about 500 holdings with around 10,000 beef cows, 55,000 breeding ewes and 1,000 horses and ponies.153 Bodmin Moor at www.org.uk. Accessed on 8 Sep 2013

Rivers and inland waters

Bodmin Moor is the source of several of Cornwall's rivers: they are mentioned here anti-clockwise from the south. 
The River Fowey rises at a height of  and flows through Lostwithiel and into the Fowey estuary.Cornwall Rivers Project|Geography | Fowey and Lerryn  
The River Tiddy rises near Pensilva and flows southeast to its confluence with the River Lynher (the Lynher flows generally south-east until it joins the Hamoaze near Plymouth). The River Inny rises near Davidstow and flows southeast to its confluence with the River Tamar. 
The River Camel rises on Hendraburnick Down and flows for approximately  before joining the sea at Padstow. 
The River Warleggan rises near Temple and flows south to join the Fowey.
On the southern slopes of the moor lies Dozmary Pool. It is Cornwall's only natural inland lake and is glacial in origin. In the 20th century three reservoirs have been constructed on the moor; these are Colliford Lake, Siblyback Lake and Crowdy reservoirs which supply water for a large part of the county's population. Various species of waterfowl are resident around these waters. Buckingham: Barracuda Books, pp. 63-67

File:FoweyLooeRiversMapCornwallUK.gif|Rivers south of Bodmin Moor
File:MapRiversSoutheastCornwallUK.gif|Rivers southeast of Bodmin moor
File:MapOfRiverCamelCornwallUK.jpg|Rivers northwest of Bodmin Moor

Parishes

The parishes on the moor are as follows:

History and antiquities

Prehistoric times

10,000 years ago, in the Mesolithic period, hunter-gatherers wandered the moor when it was wooded and had a temperate climate. There are several documented cases of flint scatters being discovered by archaeologists, indicating that these hunter gatherers practised flint knapping in the region. (1996) "The Power of Rocks: landscape and topography on Bodmin Moor", in: World Archaeology; 28, p. 165 
During the Neolithic era, from about 4,500 to 2,300 BC, people began clearing trees and farming the land. It was also in this era that the production of various megalithic monuments began, predominantly long cairns (three of which have currently been identified, at Louden, Catshole and Bearah) and stone circles (sixteen of which have been identified). It was also likely that the naturally forming tors were also viewed in a similar manner to the manmade ceremonial sites. (1996) "The Power of Rocks: landscape and topography on Bodmin Moor", in: World Archaeology; 28, pp. 151-176
In the following Bronze Age, the creation of monuments increased dramatically, with the production of over 300 further cairns, and more stone circles and stone rows. More than 200 Bronze Age settlements with enclosures and field patterns have been recorded.com - Time Team - Bodmin Moor, Cornwall - text only and many prehistoric stone barrows and circles lie scattered across the moor.  In a programme shown in 2007 Channel 4's Time Team investigated a 500 metre cairn and the site of a Bronze Age village on the slopes of Rough Tor.
King Arthur's Hall thought to be a late Neolithic or early Bronze Age ceremonial site can be found to the east of St Breward on the moor.Secret Cornwall; Bodmin Moor and its environs

Medieval and modern times

Where practicable areas of the moor were used for pasture by herdsmen from the parishes surrounding the moor. Granite boulders were also taken from the moor and used for stone posts and to a certain extent for building (such material is known as moorstone). "Building materials" in: Pevsner, N. (1970) Cornwall. 2nd ed. Penguin Books, p. 29-34 Granite quarrying only became reasonably productive when gunpowder became available.
The moor gave its name (Foweymore) to one of the medieval districts called stannaries which administered tin mining: the boundaries of these were never defined precisely. Until the establishment of a turnpike road through the moor (the present A30) in the 1770s the size of the moorland area made travel within Cornwall very difficult.
Its Cornish name, Goen Bren, is first recorded in the 12th century. Westport, co. Mayo: Evertype; p. 6

Monuments and ruins

Roughtor was the site of a medieval chapel of St Michael and is now designated as a memorial to the 43rd Wessex Division of the British Army. In 1844 on Bodmin Moor the body of 18 year old Charlotte Dymond was discovered. Local labourer Matthew Weeks was accused of the murder and at noon on 12 August 1844 he was led from Bodmin Gaol and hanged. The murder site now has a monument erected from public money and the grave is at  Davidstow churchyard.The Murder of Charlotte Dymond

Legends and traditions

Dozmary Pool is identified by some people with the lake in which, according to Arthurian legend, Sir Bedivere threw Excalibur to The Lady of the Lake.
The Beast of Bodmin has been reported many times but never identified with certainty.








