[[Black metal]]

CATEGORIES: European culture, Heavy metal subgenres, Black metal, Extreme metal, Obscenity controversies

Black metal is an extreme subgenre of heavy metal music. Common traits include fast tempos, shrieked vocals, highly distorted guitars played with tremolo picking, blast beat drumming, raw (lo-fi) recording and unconventional song structures.
During the 1980s, several thrash metal and death metal bands formed a prototype for black metal. This so-called "first wave" included bands such as Venom, Bathory, Hellhammer and Celtic Frost.
Initially a synonym for "Satanic metal",

Characteristics

Although nowadays, 'black metal' often refers to the Norwegian style with high-pitched or raspy vocals and raw production, it has also been used for bands as different as Death SS, Mercyful Fate, Mayhem, Blasphemy,Emperor. In: Jon Kristiansen: Metalion: The Slayer Mag Diaries. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points Books 2011, p. 274. and the Greek and Finnish bands that emerged around the same time as the Norwegian scene.

Instrumentation

Norwegian-inspired black metal guitarists usually favor high-pitched guitar tones and heavy distortion. Guitarists often use dissonance—along with specific scales, intervals and chord progressions—to create a sense of dread. The tritone or flat-fifth is often used, for example. Guitar solos and low guitar tunings are rare in black metal.
The bass guitar is seldom used to play stand-alone melodies. It is not uncommon for the bass guitar to be muted against the guitar, or for it to homophonically follow the bass lines of the guitar. Typically, drumming is fast and uses double-bass or blast beats, or both.
Black metal songs often stray from conventional song structure and often lack clear verse-chorus sections. Instead, many black metal songs contain lengthy and repetitive instrumental sections.
The Greek style—established by Rotting Christ, Varathron and NecromantiaJ. Campbell: Varathron "Genesis of the Unaltered Evil" DLP/Triple LP and TS Out Now, 30 January 2012, accessed on 13 December 2012.—has more traditional heavy metalChad Bowar: Retro Recommendation: Rotting Christ - Thy Mighty Contract, 24 June 2011, accessed on 13 December 2012. and death metalStefan Glas: Rotting Christ. Passage to Arcturo. In: Metal Hammer, March 1992, pp. 70f. traits than Norwegian black metal.

Vocals and lyrics

Traditional black metal bands usually use high-pitched and raspy vocals which include shrieking, screaming and snarling. and is one of the traits that distinguishes the vocals of many traditional black metal artists from those of death metal, which usually uses low-pitched growls.
Black metal was originally used as a term for extreme metal bands with Satanic and anti-Christian lyrics; today, the most common lyrical theme is opposition to Christianity and other organized religions. As part of this, many artists write lyrics that could be seen to promote atheism, antitheism, paganism or Satanism. The anti-Christianity of secular or pagan artists is often linked to the Christianization of their countries. Other oft-explored themes are depression, nihilism, misanthropy, death and other dark topics. However, over time, many artists have begun to focus more on topics like winter, nature, mythology, folklore, philosophy and fantasy. (For more information about black metal lyrics, see the ideology section below.)

Production

Low-cost production quality was typical for early black metal artists with low budgets, where recordings would often be done in their homes or basements. Even when they were able to raise their production quality, many artists chose to keep making low fidelity (lo-fi) recordings. The reason for this was to stay true to the genre's underground roots and to make the music sound more "raw" and "cold". One of the better-known examples of this is the album Transilvanian Hunger by Darkthrone – a band whom Johnathan Selzer of Terrorizer magazine says "represent the DIY aspect of black metal". Many have claimed that, originally, black metal was not meant to attract a big audience. Trelldom and God Seed vocalist Gaahl said that during its early years, "black metal was never meant to reach an audience, it was purely for our own satisfaction".

Imagery and performances

Many bands choose not to play live. In: Ablaze, no. 5, May/June 1995, p. 12. In: The New York Times, 14 December 2009. Those who do maintain that these "live performances are not for entertainment or spectacle. Sincerity, authenticity and extremity are valued above all else."
Black metal artists often appear dressed in black with combat boots, bullet belts, spiked wristbands and inverted crosses/pentagrams to reinforce their anti-Christian or anti-religious stance. However, the most stand-out trait is their use of corpse paint – black and white makeup (sometimes mixed with real or fake blood), which is used to create a corpse-like appearance.
In the early 1990s, most pioneering black metal artists used simple black-and-white pictures or writing on their record covers. This could have been meant as a reaction against death metal bands, who at that time had begun to use brightly colored album artwork. Most underground black metal artists have continued this style. In the main, black metal album covers are usually atmospheric or provocative; some feature natural or fantasy landscapes (for example Burzum's Filosofem and Emperor's In the Nightside Eclipse) while others are violent, perverted, sacrilegious and iconoclastic (for example Marduk's Fuck Me Jesus and Dimmu Borgir's In Sorte Diaboli).

History

The following depiction follows a classification according to which pioneers like Venom, Bathory and Hellhammer were part of a "first wave" and the "second wave" was begun by the early Norwegian scene; especially by Mayhem vocalist Dead's suicide,Enrico Ahlig: Marduk-Gitarrist besitzt Leichenteile von Dead, 5 June 2012, accessed on 9 January 2013. Mayhem's leader Euronymous, who founded the Norwegian scene after Dead's suicide, and Darkthrone's album A Blaze in the Northern Sky.Jon "Metalion" Kristiansen: The Saga of True Norwegian Black Metal, accessed on 2 January 2013. A Blaze in the Northern Sky. In: Rock Hard, no. 269, October 2009, p. 97. There are also other definitions according to which other albums like Sarcófago's I.N.R.I. In: Rock Hard, no. 269, October 2009, p. 84. or Samael's Worship HimsG: 5 Klassiker. In: Rock Hard, no. 269, October 2009, p. 79. began the "second wave".

First wave

The first wave of black metal refers to those bands during the 1980s who influenced the black metal sound and formed a prototype for the genre. They were often speed metal or thrash metal bands.
The term "black metal" was coined by the English band Venom with their second album Black Metal (1982). Although deemed thrash metal rather than black metal by today's standards, the album's lyrics and imagery focused more on anti-Christian and Satanic themes than any before it. Their music was fast, unpolished in production and with raspy or grunted vocals. Venom's members also adopted pseudonyms, a practice that would become widespread among black metal musicians.
The Danish band Mercyful Fate influenced the Norwegian scene with their imagery and lyrics. Frontman King Diamond, who wore ghoulish black-and-white facepaint on stage, inspired what became known as "corpse paint".
Another major influence on black metal was the Swedish band Bathory. The band, led by Thomas Forsberg (aka 'Quorthon'), created "the blueprint for Scandinavian black metal". The band played in this style on their first four albums: Bathory (1984), The Return of the Darkness and Evil (1985), Under the Sign of the Black Mark (1987) and Blood Fire Death (1988). With Blood Fire Death and the two following albums, Bathory pioneered the style that would become known as Viking metal.
Hellhammer from Switzerland "made truly raw and brutal music"Daniel Ekeroth: Swedish Death Metal. Second edition. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points 2009, p. 244, accessed on 24 January 2013. with Satanic lyrics, and became an important influence on later black metal; "Their simple yet effective riffs and fast guitar sound were groundbreaking, anticipating the later trademark sound of early Swedish death metal". In 1984, members of Hellhammer formed Celtic Frost,Biography, accessed on 24 January 2013. whose music "explored more orchestral and experimental territories. The lyrics also became more personal, with topics about inner feelings and majestic stories. But for a couple of years, Celtic Frost was one of the world's most extreme and original metal bands, with a huge impact on the mid-90's black metal scene". Tom G. Warrior of Hellhammer and Celtic Frost credited English hardcore punk band Discharge as "a revolution, much like Venom", saying, "When I heard the first two Discharge records, I was blown away. I was just starting to play an instrument and I had no idea you could go so far."J. Bennett, "Procreation of the Wicked", Precious Metal: Decibel Presents the Stories Behind 25 Extreme Metal Masterpieces, Albert Mudrian, ed., Da Capo Press, pp. 34f.
Other artists usually considered part of this movement include Kreator, Sodom and Destruction (from Germany), Bulldozer and Death SS (from Italy), whose vocalist Steve Sylvester was a member of the Ordo Templi Orientis. In: Jon Kristiansen: Metalion: The Slayer Mag Diaries. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points Books 2011, p. 474.

End of the first wave

In 1987, in the fifth issue of his Slayer fanzine, Metalion wrote that "the latest fad of Black/Satanic bands seems to be over",Incubus. In: Jon Kristiansen: Metalion: The Slayer Mag Diaries. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points Books 2011, p. 88. the tradition being continued by a few bands like Incubus and Morbid Angel (from the United States), Sabbat (from Great Britain), Tormentor (from Hungary), Sarcófago (from Brazil), GrotesqueTiamat. In: Slayer, no. 8, 1991, p. 6. Second edition. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points 2009, p. 249, accessed on 8 October 2012. and TreblinkaDaniel Ekeroth: Swedish Death Metal. Second edition. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points 2009, p. 81, accessed on 24 September 2012./early TiamatDaniel Ekeroth: Swedish Death Metal. Second edition. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points 2009, p. 162f., accessed on 24 September 2012. (from Sweden).
Other early black metal bands include Sabbat (from Japan), formed in 1983Ronald Ziegler: Merchandise whorery, accessed on 23 June 2013. and influenced by Bathory, Slayer, Destruction, Sodom and Iron Maiden; and Mortuary Drape (from Italy), formed in 1986, who have an "idiosyncratic, dark sound that … does not remind of any of the usual reference bands",Götz Kühnemund: Mortuary Drape. Tolling 13 Knell (DLP). In: Rock Hard, no. 174, accessed on 14 June 2013. and whose first demo tape, Necromancy (1987), received "excellent response" and "is destined to become in the following years an authentic cult demo for the lovers of the genre".
In May 1990, the Japanese band Sigh was formed, releasing two demos that year, Desolation and Tragedies, followed by their EP Requiems for Fools two years later. With this EP, which was originally sent to Dead, but ended up in the hands of Euronymous after Dead's suicide, Sigh managed to gain the attention of Euronymous. Sigh's vocalist, Mirai Kawashima, began trading tapes and exchanging letters with several members of the Norwegian scene, including Samoth, Faust and Vikernes. In March 1993, they recorded their debut album, Scorn Defeat. Euronymous was interested in releasing it on his label, but he was murdered in August of that same year. Instead, the album was released on Voices of Wonder, which took over Euronymous' label after his death. The album became "a cult classic in the black metal world", which, according to the band themselves, "would influence the symphonic aspects of bands like Emperor and Cradle of Filth".
In the years before the Norwegian black metal scene arose, important recordings were released by Root and Master's Hammer (from Czechoslovakia), Von (from the United States), Rotting Christ (from Greece), Samael (from Switzerland) and Blasphemy (from Canada), whose debut album Fallen Angel of Doom (1990) is considered one of the most influential records for the war metal styleRobert Müller: Wollt Ihr den ewigen Krieg?. Der tote Winkel. In: Metal Hammer, November 2011. (also known as war black metal or bestial black metal). I.N.R.I. In: Rock Hard, Nr. 304, September 2012, p. 73. Fenriz of the Norwegian band Darkthrone called Master's Hammer's debut album Ritual "the first Norwegian black metal album, even though they are from Czechoslovakia". 21 November 2009, accessed on 24 September 2012.
In 1990 and 1991, Northern European metallers began to release music influenced by these bands or the older ones from the first wave. In Sweden this included Marduk, Dissection, Nifelheim and Abruptum. In Finland, there emerged a scene that mixed first wave black metal influences with elements of death metal and grindcore; this included Beherit, Archgoat and Impaled Nazarene, whose debut album Tol Cormpt Norz Norz Norz Rock Hard journalist Wolf-Rüdiger Mühlmann considers a part of war metal's roots. Tol Cormpt Norz Norz Norz. In: Rock Hard, no. 307, December 2012, p. 77. Bands such as Demoncy and Profanatica emerged during this time in the United States, when death metal was more popular among extreme metal fans. The Norwegian band Mayhem's concert at the Eiskeller in Leipzig with Eminenz and Manos in 1990, later released as Live in Leipzig, was said to have had a strong influence on the Eastern German sceneWolf-Rüdiger Mühlmann: Die Könige vom Westwall. Die legendären Protagonisten von damals im exklusiven Interview. In: Rock Hard, no. 269, October 2009, p. 92. and is even called the unofficial beginning of German black metal. In: Rock Hard, no. 269, October 2009, p. 89.

Second wave

The second wave of black metal began in the early 1990s and was spearheaded by the Norwegian black metal scene. During 1990–1993 a number of Norwegian artists began performing and releasing a new kind of black metal music; this included Mayhem, Thorns, Burzum, Darkthrone, Immortal, Satyricon, Emperor, Enslaved, Carpathian Forest and Gorgoroth. They developed the style of their 1980s forebears into a distinct genre. This was partly thanks to a new kind of guitar playing developed by Snorre 'Blackthorn' Ruch of Stigma Diabolicum/Thorns and Øystein 'Euronymous' Aarseth of Mayhem. Fenriz of Darkthrone has credited them with this innovation in a number of interviews. He described it as being "derived from Bathory" More detail about the scene's ideologies can be found in the ideology section. Visually, the dark themes of their music was complemented with corpsepaint, which became a way for many black metal artists to distinguish themselves from other metal bands of the era.

=Helvete and Deathlike Silence=

During May–June 1991, In its basement, Euronymous founded an independent record label named Deathlike Silence Productions. With the rising popularity of his band and others like it, the underground success of Euronymous's label is often credited for encouraging other record labels, who had previously shunned black metal acts, to then reconsider and release their material.

=Dead's suicide=

On 8 April 1991, Mayhem vocalist Per Yngve Ohlin (who called himself 'Dead') committed suicide while alone in a house shared by the band.
He was found with slit wrists and a shotgun wound to the head. The weapon belonged to Mayhem's guitarist, Euronymous, which lead to rumours that the shotgun was left there to be used by Dead. Dead's suicide note apologized for firing the weapon indoors and ended: "Excuse all the blood". after re-arranging some items. One of these photographs was later used as the cover of a bootleg live album: Dawn of the Black Hearts.
In time, rumors spread that Euronymous had made a stew with bits of Dead's brain and had made necklaces with bits of his skull. Euronymous allegedly gave some of these necklaces to musicians he deemed worthy. He used Dead's suicide to foster Mayhem's 'evil' image and claimed Dead had killed himself because extreme metal had become 'trendy' and commercialized.
Two other members of the early Norwegian scene would later commit suicide: Erik 'Grim' Brødreskift (of Immortal, Borknagar, Gorgoroth) in 1999 and Espen 'Storm' Andersen (of Strid) in 2001. In: Slayer, No. 20, Blood Fire Death, 2010, p. 78.

=Church burnings=

Musicians and fans of the Norwegian black metal scene took part in over 50 arsons of Christian churches in Norway from June 1992 to 1996. Some of the buildings were hundreds of years old and seen as important historical landmarks. One of the first and most notable was Norway's Fantoft stave church, which police believed was burnt by Varg Vikernes of the one-man band Burzum. The cover of Burzum's EP Aske (Norwegian for 'ashes') is a photograph of the Fantoft stave church after its destruction. In May 1994, he was found guilty for burning down Holmenkollen Chapel, Skjold Church and Åsane Church.
Many of those convicted for the church burnings have said that their actions were a symbolic "retaliation" against Christianity in Norway. Today, opinions on the church burnings differ within the black metal community. Guitarist Infernus and former vocalist Gaahl of the band Gorgoroth have praised the church burnings in interviews, with the latter saying "there should have been more of them, and there will be more of them". However, Necrobutcher and Kjetil Manheim of Mayhem have condemned the church burnings, with the latter claiming "It was just people trying to gain acceptance within a strict group black metal scene ... they wanted some sort of approval and status". Watain vocalist Erik Danielsson said that he respected these acts "as acts of their own will" but "the only Christianity they defeated was the last piece of Christianity within themselves. Which is a very good beginning, of course", and that the acts did not reach further than the inspiration they gave to others.

=Murder of Euronymous=

In early 1993, animosity arose between Euronymous and Vikernes. On the night of 10 August 1993, Varg Vikernes (of Burzum) and Snorre 'Blackthorn' Ruch (of Thorns) drove from Bergen to Euronymous's apartment in Oslo. Upon their arrival a confrontation began and Vikernes fatally stabbed Euronymous. His body was found on the stairs outside the apartment with 23 cut wounds – two to the head, five to the neck, and sixteen to the back. "Satan's Cheerleaders". SPIN. February 1996.
It has been speculated that the murder was the result of either a power struggle, a financial dispute over Burzum records or an attempt at "outdoing" a stabbing in Lillehammer the year before by Faust. and other members of the scene.
Vikernes was arrested on 19 August 1993 in Bergen.

=Conflict between scenes=

There was said to have been a strong rivalry between Norwegian black metal and Swedish death metal scenes. Fenriz and Tchort have noted that Norwegian black metal musicians had become "fed up with the whole death metal scene" and that "death metal was very uncool in Oslo" at the time. A number of times, Euronymous sent death threats to some of the more mainstream death metal groups in Europe. Allegedly, a group of Norwegian black metal fans even plotted to kidnap and murder certain Swedish death metal musicians.
There was a brief feud between Norwegian and Finnish scenes during 1992 and 1993.

=The second wave outside Norway=

Black metal scenes also emerged on the European mainland during the early 1990s, inspired by the Norwegian scene or the older bands, or both. In Poland, a scene was spearheaded by Graveland and Behemoth. In France, a close-knit group of musicians known as Les Légions Noires emerged; this included artists such as Mütiilation, Vlad Tepes, Belketre and Torgeist. Bands such as Black Funeral, Grand Belial's Key and Judas Iscariot emerged during this time in the United States.
A notable black metal group in England at the time was Cradle of Filth, who released three demos in a black/death metal style with symphonic flourishes, followed by a studio album, which featured a then-unusual hybrid style of black and gothic metal. The band then abandoned black metal for gothic metal,
The controversy surrounding Absurd drew attention to the German black metal scene. In 1993, the members murdered a boy from their school, Sandro Beyer. Alexander von Meilenwald from the German band Nagelfar considers Ungod's 1993 debut album Circle of the Seven Infernal Pacts, Desaster's 1994 demo Lost in the Ages, Tha-Norr's 1995 album Wolfenzeitalter (which he called an "fantastic, extremely atmospheric underground jewel" by one of the most underrated German bands), Lunar Aurora's 1996 debut Weltengänger and Katharsis's 2000 debut 666 (whose second album Kruzifixxion he called "by far the best traditional black metal album from Germany"Alexander von Meilenwald: 5 Klassiker. In: Rock Hard, no. 269, October 2009, p. 82.) to be the most important recordings for the German scene. He said they were "not necessarily the best German releases, but they all kicked off something".

After the second wave

In the beginning of the second wave, the different scenes developed their own styles; as Alan 'A. A. Nemtheanga' Averill says, "you had the Greek sound and the Finnish sound, and the Norwegian sound, and there was German bands and Swiss bands and that kind of thing". By the mid-1990s, the style of the Norwegian scene was being adopted by bands worldwide, and in 1998, Kerrang! journalist Malcolm Dome said that "black metal as we know it in 1998 owes more to Norway and to Scandinavia than any other particular country". Newer black metal bands also began raising their production quality and introducing additional instruments such as synthesizers and even full-symphony orchestras.
By the late 1990s, the underground deemed many of the Norwegian pioneers, like Emperor,Wolf-Rüdiger Mühlmann: War Black Metal: Die Extremsten der Extremen. Was bleibt, ist Schutt und Asche. In: Rock Hard, no. 279, pp. 71-73. A Worst Case Scenario Written by Tornado!. In: Jon Kristiansen: Metalion: The Slayer Mag Diaries. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points Books 2011, pp. 406f. Immortal, Dimmu Borgir, Ancient, Covenant/The Kovenant, and Satyricon, to have commercialized or sold out to the mainstream media and "big bastard labels".
After Euronymous's death, "some bands went more towards the Viking metal and epic style, while some bands went deeper into the abyss". The Swedish scene had started to burn churches in 1993, followed by other cases of arson, grave desecrations, death threats and other violent acts. Members of bands like Algaion and Nefandus were involved in some of these acts. In 1995, Jon Nödtveidt of Dissection joined the Misanthropic Luciferian Order (MLO). "The First Era", accessed on 25 October 2012. In 1997, he and another MLO member were arrested and charged with shooting dead a 37-year-old man. It was said he was killed "out of anger" because he had "harassed" the two men. Nödtveidt received a 10-year sentence. As the victim was a homosexual immigrant, Dissection was accused of being a Nazi band,Dissection. Fear the Return!. In: Jon Kristiansen: Metalion: The Slayer Mag Diaries. Brooklyn, NY: Bazillion Points Books 2011, p. 568-570. but Nödtveidt denied this and dismissed racism and nationalism. The Swedish band Shining, founded in 1996, began writing music almost exclusively about depression and suicide, musically inspired by Strid and by Burzum's albums Hvis lyset tar oss and Filosofem. Verzweiflung, mein Erbe. In: Legacy, no. 73, accessed on 27 September 2012. Vocalist Niklas Kvarforth wanted to "force feed" his listeners "with self-destructive and suicidal imagery and lyrics". In the beginning he used the term "suicidal black metal" for his musicShining (25.04.07). to separate himself from the "mediocre worms". However, he stopped using the term in 2001 because it had begun to be used by a slew of other bands, whom he felt had misinterpreted his vision and were using the music as a kind of therapy rather than a weapon against the listener as Kvarforth intended. He said that he "wouldn't call Shining a black metal band" and called the "suicidal black metal" term a "foolish idea".
According to Erik Danielsson, when his band Watain formed in 1998 there were very few bands who took black metal as seriously as the early Norwegian scene had. A newer generation of Swedish Satanic bands like Watain and Ondskapt, supposedly inspired by Ofermod,Nathan T. Birk: OFERMOD. the new band of Nefandus member Belfagor, put this scene "into a new light". Kvarforth said, "It seems like people actually got afraid again". "The current Swedish black metal scene has a particularly ambitious and articulate understanding of mysticism and its validity to black metal. Many Swedish black metal bands, most notably Watain and Dissection, are were affiliated with the Temple of the Black Light, or Misanthropic Luciferian Order …, a Theistic, Gnostic, Satanic organization based in Sweden." Upon his release in 2004, Jon Nödtveidt restarted Dissection with new members whom he felt were able to "stand behind and live up to the demands of Dissection's Satanic concept". He started calling Dissection "the sonic propaganda unit of the MLO"Dissection: Live Legacy, Nuclear Blast 2003. - Final Interview with Jon Nödtveidt -, accessed on 25 October 2012. and released a third full-length album, Reinkaos. The lyrics contain magical formulae from the Liber Azerate and are based on the organization's teachings. After the album's release and a few concerts, Nödtveidt said that he had "reached the limitations of music as a tool for expressing what I want to express, for myself and the handful of others that I care about" and disbanded Dissection before committing suicide.
A part of the underground scene adopted a Jungian interpretation of the church burnings and other acts of the early scene as the re-emergence of ancient archetypes, which Kadmon of Allerseelen and the authors of Lords of Chaos had implied in their writings, Members of the NSBM scene, among others, see the Norwegian bands as poseurs whose "ideology is cheap", although they still respect Vikernes and Burzum, whom Grand Belial's Key vocalist Richard Mills called "the only Norwegian band that remains unapologetic and literally convicted of his beliefs".
In France, besides Les Légions Noires (The Black Legions), a NSBM scene arose. Members of French band Funeral desecrated a grave in Toulon in June 1996, and a 19-year-old black metal fan stabbed a priest to death in Mulhouse on Christmas Eve 1996. According to MkM of Antaeus, the early French scene "was quite easy to divide: either you were NSBM and you had the support from zine and the audience, or you were part of the black legions and you had that 'cult' aura... Since Antaeus was a band from Paris, not performing NSBM nor 'Scandinavan black metal' with all its cliché, we did not fit anywhere, yet we never did change to adapt". Many French bands, like Deathspell Omega, have an avantgarde approachJan Jaedike: Merrimack. Appetite for Destruction. In: Rock Hard, no. 302, July 2012, p. 62. and a disharmonic sound that is representative of that scene. The scene is known for innovative bands like Deathspell Omega, Antaeus and Aosoth. The Howling Spirit. In: Metal Hammer, July 2013, p. 90.
In Australia, a scene led by bands like Deströyer 666, Vomitor, Hobbs' Angel of Death, Nocturnal Graves and Gospel of the Horns arose. This scene's typical style is a mixture of old school black metal and raw thrash metal influenced by old Celtic Frost, Bathory, Venom and Sodom but also with its own elements.Götz Kühnemund: Gospel of the Horns. Schluss mit dem schöngeistigen Quatsch!. In: Rock Hard, no. 306, November 2012, p. 43.
In Italy, the first black metal bands since Death SS and Mortuary Drape were Necromass, Sulphuria and Apolokia. In Sicily, a scene was created by people like Agghiastru, Rosario Badalamenti and Nadur called Mediterranean scene and led by Inchiuvatu. They decided to use the Sicilian language for the lyrics and were influenced by Mediterranean folk musicGrind Zone, n°5/2007. and the Italian progressive rock of the seventies. This will to create a "Mediterranean way to black metal" in the mid nineties was also shared by bands like Moonspell and Nightfall.
The early American black metal bands remained underground. Some of them—like Grand Belial's Key and Judas Iscariot—joined an international NSBM organization called the Pagan Front, although Judas Iscariot sole member Akhenaten left the organization. Thelemnar, the drummer of German band Secrets of the Moon, said he got to know him "only as an intelligent person and never as a Nazi". Schwarzes Amerika. In: Metal Hammer, August 2007, pp. 88f. Other bands like Averse Sefira never had any link with Nazism. The US bands have no common style. Many were musically inspired by Burzum but did not necessarily adopt Vikernes's ideas. Profanatica's music is close to death metal,Gunnar Sauermann: Verfeindete Brüder. Tod gegen Schwarz – Death oder Black Metal?. In: Metal Hammer, August 2007, p. 90. while Demoncy were accused of ripping off Gorgoroth riffs. Schwarzes Amerika. In: Metal Hammer, August 2007, p. 91. Akhenaten was mainly inspired by Burzum, and Liturgy (whose frontman Hunter Hunt-Hendrix wants to replace traditional black metal's "death and atrophy" with "life and hypertrophy"). In: The New York Times, 5 June 2011. These bands eschew black metal's traditional lyrical content for "something more Whitman-esque" and have been rejected by some traditional black metallers for their ideologiesWatain. Black Metal Militia. In: Slayer, no. 20, Blood Fire Death, 2010, p. 9. and the post-rock and shoegazing influences some of them have adopted.
The year 1993 saw the formation of Melechesh in Jerusalem, "undoubtedly the first overtly anti-Christian band to exist in one of the holiest cities in the world".
Since the 2000s, a number of anti-Islamic and anti-religious black metal bands—whose members come from Muslim backgrounds—have emerged in the Middle East. Janaza, believed to be Iraq's first female black metal artist, released the demo Burning Quran Ceremony in 2010. Its frontwoman, Anahita, said that her parents and brother were killed by a suicide bomb during the Iraq War. Another Iraqi band, Seeds of Iblis, released their debut EP Jihad Against Islam in 2011 through French label Legion of Death. These bands, along with Tadnees (from Saudi Arabia), False Allah (from Bahrain) and Mosque of Satan (from Lebanon), style themselves as the "Arabic Anti-Islamic Legion". Another Lebanese band, Ayat, drew much attention with their debut album Six Years of Dormant Hatred, released through North American label Moribund Records in 2008. "When Black Metal's Anti-Religious Message Gets Turned on Islam". The Atlantic, 11 July 2012.

Stylistic divisions

Regarding the sound of black metal, there are two conflicting groups within the genre: "those that stay true to the genre's roots, and those that introduce progressive elements". The former believe that the music should always be minimalist – performed only with the standard guitar-bass-drums setup and recorded in a low fidelity style. One supporter of this train of thought is Blake Judd of Nachtmystium, who has rejected labeling his band black metal for its departure from the genre's typical sound.
Since the 1990s, different styles of black metal have emerged and some have melded Norwegian-style black metal with other genres.

Ideology

Bands that were part of the 'first wave' had 'Satanic' imagery and lyrics, although most of them were not Satanists. although the early Pagan bands did not call themselves 'black metal'. Bands associating themselves with black metal are generally opposed to Christianity and the other major religions. Arguably, this is the only shared belief among those calling their music black metal. Artists who oppose Christianity tend to promote atheism, antitheism, paganism or Satanism. Many artists also write lyrics that appear to be nihilistic and misanthropic.
An article in the Chronicles of Chaos webzine noted that "An overriding feature of almost all black metal is the fascination with the past".
Olson writes that some artists hold a belief similar to transcendentalists. They try to leave or "transcend" their physical form and receive knowledge from a higher being.
Some prominent musicians within the scene hold that black metal does not need to represent any particular ideology. For example, Jan Axel Blomberg (Hellhammer) said in an interview with Metal Library that "In my opinion, black metal today is just music".

Satanism

Black metal was originally a term for extreme metal bands with Satanic lyrics and imagery. However, most of the 'first wave' bands (including Venom, who coined the term 'black metal') were not Satanists and merely used it to provoke. One of the few exceptions was Mercyful Fate singer and Church of Satan member King Diamond, whom Michael Moynihan calls "one of the only performers of the '80s Satanic metal who was more than just a poseur using a devilish image for shock value".
In the early 1990s, many Norwegian black metalers presented themselves as misanthropic Devil worshippers
Others shun the belief in Satan, seeing it as "Judeo-Christian" in origin,Varg Vikernes: "A Burzum Story: Part III - The Lie-Propaganda". Burzum."Writing the deeds of Darkness and Evil". Official Bathory website. Retrieved 29 October 2012. and regard Satanists as perpetuating, and playing a part in, the "Judeo-Christian" worldview."Mayhem vs. Burzum: Opposing views of black metal", Invisible Oranges, 21 September 2011. Quorthon of Bathory said that he used 'Satan' and 'Satanism' to provoke and attack Christianity. However, with his third and fourth albums he began "attacking Christianity from a different angle", realizing that Satanism is a "Christian product" and seeing them both as "religious hocus-pocus". Nevertheless, some artists use Satan as a symbol or metaphor for their beliefs. This includes LaVeyan Satanists (who are atheist) and others. Vocalist Gaahl, who considers himself a Norse Shaman,Tatiana Godarska: GORGOROTH'S GAAHL – INFINITE DIMENSIONS, 19 June 2006, accessed on 28 October 2012. said: "We use the word 'Satanist' because it is Christian world and we have to speak their language ... When I use the word 'Satan', it means the natural order, the will of a man, the will to grow, the will to become the superman". Tartarean Desire Webzine. Varg Vikernes called himself a Satanist in early interviews but "now downplays his former interest in Satanism", saying he was using Satan as a symbol for Odin as the 'adversary' of the Christian God.

Unblack metal

Unblack metal, or Christian black metal, is music that sounds musically similar to black metal but with artists, lyrics, and imagery that promote Christianity. The Australian band Horde's debut album Hellig Usvart, released through Nuclear Blast in 1994, is often credited as being the first Christian black metal album, although the sole member, known as Anonymous, has stated that "there were similar unblack bands prior to Horde, even in Norway", referring to such bands as Antestor, who formed in 1990, although prior to 1993 they were a death/doom band bearing a different name, Crush Evil. Hellig Usvart caused great controversy in the black metal scene, and death threats were sent to Nuclear Blast Records headquarters demanding them to release the members' names. The name of Anonymous was later revealed as Jayson Sherlock, a drummer for the bands Mortification and Paramaecium.
Many in the black metal scene see "Christian black metal" as an oxymoron. On the British black metal documentary Murder Music: A History of Black Metal (2007), all interviewed musicians stated, when asked about the matter, that black metal cannot be Christian. The term "Christian black metal" drew mocking replies from black metal musicians, for example Martin Walkyier of the English metal band Sabbat commented: "'Christian black metal?' What do they do? Do they build churches? Do they repair them? (laughs)". In fact, the early unblack metal groups Horde and Antestor refused to call their music "black metal" because they felt that the term was strongly associated with Satanism. Horde called its music "holy unblack metal",

National Socialist black metal

National Socialist black metal (NSBM) is black metal music by artists who promote National Socialist (Nazi) or similar beliefs through their lyrics and imagery. The ideology of such bands is typically a mix of paganism, white supremacy, white separatism and antisemitism. However, some bands meld these beliefs with Satanism or occultism, rather than paganism. NSBM is not seen as a distinct genre, but as a neo-völkisch movement or subculture within black metal. Varg Vikernes was the first to bring such views into the scene. Some black metal bands have made references to Nazi Germany for shock value, causing them to be wrongly labeled as NSBM.
NSBM artists are a small minority within black metal, according to Mattias GardellGardell, Mattias. Gods of the Blood (2003). and Benjamin Hedge Olson.

Media

Documentaries on black metal

References in media





Sources

Further reading


