[[B. F. Skinner]]

CATEGORIES: Articles with inconsistent citation formats, 1904 births, 1990 deaths, American atheists, American philosophers, American psychologists, American skeptics, Behaviorism, Behaviourist psychologists, Cancer deaths in Massachusetts, Educational psychologists, Ethologists, Guggenheim Fellows, Deaths from leukemia, National Medal of Science laureates, Harvard University alumni, Harvard University faculty, Hamilton College (New York) alumni, People from Cambridge, Massachusetts, People from Minnesota, People from Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania, Social philosophers, University of Minnesota faculty, Fellows of the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry, Burials at Mount Auburn Cemetery, American inventors, People associated with the Human Potential Movement

Burrhus Frederic (B. F.) Skinner (March 20, 1904 – August 18, 1990) was an American psychologist, behaviorist, author, inventor, and social philosopher.pbworks.Muskingum.edu
Skinner invented the operant conditioning chamber, also known as the Skinner Box., Gilbert D, T., & Wegner D, M. (2011). Psychology. (2 ed.). New York: Worth publishers. He was a firm believer of the idea that human free will was actually an illusion and any human action was the result of the consequences of that same action. If the consequences were bad, there was a high chance that the action would not be repeated; however if the consequences were good, the actions that led to it would be reinforced., and Gilbert Daniel. (2011). Psychology. (2 ed.). New York, 2011. Web. 22 Mar. 2013. He called this the principle of reinforcement.
He innovated his own philosophy of science called radical behaviorism,B. F. Skinner, About Behaviorism and founded his own school of experimental research psychology—the experimental analysis of behavior, coining the term operant conditioning. His analysis of human behavior culminated in his work Verbal Behavior, as well as his philosophical manifesto Walden Two, both of which  have recently seen enormous increase in interest experimentally and in applied settings. Contemporary academia considers Skinner a pioneer of modern behaviorism along with John B. Watson and Ivan Pavlov.
Skinner discovered and advanced the rate of response as a dependent variable in psychological research. He invented the cumulative recorder to measure rate of responding as part of his highly influential work on schedules of reinforcement.B. F. Skinner, (1938) The Behavior of Organisms.C. B. Ferster & B. F. Skinner, (1957) Schedules of Reinforcement. In a June 2002 survey, Skinner was listed as the most influential psychologist of the 20th century. He was a prolific author who published 21 books and 180 articles.edu, accessed on 5-20-07.org, Smith Morris Bibliography

Biography

Skinner was born in Susquehanna, Pennsylvania to William and Grace Skinner. His father was a lawyer. He became an atheist after a Christian teacher tried to assuage his fear of the hell that his grandmother described."Within a year I had gone to Miss Graves to tell her that I no longer believed in God. 'I know,' she said, 'I have been through that myself.' But her strategy misfired: I never went through it." B.F. Skinner, pp. 387-413, E.G. Boring and G. Lindzey's A History of Psychology in Autobiography (Vol. 5), New York: Appleton Century-Crofts, 1967. His brother Edward, two and a half years younger, died at age sixteen of a cerebral hemorrhage. He attended Hamilton College in New York with the intention of becoming a writer. He found himself at a disadvantage at Hamilton College with many due to his intellectual attitude.B.F. Skinner: A Life Paperback. by Daniel W. Bjork: 9781557984166: Amazon. N.p., n.d. Web. 04 June 2013. While attending, he joined Lambda Chi Alpha Fraternity. He wrote for the school paper, but as an atheist, he was critical of the religious school he attended. He also attended Harvard University after receiving his B.A. in English literature in 1926 where he would later research, teach, and eventually become a prestigious board member. While at Harvard, he invented his prototype for the Skinner Box. Also, a fellow student Fred Keller, convinced Skinner he could make an experimental science from the study of behavior. This led Skinner to join Keller and they created different tools for small experiments. After graduation, he unsuccessfully tried to write a great novel while he lived with his parents, which he later called the Dark Years. He soon became disillusioned with his literary skills despite encouragement from widely renowned literary genius Robert Frost and concluded that he had little world experience and no strong personal perspective from which to write. His encounter with John B. Watson's Behaviorism led him into graduate study in psychology and to the development of his own operant behaviorism.
Skinner received a Ph.D. from Harvard in 1931, and remained there as a researcher until 1936. He then taught at the University of Minnesota at Minneapolis and later at Indiana University, where he was chair of the psychology department from 1946–1947, before returning to Harvard as a tenured professor in 1948. He remained at Harvard for the rest of his life. In 1973 Skinner was one of the signers of the Humanist Manifesto II.
In 1936, Skinner married Yvonne Blue. The couple had two daughters, Julie (m. Vargas) and Deborah (m. Buzan). He died of leukemia on August 18, 1990, D.W. (1993). B.F. Skinner, A Life. New York: Basic Books. Skinner continued to write and work until just before his death. A few days before Skinner died, he was given a lifetime achievement award by the American Psychological Association and delivered a 15-minute address concerning his work.
A controversial figure, Skinner has been depicted in many different ways. Much of Skinner's criticism derived from his penchant for attempting to apply science proven in laboratory environments at a universal level.

Theory

Skinner called his particular brand of behaviorism "Radical" behaviorism. 1 Causes of Behaviour § 3 Radical Behaviorism B. F. Skinner 1974 ISBN 0-394-71618-3 Radical behaviorism is the philosophy of the science of behavior. It seeks to understand behavior as a function of environmental histories of reinforcing consequences. Such a functional analysis makes it capable of producing technologies of behavior (see Applied behavior analysis). This applied behaviorism lies on the opposite side of the ideological spectrum as the field of cognitive science. Unlike less austere behaviorism, it does not accept private events such as thinking, perceptions, and unobservable emotions in a causal account of an organism's behavior
 
