[[British Army]]

CATEGORIES: 1707 establishments in Great Britain, British Armed Forces, British Army, Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom), Military of the United Kingdom, Military units and formations established in 1707, Wars involving the United Kingdom

The British Army is the land warfare branch of the British Armed Forces. The English Army founded in 1660, was succeeded in 1707 by the new British Army,The English Army comprised Irish and Welsh regiments as Ireland was a client state of England, and Wales was part of England before the union with Scotland. incorporating the existing Scottish regiments. It was administered by the War Office from London, which was subsumed into the Ministry of Defence in 1964. The professional head of the British Army is the Chief of the General Staff.
The full-time element of the British Army is referred to as the Regular Army and has been since the creation of the reservist Territorial Force in 1908. All members of the Army swear (or affirm) allegiance to the monarch as commander-in-chief. However, the Bill of Rights of 1689 requires Parliamentary consent for the Crown to maintain a standing army in peacetime. Parliament approves the continued existence of the Army by passing an Armed Forces Act at least once every five years. In contrast to the Royal Navy, Royal Marines and Royal Air Force, the British Army does not include Royal in its title because, after a historic struggle between Parliament and monarchy, the British Army has always been answerable to Parliament and the British people rather than the Monarch. Many of the Army's constituent regiments and corps have been granted the "Royal" prefix and have members of the Royal Family occupying senior honorary positions within some regiments.
Throughout its history, the British Army has seen action in a number of major wars involving the world's great powers, including the Seven Years' War, the Napoleonic Wars, the Crimean War, World War I and World War II. Repeatedly emerging victorious from these decisive wars has allowed Britain to influence world events with its policies and establish itself as one of the world's leading military and economic powers. Today, the British Army is deployed in several countries, including as an expeditionary force and a United Nations peacekeeping force. Additionally, the British Army maintains five permanent overseas postings. 

History

Shortly after the Act of Union in 1707 the English Army and Scottish and Irish regiments were amalgamated to form the British Army. The order of seniority of the most senior line regiments in the British Army is based on the order of seniority in the English army. Scottish and Irish regiments were only allowed to take a rank in the English army from the date of their arrival in England or the date when they were first placed on the English establishment. For example, in 1694 a board of general officers was convened to decide the rank of English, Irish and Scots regiments serving in the Netherlands; the regiment that became known as the Scots Greys were designated as the 4th Dragoons because there were three English regiments raised prior to 1688 when the Scots Greys were first placed on the English establishment. In 1713, when a new board of general officers was convened to decide upon the rank of several regiments, the seniority of the Scots Greys was reassessed and based on their entry into England in June 1685. At that time there was only one English regiment of dragoons, and so after some delay the Scots Greys obtained the rank of 2nd Dragoons in the British Army.
Following William and Mary's accession to the throne, England involved itself in the War of the Grand Alliance, primarily to prevent a French invasion restoring Mary's father, James II. 144 Following the 1707 union of England and Scotland, and the 1801 creation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, British foreign policy on the continent was to contain expansion by its competitor powers such as France and Spain. Spain, in the previous two centuries, had been the dominant global power, and the chief threat to England's early transatlantic ambitions, but was now waning. The territorial ambitions of the French, however, led to the War of the Spanish SuccessionMallinson, p. 50 and the Napoleonic Wars. Russian activity led to the Crimean War. After 1745, recruits were increasingly drawn from Scotland; by the mid-1760s between one fifth and one third of officers were from Scotland. 103
From the time of the end of the Seven Years' War in 1763, Great Britain and its successor the United Kingdom was one of the leading military and economic powers of the world.

Early British Empire

The British Empire expanded in this time to include colonies, protectorates, and Dominions throughout the Americas, Africa, Asia and Australasia. Although the Royal Navy is widely regarded as having been vital for the rise of the British Empire, and British dominance of the world, the British Army played an important role in the colonisation of India and other regions. 104 Typical tasks included garrisoning the colonies, capturing strategically important territories, and participating in actions to pacify colonial borders, provide support to allied governments, suppress Britain's rivals, and protect against foreign powers and hostile natives.
British soldiers also helped capture strategically important territories, allowing the empire to expand. The army was also involved in numerous wars to pacify the borders, or to prop up friendly governments, and thereby keep other, competitive, empires away from the British Empire's borders. Among these actions were the Seven Years' War,Mallinson, p. 106 the American Revolutionary War,Mallinson, p. 129 the Napoleonic Wars,Mallinson, p. 165 the First and Second Opium Wars,Mallinson, p. 102 the Boxer Rebellion, the Irish War of Independence,Mallinson, p. 282 its serial interventions into Afghanistan (which were meant to maintain a friendly buffer state between British India and the Russian Empire),Mallinson, p. 203 and the Crimean War (to keep the Russian Empire at a safe distance by coming to Turkey's aid). 195
As had its predecessor, the English Army, the British Army fought Spain, France, and the Netherlands for supremacy in North America and the West Indies. With native and provincial assistance, the Army conquered New France in the North American theatre of the Seven Years' War and subsequently suppressed a Native American uprising in Pontiac's War.Mallinson, p. 110
The British Army was heavily involved in the Napoleonic Wars and served in multiple campaigns across Europe (including continuous deployment in the Peninsular War), the Caribbean, North Africa and later in North America. The war between the British and the First French Empire of Napoleon Bonaparte stretched around the world and at its peak, in 1813, the regular army contained over 250,000 men. A Coalition of Anglo-Dutch and Prussian Armies under the Duke of Wellington and Field Marshal von Blücher defeated Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815. 177
The English had been involved, both politically and militarily, in Ireland since being given the Lordship of Ireland by the Pope in 1171. The campaign of English republican Protector Oliver Cromwell involved uncompromising treatment of the Irish towns (most notably Drogheda) that had supported the Royalists during the English Civil War. The English Army (and subsequently the British Army) stayed in Ireland primarily to suppress numerous Irish revolts and campaigns for independence. In addition to its ongoing conflict with ethnic Irish nationalists, it was faced with the prospect of battling Anglo-Irish and Ulster Scots peoples in Ireland, angered primarily by unfavourable taxation of Irish produce imported into Britain, who, alongside other Irish groups, had raised their own volunteer army and threatened to emulate the American colonists if their conditions were not met. Having learnt from their experience in America, the British government sought a political solution. The British Army found itself fighting Irish rebels, both Protestant and Catholic, primarily in Ulster and Leinster (Wolfe Tone's United Irishmen) in the 1798 rebellion.The 1798 Irish Rebellion BBC
In addition to battling the armies of other European Empires (and of its former colonies, the United States, in the American War of 1812), in the battle for global supremacy, the British Army fought the Chinese in the First and Second Opium Wars, and the Boxer Rebellion, Māori tribes in the first of the New Zealand Wars, Nawab Shiraj-ud-Daula's forces and British East India Company mutineers in the Sepoy Rebellion of 1857, the Boers in the First and Second Boer Wars, Irish Fenians in Canada during the Fenian raids and Irish separatists in the Anglo-Irish War.
The vastly increasing demands of imperial expansion, and the inadequacies and inefficiencies of the underfunded, post-Napoleonic Wars British Army, and of the Militia, Yeomanry, and Volunteer Force, led to the Cardwell and Childers Reforms of the late 19th century, which gave the British Army its modern shape, and redefined its regimental system. The Haldane Reforms of 1907 formally created the Territorial Force as the Army's volunteer reserve component by merging and reorganising the Volunteer Force, Militia, and Yeomanry. 79

World Wars

Great Britain's dominance of the world had been challenged by numerous other powers; in the Twentieth Century, most notably Germany. A century before, it was still vying with Napoleonic France for pre-eminence in Europe and around the world, and Hannoverian Britain's natural allies were the various Kingdoms and principalities of Northern Germany. By the middle of the 19th Century, Britain and France were allied in preventing Russia's appropriation of the Ottoman Empire (although it was the fear of French invasion that led, shortly after, to the creation of the Volunteer Force). By the first decade of the Twentieth Century, however, the UK was allied with France (by the Entente Cordiale) and Russia (which had its own secret agreement with France of mutual support in any war against the Prussian-led German Empire and the Austro-Hungarian Empire), and when the First World War broke out in 1914, the British Army sent the British Expeditionary Force to France and Belgium to prevent Germany from occupying these countries. 525–526 The British Army created the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force in Egypt and sent it to Gallipoli in an unsuccessful attempt to capture Constantinople and secure a sea route to Russia.7, Edited by Hugh Chisholm, (1911), 3; "Constantinople, the capital of the Turkish Empire." After the retreat from Gallipoli nearly 400,000 men in 13 divisions from the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force and the Force in Egypt formed a strategic reserve in Egypt called the Egyptian Expeditionary Force. 32Wavell 1968, p. 41 With most of the strategic reserve sent to the Western Front, an Egyptian Expeditionary Force of two British infantry and one Australian and New Zealand mounted division in Eastern Force, successfully defend the Suez Canal and Romani in 1916 from German and Ottoman incursions. 50Falls 1930 Vol. 1, pp. 380–406 This force captured the Sinai and garrisoned the extended lines of communication, but in early 1917 their advance was stopped at Gaza until towards the end of the year when a greatly enlarged force of infantry and mounted troops captured Beersheba, most of southern Palestine and Jerusalem. Allenby's force, now including Indian Army units which replaced a number of British units sent to the Western Front, captured the southern Jordan Valley in 1918 and carried out two major, but unsuccessful attacks to Amman and Es Salt and occupied part of the Jordan Valley, during preparations for his final successful assault in September at the Battle of Megiddo. As a result of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force's capture of two Ottoman armies, an armistice with the Ottoman Empire was signed on 31 October 1918. 194–244
The War would be the most devastating in British military history, with near 800,000 men killed and over 2 million wounded. In the early part of the war, the professional force of the BEF was virtually destroyed and, by turns, a volunteer (and then conscripted) force replaced it. Major battles included the Battle of the Somme. 310 Advances in technology saw advent of the tank,
The Second World War broke out in 1939 with the German invasion of Poland. 335 British assurances to the Polish led the British Empire to declare war on Germany. Again an Expeditionary Force was sent to France, only to be hastily evacuated as the German forces swept through the Low Countries and across France in 1940. 342 Only the Dunkirk evacuation saved the entire Expeditionary Force from capture. Later, however, the British would have spectacular success defeating the Italians and Germans at the Battle of El Alamein in North Africa,Taylor (1976), p. 157 and in the D-Day invasion of Normandy with the help of American, Canadian, Australian, New Zealand, Indian and Free French forces. In the Far East, the British army battled the Japanese in Burma. 210 The Second World War saw the British army develop its Special Air Service, Commando units and the Parachute Regiment. 371

Postcolonial era

After the end of the Second World War, the British Army was significantly reduced in size, although National Service continued until 1960. 384 This period also saw the process of decolonisation commence with the partition and independence of India and Pakistan, followed by the independence of British colonies in Africa and Asia. Accordingly the army's strength was further reduced, in recognition of Britain's reduced role in world affairs, outlined in the 1957 Defence White Paper.Mallinson, p. 407 A large force of British troops also remained in Germany, facing the threat of Soviet invasion. 440 The British Army of the Rhine was the Germany garrison formation, with the main fighting force being I (BR) Corps. The Cold War saw significant technological advances in warfare and the Army saw more technologically advanced weapons systems come into service. 442
Despite the decline of the British Empire, the Army was still deployed around the world, fighting wars in Aden,Mallinson, p. 401 Indonesia, Cyprus, Kenya and Malaya. 402 In 1982 the British Army, alongside the Royal Marines, helped to recapture the Falkland Islands during the Falklands conflict against Argentina.
In the three decades following 1969, the Army was heavily deployed in Northern Ireland, to support the Royal Ulster Constabulary (later the Police Service of Northern Ireland) in their conflict with republican paramilitary groups, called Operation Banner. 411 The locally recruited Ulster Defence Regiment was formed, later becoming home service battalions in the Royal Irish Regiment in 1992, before being disbanded in 2006. Over 700 soldiers were killed during the Troubles. Following the IRA ceasefires between 1994 and 1996 and since 1997, demilitarisation has taken place as part of the peace process, reducing the military presence from 30,000 to 5,000 troops. This is part of the 'normalisation' programme in Northern Ireland in response to the IRA's declared end to its activities.Troops pull out of Bessbrook Operation Banner News, 25 June 2007

Today

Personnel

The British Army is purely a professional force since National service came to an end. The full-time element of the British Army is referred to as the Regular Army since the creation of the reservist Territorial Force in 1908. The size and structure of the British Army is continually evolving, but as of 1 December 2013, the British Army employs; 95,800 Regulars, 3,130 Gurkhasdasa. 1 December 2013. and 26,500 Army Reservists for a combined component strength of 125,430 personnel.
The future transformation of the British Army is referred to as "Army 2020", Army 2020 is the result of the October 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review and the number of following reviews/modifications thereafter. Army 2020 will "ensure that the British Army remains the most capable Army in its class" and enable "it to better meet the security challenges of the 2020s and beyond".
In addition to the active elements of the British Army (Regular and Army Reserve), all ex-Regular Army personnel remain liable to be recalled for duty in a time of need, this is known as the Regular Reserve. Category A is mandatory, with the length of time serving in category A depending on time spent in Regular service. Category D is voluntary and consists of personnel who are no-longer required to serve in category A. Regular Reserves in both category A and D serve under a fixed-term reserve contract and are liable to report for training or service overseas and at home. These contracts are similar in nature to those of the Army Reserve.mod - reserves and cadet strengths, table 3 page 13 - read note 2. April 2013. The Long Term Reserve is also part of the Regular Reserve but excludes personnel serving in categories A and D. Unlike the other reserves the Long Term Reserve do not serve under a contract of any sort, instead they retain a "statutory liability for service" and may be recalled to service under Section 52 of the Reserve Forces Act (RFA) 1996 (until the age of 55). In 2007 there were 121,800 Regular Reserves of the British Army, of which, 33,760 served in categories A and D.mod - reserves and cadet strengths, table 3 page 5. April 2012. Publications since April 2013 no-longer report the entire strength of the Regular Reserve, instead they only give a figure for the Regular Reserves serving in categories A and D only. They had a reported strength of 31,300 personnel in 2013.
The table below shows historical personnel trends of the British Army from 1750 to 2014. The Army Reserve – or Territorial Army as it was known then - did not come into existence until 1908.Hansard 20 March 1950 Size of the Territorial Army 1950.Hansard, ARMY ESTIMATES March 1970.UK Reserve Forces Strengths, years 1995–2000 (Download PDF).

Equipment

Infantry
The basic infantry weapon of the British Army is the L85A2 assault rifle, sometimes equipped with an L17A2 underbarrel grenade launcher and with several variants such as the L86A2, the Light Support Weapon (LSW) and the L22A2 carbine variant, issued to tank crews. Support fire is provided by the FN Minimi light machine gun and the L7 General Purpose Machine Gun (GPMG); indirect fire by 51 and 81 mm mortars. Sniper rifles used include the L118A1 7.62 mm, the L115A3 and the AW50F, all produced by Accuracy International. Some units use the L82A1 .50 calibre Barrett sniper rifle. More recently the L128A1 (Benelli M4) 'combat shotgun' has been adopted, and is intended for close quarters combat in Afghanistan.
Armour
The British Army's main battle tank is Challenger 2.
Artillery
The Army uses three main artillery systems: the Multi Launch Rocket System (MLRS), AS-90 and L118. The MLRS was first used operationally in Operation Granby and has a range of  and the Starstreak HVM (High Velocity Missile) is a surface-to-air weapon, launched either by a single soldier or from a vehicle-mounted launcher.Starstreak II sighted Janes
Army Aviation
The Army Air Corps (AAC) provide direct aviation support for the Army, although the RAF also contribute by providing support helicopters. The primary attack helicopter is the Westland WAH-64 Apache, a license-built, modified version of the US AH-64 Apache that replaced the Westland Lynx AH7 in the anti-tank role.

File:Challenger Main Battle Tank with Improved Armour MOD 45149015.
File:MCV-80.
File:Apache WAH64D Helicopter MOD 45149194.
File:Soldier from A Company 1 Royal Anglian Checking his Gun in Afghanistan MOD 45154068.

Recent and current conflicts

Persian Gulf War

The ending of the Cold War saw a significant cut in manpower, as outlined in the Options for Change review. British forces were put in control of Kuwait after it was liberated.
47 British Military personnel died during the Persian Gulf War.

Balkans conflicts

The British Army was deployed to Yugoslavia in 1992; initially this force formed part of the United Nations Protection Force. 446 In 1995 command was transferred to IFOR and then to SFOR. 447 Currently troops are under the command of EUFOR. Over 10,000 troops were sent. In 1999 British forces under the command of SFOR were sent to Kosovo during the conflict there. Command was subsequently transferred to KFOR. 448 Between early 1993 and June 2010, 72 British military personnel died on operations in the former Yugoslavian countries of Bosnia, Kosovo and Macedonia.Operations in the Balkans: British Fatalities Defence factsheet

War in Afghanistan

In November 2001 the United Kingdom, as a part of Operation Enduring Freedom with the United States, invaded Afghanistan to topple the Taliban. 452 The 3rd Division were deployed in Kabul, to assist in the liberation of the troubled capital. The Royal Marines' 3 Commando Brigade (part of the Royal Navy but including a number of Army units), also swept the mountains. Approximately 7,900 British troops (including marines, airmen and sailors) are currently in Afghanistan, making it the second largest force after the US. Around 500 extra British troops were deployed in 2009, bringing the British Army deployment total up to 9,500 (excluding Special Forces).UK to withdraw 3,800 troops from Afghanistan during 2013 BBC, 19 December 2012 By March 2014 troop levels were down to 4,000. Combat operations are projected to end in 2014. Between 2001 and May 2012 a total of 414 British military personnel have died on operations in Afghanistan.Operations in Afghanistan: British Fatalities Defence factsheet

Iraq War

In 2003, the United Kingdom was a major contributor to the  invasion of Iraq, sending a force that would reach 46,000 military personnel. 179 British Military personnel have died on operations in Iraq.

The Troubles

Although having permanent garrisons there, the British Army was initially deployed in a peacekeeping role – codenamed "Operation Banner" – in Northern Ireland in the wake of Unionist attacks on Nationalist communities in DerryBloomfield, K Stormont in Crisis (Belfast 1994) p 114 and BelfastPRONI: Cabinet conclusions file CAB/4/1460 and to prevent further Loyalist attacks on Catholic communities, under Operation Banner between 1969 and 2007 in support of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) and its successor, the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI). There has been a steady reduction in the number of troops deployed in Northern Ireland since the Good Friday Agreement was signed in 1998.Army To Dismantle Tower Block Post Skyscrapernews, 2 August 2005
Operation Banner ended at midnight on 31 July 2007, bringing to an end some 38 years of continuous deployment, making it the longest in the British Army's history. A total of 303 RUC officers were killed in the same time period. In March 2009, two soldiers and a Police Officer were killed in separate dissident republican attacks in Northern Ireland.Policeman shot dead in N Ireland BBC News, 10 March 2009

File:BritishPatrolHelmand01.
File:3 Para Helmand 2007.jpg|3 Para in combat in Helmand Province, Afghanistan
File:Land Rover Defender 110 patrol vehicles.
File:South Belfast 1981.

Current deployments

High intensity operations

Low intensity operations

Permanent overseas postings

Formation and structure

The structure of the British Army is complex, due to the different origins of its various constituent parts. It is broadly split into the Regular Army (full-time Officers/soldiers and units) and the Army Reserve (Spare-time Officers/soldiers and units).
In terms of its military structure, it has two parallel organisations, one administrative and one operational.
Administrative
Operational

Structure of units

The standard operational units are structured as follows, although various units have their own structure, conventions, names and sizes:
Corps are made up of two or more divisions, but now are rarely deployed as a purely national formation due to the size of the British Army.
In place of a Battalion, a task-specific Battlegroup may be formed. A battlegroup is grown around the core of either an armoured regiment or infantry battalion, and has other units added or removed from it as necessary for its purpose. It results in a mixed formation of armour, infantry, artillery, engineers and support units, typically consisting of between 600 and 700 soldiers under the command of a Lieutenant Colonel.
A number of elements of the British Army use alternative terms for battalion, company and platoon. These include the Royal Armoured Corps, Corps of Royal Engineers, Royal Logistic Corps, and the Royal Corps of Signals who use regiment (battalion), squadron (company) and troop (platoon). The Royal Artillery are unique in using the term regiment in place of both corps and battalion, they also replace company with battery and platoon with troop.

Divisions

The British Army currently has two operational divisions. 92–93
There are also a some ten brigades which are not part of any division report directly into Support Command.Support Command Ministry of Defence

Rapid Reaction Force

16 Air Assault Brigade forms the bulk of the Army's rapid reaction force.

Combat Support

As of 2014, Force Troops Command or FTC forms the basis of the Army's Combat support, containing units ranging from artillery to military police.Ministry of Defence: Structure

Aviation components

The British Army operates alongside the Royal Air Force and the Fleet Air Arm as part of Joint Helicopter Command, but the army also has its own Army Air Corps. Military helicopters of all three services are commanded by Joint Helicopter Command, a joint 2 star headquarters operating under HQ Land Forces.Joint Helicopter Command Strategic Defence Review

Special forces

The British Army contributes two of the three special forces formations within the United Kingdom Special Forces Command; the Special Air Service Regiment and the Special Reconnaissance Regiment.
The regular Regiment, 22 SAS, has its headquarters and depot located in Hereford and consists of five squadrons: A, B, D, G and Reserve with a training wing. 62 The two reserve SAS Regiments; 21 SAS and 23 SAS have a more limited role, to provide depth to the UKSF group through the provision of Individual and collective augmentation to the regular component of UKSF and standalone elements up to task group (Regimental) level focused on support and influence (S&I) operations to assist conflict stabilisation.
The Special Reconnaissance Regiment (SRR), formed in 2005 from existing assets, undertakes close reconnaissance and special surveillance tasks. Special Forces Support Group were formed around 1st Battalion the Parachute Regiment, with attached Royal Marines and RAF Regiment assets, the unit is also open to any member of the HM Armed Forces. The Special Forces Support Group are under the Operational Control of Director Special Forces to provide operational manoeuvre support to the elements of United Kingdom Special Forces.

British Overseas Territories military units

Numerous military units were raised historically in British territories, including self-governing and Crown colonies, and protectorates. Whereas the Dominions, such as Canada and Australia, had their own armies before achieving complete independence, units raised in those territories which remained part of the realm of the UK were, and are, ultimately under the control of the UK government, and do not constitute separate armies. The UK retains responsibility for the defence of all of the fourteen remaining British Overseas Territories. Although the Cayman Islands premier has stated the desire to raise a Cayman Islands Defence Force  becoming the fifth, only four of the remaining British Overseas Territories retain locally-raised regiments:

Image:Falklandsdf.
File:Bermuda Regiment PNCO Cadre Promotion Parade. 3 (Summer) Dress.
File:Changing of the Guard duo - Royal Gibraltar Regiment.

Royal Navy and RAF ground units

The other armed services have their own infantry units which are not part of the British Army. The Royal Marines are amphibious light infantry forming part of the Naval Service, and the Royal Air Force has the RAF Regiment used for airfield defence, force protection duties and Forward Air Control.

Recruitment

The Army mainly recruits within the United Kingdom; it normally has a recruitment target of around 12,000 soldiers per year. In the early years of the 21st century there has been a marked increase in the number of recruits from other (mostly Commonwealth) countries. In 2006 overseas recruitment, mostly in Commonwealth countries, generated more than 6,000 soldiers from 54 nations; together with the 3,000 Gurkhas, 10% of the British Army is a foreign national.Britain's child army New Statesman, 5 February 2007
The Ministry of Defence now caps the number of recruits from Commonwealth countries, although this will not affect the Gurkhas. If the trend continues 10% of the army will be from Commonwealth countries before 2012. The cap is in place as some fear the army's British character is being diluted, and employing too many could make the army seen as employing mercenaries.
There has been a strong and continuing tradition of recruiting from Ireland including what is now the Republic of Ireland. (now the Republic of Ireland) and 38,000 from Northern Ireland served in the Second World War,The Oxford companion to Irish history, Sean J. Connolly, p. 505 all volunteered.

Oath of allegiance

All soldiers must take an oath of allegiance upon joining the Army, a process known as attestation. Those who wish to swear by God use the following words:

Others replace the words "swear by Almighty God" with "solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm". Under the reign of another monarch, the name of the monarch and all pronouns with gender are replaced appropriately.

Training establishments

Flags and ensigns

The British Army does not have its own specific ensign for the whole Army, unlike the Royal Navy, which uses the White Ensign, and the RAF, which uses the Royal Air Force Ensign. Instead, the Army has different flags and ensigns, some for the entire army and many for the different regiments and corps. The official flag of the Army as a whole is the Union Flag, flown in a ratio of 3:5. A non-ceremonial flag also exists, which is used at recruiting events, military events and exhibitions. It also flies from the Ministry of Defence building in Whitehall.
Whilst at war, the Union Flag is always used, and this flag represents the Army on The Cenotaph at Whitehall, London (the UK's memorial to its war dead).
The British Army has throughout its history operated ships, ports and myriad boats. Boats, Landing Craft and Ports are still operated by the Army and ensigns exists for vessels commanded by the Army. The Royal Logistic Corps operates a large fleet of vessels from its base at Marchwood near Southampton.
Each Foot Guards and line regiment (excluding The Rifles and Royal Gurkha Rifles (RGR)) also has its own flags, known as Colours—normally a Regimental Colour and a Queen's Colour. The design of different Regimental Colours vary but typically the colour has the Regiment's badge in the centre. The RGR carry the Queen's Truncheon in place of Colours.

File:Flag of the United Kingdom (3-5). The official flag of the Army.
File:BritishArmyFlag2. Sometimes the word Army in gold letters appears below the badge.
File:British Army Ensign01.svg|Ensign for general use by the Royal Logistic Corps
File:British Army Ensign00.svg|Ensign flown by the Royal Logistic Corps from vessels commanded by commissioned officers
File:Royal Engineers Ensign.png|Ensign of the Corps of Royal Engineers

Ranks, specialisms and insignia

Every regiment and corps has its own distinctive insignia, such as cap badge, beret, tactical recognition flash and stable belt.
Throughout the army there are many official specialisms. They do not affect rank, but they do affect pay bands:

Tommy Atkins and other nicknames

A long established nickname for a British soldier has been Tommy Atkins or Tommy for short. The origins are obscure but most probably derive from a specimen army form circulated by the Adjutant-General Sir Harry Calvert to all units in 1815 where the blanks had been filled in with the particulars of a Private Thomas Atkins, No 6 Company, 23rd Regiment of Foot. German soldiers in both World Wars would usually refer to their British opponents as Tommys. Present-day British soldiers are often referred to as Toms or just Tom. The British Army magazine Soldier has a regular cartoon strip, Tom, featuring the everyday life of a British soldier. Outside the services, soldiers are generally known as squaddies by the British popular press, and the general public.Songs for squaddies: the war musical Lads in Their Hundreds The Guardian, 19 May 2010
Another nickname which applies only to soldiers in Scottish regiments is Jock, derived from the fact that in Scotland the common Christian name John is often changed to Jock in the vernacular.
Welsh soldiers are occasionally referred to as Taffy or just Taff. This may only apply to those from the Taff-Ely Valley in South Wales, where a large portion of men, left unemployed from the decline of the coal industry in the area, enlisted during the First and Second World Wars. Alternatively, it is derived from the supposed Welsh pronunciation of DafyddThe Concise Oxford Dictionary ISBN 978-0-19-861131-8—the vernacular form of Dave or Davey, the patron Saint of Wales being Saint David."Taffy, n.2" OED Online. June 2013. Oxford University Press.  (accessed 26 June 26, 2013).
Irish soldiers are referred to as Paddy or Mick.
Junior officers in the army are sometimes known as Ruperts by the Other ranks especially for those from a privileged background."Rupert, n." OED Online. June 2013. Oxford University Press.  (accessed 26 June 2013). This nickname is believed to be derived from the children's comic book character Rupert Bear who epitomises traditional public school values and from the purported preponderance of that particular forename amongst young men from a public school background. Inside the British Army. London: Chatto & Windus. ISBN 0-7011-3466-6



Notes and references

Bibliography




