[[Freeway Series]]

CATEGORIES: Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim, Los Angeles Dodgers, Interleague play, Major League Baseball rivalries

The term Freeway Series refers to a series of baseball games played between Major League Baseball's Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim  of the American League and Los Angeles Dodgers of the National League. The series takes its name from the massive freeway system in the greater Los Angeles metropolitan area, the home of both teams; one could travel from one team's stadium to the other simply by traveling along Interstate 5.  The term is akin to Subway Series which refers to meetings between New York City baseball teams. The term "Freeway Series" also inspired the official name of the regions' NHL rivalry: the Freeway Face-Off.

Background

The rise of Southern California as a major region of the United States brought about a significant economic rivalry between neighboring Los Angeles and Orange counties.  
To many living outside of Southern California, the entire region is often simply referred to as "LA", associating Los Angeles and Orange counties with the same stereotypes and preconceptions. However, the two counties differ sharply in  political ideology, socioeconomic status, and demographics. Los Angeles County is more liberal, and is represented by a more ethnically diverse population, while Orange County remains one of the most conservative areas in the state.  This divide led to the Los Angeles/Orange county line to be colloquially referred to as the Orange Curtain. This can be somewhat misleading, though, because the older, more urban, cities of northern and central Orange County (Anaheim, Santa Ana, Garden Grove, Buena Park etc.) are much more in tune with Los Angeles county cities than their southern Orange County counterparts. These older Orange County cities are much more diverse and less homogenous than the south, and the income levels and demographics represent this.

History

The first exhibition game between the two clubs (won by the Angels) was played in 1962 in Palm Springs, at the time the spring training home of the Angels. The first pre-season series was played at Dodger Stadium, at the time the home ballpark of both teams  April 6–7, 1963.  The Angels won both of the two games played. After the Angels added Los Angeles to their official name in 2005, the rivalry took on renewed interest, as the series took on a more intracity atmosphere.
Throughout the 2005 season, Dodger Stadium listed the Angels as "ANA" on its out-of-town scoreboard and team schedules, as it was prior to Angels' name change. However, the Dodgers now post "LAA" on both their scoreboard and schedules. Dodger broadcaster Vin Scully refers to the team as just the Angels when mentioning them on the air.  Dodgers tickets still refer to the Angels as the "Anaheim Angels." As of the 2011 season, however, the Angels' out-of-town scoreboard in right field still lists the Dodgers by their pre-2005 "LA" abbreviation instead of "LAD".  The Angels' name change was largely opposed by the Dodgers organization, city and county of Los Angeles, Anaheim, every other city in Orange County, and fans on both sides.  The prevailing argument was that the Angels did not play within Los Angeles county limits, and that adding LA to the name inaccurately represented the location and background of the team's fans.  The Angels' ownership countered that bringing the Los Angeles name to the American League was beneficial to the entire region and organization. 
Regular- and post-season games between the two teams take place at either Angel Stadium of Anaheim or Dodger Stadium. The two stadiums are located approximately 
At one point, both teams were owned by major media conglomerates: the Angels had been owned by the Walt Disney Company, and the Dodgers were owned by News Corporation (both companies each own one of the MLB broadcast partners, with News Corporation changing its name to 21st Century Fox in 2013). Both teams have been sold in recent years.
During the 2002 World Series, there was a moment of peace in the rivalry as a result of the nightmares the Dodgers and their fans were facing because the Angels played the San Francisco Giants, the fierce in-state rivals of the Dodgers. This series was the Angels first championship, while the Dodgers' last title came in the 1988 World Series.

Common players

Bold face indicate World Series won with both teams.

Brothers

There have been different sets of brothers who have currently played for either one or both of these franchises. They include:
Vladimir and Wilton Guerrero 
Orlando and Jolbert Cabrera 
Maicer and César Izturis* 
Erick and Willy Aybar* 
Jered and Jeff Weaver* 

Other notable players

Several players have played for both teams, including:
Some members of the Angels coaching staff played for the Dodgers. They include:
In addition to Scioscia, the following Angels managers played for the Dodgers:
Additionally, retired Dodgers manager Joe Torre (2008–2010) was a broadcaster for the Angels from 1985–1990
Scioscia is the only person to have won three World Series with both teams (Dodgers in ). He led the effort in making the 2002 World Series a moment of peace in the rivalry.

The series

Regular season results

Postseason series

As of .



Other Rivalries in the Los Angeles area

Former




