[[Chemical imbalance]]

CATEGORIES: Aetiology of psychiatric disorders, Neuroscience, Psychoactive drugs

Chemical imbalance is one hypothesis about the cause of mental illness. Other causes that are debated include psychological and social causes.
The basic concept is that neurotransmitter imbalances within the brain are the main causes of psychiatric conditions and that these conditions can be improved with medication which corrects these imbalances. The phrase originated from the scientific study of brain chemistry. In the 1950s the monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) and tricyclic antidepressants were accidentally discovered to be effective in the treatment of clinical depression.Drugs and the Brain: Antidepressants
These findings and other supporting evidence led scientist Joseph J. Schildkraut (1934–2006) to publish his paper called "The Catecholamine Hypothesis of Affective Disorders" in 1965. 1965 article - Schildkraut 7 (4)  524 - J Neuropsychiatry Clin NeurosciJoseph J. Schildkraut obituary, New York Times (July 8, 2006) Schildkraut associated low levels of neurotransmitters with depression.
Research into other mental illnesses such as schizophrenia also found that too much activity of certain neurotransmitters such as dopamine was correlated to these disorders. In the scientific community this hypothesis has been referred to as the "Monoamine hypothesis". This hypothesis has been a major focus of research in the fields pathophysiology and pharmacotherapy for over 25 yearsJohan A Den Boer: Looking Beyond the Monoamine Hypothesis. European Neurological Review, 2006;6(1):87-92 and led to the development of new classes of drugs such as SSRIs (selective-serotonin reuptake inhibitors).Mental Illness - GSU Biology 4102 / 6102
This conceptual framework has been challenged within the scientific community, though no other demonstrably superior hypothesis has emerged. While the hypothesis has been shown to be simplistic and lacking, there is sufficient evidence to consider it as a useful heuristic in the aiding of our understanding of brain chemistry and explaining pharmacotherapy.
Wayne Goodman, Chair of the US Food and Drug Administration Psychopharmacological Advisory Committee, has described the serotonergic theory of depression as a "useful metaphor" for understanding depression, though not one that he uses with his own psychiatric patients. Published November 12, 2005; accessed November 17, 2007. Recently, psychiatrist Peter Kramer stated that the serotonin theory of depression had been declared dead prematurely.psychologytoday. An analysis of the studies Kramer cites argues that such statements are premature.org/?p=6 Is Clinical Depression Caused by a Serotonin Imbalance? A Response to Peter Kramer.

Monoamine hypothesis

The monoamine hypothesis is a biological hypothesis stating that depression is caused by the underactivity in the brain of monoamines, such as dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine.
In the 1950s the monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) and tricyclic antidepressants were accidentally discovered to be effective in the treatment of depression. These findings and other supporting evidence led Joseph Schildkraut to publish his paper called "The Catecholamine Hypothesis of Affective Disorders" in 1965. Schildkraut associated low levels of neurotransmitters with depression. Research into other mental impairments such as schizophrenia also found that too little activity of certain neurotransmitters were connected to these disorders.
The hypothesis has been a major focus of research in the fields pathophysiology and pharmacotherapy for over 25 years. and led to the development of new classes of drugs such as SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors).

Dopamine hypothesis

In studying the causes of schizophrenia, particular focus has been placed upon the function of dopamine in the mesolimbic pathway of the brain. This focus largely resulted from the accidental finding that a drug group which blocks dopamine function, known as the phenothiazines, could reduce psychotic symptoms. It is also supported by the fact that  amphetamines, which trigger the release of dopamine may exacerbate the psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia.
An influential theory, known as the Dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia, proposed that a malfunction involving dopamine pathways was the cause of (the positive symptoms of) schizophrenia. This theory is now thought to be overly simplistic as a complete explanation, partly because newer antipsychotic medication (called atypical antipsychotic medication) can be equally effective as older medication (called typical antipsychotic medication), but also affects serotonin function and may have slightly less of a dopamine blocking effect.

Criticisms

According to critics, the chemical imbalance hypothesis has been overpromoted and continues to be advanced as factual by pharmaceutical companies. Pharmaceutical companies promote this theory by reporting partially factual studies; often companies do not report studies that disprove the effectiveness of this theory or their drug. "Two: The Dirty Little Secret." The Emperor's New Drugs: Exploding the Antidepressant Myth. London: Bodley Head, 2009. 39-40. Print. For instance, in two of the three clinical trials the anti-depressant paroxatine proved to be as effective and less effective than a placebo. However only the trial that showed paroxatine as being effective was published by the pharaceutical company GlaxoSmithKline. They believe the general population and many journalists have accepted this hypothesis into their understanding of mental illness uncritically.






