[[Rooster]]

CATEGORIES: Chicken, National symbols of Kenya, Heraldic beasts

A rooster also known as a cockerel or cock, is a male gallinaceous bird. The term usually refers to a male chicken (Gallus gallus).
Immature male chickens less than one year old are called cockerels. The term "rooster" originates in the United States,Hugh Rawson "Why Do We Say...? Rooster", American Heritage, Aug./Sept. 2006. and the term is widely used throughout North America, as well as Australia and New Zealand., though the results for "Rooster" are heavily affected by a rugby team of that name. The older terms "cock" or "cockerel", the latter denoting a young cock, are used in the United Kingdom and Ireland.ie
"Roosting" is the action of perching aloft to sleep at night, which is done by both sexes. The rooster is polygamous, but cannot guard several nests of eggs at once. He guards the general area where his hens are nesting, and will attack other roosters that enter his territory. During the daytime, a rooster will often sit on a high perch, usually  off the ground, to serve as a lookout for his flock. He will sound a distinctive alarm call if predators are nearby.
(The term "cock" is also used generally to refer to a male of other species of bird, for example "Cock sparrow".)

Crowing

The rooster is often portrayed as crowing at the break of dawn ("cock-a-doodle-doo") and will almost always start crowing before 4 months of age. Although it is possible for a hen to crow as well, crowing (together with hackles development) is one of the clearest signs of being a rooster. He can often be seen sitting on fence posts or other objects, where he crows to proclaim his territory. However, this idea is more romantic than real, as a rooster can and will crow at any time of the day. Some roosters are especially vociferous, crowing almost constantly, while others only crow a few times a day. These differences are dependent both upon the rooster's breed and individual personality. He has several other calls as well, and can cluck, similar to the hen. Roosters will occasionally make a patterned series of clucks to attract hens to a source of food, the same way a mother hen does for her chicks.

Capons

A capon is a castrated rooster. In the caponization procedure, the bird's testes are completely removed; a surgical procedure is required for this as the rooster's sexual organs are internal. As a result of this procedure, certain male physical characteristics will experience stunted development:
Caponization also affects the disposition of the bird. Removal of the bird's testes eliminates the male sex hormones, lessening the male sex instincts and changing their behaviour: the birds become more docile, less active, and tend not to fight.
This procedure produces a unique type of poultry meat which is favoured by a specialized market. The meat of normal uncastrated roosters has a tendency to become coarse, stringy and tough as the birds age. This process does not occur in the capon. As caponized roosters grow more slowly than intact males, they accumulate more body fat. The concentration of fat in both the light and dark areas of the capon meat is greater than in that of the uncastrated males. Overall, it is often thought that capon meat is more tender, juicy, and flavorful than regular chicken.

Cockfight

A cockfight is a contest held in a ring called a cockpit between two gamecocks or cocks, with the first use of the word gamecock (denoting use of the cock in game, sport, pastime or entertainment) appearing in 1646. Gamecocks are not typical farm chickens. The cocks are specially bred and trained for increased stamina and strength. The comb and wattle are removed from a young gamecock because, if left intact, they would be a disadvantage during a match. This process is called dubbing. Sometimes the cocks are given drugs to increase their stamina or thicken their blood, which increases their chances of winning.  Cockfighting or more accurately secular cockfighting is considered a traditional sporting event by some, and an example of animal cruelty by others and is therefore outlawed in most countries. taken from the Vivian Bible.

The cockerel "waltz"

The cockerel "waltz", when the cockerel struts in a half circle with one wing extended down, is an aggressive approach signifying to females his dominance, and usually, the female will submit by running or moving away from the cockerel in acknowledgement. On rare occasions, the hen will attempt to fight the cockerel for dominance. Once dominance is established, the cockerel will rarely waltz again. When other cockerels are in the hen yard, this waltz is used significantly more and most cockerels will waltz together if dominance has not been established; either one will back off, or the two cockerels will fight. Note also that the cockerel will waltz again if he is taken out of the pen for a period, usually 24 hours, and put back.
Some more aggressive cockerels will drop and extend both wings and puff out all their body feathers to give the hens and/or other cocks the impression of a larger size, and charge through the hen yard like a bull.

Religion and spiritual belief systems

Since antiquity the rooster has been, and still is, a sacred animal in some cultures

Animism, shamanism and tribal religions

In Southeast Asia, as in Mexico, understandings and interpretations of indigenous beliefs of the veneration of spirits and deities remain strong and for many who are practicing Christians there is still the veneration of the traditional spirits (anito) as in northern Philippines.  Animist beliefs extend to the rooster and the cockfight, "a popular form of fertility worship among almost all Southeast Asians"Using Spirit Worship to Infuse Southeast Asia into the K-16 Classroom - Marc Jason Gilbert, Department of History and Sociology, North Georgia College and State University   further considered by some within the Judeo-Christian ethic as a form of Baal or Baalim.
Aluk or Aluk To Dolo a sect of Agama Hindu Dharma as a part of religion in Indonesia, within the Toraja society and the people of Tana Toraja, embrace religious rituals such as the funeral ceremony where a sacred cockfight is an integral part of the religious ceremony and considered sacred within that spiritual realm. INCITO PRIMA - Re: Funeral Ceremony in Toraja - Authorized by: Department of Law and Human Rights of Republic of Indonesia  Tongkonan - Large 'Houses of Origin' - indahnesia.
Kaharingan, an animist folk religion of the Iban branch of the Dayak people, accepted as a form of Hinduism by the Indonesian government, includes the belief of a supreme deity as well as the rooster and cockfight in relation to that of the spiritual and religious and some with the belief that humans become the fighting cocks of god, with the Iban further believing the rooster and cockfight was introduced to them by god.wordpress.virtualmalaysia.html
Ikenga, an alusi of the Igbo people in southeastern Nigeria requires consecration before religious use with offerings which include the sacrificial blood of a rooster or ram for the spirit.
thumb|right| Yoruba carved and painted wood tribal statue of a "cock fight" Miao (i.e. Hmong) are animists, shamanists and ancestor worshipers with beliefs being affected in varying degrees by Taoism, Buddhism and Christianity. At the Miao New Year there may be the sacrifice of domestic animals and there may be cockfights. The Hmong of Southeast Guizhou will cover the rooster with a piece of red cloth and then hold it up to worship and sacrifice to the Heaven and the Earth. In Shamanism in the Hmong culture, a shaman may use a rooster in religious ceremony as it is said that the rooster shields the shaman from "evil" spirits by making him invisible as the evil spirits only see the rooster's spirit.  In a 2010 trial of a Sheboygan Wisconsin Hmong that was charged with staging a cockfight, it was stated that the roosters were "kept for both food and religious purposes"Cockfight Trial Underway WHBL News April 08, 2010 resulted in an acquittal."Not Guilty Verdict In Cockfighting Trial WHBL News April 09, 2010 In Viet Nam fighting roosters or fighting cocks are colloquially called "sacred chickens".vn/Vietnam-travel-information/Battle-of-the-Chickens-choi-ga.htm
Santería which originated in Cuba from native Caribbean culture, Catholicism, and the Yoruba religion of West Africa "ritually sacrifices chickens".
Khasi people believe the rooster is sacrificed as a substitute for man, it being thought that the cock when sacrificed "bears the sins of the man"Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Volume 71, Part 3 - By Asiatic Society (Calcutta, India), Asiatic Society of Bengal – page 63  "  (See also similarity of Kapport in Judaism)
Yoruba oral history tells of God lowering Oduduwa down from the sky, the ancestor of all people, bringing with him a rooster, some dirt, and a palm seed. The dirt was thrown into the water and the cock scratched it to form land, and the seed grew into a tree with sixteen limbs, the original sixteen kingdoms.uiowa.html
"The sacrifice of a cock and a ritual cockfight was part of the Imbolc festivities in honour of the pan-Celtic goddess Brighid".merciangathering.htm Power Animals, Allies and Totem Animals - Anna Franklin  In the 20th century, Imbolc was resurrected as a religious festival in Neopaganism, specifically in  Wicca, Neo-druidry and Celtic Reconstructionism. Marian (1959, 1961) The Silver Bough, Vol. 1–4. William MacLellan, Glasgow; Vol. 2, pp. 11–42

Astrology

It is understood that the constellations of the Zodiac within the belief system of Astrology,
"the religion of the stars",  On the star map the figure of the Rooster was shown below and behind the figure of the True Shepherd, both representing the herald of the gods, in his bird and human forms respectively.Babylonian Star-lore by Gavin White, Solaria Pubs, 2008, pages 218ff & 170
Nergal, an idol of the Assyrians, Babylonians, Phoenicians, and Persians, whose name means, "a dunghill cock." (Dictionary of Phrase and Fable, Brewer, 1900) Astrological mythology of the Assyrians and Babylonians was that the idol "Nergal represents the planet Mars, which was ever the emblem of bloodshed".
The Rooster is the tenth of the twelve animal symbols in the Chinese zodiac.
See also Kukkuta Sastra in Divination.

Buddhism

thumb|right|Sacred Buddha amulet blessed in Wat Wangtakian Temple, Jorrakaepuek District, Kanjanaburee, Thailand Bayon Temple is an ancient Buddhist temple that also incorporates elements of Hindu cosmology includes "a depiction of a cockfight" within the walls of the temple.sacred-destinations.leisurecambodia.php?id=41"
With the rambling strutting roosters of the Buddhist temple of Wat SuwankhiriLonely Planet Thailand - Wat Suwankhiri on a Payathonsu cliff near by, during April, Three Pagodas Pass becomes a site of the Songkran Festival with cockfights.
Sacred Buddhist amulets are made within that religious schema, created and blessed in various temples in Thailand, many depicting  Buddha with cocks in fighting stance, sacred within that religion.

Divination

Divination, a part of many religions is derived from the Latin divinare "to foresee, to be inspired by a god" with the intent of communication between the gods and man.
Kukkuta Sastra (Cock Astrology) is a form of divination based on the rooster fight and commonly believed in coastal districts of Andhra Pradesh, India. It is prevalent in the state, especially in the districts of Krishna, Guntur, East Godavari and West Godavari and the Sankranti festival.

Hinduism

Balinese Hinduism also includes the religious belief of Tabuh Rah, a religious cockfight where a rooster is used in religious custom by allowing him to fight against another rooster in the religious and spiritual cockfight of the Balinese Hinduism spiritual appeasement exercise of Tabuh Rah.  The altar and deity Ida Ratu Saung  may be seen with a fighting cock in his hand
Likewise a popular Hindu ritual form of worship of North Malabar in Kerala, India is the Tabuh Rah blood offering to the Theyyam gods. Despite being forbidden in the Vedic philosophy of sattvic Hinduism, Jainism and Buddhism.,Theyyam almost forgotten Dance form of North Malabar (Kerala) Theyyam deities are propitiated through the rooster sacrifice where the religious cockfight is a religious exercise of offering blood to the Theyyam gods.
Makar Sankranti is a Hindu festival dependent on the position of the sun and celebration of Sankranti who is considered a Deity for Hindus and is celebrated in many ways including worship for the departed ancestors and to worship Saraswati. In the western Indian state of Gujarat, an event of the Makar Sankranti festival is kozhi kettu, the rooster fight.  Kozhi kettu is an ancient ritual of Tulunadu and an ancient ritual associated with the 'daivasthanams' (temples) there.Cockfight held at school – The Hindu – Mangalore - September 8, 2011
In 2011 the Madras High Court Bench ordered the rooster fight at Santhapadi and Modakoor Melbegam villages permitted during the Pongal religious festival.Permit cock fight: Bench - The Hindu - Jan 14, 2011
Again in 2011 a public interest litigation petition caused the Madras High Court Bench to grant permission to villagers of Kodaioor village to conduct a rooster fight during Deepavali coinciding with a local temple festival from the claims that the "villagers' religious sentiments would be hurt if the cockfight was not allowed ".C.P.R. Environmental Education Centre is a Centre of Excellence of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India. 

Samaritanism

The Samaritans or 'Cutheans' were a very early ethnic group, widely distributed and powerful. From Assyria they extended to India, China, Arabia Petraea and Abyssinia. They were also introduced by the Assyrian Empire into Samaria, in a policy of mass deportations. They had their Samaritan Temple on Mount Gerizim, opposite the Temple in Jerusalem, and they worshipped the Mesopotamian deity Nergal: his emblem was a cock (rooster).(2 Kings, 17:30). "According to the rabbis, his emblem was a cock".Clarke's Commentary on the Bible - 2 Kings 17:30

Judaism

The Zohar (iii. 22b, 23a, 49b), the book of Jewish mysticism and collection of writings on the Torah written by first century tannaic sage Rabbi Shimon Bar Yochai (Rashbi), tells of a celestial manifestation, which causes the crowing of the roosters; known also in the Talmud, is "blessed be He who has given the cock intelligence,"(Ber. 60b). and as well as Job 38:36 in the Douay-Rheims Bible.
Not only "In the rabbinic literature, the cockcrow is used as general marking of time",The Chronology of the Crucifixion – A Comparison of the Gospel Accounts – Tim Hegg TorahResource  - 2009 but also some of the Sages interpreted the "cockcrow" to mean the voice of the Temple officer who summoned all priests, Levites, and Israelites to their duties and used as such because the Hebrew gever was used also to mean a "rooster" in addition to the meaning of "man, strong man".
The Talmud likewise provides the statement "Had the Torah not been given to us, we would have learned modesty from cats, honest toil from ants, chastity from doves and gallantry from cocks"A Treasury of Jewish Quotations By Joseph L. Baron - 1985 - (Jonathan ben Nappaha. Talmud: Erubin 100b), which may be further understood as to that of the gallantry of cocks being taken in the context of a religious instilling vessel of "a girt one of the loins"(Young's Literal Translation) that which is "stately in his stride" and "move with stately bearing" within the Book of Proverbs 30:29-31. Saʻadiah ben Yosef Gaon(Saadia Gaon) identifies the definitive trait of "a cock girded about the loins" within Proverbs 30:31(Douay–Rheims Bible) as "the honesty of their behavior and their success",PROVERBS 10-31, Volume 18 - Michael V. Fox - Yale University Press 2009 - 704 pages identifying a spiritual purpose of a religious vessel within that religious and spiritual instilling schema of purpose and use, within Judeo-Christian traditions.
The Hebrew term zarzir, which literally means "girt"; "that which is girt in the loins" (BDB 267 s.v.) is recognized in the Targum as well as the Chaldaic, Syriac, Arabic, LXX and Vulgate with all referencing the fighting rooster of fighting cock as the religious vessel.  The ancient Hebrew versions identified the Hebrew "a girt one of the loins" of Proverbs 30:31 as a rooster, "which most of the old translations and Rabbis understood to be a fighting cock",Hebrew and Aramaic Lexicon of the Old Testament HALOT 1:281 s.v. zarzir with also the Arabic sarsar or sirsir being an onomatopoeticon or onomatopoeia for rooster(alektor) as the Hebrew zarzir of Proverbs 30:31. "Rooster (Gallus domesticus) bones were identified at Lachish dating to early Iron II", but even earlier not to be ruled out, which corresponds was well with "as for Palestine, the earliest chicken bones are present in Iron Age I strata in Lachish and Tell Hasben". In excavations at Gibeon, near Jerusalem, dating to the seventh century B.C., potsherds were found incised with cocks and "some of them placed within the six-pointed star of the Magen David."Early Records of the Domestic Fowl in Ancient Judea by Mikhaetl Taran published in 1975 in IBIS, The International Journal of Avian Science  The seal of Jaazaniah carries the insignia of a rooster from the ruins of the biblical Judean kingdom at Mizpah, with the inscription of "belonging to Jaazaniah, servant to the king".,A history of ancient Israel and Judah by James Maxwell Miller and John Haralson HayesThe New Encyclopedia of Archaeological Excavations in the Holy Land, edited by E. Stern, vol. 3, 1098-1102. Jerusalem: Carta, 1993 the first known representation of the chicken in Palestine, and from II Kings 25:23, we know of one Jaazaniah the Maschathit, who was an official under Gedalish at Mizpah.
Plutarch said the inhabitants of Caria carried the emblem of the rooster on the end of their lances and relates that origin to Artaxerxes, who awarded a Carian who was said to have killed Cyrus the Younger at the battle of Cunaxa in 401 B.C "the privilege of carrying ever after a golden cock upon his spear before the first ranks of the army in all expeditions"Hakhamaneshiyan(Achaemenid) Dynasty - Cyrus the great and the Carians also wore crested helmets at the time of Herodotus, for which reason "the Persians gave the Carians the name of cocks". It is Carites in 2 Kings 11 who were used by Jehoiada to protect Joash son of Ahaziah of the line of David, ancestor to Christ from Athaliah.
In the Jewish religious practice of Kapparos, a rooster as a religious vessel is swung around the head and then sacrificed on the afternoon before Yom Kippur, the  Day of Atonement. The purpose of the sacrifice is the expiation of sins of the man as the animal symbolically receives all the man's sins, which is based on the reconciliation of Isaiah 1:18.  The religious practice is mentioned for the first time by Natronai ben Hilai, Gaon of the Academy of Sura in Babylonia, in 853 C.E., who describes it as a custom of the Babylonian Jews and further explained by Jewish scholars in the ninth century by that since the Hebrew word geber(Gever)Complete Jewish Bible by David H. Stern -1998 means both "man" and "rooster" the rooster may act or serve as a palpable substitute as a religious vessel in place of the man with the practice also having been as a custom of the Persian Jews.

Christianity

In East Timor, one of the two predominately Christian nations in southeast Asia (the Philippines being the other), for some, the roof of the house is reserved for gods and spirits of ancestors, the lower portion remains for the nature spirit and usually occupied by animals, and the cock is admired because of courage and perseverance, with the courage of a man compared with that of the cock, with the cockfight occurring regularly and "many tais designs include the cock".mmiets.au/about/culture/symbols. Kosuke Koyama's thoughts and words spreading the Christian gospel while in Indonesia of, this morning I say to myself, "I will try to bring the gospel of Christ through the medium of cockfighting!" of the rooster and the religious, spiritual and sacred cockfight.
All four canonical gospels state that, during the Last Supper, Jesus foretold of Peter's denial (Saint Peter) and that he would deny Christ three times before the cock's crow.
Augustine of Hippo, Catholic saint and pre-eminent Doctor of the church understood "a visible sign of an invisible reality" of the rooster to include that as described by St. Augustine in DeOrdine as that which "in every motion of these animals unendowed with reason there was nothing ungraceful since, of course, another higher reason was guiding everything they did".Cockfight - A Case Book - Allen Dundes
In the sixth century, it is reputed that Pope Gregory I declared the cock the emblem of Christianity saying the rooster was "the most suitable emblem of Christianity", Some say that it was as a result of this that the cock began to be used as a weather vane on church steeples, and some a Papal enactment of the ninth century ordered the figure of the cock to be placed on every church steeple.google. Peter's Basilica or old Constantinian basilicaST PETER'S BASILICA. Peter's Basilica and Square in the Vatican City - The Treasury Museum  and has served as a religious icon and reminder of Peter's denial of Christ since that time, with some churches still having the rooster on the steeple today.  Alternative theories about the origin of weathercocks on church steeples are that it was an emblem of the vigilance of the clergy calling the people to prayer,Thomas Ignatius M. Forster, Circle of the Seasons, p. 18 that it was derived from the GothsWilliam Shepard Walsh, A Handy Book of Curious Information and is only possibly a Christian symbol,William White, Notes and Queries and that it is an emblem of the sun. 72
The Vatican Persian cock denoting a sacred and religious vessel acknowledged by and from the Vatican, "a girt one of the loins" of Proverbs 30:31, the Hebrew zarzir, Arabic sarsar, Greek alektor, French coq, Persian bird, Persian cock or the acknowledged rooster from the Hebrew Torah, the Christian Old Testament, the Holy Scriptures of Job, Isaiah and of the Apostles John, Luke, Matthew and Mark, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ may still further be viewed through "A Dictionary of the Bible" which tells us that "Pindar (ca. 522–443 BC), mentions the cock, Homer (ca. 800–750 BC) names a man "gever" the word for a cock and Aristophanes (ca. 446 BC – ca. 386 BC) calls it a Persian bird."A Dictionary of the Bible by James Hastings M.A. D.D., John Alexander Selbie M.A., Andrew Bruce Davidson, Samuel Rolles Driver D.D., Henry Barclay Swete D.I.
In the Bayeux Tapestry of the 1070s, originally of the Bayeux Cathedral and now exhibited at Musée de la Tapisserie de Bayeux in Bayeux, Normandy, there is a depiction of a man installing a rooster on Westminster Abbey.
The cornerstone is the first stone set in the construction of a masonry foundation and over time it became a ceremonial stone with the laying of the stone being generally important metaphorically in sacred architecture.  Frazer (2006: p. 106) in The Golden Bough tells us that, "In modern Greece, when the foundation of a new building is being laid, it is the custom to kill a cock, a ram, or a lamb, and to let its blood flow on the foundation-stone".

Islam

The understanding of the divine spiritual endowment of the rooster within Islam, may be evidenced in the words of Muhammad of that Abrahamic religion in one of the six canonical hadith collections of Sunni Islam, stating that of "when you hear the crowing of cocks, ask for Allah's Blessings for they have seen an angel".Sahih Bukhari Volume 4, Book 54, Number 522

Shintoism

Shintoism is the indigenous spirituality of the people of Japan with many roosters being found around Shinto shrines,  with the rooster being associated with the sun goddess Amaterasu.Ise Shrine (Ise Jingu), Ise - Sacred-destinations an ecumenical guide ""

Taoism

In Taoism, Hanshi and the spring Hanshi festival were when fires were not used and then relit. Since fire, like the cock a yang symbol and symbol of the sun, was temporarily extinguished and then relit. In a Tao religious aspect, to have a rooster fight another rooster, was the same in substance as a fire-renewal custom, where the rooster and the cockfight then takes its place as an indispensable spring ritual, and "Taoism, which assessed it positively in this form, can be thought to have guaranteed its continued existence".A Brush with the Spur: Robert Joe Cutter on the Chinese Cockfight, (review-article of The Brush and the Spur: Chinese Culture and the Cockfight), in Journal of the American Oriental Society, 113.3 (1993), pp. 444-49" The Hanshi festival was eventually moved to coincide with the Qingming Festival or the Pure Brightness Festival which still includes the rooster and cockfight.com,  Shanghai,  People's Republic of China "

Zoroastrianism

Zoroastrianism,  claimed to be "the oldest of the revealed world-religions"The Religion Toolkit - A Complete Guide to Religious Studies By John Morreall, Tamara Sonn - Published September 2011 and founded by the Prophet Zoroaster (or Zarathustra) opposed animal sacrifices but held the rooster as a "symbol of light"

Emblems

The cockerel was already of symbolic importance in Gaul at the time of the invasion of Julius Caesar and was associated with the god Lugus. Today the Gallic rooster is an emblem of France. The rooster is also an emblem of Wallonia and Denizli.
Among Roman deities, Priapus was sometimes represented as a cock, with its beak as a phallus and its wattles as testicles. The cock or a man with rooster attributes was similarly used as an erotic symbol, Priapus GallinaceusThe phallic 'Savior of the World' hidden in the Vatican, 22 March 2012, accessed 8 June 2013
A fighting cockerel on a ball is the symbol of Tottenham Hotspur Football Club. The cockerel wears a pair of spurs which is a reference to the club's nickname. It has been present on their crest and shield since 1901. Additionally, the cockerel is the emblem of Turkish sports club Denizlispor, which was founded in 1966. Also, the supporters of the club are called cockerels.
Another soccer club that uses a rooster as its symbol is the Clube Atlético Mineiro, from Brazil. The supporters of the club and the supporters of other Brazilian clubs, often refer to Mineiro as "Galo", which means rooster in Portuguese.
The "Crazy Rooster", a symbol of Clube Atlético Mineiro.
Another sporting team that has adopted the cockerel as its emblem is the National Rugby League team, the Sydney Roosters, in Australia. The Roosters' emblem is a cock with its comb fashioned to represent the Sydney Opera House.
Jesus College in the University of Cambridge features roosters on its coat of arms.
The University of South Carolina features a Gamecock, or fighting cockerel, as it's mascot for all athletic programs. 
The emblem of Chianti Classico is a black rooster.
A black cockerel was believed in medieval times to be a symbol of witchcraft along with the black cat,Name of the Rose (1986), based on the 1980 Spanish novel of the same name, with the rooster "used as symbols of either virtue or vice" until modern times.

Gallery

File:Coq Cou nu FR 2013.jpg|Naked neck rooster in France
File:Coq Belle-Ile.jpg|A full grown rooster
File:The Rooster.
File:Rooster 1 AB.jpg|A Sussex rooster
File:Naked neck rooster.jpg|A Naked Neck rooster
File:Roosters preparing to fight.jpg|Two roosters about to fight
File:Bantam Rooster.jpg|Bantam Rooster
File:Cockerel (5606894854).jpg|Polish chicken
File:White cock in the village.JPG
File:Joseph Crawhall - Spanish Cock And Snail.jpg
File:Brown Leghorn rooster in Australia.jpg|Brown Leghorn rooster 
File:Faverolles cock and hen close-up.jpg





Sources




