[[Hibernia oil field]]

CATEGORIES: Oil fields of Newfoundland and Labrador

Hibernia is an oil field in the North Atlantic Ocean, approximately 
The production platform Hibernia is the world's largest oil platformE&E Publishing, 8 Nov. 2013 and consists of a  of crude oil.

Geology

The field was discovered in 1979 with the Hibernia P-15 well, and is located on the Grand Banks of Newfoundland in the northwest sector of the Jeanne d'Arc Basin, the Cretaceous primary reservoir being the Berriasian and Valanginian age river delta Hibernia sandstones at a depth of 3720 m, structurally trapped in a faulted anticline.

Exploration before development

Exploration drilling to map the field began in the 1960s and continued into the 1980s, with the loss of the Ocean Ranger mobile offshore drilling unit (MODU) in the process. In the mid-1980s, a new Conservative federal government under Brian Mulroney pledged that then Crown corporation Petro-Canada (now part of Suncor Energy) would be a lead player in creating a commercially viable offshore development on the Hibernia field.  Hibernia would become one of a series of regional "mega-projects" that Mulroney's government started across Canada during this time.LA Times, 19 July 1988

Development

Following several years of aborted startup attempts, during which time the federal government was forced to increase its liability stake in the project by forming the Crown Corporation Canada Development Investment Corporation, the Hibernia megaproject began construction of the production platform and gravity base structure in the early 1990s.Hibernia Milestones
The Hibernia offshore oil field is owned jointly by ExxonMobil Canada (33.125%), Chevron Canada Resources (26.875%), Suncor (20%), Canada Hibernia Holding Corporation (8.5%), Murphy Oil (6.5%) and StatoilHydro Canada Ltd (5%).Hibernia Shareholder Companies
As the Hibernia field was located in an inhospitable environment consisting of rogue waves, fog, icebergs and sea ice, hurricanes, and nor'easter winter storms,  engineering analyses determined that the most appropriate drilling platform would be in the form of a gravity base structure (GBS).Hibernia Ice Management
The Hibernia GBS sits on the ocean floor approximately  out of the water.  The platform acts as a small concrete island with serrated outer edges designed to counter icebergs.  The GBS contains production storage tanks for 1.3 million barrels of oil in an 85 m high caisson, with the entire structure weighing 587,000 tonne before 450,000 tonnes of solid ballast were added.
Production commenced on November 17, 1997.  A dedicated fleet of shuttle tankers continuously operates between the platform and an onshore transshipment facility at Whiffen Head, adjacent to the Come By Chance Refinery.  Many of these people received training in construction management and high technology. Others received an upgrading of their skills as a result of this project.
The development of Hibernia involves a considerable amount of drilling services.  As of January 1, 2007, over 50 development wells have been successfully drilled from the platform, including a Canadian record "extended reach drilling" well.
The platform always has at least one logistics support vessel in attendance, which shuttle supplies and provides on-station emergency support.  These support vessels are also tasked during the spring and summer months to tow small and medium-sized ice bergs which might collide with the platform, even though the GBS is engineered to withstand such a hit. The crew consists of 280 people who spend 3 weeks on the platform and three weeks on land, flown to and from the platform by helicopter.
The platform has been used to refuel CH-149 Cormorant search and rescue helicopters on long-range missions in the North Atlantic.

Production

The Canada-Newfoundland and Labrador Offshore Petroleum Board listed the total oil field production at  of oil.








