[[Queensland Health]]

CATEGORIES: Government departments of Queensland, Medical and health organisations based in Australia

Queensland Health is the department of the Government of Queensland responsible for operating and administering the public health system of the Australian State of Queensland. It is responsible to the State's Health Minister Lawrence Springborg and its Director-General is Ian Maynard. In 2010, Queensland Health had approximately 78,000 employees across the state.
In the mid-1940s Queensland was the first state in Australia to introduce free and universal public hospital treatment, a policy that some other states followed.

Jayant Patel

Queensland Health and the Bundaberg Base Hospital were involved in a scandal surrounding the employment of surgeon Jayant Patel.  The Queensland Medical Board approved his registration and he was then quickly promoted to Director of Surgery even though he lacked specific qualifications.
In March 2005, Rob Messenger raised concerns with Patel's medical practices in the Queensland Parliament after he was contacted by hospital nurse Toni Hoffman. Hoffman received the 2006 Australian of the Year Local Hero Award for her role as a whistleblower.
An inquiry into the matter known as the Morris Inquiry was started but was terminated on the grounds of perceived bias. A second inquiry known as the Davies Inquiry found that the Queensland Health district manager and the hospital's Director of Medical Services had mostly ignored more than 20 complaints regarding Patel.
On 1 July 2010, Patel was sentenced to seven years' jail after he was found guilty of three charges of manslaughter and one count of grievous bodily harm.

2005 restructure

Queensland Health was restructured toward the end of 2005 from 38 "health districts" to 20. There were a number consolidations particularly in the urban areas with the formation of the "Northside" and "Southside" Districts. Northside District included three major hospital facilities including The Prince Charles Hospital, Redcliffe and Caboolture Hospitals while Southside brought the Logan, Redlands, Beaudesert and Queen Elizabeth II Jubilee Hospitals together. Somewhat strangely the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital (RBWH) on the Northside, and the Princess Alexandra Hospital or regional centre on the Southside remained independent entities or Districts in their own right.
From September 2008 the 20 health service districts were further reduced to 15. According to a Queensland Health media release, nine districts remain unchanged. They are: Central Queensland, Townsville, Mackay, Cairns, Torres Strait, Cape York, Mount Isa, Central West and South West Districts.
Six new districts were created. They are:

Health Quality and Complaints Commission

In response to the Forster Review of Queensland Health Systems an independent Health Quality and Complaints Commission was established on 1 July 2006 to allow patients to lodge complaints about health matters.
The Minister stated on 5 October 2005, that "The Forster Review found while Queensland Health's policy reflects contemporary best practice, its implementation has been poor and there is a lack of uniformity and quality in complaints systems across the State. People are unsure how to lodge complaints, staff don't feel confident in handling them and there is an inadequate system for informing Queensland Health about complaints or concerns." 
The (full-time) Commissioner is Professor Michael Ward, a former Professor of Medicine at the University of Queensland.  There are also a number of part-time Assistant Commissioners.  
The Health Quality and Complaints Commission also has a role in the development and implementation of quality, safety and clinical practice standards throughout Queensland's public and private services and monitor best practice clinical governance and patient safety.
It was subject to review by an all-party Parliamentary Committee after its first full year of operation.

Payroll problems

In April 2010, it was revealed that many Queensland Health staff were experiencing incorrect payment of wages since the introduction of a new payroll system. It went live in March 2010, without adequate testing and despite warnings from SAP and IBM.
The problem was not resolved by May, with 35,000 wage anomalies to be fixed, but some progress had been made.

Payroll System Commission of Inquiry

The Queensland Health Payroll System Commission of Inquiry (QHPSCI) was established by order of the Governor in Council on 13 December 2012. The Honourable Richard Chesterman AO RFD QC commenced the Inquiry on 1 February 2013. In his remarks at the directions hearing, Commissioner Chesterman explained the purpose of the inquiry "is to determine why such large amounts of money have been lost to the public, whether anything might be recovered; and why such distress was inflicted on the Queensland Health workforce."
 Commissioner's directions hearing remarks.
QHPSCI's public hearings began on Monday 11 March 2013 with phase one focusing on the 'Tender Process". The second phase, examining the 'Contract' with IBM, commenced on 22 April 2013. The third and final phase, "Settlement", began on Monday 27 May 2013. The former Premier and two ex-ministers were called to give evidence during this phase.   A special hearing was held on the 18 June 2013 to deal with late information submitted to the Commission. The QHPSCI will present its findings to the Premier on 31 July 2013.

Proposed Abolishment

Former Premier Anna Bligh announced on 12 December 2011 that the department would be dismantled.  The decision was attributed to an "unacceptable culture", the theft of $16 million from the department and problems with the payroll system which has cost hundreds of millions of dollars. The department was due to cease operations on 1 July 2012.
In January 2012, more details of the reform plan were announced, with an emphasis on health care management to be done locally. In March 2012, the ALP lost power in Queensland and the proposed abolition of Queensland Health did not eventuate.

2012 restructure

Following Queensland's agreement to participate in National Health Care Reform in 2011, an Australian Health Care Agreement was signed that required the creation of local hospital networks that would be directly funded by the Commonwealth.Health and Hospital Network and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2012 Under the new arrangements the HHSs would each have their own board to manage and oversee the operations of the HHS. These changes became effective on 1 July 2012.








