[[The First Wives Club]]

CATEGORIES: 1990s romantic comedy films, 1996 films, American romantic comedy films, English-language films, Female buddy films, Films about revenge, Films based on novels, Films directed by Hugh Wilson, Paramount Pictures films, Films set in New York City

The First Wives Club is a 1996 comedy film, based on the best-selling 1992 novel of the same name by Olivia Goldsmith. Narrated by Diane Keaton, it stars Keaton, Goldie Hawn, and Bette Midler as three divorced women who seek revenge on their ex-husbands who left them for younger women. Stephen Collins, Victor Garber and Dan Hedaya co-star as the husbands, and Sarah Jessica Parker, Marcia Gay Harden and Elizabeth Berkley as their lovers, with Maggie Smith, Bronson Pinchot and Stockard Channing also starring. Scott Rudin produced and Hugh Wilson directed; the film was distributed by Paramount Pictures.
The film became a surprise box-office hit following its North American release, eventually grossing $181,490,000 worldwide, mostly from its domestic run, despite receiving mixed reviews. It developed a cult following among middle-aged women,Elizabeth Gleick. "Hell Hath No Fury" Time magazine. Retrieved on 1996-10-07. and the actresses' highest-grossing project of the decade helped revitalize their careers in film and television. Composer Marc Shaiman was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Music Score, while Hawn was awarded a Blockbuster Entertainment Award and both Midler and Parker received Satellite Award nominations for their portrayals.

Plot

At Middlebury College in 1969, four young friends, Elise Elliot (Dina Waters), Brenda Morelli (Michele Brilliant), Annie MacDuggan (Adria Tennor), and Cynthia Swann (Juliehera DeStefano), are graduating. As graduation gifts, valedictorian Cynthia presents the girls with matching Bulgari pearl necklaces. As the graduates take a commemorative picture of the four of them (presumably for the last time), Cynthia makes Annie, Brenda and Elise promise that they will always be there for each other throughout the remainder of their lives.
In the present time, the four friends eventually lose touch with one another, as evident when Cynthia (Stockard Channing) is tearfully gazing at the picture of the four of them on that graduation day. Now wealthy and living in a luxurious penthouse, she gives her maid her own Bulgari pearl necklace (matching the three she gave to her friends on graduation day), and has the maid mail letters to them. She later walks outside of the balcony of her penthouse in a floor length fur coat, a cigarette and a drink, and then commit suicide by jumping from perilous heights after learning through the tabloids that her ex-husband Gil (whom Cynthia made wealthy through her connections, according to narrator Annie) married his much younger mistress the day before.
Her former friends aren't doing much better: Brenda (Bette Midler) is divorced, left for a younger woman, depressed, and struggling financially. Elise (Goldie Hawn), whose husband also left her for a younger woman, is now an aging alcoholic movie actress who has become a plastic-surgery addict to keep her career afloat. Annie (Diane Keaton), meanwhile, is separated, suffering extreme self-esteem issues, and going through therapy with her husband. Shortly after Cynthia's funeral, at which the three remaining friends are reunited for the first time since college, Annie's husband, Aaron (Stephen Collins), leaves her for her younger therapist (Marcia Gay Harden) and asks her for a divorce after assuming that spending a night together would reconcile them; Brenda has a rather unpleasant encounter at a clothing store with her ex, Morty (Dan Hedaya) and his younger and rather hateful mistress Shelly (Sarah Jessica Parker), and Elise finds out that her soon-to be ex-husband, Bill (Victor Garber), is requesting alimony and half of their marital assets claiming that Elise owes her fame to him. Also, during a meeting with a director for a possible leading lady movie role, she discovers that she is only to play the lead female's mother; she later learns the lead female is Bill's current girlfriend. Shortly thereafter, the three friends receive the letter that Cynthia mailed to them before her suicide. After all three read their letter from Cynthia and feeling that they have been taken for granted by their husbands, the women decide to create the First Wives Club, aiming to get revenge on their exes. Annie's lesbian daughter Chris (Jennifer Dundas) also gets in on the plan by asking for a job at her father's advertising agency so she can supply her mother with inside information, as payback for Aaron's unfairness toward Annie.
Brenda finds out through her uncle Carmine (Philip Bosco) who has Mafia connections that Morty is guilty of income tax fraud, while Annie makes a plan to revive her advertising career and buy out Aaron's partners. However, as their plan moves through, things start to fall apart when they find out that Bill has no checkered past and nothing for them to use against him. Elise, feeling sorry for herself, gets drunk which only results in her and Brenda hurling vicious insults at each other, and the women drift apart. When Annie starts thinking about closing down the First Wives Club, her friends come back, saying that they want to see this to the end and Bill hasn't done anything blatantly wrong, but only as far as he knows. As a result, the wives manage to uncover information revealing that Bill's mistress (Elizabeth Berkley) is actually a minor.
Deciding that revenge would make them no better than their husbands, they instead use these situations to push their men into funding the establishment of a nonprofit organization dedicated to aiding abused women, in memory of their college friend Cynthia. The film ends with a celebration at the new Cynthia Swann Griffin Crisis Center for Women. Annie narrates that Elise started a relationship with a cast member in her new, successful play, that Brenda and Morty reconciled their differences and got back together, and that when Aaron tried to get back together with her, Annie told him to "drop dead." While outside the center Bill meets Shelly and the two start to flirt. The film concludes with the three women joyfully singing "You Don't Own Me."

Cast

Development

Writing

The film project originally belonged to Sherry Lansing, who bought the unpublished manuscript of the novel in 1991, after many publishers had rejected it, and handed it over to producer Scott Rudin when she became CEO of Paramount Pictures in 1992.

Casting

Diane Keaton was the first reported to have landed one of the starring roles, having previously worked with Rudin on the films Mrs. Soffel and Marvin's Room, followed by Bette Midler who had originally auditioned for the "more glamorous role" of Elise. Elizabeth Berkley only took her part to "work with the best actresses around,""Five Questions with...
Cameos of note include Ivana Trump (who famously stated in the film, "Don't get mad, get everything."), Gloria Steinem, and Kathie Lee Gifford as themselves, as well as author Olivia Goldsmith, director Hugh Wilson as a commercial director, and Heather Locklear as the younger lover of James Naughton's character Gil. "I played her boyfriend and apparently they felt that that was not inherently part of the storyline and so she broke up with me before the movie started," he joked on Larry King Live in 2006.Jon Stewart - Oscars Host Stewart Axed From First Wives Club

Production

Principal photography took place over three months at the Kaufman Astoria Studios in Queens, New York City between December 4, 1995,'The First Wives Club' Starts Production In New York City; Film Stars Bette Midler, Goldie Hawn And Diane Keaton - Pr Newswire - Highbeam Research and March 19, 1996. Among the 60 sites showcased on screen are Christie's auction house, the Bowery Bar, a suite at The Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, Café des Artistes, the King Cole Bar at the St. Regis Hotel, Frank E. Campbell's funeral home, and Barneys. Other familiar sites include the Chrysler Building, the NoHo neighborhood, both 5th and 7th Avenues, Riverside Drive, and Central Park.The First Wives Club
Production designer Peter Larkin took much inspiration from Hollywood's romantic comedies of the 1930s, incorporating a post-Great Depression view on style and luxury, widely popularized through these films. "Those sets looked better than real New York penthouses and nightclubs ever could," he said upon creation. "In this film I wanted settings that had that kind of striking nature."NewspaperARCHIVE.com - Search old newspaper articles online

Release

Reception

The film has received mixed reviews by critics. The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 39% of critics gave the film a positive rating, based on 33 reviews, with an average score of 5.4/10.
Edward Guthmann of the San Francisco Chronicle called that the film a "terrific comedy" and "a glamorous revenge romp, a 9 to 5 mixed with Auntie Mame", giving "each star the opportunity to do her best work in a long, long time." He added that "what's surprising isn't that each of them is so delightfully good but that they work together so well."
Janet Maslin from New York Times remarked that the film "freely overhauls the amusing beach book by Olivia Goldsmith, eliminating the sex, adding more slapstick and tailoring the leading roles to suit three divas in starring roles." While she felt that "Bette Midler, Diane Keaton and Goldie Hawn make a spirited, surprisingly harmonious trio," reeling off "one-liners with accomplished flair, even when the film turns silly and begins to, pardon the expression, sag", she found that the film fared "better with sight gags and quick retorts than with plot development".

Box office

The film opened at the number 1 spot at the North American box office making $18.9 million in its opening weekend. It stayed at the top spot for three consecutive weeks.

Sequel and stage adaptation

Sequel

For years there have been rumors of a sequel to the film. In a Chicago Sun-Times interview in 2003, Keaton expressed her readiness to appear in a second film. A year later, writer Paul Rudnick reportedly started writing a draft, entitled Avon Ladies of the Amazon,The Keaton Chronicles : With Success Of `First Wives,' Satisfaction Of `Marvin's Room' And Parenthood, Actress Is Hitting Her 50S Ground Running. - Free Online Library and in 2005, Midler confirmed to USA Today that there was indeed a manuscript but that "the strike kept it from happening."USATODAY. But I think we should all do it for the same amount of money.' Now, if there were three men that came back to do a sequel, they would have paid them three times their salary at least." On February 25, 2011, Goldie Hawn posted a picture on Twitter of the three at a lunch confirming that they had all signed on for a sequel, and the next day re-tweeted a message from Bravo TV confirming this again.Goldie Hawn Is Tired Of Hollywood's Sexism - Starpulse Entertainment News Blog

On stage

A musical stage version of the film, The First Wives Club – The Musical, opened at The Old Globe Theater in San Diego, California on July 17, 2009, in previews, through August 23, 2009,Jones, Kenneth. Musical First Wives Club Will Now Convene July 17 Toward July 31 Opening. Playbill. The book is by Rupert Holmes, with a score by the "one-time only reunited" Holland-Dozier-Holland songwriting team from 1960s Motown soul music fame. Francesca Zambello directed the San Diego production. "Globe to be first to stage musical First Wives Club", The San Diego Union-Tribune, September 5, 2008Jones, Kenneth."First Wives Club Musical Will Premiere in San Diego in 2009; Zambello Directs", playbill.Simonson, Robert."Rupert Holmes to Pen Book for First Wives Club Musical", playbill.Jones, Kenneth. "Lenox, Carmello, Gasteyer, Oscar, Dossett, Harris and More Sing First Wives Club in NYC", playbill.com, January 27, 2009
The principal cast in the San Diego production originally included Karen Ziemba as Annie, Adriane Lenox as Elise, Barbara Walsh as Brenda, John Dossett as Aaron, Kevyn Morrow as Bill, Brad Oscar as Morty, Sara Chase as Trophy Wife, and Sam Harris as Duane. Lisa Stevens choreographed, with scenic design by Peter J. Davison and costumes by Paul Tazewell. "Ziemba, Lenox and Walsh to Star in Old Globe's First Wives Club". Playbill."Tell Us, Miss Jones: Sheryl Lee Ralph Will Be Part of First Wives Club", playbill. First Wives Club – The Musical Convenes July 17 at Old Globe playbill. Variety, August 3, 2009 but the production sold approximately 29,000 tickets in its 5 week run. The ticket demand was so strong early on that the show's run was extended an extra week prior to its opening night.
On November 11, 2009, it was announced that Francesca Zambello dropped out as director, and that the producers would secure a new director prior to any Broadway run.Zambello Bows Out as Director of The First Wives Club Musical

Awards and nominations

American Film Institute recognition:

Soundtracks

The official soundtrack of music featured in the film was released on September 17, 1996, shortly before the film's premiere.
The film's original score, composed by Marc Shaiman, was also released on November 26, 1996.






