[[Untersberg]]

CATEGORIES: Mountains of Bavaria, Geography of Salzburg (state), Mountains of the Alps, Austria–Germany border, International mountains of Europe, Berchtesgaden Alps, Watermills in Germany

The Untersberg is a massif of the Berchtesgaden Alps, a prominent northern spur that straddles the border between Berchtesgaden, Germany and Salzburg, Austria. The highest peak of the table-top mountain is the Berchtesgaden Hochthron at .

Geography

The Untersberg rises at the rim of the Northern Limestone Alps, immediately at the Salzburg Basin and the broad Salzach Valley. Neighbouring peaks are the Hoher Göll in the southeast and Mt. Watzmann in the south, beyond the Berchtesgaden Basin. In the northwest, the Saalach Valley with Bad Reichenhall separates it from the Hochstaufen mountain range. About two-thirds of the area, including the Berchtesgaden Hochthron, is located in Germany, while the northernmost steep edge above Salzburg belongs to Austria.
The mountain is popular with tourists due to its proximity to the city of Salzburg: less than .
The first recorded ascent was in the first half of the 12th century, by Eberwein, a member of the Augustinian monastery at Berchtesgaden. The mountain lends its name to an 1829 opera, Der Untersberg, by Johann Nepomuk von Poißl (1783–1865), and has inspired a series of works by German artist Stephan Hess.com/gallery/v/untersberg/?g2_page=3

Peaks

Geology

The Untersberg massif is mainly made up of limestone, a bed of Dachstein chalk—mined as "Untersberg marble"—on a dolostone basis, and of small deposits of bauxite.
The Karst topography of the limestone includes numerous caves. So far, more than 400 have been explored—including the Schellenberg ice cave at an elevation of  depth. An expedition in August 2008 revealed that its lowest point had not yet been reached.

Marble Ball Mills

The Untersberger marble ball mills are stone ball mills in Marktschellenberg in Berchtesgaden at the opening of the Almbachklamm valley.
The Kügelmühlen (ball mills) were established in 1683 and are among the oldest business enterprises in today's Bavaria. Once primarily popular children's toys, these marbles were shipped all over the world. Through Rotterdam and London, marble shipping was directed toward the East and West Indies and exported at the rate of 60,000 to 80,000 and sometimes even 100,000 pounds per year. In sailing ships, marbles were welcome as cargo, as they were suitable as ballast by their high density. The last marbles went from here to London in 1921.
As late as the middle of last century the Almbach valley had 40 ball mills with another 90 in the surrounding region, worked mainly by poor mountain farmers. Today, a single ball mill operates primarily as an attraction.
The ball mill is driven by the waters of the Almbach river. The lower fixed grinding stones are made of hard sandstone and the upper turntables from beech wood. Grinding of the balls varies from two to eight days according to their size. Next there is fine sanding and a polish. Such is the process for traditional Untersberg marble, which forms the facade of buildings such as the Salzburg Cathedral.

Legend

According to a king in the mountain legend, Emperor Frederick Barbarossa is asleep inside Mt. Untersberg until his resurrection. His beard is said to be growing longer and longer around a round table and to have grown round two times. Myth says that when the beard has grown three times around the table the end of the world has come. When Frederick leaves the mountain, there will be no further Holy Roman Emperor and the last great battle of humankind will be fought on the Walserfeld, a pasture at Wals, west of Salzburg. There is a similar legend for the Kyffhäuser Mountain in Thuringia.
Other legends say that it is Charlemagne waiting inside the Untersberg, taken care of by the Untersberger Mandln, small dwarf-like creatures. Every hundred years he awakes and when he sees the ravens still flying around the Untersberg he sleeps for another century. The Alpine tradition of the Untersberg Wild Hunt has recently been revived. There are also legends about the cave system below the mountain.

Gallery

Image:Untersberg_Feb20522.jpg|Untersberg
Image:Untersberg 030704.jpg|View across the "Mittagsscharte", in the background on the left the "Salzburger Hochthron"
Image:Untersberg gipfel.jpg|Geiereck, a peak of the Untersberg
Image: Salzburg (8).JPG|Untersberg cable car station
Image: Untersberg (5).
Image: Untersberg (19). Note Salzburg Airport on the left and Salzburg old & new towns to the right
Image: Untersberg (24).
Image: UntersbergView.








