[[Outside (David Bowie album)]]

CATEGORIES: David Bowie albums, 1995 albums, Concept albums, Cyberpunk music, Albums produced by David Bowie, Albums produced by Brian Eno, Albums produced by David Richards, Industrial rock albums

Outside is a concept album first released 26 September 1995 by David Bowie on Virgin Records, and Bowie's nineteenth studio album. The album was Bowie's reunion with Brian Eno, whom Bowie had worked with most famously on his Berlin Trilogy in the 1970s. Subtitled "the Ritual Art-Murder of Baby Grace Blue: A non-linear Gothic Drama Hyper-Cycle," Outside centres around the characters of a dystopian world on the eve of the 21st century. The album put Bowie back into the mainstream scene of rock music with its singles "The Hearts Filthy Lesson", "Strangers When We Meet", and "Hallo Spaceboy" (remixed by Pet Shop Boys).

History and development

Bowie had reconnected with Brian Eno at Bowie's wedding to Iman Abdulmajid in 1992. Bowie and Eno each played pieces of their own music at the wedding reception and delighted at the "ebb and flow" of couples on the dance floor. At that point, Bowie knew "we were both interested in nibbling at the periphery of the mainstream rather than jumping in. We sent each other long manifestoes about what was missing in music and what we should be doing. We decided to really experiment and go into the studio with not even a gnat of an idea."
As a result, unlike some of Bowie's previous albums, not a single song was written prior to the band going into the studio. Instead, Bowie wrote many songs alongside the band in improvised sessions. Bowie and Eno also continued the experimental songwriting techniques they'd started using back during the Berlin Trilogy. In 1995 while talking to the press about the album, Bowie stated that:

The "random cutups" from the Adler story that are part of the album's lyrics and liner notes were written by Bowie, who typed them into his Mac computer and then ran a custom program called the "Verbasiser," which would cut up and reassemble his words electronically, much like he had done with paper, scissors and glue back in the 1970s. He would then look at the lyrics while the band played a song and decide "whether I was going to sing, do a dialogue, or become a character. I would improvise with the band, really fast on my feet, getting from one line to another and seeing what worked." Bowie claimed that it took about three and a half hours using this method to create "virtually the entire genesis" of the album Outside.
At nearly 75 minutes, the album is one of Bowie's longest. When it was released, Bowie knew that could be a problem. He said, "as soon as I released that I thought, 'It's much too fucking long. It's gonna die.' There's too much on it. I really should have made it two CDs."

Concept and themes

The liner notes feature a short story by Bowie, the Diary of Nathan Adler, which outlines a somewhat dystopian version of the year 1999 in which the government, through its arts commission, had created a new bureau to investigate the phenomenon of Art Crime. In this future, murder and mutilation of bodies had become a new underground art craze. The main character, Nathan Adler, was in the business of deciding what of this was legally acceptable as art and what was, in a word, trash. The album is filled with references to characters and their lives as he investigates the complicated events leading up to the murder of a fourteen-year-old girl. One is meant to assume that Bowie's character, Nathan Adler, works for the British government due to several references to the cities of London and Oxford, but in the liner notes these are revealed to be, at least in some cases, London, Ontario and Oxford, New Jersey, indicating that the entire story may take place in North America—or, indeed, that the distinction between the two places has become blurred and indistinguishable.
Bowie would claim that the album has "strong smatterings of Diamond Dogs ... The idea of this post-apocalyptic situation is there, somehow. You can kind of feel it."
In interviews, Bowie remarked that the album was meant to reflect the anxiety of the last five years of the millennium:

In 1999, Bowie also said about his motivations and inspirations for the album: 

Follow-up albums

Bowie had considered writing an album every year or so through the end of the millennium to tell the story of how the end of the millennium felt. He said, "This is a once-in-a-lifetime chance, by a narrative device, to chronicle the final five years of the millennium. The over-ambitious intention is to carry this through to the year 2000." He felt he had recorded enough material during the Outside sessions that he voiced his intention to continue the narrative of Outside through a 3-album set. He intended to call the second follow-up album "Contamination," and had sketched out the characters for the album (including some "17th century people") and had expected the album to be released in the spring of '97. Despite this, no direct follow-up to the album was ever produced, and Bowie's next album was his jungle and drum and bass-influenced work Earthling.
Bowie also mentioned the possibility of releasing an album called Inside which would be a making-of about Outside: "Our working method be detailed on it, a couple of jams and more of those voices. The first monologue of Baby Grace was 15 minutes long and was very Twin Peaks." Despite this claim, no such album was released.
On having over-recorded for the album, Bowie said:

And of continuing the story begun in Outside, he said (in an 1995 interview):

Critical reviews

Rolling Stone magazine gave the album 3 out of 5 stars upon release, criticizing the interspersed narrative tracks, stating "It's the superfluous wordage - the intrusive spoken monologues, the jury-rigged cybernoir narrative, the overelaborate characterizations - that damn near sink the record." However, they generally praised the music, saying that it's "arguably his best work since the '70s" and that the music is "a potent collection of avant-garage riffs and rhythm notions." They went on to appreciate Bowie's lyrics as "smart," "effective," and "sly" especially on the songs "I Have Not Been to Oxford Town" and "A Small Plot of Land." 
"Regulars might feel short-changed on the tune front," observed Tom Doyle in Q, "and those legions who came in on Let's Dance will most certainly be left completely and utterly bewildered. Perhaps, though, that's entirely the point."Q, October 1995
Live! magazine called the album "risky" but considered it ultimately to be successful.

Live performances

Bowie considered performing Outside theatrically, but wasn't sure how. He said,
Instead, Bowie took his music on a more conventional tour from late 1995 to early 1996. Bowie toured with Nine Inch Nails in support of his album, called the "Outside Tour". Morrissey opened for Bowie in the UK in September peaking with three shows at the Wembley Arena in London. Morrissey was also supposed to be the support act during the European leg in October but he finally cancelled his commitments just before the beginning of the tour.

Track listing

All lyrics written by David Bowie; music composers are listed below. Listed in italics are the characters who are singing in each particular song.
"I Am With Name" contains a sample from "The Brian May Band Live at Brixton Academy".I Am With Name

Alternative versions

The Japanese release of the album had "Get Real" as an additional track, as did the 2004 Sony reissue.
An edited version called Excerpts from Outside was released as an LP in 1995. In 1996 the album was released as version 2, but with different versions of it being distributed in Australia, Japan and Europe. In Europe, the re-edition was released by BMG without "Wishful Beginnings", but with the Pet Shop Boys remix of "Hallo Spaceboy" as the last track. In Australia and Japan, version 2 was released as a double-disc album, with the first one being the untouched original disc of Outside, and the second one including remixes and live versions already released on the 1995–1996 singles. In 2004 the album was again released as a limited 2CD edition.

Excerpts from Outside – LP version

Australian bonus disc – version 2

The Japanese version of the bonus disc had the "Rubber mix" of "The Hearts Filthy Lesson" instead of the "Bowie mix".

2004 limited 2CD-edition

Charts

Album

Personnel

Popular Culture

"The Hearts Filthy Lesson" was used as the end credits for David Fincher's 1995 film Se7en.
The song "I'm Deranged" was featured as the opening title and end credits music for David Lynch's 1997 film Lost Highway. For the end credits Bowie's vocals start a cappella for the first couple of lines, before the backing track fades up.
The song "I have not been to Oxford Town" was slightly modified by replacing 'Oxford Town' with 'Paradise' and '20th Century' with '23rd century' and featured in Paul Verhoeven's 1997 film "Starship Troopers". It was performed by Zoe Poledouris and renamed "I have not been to Paradise" in her cameo appearance as the high school graduation party band's lead singer.




