[[Lynchburg College]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in Virginia, Universities and colleges affiliated with the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), Educational institutions established in 1903, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, Council of Independent Colleges, Education in Lynchburg, Virginia, Universities and colleges accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, Visitor attractions in Lynchburg, Virginia, Lynchburg College

Lynchburg College is a private college in Lynchburg, Virginia, USA, related by covenant to the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) with approximately 2,500 undergraduate and graduate students. The Princeton Review lists it as one of the 368 best colleges in the nation.

History

Lynchburg College was founded in 1903 as Virginia Christian College by Dr. Josephus Hopwood as a selective, independent, coeducational, and residential institution, which has a historical and current relationship to the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ). The instition officially changed its name to Lynchburg College in 1919, citing a constituency that had expanded beyond Virginia. Hopwood was president of Milligan College in Tennessee when a group of ministers and businessmen approached him about establishing a college in Lynchburg. A key to the founding was that Westover Hotel, a failed resort, was available for sale.  When Hopwood agreed to serve, they purchased the resort for $13,500, resulting in Lynchburg's current campus.
The College has maintained its original commitment to a liberal arts education. Beginning with 11 faculty and 55 students, the College has grown to 159 full-time faculty and 2,800 undergraduate and graduate students. The College offers 39 majors, 49 minors, two dual-degree programs, the Westover Honors Program, and offers graduate degrees in Masters of Arts, Masters of Business Administration, Masters of Education, and Masters of Science in Nursing as well as Doctorate programs in Physical Therapy and Educational Leadership. Lynchburg College has more than 20,000 alumni.
The Lynchburg College hymn was written by alumnus Paul E. Waters. Its melody was taken from JS Bach's "O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden" Op. 135a, No. 21. The college fight song includes the phrase, "Hornet Born and Hornet Bred and when I die I'll be Hornet dead."
In the fall of 1994,a few months after Intel had introduced its Pentium microprocessor, Dr. Thomas R. Nicely, from Lynchburg College, was doing computations related to the distribution of prime numbers and discovered the Pentium FDIV bug. Dr. Nicely left Lynchburg College in 2000.
In 1997, Dr. Leonard Edelman was denied tenure by then-Dean of the College and he filed a lawsuit against the college for religious and gender discrimination. However, the filing was made beyond the allowable limit as provided for by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Edelmen filed a petition for re-consideration, and his lawsuit went all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court. The court ruled against his extension request, and not on the merit of his tenure-denial claim.pdf}}
Community outreach remains a tradition of the College, through initiatives of its eight Centers of Lynchburg College and the SERVE program, through which 98,000 volunteer hours are contributed annually by students, faculty, and staff.

Campus and Campus Life

Lynchburg College is located in Lynchburg, Virginia, about 180 miles southwest of Washington D.C., in the Central Virginia foothills of the Blue Ridge Mountains. It occupies , the Claytor Nature Study Center, located about 40 minutes from campus. Most students live on campus and in nearby college-owned houses.

Student Organizations

Lynchburg College has over 40 clubs & organizations for students to participate in. Examples of organization types include Greek life, student government, spiritual life, volunteer organizations, leadership programs, and publications.

=Greek Life=

Fraternity life began on the Lynchburg College campus in 1962, with the arrival of Sigma Mu Sigma, whose Sigma Chapter was active until disbanded in the mid 1980s. Fraternities and sororities appeared on campus again in 1992.  All official Greek houses are located on Vernon Street, and are currently owned by the college. LC is 17% Greek. Listed below are the chapters of the social fraternities and sororities that comprise Greek life at LC.
Fraternities
Sororities
National Pan-Hellenic Council Fraternities and Sororities

Athletics

The Lynchburg College Hornets participate in the Old Dominion Athletic Conference (ODAC). The Hornets program offers eight men's sports, nine women's sports, and two co-ed sports. Since joining the ODAC, the Hornets have recorded 148 conference titles. 

Lynchburg is a strong athletic program in the ODAC. Traditionally its baseball, cross country, field hockey, soccer, softball, and track and field teams compete at a high level in conference play.
The Hornets have won several ODAC championships throughout their history, most recently with the Men's Indoor and Outdoor Track and Field in 2010.
In 2010 the unranked Hornet men's soccer team made it the NCAA Division III national championship game, before losing to Messiah College.
In 2011, the Hornet Field Hockey team and the Women's Soccer team both captured the ODAC Championship title, but unfortunately, both teams fell in the NCAA tournament.
Lynchburg College fielded a football team from 1917 to 1932, when it was disbanded due to financial constraints associated with the Great Depression.
Men's Athletics
Women's Athletics
Co-Ed Athletics

Administration

Lynchburg College has both a President and a Board of Trustees, which currently consists of 37 individuals. The Board of Trustees' role in administration is the "fundamental oversight of the College."
Dr. Kenneth R. Garren began his tenure as the tenth president of Lynchburg College in 2001. A former vice president and dean of Roanoke College, Garren led Lynchburg College through its 2003 centennial celebration and initiatives such as a strategic plan, campus facilities master planning, building projects (including Elliot & Rosel Schewel Hall), and restoration work on College Lake.  Recently, the college finished a multimillion dollar renovation of Shellenberger Field.

Notable alumni






