[[Sonic Advance 3]]

CATEGORIES: 2004 video games, Game Boy Advance games, Game Boy Advance-only games, Platform games, Sega video games, Side-scrolling video games, Sonic Team games, Sonic the Hedgehog video games, Yuji Naka games

 is a 2004 platform game in the Sonic the Hedgehog series, developed by Sonic Team and Dimps and published by Sega and THQ for the Game Boy Advance. It was first released in North America on June 7, 2004, later in Japan on June 17, 2004 and then in Europe on June 18, 2004. The game uses elements from Sonic Advance and Sonic Advance 2, as well as allowing the player to choose an additional partner, who augments the player's actions. The Chao Garden mode from the previous Advance games has been removed, and the Chao Garden in this game serves to help the player view the Chaos Emeralds and chao they have collected.

Plot

Sometime before the events of the storyline, Dr. Eggman builds a robotic assistant based on and using parts from Emerl named Gemerl. Gemerl was designed to be a loyal, obedient copy of Emerl. As such, he can learn new attacks, and can meld himself seamlessly with any mechanical device.
Eggman tears the Earth apart when an experiment using Chaos Control (a power that allows the user to control time and space) goes awry, and Sonic is separated from Knuckles, Amy, and Cream and is stranded with Tails. The two begin to search for their friends and the source of the trouble (which is the separation of the Chaos Emeralds). But like always, Eggman is making everything from doomsday devices to strange contraptions and is trying to vanquish Sonic once and for all.
Alternate Ending: (without all Chaos Emeralds)
After defeating the final boss, Eggman and Gemerl are defeated and try to escape, with Eggman swearing revenge. The heroes, chase him down to the edge of the temple, knocking Eggman to a deadly situation. Gemerl stays and looks at the heroes, and shakes his head scornfully, then jumps off the edge to follow his master. Peace is finally restored to the world. Then the game ends with all the playable characters getting their photo taken by Omochao. (The end credits also leave a message to players to collect any remaining Chaos Emeralds)
True Ending: (with all 7 Chaos Emeralds)
After defeating the final boss, Eggman and Gemerl are defeated and try to escape, with Eggman swearing revenge. However, Gemerl stops running & attacks Sonic, causing the Chaos Emeralds Sonic has to scatter. Upon seeing the 7 Chaos Emeralds, the bad code that caused Emerl to malfunction activates, and Gemerl uses the Chaos Emeralds to transform into a rogue, orb-shaped robot. Gemerl then grabs Dr. Eggman and throws him at Sonic before escaping into outer space. Using the power of the Emeralds as well, Sonic becomes Super Sonic and, with the help of Dr. Eggman, Super Sonic destroys the improved Gemerl. Eventually, Tails finds Gemerl's broken body on a beach and repairs the robot. The game ends with the new Gemerl playing with Cream the Rabbit at her mother Vanilla's house.

Gameplay

The basic gameplay combines the traditional platforming elements of Sonic Advance, and the speed-orientated gameplay of Sonic Advance 2, to provide an experience similar to the original games. Sonic Advance 3 also introduced a new game feature called "Tag Action". Tag Action is similar to Knuckles' Chaotix: the player picks two characters and controls one while the other will just follow along controlled by the computer (or player two in multiplayer mode). Additionally, in a feature first seen in Knuckles' Chaotix the character can pick up the teammate by holding R, and then release them to use special abilities. Certain pairings, such as pairing Sonic and Tails or Amy and Cream, give the player access to the trick moves from the previous game.
At the start of the game, only Sonic and Tails are playable. By completing certain levels with Sonic as the team leader, Knuckles, Cream and Amy become playable.
The games features seven main levels (Route 99, Sunset Hill, Ocean Base, Toy Kingdom, Twinkle Snow, Cyber Track and Chaos Angel), each with their own "Zone Map". These maps have three acts which can be played in any order, but all three must be played before the boss can be fought. These maps also contain two mini-games in which extra lives can be earned. The player can change between maps by entering the "Sonic Factory". Here, the player can also change characters and access the level's "Chao Playground", which contains all the Chao found in that level. The player needs to find 10 per level in order to access the Special Stage and earn Chaos Emeralds. 
Two additional levels follow Chaos Angel - the final boss, "Altar Emerald" (The shrine of the Master Emerald) and the extra boss, "Nonaggression", which can only be accessed when playing as Sonic after all seven emeralds have been collected.

Characters

Playable Characters

The game features a partner system, meaning the effects of one character will be affected by whom he's partnered with. For example, if Sonic is paired with Amy, Sonic can attack with a hammer, but has a jump instead of a Spin Attack. In contrast, if Amy has Sonic as her partner, she is able to use the spin attack.

Development

Yuji Naka had limited involvement in the development of Sonic Advance 3, and conceived of the two-player dynamic.

Reception

Like its two predecessors, Sonic Advance 3 has received mostly positive reception, with scores including a 9.0 from IGN, 9/10 from GameZone
Sonic Advance 3 has sold over 1.5 million copies since its release.
The game won the award of best handheld game of 2004 at the Golden Joystick Awards.






