[[Department of the Environment (Australia)]]

CATEGORIES: Government departments of Australia, Conservation in Australia, Environment of Australia, Environment ministries, Water ministries, Water in Australia, Ministries established in 2013, Public policy in Australia, 2013 establishments in Australia

The Australian Department of the Environment is a department of the Government of Australia charged with the responsibility of developing and implementing national policy, programs and legislation to protect and conserve Australia's environment and heritage.

Structure

The department is an Australian Public Service Department of State in the environment portfolio, under the Public Service Act 1999.
The head of the department is the Secretary of the Department of the Environment, currently Dr Gordon de Brouwer  and to the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for the Environment, currently Senator the Hon. Simon Birmingham.

History

The department was formed by way of an Administrative Arrangements Order issued on 18 September 2013
Since formation, the department has faced significant cuts (25 per cent to be cut from the organisation's budget over four years), in line with the Coalition Government's environmental deregulation policies.

Mission

The stated aims of the department are to achieve the protection and conservation of the environment; to ensure that Australia benefits from meteorological and related sciences and services; and to see that Australia's interests in Antarctica are advanced. The department develops and implements national policy, programs and legislation to protect and conserve Australia's environment and heritage.
Operational activities== 
The functions of the department are broadly classified into the following matters:

Agencies

The department and the following executive agencies and statutory authorities form the Australian Government's environment portfolio.

Programs

The department manages a number of major programs. The most significant of those dealing with natural resource management come under the umbrella of the Natural Heritage Trust and the National Action Plan for Salinity and Water Quality. Both the Trust and National Action Plan are administered jointly with the Department of Agriculture.

Divisions

Divisions of the department include the Australian Antarctic Division, Supervising Scientist Division, Heritage Division, Parks Australia, Policy and Communications, Australian Wildlife, Sydney Harbour Federation Trust, Australian Land and Coasts plus a number of executive agencies and statutory authorities.

Environmental protection

The Department of the Environment administers environmental laws, including the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 and a range of other Acts. It is also responsible for Australia's participation in a number of international environmental agreements.

Islands administration

The department also administers areas of the Coral Sea Islands,








