[[Wesleyan University Philippines]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 1946, Universities and colleges in the Philippines, Education in the Philippines, Higher education in the Philippines, Association of Christian Schools, Colleges, and Universities, Protestant schools in the Philippines, Cabanatuan, 1946 establishments in the Philippines



Wesleyan University-Philippines (WU-P) is a private, non-stock, non-profit and non-sectarian university located in Cabanatuan City, Nueva Ecija, Philippines and ran by the United Methodist Church (UMC). Founded in 1946 as the Philippine Wesleyan College, it is named after John Wesley, the founder of Methodism. The university offers pre-elementary, grade school, high school, undergraduate, and graduate programs.wesleyan.ph/aboutwup.
The University was granted a five-year autonomy by the Commission on Higher Education effective March 11, 2009.com/nuevaecijajournal/03312009.html
Its acronym may be written as WUP or WU-P.

History

Wesleyan University - Philippines was opened in 1946 by a group of Methodist laymen led by Carlos Mañacop, Sr. as a response to the Novo Ecijanos' difficulty in sending their children to schools in Metro Manila. Plans for the creation of a Christian institution of higher learning in Cabanatuan City was then set forth, and on July 1 the group officially established a school, called the Philippine Wesleyan College (PWC) in honor of the founder of Methodism, in a building made up of bamboo fronds that housed a first batch of 368 Liberal Arts and Teacher Education enrolees taught by a 19-member faculty. The PWC was incorporated on April 28, 1948.

Demonym

The demonym "Wesleyanian" is a unique word coinage which originated from WU-P. The term has been around for decades, though its use is regarded as traditional rather than official, and exclusive only to the university's academic and administrative community. Here the term "Wesleyan" is considered a general noun instead of an adjective, therefore requiring the use of the suffix -ian in order to convert it into its gentilic form. Though the subject of an ongoing linguistic and grammatical debate for being a bizarre form of a suffixed noun affixed with a second suffix, the term nonetheless gained wide if not universal currency among students and professors, that even a secondary publication was named "The Wesleyanian" and the term has been used repeatedly to refer to its community in a number of publications, speeches and even in official documents. WU-P is the only Wesleyan institution in the world which refers to its affiliates as "Wesleyanians."

Administrators

At present, 11 administrators have taken turns in the university's presidency. Currently the president is elected by the Board of Trustees from among its ranks, with general concurrence obtained from the College of Bishops of the Philippine Central Conference of the United Methodist Church in the Philippines. 

Growth

Under the administrations of Carlos Mañacop, Roxy Lefforge and Asuncion Perez Wesleyan posted its first rapid growth. Mañacop was able to bring an unprecedented increase in enrollment due to the addition of new courses, while a U-shaped concrete four-story building was constructed during the time of Perez at Del Pilar Street.
Since then PWC began its growth in terms of academic and community outreach programs, physical plant and facilities, student population and campus area. Bishop Ralph Cushman's cash donation to purchase three hectares of land spurred an outpouring of philanthropic backings that led to more areas of expansion, which included a two-hectare land donation by the Garcia family. Years later, a German Protestant organization donated funds used to construct the Academic and EZE buildings at the new Cushman Campus.
During Lacson's term many other improvements took place. Being the first president of Wesleyan as a university and the first administrator to have her office at the Cushman Campus, she oversaw the completion of the three-story EZE building which now houses the College of Education, as well as the Carlos Mañacop building next to EZE Building which houses the College of Business and Accountancy and the College of Arts and Sciences. The four-story concrete Library and Research Building, the High School Building and the Administration Building which bears her name were likewise opened in less than a decade. A concrete two-story building for the College of Engineering was also built in the new campus. Some new courses were offered and the Graduate School was opened.
Philippine Wesleyan College was awarded university status and became Wesleyan University-Philippines (WUP) on April 24, 1978.wesleyan.ph/aboutwup.php?page=history
In 1982, the university prepared a ten-year development plan (1982–1992) which prioritized the transferring of the entire university to the all-new Cushman Campus, a goal which was accomplished a year ahead of schedule.
This period of infrastructural development continued under the presidency of Cleto, who pushed for the construction of the D.D. Alejandro Hall, a five-story concrete building in front of the High School Department where classes of the College of Computer Studies are held. Cleto also executed the construction of the five-story concrete dormitory at the southern part of the campus, while at the north a three-story concrete building was completed to accommodate the Pre-school and Elementary School departments.
During the year 2000, the university later merged with Aurora Wesleyan College which was established Methodist missionaries Richard and Eva Wehrman in the late 60s. The college later called itself Wesleyan University- Philippines - Aurora and started offering more courses.
Under Lumba, the building for the College of Hotel, Restaurant and Institution Management (CHRIM), the CHRIM Mini Hotel and the Graduate School rose. The renovation of the University Gate was completed and the John Wesley Park, where the life-sized statue of John Wesley created by TOYM-awardee Juan Sajid de Leon stands, was inaugurated.
Since then, the university has increased in the number of courses and programs it offers. Courses such as Nursing, Social Work, Nutrition, Agriculture, Electronics and Communications Engineering, Graduate Courses in Business Administration and a doctoral program were added. The Computer Science, BS in Criminology, and BS in Hotel, Restaurant and Institution Management courses have been recently recognized by the Commission on Higher Education.wesleyan.ph/aboutwup.php?page=history
During the administration of Maglaya the WU-P Cardiovascular Diagnostic Center and Medical Center (now renamed the Wesleyan University General Hospital and Cardiovascular Center or WUGHCC) was opened. Dubbed "The Heart Center of the North" and intended chiefly for handling cardiovascular cases, the hospital boasts of the same expertise, equipment and facilities as those provided at the Philippine Heart Center (PHC), but charges lower fees compared to the latter. It had its first successful heart operation on May 18, 2007 on a tricycle driver whose valve was replaced with a metallic prosthetic valve.inquirer.php?db=1&article=20070718-77265
Infrastructural improvements also took place during Palomo's administration which saw the opening of a new foodcourt, a new 4 classroom Elementary building, HRIM laboratory and the deployment of WiFi connectivity over the campus. Moreover, the university started to offer courses like Medical Technology (BSMT), Radiologic Technology (BSRT) and Information Technology (BSIT).

Campus

The university has two campuses in Central Luzon: the Cushman Campus and Aurora Extension Campus. 
Cushman Campus is a more than seven-hectare area donated by Methodist Bishop Ralph Cushman located at Cabanatuan City, the campus was established as the university's center of operation after transferring from the dilapidated Del Pilar Street campus; more than 30 buildings were constructed since the establishment of Cushman Campus. The Aurora Extension Campus located at Maria Aurora, Aurora rose as the Aurora Wesleyan College initiated by Methodist missionaries during the late 80's. Aurora Wesleyan College was later acquired and developed to be WU-P's first campus outside Nueva Ecija.

Academic programs

WU-P offers basic education programs (from pre-school to secondary) and a tertiary program which enrolment comprises majority of the university's student population. It has nine undergraduate colleges, namely the College of Arts and Sciences, College of Computer Studies, College of Nursing, College of Allied Medical and Health Courses, College of Criminal Justice Education, College of Education, College of Business and Accountancy, College of Hotel, Restaurant and Institution Management; and the College of Technology in addition to the Graduate School, which confers graduate and postgraduate degrees on a number of majors.

Accreditation and recognition

The University operates five programs with Level II Accreditation Status as certified by the Federation of Accrediting Agencies of the Philippines (FAAP) and the Association of Christian Schools and Colleges Accrediting Agency, Inc. (ACSC-AAI). These programs are the pre-school, elementary, high school, Accountancy and the Graduate School. The Colleges of Arts and Sciences, Education, and Business Administration enjoy Level III Accreditation status.
In 1990-1991, Wesleyan University-Philippines was identified by the Philippine Association for Teacher Education (PAFTE) as the regional center for Teacher Education. The College of Education serves also as a Teacher-Training Institution (TTI) for the training of secondary Science and Mathematics teachers.
In 1991-1992, WU-P was nominated by the DECS Regional Office III as one of the so-called "excellent schools" in Region III. Likewise, the Philippine Historical Association named WU-P a Regional Nucleus School. The university serves as the seat of the non-government organizations (NGOs) forum in Nueva Ecija and the center for Drug Prevention Education in the province. The College of Technology is a Center of Development for Region III, a recognition granted by the Commission on Higher Education III (CHED III).
The Commission on Higher Education granted the university a Deregulated Status in 2004. In the most recent evaluation conducted in 2005 by the Commission on Higher Education, the WU-P Graduate School was rated "very good," besting all other schools in Region III including state universities and colleges.
The university has been granted a five-year autonomous status by the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) effective March 11, 2009. An autonomous status allows universities to design their own curricula, offer new programs and put up branches or satellite campuses without having to secure permits, confer honorary degrees, and carry out operations without much interference from CHEd.gmanetwork. Joseph's College of Quezon City, University of Santo Tomas and Centro Escolar University, among others.com/nuevaecijajournal/03312009.html

Student life

Student leadership and clubs

The Supreme Student Council (SSC) is the central governing body of the WUP student population. It began in AY 2009-2010 to consolidate the student councils of all colleges, which then had separate governors to administer respective affairs.wesleyan.ph/campus. At least three Wesleyan students became Ayala Young Leaders while one alumnus, Jerome M. Dayao, was selected as one of the Ten Outstanding Students of the Philippines (TOSP) for 2006 in the field of medicine.news.gov.htm Dayao was the first TOSP awardee in the Central Luzon Region. He was the editor-in-chief of Genré, the central student publication of WU-P from 2005 to 2006. Three other editors of the publication became finalists of TOSP. Orlando Zarate Jr., Governor of Nursing Students Organization 2008-2009 was chosen in 2009 as one of the Top Ten Outstanding Nursing Students in the Philippines.
There are at least more than 35 active tertiary-level minor organizations in the university, each acting under the supervision of the Office of Student Affairs (OSA). Some tertiary-level clubs chartered as student arms are the Red Cross Youth (Red Cross Intl.), College-Y (YMCA), JPIA, JFINEX, SaveMe Movement, Every Nation Youth Ministries, Campus Youth Ministry, Service for Peace Club, Solely Indispensable Nursing Arts Guild (SINAG, Foreign/International Students Organization and the International Youth Fellowship (IYF), among others.  Meanwhile, root organizations have been established by students as well. The university has a chorale group and a stage-performing club, the Telon.wesleyan.ph/campus.php?page=orgs
Fraternities are not recognized by the WU-P administration, but there are a few underground brotherhood such as the Tau Gamma Phi, Alpha Phi Omega, Kappa Epsilon, Sigma Phi, Delta Phi Omicron, Samahang Ilokano etc. The university's ROTC corps also has their own "sabre and rifle" association as well.

Publications

Formerly named The Chronicle, Genré is the central student publication of the university.  Apart from the central paper, the College of Nursing also has its own official college publication named The Impulse, as well a school organ for elementary pupils ("The Graders") and student publication for secondary students ("The Wesleyanian"). The university also issues the Wesleyan Updates, the only publication which is not edited by the students.
The central publication Genré usually issues a newsletter and/or magazine edition during the first semester, and another newsletter and/or literary folio during the second semester (frequency of publication is determined according to editorial preference and budget). The editors and staff writers are known for their achievements in press congresses and other major off-campus competitions and award-giving bodies. For years it had been the berth of Ayala Young Leaders and TOSP nominees and winners.
As a journalistic publication, Genré enjoys editorial independence. Members of the editorial board and staff are selected through a competitive entrance examination administered by the adviser every June or July.  The adviser (currently Prof. Ruth C. Alfonso) is the only personnel designated by the OSA to handle the publication. Formerly selection does not exceed 16 staffers and members of the editorial board, though at present membership has risen to accommodate a wide range of campus and off-campus news and events coverage.wesleyan.ph/campus.php?page=genre

Notable alumni

Honorary Alumni






