[[Pfeiffer University]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in North Carolina, Education in Stanly County, North Carolina, National Register of Historic Places in North Carolina, Educational institutions established in 1885, Council of Independent Colleges, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, Universities and colleges accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, Universities and colleges in Charlotte, North Carolina, Buildings and structures in Stanly County, North Carolina, Pfeiffer University

Pfeiffer University is a private university in the village of Misenheimer near Richfield, North Carolina.

History

Pfeiffer originated from a home school operated by Miss Emily Prudden in the late 19th century.  The school first began operation on the outskirts of Hudson, North Carolina, on Lick Mountain in (Caldwell County, North Carolina). University archivist Jonathan Hutchinson said in 2013, "Our accepted founding date is 1885," referring to the date Prudden's first school began, "but Emily probably started the school in about 1898."Shannon Beaman, "Pfeiffer University's first fifty years recalled," Stanly News and Press, October 27, 2013, p. 10A. The school was called Oberlin, after John Frederick Oberlin, a French priest noted for his social improvement in the Alsace Region of France. The school was later endowed by Mrs. Mary P. Mitchell, and the name was changed to the Mitchell School.
A fire destroyed the school in 1907 and it moved to the nearby town of Lenoir, North Carolina. As that location proved inadequate, the school again relocated in 1910, this time to its current location in Misenheimer. The Mitchell School began issuing high school diplomas in 1913.   In 1928 the school began offering junior college classes and was accredited as such in 1934.  It was that year that the Pfeiffer family of New York City gave generous financial gifts to the school for construction of new buildings, and it was then that the name Pfeiffer Junior College was used.
During the 1950s the school began offering senior college courses.  The four-year Pfeiffer College was accredited in 1960 during the administration of Dr. J. Lem Stokes II, President.  Pfeiffer opened a satellite campus in Charlotte, approximately forty miles away, in 1977.  In 1996 the college's trustees voted to re-organize to achieve university status, and the current name of Pfeiffer University was adopted.
An outdoor drama entitled "The Legacy of Lick Mountain" relates the beginning of the school, and will be presented in Hudson, N.C. in the summer of 2014.

Schools of the University

    Accounting
    Business Administration
    Computer Information Systems
    Sports Management
    3-2: BA & MBA
    Comprehensive Science
    Elementary Education
    English
    Health & Physical
    Mathematics
    Music
    Social Studies
    Special Education
    Biology
    Chemistry
    Environmental Science
    Mathematics
    Communication
    English
    English: Creative Writing
    English Education
    History
    History: Social Studies
    Licensure Track
    Political Science
    Criminal Justice
    Human Services
    Pre-Medical Studies
    Psychology
    Religion & Practical Theology
    Exercise Science
    Nursing
    Business Administration
    Criminal Justice
    Health Administration
    Interdisciplinary Studies
    Human Relations
   *Business
    MBA - Master of Business Administration
    MSL - Master of Science in Leadership
   *Joint Degree
    MBA/MHA Joint Degree
    MBA/MSL Joint Degree
    MHA/MSL Joint Degree
   *Education
    MSEE - Master of Science in Elementary Education (Charlotte only)
    MAT-SPED - Master of Arts in Teaching Special Education (Charlotte only)
   *Health
    MHA - Master of Health Administration
   *Marriage and Family Therapy
    MFT - Master of Arts in Marriage and Family Therapy (Charlotte and Triangle only)
   *Practical Theology
    MAPT - Master of Arts in Practical Theology(Charlotte only)
        Center for Deacon Education

Graduate Studies

Pfeiffer has 2 graduate campuses. The main graduate campus is located in Charlotte, North Carolina near the SouthPark area. The campus has been in Charlotte for 33 years and currently serves several hundred students. Pfeiffer's Research Triangle Park campus, located in Morrisville, North Carolina, serves graduate students in Raleigh, Durham, Chapel Hill and surrounding areas.
The graduate degrees offered include Masters degrees in Business Administration, Healthcare Administration, Education, Organizational Change and Leadership, and Marriage & Family Therapy.

Ratings

U.S. News and World Report

In the 2010 edition of the U.S. News & World Report, Pfeiffer University was listed as a "selective" school.

MBA Program

Pfeiffer's MBA program, which has been named one of the top enrolling MBA programs in NC, earned the first-ever American accreditation for its International Master of Business Administration (MBA) degree program issued by ACQUIN, the German accreditation agency.

MFT Program

In collaboration with the American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy (AAMFT), the Pfeiffer University MFT Program is an accredited MFT Graduate School approved by the Commission on Accreditation for Marriage and Family Therapy Education (COAMFTE).

Athletics

Pfeiffer's athletic teams are known as the Falcons.  They compete in the NCAA's Division II as a member of the Conference Carolinas (formerly the Carolinas-Virginia Athletic Conference). Men's teams include baseball, basketball, cross country, golf, lacrosse, soccer, swimming, tennis and volleyball.  Women's sports consist of basketball, cross country, golf, lacrosse, soccer, softball, swimming, tennis and volleyball.  
The 1981 Women's Field Hockey team became Pfeiffer's first team to win a National Championship.
Steven Armstrong of Edinburgh, Scotland became Pfeiffer's first individual National Champion in 1995 winning the NAIA National Golf Championship at Bailey Ranch, Tulsa, Oklahoma.
In 2009, varsity student-cyclist Joey Rosskopf won the overall Division II national road cycling championships.

Notable alumni

Gray Stone Day School

Gray Stone Day School, which opened in Fall 2002, In 2012 the school opened a new wing of classrooms to accommodate the largest freshman class in school history.






