[[Oh Brother, Where Art Thou?]]

CATEGORIES: The Simpsons (season 2) episodes, 1991 television episodes

"Oh Brother, Where Art Thou?" is the fifteenth episode of The Simpsons second season. It originally aired on Fox in the United States on February 21, 1991. In the episode, Grampa confesses that Homer has a half-brother, whom Homer immediately tries to track down. He eventually discovers that his brother is Herbert Powell, the head of a car manufacturer. Herb immediately starts to bond with Bart and Lisa, and he invites Homer to design his own car. Homer's car design turns out to be a disaster, which causes Herb to become bankrupt.
The episode was written by Jeff Martin and directed by Wes Archer. American actor Danny DeVito provided the voice of Herb. The episode features cultural references to cars such as the Edsel, the Tucker Torpedo, the Ford Mustang, and the Lamborghini Cheetah. Since airing, the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics. It acquired a Nielsen rating of 15.4, and was the highest-rated show on Fox the week it aired. Some fans were upset with the sad ending of the episode, and as a result the producers decided to write a sequel, "Brother, Can You Spare Two Dimes?", in which Herb regains his fortune and forgives Homer.

Plot

After watching the latest McBain film, Grampa suffers a mild heart attack. Thinking he might die, he is prompted to confess a long-hidden secret: Homer has a half-brother. Grampa explains that he met a carnival prostitute before marrying Homer's mother, and they had a son that they left at the Shelbyville Orphanage. Determined to find his brother, Homer and his family go to the orphanage and find out that Grampa's love child was adopted by a Mr. and Mrs. Powell and named Herbert.
Herbert Powell, who looks just like Homer, except he is taller, slimmer and has more hair, is the head of the automobile manufacturer Powell Motors in Detroit, which is in need of new ideas. He is very rich, but is unhappy not knowing who he is and where he comes from. He is overjoyed upon hearing of his half-brother and invites the entire Simpson family to stay at his mansion. Bart, Lisa, and Maggie are enthralled by Herb's wealthy lifestyle and kind personality, although Marge constantly worries about spoiling her kids. Herb then decides that Homer, being an average American, is the perfect person to design a new car for his company.
Homer is given entirely free rein in the design, but is at first too timid to voice an opinion, as Herb's designers begin to design the car with their own ideas in mind. When Herb gets word of this, he gives Homer a pep talk that sends him back to the designers determined to build the car with all sorts of weird effects like bubble domes, tail fins and several horns that play "La Cucaracha". At the unveiling of the new car, Herb is horrified to find that the car is a badly-designed and hideously styled monstrosity that costs US$82,000, leaving Powell Motors bankrupt and out of business, while Herb's mansion is foreclosed and he loses everything he ever worked for; as he departs Detroit on a bus, he angrily remarks to Homer that as far as he is concerned, he has no brother.
While Homer drives the family home, Bart tells him that the car he built was great, and Homer becomes relieved to discover that at least one person liked it.

Production

"Oh Brother, Where Art Thou?" was written by Jeff Martin and directed by Wes Archer. Both Homer's mother Mona Simpson and Herb make their first appearances on The Simpsons in the episode. Some fans were upset with the sad ending of the episode, and as a result the producers decided to write a sequel in which Herb would be given a kinder fate. The resulting episode, "Brother, Can You Spare Two Dimes?", aired at the end of the third season.
The episode was recorded on August 13, 1990. The voice of Herb was provided by guest star Danny DeVito, an American actor who was suggested for the role by Simpsons executive producer Sam Simon. While recording the scenes, Cartwright stood directly across the room from DeVito, which she appreciated since she got to see him in action. She thought DeVito "threw his body and soul" into his performance. While the recording took part, animation director Archer scribbled down some of DeVito's attitudes, gestures, and facial expressions on a piece of paper as he performed. In one scene of the episode, Herb tells Homer and the rest of the Simpson family to "make yourselves at home. We have a tennis court, a swimming pool, a screening room..." Cartwright said of it:

Cultural references

The storyline of a controversially styled car causing the company to fail both echoes that of the Edsel and the Tucker Torpedo. The Edsel was a controversially styled car that bore the name of Henry Ford's son, Edsel Ford, and is now considered one of the biggest car flops in history. Production of the Tucker Torpedo, which introduced many new features, was shut down amidst scandal and accusations of stock fraud in 1949. Homer wants the horns of the car he is designing to play the traditional Spanish folk corrido "La Cucaracha".
The title of the episode is a reference the name of the fictional book "O Brother, Where Art Thou?" in the 1941 film Sullivan's Travels. Herb lives in a house that looks like American architect Frank Lloyd Wright's house in Oak Park, Illinois, works in a studio that looks like the Taliesin school of architecture in Spring Green, Wisconsin, and his factory resembles the Johnson Wax Headquarters in Racine, Wisconsin, all three buildings designed by Wright.

Reception

In its original broadcast, "Oh Brother, Where Art Thou?" finished twenty-sixth in the ratings for the week of February 18–24, 1991. With a Nielsen rating of 15.4, equivalent to approximately 14.1 million viewing households, it was the highest-rated show on Fox that week.
Since airing, the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics. The authors of the book I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide, Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, wrote that although it is "inevitable" that Homer's car will be a disaster, the "joy of this episode is anticipating exactly what sort of disaster."
DVD Movie Guide's Colin Jacobson called the episode a solid episode and said that the introduction of Homer's brother "could have been gimmicky, especially with a big-name guest star like DeVito, but the concept fared nicely." Jacobson added that he thought DeVito "brought spark to his part and made Herb fun and lively. The parts in which Homer developed his car were also hilarious and offered some of the show's best bits. The program even showed some great little moments, like the hallmark Simpson five-o-clock shadow on infant Herb."
On June 29, 2013, Porcubimmer Motors debuted a real-life version of "The Homer," the car that was designed by Homer in this episode, at the 24 Hours of LeMons race in Buttonwillow, California.






