[[Hiro Mashima]]

CATEGORIES: 1977 births, Hiro Mashima, Japanese Christians, Living people, Manga artists, People from Nagano, Nagano

 is a Japanese manga artist. He gained success with his first serial Rave, published in Kodansha's Weekly Shōnen Magazine from 1999 to 2005. His currently ongoing Fairy Tail, published in the same magazine since 2006, is experiencing even greater popularity.

Early life

Hiro Mashima stated that he knew he wanted to be a manga artist for as long as he can recall. His father was an artist that aspired to turn professional, but died when Mashima was young.

Career

Mashima created a story on his own and brought it to manga editors, which led to entering it into a competition that he won. He made his official serialization debut the following year with Rave in Weekly Shōnen Magazine. It ran until 2005 and was adapted into an anime titled Groove Adventure Rave from 2001 to 2002. Both the manga and anime were released in North America under the name Rave Master.
In 2003, he collected some of his one-shot titles in two volumes: Mashima-en Vol.1 & 2. Those stories include, among others, "Magician", "Xmas Hearts" and the "Fairy Tail" pilot chapter.
From 2005 to 2007, Mashima wrote Monster Soul in Comic BomBom.
While working on Rave, Mashima drew the prototype for what would become Fairy Tail. Fairy Tail began serialization in Kodansha's Weekly Shōnen Magazine in 2006 and has been adapted into a television anime series.
Mashima serialized Monster Hunter Orage, an adaptation of the Monster Hunter video games, in Monthly Shōnen Rival from 2008 to 2009.
In 2011, he created a crossover manga between Rave and Fairy Tail published in the May issue of Weekly Shōnen Magazine.
Fairy Tail will be getting its own magazine, titled Monthly Fairy Tail. It will include spin-off manga by other artists as well as a prequel by Mashima himself currently set to be titled Fairy Tail Zero.

Style and influences

Mashima listed Akira Toriyama's Dragon Ball as his favorite manga growing up, and the video game series Dragon Quest as inspiring him to become an artist. He also read/watched several works by Hayao Miyazaki as a child.
For Rave, Mashima's inspiration was wanting to travel the world, while for Fairy Tail it was simply sitting in bars and partying with his friends, the community aspect, but is also about young people finding their calling. He stated that while he tries to consider both his own interests and the fans' on what will happen next in Fairy Tail, the fans take precedence. 
Mashima has named his main characters after the seasons: In Rave, the main character is named Haru which is Japanese for spring. In Fairy Tail, the main character is  which is the Japanese word for summer. He has also named a character Fuyu, which is Japanese for winter. Mashima said in an About. The main characters of both Rave and Fairy Tail do not have fathers, partly taken from Mashima's own experience of his father dying when he was young.
Mashima had six assistants in 2008 that worked in an 8,000 sq. feet area with seven desks, as well as a sofa and TV for video games. He revealed his schedule for Fairy Tail was script and storyboards on Monday, rough sketches the following day, and drawing and inking Wednesday through Friday. The weekend was for Monster Hunter; working on a quarter of the story each weekend and finishing by the end of the month. In 2011, he stated that he worked six days a week, for 17 hours a day. Mashima's assistants have included Miki Yoshikawa, who has gone on to work on the romantic comedies Yankee-kun and Megane-chan and Yamada-kun to 7-nin no Majo. In 2008, together they developed a crossover one-shot story called Fairy Megane where characters from Yankee-kun join the members of Fairy Tail on an assignment. Shin Mikuni has also assisted for Mashima; Mikuni developed a manga series called Spray King. 

Works






