[[Telcordia Technologies]]

CATEGORIES: Bell System, Research and development organizations, Companies based in Middlesex County, New Jersey, Companies established in 1983, Piscataway, New Jersey

Telcordia Technologies, formerly Bell Communications Research, Inc. or Bellcore, is the telecommunication research and development (R&D) company based in the United States created as part of the 1982 Modification of Final Judgment that broke up American Telephone & Telegraph (AT&T). On June 14, 2011, Ericsson announced an agreement to acquire Telcordia and the acquisition was closed on January 12, 2012.
The purchase of Telcordia by Ericsson, which was approved by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS), resulted in the creation of Applied Communication Sciences, formerly the research and consulting arm of Telcordia. Applied Communication Sciences is a wholly owned subsidiary of Telcordia, which is ultimately owned by Ericsson.Interconnection Solutions Renamed iconectiv  Its offers cover such areas as number portability, device theft and counterfeit prevention, information services, numbering and addressing, mobile messaging and spectrum management.About iconectiv

History

The company was created on October 20, 1983, as Central Services Organization, Inc. as part of the 1982 Modification of Final Judgment that broke up the Bell System. It later received the name Bell Communications Research, Inc. Bellcore was a consortium established by the Regional Bell Operating Companies upon their separation from AT&T. Since AT&T retained Bell Laboratories, the operating companies wanted to have their own R&D facility. Bellcore, the tenth company to register a .
Bellcore's initial staff and corporate culture drew heavily via transfers of personnel from the nearby Bell Labs locations in northern New Jersey, plus additional staff from AT&T and the regional operating companies. The company originally established its headquarters in Livingston with dedication by New Jersey Governor Thomas Kean in 1985, but moved its headquarters to Morristown a decade later.
Although Bellcore's R&D and standard setting were of considerable importance to the telecommunications industry in general, the asset value of the company was largely centered in ownership of the approx. 6,000 pieces of network software, many of enormous size, that functionally ran the U.S. telephone system.
In 1992 issues related to the management of the software systems led to the formation of a Study Group of senior business and legal representatives of the seven Owner Companies, commonly referred to as the OC's, together with the executive leadership of Bellcore, and facilitated by Marc Paul Chinoy, President of The Regis Group, Inc. of Leesburg, Virginia.  A structured deliberation of the joint leadership continued on a daily basis until November 1996, when by unanimous decision, the Study Group recommended, and the seven OC CEO's approved the divestiture of the company, while retaining the name and logo.

Separation from the Baby Bells

In 1996, the company was provisionally acquired by Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC).Dr. J. Robert Beyster with Peter Economy, The SAIC Solution: How We Built an $8 Billion Employee-Owned Technology Company, John Wiley & Sons (2007) p.73 The sale was closed one year later, following a regulatory approval process that covered all the states individually.  Since the divested company no longer had any ownership connection with the Bell regional companies, the name was officially changed to Telcordia Technologies, Inc. in 1999.Tim McElligott & Jason Meyers, BELLCORE 3.0, Connected Planet, September 22, 2003 – accessed July 8, 2010 Stake in the company was subsequently sold in November 2004 to Providence Equity Partners and Warburg Pincus, who both held equal stakes in the company. 
On June 14, 2011, Ericsson announced an agreement to acquire TelcordiaEricsson to acquire Telcordia, press release, Ericsson, 2011-06-14 for $1.15 billion. The acquisition was completed on January 12, 2012, when Telcordia became a wholly owned subsidiary of Ericsson.
Telcordia is a chief architect of the telecommunications system in the U.S., and has pioneered many of the telecommunications services used today, including Caller ID, Call Waiting, Mobile number portability and Toll-free telephone number (800) service. Telcordia's expertise lies in managing large, complex projects across the operations and communications spectrum.
Telcordia offers products and services in the area of network planning and engineering, service assurance, delivery, fulfillment and data management and operations support. Telcordia's software products are designed to solve communications problems, support complex operations missions and system interoperability issues. Telcordia also writes proposed generic requirements (GRs) for telecommunications industry hardware and offers consulting and testing to these GRs.
Telcordia has its headquarters in Piscataway, New Jersey, and has a Software Development Lab in Chennai, India. Telcordia is pioneer in the field of prepaid Charging system commonly called as Intelligent network. Most of the development work in Intelligent network now comes from the labs in India and the United States. Its headquarters campus at Piscataway and its offices and laboratories at Red Bank, New Jersey, were originally Bell Laboratories (Bell Labs) locations transferred to Telcordia.

Innovation

Telcordia research has yielded more than 1,800 patents across ADSL, ATM/SONET, Advanced Intelligent Network, optical networking, wavelength-division multiplexing, wireless (3G, 4G, cellular, mobility), security, and more.
It is also the inventor of the Operations Systems Modification of Intelligent Network Elements (OSMINE) procedure.

Acquisition by Ericsson

On June 15, 2011, Ericsson announced that it would buy Telcordia for $1.15 billion In October, 2012, Applied Communication Sciences relocated its headquarters to Basking Ridge, New Jersey, occupying the former AT&T Wireless headquarters building. In February 2013, Ericsson launched iconectiv as the new brand for its Interconnection business.






