[[Rudy Giuliani]]

CATEGORIES: 1944 births, 20th-century Roman Catholics, 21st-century Roman Catholics, American businesspeople, American political writers, American Roman Catholics, American writers of Italian descent, Cancer survivors, Honorary Knights Commander of the Order of the British Empire, Knights of the Order of Merit of Savoy, Living people, Manhattan College alumni, Mayors of New York City, New York lawyers, New York Republicans, New York University School of Law alumni, People associated with the September 11 attacks, People from Brooklyn, Rudy Giuliani, United States Associate Attorneys General, United States Attorneys for the Southern District of New York, United States presidential candidates, 2008, Writers from New York City

Rudolph William Louis "Rudy" Giuliani (;See inogolo: pronunciation of Rudy Giuliani. born May 28, 1944) is an American lawyer, businessman, former politician, and public speaker from New York. He served as Mayor of New York City from 1994 to 2001.
A Democrat and Independent in the 1970s, and a Republican since the 1980s, Giuliani served in the United States Attorney's Office, for the Southern District of New York, eventually becoming U.S. Attorney. He prosecuted a number of high-profile cases, including ones against organized crime and Wall Street financiers.
Giuliani served two terms as Mayor of New York City, having run on the Republican and Liberal lines. He was credited with initiating improvements in the city's quality of life and with a reduction in crime. He ran for the United States Senate in 2000 but withdrew after he was diagnosed with prostate cancer. and received an honorary knighthood from Queen Elizabeth II in 2002.com
After leaving office as mayor, Giuliani founded Giuliani Partners, a security consulting business; acquired Giuliani Capital Advisors (later sold), an investment banking firm; and joined the Bracewell & Giuliani law firm, which changed its name when he became a partner.

Early life

Rudolph Giuliani was born in an Italian-American enclave in East Flatbush in the New York City borough of Brooklyn, the only child of working-class parents, Harold Angelo Giuliani (1908–1981) and Helen (née D'Avanzo; 1909–2002), both first-generation Americans, children of Italian immigrants.
Early in life, Rudy Giuliani developed a lateral lisp which he still has to this day.
Giuliani attended Manhattan College in Riverdale, Bronx, where he majored in political science with a minor in philosophy. There he considered becoming a priest, after having studied theology for four years in college."In a Surprise, Pat Robertson Backs Giuliani", The New York Times, November 8, 2007
Giuliani was elected president of his class in his sophomore year, but was not re-elected in his junior year. He joined the Phi Rho Pi fraternity, and was active in shaping its direction. He graduated in 1965. Giuliani eventually decided to forego the priesthood, instead attending New York University School of Law in Manhattan, where he made law review and graduated cum laude with a Juris Doctor in 1968.
Giuliani started his political life as a Democrat. He has stated that he admires the Kennedy family, and volunteered for Robert F. Kennedy's presidential campaign in 1968. He also worked as a Democratic party committeeman on Long Island in the mid-1960s,The Democratic Party| DNC Statement on Giuliani's Potential Presidential BidJack Newfield, "The Full Rudy: The Man, the Mayor, the Myth", The Nation, May 30, 2002; retrieved June 2, 2007 and voted for George McGovern for president in 1972."What an anti-Giuliani ad should say"

Legal career

Upon graduation, Giuliani clerked for Judge Lloyd Francis MacMahon, United States District Judge for the Southern District of New York.
Giuliani did not serve in the military during the Vietnam War. His conscription was deferred while he was enrolled at Manhattan College and NYU Law. Upon graduation from NYU Law in 1968, he was classified by the Selective Service System as 1-A, available for military service. He applied for a deferment but was rejected. In 1969, Judge Lloyd Francis MacMahon wrote a letter to Giuliani's draft board, asking that he be reclassified as 2-A, civilian occupation deferment, because Giuliani, who was a law clerk for MacMahon, was an essential employee. The deferment was granted. In 1970, Giuliani received a high draft lottery number; he was not called up for service although by then he had been reclassified 1-A. In 1970, Giuliani joined the United States Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York."Is Giuliani a dime-store Dewey?" WorldNetDaily, November 17, 2007 In 1973, he was named Chief of the Narcotics Unit and became executive U.S. attorney.
In 1975, Giuliani switched his party registration from Democratic to Independent as he was recruited to Washington, D.C. during the Ford administration, where he was named Associate Deputy Attorney General and chief of staff to Deputy Attorney General Harold "Ace" Tyler. His first high-profile prosecution was of U.S. Representative Bertram L. Podell (NY-13), who was convicted of corruption."Convicted Politician Bertram Podell, 79". The Washington Post. August 22, 2005. From 1977 to 1981, during the Carter Administration, Giuliani practiced law at the Patterson, Belknap, Webb and Tyler law firm, as chief of staff to his previous DC boss, Ace Tyler. Tyler later became critical of Giuliani's turn as a prosecutor, calling his tactics "overkill".
On December 8, 1980, one month after the election of Ronald Reagan brought Republicans back to power in Washington, he switched his party affiliation from Independent to Republican. Giuliani later said the switches were because he found Democratic policies "naïve", and that "by the time I moved to Washington, the Republicans had come to make more sense to me". Others suggested that the switches were made in order to get positions in the Justice Department. Giuliani's mother maintained in 1988 that: 
In 1981, Giuliani was named Associate Attorney General in the Reagan administration,"Doing Rudy Justice", National Review, November 7, 2007 the third-highest position in the Department of Justice. As Associate Attorney General, Giuliani supervised the U.S. Attorney Offices' federal law enforcement agencies, the Department of Corrections, the Drug Enforcement Administration, and the United States Marshals Service. In a well-publicized 1982 case, Giuliani testified in defense of the federal government's "detention posture" regarding the internment of over 2,000 Haitian asylum seekers who had entered the country illegally. The U.S. government disputed the assertion that most of the detainees had fled their country due to political persecution, alleging instead that they were "economic migrants". In defense of the government's position, Giuliani testified that "political repression, at least in general, does not exist" under President of Haiti Jean-Claude Duvalier's regime."Around the World; U.S. Official Finds No Repression in Haiti". The New York Times. April 3, 1982.
In 1983, Giuliani was appointed U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York, which was technically a demotion but was sought by Giuliani because of his desire to personally litigate cases. It was in this position that he first gained national prominence by prosecuting numerous high-profile cases, resulting in the convictions of Wall Street figures Ivan Boesky and Michael Milken. He also focused on prosecuting drug dealers, organized crime, and corruption in government. He amassed a record of 4,152 convictions and 25 reversals. As a federal prosecutor, Giuliani was credited with bringing the "perp walk", parading of suspects in front of the previously alerted media, into common use as a prosecutorial tool.
Giuliani's critics claim he arranged public arrests of people, then dropped charges for lack of evidence on high-profile cases rather than going to trial. In a few cases, his public arrests of alleged white-collar criminals at their workplaces with charges later dropped or lessened, sparked controversy, and damaged the reputations of the alleged "perps".

Mafia Commission trial

In the Mafia Commission Trial (February 25, 1985 – November 19, 1986), Giuliani indicted eleven organized crime figures, including the heads of New York's so-called "Five Families", under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) on charges including extortion, labor racketeering, and murder for hire. Time magazine called this "Case of Cases" possibly "the most significant assault on the infrastructure of organized crime since the high command of the Chicago Mafia was swept away in 1943", and quoted Giuliani's stated intention: "Our approach is to wipe out the five families."
According to an FBI memo revealed about 20 years later, leaders of the five New York mob families voted in 1987 on whether to issue a contract for the death of U.S. attorney Rudolph Giuliani. Heads of the Lucchese, Bonanno, and Genovese families rejected the idea, though Gambino leader John Gotti encouraged assassination.

Boesky, Milken trials

Ivan Boesky was a Wall Street arbitrageur who had amassed a fortune of about $200 million by betting on corporate takeovers. He was investigated by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) for making investments based on tips received from corporate insiders. These stock acquisitions were sometimes brazen, with massive purchases occurring only a few days before a corporation announced a takeover. Although insider trading of this kind was illegal, laws prohibiting it were rarely enforced until Boesky was prosecuted. Boesky cooperated with the SEC and informed on several others, including junk bond trader Michael Milken. Per agreement with Giuliani, Boesky received a 

Mayoral campaigns

Giuliani was U.S. Attorney until January 1989, resigning as the Reagan Administration ended. He garnered criticism until he left office for his handling of cases, and was accused of prosecuting cases to further his political ambitions. He joined the law firm White & Case in New York City as a partner. He remained with White & Case until May 1990, when he joined the law firm Anderson Kill Olick & Oshinsky, also in New York City. Giuliani, Bracewell & Giuliani

1989

Giuliani first ran for New York City Mayor in 1989, attempting to unseat three-term incumbent Ed Koch. He won the September 1989 Republican Party primary election against business magnate Ronald Lauder, in a campaign marked by claims that Giuliani was not a true Republican and by an acrimonious debate. Seeley
"In G.O.P. Debate Today, Which Tack for Giuliani?", The New York Times, May 3, 2007. Retrieved March 31, 2008.[/ref] In the Democratic primary, Koch was upset by Manhattan Borough President David Dinkins.
In the general election, Giuliani ran as the fusion candidate of both the Republican and Liberal Parties. The Conservative Party, which had often co-lined the Republican party candidate, withheld support from Giuliani and ran Lauder instead. Retrieved March 30, 2007. Conservative Party leaders were unhappy with Giuliani on ideological grounds. They cited the Liberal Party's endorsement statement that Giuliani
"agreed with the Liberal Party's views on affirmative action, gay rights, gun control, school prayer and tuition tax credits.""Election 2008: Giuliani Quotes Disturb N.Y. Conservative", National Federation of Republican Assemblies
During two televised debates, Giuliani framed himself as an agent of change, saying, "I'm the reformer""In Their First Debate, Dinkins and Giuliani Go At It, Gently", The New York Times, November 5, 2007. Retrieved June 24, 2007. that "If we keep going merrily along, this city's going down", and that electing Dinkins would represent "more of the same, more of the rotten politics that have been dragging us down". Giuliani also accused Dinkins of not having paid his taxes for many years and of several other ethical missteps, in particular a stock transfer to his son. Dinkins said the tax matter had been fully paid off, denied other wrongdoing, and said that "what we need is a mayor, not a prosecutor", and that Giuliani refused to say "the R-word — he doesn't like to admit he's a Republican."  Dinkins won the endorsements of three of the four daily New York newspapers, while Giuliani won approval from the New York Post.David Dinkins Elected First Black Mayor of New York AfroTimes, November 11, 1989
In the end, Giuliani lost to Dinkins by a margin of 47,080 votes out of 1,899,845 votes cast, in the closest election in New York City's history.

1993

Four years after he was beaten by Dinkins, Giuliani again ran for mayor. Once again, Giuliani also ran on the Liberal Party line but not the Conservative Party line, which ran activist George Marlin."Q&A: George Marlin", The New York Sun, March 21, 2007; Retrieved June 24, 2007 The city was suffering from a spike in unemployment associated with the nationwide recession, with local unemployment rates going from 6.7% in 1989 to 11.1% in 1992.New York State Department of Labor statistics,
Giuliani promised to focus the police department on shutting down petty crimes and nuisances as a way of restoring the quality of life: 
Dinkins and Giuliani never debated during the campaign, because they were never able to agree on how to approach a debate. Dinkins was endorsed by The New York Times and Newsday,"Why Dinkins Lost", Newsday, November 4, 1993 while Giuliani was endorsed by the New York Post and, in a key switch from 1989, the Daily News."In an Endorsement, a Search for Signals", The New York Times, November 1, 1993. Giuliani came to visit the late Lubavitcher Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, seeking his blessing and endorsement. Avrum Ehrlich, p. 109. KTAV Publishing, ISBN 0-88125-836-9
Giuliani won by a margin of 53,367 votes. He became the first Republican elected Mayor of New York City since John Lindsay in 1965.

1997

Giuliani's opponent in 1997 was Democratic Manhattan Borough President Ruth Messinger, who had beaten Al Sharpton in the September 9, 1997 Democratic primary."Giuliani Wins With Ease", CNN, November 4, 2007. In the general election, Giuliani once again had the Liberal Party and not the Conservative Party listing. Giuliani ran an aggressive campaign, parlaying his image as a tough leader who had cleaned up the city. Giuliani's popularity was at its highest point to date, with a late October 1997 Quinnipiac University Polling Institute poll showing him as having a 68 percent approval rating; 70 percent of New Yorkers were satisfied with life in the city and 64 percent said things were better in the city compared to four years previously.
Throughout the campaign he was well ahead in the polls and had a strong fund-raising advantage over Messinger. On her part, Messinger lost the support of several usually Democratic constituencies, including gay organizations and large labor unions."The Last Of The Liberals" The local daily newspapers — The New York Times, Daily News, New York Post and Newsday — all endorsed Giuliani over Messinger."Giuliani Goes After Voters In Messinger's Stronghold", The New York Times, October 27, 1997; Retrieved June 24, 2007
In the end, Giuliani won 59% of the vote to Messinger's 41%, and became the first Republican to win a second term as mayor since Fiorello H. La Guardia in 1941. Voter turnout was the lowest in 12 years, with 38% of registered voters casting ballots.

Mayoralty

Giuliani served as mayor of New York City from 1994 through 2001.

Law enforcement

In Giuliani's first term as mayor, the New York City Police Department at the instigation of Commissioner Bill Bratton adopted an aggressive enforcement/deterrent strategy based on James Q. Wilson's "Broken Windows" approach. The legal underpinning for removing the "squeegee men" from the streets was developed under Giuliani's predecessor, Mayor David Dinkins.
During Giuliani's administration, crime rates continued to drop in New York City, which Giuliani's presidential campaign website credited to his leadership.[ref]
 A small nationwide drop in crime preceded Giuliani's election, and critics say that he may have been the beneficiary of a trend already in progress. Additional contributing factors to the overall decline in New York City crime during the 1990s were the addition of 7,000 officers to the NYPD, lobbied for and hired by the Dinkins administration, and an overall improvement in the national economy. Changing demographics were a key factor contributing to crime rate reductions, which were similar across the country during this time.[ref]Greene Crime Delinquency
1999; 45: pp. 171–87 "Zero Tolerance: A Case Study of Police Policies and Practices in New York City". Retrieved December 5, 2006.[/ref] Because the crime index is based on that of the FBI, which is self-reported by police departments, some have alleged that crimes were shifted into categories that the FBI doesn't collect.Rudy! - An Investigative Biography of Rudolph Giuliani by Wayne Barrett
Giuliani's supporters cite studies concluding that the decline in New York City's crime rate in the 1990s and 2000s exceeds all national figures and therefore should be linked with a local dynamic that was not present as such anywhere else in the country: what University of California sociologist Frank Zimring calls "the most focused form of policing in history". In his book The Great American Crime Decline, Zimring claims that "up to half of New York's crime drop in the 1990s, and virtually 100 percent of its continuing crime decline since 2000, has resulted from policing."Heather MacDonald New York Cops: Still the Finest CityJournal.org
Bratton was featured on the cover of Time in 1996."Finally, We're Winning The War Against Crime. Here's Why", Time, January 15, 1996. Retrieved March 6, 2007. Giuliani reportedly forced Bratton out after two years, in what was generally seen as a battle of two large egos in which Giuliani was not tolerant of Bratton's celebrity. Bratton went on to become chief of the Los Angeles Police Department. Retrieved March 14, 2007. Giuliani's term also saw allegations of civil rights abuses and other police misconduct under other commissioners after Bratton's departure. There were police shootings of unarmed suspects,NYC POLICE SHOOTINGS 1999, July 9, 2000. Retrieved December 5, 2006. and the scandals surrounding the torture of Abner Louima and the killings of Amadou Diallo and Patrick Dorismond. Giuliani supported the New York Police Department, for example by releasing what he called Dorismond's "extensive criminal record" to the public, including a sealed juvenile file.[ref]
CNN: "Giuliani, New York police under fire after shooting of unarmed man", March 19, 2000. Retrieved December 5, 2006.[/ref]

City services

The Giuliani administration advocated the privatization of failing public schools and increasing school choice through a voucher-based system.org Giuliani supported protection for illegal immigrants. He continued a policy of preventing city employees from contacting the Immigration and Naturalization Service about immigration violations, on the grounds that illegal aliens should be able to take actions such as sending their children to school or reporting crimes to the police without fear of deportation.Officials: Let illegal immigrants report crimes USA Today, December 5, 2007
During his mayoralty, gay and lesbian New Yorkers received domestic partnership rights. Giuliani induced the city's Democratic-controlled New York City Council, which had avoided the issue for years, to pass legislation providing broad protection for same-sex partners. In 1998, he codified local law by granting all city employees equal benefits for their domestic partners."What will Rudy say to his gay friends?", Salon.com, February 26, 2004

Appointees as defendants

Several of Giuliani's appointees to head City agencies became defendants in criminal proceedings.
In 2000, Giuliani appointed 34-year-old Russell Harding, the son of Liberal Party of New York leader and longtime Giuliani mentor Raymond Harding, to head the New York City Housing Development Corporation, although Harding had neither a college degree nor relevant experience. In 2005, Harding pleaded guilty to defrauding the Housing Development Corporation and to possession of child pornography. He was sentenced to five years in prison."Disgraced ex-Giuliani official claims mental illness, judge prescribes prison", New York Newsday, July 22, 2005. Retrieved March 9, 2007. Russell Harding committed suicide in 2012.
In a related matter, Richard Roberts, appointed by Giuliani as Housing Commissioner and as chairman of the Health and Hospitals Corporation, pleaded guilty to perjury after lying to a grand jury about a car that Harding bought for him with City funds.
Giuliani was a longtime backer of Bernard Kerik, who started out as a NYPD detective driving for Giuliani's campaign. Giuliani appointed him as the Commissioner of the Department of Correction and then as the Police Commissioner. Giuliani was also the godfather to Kerik's two youngest children.[ref]
William K. Rashbaum, "Former Police Commissioner Pleads Guilty to Taking Gift", New York Times, July 1, 2006[/ref] Kerik is currently awaiting trial on related federal charges of conspiracy, tax fraud and obstruction of justice.com Giuliani has not been implicated in any of the Kerik scandals.

2000 U.S. Senate campaign

Due to term limits, Giuliani could not run in 2001 for a third term as Mayor. In November 1998, long-serving Democratic New York Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan announced his retirement and Giuliani immediately indicated an interest in running in the 2000 election for the now-open seat. Due to his high profile and visibility Giuliani was supported by the state Republican Party, even though he had irritated many by endorsing incumbent Democratic Governor Mario Cuomo over Republican George Pataki in 1994. Giuliani's entrance led Democratic Congressman Charles Rangel and others to recruit then-U.S. First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton to run for Moynihan's seat, hoping she might combat his star power.
An early January 1999 poll showed Giuliani trailing Clinton by 10 points. Clinton was now 8 to 10 points ahead of Giuliani in the polls.
Then followed four tumultuous weeks, in which Giuliani's medical life, romantic life, marital life, and political life all collided at once in a most visible fashion. Giuliani discovered that he had prostate cancer and needed treatment; his extramarital relationship with Judith Nathan became public and the subject of a media frenzy; he announced a separation from his wife Donna Hanover; and, after much indecision, on May 19, 2000 he announced his withdrawal from the Senate race.

September 11 terrorist attacks

=Preparedness=

Giuliani has been criticized for ignoring the ongoing threat to New York City from Islamist terrorism in the years between the World Trade Center 1993 bombings and September 11.
Prior to September 11, Giuliani reportedly never referred to the 1993 bombing publicly except for a single metaphorical reference in his inaugural address not referring to terrorism."Olbermann Giuliani blames his terror mistakes" (busted) Giuliani also reportedly never discussed the threat of terrorism with the U.S. Attorney in his district, and had to ask Henry Kissinger for background information on Osama Bin Laden after the September 11th attacks despite the fact that the Bin Laden had previously declared a Fatwa against the United States;
Jerome Hauer, Giuliani's emergency management chief between 1996 and 2000, later said that "We never talked about Islamic terrorism. We talked about chemical terrorism, biological terrorism. We did talk about car bombs every now and then. But I don't think there was much interest on his part Islam terrorism."Amanda Ripley, "Mr. Tough Talk," Time Magazine September 3, 2007, p. 30 

=Response=

Giuliani was prominent in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001 attacks on the World Trade Center. He made frequent appearances on radio and television on September 11 and afterwards– for example, to indicate that tunnels would be closed as a precautionary measure, and that there was no reason to believe that the dispersion of chemical or biological weaponry into the air was a factor in the attack. In his public statements, Giuliani said: 
The 9/11 attacks occurred on the scheduled date of the mayoral primary to select the Democratic and Republican candidates to succeed Giuliani. The primary was immediately delayed two weeks to September 25. During this period, Giuliani sought an unprecedented three-month emergency extension of his term from January 1 to April 1 under the New York State Constitution (Article 3 Section 25). In the end leaders in the State Assembly and Senate indicated that they did not believe the extension was necessary. The election proceeded as scheduled, and the winning candidate, the Giuliani-endorsed Republican convert Michael Bloomberg, took office on January 1, 2002 per normal custom.
Giuliani claimed to have been at the Ground Zero site "as often, if not more, than most workers.... I was there working with them. I was exposed to exactly the same things they were exposed to. So in that sense, I'm one of them." Some 9/11 workers have objected to those claims.
When Saudi Prince Alwaleed bin Talal suggested that the attacks were an indication that the United States "should re-examine its policies in the Middle East and adopt a more balanced stand toward the Palestinian cause", Giuliani asserted, "There is no moral equivalent for this act. There is no justification for it... And one of the reasons I think this happened is because people were engaged in moral equivalency in not understanding the difference between liberal democracies like the United States, like Israel, and terrorist states and those who condone terrorism. So I think not only are those statements wrong, they're part of the problem." Giuliani subsequently rejected the prince's $10 million donation to disaster relief in the aftermath of the attack.

=Preparedness=

Giuliani has been widely criticized for his decision to locate the Office of Emergency Management headquarters on the 23rd floor inside the 7 World Trade Center building. Those opposing the decision perceived the office as a target for a terrorist attack in light of the previous terrorist attack against the World Trade Center in 1993.
In January 2008, an eight-page memo was revealed which detailed the New York City Police Department's opposition in 1998 to location of the city's emergency command center at the Trade Center site. The Giuliani administration overrode these concerns.
The 9/11 Commission Report noted that lack of preparedness could have led to the deaths of first responders at the scene of the attacks. The Commission noted that the radios in use by the fire department were the same radios which had been criticized for their ineffectiveness following the 1993 World Trade Center bombings. Family members of 9/11 victims have said that these radios were a complaint of emergency services responders for years.
An October 2001 study by the National Institute of Environmental Safety and Health said that cleanup workers lacked adequate protective gear."New Yorkers Tell Federal Officials To Stop Ignoring 9/11's Health Effects"

=Public reaction=

In the wake of the attacks, Giuliani gained international attention and was widely hailed for his leadership during the crisis. site
When polled just six weeks after the attack Giuliani received a 79 percent approval rating among New York City voters, a dramatic increase over the 36 percent rating he had received a year earlier – average at the end of a two-term mayorship.

=Time person of the year=

On December 24, 2001,CNN.
Giuliani was praised by some for his close involvement with the rescue and recovery efforts, but others argue that "Giuliani has exaggerated the role he played after the terrorist attacks, casting himself as a hero for political gain." Before September 11, Giuliani's assets were estimated to be somewhat less than $2 million, but his net worth could now be as high as 30 times that amount."Wealth Is a Common Factor Among GOP Hopefuls", The New York Times, May 17, 2007 However one must take into account that since then he has been working in the private sector. As is the case with many politicians, he has made most of his money since leaving office.

=Aftermath=

For his leadership on and after September 11, Giuliani was given an honorary knighthood (KBE) by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II on February 13, 2002.
Giuliani initially downplayed the health effects arising from the September 11 attacks in the Financial District and lower Manhattan areas in the vicinity of the World Trade Center site. 14 He moved quickly to reopen Wall Street, and it was reopened on September 17. In the first month after the attacks, he said "The air quality is safe and acceptable."Anita Gates, "Buildings Rise from Rubble while Health Crumbles", "New York Times", September 11, 2006, reporting on the documentary, "Dust to Dust: The Health Effects of 9/11" However, in the weeks after the attacks, the United States Geological Survey identified hundreds of asbestos 'hot spots' of debris dust that remained on buildings. By the end of the month the USGS reported that the toxicity of the debris was akin to that of drain cleaner.C&En: Cover Story - Chemical Analysis Of A Disaster The city's health agencies, such as the Department of Environmental Protection, did not supervise or issue guidelines for the testing and cleanup of private buildings. Instead, the city left this responsibility to building owners.
Giuliani took control away from agencies such as the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Army Corps of Engineers and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, leaving the "largely unknown" city Department of Design and Construction in charge of recovery and cleanup. Documents indicate that the Giuliani administration never enforced federal requirements requiring the wearing of respirators. Concurrently, the administration threatened companies with dismissal if cleanup work slowed. She stated that she believed that the subsequent lung disease and deaths suffered by WTC responders were a result of these actions."Christie blasts Rudy on WTC air" However, former deputy mayor Joe Lhota, then with the Giuliani campaign, replied, "All workers at Ground Zero were instructed repeatedly to wear their respirators."
Giuliani asked the city's Congressional delegation to limit the city's liability for Ground Zero illnesses be limited to a total of $350 million. Two years after Giuliani finished his term, FEMA appropriated $1 billion to a special insurance fund, called the World Trade Center Captive Insurance Company, to protect the city against 9/11 lawsuits."Ground Zero Illness Clouding Giuliani's Legacy", The New York Times, May 14, 2007
In February 2007, the International Association of Fire Fighters issued a letter asserting that Giuliani rushed to conclude the recovery effort once gold and silver had been recovered from World Trade Center vaults and thereby prevented the remains of many victims from being recovered: "Mayor Giuliani's actions meant that fire fighters and citizens who perished would either remain buried at Ground Zero forever, with no closure for families, or be removed like garbage and deposited at the Fresh Kills Landfill", it said, adding: "Hundreds remained entombed in Ground Zero when Giuliani gave up on them."Giuliani & New York firefighters

Post-mayoralty

Politics

=Before 2008 election=

Since leaving office as Mayor, Giuliani has remained politically active by campaigning for Republican candidates for political offices at all levels. He was a speaker at the 2004 Republican National Convention, where he endorsed President George W. Bush for re-election by recalling that immediately after the World Trade Center towers fell, 
Similarly, in June 2006, Giuliani started a website called Solutions America to help elect Republican candidates across the nation.
After campaigning on Bush's behalf in the U.S. presidential election of 2004, he was reportedly the top choice for Secretary of Homeland Security after Tom Ridge's resignation. When suggestions were made that Giuliani's confirmation hearings would be marred by details of his past affairs and scandals, he turned down the offer and instead recommended his friend and former New York Police Commissioner Bernard Kerik. After the formal announcement of Kerik's nomination, information about Kerik's past– most notably, that he had ties to organized crime, had been sued for sexual harassment and had employed an undocumented alien as a domestic servant– became known.

=2008 presidential campaign=

In November 2006 Giuliani announced the formation of an exploratory committee toward a run for President of the United States in 2008. In February 2007 he filed a "statement of candidacy" and confirmed on the television program Larry King Live that he was indeed running.com
Early polls showed Giuliani with one of the highest levels of name recognition and support among the Republican candidates. Throughout most of 2007 he was the leader in most nationwide opinion polling among Republicans. Original front-runner Senator John McCain had faded, and most polls showed Giuliani to have more support than any of the other declared Republican candidates, with only former Senator Fred Thompson and former Governor Mitt Romney showing greater support in some per-state Republican polls.
Giuliani's campaign hit a difficult stretch during November and December 2007, in which Bernard Kerik, whom Giuliani had appointed to or recommended for several top positions, was indicted on 16 counts of tax fraud and other federal charges;
Despite his strategy, Giuliani did compete to a substantial extent
Giuliani's campaign ended up $3.6 million in arrears,

=After 2008 election=

Following the end of his presidential campaign, Giuliani's "high appearance fees dropped like a stone."Greenbaum, Mark (April 3, 2011) Why Mitch Daniels is the Republican to watch for '12, Salon.
Giuliani said his political career was not necessarily over, and did not rule out a 2010 New York gubernatorial or 2012 presidential bid.
On November 19, 2009, Giuliani decided he would not run for Governor, but rather would consider a run in the U.S. Senate special election in 2010 against Kirsten Gillibrand.
As of early 2010, Giuliani continues to appear frequently as a television political commentator. He and his viewpoints have been criticized by Markos Moulitsas and other liberal bloggers. Yet the media keeps inviting him back to peddle his typical brand of bullshit."); citing Steve Benen, "STOP GIVING RUDY THE CLOWN AIRTIME", January 28, 2010, found at Washington Monthly website ("The problem with news outlets constantly turning to former Mayor Rudy Giuliani for "political analysis" is three-fold. First, he's an irrelevant figure with predictable observations. Second, he says things that are clearly false. And third, he hasn't the foggiest idea what he's talking about, but he keeps getting invited back."); in turn citing Christina Bellantoni, "Giuliani Wrongly Says Obama Didn't Talk About Xmas Bomber (VIDEO)", Talking Points Memo (TPM) LiveWire, January 28, 2010, 10:51AM, found at Talking Points Memo website. All In late October 2010, Giuliani threw his support to former Maryland governor Bob Ehrlich in the Maryland Governor's race, calling Ehrlich one of the best governors of all time.
As 2011 began, Giuliani was considering a run for the Republican nomination in the United States presidential election, 2012. Many political observers, and some of Giuliani's 2008 staff, were reportedly skeptical that Giuliani would actually do this."Giuliani Considering a 2012 Run? 'Absolutely'"
On October 11, 2011, Giuliani announced that he was not running for president. According to Kevin Law, the Director of the Long Island Association, Giuliani believed that "As a moderate, he thought it was a pretty significant challenge. He said it's tough to be a moderate and succeed in GOP primaries", Giuliani said "If it's too late for (New Jersey Governor) Chris Christie, it's too late for me".

Iraq Study Group

On March 15, 2006, Congress formed the Iraq Study Group (ISG). This bipartisan ten-person panel, of which Giuliani was one of the members, was charged with assessing the Iraq War and making recommendations. They would eventually unanimously conclude that contrary to Bush administration assertions, "The situation in Iraq is grave and deteriorating" and called for "changes in the primary mission" that would allow "the United States to begin to move its forces out of Iraq".Iraq Study Group report
On May 24, 2006, after missing all of the group's meetings,"Rudy missing in action for Iraq panel" CRAIG GORDON June 18, 2007, 11:41 PM EDT Newsday including a briefing from General David Petraeus, former Secretary of State Colin Powell and former Army Chief of Staff Eric Shinseki,Amanda Ripley, "Mr. Tough Talk", Time Magazine, September 3, 2007, pg. 31 Giuliani resigned from the panel, citing "previous time commitments". Giuliani's fundraising schedule had kept him from participating in the panel, a schedule which raised $11.4 million in speaking fees over 14 months, and that Giuliani had been forced to resign after being given "an ultimatum to either show up for meetings or leave the group" by group leader James Baker."Giuliani Left Group on Iraq After Warning, Article Says", The New York Times, June 20, 2007 Giuliani subsequently said that he had started thinking about running for President, and being on the panel might give it a political spin.Fred Kaplan, "The Man Who Knows Too Little: What Rudy Giuliani's Greedy Decision to Quit the Iraq Study Group Reveals about his Candidacy"
Giuliani was described by Newsweek in January 2007 as "one of the most consistent cheerleaders for the president's handling of the war in Iraq""More Campaign Troubles for Giuliani", Newsweek Politics and as of June 2007 remained one of the few candidates for president to unequivocally support both the basis for the invasion and the execution of the war.CNN Political Ticker: "Giuliani: Iraq war 'absolutely the right thing to do'"

Giuliani Partners

After leaving the mayor's office, Giuliani founded a security consulting business, Giuliani Partners LLC,
In June 2007 he stepped down as CEO and Chairman of Giuliani Partners,

Bracewell & Giuliani

In 2005, Giuliani joined the law firm of Bracewell & Patterson LLP (renamed Bracewell & Giuliani LLP) as a name partner and basis for the expanding firm's new New York office. When he joined the Texas-based firm he brought Marc Mukasey, the son of Attorney General Michael Mukasey, into the firm.
Despite a busy schedule, Giuliani was highly active in the day-to-day business of the law firm, which was a high-profile supplier of legal and lobbying services to the oil, gas, and energy industries. The agreement reached resulted in Purdue Pharma and some of its executives paying $634.5 million in fines.
Bracewell & Giuliani represents corporate clients before many U.S. Government departments and agencies. Some clients have worked with corporations and foreign governments.

Personal life

Marriages and relationships

Giuliani has been married three times. On October 26, 1968, soon after he graduated from law school, he married Regina Peruggi, whom Giuliani had known since childhood. In the mid-70s the marriage was in trouble and in 1975 they agreed to a trial separation. Giuliani met local television personality Donna Hanover sometime in 1982, and they began dating when she was working in Miami. Giuliani filed for legal separation from Peruggi on August 12, 1982. The Giuliani-Peruggi marriage was ended in two ways: a civil divorce was issued by the end of 1982,Lynda Richardson, "A Scholarly Fund-Raiser's Stroll to the Park", The New York Times, May 4, 2001. Retrieved March 31, 2008. while a Roman Catholic church annulment of the Giuliani-Peruggi marriage was granted at the end of 1983, according to Giuliani, because he discovered that he and his wife were second cousins,Powell, Michael and Goldfarb, Zachary A.  Washington Post, March 8, 2006, pg. A04 and they did not have the Church dispensation thus needed."Giuliani To Wed At Gracie Mansion, Former NY Mayor And Judith Nathan Set Date For Nuptials"
Giuliani biographer Wayne Barrett reports that Peruggi's brother believes that Giuliani knew at the time of the marriage that they were second cousins. Alan Placa, Giuliani's best man, later became a priest and helped get the annulment through proper channels. Recollections differ on whether Placa told Giuliani's mother at the time of the marriage that the couple's familial relationship would not be a problem. See Barrett, Rudy!: An Investigative Biography of Rudolph Giuliani, pp. 143–44. Giuliani and Peruggi did not have any children.
Giuliani and Hanover then married in a Catholic ceremony at St. Monica's Church in New York on April 15, 1984."Donna's Riskiest Role" They had two children, son Andrew Harold (born January 30, 1986 in New York) and daughter Caroline (born 1989). Andrew first became a familiar sight by clowning onstage at Giuliani's first mayoral inauguration, and later with his father at New York Yankees games, of whom Rudy Giuliani is an enthusiastic fan. Andrew became an accomplished junior golfer, although he was later kicked off the golf team at Duke University on the grounds of misbehavior.
Beginning in 1996, Giuliani and Hanover's public relationship became distant, with Hanover appearing at few public events. Retrieved February 15, 2007. There were reports that Hanover was aware of her husband's personal conduct as early as 1995. On Father's Day Giuliani had told reporters that he was returning to Gracie Mansion to play ball with Andrew, but instead went to City Hall, to a basement suite with his press secretary. Three hours later, Hanover, angered, appeared at City Hall; a mayoral aide prevented her from entering the suite. The mayor and Lategano denied the allegations.
Still married to Hanover, Giuliani met Judith Nathan, a twice-divorced sales manager for a pharmaceutical company, in May 1999 at Club Macanudo, an Upper East Side cigar bar;Eric Konigsberg, "Drawing Fire, Judith Giuliani Gives Her Side", The New York Times, August 5, 2007; Retrieved August 14, 2007 he took the initiative in forming an ongoing relationship that was kept secret for almost a year.
By March 2000, Giuliani had stopped wearing his wedding ring, In early May 2000, the Daily News and then the New York Post broke news of Giuliani's relationship with Nathan. Giuliani first publicly acknowledged her on May 3, 2000, stating that Nathan was his "very good friend".
On May 10, 2000, Giuliani called a press conference to announce that he intended to separate from Hanover. Hours later Hanover said, "I had hoped that we could keep this marriage together. For several years, it was difficult to participate in Rudy's public life because of his relationship with one staff member", a reference to Lategano. Giuliani, Hanover and Nathan appeared on the cover of People in the aftermath. Retrieved June 12, 2007
Giuliani moved out of Gracie Mansion 
In May 2001, Giuliani's attorney revealed (with the mayor's approval) that Giuliani was impotent due to his prostate cancer treatments and had not had sex with Nathan for the preceding year. "You don't get through treatment for cancer and radiation all by yourself", Giuliani said. "You need people to help you and care for you and support you. And I'm very fortunate I had a lot of people who did that, but nobody did more to help me than Judith Nathan."Elisabeth Bumiller, "Giuliani Breaks Silence, Citing 'Adult' and 'Mature' Relationship", The New York Times. Retrieved June 12, 2007. Giuliani argued in a court case that he aimed to introduce Nathan to his children on Father's Day, 2001, and that Hanover had prevented this visit. 12 Giuliani and Hanover finally settled their acrimonious divorce case in July 2002, after his mayoralty had ended, with Giuliani paying Hanover a $6.8 million settlement and granting her custody of their children. Giuliani subsequently married Nathan on May 24, 2003, and thus gained a stepdaughter, Whitney. It was also Nathan's third marriage after two prior divorces.
By March 2007, The New York Times and the Daily News reported that Giuliani had become estranged from both his son Andrew and his daughter Caroline, missing major events in their lives, such as graduations, and sometimes going long stretches without talking to them, and that neither of them was taking part in his presidential campaign. Retrieved June 12, 2007. She also linked her personal Facebook page for a while to a page related to the campaign of Democratic presidential candidate Senator Barack Obama.[ref]Lucy Morrow Caldwell,
"Rudy Giuliani's Daughter is Supporting Barack Obama", Slate.[/ref]
On August 4, 2010, his daughter Caroline was arrested and charged with petty larceny after allegedly shoplifting about $100 in cosmetics from a Sephora store near her mother Donna Hanover's Upper East Side home.

Prostate cancer

Nineteen years after Giuliani's father died at age 73 in April 1981 of prostate cancer at Memorial Sloan–Kettering Cancer Center, Giuliani was diagnosed at age 55 in April 2000 with prostate cancer on prostate biopsy after an elevated screening PSA. with five months of adjuvant Lupron hormonal therapy.

Religion and beliefs

Giuliani has declined to comment publicly on his religious practice and beliefs, although he identifies religion as an important part of his life. When asked if he is a practicing Catholic, Giuliani answered, "My religious affiliation, my religious practices and the degree to which I am a good or not-so-good Catholic, I prefer to leave to the priests."Fox News, October 3, 2007

Awards and honors

Books

Films







|-

|-
|-
|-
|-


