[[Microstrip]]

CATEGORIES: Microwave technology, Electronics, Signal cables

thumb|right|200px|Cross-section of microstrip geometry. Conductor (A) is separated from ground plane (D) by dielectric substrate (C). Upper dielectric (B) is typically air. Microstrip is a type of electrical transmission line which can be fabricated using printed circuit board technology, and is used to convey microwave-frequency signals. It consists of a conducting strip separated from a ground plane by a dielectric layer known as the substrate. Microwave components such as antennas, couplers, filters, power dividers etc. can be formed from microstrip, the entire device existing as the pattern of metallization on the substrate. Microstrip is thus much less expensive than traditional waveguide technology, as well as being far lighter and more compact.  Microstrip was developed by ITT laboratories as a competitor to stripline (first published by Grieg and Engelmann in the December 1952 IRE proceedings).
The disadvantages of microstrip compared with waveguide are the generally lower power handling capacity, and higher losses. Also, unlike waveguide, microstrip is not enclosed, and is therefore susceptible to cross-talk and unintentional radiation.
For lowest cost, microstrip devices may be built on an ordinary FR-4 (standard PCB) substrate. However it is often found that the dielectric losses in FR4 are too high at microwave frequencies, and that the dielectric constant is not sufficiently tightly controlled. For these reasons, an alumina substrate is commonly used.
On a smaller scale, microstrip transmission lines are also built into monolithic microwave integrated circuits.
Microstrip lines are also used in high-speed digital PCB designs, where signals need to be routed from one part of the assembly to another with minimal distortion, and avoiding high cross-talk and radiation.
Microstrip is very similar to stripline and coplanar waveguide, and it is possible to integrate all three on the same substrate.

Inhomogeneity

The electromagnetic wave carried by a microstrip line exists partly in the dielectric substrate, and partly in the air above it. In general, the dielectric constant of the substrate will be different (and greater) than that of the air, so that the wave is travelling in an inhomogeneous medium. In consequence, the propagation velocity is somewhere between the speed of radio waves in the substrate, and the speed of radio waves in air. This behaviour is commonly described by stating the effective dielectric constant (or effective relative permittivity) of the microstrip; this being the dielectric constant of an equivalent homogeneous medium (i.e., one resulting in the same propagation velocity).
Further consequences of an inhomogeneous medium include:

Characteristic impedance

A closed-form approximate expression for the quasi-static characteristic impedance of a microstrip line was developed by Wheeler:H. A. Wheeler, "Transmission-line properties of parallel wide strips by a conformal-mapping approximation", IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., vol. MTT-12, pp. 280-289, May 1964.H. A. Wheeler, "Transmission-line properties of parallel strips separated by a dielectric sheet", IEEE Tran. Microwave Theory Tech., vol. MTT-13, pp. 172-185, Mar. 1965.H. A. Wheeler, "Transmission-line properties of a strip on a dielectric sheet on a plane", IEEE Tran. Microwave Theory Tech., vol. MTT-25, pp. 631-647, Aug. 1977.
Here Z0 is the impedance of free space, εr is the relative permittivity of substrate, w is the width of the strip, h is the thickness ("height") of substrate, and t is the thickness of the strip metallization.
This formula is asymptotic to an exact solution in three different cases
Curiously, Harold Wheeler disliked both the terms 'microstrip' and 'characteristic impedance', and avoided using them in his papers.

Bends

In order to build a complete circuit in microstrip, it is often necessary for the path of a strip to turn through a large angle. An abrupt 90° bend in a microstrip will cause a significant portion of the signal on the strip to be reflected back towards its source, with only part of the signal transmitted on around the bend. One means of effecting a low-reflection bend, is to curve the path of the strip in an arc of radius at least 3 times the strip-width.T.H. Lee, Planar Microwave Engineering; Cambridge University Press, pp. 173-174, 2004. However, a far more common technique, and one which consumes a smaller area of substrate, is to use a mitred bend.
thumb|left|200px|Microstrip 90° mitred bend. The percentage mitre is 100x/d To a first approximation, an abrupt un-mitred bend behaves as a shunt capacitance placed between the ground plane and the bend in the strip. Mitring the bend reduces the area of metallization, and so removes the excess capacitance. The percentage mitre is the cut-away fraction of the diagonal between the inner and outer corners of the un-mitred bend.
The optimum mitre for a wide range of microstrip geometries has been determined experimentally by Douville and James.R. J. P. Douville and D. S. James, Experimental study of symmetric microstrip bends and their compensation; IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., vol. MTT-26, pp. 175-182, Mar. 1978. They find that a good fit for the optimum percentage mitre is given by
For both the curved and mitred bends, the electrical length is somewhat shorter than the physical path-length of the strip.








