[[Cedrus deodara]]

CATEGORIES: Cedrus, Flora of the Himalayas, Flora of Tibet, Flora of India, Flora of Western China, Flora of Nepal, Trees of India, Trees of Pakistan, National symbols of Pakistan, Flora of Jammu and Kashmir, Medicinal plants of Asia, Least concern plants, Trees of temperate climates, Garden plants of Asia, Drought-tolerant trees, Ornamental trees, Plants used in Ayurveda

Cedrus deodara (deodar cedar, Himalayan cedar, or deodar; Sanskrit देवदारु devadāru, Hindi: देवदार devadār, दारूक dāruk; Urdu: ديودار/دیار deodār; 
The leaves are needle-like, mostly  long, and shed their pollen in autumn.

Etymology

The specific epithet, which is also the English vernacular name, derives from the Sanskrit term devadāru, which means "wood of the gods", a compound of deva (god) and dāru (wood, etym. tree).

Cultural importance in the Indian subcontinent

Among Hindus, as the etymology of deodar suggests, it is worshiped as a divine tree. Deva, the first half of the Sanskrit term, means divine, deity, or deus. Dāru, the second part, is cognate with (related to) the words durum, druid, tree, and true.
Several Hindu legends refer to this tree. For example, Valmiki Ramayan – Kishkinda khanda- stanza 4-43-13 reads:
 
 ''lodhra padmaka khaNDeSu devadaaru vaneSu ca |
raavaNaH saha vaidehyaa maargitavyaa tataH tataH || || 4-43-13''
 
 ''That means "In the stands of Lodhra trees, Padmaka trees and in the woods of Devadaru, or Deodar trees, Ravana is to be searched there and there, together with Sita. 4-43-13"
''
Forests full of Deodar or Devadāru trees were the favorite living place of ancient Indian sages and their families who were devoted to the Hindu god Shiva. To please Lord Shiva, the sages used to perform very difficult tapasya (meditation) practices in deodar forests. Also the ancient Hindu epics and Shaivite texts regularly mention Darukavana, meaning a forest of deodars, as a sacred place.
The deodar tree is the national tree of Pakistan.

Cultivation and uses

It is widely grown as an ornamental tree, often planted in parks and large gardens for its drooping foliage. General cultivation is limited to areas with mild winters, with trees frequently killed by temperatures below about 
The most cold-tolerant trees originate in the northwest of the species' range in Kashmir and Paktia Province, Afghanistan. Selected cultivars from this region are hardy to USDA zone 7 or even zone 6, tolerating temperatures down to about  Of these, 'Eisregen', 'Eiswinter', 'Karl Fuchs', and 'Polar Winter' were selected in Germany from seed collected in Paktia; 'Kashmir' was a selection of the nursery trade, whereas 'Shalimar' originated from seeds collected in 1964 from Shalimar Gardens, India (in the Kashmir region) and propagated at the Arnold Arboretum.
This plant has gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit.

Construction material

Deodar is in great demand as building material because of its durability, rot-resistant character and fine, close grain, which is capable of taking a high polish. Its historical use to construct religious temples and in landscaping around temples is well recorded. Its rot-resistant character also makes it an ideal wood for constructing the well-known houseboats of Srinagar, Kashmir. In Pakistan and India, during the British colonial period, deodar wood was used extensively for construction of barracks, public buildings, bridges, canals and railway cars. Despite its durability, it is not a strong timber, and its brittle nature makes it unsuitable for delicate work where strength is required, such as chair-making.

Herbal Ayurveda

The use of C. deodara in Ayurvedic medicines is well recorded.
The inner wood is aromatic and used to make incense. Inner wood is distilled into essential oil. As insects avoid this tree, the essential oil is used as insect repellent on the feet of horses, cattle and camels. It also has anti-fungal properties
Due to its anti fungal and insect repellent properties, rooms made of Deodar wood are used to store meat and food grains like oats and wheat in Shimla, Kullu  and Kinnaur district of Himachal Pradesh. In Himachal people suffering from asthma or other respiratory problems are advised to sit under a Deodar tree early in the morning.
Cedar oil is often used for its aromatic properties, especially in aromatherapy. It has a characteristic woody odour which may change somewhat in the course of drying out. The crude oils are often yellowish or darker in colour. Its applications cover soap perfumes, household sprays, floor polishes and insecticides and is also used in microscope work as a clearing oil.

Chemistry

The bark of Cedrus deodara contains large amounts of taxifolin.
The deodar cedar also contains lignans

Gallery

Image:Deodar shoots.jpg|Cedrus deodara needles
Image:Deodar Cedar Cedrus deodara 'Gold Cone' Needle Closeup 3264px.jpg|Cedrus deodara 'Gold Cone' needles
Image:RS - 24 (Cèdre de l'Himalaya).JPG|Cedrus deodara
Image:Cedrus deodara Lokrum.jpg|Cedrus deodara at Lokrum, Croatia
Image:Pedrengo cedro nel parco Frizzoni.jpg|Cedrus deodara at Pedrengo, Bergamo, Italy
Image:Deodar sunrise.JPG| Cedrus deodaras at sunrise in Alton, Hampshire, England








