[[Rift Valley fever]]

CATEGORIES: Arthropod-borne viral fevers and viral haemorrhagic fevers, Zoonoses, Insect-borne diseases, Sheep and goat diseases, Biological weapons, Virus-related cutaneous conditions

Rift Valley fever (RVF) is a viral disease that can cause mild to severe symptoms. The mild symptoms may include: fever, muscle pains, and headaches which often last for up to a week. The severe symptoms may include: loss of the ability to see beginning three weeks after the infection, infections of the brain causes severe headaches and confusion, and bleeding together with liver problems which may occur within the first few days. Those who have bleeding have a chance of death as high as 50%.
The disease is caused by the RVF virus, which is of the Phlebovirus type. It is spread by either touching infected animal blood, breathing in the air around an infected animal being butchered, drinking raw milk from an infected animal, or the bite of infected mosquitoes. Animals such as cows, sheep, goats, and camels may be affected. It does not appear that one person can infect another person. Diagnosis is by finding antibodies against the virus or the virus itself in the blood.
Prevention of the disease in humans is by vaccinating animals against the disease. This must be done before an outbreak occurs as if it is done during an outbreak it may worsen the situation. Stopping the movement of animals during an outbreak may also be useful. As may decreasing mosquito numbers and avoiding their bites. There is a human vaccine; however, as of 2010 it is not widely available. Once infected there is no specific treatment.
Outbreaks of the disease have only occurred in Africa and Arabia. Outbreaks usually occur during periods of increased rain which increase the number of mosquitoes. The disease was first reported among livestock in Rift Valley of Kenya in the early 1900s,

Signs and symptoms

In humans, the virus can cause several syndromes. Usually, sufferers have either no symptoms or only a mild illness with fever, headache, myalgia and liver abnormalities. In a small percentage of cases (About 1% of people with the disease die of it. In livestock, the fatality level is significantly higher. Pregnant livestock infected with RVF abort virtually 100% of foetuses. An epizootic (animal disease epidemic) of RVF is usually first indicated by a wave of unexplained abortions.
Other signs in livestock include vomiting and diarrhoea, respiratory disease, fever, lethargy, anorexia and sudden death in young animals.

Cause

Virology

The virus belongs to the Bunyavirus family. This is a family of enveloped negative single stranded RNA viruses. All Bunyaviruses have an outer lipid envelope with two glycoproteins - G(N) and G(C) - required for cell entry. They deliver their genome into the host-cell cytoplasm by fusing their envelope with an endosomal membrane. 
The virus' G(C) protein has a class II membrane fusion protein architecture similar to that found in flaviviruses and alphaviruses. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA  This structural similarity suggests that there may be a common origin for these viral families.

Transmission

The virus is transmitted through mosquito vectors, as well as through contact with the tissue of infected animals. Two species - Culex tritaeniorhynchus and Aedes vexans - are known to transmit the virus.

Diagnosis

Diagnosis relies on viral isolation from tissues, or serological testing with an ELISA.

Epidemiology

RVF outbreaks occur across sub-Saharan Africa, with outbreaks occurring elsewhere infrequently. In Egypt in 1977-78, an estimated 200,000 people were infected and there were at least 594 deaths. H., Ksiazek, T. G., Nichol, S. T., & MacLachlan, N. J. (2009). Rift Valley fever virus. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 234(7), 883–893. doi:10.2460/javma.234.7.883 In Kenya in 1998, the virus killed over 400 Kenyans. In September 2000, an outbreak was confirmed in Saudi Arabia and Yemen).  On 19 Oct 2011, a case of Rift Valley fever contracted in Zimbabwe was reported in a Caucasian female traveler who returned to France after a 26-day stay in Marondera, Mashonaland East Province during July and August, 2011G. Vesin: RIFT VALLEY FEVER, HUMAN - FRANCE: ex ZIMBABWE (MASHONALAND EAST) FIRST REPORT, ProMED, a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases,  Date: Wed 19 Oct 2011. but later classified as 'not confirmed.'M. Grandadam and D. Malvy: PRO/AH/EDR> Rift Valley fever, human - France (02): ex Zimbabwe (ME) NOT Published Date: 2011-11-29 21:06:58 Archive Number: 20111129.3486. ProMED, a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases,  Date: 29 Nov 2011.

2006/07 outbreak in Kenya and Somalia

In November 2006, a Rift Valley fever outbreak occurred in Kenya. The victims are from the North Eastern Province and Coast Province of Kenya, which had received heavy rain in recent months, causing floods and creating breeding grounds for mosquitoes, which spread the virus of the fever from infected livestock to humans.
By 7 January 2007, about 75 people had died and another 183 were infected.
The outbreak was subsequently reported to have moved into Maragua and Kirinyaga districts of Central Province of Kenya.
On 20 January 2007, the outbreak was reported to have crossed into Somalia from Kenya and killed 14 people in the Lower Jubba region.
As of 23 January 2007, cases had started to crop up at the Kenyan capital, Nairobi. Businesses were suffering large losses, as customers were shunning the common meat joints for the popular nyama choma (roast meat), as it was believed to be spreading the fever.
In December 2006 and again in January 2007, Taiwan International Health Action (Taiwan IHA) began operating missions in Kenya  consisting of medical experts assisting in training laboratory and health facility personnel, and included donations of supplies, such as mosquito sprays. The United States Centers for Disease Control also set up an assistance mission and laboratory in Kenya.
By the end of January, 2007, some 148 people had died since the outbreak began in December.
As at 14 March 2007, the Kenyan government declared RVF as having diminished drastically after spending an estimated 2.5 million  in vaccine and deployment costs. It also lifted the ban on cattle movement in the affected areas.
As of 2 November 2007, 125 cases, including 60 deaths, had been reported from more than 10 localities of White Nile, Sinnar, and Gezira states in Sudan. Young adult males are predominantly affected. More than 25 human samples have been found positive for RVF by PCR or ELISA.

2010 South Africa outbreak

As of 8 April 2010, the Ministry of Health South Africa had reported 87 human cases infected with Rift Valley fever (RVF), including two deaths in Free State, Eastern Cape and Northern Cape provinces.promedmail. The human cases are: farmers, veterinarians and farm workers. All cases were confirmed with RVF by test conducted at the National Institute of Communicable Diseases (NICD) in Johannesburg, South Africa.
An ongoing outbreak of Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) infection is affecting sheep, goats, cattle and wildlife on farms within Free State, Eastern Cape, Northern Cape, Western Cape, Mpumalanga, North West, and Gauteng provinces. As of 29 March 2010, about 78 farms reported laboratory-confirmed animal cases, with extensive livestock deaths.
Outbreak investigations by the Department of Health and the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries are ongoing, and are being supported by the South African Field Epidemiology and Training Programme and NICD. The Department of Health and the Department of Agriculture are taking measures to enhance disease surveillance among cattle and in managing the control of the disease outbreak. 
Sporadic cases of RVFV infection in animals have been documented in South Africa in recent years. The last major outbreak of the disease in humans occurred between 1974 and 1976, where an estimated 10,000 to 20,000 cases were recorded.
The disease claimed the life of Springbok rugby player Juan Smith's father Giel.

Biological weapon

Rift Valley fever was one of more than a dozen agents that the United States researched as potential biological weapons before the nation suspended its biological weapons program in 1969 due to possible bomb threats that might cause a panic in the United States."Chemical and Biological Weapons: Possession and Programs Past and Present", James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies, Middlebury College, April 9, 2002, accessed November 14, 2008.






