[[Friends Reunited]]

CATEGORIES: Community websites, British websites, Social networking services

Friends Reunited is a portfolio of social networking websites based upon the themes of reunion with research, dating and job-hunting. The first and eponymous website was created by a husband and wife team in the classic back bedroom internet start-up; it was the first online social network to achieve prominence in Britain, and it weathered the dotcom bust.
Each site works on the principle of user-generated content through which registered users are able to post information about themselves which may be searched through by other users. A double-blind email system allows contact between users. Formerly, the site cost £7.50 per year to use but is now free.Friends Reunited axes fee - Technology - News - Manchester Evening News
The main Friends Reunited site aims to reunite people who have in common a school, university, address, workplace, sports club or armed service; the sister site Genes Reunited enables members to pool their family trees and identify common ancestors; the Dating and Jobs sister sites link members with similar attributes, interests and/or locations.
Friends Reunited branding has been attached to CD collections of nostalgic popular music, and television programmes broadcast on the ITV network, which owned the site until August 2009. A book of members' stories was published in 2003 by Virgin Books, and a song about (and named after) the site was released by The Hussys in 2006.
Following ITV's sale of the site to DC Thomson's Brightsolid subsidiary in 2009, the company relaunched Friends Reunited in March 2012 with a new emphasis on nostalgia and memories.

History

Establishment

The website was conceived by Steve and Julie Pankhurst of Barnet, Hertfordshire and friend Jason Porter in 1999. Julie Pankhurst's curiosity about the current status of old school friends inspired her to develop the website, exploiting a gap in the UK market following the success of US website Classmates.BBC News, 13 January 2003. Friends Reunited comes of age Friends Reunited was officially launched in July 2000.  By the end of the year, it had 3,000 members, and a year later this had increased to 2.5 million."Friends Reunited - interfere with nature at your peril",The Register, January 2, 2002 Ex-Financial Times executive Michael Murphy was brought into Friends Reunited as the new Chief Executive in 2005 and the similar web site SchoolFriends Australia & Findakiwi New Zealand was rebranded and merged with the UK site.

ITV ownership

By December 2005, Friends Reunited had over fifteen million members and was bought by British TV company ITV plc for £120 million ($208 million), plus further payments of up to £55 million based on its performance up to 2009. ITV buys Friends Reunited website
Friends Reunited had become popular enough that its uses have gone beyond the intentions of its founders. According to the Register, potential employers use entries to screen job applicants. Friends Reunited gives third reference. Friends Reunited has been used by bitter partners to exact revenge on those who have abandoned themThe Observer, May 5, 2002. Web hath no fury like a woman scorned and users have been sued for comments made on Friends Reunited about other people. Friends Reunited user in libel payout Friends Reunited features prominently in Ben Elton's detective novel Past Mortem (2004). The website launched a series of television advertisements for the first time in early 2007. Friends Reunited appeals to animal lovers in TV ad push
Friends Reunited had been accused of being left behind by competitors in the UK, primarily Facebook and Bebo (see others in list of social networking sites), with growth of only 1.2% year-on-year in 2007. In March 2008, the site dropped the subscription fee required to contact members in a bid to regain losses of 47% of unique users and market share from more dominant social networking sites.com The site made a profit of £22 million in 2007 - though its market valuation has fallen sharply from the £175 million paid by ITV in 2005, while those of competitors have increased dramatically.friendsreunited.co.uk - Traffic Details from Alexa

brightsolid ownership

On 4 March 2009, ITV announced that it would sell Friends Reunited as part of wider restructuring and disposal of non-core assets.brightsolid.BBC News, 6 August 2009. ITV in £25m Friends Reunited sale Following regulatory approval, the sale was completed on 25 March 2010.
On 15 December 2011, DC Thomson estimated that Friends Reunited was worth only £5.2 million, a fifth of the price they paid to ITV two years previously. DC Thomson's Friends Reunited continues fall in value
The site was relaunched in March 2012,BBC News, IFriends Reunited relaunches site with 'nostalgia' focus with the focus shifting from reunited with school friends, to being a place where people collect and share memories of the past.
On the 1st of October 2013, under the guidance of new CEO Annelies van den Belt, brightsolid Online Publishing was rebranded as DC Thomson Family History, focusing on its core family history brands. As a result of this, Friends Reunited was no longer considered an integral part of the direction and is to be re-incubated elsewhere in the DC Thomson company. 








