[[LINK Train]]

CATEGORIES: Transport in the Greater Toronto Area, Light rail in Canada, Passenger rail transport in Ontario, Airport people mover systems, Cable Liner people movers, Toronto Pearson International Airport, People mover systems in Canada

The LINK Train is an automated people mover (APM) service installed by DCC Doppelmayr Cable Car which connects Terminals 1 and 3 (there is no Terminal 2) and the Viscount Reduced Rate parking lot and garage at Toronto Pearson International Airport in Mississauga, Canada. 
It opened on July 6, 2006, in addition to the LINK bus system which operated alongside it.  The train runs 24 hours a day, 7 days a week and is wheelchair accessible.

Train

The service uses two trains of six cars each, built by DCC Doppelmayr Cable Car GmbH, a company based in Wolfurt, Austria. They use a drive and tension system. Each train has capacity for 150 passengers with baggage (25 per car - 17 standing, 8 seated) or 2,180 passengers per hour per direction (pphpd).
The  elevated system has a travel time of three minutes one way.  If ridership increases beyond the present capabilities of the system, additional capacity could be added in several ways: the stations have been built to accommodate seven-car trains, which would increase capacity to 175 passengers per train (2,500 pphpd); a second station could be built in Terminal 1; and the system could be converted from the current 36 mm  cable technology to self-propelled technology.Greater Toronto Airport Authority - Taking Flight - The Airport Master Plan - 2008-2030 
The service is free of charge.

Vehicles

There are two Cable Liner shuttle sets, each one a six-car set. The same cars are used on the Mandalay Bay Tram system between Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino in Paradise and on the AirRail Link at Birmingham Airport, Birmingham, England.
The rolling stock cost $56 million CAD.  

Stations

The two lines, running side-by-side, are 

Project information

The Toronto Pearson International Airport APM System projected was started in May 2002 when the proposal was submitted.

Facts

Both systems (1 and 2) operate in shuttle mode with a total capacity of up to 2,180 pphpd. The rubber tired system runs on a smooth steel surface and propulsion is provided by the rope. The absence of onboard motors, braking systems and gearboxes eliminates excessive noise, oil spills from the trains, and dust from brakes. Doppelmayr asserts that a cable-driven APM is the most environmentally responsible solution for transportation in high density applications.

Service disruptions

On March 30, 2009, the LINK Train was put out of service for extensive maintenance due to engineering design flaws. Normal service resumed in July 2009.
As of March 16, 2013, the LINK Train was shut down for approximately 8 months during the construction of the Union Pearson Express.  Regular service resumed as of November 8.

Previous shuttle bus

Prior to 2003, and during the maintenance period, a shuttle bus service was operated between the terminals by contractor Penetang-Midland Coach Lines (PMCL).

Future connections

The Union Pearson Express, an airport rail link to Union Station is projected to be completed to the LINK station at Terminal 1 in time for the 2015 Pan American Games.
The originally proposed Eglinton Crosstown LRT was projected to connect Pearson to Scarborough by 2018 as part of the Transit City plan.
However, when the four Transit City lines were found to be $2.4 billion over their funding envelope in January 2010, parts of the network were deferred, including the western section of the Eglinton Crosstown LRT. A future extension could eventually reach the airport, completing the line as envisioned.








