[[Nazeh Darwazi]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing, 2003 deaths, Deaths by firearm in the West Bank, Israeli–Palestinian conflict, Journalists killed while covering military conflicts, People killed by the Israel Defense Forces

Nazeh Darwazi, also Romanized  Darwazeh, (ca. 1958-1961 – 19 April 2003), was a freelance cameraman for the US news agency Associated Press Television Network (APTN) and Palestinian state television when he was killed in Nablus in the West Bank while reporting, according to eyewitnesses, by a bullet in the head fired by an Israeli soldier from a distance of about 20 yards (18 m) after having pointed his weapon at the clearly marked journalist.
Darwazi was one of five journalists to die while reporting on the Second Intifada between 2002 and 2003.

Early life

Nazeh Darwazi was born and raised in Nablus. Various accounts of his age were reported. He lived in Nablus with his wife Raeda and their five children. His funeral was reported to have attracted over a thousand people.

Career

Nazeh Darwazi worked for The Associated Press for two years. He was also a journalist for Palestinian television.

Death

Eighteen Palestinians were injured by rubber bullets and live fire, during clashes between Israeli troops and Palestinian's throwing stones.

Investigation

Reporters Without Borders investigated the event and found that the army had not interviewed eyewitnesses. The soldiers had been questioned, but nobody was punished. Palestinian Authority stated that Israel had "committed a war crime" by "opening fire on journalists and other civilians".
The Associated Press reported two Palestinian cameramen: Hassan Titi from Reuters and Sami al-Assi from a Palestinian station. Both cameramen said the soldier aimed at the journalists. 
Video footage taken by Reuters confirms a soldier kneeling by a tank pointing a rifle down the alley where the journalists were wearing the green bulletproof vests stating, Press. Nazeh Darwazeh fell to his death shortly after the soldier fired.
The Israeli investigation claimed that Israeli soldiers had been shot at before returning fire when Darwazi was killed.

Context

200px|thumbnail|right|A street scene of the Old City of Nablus. Two weeks after the Darwazi killing, James Miller was also killed on 2 May 2003 by the Israel Defense Forces while making a film about the Second Intifada.
Nazeh Darwazi was covering the Passover clashes in Nablus when he was killed.  Israeli troops arrested several Palestinians in Nablus on suspicion of a planning a potential suicide attack during Passover. Three of the four were arrested around Casbah; the fourth turned himself in at a military checkpoint. In Rafah, five Palestinians were killed by Israeli troops during a raid of a nearby refugee camp in the southern Gaza strip. Twenty-seven people total were wounded in the raid. At the time, Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat was in a dispute with his handpicked prime minister, Mahmoud Abbas, over the formation of a new government.

Reaction

On Monday April 23,2003 in front of the international Red Cross headquarters in Al-Khalil district,a group of Palestinian journalists staged a sit-in to publicly declare their disgust with Zionist occupation forces' murder of Nazeh Darwaza, in Nablus. The Palestinian Authority accused the IDF of war crimes.
Reporters Without Borders, which is based in France, urged President Jacque Chirac to bring the issue of journalist security and safety up when he met with Israeli Moshe Katzav in 2004.
The Committee to Protect Journalists issued statement about Nazeh Darwazi's death. Joel Simon, CPJ, said, "We demand an immediate and thorough inquiry into the shooting death of Nazih Darwazeh and call on you to ensure that those responsible are swiftly brought to justice."
Nazeh Darwazi's body was wrapped in the Palestinian and carried from the Rafidyeh hospital by representatives of the Palestinian press. Those carrying Darwazi chanted against Israel. They carried his body to the funeral,which over one thousand people attended.



 References == 




