[[The Sharper Image]]

CATEGORIES: Companies based in San Francisco, California, Retail companies established in 1977, Companies that have filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, Companies disestablished in 2008

Sharper Image is an American product brand, formerly associated with a defunct retail company, now licensed for use on consumer electronics and gift products."About Us." The Sharper Image.
The earlier consumer products retailer by that name was founded by Richard Thalheimer and was in business from 1977 until its closing in 2008. The company sold merchandise through dozens of retail stores throughout the United States, a monthly catalog and its website, along with business-to-business sales teams which marketed products for corporate incentive programs and wholesale to retailers.
On February 19, 2008, the company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, blaming low sales aggravated by a decline in consumer spending and negative publicity surrounding its Ionic Breeze air purifiers. 
Iconix Brand Group bought The Sharper Image in 2011.Iconix acquires The Sharper Image brand

History

The Sharper Image Corporation was the brainchild of Richard Thalheimer.  The company started as a catalog business to sell jogging watches.  
In 2006 there was a change in the board of directors of the company, including the removal of Thalheimer as CEO.
Thalheimer was replaced by Chairman Jerry W. Levin, who was formerly Chairman and CEO of American Household/Sunbeam, Coleman, and Revlon, and under whom Sunbeam Products/American Household had filed for bankruptcy in 2001.
On April 9, 2007, Steven A. Lightman became the President and CEO.
Levin is also Chairman & CEO of JW Levin Partners LLC, a management and investment firm, since February 2005. And as of October 2009, is Chairman and Interim CEO of Wilton Brands, Inc. Levin was Vice Chairman of Clinton Group, a private diversified asset management company, between December 2007 and October 2008.
On April 10, 2008, Levin resigned as a member and Chairman of the Board of the company to pursue participating with other investors to acquire some or all of the company's businesses or assets. But, as was pointed out, "Levin hasn't made a lot of money for the investors of Sharper Image he's teamed up with so far, including hedge fund Ramius Capital, which helped bring him in as a director, and Clinton Group, which announced a large stake in December."
In May 2007, Thalheimer created his own e-commerce site 

Bankruptcy

On February 19, 2008, The Sharper Image stock reached a record low of 41 cents a share, followed by 29 cents a share on February 20, 2008. On February 25, 2008, The Sharper Image announced it had received notification that it would be delisted from the NASDAQ exchange.  The company filed for protection with the U.S. bankruptcy court in Wilmington, Delaware.  Sharper Image said it had $251.5 million of assets and $199 million of debts as of January 31, 2008, according to the filing.
On May 29, 2008, a joint venture led by units of private investment firms Hilco Consumer Capital Corp. Infinity Lifestyle Brands and Gordon Brothers Group won a bankruptcy auction to acquire the assets of The Sharper Image, paying $49 million plus some contingent recovery for the company's assets.

Post-bankruptcy

The Sharper Image name was licensed as a product brand, by a joint venture between Hilco Consumer Capital, Infinity Lifestyle Brands, Gordon Brothers and Bluestar Alliance.
Iconix Brand Group bought The Sharper Image in 2011.

Advertising and business

The Sharper Image's advertising budget was primarily directed to its monthly catalog for about the first 20 years of its existence.
The company was known to receive special supplier contracts.  For instance, its HW551 and HW552 product code massage chairs were specific to The Sharper Image, and Human Touch Interactive does not sell those specific chairs to any other retailer.  Ever since the Robosapien was released on the market a few years ago, The Sharper Image had the exclusive rights to sell the "Signature Series" Robosapiens in chrome or blue-chrome, as opposed to the standard white models that are sold in other stores.

Consumer Reports lawsuit

In 2002, Consumer Reports tested many fan-driven air purifiers alongside The Sharper Image's Ionic Breeze Quadra.  The Sharper Image was not happy with the results, and sued Consumer Reports in order to get what they thought would be a more fair testing of the product.
Two years later, Consumer Reports stated that the Quadra could be dangerous to consumers' health, because of the trace levels of ozone produced by the unit.






