[[Boris Kodjoe]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 births, Living people, German models, African-American Methodists, African-American models, African-American male actors, Male actors from Vienna, German male film actors, German emigrants to the United States, German male television actors, German people of Ghanaian descent, Jews in the African diaspora, Christians of Jewish descent, American male film actors, American people of German-Jewish descent, American people of Ghanaian descent, American people of German descent, German people of Jewish descent, German Protestants, Jewish American male actors, United Methodists, Virginia Commonwealth University alumni, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors, Jewish male models, American male television actors

Boris Frederic Cecil Tay-Natey Ofuatey-Kodjoe; born 8 March 1973), better known as Boris Kodjoe, is an American actor known for his roles as Jason in the 2000 film Love & Basketball, and the sports-courier agent Damon Carter on the Showtime drama series Soul Food. 

Early life

Kodjoe was born in Vienna, Austria, the son of Ursula, a German psychologist of partially Jewish descent, and Eric Kodjoe, a Ghanaian physician who is of the Nzema people. His namesake is the Russian poet and writer Boris Pasternak. "STAGE TO SCREENS: Chats With Whitford, Hurt, Howard, and Kodjoe", Playbill, 5 May 2008. Kodjoe's maternal great-grandmother was Jewish and died in the Holocaust; his maternal grandmother survived the war in hiding.Boris Kodjoe at superiorpics. Kodjoe is fluent in French, English, and German, and speaks some Spanish. He has a brother named Patrick and two sisters named Nadja and Lara.

Career

Kodjoe attended Virginia Commonwealth University on a tennis scholarship, and graduated with a bachelor's degree in marketing in 1996."Kodjoe's Time Has Finally Come," Virginia Commonwealth University Athletics, Wednesday, June 16, 2010. A four-year letterman on the Rams' men's tennis team, he is currently ninth in school history with 75 career singles wins. Tied for third in doubles victories with 66, he was paired with Jonas Elmblad on 37 of them, also third all-time. His brother Patrick Kodjoe played for VCU's basketball team. A back injury ended Boris' tennis aspirations, but he was quickly signed as a model and soon after entered acting.
Named one of the "50 Most Beautiful People in the World" by People magazine in 2002, Kodjoe is perhaps best known as one of the seven regular cast members from the Showtime drama Soul Food, which aired from 2000 to 2004. He appeared in the 2002 film Brown Sugar and starred in the short-lived sitcom Second Time Around with his Soul Food co-star Nicole Ari Parker, whom he eventually married. He played the role of David Taylor, the wayward son of Pastor Fred Taylor in the October 2005 film The Gospel. He performed in a play called Whatever She Wants starring Vivica A. Fox and made an appearance on the fifth season of Nip/Tuck. His most recent role was in the 2009 science fiction film Surrogates.  On December 16, 2009, it was announced that Kodjoe had been cast as the male lead, Steven Bloom, in the new J. J. Abrams television series Undercovers; the show premiered in September and was subsequently cancelled in November 2010 on NBC. Also that year, he appeared as Luther in the film Resident Evil: Afterlife. He appeared on Franklin & Bash in 2012.
In 2013, Kodjoe began starring in the BET comedy parody series Real Husbands of Hollywood. In 2014 he was cast as regular on the ABC primetime soap opera The Club created by Susannah Grant.

Personal life

Kodjoe married his Soul Food: The Series co-star Nicole Ari Parker on May 21, 2005 in Gundelfingen, Germany. She gave birth to their first child, a girl, Sophie Tei-Naaki Lee Kodjoe, on March 5, 2005. Sophie has spina bifida, which was diagnosed at birth. Parker gave birth to the couple's second child, a boy, Nicolas Neruda Kodjoe, on October 31, 2006. Kodjoe and his wife are members of Cascade United Methodist Church in Atlanta, Georgia. "In Atlanta's churches, prayers for president-elect", The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, 9 November 2008. The family resides in Atlanta, after moving from Los Angeles, California.

Filmography

Film

Television






