[[The College of Saint Rose]]

CATEGORIES: The College of Saint Rose, Universities and colleges in New York, Educational institutions established in 1920, Former Roman Catholic universities and colleges in the United States, Council of Independent Colleges, Education in Albany, New York, U.S. Route 20, Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, Universities and colleges in Albany County, New York

The College of Saint Rose  The College enrolls a total of approximately 4,863 students (2,931 undergraduates and 1,932 postgraduates).
The College is broadly divided into four schools: the School of Arts and Humanities (which includes the Music, Art, and Communications Departments), the School of Mathematics and Sciences, the School of Business, and the School of Education. These schools offer a total of over 50 degrees at the certificate, undergraduate, and graduate levels.

History

The idea for The College of Saint Rose was conceived by Monsignor Joseph A. Delaney, the vicar-general of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Albany in 1920. He aimed to create a Catholic college for women in the large swath of land between the two nearest Catholic colleges, those in New York City and Buffalo. With this idea in mind, Delaney contacted Sr. Blanche Rooney, a member of the local chapter of the Sisters of Saint Joseph of Carondelet, located in the Provincial House on Eighth Street in Troy, New York. Rooney and her sisters were conducive to the idea and, with the permission and support of Bishop Edmund F. Gibbons, bishop of Albany, Sr. Blanche Rooney, CSJ, and Monsignor Delaney purchased the William Keeler estate at 979 Madison Avenue. Upon application and granting of a provisional charter from the Board of Regents The College of Saint Rose was officially established as a Roman Catholic college for women with a liberal arts curriculum in Albany, New York on June 28, 1920. Of Glory, Of Praise: A 75-Year History of The College of Saint Rose. Albany, NY: The College of Saint Rose, 1994. p. 4-5.
Its founders selected the name of Saint Rose to honor the first canonized saint in the Americas, Saint Rose of Lima. Initially, emphasis was placed on the professional training of teachers, but quickly expanded to include preparation for business and other professions.
As needs in the Albany area increased, the College expanded and revised its programs to meet those needs. An evening division was developed in 1946 to meet the needs of World War II veterans and was re-instituted in 1974 to respond to continuing education needs. In 1949, a graduate school was added to provide master's degree programs.
Men were admitted to both the original evening and graduate divisions, and in 1969 the College became fully co-educational yet male housing was not available until the 1970s.
In 1970, the Board of Trustees was expanded to include laypersons in addition to the Sisters of Saint Joseph. At the time this expansion created a board composed of nineteen members including a president, eight sisters, and ten laypersons. With the formal transfer of control to this board, The College of Saint Rose became an independent college sponsored by the Sisters of Saint Joseph of Carondelet. 147

Campus

Pine Hills Campus

The main campus of The College of Saint Rose is located in the Pine Hills neighborhood of Albany, New York, the capital city of New York State. The 46-acre campus is bounded by Western Avenue to the north, Partridge Street to the east, Morris Street to the south, and Main Avenue to the west, although there is college property north of Western and east of Partridge. Because of the College's urban location all new expansion of the main Pine Hills campus' footprint occurs either through acquisition of existing structuresHalligan, Lauren (February 14, 2012)  Some of this conflict is due to the College's status as a not-for-profit organization in New York State which, as such, is exempt from paying property taxes in the city of Albany.
The first college building was 979 Madison Avenue, a large Victorian-era house that was acquired by the College in 1920 and served as the only College building during the 1920-1921 academic year. The house was known as Saint Rose Hall up until 1970, when the name was changed to Moran Hall in honor of Sister John Joseph Moran. The building is currently occupied by the Alumni Relations office and faculty offices of the History and Political Science Department.>Hubert, Brian.
Albertus Hall, at 432 Western Avenue, is one of the major academic facilities on the campus, housing the many of the classes during the academic year. The brick, steel and stone building was designed by Frank J. Morgan with the aim of creating classroom, laboratory and administrative space for the College. Construction of the building commenced in 1932 and finished in 1933. Renovations in 2006 gave the building its current interior, and also added seven new classrooms among other changes. It is connected to the Science Center (993 Madison Avenue) through shared hallways.
St. Joseph's Hall is a four-story English brick building with limestone trim fronted by six Corinthian columns. It is located at 985 Madison Avenue between the Science Center to the west and Moran Hall to the east. The structure was built in 1922 at a cost of half a million dollars due to a need for classroom and dining space to house the growing student body. As the first academic building constructed specifically for the College, St. Joseph Hall originally auditorium, classrooms, chapel, dormitory, a dining area, and kitchens in the basement. 7-8 Since its construction the auditorium has held and continues to hold campus events including visiting professors, club-sponsored events, and awards ceremonies. The campus chapel was previously located on the third and fourth floors, but that space is currently occupied by numerous campus offices. Specifically, the third floor is now home to the Career Center and the Student Support Center, the latter of which includes the Bursar's, Golden Knights Card Services, and the Office of Financial Aid. Likewise, the Office of the Registrar is located on the fourth floor, beside several other offices.
The primary social, dining, and restaurant center on at Saint Rose is the Events and Athletics Center (EAC), located at 420 Western Avenue. The eastern side of the EAC houses athletic facilities including the Daniel P. Nolan Gymnasium, the Robert Bellizzi Fitness Center, locker rooms, and a four lane swimming pool. The western side contains social and dining facilities such as the Main Dining Room, the Camelot Room, a Starbucks, the Commuter Lounge, the Campus Book Store, the Mail Room and Copy Center, as well as the Offices of Student Affairs, Physical Education, Athletics, Dining Services, the Student Association (SA), and the Student Events Board (SEB).
The Massry Center for the Arts features the Kathleen McManus Picotte Recital Hall, the Esther Massry Gallery, and the William Randolph Hearst Music Wing. This building serves as the primary venue for concerts and exhibitions by the College's students and faculty, and a performance and exhibition space for artists, musicians, vocalists and orchestras.
It is one of the college's most recent and major attempts at building green. Some of the green features of the Massry Center are:
In 1994, the College discussed the need to build a new "sacred space" for the college community. Considering the changes that had occurred at Saint Rose and in the world since 1920, the College decided to build an interfaith space. This space was christened the Hubbard Interfaith Sanctuary
On the northwestern side of the Sanctuary is the Catholic Christian prayer room. This space celebrates the College's heritage as a Roman Catholic College. There are visible stained glass windows from a residence hall on campus that once housed a community of Christian Brothers. On the northeastern side of the Sanctuary there is interfaith prayer room. The prayer books of the major non-Christian traditions are here. Members of the College  community from the Hindu, Jewish, Buddhist and Muslim traditions can go there for private prayer. The room faces east toward Mecca and Jerusalem for Muslim and Jewish prayer. Prayer rugs are available for Muslim prayer.
The Saint Rose Campus Theatre at 996A Madison Avenue (behind 1000 Madison Avenue) once housed the third and fourth grades of Vincentian CCD and the building was called "The Barn." Also, the parking lot behind the Massry Center was once the football practice field for Vincentian Institute.

Satellite Facilities

The school's Christian Plumeri Sports Complex was constructed at a cost of $4.7 million whch included a $1 million challenge contribution from Joe Plumeri, Chairman and CEO of Willis Group Holdings and the college's 2006 commencement speaker.  The complex was named in honor of Plumeri's deceased son.
Located at the complex Bellizzi Field was named in honor of former coach Bob Bellizzi.
The College's Art and Design program is housed, almost entirely, in Picotte Hall. The Hall is located at 324 State Street and, as such, is one of the few buildings owned by the campus not adjacent to the main Pine Hills campus. The interior of Picotte Hall contains facilities supporting the College's programs in printmaking, sculpture, painting, photography, and graphic design.  There are also several general use classrooms. The building was donated by Kathleen McManus Picotte ('34) in 1976 and her husband, Bernard Picotte.

Organization and Administration

Saint Rose is a not-for-profit
The College endowment for fiscal year 2011 amounted to $31.6 million, an increase of approximately 18% over the 2010 endowment of $26.7 million., ibid.
Students have a degree of representation on campus through the College of Saint Rose Student Association.
The College also provides an Employee Assistance Program to help college employees and their families resolve issues which may have a negative impact on job performance.[ref]
 p. 16[/ref]

Admissions

In June 2012, the College chose to make submission of SAT and ACT scores an optional requirement for students applying for admission. (June 25, 2012)

Campus Ministry

The Campus Ministry Office works to support the members of the College community as they consider the meaning of religion and spirituality in their lives.
The Office of Campus Ministry offers programs in a number of areas:

Student Life

Student Body

There were 4,863 students in Fall 2011, of whom 595 were first-time degree-seeking freshman, 2,931 were undergraduates, and 1,932 were postgraduates.  67.8% were women, and 32.2% were men, with an average age of 20. Racially, 76.6% of the students categorized themselves as "White", 5.4% categorized themselves as "Black or African-American", and 5.1% categorized themselves as "Hispanic/Latino". Approximately 86% are from within New York State, with 14.7% hailing from places other than New York State.
In addition, 1.4% of the students are non-resident aliens. There have been international students attending The College of Saint Rose from the following countries: Canada, China, Egypt, El Salvador, England, Hong Kong, India, Ireland, Kenya, Pakistan, Peru, Russia, Sweden, Thailand and Tanzania.

Student Housing

Students choosing to attend The College of Saint Rose have a variety of housing options from which to pick. Available choices depend upon the number of preferred roommates, preferred housing, and class status.
The Office of Residence Life makes all room assignments. Prior to move-in, all residents are required to pay a room deposit fee: for first year and transfer students the fee is paid upon acceptance; for returning students a higher fee is paid prior to the room reservation deadline. In addition, the College requires that all prospective residents review and choose to abide by the Residence Hall Occupancy Agreement. This form prohibits certain behaviors, all pets (excluding fish in 10 gallon tanks or less), and includes numerous standard stipulations. One of the provisions in the Agreement allows the College to make use of resident's rooms during vacation periods.
The campus has a variety of structures devoted to student housing, including large dormitories and numerous Victorian-era neighborhood houses. Incoming students are limited to freshman-only residences Brubacher, Lima, and Golub Halls. Likewise, transfers can only apply to live in Carondelet, Cavanaugh, Quillinan, or Riley Halls, After freshman year, housing options expand to include Centennial, Morris, and Alumni Halls, in addition to numerous other smaller houses on campus. Many of the smaller halls are single sex residences.
As noted, upperclassman (sophomores, juniors, and seniors) have the option of living in Centennial Hall, the newest residence on the campus, recently constructed during the 2011-2012 academic year. Centennial Hall is a 94,000 square-foot, four-story residence hall that can house up to 224 students in 66 two- and four-person suite-style apartments which include single-occupant bedrooms, living and dining rooms, as well as kitchens. In addition the Madison Avenue building contains study rooms, laundry facilities, a bike room (and outdoor rack), a market, and a cafe. Daily oversight of the student body residing in the Hall is provided by a Professional Staff Area Coordinator and two student Resident Assistants.
In addition to on-campus housing, the Pine Hills neighborhood surrounding the College has numerous apartments for rent throughout the year. The majority of leases in the neighborhood begin in the summer months, often June or July.

Dining

The main dining hall for the campus is located on the second floor of the Events and Athletics Center. Aramark employees run both the main dining hall and the Camelot Room. Snack shops, under the name of POD's or "Provisions-On-Demand", are located in the Lally School of Education and Centennial Hall.
All dining services at The College of Saint Rose are contracted out to ARAMARK Educational Services, Inc., a branch of the Aramark Corporation. Meal plan options are offered under Aramark's CampusDish program. As of July 2012 there were three primary meal plan choices offered under the CampusDish program. These include the Platinum Plan ($2,679/semester), the Gold Plan ($2,623/semester), and the Silver Plan ($2,511/semester).
As at many colleges, the student populace waxes and wanes on campus dining. Some common subjects at Saint Rose are the campus dining hall hours,Sim, Carly (Published September 27, 2011)
All on-campus residents are required to be on a campus-sponsored meal-plan, except students living in Centennial Hall or any of the other campus-owned apartments. Waivers may be requested for students who demonstrate "dietary restrictions caused by a specific medical or disability condition" which "cannot be met by Dining Services." This waiver stipulates that students who have made "lifestyle choices such as an organic or vegetarian diet" will not be considered for a meal-plan waiver.

Safety and Security

The campus employs a Security force that is on-call twenty four hours a day, seven days a week. Although headquartered in the Security Office at 340 Western Avenue, at the corner of Partridge Street and Western Avenue, Security officers can often be spotted making continuous rounds of the campus grounds. In addition to the main office, Security desks are maintained in the largest student residences—Lima, Brubacher, and Centennial Hall. Additional desks are manned throughout the campus when the College is in session.
Although the Saint Rose campus is open during classes, residence halls can only be—at any time—accessed by students with appropriate electronic identification cards. Security cameras are mounted along the outside of many of the residence halls, as well as in all major stairwells. The security cameras are monitored live by the college's Security officers. All residence halls are also equipped with hardwired fire detectors and sprinklers.
Per the Clery Act of 1998, campus Security prepares a report each year that is released on the College website on October 1. The Security Report for 2010 found that there were 146 liquor law violations, 26 drug law violations, 2 aggravated assaults, 15 burglaries, 1 motor vehicle theft, 1 arson, and 3 robberies on campus. The report included violations which  occurred in on-campus or off-campus facilities, in property owned or controlled by the College, or on public property within or immediately adjacent to the campus.

Academics

The academic program at the College of Saint Rose consists of four schools: the School of Arts and Humanities (which includes the Music, Art, and Communications Departments), the School of Mathematics and Sciences, the School of Business, and the School of Education.
Online Courses Offered: Yes

Degrees

Saint Rose offers Bachelor's, Post-Bachelor's certificates, Master's, and Post-Master's certificates. There are 66 degree programs offered at Saint Rose, 45 master's degrees, and 12 graduate certificates. These degrees, of which there are currently 66, include:

General information

The Saint Rose Office of Public Relations and Marketing maintains accounts on Facebook, YouTube, and Twitter.

Environmental Policies

Sustainability House

The College of Saint Rose, in conjunction with other Capital Region colleges and universities, signed a pact to reduce their carbon footprint and continue to pursue environmentally friendly policies.
In spring of 2009 McCormick Hall was established as the Sustainability House. The dormitory aimed to reduce its carbon footprint through decreasing electrical usage by unplugging unused appliances and forgoing use of personal refrigerators in favor of a standard kitchen refrigerator, among other sustainable practices. However, due to a lack of students applying to live in the Sustainability House for the fall 2012 semester, McCormick Hall was reverted to standard student housing.Thibdeau, Heather (Published May 12, 2012) 

Athletics

The College of Saint Rose is a Division II member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), offering 18 varsity intercollegiate sports at the NCAA Division II level. p. 9 Shortly before 2000, Saint Rose became a member of the Northeast-10 Conference (NE-10).
Men's Cross Country, Women's Cross Country, Men's Golf, Men's Soccer, Women's Soccer, Women's Tennis, Women's Volleyball
Men's Basketball, Women's Basketball, Men's Swimming and Diving,
Women's Swimming and Diving, Men's Indoor Track & Field, Women's Indoor Track & Field
Baseball, Men's Golf, Softball, Women's Tennis,
Men's Outdoor Track & Field, Women's Outdoor Track & Field, Men's Lacrosse
The school's primary colors are white and gold, but black and gold are used for marketing purposes. The school's NCAA Division II sports teams are referred to as the Golden Knights.
St Rose has produced seven All-Americans during the past three years:

2009 Women's Soccer

St Rose became only the third team in Northeast-10 Conference history (1985) to win three consecutive postseason league titles. The final record of the season was 24–1. The College finished ranked 4th in the United States.
Division II NCAA Semifinals in Tampa, Florida. Amanda Deck, Katie Whiting, and Kelly Guerin made the 2009 NSCAA first-team All-America list

2011 Women's Soccer NCAA Division II title

In 2011, Saint Rose won its first national sports title (NCAA Women's Soccer Championship Division II), by beating the two-time defending champions, the Grand Valley State Lakers, 2-1.

Notable Faculty and Alumni







