[[Shane Crawford]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, Living people, All-Australians (AFL), Australian rules footballers from New South Wales, Brownlow Medal winners, Leigh Matthews Trophy winners, New South Wales Australian rules football State of Origin players, Sportspeople from Melbourne, Hawthorn Football Club players, Peter Crimmins Medal winners, Allies State of Origin players, The Apprentice Australia contestants, Australian Football Hall of Fame inductees, Australian television personalities, Australian television presenters

Shane Barry Crawford (born 9 September 1974) is a former Australian rules footballer who played 305 senior games for the Hawthorn Football Club in the Australian Football League (AFL) and won the League's highest individual honour, the Brownlow Medal. He is currently an Australian television personality who appears regularly on Nine Network shows, the AFL Footy Show, Getaway and Postcards.

AFL career

Crawford spent his childhood in Finley, New South Wales and played his junior football with the Finley Football Club.
Crawford played 305 career AFL games. He is also a four-time All-Australian player and played in three International Rules series' for Australia. He became Captain of Hawthorn in 1999 and that season also won the AFL's top individual honours, the Brownlow Medal and the Leigh Matthews Trophy. He has won four Hawthorn Best & Fairest Awards (1998, 1999, 2002, 2003) and came second in the Brownlow in 2003, losing to the winners by one vote. He was also a member of Hawthorn's 2008 Premiership side.
Crawford stepped down from the Hawthorn Captaincy after the 2004 season, in which he broke his arm and the Hawks finished second last on the AFL ladder. He regained some form in the 2005 season and was again one of the league's leading possession winners.
He played his 300th game for Hawthorn against Brisbane in Round 19 in 2008 in Launceston when Hawthorn defeated the Lions by 69 points.
On 27 September 2008, Crawford won his first Premiership in his 305th AFL match, aged 34. He played more AFL games before receiving his first Premiership Medal than any other player.
Crawford was offered another year with the Hawks,
In 2012 Crawford was inducted in the Australian Football Hall of Fame.

Media career

Crawford is currently a presenter on Channel Nine, being part of three current shows. He is a regular panel member of The AFL Footy Show and a presenter on holiday and destination programs Getaway and Postcards. He was also a contestant on the first season of Channel 9's series The Celebrity Apprentice, where celebrities compete for charities of their choosing. Shane raised $49,311 for his charity the Breast Cancer Network Australia. He finished third overall behind dance guru Jason Coleman and actor/comedian Julia Morris.

World records

In 2009 Crawford set five Guinness world records during broadcasts of The Footy Show.

Author

In 2010, Crawford released his autobiography That's What I'm Talking About written in conjunction with Glenn McFarlane and released in soft-cover and eBook editions.
In March 2014, a series of children's books with football themes, co-authored by Shane Crawford and Adrian Beck were released. The books revolve around the character 'Nick' who is the captain of the 'Cobar Creek Crocs' football team. The four books, released in paperback and eBook formats are: Crawf's Kick it to Nick : The Cursed Cup, Crawf's Kick it to Nick: Outbreak on the Oval, Crawf's Kick it to Nick: Bugs from Beyond and Crawf's Kick it to Nick: Forward Line Freak.

Breast cancer fundraising

On 16 September 2010, Crawford completed a 780 km run named 'That's What I'm Walking About'
In June and July 2013, Crawford cycled 3,600 km from Melbourne to Perth in a fundraising event named 'Tour de Crawf' that took place over 22 days. He averaged nearly 170 km per day and in total he raised $1,328,249 for the Breast Cancer Network Australia.

Honours

In October 2000, Crawford was awarded the 'Australian Sports Medal' for services to Australian football. 

Personal life

Crawford has a longtime partner, Olivia Anderson and they have 4 sons – Charlie (born 2006), Benjamin (born 2008) and twins Jack and Harry (born 2011). He has two brothers, Andrew and Justin.
Crawford's interests outside football are diverse, including his passion for horse racing.shanecrawfordracing.au
In 2011 Crawford launched his children's wear range Kiniki onto the market.






