[[Doug Pederson]]

CATEGORIES: 1968 births, Living people, People from Bellingham, Washington, American football quarterbacks, Players of American football from Washington (state), New York/New Jersey Knights players, Rhein Fire players, Miami Dolphins players, Green Bay Packers players, Philadelphia Eagles players, Cleveland Browns players, Louisiana–Monroe Warhawks football players, Kansas City Chiefs coaches, Philadelphia Eagles coaches, Super Bowl champions

Doug Irvin Pederson (born January 31, 1968) is a former American football quarterback in the National Football League.  He spent most of his career as a member of the Green Bay Packers, serving as a backup to Brett Favre. He is currently the Offensive Coordinator for the Kansas City Chiefs.

Playing career

Early years

Pederson attended Ferndale High School in Ferndale, Washington, and was an All-State selection in football, basketball, and baseball. Following high school he attended Northeast Louisiana University where he was quarterback from 1987 through 1990. He still holds multiple passing records at the school."ULM Football Records." 2008 ULM Warhawks Football Media Guide.

Professional

Pederson originally signed as a rookie free agent by the Miami Dolphins in 1991 In 1992, Pederson played for the New York/New Jersey Knights of the World League of American Football.
Pederson returned to the World League in 1995, playing for the Rhein Fire.  In 1995, Pederson was selected by the Carolina Panthers in the NFL Expansion Draft, The next year Pederson filled the same role for the Cleveland Browns and their sophomore quarterback, Tim Couch.  In 2001, Pederson again joined Green Bay, and he remained the backup quarterback there, up until his retirement after the 2004 NFL season.
After the 2004 season, due to injury, Pederson retired from football.

Coaching career

High school

After his retirement, Pederson was hired as head football coach of Calvary Baptist Academy, a private, Christian high school in Shreveport, Louisiana.  Calvary was going into its second year as a program when Pederson signed on in March 2005.
Pederson was the head coach at Calvary for four years, and holds a 33-7 record in the regular season and a 8-3 record in the post-season.  The Cavaliers were in the state playoffs all four years with Pederson as head coach.  In 2007, he led the Cavaliers to the semi-finals and lost to State runners-up St. James Wildcats. He led the Cavaliers to their first District Title in 2007.

Professional

On January 29, 2009, Pederson was hired as the offensive quality control coach for the Philadelphia Eagles. 
On February 8, 2011, he was promoted to quarterbacks coach, replacing James Urban, who was promoted to assistant offensive coordinator. Under Pedersons guidance in 2011, the Eagles set a franchise record with 6,386 yards. 
On January 11, 2013, Pederson was hired to serve as offensive coordinator for the Kansas City Chiefs.

Personal

Doug Pederson and wife Jeannie Pederson are the parents of three sons. His oldest son Drew is a quarterback at Division I-FCS Samford University.com/roster.aspx?rp_id=4107&path=football






