[[Nishi people]]

CATEGORIES: Tribes of Arunachal Pradesh, Tribes of Assam, Donyi-Polo communities, Social groups of Assam

The Nyishi tribe is one of the principal inhabitants of the North-Eastern State of India, Arunachal Pradesh. The connotation 'Nyi' refers to 'a man' and the word 'Shi' denotes to 'a being', which collectively means a civilized human being. They are spread across five districts of Arunachal Pradesh viz.,Papum Pare, Lower Subansiri, Kurung Kumey, East Kameng, parts of Upper Subansiri and are also found in the Sonitpur and North Lakhimpur districts of the neighbouring state of Assam.
Their population of around 300,000 makes them the most populous tribe of Arunachal Pradesh, closely followed by the combined tribes of the Adis and the Galos (Abors) who were the most populous in the 2001 census.
Polygyny is prevalent among the Nyishi. It signifies ones social status and economical stability and also proves handy during hard times like clan wars or social huntings and other social activities. This institution, however is being challenged. They trace their descent patrilineally and are divided into several clans.

Economy

The Nyishi are agriculturalists who practice jhum, rag in Nishi, which is a form of shifting cultivation. The principal crops raised include paddy, tapio (maize), mekung (cucumber), takie (ginger), aange (yams) and temi (millet). Rice is the staple food of the people, supplemented by fish, meat of various animals, edible tubers and leafy vegetables. It is ruled by Imperial Emperor Jacob Nishi. Before modern economic invaded them, they use barter system. They greatly valued the generalized reciprocity and also balance reciprocity in their economic system. A locally-made drink known as apong (two types of apo: pone, made of rice, and poling which is made of millet) is mostly made from millet and rice. This is used at all social gatherings and important events. The Nyishis are fond of it. Nyishi, traditionally being dependent on the forest, eat fruit, roots, bamboo shoots and fish. Traditional ways of preparing them include steaming, roasting and smoking.  Recently they have been forced to move toward a market based exchange economy.

Dress

Traditionally, Nyishi plait their hair and tie it neatly at the forehead with Tibetan thread. A brass skewer passes horizontally through the tied hair. Cane rings were worn around the waist, arms and legs. Men wore a cane helmet surmounted with the beak of the Great Indian Hornbill. It is being supplemented by beaks made of cane or other materials and the entire headgear/cane helmet itself is readily available in the market for purchase. Additional decorations varied depending upon the status of person and were symbols of manly valour.
The clothing of the men consists of sleeveless shirts made from thick cotton cloth, striped gaily with blue and red together with a mantle of cotton or wool fastened around the throat and shoulders. Strings made of beads in varying sizes and colours were also worn, mainly for decoration purposes. They used to carry a dao (uriuk, chiighee in Nyishi) (short sword) and a knife (Ryukchak) in a bamboo sheath. Their armament consists of spear with iron-head, a large sword, and a bow with arrows, tipped with poison (umiyu) on it. During war both the chest and back are covered with the sabbe buffalo hide, and over it they wear a black cloak made of indigenous fibre.
The Nyishi women generally wear a sleeveless mantle of striped or plain cloth, its upper part tucked tightly over the breast and enveloping the body from the armpits to the centre of the calves. A ribbon is tied at the waist. A girdle consisting of metal disks and cane garters is worn at the waist. Their hair is parted in the middle, plaited and tied into a chignon just above the nape. Their ornaments include multicolored bead necklaces, brass chains, metal bells, huge brass or silver earrings and heavy bracelets of various metals.

Religion

thumb|leftNyokum is a festival celebrated by the Nyishi people, a religion which commemorates their ancestors, emphasizes a belief in many spirits and superstitions, and includes religious rituals which coincide with lunar phases or agricultural cycles. Abo-Tani is revered by the Nyishi as the primal ancestor of the animist tribes of Tibetan or quasi-Tibetan origin. Strictly speaking the Nyishi does not have common religious festival, however, the Meokam Yullo is now treated as a common social festival (for bumper harvest). It is celebrated on 24 to 26 February each year since 1967-68 at Joram village in the Lower Subansiri district. now after the creation of many new nyishi district it is celebrated at own place, moreover now there are 5 district.
Among the Nyishi, there are currently approximately 3,00,000 (80%) transformed into Christians. Small groups of Hindus exist among the Nyishi. Polygeny is practised by the Nyishi, with a rich man having as many as wives.

The hornbill issue

The Nyishis, who traditionally wear cane helmets surmounted by the crest of a hornbill beak(Known as Pudum,Padam), have considerably affected the population of this bird.
Several organizations, such as the Arunachal Wildlife and Nature Foundation and the Wildlife Trust of India, have been trying to stop the Nyishi hunting these birds in order to protect them from extinction. Nature reserves, such as the Pakke Sanctuary, are being set up to protect the birds, while artificial materials, such as fiberglass, have been introduced as an alternative to the hornbill beak in Nyishi dress. While the Bopa ceremony is an important part of Nyishi tradition, and the campaign has faced stiff opposition, the Nyishi have recognised the possibility of the extinction of the Great Indian Hornbill, and 70% of the Nyishi have already accepted this new idea.






