[[Rammstein]]

CATEGORIES: Echo winners, German heavy metal musical groups, German industrial music groups, Industrial metal musical groups, Industrial rock musical groups, Kerrang! Awards winners, Musical groups established in 1994, Musical groups from Berlin, Musical sextets, Obscenity controversies, Rammstein, Republic Records artists, Slash Records artists, World Music Awards winners, 1994 establishments in Germany

Rammstein ( and consists of Till Lindemann (lead vocals), Richard Z. Kruspe (guitar and backing vocals), Paul H. Landers (guitar, backing vocals), Oliver "Ollie" Riedel (bass guitar), Christoph "Doom" Schneider (drums and electronic percussion) and Christian "Flake" Lorenz (keyboards). Since their formation, Rammstein have had no changes in their line-up.
Their songs are usually in German, but they have also performed songs entirely or partially in other languages such as English, Spanish, French and Russian. Rammstein's entire catalogue is published by Universal Music Group.

History

Founding and Herzeleid (1989-1996)

Rammstein was founded by guitarist Richard Z. Kruspe. In 1989, he escaped to West Berlin and started the band Orgasm Death Gimmicks. At that time, he was heavily influenced by American music, especially that of Kiss. After the Berlin Wall came down, he moved back home to Schwerin, where Till Lindemann worked as a basket-weaver and played drums in the band First Arsch (loosely translated as "First Ass" or "First Arse"). At this time, Richard lived with Oliver Riedel, of the band The Inchtabokatables, and Christoph "Doom" Schneider (of Die Firma). Richard realised that the music he had previously created did not properly suit him. He envisioned something that would combine machines as well as the sound of hard guitars. The three started working together on a new project. Richard soon found it extremely difficult to write both music and lyrics at the same time, so he persuaded Lindemann to join Rammstein. Richard first discovered Till when he overheard him singing while he was working.
The band was named after the Ramstein air show disaster. Mix mir einen Drink. – p. 262. Schwarzkopf & Schwarzkopf, Berlin 2002, ISBN 3-89602-418-3 At first, the band had denied this and said that their name was inspired by the giant doorstop type devices found on old gates, called Rammsteine."Rammstein-Who Are They?." Interview with bands. JAM. VIVA JAM Interview: Berlin, Germany 1997. Video. 08:17 The extra "m" in the band's name makes it translate literally as "ramming stone".
A contest was held in Berlin for amateur bands in 1994, the winner of which would receive the opportunity to record a four track demo CD in a professional studio. Kruspe, Schneider, Riedel, and Lindemann entered and won the contest, which sparked the attention of Paul H. Landers, who wanted in on the project upon hearing their demo. To complete their sound, Rammstein then attempted to recruit Christian "Flake" Lorenz, who had played with Landers in Feeling B. At first, Lorenz was hesitant, but eventually agreed to join the band. Later, they were signed by Motor Records.
Rammstein began to record their first studio album, Herzeleid, in March 1995 with producer Jacob Hellner. They released their first single "Du riechst so gut" on 17 August and released the album on 24 September 1995. Later that year, they toured with Clawfinger in Warsaw and Prague. Rammstein headlined a tour of their own through Germany from 2 December to 22 December consisting of 17 shows which helped to boost the band's popularity. They then went on several tours throughout early 1996, releasing their second single titled "Seemann" on 8 January 1996.
On 27 March, Rammstein performed on MTV's Hanging Out in London; their first performance in the UK. Rammstein's first major boost in popularity outside Germany came when music director Trent Reznor chose two Rammstein songs, "Heirate mich" and "Rammstein", for David Lynch's film Lost Highway. The soundtrack for the film was released in the U.S. in late 1996 and later throughout Europe in April 1997.
Rammstein went on to tour through Germany, Austria, and Switzerland from September to October 1996, performing an anniversary concert on 27 September called "100 years of Rammstein". Guests to the concert included Moby, Bobo and The Berlin Session Orchestra, Berlin director Gert Hof was responsible for the light show.

Sehnsucht and Live aus Berlin (late 1996–2000)

Rammstein started recording Sehnsucht in November 1996 at the Temple Studios in Malta. The album was again produced by Jacob Hellner. "Engel", the first single from the album, was released on 1 April 1997 and reached gold status in Germany on 23 May. This prompted the release of a fan edition of the single, named Engel - Fan Edition. This contained two previously unreleased songs, "Feuerräder" and "Wilder Wein". Release of the second single from the album Sehnsucht was "Du hast", which hit the German single charts August 1997 at number 5.
Rammstein then continued touring in the summer while Sehnsucht was released on 22 August 1997. The album reached number 1 in Germany after two weeks in the charts. Simultaneously, Herzeleid and both Sehnsucht singles ("Du hast" and "Engel") were in the Top 20 of the German charts. Rammstein continued to headline sold out shows throughout Europe in September and October. On 5 December 1997, they embarked on their first tour of the United States as the opening act for KMFDM.
On 22–23 August 1998, Rammstein played to over 17,000 fans at the Wuhlheide in Berlin; the biggest show the band had played there up to that date. Supporting acts were Danzig, Nina Hagen, Joachim Witt and Alaska. The show was professionally filmed, intended to be released on their upcoming live DVD, Live aus Berlin.
Rammstein embarked on a live tour with Korn, Ice Cube, Orgy and Limp Bizkit called the Family Values Tour in September through to late October 1998. To further continue their success in the US, Sehnsucht received Gold record status on 2 November.
The band was nominated at the MTV European Music Awards for Best Rock Act and performed "Du hast" live on 12 November that year.
Rammstein had further success in 1999, starting off the year in February with a nomination for Best Metal Performance at the 41st-annual Grammy Awards. A year after it was filmed, the Live aus Berlin concert was released on CD on 30 August 1999, with a limited edition double CD also available. Two weeks after it was released, Live aus Berlin went to number one in the German Album Charts. On 13 September and 26 November 1999 the video and DVD versions of the concert were released respectively.  Further popularity came via Rammstein's song "Du hast" being included on The Matrix: Music from the Motion Picture.

Mutter (2000–2002)

Rammstein's album Mutter was recorded in the south of France in May and June 2000, and mixed in Stockholm in October. During Christmas 2000, Rammstein released an MP3 of "Links 2-3-4" as a teaser for their new album. Kruspe also wrapped a thread of his own hair onto the G string of his guitar just for this album, he said "It gave it a certain sound".
2001 was a busy year for Rammstein, starting in January and February with the band playing the Big Day Out festival in Australia and New Zealand. January also heralded the shooting of the video for their upcoming single, "Sonne", recorded in Potsdam at Babelsberger Filmstudios from 13 to 15 January 2001. The video was released on 29 January 2001. The single for "Sonne" was released on 12 February 2001 in Europe, featuring an instrumental version of the song, two remixes by Clawfinger and the song "Adios" from the upcoming album.
Mutter was released on 2 April 2001, sparking another Rammstein tour through Germany, Austria, and Switzerland. On 14 May, the second single from the album, "Links 2 3 4", was released, along with a video of the single on 18 May. After a tour throughout Europe in June, the band then toured the U.S., Canada and Mexico from June to August 2001.
"Ich will", the third single from the album, was released on 10 September 2001 and a Tour edition of the Mutter album (the cover of which is red) was released, featuring alternative artwork and live versions of "Ich will", "Links 2 3 4", "Sonne" and "Spieluhr".
From 8 to 12 January 2002, Rammstein traveled to Prague to participate in a minor scene for the film xXx. The band is seen in the opening scene, performing their song "Feuer frei!" in a concert. "Feuer frei!" was released across Europe as the first single from the xXx soundtrack on 14 October 2002. Rammstein released two remixes of the song. Furthermore, the single's track listing included "Du hast" and "Bück dich" cover versions by Battery. The video for the single was edited by Rob Cohen, which contains part Rammstein performance at the beginning of the film and part snippets from the film itself.

Reise, Reise (2003–2005)

Rammstein recorded Reise, Reise (meaning "journey journey", but also an archaic Reveille) at the El Cortijo studio in southern Spain in November and December 2003; it was mixed at Toytown studio in Stockholm, Sweden in April and May 2004. The first single from the album was "Mein Teil", released on 26 July. The video was shot in the Arena, in the Treptow district of Berlin. Outdoor shooting took place at the Deutsche Oper (Opera House) U-Bahn station on Bismarckstrasse. The director was Zoran Bihac, who also filmed the "Links 2 3 4" video.
The video for the second single, "Amerika", was filmed on 6–7 August 2004 in the ruins of the former cement works in Rüdersdorf, near Berlin, under the direction of Jörn Heitmann (who also directed the "Ich will" video, among others). The space suits for the moon scenes were borrowed from Hollywood and 240 tons of ash were needed to create the moon landscape. The video premiered on 20 August, while the single was released on 13 September.
Reise, Reise was released on 27 September and went straight into top 10 charts throughout Europe. According to the Billboard charts, Rammstein were now the most successful German-language band of all time. Rammstein then toured Germany through November and some of December 2004, releasing the single "Ohne dich" on 22 November.
In February 2005, Rammstein toured Europe again. By 28 February, Rammstein had played 21 concerts in front of more than 200,000 spectators in ten countries. It was on this tour that the band was faced with several lawsuits resulting from severe fire breathing accidents involving audience members. "Keine Lust" the fourth single from Reise, Reise, was released on 28 February 2005.
From 27 May to 30 July 2005, Rammstein played festivals across Europe. Footage from these concerts eventually ended up on Rammstein's live DVD Völkerball, released in November 2006.

Rosenrot and Völkerball (2005–2006)

In August 2005, Rammstein revealed the name of their next studio album: Rosenrot. Their first single from the album, "Benzin", was released on 5 October, with its video premiere on 16 September. Rosenrot was released worldwide on 28 October. Directly following the release, the album continued the success of its predecessor, Reise, Reise, placing on top 10 charts in 20 countries.
16 December 2005 marked the release of the title track on Rosenrot. The video for "Mann gegen Mann" was released on 6 February 2006, with the single being released on 3 March. On 19 February 2006, Rammstein had an asteroid named after them, 110393 Rammstein.
On 17 November, the first Rammstein Live DVD since Live aus Berlin from 1998 was released. Völkerball shows concert performances by the band in England, France, Japan and Russia. The Special Edition is extended by a second DVD, which contains the documentaries "Anaconda in the net" by Mathilde Bonnefoy and the "Making of the album Reise, Reise" by the band's guitarist Paul Landers. The limited edition was released as a large black-and-white photo-book with photos by Frederic Batier, who had accompanied the band through their recent tours. The photo-book edition contains two DVDs and two live albums.

Liebe ist für alle da and tour (2007–2011)

The band took a hiatus in 2006 and began work again in 2007. The recording process reportedly took two years. In July 2009, the title track "Liebe ist für alle da" leaked onto the internet, along with promotional materials. This led Universal Music to take action against certain fan sites."New Rammstein Song 'Liebe Ist Fur Alle Da' Leaked". Alt-UK, 2009-07-20."What's going on?". Herzeleid. Retrieved 2009-08-10.
It was confirmed in August 2009 that the new album would have 11 tracks,  On September 1, 2009, it was confirmed on the band's website that "Pussy" would be the first single from the album. On the same day, The Gauntlet posted a promotional video for it. The video also confirmed the album title, Liebe ist für alle da. Later, the title was confirmed again in an interview with Paul Landers for RockOne magazine. 46,7
The music video for "Pussy" was released on September 16, 2009, at 20:30 GMT, released especially for the adult website Visit-x.
On November 8, 2009, Rammstein began the first leg of the Liebe ist für alle da Tour in Lisbon, Portugal. As part of their European summer tour, Rammstein performed at the 2010 Rock AM Ring Festival on 4–6 June 2010. They also headlined several shows across Europe on the Sonisphere Festival, including their first ever outdoor UK performance at Knebworth Park, performing the day before Iron Maiden. On Sunday July 18, 2010, Rammstein played in front of more than 130,000 people in Quebec City on the Plains of Abraham as the closing show for the Festival d'été de Québec. It was their first North American appearance in 9 years. The band announced that their last tour dates of 2010 were to be in the Americas. After several South American dates, the band returned to the United States for a single show at the famous Madison Square Garden in New York City – their first US show in over nine years, it is rumored that tickets sold out in as little as fifteen minutes. They also performed at Bell Centre in Montreal, Canada on December 9. This concert also sold out within the first hour of tickets going on sale, indicating a high demand to see Rammstein in North America. The band then played at Big Day Out 2011 from January 21 to February 6 in New Zealand and Australia. The band also visited South Africa for the first time in 2011 and played two concerts at Cape Town and Johannesburg. On February 16, 2011, Rammstein announced that, after the massive success of their sold out Madison Square Garden show on December 11, 2010, they would be touring North America after 10 years, stopping in New Jersey (East Rutherford) Izod Center, Montreal Bell Centre, Toronto Air Canada Centre, Chicago Allstate Arena, Edmonton Rexall Place, Seattle Tacoma Dome, San Francisco (Oakland) Oracle Arena, Los Angeles The Forum (Inglewood), and Las Vegas Thomas and Mack Center, Mexico City's Palacio de los Deportes, Guadalajara's Arena VFG, and Monterey's Auditorio Banamex to a total of six US dates, three Canadian dates, and four Mexican dates. Tickets went on sale February 25 and 26 to great response, with many shows completely selling out, making this tour a complete success. On April 20, 2011, the band also won the Revolver Golden God Award for Best Live Band, their first US award.

Made in Germany 1995–2011 (2011–2013)

Rammstein released a greatest hits album titled Made in Germany 1995–2011 on December 2, 2011. It contains one previously unreleased track, "Mein Land" which was released as a single on November 11, 2011 with another track, "Vergiss uns nicht", that was released at a later date. The compilation is available in three different editions: The standard edition; this includes a CD with normal songs from their back catalog. Special edition; has the same CD from the standard edition and an extra CD with Rammstein songs that have been remixed by different artists such as Scooter. Finally, the super deluxe edition; has the two previously mentioned CDs and 3 DVDs with interviews and the making of videos from different music videos.
The video for the song "Mein Land" was filmed on May 23, 2011 at Sycamore Beach in Malibu, California. It premiered on the band's official website on November 11, 2011. A full European tour in support of Made in Germany began on November 2011 and spanned all the way to May 2012. It included a North American tour that began on April 20, 2012 in Sunrise, Florida and ended on May 25, 2012 in Houston, Texas that visited 21 cities throughout the US and Canada. The Swedish industrial band Deathstars supported the band during the first two legs of the European tour. DJ Joe Letz from Combichrist and Emigrate was the opening act for the North American Tour.
Rammstein, minus Till Lindemann, performed "The Beautiful People" with Marilyn Manson at the Echo Awards on March 22, 2012.
On September 21, 2012, it was announced that Rammstein would be headlining Download Festival 2013, along with Iron Maiden and Slipknot. 12 additional festival performances for summer 2013 were announced the same day, including Wacken Open Air festival and Rock Werchter.
On November 22, 2012, Rammstein announced via Facebook that they will be releasing a video collection featuring all music videos entitled Videos 1995-2012, plus two unreleased music videos for "Mein Herz Brennt", originally featured on the album Mutter. The first video premiered on the band's Vimeo, while the second will premier on a promotional website. Both videos were directed by Zoran Bihac.
In July 2013, guitarist Paul Landers revealed in an interview the possibility of a Rammstein documentary and a live DVD. He expressed the band may "start thinking" on a new album in 2014.

Musical style and influences

Although Rammstein is often generalized as Neue Deutsche Härte (New German Hardness), their music spans a variety of related styles, including heavy metal, industrial music, and groove metal.
Rammstein's style has tended to divide critics. New Zealand's Southland Times (December 17, 1999) suggested that Till Lindemann's "booming, sub-sonic voice" would send "the peasants fleeing into their barns and bolting their doors", while the New York Times (January 9, 2005) commented that on the stage, "Mr. Lindemann gave off an air of such brute masculinity and barely contained violence that it seemed that he could have reached into the crowd, snatched up a fan, and bitten off his head." Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic commented that "their blend of industrial noise, grinding metal guitars, and operatic vocals is staggeringly powerful." "We just push boundaries", said Till Lindemann in an interview with rock magazine Kerrang!. "We can't help it if people don't like those boundaries being pushed."

Lyrics

Nearly all of Rammstein's songs are in German. However, the band has recorded English songs as well as a cover of the song "Stripped" (Depeche Mode). In addition, the songs "Amerika", "Stirb nicht vor mir/Don't Die Before I Do," and "Pussy" contain lyrics in English. The song "Moskau" ("Moscow") contains a chorus in Russian. "Te quiero puta!" is entirely in Spanish, and the song "Frühling in Paris" has a chorus in French. Oliver Riedel commented that "German language suits heavy metal music. French might be the language of love, but German is the language of anger."
The lyrics of Rammstein, and their utterance by singer Till Lindemann, are an essential element of the music and shape the perception by fans and a wider public. Among other things that are often very controversial, Rammstein also uses lyrics of classical German literature, e.g. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe's famous poems Der Erlkönig (1778) and Das Heidenröslein (1771) for the songs "Dalai Lama" and "Rosenrot", respectively.Lüke, Lüke, Martina. "Modern Classics: Reflections on Rammstein in the German Class." Die Unterrichtspraxis/Teaching German 41:1 (Spring 2008): 15-23.
Many of their songs are inspired by real life events. These songs include "Rammstein" (Ramstein airshow disaster), "Mein Teil" (The Meiwes Case), "Wiener Blut" (Fritzl case) and "Donaukinder" (2000 Baia Mare cyanide spill).
Wordplay is a fundamental component of Rammstein's lyrics. In many instances, the lyrics are phrased such that they can be interpreted in several ways. The song "Du hast", for example, is a play on the German marriage vow Willst Du, bis der Tod euch scheidet, treu ihr sein für alle Tage? ("Will you, until Death separates you, be faithful to her for the rest of your days?"). In the song, the traditional affirmative response, Ja ("Yes"), is replaced by its negation Nein ("No"). The song starts, in fact, with a play on words: Du... Du hast... Du hast mich... meaning "You have me". This line is often mistaken for "You hate me", because in German, there is no distinction between the pronunciation of Du hasst ("you hate") and Du hast ("you have"). The pun is later resolved as the sentence is completed: Du hast mich gefragt/Und ich hab' nichts gesagt ("You have asked me/And I have said nothing"). Confusingly, the band did also make an English version of the song named "You Hate", which was not translated directly from "Du hast". While many arguments are made about "Du hast", it is known that Rammstein used this wording to mislead and create humour in the song, causing many non-speakers of German to be confused.

Live performances

Rammstein have achieved particular fame for their hugely over-the-top stage show, using so many pyrotechnics that fans eventually coined the motto "Other bands play, Rammstein burns!" (a quip at Manowar's song "Kings of Metal", which states, "other bands play, Manowar kills"). After an accident in the Arena in Berlin where some burning decoration parts fell (27 September 1996) the band used professionals to handle the pyrotechnics; Lindemann is now a licensed pyrotechnician who spends entire songs engulfed head-to-toe in flames. He has suffered multiple burns on his ears, hair and arms.
The heat is so intense that on occasion, people have been carried out of Rammstein concerts suffering from heat exhaustion, and lighting gantries have been seen glowing red-hot from repeated fireball hits. The variety of the pyrotechnics can be seen in a recent concert playlist, which includes such items as "Lycopodium Masks", "Glitterburst Truss", "Pyrostrobes", "Comets", "Flash Trays" and "Mortar Hits".
The band's costumes are equally outlandish. During the Reise, Reise tour, they wore Lederhosen, corsets and vague military uniforms with stahlhelms, while during the Mutter tour the group kept to the themes of the album artwork and descended onto the stage from a giant uterus while wearing diapers. In the Völkerball concert, among others, Till changed costumes between songs, dressed accordingly for each. For example, in "Mein Teil", he was dressed as a butcher, in "Reise, Reise", as a sailor. The rest of the band each wore their own preferred costume, but none as outlandish or themed as Till's.
The band's flair for costumes shows up not only in live shows, but in videos as well. In the "Keine Lust" video, all members except Lorenz were dressed in fat suits. In the "Amerika" video, all members of the band wore astronaut costumes.
Since the Mutter Tour, starting in 2001, Rammstein have worked with stage designer Roy Bennett, who helped the band in developing the look of the stages. With the Reise, Reise Tour (2004/2005), the band began using a two-level stage, with half the band playing the lower level, as the other half was placed at the upper. At this tour, the upper level rose over 2 metres above the stage floor and had an oval entrance just beneath the drums. At both sides of the upper level, a special lift made it possible for the band members to access both stage levels. On the LIFAD Tour (starting 2009), the new stage still had a two-level design. This time, however, the upper level only had about half the height as on the previous tour. Stage entrance was possible by a hydraulic ramp in the middle of the stage floor. At each end of the upper level, stairs are placed in order to gain access to both levels.
This tour does not only include lots of pyrotechnics, but also a massive lighting show – for example, the famous band logo-cross as big lamps and four enormous collapsible towers, forming the industrial backdrop of the set, capable of doing different lighting effects. According to Kruspe, the on-stage wackiness is entirely deliberate (Rammstein's motto according to Schneider is: "Do your own thing. And overdo it!"). The aim is to get people's attention and have fun at the same time. "You have to understand that 99 per cent of the people don't understand the lyrics, so you have to come up with something to keep the drama in the show," he said. "We have to do something. We like to have a show; we like to play with fire. We do have a sense of humour. We do laugh about it; we  have fun ... but we're not Spinal Tap. We take the music and the lyrics seriously." "It's a combination of humour, theatre and our East German culture, you know?"
Their onstage antics have also led them to trouble. During their stint on the American Family Values Tour 1998, alongside acts such as rapper Ice Cube, Korn, Limp Bizkit and Orgy, the band was arrested for indecency. In one of the more infamous moments vocalist Till Lindemann engaged in simulated sodomy with keyboardist Lorenz during their performance of "Bück dich" in Worcester, Massachusetts. They were subsequently arrested and fined $25 and spent one night in jail.

Controversies

Imagery

The New York Times described Rammstein's music as a "powerful strain of brutally intense rock... bringing gale-force music and spectacular theatrics together". Rammstein have vehemently denied this and said they want nothing to do with politics or supremacy of any kind. Lorenz, annoyed by the claim, has remarked it is just a photo, and should be understood as such. Herzeleid has since been given a different cover in North America, depicting the band members' faces. The clip for the song "Amerika" shows people from different nationalities throughout the video and Rammstein members taking photographs with them at the end of the clip.
The song "Links 2-3-4" (Links being German for "left") was written as a riposte to these claims. According to Kruspe, it means, "'My heart beats on the left, two, three, four'. It's simple. If you want to put us in a political category, we're on the left side, and that's the reason we made the song".
According to the German online music magazine laut. The full text can be found here: "Einheitsfrontlied"
 
 Rammstein embed the Lafontaine saying My heart beats left into their lyric and cite a line of an old Hannes Wader workers' song ("Left, 2, 3, 4; left 2, 3, 4; where your place is comrade, line up into the Workers' United Front, if you are a worker").

Lorenz stated that the song was created to show the band could write a harsh, evil, military-sounding song without being Nazis.

Videos

In October 2004, the video for "Mein Teil" ("My part") caused considerable controversy in Germany when it was released. It takes a darkly comic view of the Armin Meiwes cannibalism case, showing a cross-dressed Schneider holding the other five band members on a leash and rolling around in mud. The controversy did nothing to stop the single rising to No. 2 in the German charts. Meiwes (who was convicted of manslaughter in 2004, then retried in 2006 and found guilty of murder) brought a lawsuit in January 2006 against the band for infringement of rights to the story.
The band's own views of its image are sanguine: "We like being on the fringes of bad taste", according to Paul H. Landers, while Christian "Flake" Lorenz comments "The controversy is fun, like stealing forbidden fruit. But it serves a purpose. We like audiences to grapple with our music, and people have become more receptive".
The video for "Pussy" was released September 2009. It features graphic scenes of nudity along with women engaging in sexual activity with body doubles of the band members. It is the third Rammstein video to include nudity.

Placement on the Index

On November 5, 2009 their sixth studio album, Liebe ist für alle da was placed on the Index of the Bundesprüfstelle für jugendgefährdende Medien or BPjM (Federal Department for Media Harmful to Young Persons), making it illegal in Germany to make the album accessible to minors or display it where it can be seen by people underage, effectively banning it from stores.

Purported legal action against Sony music/Sony music Entertainment GmbH

In 2010, Rammstein settled out of court against Apocalyptica's former record label Sony Music Entertainment GmbH as the successor of the by now defunct affiliated label Gun Records for using Rammstein's label in marketing Apocalyptica's 2007 album Worlds Collide, which featured a duet with singer Lindemann.
The legal action most likely did no harm to the relationship between the bands, since Apocalyptica were seen on stage with Rammstein during the song "Mein Herz brennt" in February 2012 at Hartwall Arena, Helsinki.

Band members

Discography

Tours

Awards

Übersicht über alle Echo – Preisträger seit 1992 (German, retrieved on December 24, 2010)[/ref]



Further reading




