[[Lynne Russell]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, American expatriates in Canada, Living people, People from Toronto, Canadian television news anchors, Canadian radio personalities, American television news anchors, People from Orange, New Jersey, Canadian women journalists, Women radio journalists

Lynne Russell (born November 1, 1946 in Orange, New Jersey) is an American journalist and author. She was the first woman to solo anchor a prime time network nightly newscast, as the popular host of CNN Headline News from 1983 to 2001. While her resume' includes local television and radio markets from Miami to Honolulu, she is best known for her work on CNN and on CNN Headline News.

Early life and education

Russell, an only child, studied classical Russian ballet and piano from the age of seven. Her mother was of Italian descent, one of seven children of Neapolitan immigrants who had a small grocery store in New Jersey; her father, one of nine children born on a family farm in Leeds, North Dakota, was of Irish and German background. Russell grew up in the military, as an "Army brat". Her father was a career U.S. Army Chief Warrant Officer, and the family moved frequently. Consequently, she attended thirteen schools before graduating from Manzano High School in Albuquerque, New Mexico. She had planned on a career in the Foreign Service, fascinated by the travel and freedom her mother's only unmarried sibling, Maria, enjoyed in the diplomatic service, so Russell began picking up languages in high school. But her mother prevailed upon her to be more practical and pursue a line of work in which she could "always find a job", and she enrolled in the School of Nursing at the University of Colorado in Boulder and Denver.

Career

Discovering nursing did not suit her emotionally, she was approached to begin her television news career, as Jacksonville NBC affiliate WTLV news director Howard Kelley asked her to anchor their evening Action News with Peter Burns. This happened the day after Russell's boss had put his fist through the control room door at the radio station, because she had broken format and neglected to play a Bee Gees song. Russell grabbed the TV job.
WTLV gave way to Honolulu, Hawaii NBC affiliate KHON-TV, where she anchored, worked the military beat and reported on health stories. In addition, her days began at 4am, telephoning Oahu's neighbor islands looking for news to report in the NBC Today Show local slots. After a sleepless year, she moved back to the mainland as investigative and courts reporter and evening eyewitness news anchor with Fred Lozano at CBS affiliate KENS in San Antonio, Texas.

CNN and CNN Headline News

In January 1983, media mogul Ted Turner's staff contacted Russell at KENS in San Antonio and asked her to move to Atlanta, Georgia, where the Cable News Network had just established itself as the first 24-hour television news outlet. Its new sister network, known then as CNN2, would televise 48, half-hour newscasts every day. Russell said yes. She stayed until May, 2001. She became the first woman to solo anchor a prime time network nightly newscast, as the popular host of CNN Headline News from 1983 to 2001.
Russell is credited
In 1989, at Fort Campbell, Kentucky, she combined her connections to the military and to her colleagues by pinning the coveted Air Assault badge on CNN's first Special Assignments Correspondent, friend, and then-current fiancė, Chuck de Caro, upon his graduation from the US Army Air Assault School.
Russell resigned from the networks to help care for her ailing spouse, who later recovered, but from whom she is now divorced. Her final newscast on CNN Headline News came on May 18, 2001.  Fellow anchor Chuck Roberts, who had delivered the inaugural newscast on that network, produced a short retrospective of Russell's time at CNN. It aired that night: Lynne Russell - last newscast on Headline News. The same channel, now known as HLN, is not a part of the original network.

After CNN

In 2005, Russell accompanied her then-husband, who had recovered from his illness, to Toronto, Canada, where she focused on writing, but kept her hand in the media. From 2006 to 2008, she was an anchor on Canadian Broadcasting Corporation television network CBC Newsworld. From 2008 to 2010, she hosted a radio program on Toronto station Newstalk 1010. She also acquired an Ontario real estate license and traded in real estate with a brokerage there.
She currently divides her time among Washington, DC, Toronto and Atlanta.

Other

1993 to present: Private Detective in the State of Georgia. bitterly disappointed.
1996 to 2005: Deputy Sheriff in Fulton County, Georgia, Reserve Division. Besides Jail Officer, her duties included traffic, appropriations, communications and courthouse security during the trial of former Black Panther H. Rap Brown (Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin), now serving a life sentence for the murder of a Fulton County deputy.
From 2010: Storyteller In Residence at Centennial College School of Journalism, in Toronto. Her students are Centennial College undergraduates, as well as University of Toronto post-graduate sports journalism students.
Russell has two black belts in the Korean-American martial art of Choi Kwang Do.
She creates very high-end, one-of-a-kind Italian silk lampshades, and markets them through Benevento Lampshade Company.
Russell retains her passion for red lipstick, although she was prevailed upon by Turner Security to cease wearing it on CNN, after some male viewers thought she was sending them messages with the color. She sells her version of red lipstick, Lynne Russell Red, as well as other favorites on www.com

Writing

Russell has written numerous books, magazine articles and online pieces including:
2011 to present: Lynne Russell's Blog: www.blogspot.com
2012: Hell On Heels (Amazon. The first of a trilogy of novels whose heroine, P.J. Santini, is a Buffalo, New York television reporter who, like Russell, is also a private investigator and a woman of Italian descent with "a weakness for dangerous men and high heels". The Toronto Star calls P.J. Santini "the love child of Janet Evanovich and Elmore Leonard". The second novel, Heels of Fortune, is due out by Thanksgiving 2013.
2011: Public Broadcasting System's   MediaShift…Your Guide To The Digital Media Revolution  (August 22, 2011): "Teaching Journalism in an Age When News Comes to You"
1999: How to Win Friends, Kick Ass and Influence People…a memoir (St. Martin's Press). According to actor, comedian and author Richard Belzer (Homicide: Life on the Street), "If Xena, Warrior Princess, could come to life and tell her secrets, this would be her book."

Video Appearances

Video appearances include:
1996: Crook & Chase television show (February 26)
1995: Extra The Entertainment Magazine - Source: IMDb.com  Internet Movie Database
1994: Late Night with Conan O'Brien (TV series)- Herself –Episode dated 25 July 1994 (1994) … Herself 
1993: The War Room (documentary) - Herself 
1988: Tanner '88 (TV series)- Herself –The Boiler Room (1988)




