[[Arapaho language]]

CATEGORIES: Arapaho, Plains Algonquian languages, Indigenous languages of the North American Plains, Endangered Algic languages, Languages of Oklahoma

The Arapaho (Arapahoe) language (in Arapaho: Hinónoʼeitíít ) is one of the Plains Algonquian languages, closely related to Gros Ventre and other Arapahoan languages. It is spoken by the Arapaho people of Wyoming and Oklahoma. Speakers of Arapaho primarily live on the Wind River Reservation in Wyoming, though some have affiliation with the Cheyenne people living in western Oklahoma.

Dialects

Besawunena, only attested from a wordlist collected by Kroeber, differs only slightly from Arapaho, though a few of its sound changes resemble those seen in Gros Ventre. It had speakers among the Northern Arapaho as recently as the late 1920s.

Status

The exact number of Arapaho speakers is not precisely known; however it has been estimated that the language currently retains between 250  Currently, the language may be acquired by children, for a population estimate as recent as 2007 lists an increase to 1,000 speakers and notes that the language is in use in schools, bilingual education efforts begun on Wind River Reservation in the 1980s and the Arapaho Language Lodge, a successful immersion program, was established in 1993.ethnologue. Ethnologue deems it "threatened," meaning that some children are learning it but it is threatened by other languages and it may be losing speakers.

Classification

Arapaho is an Algonquian language of the Algic family.ethnologue.com/language/arp

Phonology

Among the sound changes in the evolution from Proto-Algonquian to Arapaho are the loss of Proto-Algonquian *k, followed by *p becoming either 

Vowels

At the level of pronunciation, Arapaho words cannot begin with a vowel, so where the underlying form of a word begins with a vowel, a prothetic 
Arapaho has a series of four short vowels 
Remarkably, unlike more than 98% of the world's languages, Arapaho has no low vowels, such as .Search the UPSID database for languages not having a low vowel
In addition, there are four diphthongs, 

Consonants

The consonant inventory of Arapaho is given in the table below. When writing Arapaho, .

Allophony

The phoneme /b/ (the voiced bilabial stop) has a voiceless allophone p that occurs before other consonants or at the end of a word. The plosives 

Consonant clusters

Consonant clusters in Arapaho can only be two consonants long. Consonant clusters do not occur word initially, and /hC/ is the only that occurs word finally. The only consonant cluster that is "base generated" (exists in the most underlying representation of words) is /hC/. At the "surface" (at the level of actual pronunciation), other clusters arise by phonological processes including vowel syncope, or by juxtaposition of morphemes.

Prosody

Arapaho is a pitch-accent language. There are two phonemic tones: high (marked with an acute accent) or "normal" (unmarked). The contrast can be illustrated with the pair hónoosóóʼ, "it is fancy" and honoosóóʼ, "it is raining." Long vowels and vowel sequences can carry a contour tone from high to low, as in hou3íne-, "to hang" (where the first syllable has a normal tone) versus hóu3íne-, "to float" (where the first syllable has a high+normal, or falling, tone). Although tonal contrasts are distinctive in Arapaho, minimal pairs such as those listed above are rare.

Grammar

Notes



Further reading




