[[Lemon of Troy]]

CATEGORIES: The Simpsons (season 6) episodes, 1995 television episodes

"Lemon of Troy" is the 24th episode of The Simpsons. p. 175. In the episode, the children of Springfield wage war on Shelbyville after their beloved lemon tree is stolen from them by Shelbyville children. The parents of the Springfield children take Ned's recreational vehicle (RV) to search for their boys, and when they find them, the children convince them to help recover the stolen tree from an impound lot.
It was written by Brent Forrester and directed by Jim Reardon. For the episode, the animators designed a non-polluted version of Springfield. It features cultural references to the 1984 song "When Doves Cry", the 1981 film The Road Warrior and the 1968 song "What a Wonderful World", and the title of the episode is a play on the name Helen of Troy from Greek mythology. The episode acquired a Nielsen rating of 8.1.

Plot

When Marge catches Bart vandalizing a town sidewalk by writing his name in wet cement, she lectures him on the importance of town pride. Afterwards, Bart realizes how wonderful it is living in Springfield. Consequently, however, Bart also becomes upset with anti-Springfield sentiments coming from the neighboring town of Shelbyville. Grampa explains that this rivalry can be traced back to the establishment of the two towns. This occurred when the founders Jebediah Springfield and Shelbyville Manhattan discovered they had irreconcilable differences regarding their visions for a perfect town, Springfield favoring promotion of chastity and Shelbyville advocating incestuous marriages between cousins.
The next day, Springfield's lemon tree is stolen by a couple of boys from Shelbyville. Taking his town pride to heart and swearing to keep it, Bart leads Milhouse, Nelson, Martin, Todd, and Database into Shelbyville to search for the tree and bring it back to Springfield. The group splits up and has a few misadventures. Bart goes undercover and infiltrates the children of Shelbyville by disguising himself. However, he is unable to obtain any information. Eventually, the Springfield children track down the tree to an impound lot (where one of the boys that stole the tree lives).
Back in Springfield, Homer, using Ned Flanders' RV, leads the fathers to find the boys. When the two groups meet, the boys tell their fathers of the tree being stolen, convincing them to help recover it. At the impound lot, the fathers demand the return of the tree, while the owner of the impound lot refuses and taunts them. Using a plan similar to the Trojan Horse, Bart steers the RV to the outside of the hospital. The RV is taken to the impound lot after it is found parked outside the hospital. When night falls, the Springfieldian boys and their fathers get out of the RV and tie the tree to the top. They are caught in the middle of this act by the owner but manage to escape. The tree, though considerably damaged during the escape, is returned to Springfield. The children of Springfield celebrate with lemonade, while those in Shelbyville drink turnip juice, much to their disgust.

Production

Brent Forrester wrote "Lemon of Troy", his second episode of The Simpsons. Jim Reardon directed it. Early on in the production stage, the writers decided that the leader of the Shelbyville children, Shelby, and his father should be modeled after Bart and Homer. Shelby's voice was provided by Tress MacNeille, and Shelby's father was voiced by Hank Azaria, who based his performance on Walter Matthau. Dan Castellaneta originally based his performance of Homer on Matthau.
The writers wanted to have the Springfield children find an area of Springfield that was not decimated, and the animators designed a version of Springfield that was very idyllic. They drew several scenes of the children running through non-polluted streams and woodlands.

Cultural references

In the episode, Milhouse recites a slightly paraphrased line from Prince's 1984 song "When Doves Cry". Bart identifies the number seven in Roman numerals by referring to a nonexistent sequel of the Rocky series, Rocky VII: Adrian's Revenge. The scene with Bart and his team sitting on a hill above the enemy camp and looking down at the captured tree being circled by children on bicycles bears a resemblance to an early scene in Mad Max 2.
thumb|The method of recovery of the lemon tree is a reference to the legend of the Trojan Horse. The title of the episode is a play on her name. The method of recovery of the tree is an echo of the Trojan Horse (a fact lost on Homer, who gleefully exclaims that "no one in history has ever done anything this clever").
While Shelby's father is towing Ned Flanders' RV, he can be heard singing "What a Wonderful World" by Louis Armstrong.

Reception

In its original American broadcast, "Lemon of Troy" finished 55th in the ratings for the week of May 11 to May 17, 1995, with a Nielsen rating of 8.1.






