[[Razorback]]

CATEGORIES: Fauna of the Southeastern United States, Invasive mammal species, Mammals of the United States, Pig breeds, American English, Invasive animal species in the United States, Feral pigs

Razorback and wild hog are  Americanisms, loosely applied to any type of feral pig, wild boar or cross in North America.  Common wild boar (Sus scrofa scrofa) are sometimes called "Russian boar" or "Russian razorbacks".  The term "Razorback" has also appeared in Australia, to describe such animals there.

Introduction to the Americas

Domestic pigs were first introduced to the Americas in the sixteenth century.
Christopher Columbus is known to have intentionally released domestic swine in the West Indies during his second voyage in order to provide future expeditions with a freely available food supply.
Hernando de Soto is known to have introduced Eurasian domestic swine to Florida in 1539,
The practice of introducing domestic pigs into the New World continued throughout the exploration periods of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. It is thought that the Eurasian wild boar (Sus scrofa scrofa), which originally ranged from Great Britain to European Russia may have also been introduced.
In South America, during the early twentieth century, free-ranging boars
Recently established Brazilian boar populations are not to be confused with long established populations of feral domestic pigs, which have existed mainly in the Pantanal for more than a hundred years, along with native peccaries. The demographic dynamics of the interaction between feral pig populations and those of the two native species of peccaries (Collared Peccary and White-lipped Peccary) is obscure and is being studied presently. It has been proposed that the existence of feral pigs could somewhat ease jaguar predation on peccary populations, as jaguars would show a preference for hunting pigs, when these are available.

21st century

Feral hogs are a growing problem in the U.S. and on the southern Prairies in Canada.Calgary Sun, March 23, 2013
As of 2013, the estimated population of  six million feral hogs causes billions of dollars in property damage every year in the U.S., both in wild lands and in agricultural ones. Because a swine's natural instinct is to root for tubers and seeds under the ground with its snout and tusks,  a sounder of razorbacks can reduce acres of potatoes or corn fields to nothing in just a few nights.  For commercial pig farmers, there is great concern that some of the hogs could be a vector for swine fever to return to the United States, which heretofore has been extinct in America since 1978. It is equally a public health concern that certain zoonotic diseases could jump to humans as waterborne illness: razorback sounders are known to defecate as they wallow in creek bottoms, washes, and other water sources that may be used or connected to sources of drinking water.
The present range of wild hogs includes all of the United States south of the 36th parallel North longitude. The range begins in the mountains surrounding  California and crosses over the mountains, continuing consistently much farther east towards the Louisiana bayous and forests, terminating in the entire Florida peninsula.  In the East, the range expands northward to include most of the forested areas and swamps of the Southeast, and from there goes up the spine of the Appalachian Mountains as far north as Upstate New York, with a growing presence in states bordering West Virginia and Kentucky. Currently Texas has the largest estimated population of 2.6  million razorbacks existing in 253 of its 254 counties.
Some aquatic animals like alligators and American crocodiles manage their numbers in the Southern swamps and South Florida, but as reptillian predators they are hemmed in by decreasing temperatures in fall and winter. Mid level predators, like  bobcats and coyotes, may occasionally take piglets or weakened animals, but are not large enough to challenge a full grown boar that can grow to be three times their weight. In Florida, razorbacks make up a significant portion of the Florida panther's diet.
Compounding the problem is the shortened list of natural predators available in the United States to suppress razorback numbers.  In North America, large predators that would suppress their numbers would include all subspecies of the gray wolf, the cougar,  the jaguar, the red wolf, the black bear, and the grizzly bear. Unfortunately each keystone predator presents problems: the jaguar is extirpated from California and the Southwest.  The grizzly, while native to most of the American West, is gone from the states that have huge hog infestations, namely Texas, Arizona, California, and New Mexico and the species has a very slow reproductive rate.  Wolf numbers are overall weak and expected to remain so as they slowly repopulate their range; only one has thus far been recorded as inhabiting California in spite of thousands of miles of good habitat.  The cougar is present in most of the West, but is gone from the East with no known populations east of Minnesota in the north and very thin numbers east of Houston in the South.    The black bear, as illustrated, is both predator and competitor.  Programs do exist to protect the weakened numbers of large predators in the US, but it is expected to take a very long time for these animals to naturally repopulate former habitat.
Alarmed at the overall population explosion, American hunters have in recent years taken to trapping and/or killing as many hogs as they can get their hands on, especially in Texas. Some have even turned the trapping and killing of razorbacks into small businesses. Legal restrictions on methods of hunting are fairly lax, as most state departments of wildlife openly acknowledge them as an ecological threat and some classify them as vermin: crossbows, professional grade bows and arrows,  high powered rifles, semi-automatic pistols or revolvers, and military grade knives are weapons of choice. Many states do not even have a bag limit.
Hunting with dogs is permitted and very common, and has been practiced in the Southeast for generations. Competitions for who can produce the fastest hog dog are rife in the South, with Uncle Earl's Hog Dog Trials in Louisiana being the crown jewel, held every summer since 1995.   Preferred scent dogs for catching feral pigs mostly are native breeds, and include the Louisiana Catahoula Leopard Dog, the Blue Lacy, all members of the Coonhound family, the Plott Hound, and the Blackmouth Cur; catch dogs typically are American Pit Bull Terriers and their crosses, and American Bulldogs.   The method of hunting has little variation and usually the hunter will send out his bay dogs to chase the hog until it wears it out, then a bigger dog will be sent out to catch and hold down the hog (which can get very aggressive) until the hunter can come and kill it.
No one management technique alone can be totally effective at controlling feral hog populations. Research published by the Texas A&M AgriLife Extension Service suggests that harvest levels of 66% are required to hold Texas feral hog populations steady. Best management practices suggest the use of corral traps which have the ability to capture the entire sounder of feral hogs.  Additional legal methods should be used as tool to further reduce feral hog populations in an area.

Appearances in popular culture

Following a long tradition of wild boar images in European heraldry, the razorback serves as an athletic image for the University of Arkansas in Fayetteville USA. The current live mascot's name is Tusk, a Russian boar. Fans of the team shout a chant derived from a domestic hog farmers' call.
Razorback is also the title of a 1984 Australian horror film directed by Russell Mulcahy, featuring a murderous and gigantic wild boar terrorizing the Australian outback. Other killer pig films include Pig Hunt (2008) by the late James Isaac and the Korean black comedy Chawz (2009).
An Australian razorback appears in the Disney animated film The Rescuers Down Under (1990). The Razorback is the name of a Space Marine tank in Warhammer 40,000. Razorback is the name of a boar-like humanoid subspecies in the popular massive muliplayer online role-playing game, World of Warcraft. The Razorback is also the name of an unlockable secondary item in Team Fortress 2. The item is portrayed as an Aboriginal shield that the Sniper character can wear on his back.



External Links




