[[Jim White (musician)]]

CATEGORIES: 1957 births, American alternative country singers, American country singers, Living people, Luaka Bop artists

Michael Davis Pratt (born March 10, 1957) known professionally as Jim White, is a Southern American singer-songwriter and guitarist. White's music can be loosely described as alternative country, but veers off in different, sometimes experimental directions with occasional nods
to Tom Waits and the literary narratives of Flannery O'Connor, Cormac McCarthy, and Harry Crews.

Early life

White was born in California but moved to Pensacola, Florida at the age of 5 . However, during a party organized by film school friends, White began to perform, and began writing material for an album soon afterward.

Musical career and performances

White's live shows, particularly when touring solo, can be characterized as off-beat, blending his playlist with open discussion with the audience, anecdotal storytelling derived from his own life experiences, all of which is typically humorous and insightful,with a deep sense of his feeling for the broken beauty of humanity. He has stated during shows that ultimately he wishes to return to the academic field, particularly as a professor, rather than continue as a professional, touring musician. Much of this is due to his family life, which he has stated takes priority in his life and is the reason he does not like touring very much. His sister, Katherine Pratt, teaches at Loyola Law School.
White's band has no fixed lineup, but regularly includes musicians such as Dan Nettles (Electric Guitar); Peter Alvanos, Robby Handley, Steve Bishop Maples (Bass); Rob McMaken (Dulcimer, Acoustic Guitar, Mandolin), Marlon Patton (Drums) and Mark Tulk (Keys).
White's albums often feature collaborations. On Wrong-Eyed Jesus, folk singer Victoria Williams sings on the track "Angel-Land"; British electronica trio Morcheeba produced and played on three tracks on No Such Place. Aimee Mann, Barenaked Ladies, and jazz guitarist Bill Frisell appear on Drill a Hole in That Substrate and Tell Me What You See, which was produced by Joe Henry, Tucker Martine, and Jim White himself. In an interview with David Byrne, White describes the making of the album.  
PRODUCING
In 2011, White produced a song, entitled "Simon Says," on Thugs and China Dolls, the sophomore record from Savannah-based singer-songwriter Dare Dukes. 
In 2012 White produced The Skipperdees debut record, Some Bright Mourning, a dark folk offering that received solid reviews (5 stars Flagpole magazine), and Alex Wright's dreamy sophomore offering Starlight Navigator.
In 2013 White teamed up with Packway Handle Band to record Take It Like A Man, a bluegrass/folk hybrid scheduled to be released in 2015.
Searching for the Wrong-Eyed Jesus is a 2004 BBC documentary, directed by Andrew Douglas, in which Jim White describes his idea of the rural South. The film features performances by like-minded musicians such as The Handsome Family, David Eugene Edwards of 16 Horsepower and Johnny Dowd.
White's song "Wordmule" was featured in "Blood Money" from season five of Breaking Bad.

Discography

Albums

EPs

Collaborations

Film

Visual Art Exhibits

"Deep Fried Ephemera", The Douglas Hyde Gallery, Dublin, Ireland 4 July – 18 August 2009
"Winter at SECCA" Southeastern Center for Contemporary Art, Winston-Salem, NC
Also participated in inaugural "Crossroads" series, performing with The South Memphis String Band, Feb. 19, 2011
"Scrapbook of a Fringe Dweller" Ogden Museum of Southern Art, New Orleans LA, Oct.7-Dec. 15 2013

Books

"Superwhite! / Wild-Eyed Tree," The Douglas Hyde Gallery, 2009.  In conjunction with art exhibit.  "Includes autobiographical text, Superwhite (Another True Story), and previously unreleased lyrics by Jim White. Also included are images of the exhibition and photographs by Jim White."[ref]
</ref>

Theater

Musical Score to "The Americans", a Sam Shepard play (with Dan Nettles), Juilliard School of Music NYC, 11 February 2010






