[[Comcast Cable]]

CATEGORIES: Comcast Corporation, Internet service providers of the United States, Telecommunications companies of the United States, Cable television companies of the United States, VoIP companies of the United States, Companies established in 1981

Comcast Cable Communications, LLC (d/b/a Xfinity) is the cable division of Comcast Corporation. Comcast Cable's CEO is Neil Smit, its chairman is Ralph J. Roberts, and its CFO is Catherine Avgiris.

Branding

In 2010, Comcast began promoting Xfinity, the company's rebranded trademark for triple play services in Comcast's largest markets, including the company's digital cable, cable Internet access, and cable telephone services and radio. philly. Accessed March 15, 2010.
The Xfinity rebranding has been controversial as a purported effort to sidestep the negativity of the Comcast brand. Reuters.Comcast Xfinity Rebranding Largely Laughed At, DSLreports. Dslreports.Gregory, Sean. (February 7, 2010) Comcast's New Name: Rated X?, Sean Gregory, Time Magazine, February 7, 2010. Time. In February 2010, TIME listed Xfinity at number 2 in their Top 10 Worst Corporate Name Changes list. (February 8, 2010) Top 10 Worst Corporate Name Changes, Claire Suddath, Time Magazine, February 8, 2010. Time.

Internet provider

Comcast is the largest provider of cable internet access in the US, servicing 40% of the market in 2011. According to the Comcast High Speed Internet terms of service, residential customers are provided with dynamic IP addresses. Comcast. Comcast's "PowerBoost" delivers bursts for all but their highest-end and lowest-end tiers, allowing subscribers to use all excess cable node capacity to speed up the first few seconds of downloads.
Comcast began offering internet services in late 1996, when it helped found the @Home Network, which sold internet service through Comcast's cable lines. The agreement continued after @Home's merger with Excite.
Currently available Comcast High-Speed Internet Plans: (pricing varies slightly)
Speeds are given in megabits per second, where 1 megabit = 0.125 megabytes = 125000 bytes.
Along with the price of internet subscriptions, Comcast charges users an additional $7.95/month to rent a cable modem.
In 2011, Comcast launched its "Internet Essentials" program, which offers low-cost internet service to families with children who qualify for free or reduced price school lunches. The plan launched at $10 per month, with discounts on a computer and free training are also provided.

Data cap

Initially, Comcast had policy of terminating broadband customers who use "excessive bandwidth", a term the company refused to define in its terms of service, which once said only that a customer's use should not "represent (in the sole judgment of Comcast) an overly large burden on the network". Company responses to press inquiries suggest a limit of several hundred gigabytes per month. Johnson, "Not so fast, broadband providers tell big users",  The Boston Globe"Say Good Night, Bandwidth Hog", The New York Times In September 2007, Comcast spokesman Charlie Douglas said the company defines "excessive use" as the equivalent of 30,000 songs, 250,000 pictures or 13 million emails in a month. Other company statements have said the limit varied from month to month, depending on the capacity of specific CMTS's, and that it affected only the top one-thousandth of high-speed Internet customers.
Comcast introduced a 250 GB monthly data transfer cap to its broadband service on October 1, 2008,Comcast 250GB Cap Goes Live October 1. Broadbandreports. combining both upload and download towards the monthly limit. If a user exceeds the cap three times within six months, the customer's residential services may be terminated for one year.net Frequently Asked Questions about Excessive Use. Help.net (October 1, 2008).
As the cap provoked a strongly negative reaction from some,

Network management and peering

In September 2007, a rumor emerged among tech blogs that Comcast was throttling or even blocking internet traffic transmitted via the BitTorrent protocol.
In 2010, Netflix signed an agreement with Level 3 Communications to carry its data. Shortly after, Level 3 entered a heated dispute concerning whether Level 3 would have to pay Comcast to bridge their respective networks, in an agreement known as peering.

Land line telephone

Comcast Digital Voice, now known as Xfinity Voice, is a telephone product offered  by Comcast Corporation.  Comcast offers CDV in both residential and business class and is packaged with Xfinity. The service was launched in 2005 in select markets, before being extended to all of Comcast's markets.
Xfinity Voice allows communication over the internet using VoIP, but uses a private network instead of a public IP address, which allows Comcast to prioritize the voice data during heavy traffic. In technical terms, on Comcast's Hybrid Fiber Coaxial network, calls are placed into individual Unsolicited Grant Service flows, based on DOCSIS 1.1 Quality of service standards. For the customer, this has the benefit of preventing network congestion from interfering with call quality. However, this separation of traffic into separate flows, or Smart pipe, has been seen by some as a violation of net neutrality, who call instead for equal treatment of all data, or dumb pipe.
Because telephone services over VoIP are not automatically tied to a physical address, Xfinity Voice utilizes E911 to help 911 service operators to automatically locate the source of the 911 call. Voice calls are delivered as a digital stream over the Comcast network, signal is converted to analog plain old telephone service lines at the cable modem, which outputs on standard analog RJ-11 jacks.
After trial runs in 2005, Comcast rolled out its Digital Voice service to all its markets in 2006. Comcast's older service, Comcast Digital Phone, continued to offer service for a brief period, until Comcast shut it down around late 2007.
Comcast has transitioned from traditional land line service to VoIP style delivery. Beginning in 2005, Comcast launched its VoIP service, Comcast Digital Voice. As of the end of 2013, Comcast has 10.7 million voice customers.
At the start of 2012, Comcast stood as the United States' third-largest residential telephone provider. 5. The company first gained status as the USA's third largest phone company in 2009. See: Comcast Now Third Largest Phone Company, DSLreports. At that time the company supplied 9.34 million residential telephone lines.

Cable television

Comcast's cable television customers peaked in 2007, with about 24.8 million customers.
2012 pricing: (taken from Scranton, PA, varies slightly by region)
In addition to the prices of subscriptions, since July 2012, Comcast charges a Regulatory Recovery Fee of varying size in order to "recover additional costs associated with governmental programs."

Retransmission fees

Beginning in the mid 2000s, television stations increasingly required cable companies like Comcast to pay retransmission fees in exchange for permission to broadcast their content.
Since the rise of retransmission fees, distributors like Comcast pay substantial fees for retransmitting broadcast television, which is free over the air for consumers. Comcast has instated a $1.50 Broadcast TV Fee to cover part of the cost of getting permission from stations to retransmit the free stations, itemized separately for consumers. Comcast's subsidiary, NBCUniversal, is one of several broadcasters currently in legal dispute with Aereo, over the question of whether the company is a retransmitter (which would require it to pay retransmission fees).

Home security and automation

Comcast now offers a home security and home automation service known as Xfinity Home, in some of its service areas. This service provides residential customers a monitored burglar and fire alarm, surveillance cameras, and home automation.

Comcast Business

In addition to residential consumers, Comcast also serves businesses as customers, targeting both small businesses with fewer than 20 employees and also mid-sized businesses of 20–500 employees. In 2009, Minneapolis–Saint Paul became the first city in which Comcast Business Class offered 100 Mbit/s Internet service, which includes Microsoft Communication Services.[ref]
Comcast Launches 100 Mbps High-Speed Internet Service for Businesses in the Twin Cities, Business Wire press release, September 8, 2009.[/ref] Comcast Business Class Internet service does not have a bandwidth usage cap.
Comcast Business services were initially sold exclusively through direct sales employees. In March 2011, Comcast created an indirect sales channel called the Solution Provider Program, a comprehensive indirect channel program that enables telecommunications consultants and system integrators to sell Comcast's services such as Business Class Internet, Voice, and high-capacity Ethernet services to small and mid-market businesses. The program offers recurring commissions for sales partners based on monthly revenue, and Comcast will provide, install, manage and bill for these services. For the initial launch of the Solutions Provider Program, Comcast enlisted three national master representatives—Telarus, based in Salt Lake City, Utah; Intelisys, based in Petaluma, California; and Telecom Brokerage Inc (TBI), based in Chicago. Sub-agent sales partners must work with one of these three partners in the early stages of the program.




