[[Queluz, São Paulo]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places in São Paulo (state), Populated places established in 1876

Queluz is a municipality in the state of São Paulo in Brazil. The population in 2003 was 9,544, the density was 38.33/km² and the area is . The area to the northeast marks the boundaries with two other states, Minas Gerais to the north and Rio de Janeiro to the east.
The city came from a village of Indians Puris in the year of 1800.	
The village grew up around a chapel built by Indians and slaves under the leadership of father Francisco das Chagas Lima, who was sent to evangelize the Indians Puris, where he stands today is the Mother Church. Did the city in 1876. His patron is St. John the Baptist and the name of Queluz is a tribute to the Imperial Family, with the name of the town where he was born D. Pedro I. The municipality has to do with the culture of coffee and that left major milestones rural, with the headquarters, still existing farms of the Sertão, São José, Restauração, Bela Aurora, Regato, Cascata and other. 

Population history

Coat of arms

Its coat of arms has a shield that is divided into four.

Flag

Its flag features a cross with the colours of navy blue on the top-left and the bottom-right and red squares on the bottom-left and the top-right with its coat of arms in the middle.

Climate

Its climate is tropical, presenting average minimum of 16 and maximum averages of 26.

Economy

The economic development of the municipality is related to farming and the production of toys in wood, leather, embroidery.
The activities of the secondary sector are that more has contributed to the economic development of the region.
The deployment in the region's main steel from Brazil, the CSN (Companhia Siderurgica Nacional) has entailed many advantages to the industrial structure of the region since many of the industries that it is installed, you are complementary or use its products on a large scale.
The inauguration of the factory of Volkswagen trucks in Resende, 32km away from Queluz, and the construction of the Peugeot factory in Resende also are two important milestones in the industrial development of the region.
The industries that we establish in the municipality of Queluz can count on exemption for a period of ten years ISS municipal taxes (Tax Services) IPTU (Territorial Urban Property Tax). The council also support possible negotiations with the state and federal governments as the reduction of other taxes.
Having designed the installation of new industries, the Mayor might donate land with infrastructure already available.

Turistic points

RAILWAY STATION: 	
Built in 1874 to replace the other destroyed by fire. In 1999 he was transferred to the city, is being prepared to house a future Cultural Area. Located on Rua Tenente Manoel França.
BUILDING THE DESQUE:
Dating from 1830, in Baroque style, was built to serve as the Parish House, later hosted the Santa Casa. Today, it is headquarters of the Secretaries of Education, Culture and Tourism, the Municipal Library and Museum Malba Tahan (great writer and mathematician, author of the book Maktub, among others). Located at the Praça Padre Francisco das Chagas Lima.
BUILDING THE FORUM:
Built in 1900, in colonial style, has also served as Chain Public, Police Station, Posting Police Headquarters of the former Public Force of the state. Located at the Praça Portugal.
SCHOOL BUILDING GROUP:
Inaugurated in 1915, in style of the time, today houses the School of Education Foundation Hall Capitão Jose Carlos de Oliveira Garcez.
HOUSE OF MALBA TAHAN:
Great writer and mathematician, who lived until adolescence in Queluz, author of several books famous as Maktub and The Man who Calculava. Located near the Church.
BRIDG ON THE RIO PARAIBA DO SUL:
Built in 1933, replacing the old bridge (its foundations are still visible) exploded for "Forças Legalistas" in Revolution of 1932, to prevent the movement of forces of the government of the time.
CHURCH OD SÃO JOÃO BATISTA:
Construction dated 1830, on an existing chapel, still retains its original features. It houses an image of São João Batista, patron of the city, carved in wood and coming of Portugal.
HEADQUARTERS OF FARM RESTAURAÇÃO:
Built in 1850, the foot of the Serra da Mantiqueira, in the cycle of coffee, it is private property and served as a landing for the Emperor D. Pedro, when of your trip. 
PICO PEDRA DA MINA:
The highest point of the Mantiqueira range and 4 of Brazil, which still has massive rocky other points above the  high. Own for the practitioners of treking, hiking, climbing and camping wild. The site is not yet open for visitation because of the difficulty of access. The council demanded the recognition and installation of the National Park of Stone's Mina. Access by Cascadura Farm.
MIRANTE DO CRISTO:
Image of Christ the Redeemer that with open arms bless the city. Can be seen throughout the city and part of the Vale do Paraiba and the Serra da Mantiqueira. Access by car for the Road Queluz / Areias.




