[[Mayor of Christchurch]]

CATEGORIES: Mayors of Christchurch, Lists of mayors of places in New Zealand

The Mayor of Christchurch is the head of the municipal government of Christchurch, New Zealand, and presides over the Christchurch City Council.  The mayor is directly elected using a First Past the Post electoral system. The current mayor, Lianne Dalziel, was first elected in the October 2013 mayoral election.

History

Chairmen of the Town Council

Christchurch became a city by Royal charter on 31 July 1856; the first in New Zealand. Since 1862, chairmen were in charge of local government. Five chairmen presided in the initial years:

Mayors of the City Council

The town council held a meeting on 10 June 1868 to elect its first mayor. In those days, councillors were elected for three-year terms, and once a year elected one of their group as mayor, i.e. the position was not elected at large (by the voting public) as is the case today.
The following councillors attended the 10 June meeting: William Wilson, James Purvis Jameson, T. Tombs, George Ruddenklau, Henry Thomson, W. A. Sheppard, William Calvert
Hence, the last chairman (William Wilson) became the first mayor in 1868. The first chairman (John Hall) became mayor 44 years later in 1906. There have been 45 holders of the position. The longest-serving was Sir Hamish Hay, who held the post for 15 years (5 terms). The shortest mayoralty was by Tommy Taylor in 1911, who died three months after being elected. Wilson's term, at just over six months, was the second shortest. Vicki Buck and the current mayor, Lianne Dalziel, have been the only female mayors so far.
Initially, councillors elected one of their own as mayor towards the end of the year, and the role was usually awarded to the most senior councillor. Most elections were unanimous, and the newly elected mayor was instantly regarded as the head of the council. The system changed with the introduction of The Municipal Corporations Acts Amendment Act, 1875, as that legislation stipulated that mayors had to be elected at large (i.e. by eligible voters).
Five mayors have held non-consecutive terms:

Recent mayors

Three former mayors are alive:
The most recent deaths were:

List of Mayors of Christchurch

List of Deputy-Mayors of Christchurch

The position of Deputy Mayor was established in 1917. In the first meeting of the newly elected council on 7 May 1917, Alfred Williams Five deputy-mayors were later elected as mayors: John Beanland, James Arthur Flesher, Dan Sullivan, Ernest Andrews, and George Manning. Four deputy-mayors, including the current holder of the office, were mayors before they served as deputies: Henry Thacker, John Archer, Robert Macfarlane, and Vicki Buck.



Notes




