[[The Rocky Horror Picture Show]]

CATEGORIES: Rocky Horror, 1975 films, 1970s comedy horror films, 1970s LGBT-related films, 1970s musical comedy films, American films, American comedy horror films, American LGBT-related films, British LGBT-related films, American musical comedy films, English-language films, Films directed by Jim Sharman, Cross-dressing in film, Dance films, Films based on musicals, Incest in film, LGBT-related comedy films, LGBT-related horror films, LGBT-related musical films, Mad scientist films, United States National Film Registry films, 20th Century Fox films, Films set in country houses

The Rocky Horror Picture Show is a 1975 musical comedy horror film adaptation of the musical stage production, The Rocky Horror Show, originally conceived by Richard O'Brien who co-wrote the film's screenplay with director, Jim Sharman. The production is a humorous tribute to the science fiction and horror B movies of the late 1930s through early 1970s. It stars Tim Curry, Susan Sarandon and Barry Bostwick along with cast members from the original Royal Court Theatre, Roxy Theatre and Belasco Theatre productions.
The film was shot at Bray Studios, and an old country estate called Oakley Court, in Berkshire, England. The estate is best known for its use in Hammer Horror productions. Twentieth Century Fox insisted on casting the two characters of Brad and Janet with American actors, Barry Bostwick and Susan Sarandon. Some of the costumes from the film were originally used in the stage production. Props and set pieces were reused from old Hammer films. Although the film is both a send-up and tribute to many of the science fiction and horror movies from the 1930s up to the 1970s, costume designer Sue Blane had not conducted any research in designing for the film. Blane believes that the costumes in the film directly impacted on the development of punk music fashion.
Although largely ignored upon release, it soon gained notoriety as a midnight movie when audiences began participating with the film at the Waverly Theater in New York City in 1976. Audience members returned to the cinemas frequently and talked back to the screen and began dressing as the characters, spawning similar performance groups across the United States. Still in limited release nearly four decades after its premiere, it has the longest-running theatrical release in film history. Today, the film has a large international cult following and is one of the most well-known and financially successful midnight movies of all time. It was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress in 2005. The film's creative team also produced Shock Treatment, a stand alone movie using the characters of Brad and Janet and featuring many of the same cast.

Plot

A criminologist narrates the tale of the newly engaged couple Brad Majors and Janet Weiss who find themselves lost and with a flat tire on a cold and rainy late November evening. Seeking a telephone, the couple walk to a nearby castle where they discover a group of strange and outlandish people who are holding an Annual Transylvanian Convention. They are soon swept into the world of Dr. Frank N. Furter, a self-proclaimed transvestite from Transsexual, Transylvania. The ensemble of convention attendees also includes servants Riff Raff, his sister Magenta, and a groupie named Columbia.
In his lab, Frank claims to have discovered the "secret to life itself". His creation, Rocky, is brought to life. The ensuing celebration is soon interrupted by Eddie, an ex-delivery boy, partial brain donor to Rocky, and Columbia's lover, who rides out of a deep freeze on a motorcycle. In a jealous rage, Frank corners him and kills him with an ice axe. He then departs with Rocky to a bridal suite.
Brad and Janet are shown to separate bedrooms where each is visited and seduced by Frank, who poses as Brad (when visiting Janet) and then as Janet (when visiting Brad). Janet, upset and emotional, wanders off to look for Brad, whom she discovers, via a television monitor, is in bed with Frank. She then discovers Rocky, cowering in his birth tank, hiding from Riff Raff, who has been tormenting him. While tending to his wounds, Janet becomes intimate with Rocky, as Magenta and Columbia watch from their bedroom monitor.
After discovering that his creation is missing, Frank returns to the lab with Brad and Riff Raff, where Frank learns that an intruder has entered the building. Brad and Janet's old high school science teacher, Dr. Everett Scott, has come looking for his nephew, Eddie. Frank suspects that Dr. Scott investigates UFOs for the government. Upon learning of Brad and Janet's connection to Dr. Scott, Frank suspects them of working for him. Frank, Dr. Scott, Brad, and Riff Raff then discover Janet and Rocky together under the sheets in Rocky's birth tank, upsetting Frank and Brad. Magenta interrupts the reunion by sounding a massive gong and stating that dinner is prepared.
Rocky and the guests are served dinner, which they soon realize has been prepared from Eddie's mutilated remains. Janet runs screaming into Rocky's arms and is slapped and chased through the halls of the castle by a jealous Frank. Janet, Brad, Dr. Scott, Rocky, and Columbia all meet in Frank's lab, where Frank captures them with the Medusa Transducer, transforming them into statues. They are then forced to perform a live cabaret floor show with Frank as the leader.
Riff Raff and Magenta interrupt the performance, revealing themselves and Frank to be aliens from the planet Transsexual in the galaxy of Transylvania. They stage a coup and announce a plan to return to their home world. In the process, they kill Columbia, Rocky and Frank, who has "failed his mission". They release Brad, Janet, and Dr. Scott, then depart by lifting off in the castle itself. The survivors are then left crawling in the dirt, and the narrator concludes that the human race is equivalent to insects crawling on the planet's surface.

Cast

Production

Concept and development

Richard O'Brien, a Briton raised in New Zealand, was living in London as an unemployed actor in the early 1970s. He wrote most of The Rocky Horror Show during one winter just to occupy himself.
O'Brien showed a portion of the unfinished script to Australian director Jim Sharman, who decided to direct it at the small experimental space Upstairs at the Royal Court Theatre, Sloane Square, Chelsea, which was used as a project space for new work. O'Brien had appeared briefly in Andrew Lloyd Webber's Jesus Christ Superstar, directed by Sharman and the two also worked together in Sam Shepard's The Unseen Hand. Sharman would bring in production designer Brian Thomson.
The Rocky Horror Show would eventually play in the United States in Los Angeles and New York City as well as other cities.

Filming and locations

The film was shot at Bray Studios, and Oakley Court, a country house in Berkshire, England and Elstree Studios  Filming took place during autumn, which made conditions worse, and during filming, Sarandon fell ill with pneumonia. Filming of the laboratory scene and the title character's creation occurred on 30 October 1974. 16 
The movie is both a send-up and tribute to many of the science fiction and horror movies from the 1930s up to the 1970s.

Costumes, make-up and props

In the stage productions, actors generally did their own makeup. However, for the film, the producers chose Pierre La Roche, who had previously been a makeup artist for Mick Jagger, to redesign the makeup for each character. In "Rocky Horror; From Concept to Cult", designer Sue Blane discusses the Rocky Horror costumes' influence on punk music style. "was a big part of the build up punk." She states that ripped fishnet stockings, glitter and coloured hair were directly attributable to Rocky Horror.
Some of the costumes from the film were originally used in the stage production. Props and set pieces were reused from old Hammer productions and others. The tank and dummy from "The Revenge of Frankenstein" were used for the Character of Rocky's birth. These steps, while cost cutting, also enhanced the status of the film with so many references to older productions.
Originally, costume designer Sue Blane wasn't keen on designing for the film until she realized Tim Curry, an old friend, was doing the show. Tim and Blane had worked together in Glasgow's Citizen Theatre in a production of "The Maids", where Curry had worn a woman's corset in the production. Blane arranged it with the theatre to loan her the corset from the other production for Rocky Horror. Blane admits that she did not conduct research for her designing and had never seen a science fiction film, and is acutely aware that her costumes for Brad and Janet may have been generalizations.
The budget for the film's costumes was $1600,   far more than the stage production budget, but having to double up on costumes for filming was expensive. For filming, corsets for the finale had to be doubled for the pool scene with one version drying while the other was worn on set. While many of the costumes are exact replicas from the stage productions, other costumes were new to filming such as Columbia's gold sequined tuxedo and top hat and Magenta's maid's uniform.
Costume designer Sue Blane was amazed by the recreation and understanding of her designs by fans. When she first heard that people were dressing up she thought it would be tacky but was very surprised to see the depth at which the fans went to recreate her designs. Rocky Horror fan, Mina Credeur, who designs costumes and performs as Columbia for Houston's performance group, states that "the best part is when everyone leaves with a big smile on their face", noting that there's "such a kitschiness and campiness that it seems to be winking at you".

Title sequence

The film starts with the screen fading to black and over-sized, disembodied female lips appear overdubbed with a male voice, The opening scene and song, "Science Fiction, Double Feature" consists of the lips of Patricia Quinn (who appears in the film later as the character Magenta), but has the vocals of actor and Rocky Horror creator, Richard O'Brien (who appears as Magenta's brother Riff Raff). The lyrics reference science fiction and horror films of the past and list several film titles from the 1930s to the 1970s, including, The Day the Earth Stood Still, Flash Gordon, The Invisible Man, King Kong, It Came from Outer Space, Doctor X, Forbidden Planet, Tarantula, The Day of the Triffids, Curse of the Demon, When Worlds Collide and The Bride of Frankenstein. The disembodied lips are featured on posters and other merchandise for the film, with the tag line "A Different Set of Jaws", a spoof of the poster for the film Jaws which was also produced in 1975.

Music

The soundtrack was released in 1975 by Ode Records and produced by Richard Hartley. The album peaked at #49 on the Billboard 200 in 1978.

Release

The film opened in the United Kingdom on August 14, 1975 and in the United States on September 26, premiering at the UA Westwood in Los Angeles, California. It did well at that location, but not elsewhere. Prior to the midnight screenings' success, the film was withdrawn from its eight opening cities due to very small audiences, and its planned New York City opening on Halloween night was cancelled. 11 Fox re-released it around college campuses on a double-bill with another rock music film parody, Brian De Palma's Phantom of the Paradise, but again it drew small audiences. 
With Pink Flamingos (1972) and Reefer Madness (1936) making money in midnight showings nationwide, an executive at 20th Century Fox, Tim Deegan, was able to talk distributors into midnight screenings,
The film is considered to be the longest-running release in film history. 

Broadcast and home video

A Super 8 version of selected scenes of the film was made available. 77 In 1983 Ode Records released "The Rocky Horror Picture Show, Audience Par-Tic-I-Pation Album", recorded at the 8th Street Playhouse. The recording consisted of the film's audio and the standardized call-backs from the audience.

Reception and reaction

Critical reception

Roger Ebert noted that when released, The Rocky Horror Picture Show was "ignored by pretty much everyone, including the future fanatics who would eventually count the hundreds of times they'd seen it".  He considered it more a "long-running social phenomenon" than a movie, rating it 2 out of 4 stars.  
Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 78%.
In 2005, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".

Cult phenomenon

=New York City origins=

The Rocky Horror Picture Show helped shape conditions of cult film's transition from art-house to grind-house style. The film developed a cult following in 1976 at the Waverly Theatre in New York, which developed into a standardized ritual. According to J. Hoberman, author of Midnight Movies, it was after five months into the film's midnight run when lines began to be shouted by the audience. Louis Farese Jr., a normally quiet teacher who, upon seeing the character Janet place a newspaper over her head to protect herself from rain yelled, "Buy an umbrella you cheap bitch". This self-proclaimed "counter point dialogue" became standard practice and was repeated nearly verbatim at each screening. Performance groups became a staple at Rocky Horror screenings due in large part to the prominent New York City fan cast, and fans are credited with the talk back lines. 
The performances of the audience was scripted and actively discouraged improvising, being conformist in a similar way to the repressed characters. 
On Halloween in 1976, people attended in costume and talked back to the screen, and by mid-1978, Rocky Horror was playing in over 50 locations on Fridays and Saturdays at midnight. Newsletters were published by local performance groups, and fans gathered for Rocky Horror conventions. By the end of 1979, there were twice-weekly showings at over 230 theatres. A publication, "The Transylavanian" printed a number of issues, and a semi-regular poster magazine was published as well as an official magazine.

=Los Angeles, Hollywood=

The Los Angeles area performance groups originated in 1977 at the Fox Theatre, where Michael Wolfson won a look-alike contest as Frank N. Furter, and won another at the Tiffany Theater on Sunset Boulevard. Wolfson's group eventually performed in all of the LA area theaters screening Rocky Horror, including the Balboa Theater in Balboa, The Cove at Hermosa Beach and The Sands in Glendale. He was invited to perform at the Sombrero Playhouse in Phoenix, Arizona. At the Tiffany Theatre, the audience performance cast had the theater's full cooperation; the local performers entered early and without charge. The fan playing Frank for this theatre was a transgender performer. 

=San Francisco=

In San Francisco, Rocky Horror moved from one location to the Strand Theatre located near the Tenderloin on Market Street.

=Fan following=

Rocky Horror is one of the last few western rites left that pertain to the carnivalesque. 
The Rocky Horror Picture Show has a global following and remains popular well into the 21st century.

Sequels

In 1981, Sharman reunited with O'Brien to do Shock Treatment. This stand-alone feature was not a direct sequel to the original film.
Ten years later, O'Brien wrote another script intended as a direct sequel to the cult classic entitled Revenge of the Old Queen. Producer Michael White had hoped to begin work on the production and described the script as being "... in the same style as the other one. It has reflections of the past in it."

Cultural impact

The Rocky Horror Picture Show has been featured in a number of other feature films and television series over the years. Rocky Horror themed episodes of Glee, The Drew Carey Show, and That 70s Show were broadcast and films like Vice Squad, and The Perks of Being a Wallflower  The 1980 film Fame featured the audience, in some cases reciting their call back lines to the screen, dancing the Time Warp,
"The Rocky Horror Glee Show" aired on October 26, 2010 as part of the second season of the TV series Glee, which recreated several scenes from the film, including the opening credits, and featured Barry Bostwick and Meat Loaf in cameo roles. 
Rocky Horror remains a cultural phenomenon in both the U.S. and U.K..






Bibliography




