[[Campaign for Real Ale]]

CATEGORIES: Beer organisations, Consumer organizations, Organizations established in 1971, Beer and breweries in the United Kingdom, Alcohol in the United Kingdom, Organisations based in Hertfordshire, 1971 establishments in the United Kingdom

The Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA) is an independent voluntary consumer organisation based in St Albans, England, whose main aims are promoting real ale, real cider and the traditional British pub. It is now the largest single-issue consumer group in the UK, and is a founding member of the European Beer Consumers Union (EBCU).

History

The organisation was founded in 1971 in Dún Chaoin, Kerry, Ireland by Graham Lees, Bill Mellor, Michael Hardman, and Jim Makin, who were opposed to the growing mass production of beer and the homogenisation of the British brewing industry.  Other early influential members included Christopher Hutt, author of Death of the English Pub, who succeeded Hardman as chairman, Frank Baillie, author of The Beer Drinker's Companion, and later the current Good Beer Guide editor, Roger Protz. The original name was the Campaign for the Revitalisation of Ale.

Aims

CAMRA's stated aims are to:
CAMRA's campaigns include promoting small brewing and pub businesses, reforming licensing laws, reducing tax on beer, and stopping continued consolidation among local British brewers.  
CAMRA does not support the promotion and sale of keg based craft beer in the UK. CAMRA's Internal Policy document states that real ale can only be served from cask without the use of additional carbonation. This policy means that "any beer brand which is produced in both cask and keg versions" is not admitted to CAMRA festivals or supported by CAMRA.

Organisation

In 2009, CAMRA announced that it had reached the 100,000 members mark and subsequently went on to pass the 150,000 members mark in 2013. Member benefits include a monthly newspaper, What's Brewing and a quarterly BEER magazine, and free or reduced price admission to CAMRA-organised beer festivals. In recent times CAMRA has obtained benefits for its members from some commercial organisations and increasingly some licensed premises offer members price reductions on real ale (and sometimes cider and perry). 
CAMRA is organised on a federal basis, with numerous independent local branches, each covering a particular geographical area of the UK, that contribute to the central body of the organisation based in St Albans. It is governed by a voluntary unpaid national executive, elected by the membership.
The current National Chairman is Colin Valentine, who took over from Paula Waters in February 2010. The Chief Executive is Mike Benner.
CAMRA has established influence at national government level, including English Heritage, and has been designated by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry as a "super-complainant" to the Office of Fair Trading.

Events and publications

CAMRA publishes the Good Beer Guide, an annually compiled directory of its recommended pubs and brewers; the Good Cider Guide, an occasionally compiled directory of pubs that sell real Cider; the Good Bottled Beer Guide, an occasionally compiled review of real ale in a bottle.
CAMRA members receive a monthly newspaper called What's Brewing and a quarterly colour magazine called Beer.
It also runs the Great British Beer Festival, a yearly event held in London at which a large selection of cask ales and ciders are tasted.  It also maintains a National Inventory of Historic Pub Interiors to help bring greater recognition and protection to Britain's most historic pubs. In 2013 CAMRA launched public access to a national pub database website called Whatpub. click here for the website

Festivals

CAMRA supports and promotes numerous beer and cider festivals around the country each year, which are organised by local CAMRA branches around the UK. Generally, each festival charges an entry fee which varies depending upon the area, and either covers entry only or includes a commemorative ⅓, ½ or 1 pint glass sporting the details of the festival. A festival programme is usually also provided, listing the drinks available for tasting and providing a brief description of each beverage.List of upcoming CAMRA beer festivals
The Campaign also organises the annual Great British Beer Festival in August, held in the Great Hall Kensington Olympia, London, having been a few years at Earl's Court .Great British Beer Festival

Awards

CAMRA presents awards for beers and pubs, such as the National Pub of the Year, in which approximately 4,000 active CAMRA members from 200 local branches vote for their favourite pub of the year. The branch winners are entered into 16 regional competitions which are then visited by several individuals who select the ones they like best. There are also the Pub Design Awards, which are held in association with English Heritage and The Victorian Society.  These comprise several categories, including new build, refurbished and converted pubs.  The best known CAMRA award is the Champion Beer of Britain, which is selected at the Great British Beer Festival, other awards include the Champion Beer of Scotland and the Champion Beer of Wales.

National Beer Scoring Scheme

CAMRA developed the "National Beer Scoring Scheme" (NBSS) as an easy to use scheme for judging beer quality in pubs, to assist CAMRA branches in selecting pubs for the Good Beer Guide. The person filling in the form records their name, date, the pub, the beer and the score.
The scores range from 0, meaning that no real ale is available; increasing in increments of 0.5 through 2, which signifies an average beer that is drunk without calling attention to itself in either a positive or negative manner; up to 5, which signifies a perfect beer. CAMRA members may also input their beer scores on line via the CAMRA website Whatpub.

Pub heritage group

The "CAMRA Pub Heritage Group" is a group established to identify, record and help protect pub interiors of historic and/or architectural importance, and seeks to get them listed, if not already.
The group maintains two inventories of "Heritage pubs", the National Inventory (NI), which contains only those pubs that have been maintained in their original condition (or have been modified very little) for at least 30 years, but usually since at least World War II. The second, larger inventory is the Regional Inventory (RI), which is broken down by county and contains both those pubs listed in the NI and other pubs that are not eligible for the NI, for reasons such as having been overly modified, but are still considered historically important, or have particular architectural value.
The NI contains 289 pubs .

LocAle

With the main aims in mind, the group launched the LocAle scheme in 2007 which was developed by Steve Westby 'Check your beers urges LocAle creator' , What's Brewing, August 2010 issue of the Nottingham branchCAMRA LocAle (accessed 25 July 2013) to help promote locally brewed beers and also help with environmental issues. The scheme functions slightly differently in each area, and is managed by each branch, but the overall rule is that each participating pub is allowed to purchase beer from whatever brewery they wish, but if the beer is to be promoted as a 'LocAle' it must come from a brewery within a predetermined number of miles (which is set by each CAMRA branch, but generally is around 20 or 25 miles,LocAle - More Information & Downloads for Licensees (accessed 25 July 2013) although, the North London branch has set it at 30 milesCAMRA North London - LocAle (accessed 6 September 2010)) from brewery to pub door,'LocAle boosts local tourism', What's Brewing, September 2010 issue even if it comes from a distribution centre further away; in addition, each participating pub must keep at least one LocAle for sale at all times.








