[[Klotski]]

CATEGORIES: Puzzles, Mechanical puzzles, Combination puzzles, Puzzle video games, Microsoft Entertainment Pack, Wooden toys

Klotski (from Polish klocki—wooden blocks) is a sliding block puzzle. The name may refer to a specific layout of ten blocks, or in a more global sense to refer to a whole group of similar sliding-block puzzles where the aim is to move a specific block to some predefined location.

Rules

Like other sliding-block puzzles, several different-sized block pieces are placed inside a box, which is generally in 4×5 size. Among the blocks, there is a special one (usually the largest) which must be moved to a special area designated by the game board. The player is not allowed to remove blocks, and may only slide blocks horizontally and vertically. Common goals are to solve the puzzle with a minimum number of moves or in a minimum amount of time.

Naming

right|204px|thumb|A screenshot of the "forget me not" level in the Windows Entertainment Pack version of the gameThe earliest known reference of the name Klotski originates from the computer version for Windows 3.1 by ZH Computing in 1991, which was also included in Microsoft Windows Entertainment Pack. The sliding puzzle had already been trademarked and sold under different names for decades, including Psychoteaze and Ego Buster. There was no known widely used name for the category of sliding puzzles described before Klotski appeared.

History

It is still unknown which one is the original, or (in turn) if it has evolved from some other sliding-block puzzle, say, the 15 puzzle, which enjoyed immense popularity in western countries during late 19th century. There are many confusing and conflicting claims, and several countries claim to be the ultimate origin of this game.

Solving

The minimum number of moves for the original puzzle is 81, which is verified by computer to be the absolute minimum for the default starting layout, if you consider sliding a piece two positions in the same direction to be a single move.
The first published 81-step solution is by Martin Gardner, in Feb 1964 issue of Scientific American. In the article he discussed the following puzzles (with Edward Hordern classification code in parentheses): Pennant Puzzle (C19), L'Âne Rouge (C27d), Line Up the Quinties (C4), Ma's Puzzle (D1) and a form of Stotts' Baby Tiger Puzzle (F10).
For earliest published solutions (not optimal solution), currently known is from Chinese educator Xǔ Chún Fǎng, in his book 數學漫談. (translation: Mathematics Tidbits; Kāi Mínɡ Shū Diàn, March 1952) His solution involves 100 steps.

Variation

There are several variations of this game, some with names specific to the culture of certain countries, some with different arrangement of blocks.
It is still unknown whether these variations affected each other and how.

Block name variation

The following variations basically have the same layout and block arrangement, varying only in name (human, animal, or others), usually with some sort of story behind the names. It is completely unknown whether they share the same origin, though this is highly possible as they are identical to each other.

=Huarong Dao=

Huarong Dao (alternatively named Huarong Path or Huarong Trail, Chinese name: 華容道) is the Chinese variation, based on a fictitious story in the historical novel Romance of the Three Kingdoms about the warlord Cao Cao retreating through Huarong Trail (in present-day Jianli County, Jingzhou, Hubei) after his defeat at the Battle of Red Cliffs in the winter of 208/209 CE during the late Eastern Han Dynasty. He encountered an enemy general, Guan Yu, who was guarding the path and waiting for him. Guan Yu spared Cao Cao and allowed the latter to pass through Huarong Trail on account of the generous treatment he received from Cao in the past. The largest block in the game is named "Cao Cao".

=Daughter in the box=

The Daughter in the Box (Japanese name: hakoiri musume) wood puzzle depicts an "innocent young girl, who knows nothing of the world" trapped in a building. The largest piece is named "daughter", and other blocks are given names of other family members (like father, mother and so on).
Yet another variation in Japan uses name of pieces from shogi.

=L'âne rouge=

In France it is well known as L'âne rouge. It features a red donkey (the largest piece) trying to escape a maze of fences and pens to get to its carrots. However, there is no known and documented record of its first existence in France.

=Khun Chang Khun Phaen=

This is a variation from Thailand. Khun Phaen is a famous character in Thai legend, and the game is named after the epic poem Khun Chang Khun Phaen, in which the character is imprisoned. The game depicts Khun Phaen breaking out of the prison by overcoming its nine sentries.
There is a slight difference between Khun Chang Khun Phaen and the standard layout - the middle 2 1×1 blocks are moved to bottom. Other than that, all other blocks are the same. The origin of this variation is unknown.

Block arrangement variation

In this context, the "basic" arrangement is assumed to be a 4×5 area laid out as follows:-
This is used globally as the "basic" game of Klotski. It is coded C27d in Hordern classification of sliding puzzle games.

=Pennant Puzzle=

Coded as C19 in Hordern classification, it is first copyrighted in 1909 by Lewis. W. Hardy in United States.  Standard Trailer Co. has it copyrighted under the name Dad's Puzzler in 1926 (also in US).  Its arrangement is different:
Other than these, the game rules are the same as Klotski. The minimum number of moves to solve the puzzle is 59.

=Ma's Puzzle=

Ma's Puzzle is copyrighted by Standard Trailer Co. at 1927. It was the first sliding puzzle to use non-rectangular shape. Its goal is to join its 2 L-shaped pieces together, either anywhere or top right corner of the board.

Computerized version

The first known graphical version of Klotski was created for Windows by ZH Computing in 1991. It was later in the same year included in the third Microsoft Windows Entertainment Pack. Many versions of Klotski followed, either freely available or commercially available. For example, one is included in the GNOME desktop environment. Some include blocks which have special effects.

Notes and references






