[[Drum Corps International]]

CATEGORIES: Organizations based in Indianapolis, Indiana, Drum and bugle corps

Drum Corps International (DCI), formed in 1972, is the non-profit governing body for junior drum and bugle corps in the U.S.A. and Canada. Junior corps are composed of members 21 years of age and younger. DCI is composed of member corps who have earned their membership through competition. It is responsible for developing and enforcing the rules of competition and is the sanctioning body for junior corps competitions. DCI is headquartered in Indianapolis, Indiana. Its Board of Directors is composed primarily of directors of the member corps.
The stated purpose of a DCI corps is "..." The DCI competitive summer tour, consisting of DCI-sanctioned competitions (known as the Summer Music Games) throughout the United States and Canada, culminates in August with the week-long DCI World Championships.Drum Corps International: The First Decade: 1972-1981; Nicholas Waerzeggars; Drum Corps World; 2012
Other drum corps associations around the world are largely based upon DCI.

Class structure

Currently, DCI assigns North American corps to two classes, and corps from Europe and Asia are assigned to the International Class. Corps from all classes often compete together, but are judged and ranked separately. In the past, classes have been fully or partially determined by the number of marching members in each corps; at present, all corps may march up to a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) members.

Historic classes and divisions

Source: A History of Drum & Bugle Corps, Vols. 1 & 2; Steve Vickers; Drum Corps World; 2002 & 2003

Class and division membership limits

Drum corps season

Prior to the advent of DCI, many locals corps were a year-round youth activity. Still, the competitive season generally ran from Memorial Day to Labor Day, which essentially coincided with the school systems' summer break.
Today, drum corps is often still a year-long activity, but not in the same manner. Where once memberships were almost entirely local, many corps now have a membership drawn from all over North America and the world. Therefore, off-season activities occur during "camp" weekends. At the early camps, potential members audition for membership in the corps. Later, the members gather monthly or bimonthly to work in preparation for the summer. As the season nears, many corps go into intense, full-time camps, with the members "moving in" and spending days on end in preparation for going "on tour."
At the present time, the competitive season begins in mid-June and ends with the DCI World Championships during the second week of August.
For members of all World Class corps and the most competitive Open Class corps, the activity is a full-time summer commitment.  Members travel from show site to show site, performing in competitions and parades across North America nearly non-stop until the DCI Championships. Corps travel by coach buses in convoy with semi-trailer trucks holding equipment and field kitchens. Once on the road, members generally sleep on the buses as the corps travels at night, and in sleeping bags on school gym floors when their next destination is reached.  The corps practice their shows for as long as the schedule allows during the day, and then they go to the stadium for the local competition.  After each show is over, the cycle repeats, with only a few breaks in the cycle for laundry days and an occasional free day for relaxation.
Some corps have neither the finances nor the member commitment to spend the entire summer "on tour." Some of these corps restrict themselves to local competitions only. Others may delay the start of their touring, marching only a short season on the way to the DCI Championships.

DCI Championships

The DCI Championships, first contested in 1972, are the culmination of the drum corps season. Originally held during the third weekend in August, this has moved to the week of the second weekend in August, as the school year has lengthened and the Championship activities have increased.
Over the years, the DCI Championships were held in college or professional sports stadiums in eighteen U.S and Canadian cities, spread from Montreal in the north to Miami in the south, and from Philadelphia in the east to Pasadena in the west. Since 2009, however, the Championships have been based in Indiana, with the Open Class Championships being held at Ames Field in Michigan City and the World Class Championships at Lucas Oil Stadium in Indianapolis. DCI plans to remain at the current venues until at least 2018."DCI Moving Headquarters, World Championships to Indianapolis", Drum Corps World, 8/29/2006
Beginning in 1975, the DCI Championship Finals were televised on PBS.DCI on ESPN2 -- tune in on Sept. 6, DCI News, 8/17/2005 Although the Finals have not been broadcast live in several years, since 2004, the quarterfinals have been screened live at a large number of movie theaters across the country.
During championships week, in addition to the Open Class and World Class Championships, Individual & Ensemble (I&E) competitions are also held, typically at an indoor facility near the championship stadium. Members of all corps are able to compete, and participating members often use much of their limited free time to prepare their I&E routines. There are a great number of categories or captions for each individual brass and percussion instruments, for auxiliary (aka "color guard") equipment, and for brass, percussion, auxiliary, and mixed ensembles.  In the 2005 season, I&E included woodwind instruments for the first time, in recognition that many marching members play instruments other than brass and percussion.

Drum Corps International champions by year and division or class

Source:
Note: Some associations outside the U.S.A and Canada allow members to march until as late as age 25. Therefore, corps from those associations can march with, but not in direct competition with, Open Class corps. The highest scoring of these corps at the DCI World Championships is named the International Class champion. There are some years when no corps from outside the U.S.A and Canada attended World Championships, so no International champion is named for those years. (Prior to 1988, international corps were allowed to compete against North American corps, despite variations in elegibility.)

Corps with five or more Drum Corps International titles

Marketing

DCI and the individual drum corps derive a large part of their revenues from marketing their product. DCI not only sells tickets to its sanctioned competitions, but it is also the primary distributor of audio and video merchandise for the junior drum and bugle corps activity, mainly via its web site.
The DCI videos are produced by professionals who primarily work for the major broadcast and cable television networks. Audio products have often been produced by Grammy Award winning recording engineers.

Other DCI activities

In early 2013, Drum Corps International launched two new competitive musical activities for small groups. Unlike DCI's drum corps, units in these activities are not restricted by age limits or a short competitive season. Both activities have seen immediate interest, with many groups forming around the world. Nations where these activities are growing include the U.S.A., Canada, China, Japan, Korea, Indonesia, Thailand, Taiwan, and Ireland.dci.cfm?news_id=9e8a0864-1466-4a3d-b063-c74fa0c2b76e

DrumLine Battle™

Drum line battles have been going on for years, but not in a formal, competitive format. In DrumLine Battle™, drum lines of up to 30 marching members (no grounded percussion) compete in head-to-head judged competition. The competitions may be held either live and face-to-face or online, allowing groups from all over the world to compete against each other. Judging criteria is not restricted to technical proficiency, but includes showmanship and attitude. (E-Sarn, a drum line from Thailand, traveled to Indianapolis to compete in the DrumLine Battle™ contest held during DCI Championship week and defeated the drum lines from 15 U.S. drum corps and marching bands.)

SoundSport®

The stated goal of SoundSport® is to provide the drum corps competitive performance experience in a low-cost, local setting. Musical ensembles of 5 to 50 members, using any musical instruments, perform a 5-7 minute marching music show in an area measuring 70' wide by 50' deep. (At least two inactive drum and bugle corps and Southwind are trying to use SoundSport® as a means to return to the field of competition, and at least one SoundSport® team Guardians has announced its intent to become a DCI corps.)








