[[Ken Howard]]

CATEGORIES: 1944 births, Living people, American male film actors, American male stage actors, American male television actors, Presidents of the Screen Actors Guild, Amherst College alumni, Amherst Lord Jeffs men's basketball players, Male actors from California, Male actors from New York, Basketball players from California, Basketball players from New York, Organ transplant recipients, People from North Hempstead, New York, People from El Centro, California, Sportspeople from New York City, Yale School of Drama alumni, Outstanding Performance by a Supporting Actor in a Miniseries or Movie Primetime Emmy Award winners, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors

Kenneth Joseph "Ken" Howard, Jr. (born March 28, 1944) is an American actor, best known for his roles as Thomas Jefferson in 1776 and as basketball coach and former Chicago Bulls player Ken Reeves in the television show The White Shadow. He was elected president of the Screen Actors Guild in September 2009

Early life

Howard was born in El Centro, California, the son of Martha Carey (née McDonald) and Kenneth Joseph Howard, Sr., the older of their two sons. His younger brother, the late Don Howard, was also an actor. He stands approximately 6'6" (1.98 m) which in high school earned him the nickname "Stork."
He grew up in the Long Island, New York community of Manhasset. Howard had basketball in his blood well before The White Shadow debuted. The nickname "The White Shadow" was given to him by the Long Island press in 1961, as Howard was the only Caucasian starter on the Manhasset High School varsity basketball team.
A member of the National Honor Society in high school, Howard turned down several offers of basketball scholarships in favor of a more focused academic education.  He is a graduate of Amherst College, where he served as captain of the basketball team.

Career

Theater

Howard began his career on Broadway in Promises, Promises with Jerry Orbach. In 1970, he won a Tony Award as Best Supporting or Featured Actor (Dramatic) for Child's Play.  Howard later starred on Broadway as Thomas Jefferson in 1776  and reprised the role in the 1972 film.  Other Broadway appearances include the Seesaw in 1973 andThe Norman Conquests.  Howard portrayed several US presidents in the 1975 Broadway musical 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue and in 1976, appeared as Warren G. Harding in Camping with Henry and Tom in 1995.

Television

On television, he appeared as Ken Reeves, a Los Angeles high school basketball coach, in The White Shadow, produced by Bruce Paltrow in 1978. (The nickname was given to him in 1961 by the Long Island press when he was the only Caucasian starter on the Manhasset High School varsity basketball team.) Howard had the starring role in the 1973 TV series Adam's Rib opposite his good friend, and Bruce Paltrow's wife, Blythe Danner. He starred in The Manhunter, an American crime drama that was part of CBS's lineup for the 1974-1975 television season. The series was produced by Quinn Martin and starred Howard as Dave Barret, a 1930s-era private investigator from Idaho. He starred in the TV movie Father Damien in 1980 and won a Daytime Emmy Award in 1981 for his performance as the ideal father in the CBS afternoon special The Body Human: Facts for Boys. Additional credits include "Sidney Sheldon's Rage of Angels, 1983," the 2000 miniseries Perfect Murder, Perfect Town and the feature film Dreamer: Inspired by a True Story, both co-starring Kris Kristofferson.   He played the title character in the 1984 American Playhouse production of Mark Twain's Pudd'nhead Wilson, having earlier played Mark Twain on Bonanza.  Later, he appeared as Garrett Boydston in Dynasty and its spin-off The Colbys. In the early 1990s, he was a regular on the television series Murder, She Wrote as guest sleuth with Angela Lansbury, and later in Crossing Jordan as Jill Hennessy's father from 2001-2004. In 2007, he appeared as the primary villain in the critically acclaimed series Cane with Jimmy Smits.
He has guest-starred on numerous television dramas.  He was guest villain in Hart to Hart Returns, a 1993 made for TV movie starring Stefanie Powers and Robert Wagner. Howard appeared in season one of The West Wing as President Bartlett's first choice for U.S. Supreme Court Justice in the episode "The Short List". Other dramatic guest roles include: NYPD Blue, The Practice, Boston Legal, Cold Case, Dirty Sexy Money, Eli Stone, Brothers and Sisters, Law & Order: SVU, Curb Your Enthusiasm, Fairly Legal, The Closer , Blue Bloods.  He appeared in an episode of The Golden Girls as one of Blanche's many lovers, in The Office as Michael's former boss, and in 30 Rock as Jack Donaghy's boss from Kabletown, Hank Hooper.

Film

He made his movie debut in 1970 in Tell Me That You Love Me, Junie Moon opposite Liza Minnelli. He has appeared in numerous movies since, in both dramatic and comedy roles, including: Oscar with Sylvester Stallone in 1991, Clear and Present Danger with Harrison Ford in 1994, and The Net with Sandra Bullock in 1995, In Her Shoes in 2005. In 2007, Howard appeared in Rambo again with Sylvester Stallone, and Michael Clayton as the villain to George Clooney's hero.  In 2010, he starred in The Numbers Game with Steven Bauer. He next appeared as Harlan F. Stone in Clint Eastwood's J. Edgar.
He gave an acclaimed performance as Phelan Beale in the 2009 HBO film Grey Gardens playing opposite Jessica Lange, for which he received an Emmy Award.

Literature

Howard is the author of the 2003 book Act Natural: How to Speak to Any Audience, based on the drama courses he has taught at Harvard University. He is a popular reader for audiobooks.

Personal life

He has been married to Linda Fetters, a stuntwoman, since 1992. They reside in the Los Angeles, California area. From 1977 to 1991, he was married to Margo Coleman, known professionally as Margo Howard, the daughter of Ann Landers. The marriage ended in divorce. From 1973 to 1976, he was married to TV soap opera actress, Louise Sorel.   The marriage ended in divorce.
Howard had a kidney transplant in 2000 and is very active and supportive of the National Kidney Foundation, serving as its Chancellor.

Stage productions

Filmography






