[[Moharram Navidkia]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, Living people, Iranian footballers, Iran international footballers, Association football midfielders, Sepahan players, VfL Bochum players, 2006 FIFA World Cup players, 2. Bundesliga players, Expatriate footballers in Germany, Iranian expatriate footballers, People from Isfahan, Asian Games gold medalists for Iran

Moharram Navidkia ( who currently plays as the captain of Sepahan in Iran's Premier League. He plays as a midfielder.
During his career, he has dealt with consecutive injuries making him unable to regain his top form.
As an international player, he is a former captain of the Iran under-23 team and has collected 25 caps for the senior team of Iran, before bidding his farewell on December 2009.
His brother, Rasoul Navidkia is also a professional footballer who plays in the Iran Pro League.

Club career

He began his career at Sepahan football club. Becoming the product of the club's football development program. He managed to attract attention during the 2002–03 Iran Premier League season while playing for a team many at first thought to be average, but they won the championship title at the end. 
He was selected the best player of IPL for the 2003–04 season and was considered one of the best Iranian players despite his young age. Due to his potential talent, young age, and impressive performances, he was transferred to VfL Bochum even though he was injured at the time of the signing.
He was not able to recover his old form, and went back to Sepahan in 2006 on loan. After the World Cup in Germany, Navidkia signed a contract with Sepahan again. He had difficulties with the injuries during his career in Sepahan and finally in the 2009–10 season he had his most stable season after a few years.

Club career statistics

International career

He was first selected to the national team during the West Asian Football Federation tournament in 2002, which was held in Syria. He made his debut for Iran against Jordan in August 2002. His biggest achievement was winning the gold medal of the 2002 Asian Games with Iran U-23 in Busan, where he continued his impressive display during the games.  He played in the 2006 FIFA World Cup qualification for Team Melli.
Having been selected among Iran's reserve men for the 2006 World Cup, he was called up to join the team in Germany to replace injured Sattar Zare. He bid his farewell to national team on December 2009. In May 2011, he was called up to Iran national team by Carlos Queiroz, but he rejected the offer due to his "several injuries and surgeries" which makes him unable to play for both national team and club.

International goals

Awards and honours

Club

Country

Individual






