[[Vietnam national football team]]

CATEGORIES: Asian national association football teams, Vietnam national football team, National sports teams of Vietnam

The Vietnam national football team () is the national football team representing Vietnam in international football competition and is managed by the Vietnam Football Federation.
In the FIFA World Rankings, Vietnam's highest standing was in the first release of the figures, in September 1998, at 84th. The team is currently ranked 116th in the World, 16th in Asia and 1st in South East Asia by FIFA (April 2014).
By late 1950s, known by the name South Vietnam national football team became one of the four strongest teams in Asia, as they advanced into the final round of 1956 AFC Asian Cup, 1960 AFC Asian Cup, finishing 4th both times. The team also won 10th Merdeka Tournament in Malaysia, 1966.
Vietnam is one of the most successful teams in South East Asia along with Thailand, Singapore, Indonesia and Malaysia. Winning the ASEAN Football Championship 2008 and other small competitions and still improving today.
While Vietnam was split into North and South Vietnam, two national teams existed and both were controlled by similar Vietnam Football Associations. After the two countries unified in 1976 the Vietnam Football Associations was renamed to Vietnam Football Federation.

History

Pre-history

Football was introduced to Vietnam in 1896 by the French. It was first introduced in Cochinchina (Nam Kỳ); it later spread to other parts of Vietnam. The Vietnamese learned the game from the French before creating their own teams. On July 20, 1908, the first Vietnamese football teams with Vietnamese players had their first match where Phú Mỹ team defeated team Chợ Đũi with the score of 2-0. In 1928, Vietnam picked out the best team to compete in their first tournament in Singapore.

North team

The North team was not very active and played only against other communist and pro-communist countries from 1956 to 1966. They had their first match against China PR where they lost 5-3 under head coach Truong Tan Buu. They participated in the first GANEFO competitions at Indonesia in 1962 and Cambodia in 1966.
The North team was the national team of Democratic Republic of Vietnam between 1945 and 1975. The team ceased to exist when the North and South regions combined into the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Most of North Vietnam's international games were played against other socialist countries.

South team

The South team (Vietnamese: Đội tuyển túc cầu quốc gia Việt Nam Cộng hòa) was the national team of South Vietnam controlled by Vietnam Football Association (now Vietnam Football Federation) between 1949 and 1975. It took part in the first two Asian Cups finals (1956 and 1960), finishing 4th both times. They won the first SEA games in 1959 in Thailand. The team also entered qualification for the 1974 FIFA World Cup. They played their last game against Malaysia in 1975 where they lost 3-0.
The only World Cup which South Vietnam entered was the 1974 tournament in West Germany. They were placed in Zone A of the AFC and OFC qualification in Seoul, South Korea. On 16 May 1973 they beat Thailand  1-0 to qualify for Group 1. On 20 May South Vietnam lost their opening game 4-0 to Japan and four days later they lost 1-0 to Hong Kong and were eliminated. Hong Kong and Japan advanced but neither got any farther, losing play-offs for the next round to South Korea and Israel respectively.

Present team

Vietnamese professional football league was launched in 1980 to redevelop Vietnamese football after a long period of civil war. V-League was the official name used since 2000-2001 season.
In 1989, following the Đổi mới reforms, a new football federation was formed. Vietnamese sports began to return to international events. After three months of preparation, in August 1989, the First Congress of the new football federation took place in Hanoi, declaring Vietnam Football Federation. Trịnh Ngọc Chữ, deputy minister of General Department of Sports, was elected president of VFF and Lê Thế Thọ was appointed general secretary.
The Vietnam national team was created once again and played their first match for 18 years against the Philippine in 1991 where they had a draw. In 1996, along with other South East Asian teams, Vietnam participated in the first Tiger Cup where they finished in third place. Vietnam hosted the second Tiger Cup in 1998 where they were defeated by Singapore in the final.

=2007 AFC Asian Cup co-host and triumph=

In 2007, Vietnam hosted the AFC Asian Cup for the first time along with Thailand, Indonesia, and Malaysia. They beat the UAE 2-0 and drew 1-1 with Qatar in the group stage. Though they lost 4-1 to Japan, they were still able to go on to quarter-finals and were the only host and only South East Asian team to reach quarter-finals. In the quarter final they were defeated by the later champion Iraq.

=2008 AFF Suzuki Cup triumph=

In the 2008 AFF Suzuki Cup, the successor to the Tiger Cup/ASEAN Football Championship, Vietnam defeated the defending champion Singapore 1-0 away from home in the semi-finals after a goalless draw in Hanoi. They also defeated Thailand 2-1 in the finals away from home. In the final 2nd-leg, Thailand scored the opening goal that leveled the aggregate score to 2-2, however Vietnam's star Le Cong Vinh scored a late equalised goal from Nguyen Minh Phuong's free kick, which gave Vietnam 3-2 aggregate win and its first title in the regional tournament.

Kits

Vietnam's previous kit manufacturers were Adidas and, from 2005 to 2008,  Li-Ning.
Vietnam traditionally wear all-red with yellow accents. The away kit is all-white with yellow accents. Vietnam old away color is all-white with light blue accents which ended when Vietnam start using Li-Ning, the Chinese sport company.
Since 2009, Vietnam began to be sponsored by Nike. Nike supply training materials and uniforms for the national football teams and futsal team on a five-year deal.
The first two games with Nike, Vietnam wore a temporary away kit for matches with Lebanon and China PR in 2011 AFC Asian Cup qualification.

|}
|}

National Stadium

Mỹ Đình National Stadium (
The stadium is home to the Vietnam national football team, and hosts its home international matches.
Located in Từ Liêm District, 10 kilometres north-west of central Hanoi, the 40,000-seat stadium is the second biggest in the country and was built at a cost of US$53 million. Arched roofs cover the grandstands on the east and west sides of the arena, providing shelter for half of the seats. 
The area provides training facilities for the teams with two football training grounds conveniently located next to the stadium.

Sponsorship

Primary sponsors includes Nike and Honda Vietnam. Local sponsor includes Eximbank, Petro Vietnam, Hoa Sen Group, Kova Paint, Boss Paint, Dong Luc Group, Viettel Mobile, Cuulong Steel, Thai Son Nam Group, Phan Lan Nung Chay Group, Canh Buom Do Group, Huu Lien A Chau Joint-Stock Company.

Schedules and results

All time are Indochina Time.

 

Players

Current squad

The following players were called up for 2015 AFC Asian Cup qualification matches against Hong Kong on March 5, 2014.  
Caps and goals as of March 5, 2014 (Only official matches). 






















Recent call-ups

The following players have also been called up to the Vietnam squad within the last 12 months.






















Current coaching staff

Managers

Coaches by years since 1991

Competitive Records

FIFA World Cup

AFC Asian Cup

ASEAN Football Championship

Vietnam Football Federation Cup

All–time record against all nations

Honours all the competition

Former squads

Current titles








