[[MTV Unplugged (Mariah Carey EP)]]

CATEGORIES: Mariah Carey albums, 1992 EPs, MTV Unplugged albums, Columbia Records albums, Live EPs, 1992 live albums, Columbia Records live albums, Columbia Records EPs

MTV Unplugged is an extended play (EP) and live album by American singer-songwriter Mariah Carey, released in the United States on June 2, 1992 by Columbia Records. Following the success of Carey's previous two albums and the growing critical commentary on her lack of concert tours and unsubstantial televised performances, Sony BMG organised a performance show at the Kaufman Astoria Studios, New York on March 16, 1992. The show, titled MTV Unplugged, originally aired on MTV to help promote Carey's album Emotions, as well as help shun critics who deemed Carey a possible studio artist. However, after its success, the show was released to the public as an EP, with an accompanying VHS titled MTV Unplugged +3.
Upon release, the EP garnered generally positive reviews from music critics, many of whom complimented Carey's vocals. Commercially, the album was a success, peaking at number three on the Billboard 200, and was certified three times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), denoting shipments of over three million copies within the United States. Additionally, the EP experienced strong success in several international markets, such as the Netherlands and New Zealand, where it reached number one and was certified double platinum. MTV Unplugged peaked within the top five in the United Kingdom, and in the top ten in Australia and Canada.
"I'll Be There" was chosen as the lead single from the album. Due to its critical success up until that point, it was released one month before its parent EP, eventually becoming Carey's sixth chart topper in the United States, and one of the few songs to do so by two different acts. Globally, the song was successful, topping the singles charts in the charts in Canada, the Netherlands and New Zealand, as well as attaining the top five position in Ireland and the United Kingdom. After its success, "If It's Over", a song from Carey's second studio effort Emotions was released, due to its exposure on the show and EP.

Background

After the release of Carey's second studio album, Emotions (1991), critics began wondering whether Carey would finally embark on a worldwide tour, having not toured to promote her self-titled debut album. The issues Carey faced once the show was booked was the content; she didn't know what material to present at the intimate concert. While Carey felt strongly of her more soulful and powerful songs, it was decided that her most popular content to that point would be included. Days prior to the show's taping, Carey and Afanasieff thought of adding a cover version of an older song, in order to provide something different and unexpected. They chose "I'll Be There", a song made popular by The Jackson 5 in 1970, rehearsing it few times before the night of the show.

Synopsis

Carey's performance was recorded on March 16, 1992 at Kaufman Astoria Studios in Queens, New York. The performance varied heavily from the studio version, as it was more low key and only used voices in a cappella form, without any heavy instrumentation. Prior to beginning the fifth song on the set-list, "Make It Happen", Afanasieff shared the organ with Cole, playing the bass while the latter handled the treble. After the song began, the back-up began "piling their vocals" over Carey's, according to author Chris Nickson, and allowed the song to attain a more "churchy feel". He felt the song was superior to the studio version, due to its stripped performance and vocals:
 
 "The roughness of this version succeeded in a way the recorded version on 'Emotions' could never manage. In the sterile atmosphere of a studio, where perfection, technology, and overdubbing were the rules, spontaneity had no place. On the stage, it was valued, and this performance had it. Everyone pushed everyone just a little further, to create something wonderful, and judging by the response, the audience realized it, as did Mariah when the song was finished."

Soon after completing "Make It Happen", Carey eagerly presented the final song on the set list, "I'll Be There". The way the song was arranged, Carey took Michael Jackson's lead, while Trey Lorenz sang the second lead, originally sung by Jermaine Jackson. After performing the sung alongside a very simple arrangement and minimal instrumentals, the back-up singers began humming to the tune of "Can't Let Go", leading Carey to present "another final" song for the show. Several days after the concert, Carey sat down with Melinda Newman from Billboard, telling her of the experience recording the show, as well as her view on it from a creative perspective. She said "Unplugged taught me a lot about myself because I tend to nitpick everything I do and make it a bit too perfect because I'm a perfectionist. I'll always go over the raw stuff, and now I've gotten to the point where I understand the raw stuff is usually better."

Release

Originally, MTV planned to air the show several times during April 1992, it was normal for MTV Unplugged sessions to air around six times during the month of release, before being archived. Carey's version was met with critical acclaim and extended popularity, leading to it being shown more often than usual. Fans from around the United States made multiple requests for the show to be aired on television, and by the end of April 1992, Carey's episode of MTV Unplugged had aired over three-times as much as an average episode would. The concert's success tempted Sony officials to use it as some form of an album. However, Carey and Afansieff were already making headway on a new album set tentatively for release in 1993. This being so, Sony decided to release it as an EP, selling for a reduced price due to its shorter length.

Video

After the success of the EP's lead single "I'll Be There", Sony chose to release not only the EP, but a VHS accompaniment package; a video of the actual concert titled MTV Unplugged +3. Aside from featuring the seven song's performed at Kaufman Astoria Studios, it held three music videos; "Can't Let Go", "Make It Happen", and a rare remix version and video of "Emotions". The video peaked atop the Billboard video chart, and was certified platinum by the RIAA, denoting shipments of over 100,000 units throughout the United States.

Critical reception

MTV Unplugged garnered generally positive reviews from music critics. Allmusic editor Shawn M. Haney gave the album three out of five stars, praising Carey's vocals as well as her cover of "I'll Be There". Additionally, they felt Carey's performance of "I'll Be There" was "killer" and concluded their review with "In the process, this rare public appearance reminded us there was a big-league performer inside that party dress."

Commercial performance

MTV Unplugged debuted at number eight on the Billboard 200, during the week of June 20, 1992. In its third week, the album peaked at number three.
Outside the United States, the album experienced success in several European markets. In Austria, MTV Unplugged entered the albums chart at number thirty-nine, eventually peaking number twenty-one and spending a total of ten weeks on the chart.

Singles

After the decision to release the EP was made, Sony decided to release Carey's live version of "I'll Be There" as the only single, due to its critical success. The song debuted at number thirteen on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Carey's highest debut on the chart at the time. After four weeks, the song topped the chart, becoming Carey's sixth number one in the United States, and spending two weeks there. Its success across the globe was strong, peaking at number one on the singles charts in Canada, the Netherlands, and New Zealand, and reached number two and three in the United Kingdom and Ireland, respectively.

Track listing

Credits and personnel

Credits for MTV Unplugged adapted from Allmusic.

Charts and certifications

Charts

Certifications



Singles



Works cited

 | last = Nickson
 | first = Chris
 | title = Mariah Carey revisited: her story
 | year = 1998
