[[Romani people]]

CATEGORIES: Romani, Indo-Aryan peoples, Nomadic groups in Eurasia, Ethnic groups in Europe



The Romani are a diasporic ethnicity of Indian origin, living mostly in Europe and the Americas.
Romani are widely dispersed, with their largest concentrated populations in Europe — especially Central and Eastern Europe and Anatolia, the Iberian Kale and Southern France. They originated in India and arrived in Mid-West Asia, then Europe, at least 1000 years ago,[ref]
 the ancestors of both the Romani and the Dom left North India sometime between the sixth and eleventh century.
Since the nineteenth century, some Romani have also migrated to the Americas. There are an estimated one million Roma in the United States; and 800,000 in Brazil, most of whose ancestors emigrated in the nineteenth century from eastern Europe. Brazil also includes Romani descended from people deported by the government of Portugal during the Inquisition in the colonial era. In migrations since the late nineteenth century, Romani have also moved to Canada and countries in South America.Sutherland, Ann, "Gypsies: The Hidden Americans", # Waveland Press (July 1986)# ISBN 0-88133-235-6, # ISBN 978-0-88133-235-3
The Romani language is divided into several dialects, which add up to an estimated number of speakers larger than two million. The total number of Romani people is at least twice as large (several times as large according to high estimates). Many Romani are native speakers of the language current in their country of residence, or of mixed languages combining the two; those varieties are sometimes called Para-Romani.

Names

Romani usage

In the Romani language, rom is a masculine noun, meaning "man, husband", with the plural roma. Romani is the feminine adjective, while romano is the masculine adjective. Some Romanies use Rom or Roma as an ethnic name, while others (such as the Sinti, or the Romanichal) do not use this term as a self-ascription for the entire ethnic group.[ref]
.[/ref]
Sometimes, rom and romani are spelled with a double r, i.e., rrom and rromani. In this case rr is used to represent the phoneme  (also written as ř and rh), which in some Romani dialects has remained different from the one written with a single r. The rr spelling is common particularly in Romania, in order to distinguish from the endonym for Romanians (sg. român, pl. români).

English usage

In the English language (according to the Oxford English Dictionary), Rom is a noun (with the plural Roma or Roms) and an adjective, while Romani (Romany) is also a noun (with the plural Romanies or Romanis) and an adjective. Both Rom and Romani have been in use in English since the 19th century as an alternative for Gypsy. Romani was initially spelled Rommany, then Romany, while today the Romani spelling is the most popular spelling. Occasionally, the double r spelling (e.g., Rroma, Rromani) mentioned above is also encountered in English texts.
The term Roma is increasingly encountered during recent decadesp. 52 in Elena Marushiakova and Vesselin Popov's "Historical and ethnographic background; gypsies, Roma, Sinti" in Will Guy ed. Between Past and Future: The Roma of Central and Eastern Europe a Foreword by Dr. Ian Hancock, 2001, UK: University of Hertfordshire Press.p. 13 in Illona Klimova-Alexander's The Romani Voice in World Politics: The United Nations and Non-State Actors (2005, Burlington, VT.: Ashgate). as a generic term for the Romani people, although it is sometimes considered pejorative.
Because all Romanies use the word Romani as an adjective, the term began to be used as a noun for the entire ethnic group.[ref]
.[/ref]
Today, the term Romani is used by most organizations—including the United Nations, the Council of Europe, and the US Library of Congress.[ref]
.[/ref]
The standard assumption is that the demonyms of the Romani people, Lom and Dom share the same origin.

Gypsy

The English term Gypsy (or Gipsy) originates from the Middle English gypcian, short for Egipcien. It is ultimately derived from the Greek  (Aigyptioi), via Middle French and Latin. This designation owes its existence to the belief, common in the Middle Ages, that the Romanies, or some related group (such as the middle eastern Dom people), were itinerant Egyptians. (1961). The Gypsies in the Byzantine Empire and the Balkans in the Late Middle Ages. Dumbarton Oaks Papers, Trustees for Harvard University, 15, 141-165. According to one narrative they were exiled from Egypt as punishment for allegedly harbouring the infant Jesus.
This exonym is sometimes written with capital letter, to show that it designates an ethnic group.  The term 'gypsy' appears when international research programmes, documents and policies on the community are referred to. However, the word is often considered derogatory because of its negative and stereotypical associations.Report in Roma Educational Needs in Ireland
As described in Victor Hugo's novel The Hunchback of Notre Dame, the medieval French referred to the Romanies as egyptiens. The term has come to bear pejorative connotations. The word Gypsy in English has become so pervasive that many Romani organizations use it in their own organizational names.
In North America, the word gypsy is most commonly used as a reference to Romani ethnicity,American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition, definition 1 and 2 though lifestyle and fashion are at times also referenced by using this word.Starr, J. (1936). An Eastern Christian Sect: the Athinganoi. Dumbarton Oaks Papers, Trustees for Harvard University, 29, 93-106.

Population and subgroups

Romani population

For a variety of reasons, many Romanies choose not to register their ethnic identity in official censuses. There are an estimated four million Romani people in Europe (as of 2002),3.8 million according to Pan and Pfeil, National Minorities in Europe (2004), ISBN 978-3-7003-1443-1, p. 27f. although some high estimates by Romani organizations give numbers as high as 14 million.Council of Europe compilation of population estimates
Significant Romani populations are found in the Balkans, in some Central European states, in Spain, France, Russia and Ukraine. Several million more Romanies may live out of Europe, in particular in the Middle East and in the Americas.

Romani subgroups

As a result of the caste system, inherited from India, and their movement on Asia, Europe, America and Australia, many designations can be given to individual Roma groups.

All-encompassing self-description is always "Rom".
Other groups, using different endonyms are, for example:
Other Romani sub-groups include:
 - Yaron Matras,Peter Bakker,Khristo Kiuchukov</ref>
Some groups which are commonly thought of as Romani, either by surrounding populations or by Romani groups, do not consider themselves to be Romani. This applies to the Balkan Egyptians and the Ashkali.

History

Origins

Findings suggest an Indian origin for Roma. Findings recently reported also in Current Biology. Because Romani groups didn't keep chronicles of their history or have oral accounts of it, most hypotheses about Romani's migration early history are based on linguistic theory.

=Shahnameh legend=

According to a legend reported in Shahnameh and repeated by several modern authors, the Sasanian king Bahrām V Gōr learned towards the end of his reign (421–39) that the poor could not afford to enjoy music, and he asked the king of India to send him ten thousand luris, men and women, lute playing experts. When the luris arrived, Bahrām gave each one an ox and a donkey and a donkey-load of wheat so that they could live on agriculture and play music gratuitously for the poor. But the luris ate the oxen and the wheat and came back a year later with their cheeks hollowed with hunger. The king was angered with their having wasted what he had given them, ordered them to pack up their bags on their asses and go wandering around the world.

=Linguistic evidence=

The linguistic evidence has indisputably shown that roots of Romani language lie in India: the language has grammatical characteristics of Indian languages and shares with them a big part of the basic lexicon, for example, body parts or daily routines.Šebková, Hana; Žlnayová, Edita (1998). Nástin mluvnice slovenské romštiny (pro pedagogické účely). Ústí nad Labem: Pedagogická fakulta Univerzity J. E. Purkyně v Ústí nad Labem: .
More exactly, Romani shares the basic lexicon with Hindi and Punjabi. It shares many phonetic features with Marwari, while its grammar is closest to Bengali.
Romani and Domari share some similarities:  agglutination of postpositions of the second Layer (or case marking clitics) to the nominal stem, concordmarkers for the past tense, the neutralisation of gender marking in the plural, and the use of the oblique case as an accusative.[ref]
