[[Pataudi]]

CATEGORIES: Cities and towns in Gurgaon district

Pataudi is a town in Gurgaon district in the Indian state of Haryana. It is located 

Pataudi was the seat of Pataudi State which was ruled by the Nawabs of Pataudi. The 8th Nawab, Iftikhar Ali Khan Pataudi, played cricket for both England and India and captained the latter. His son the 9th Nawab also captained the Indian cricket team. It takes only 30 minutes to reach Pataudi and is only 27 Kilometers from Gurgaon city.distancesbetween.com/distance-between/distance-from-gurgaon-to-pataudi/12871/r3/

Geography

Pataudi is located at .

Demographics



Caste Composition

Patuadi is a reserved constituency, it has more than 45 thousand of Ahir votes out of 1,35,000 total votes in it. The Backward Classes and the Scheduled Castes constitute about 7,00,00 of the votes. The Rajputs constitute 12,000 with about equal number of Jats.

Real Estate Development

Pataudi Road is now is in the vicinity of three major highways –  National Highway 8 (India) and the upcoming Kundli–Manesar–Palwal Expressway and the proposed Dwarka Expressway. Industrial Model Township (IMT) Manesar is just four kilometers from Pataudi Road. Several residential units coming up on the Pataudi Road, the logistics park, Special Economic Zones (SEZs) by Reliance, Raheja Engineering SEZ Adding to this are the government's plans to upgrade infrastructure facilities along the belt. As per the new GurgaonManesar Master Plan 2021, the availability of land for development has opened up huge possibilities, mainly in the new sectors along Pataudi Road, slated to emerge as a growth corridor in the near future. A draft development plan for Pataudi town, too, is being prepared. It is expected to have about 4-5 sectors.qubrex.com/story/2009/10/10/2522/6267
Pataudi Road is proposed to be widened  to 135 meters. The sectors roads too would be atleat 60 meters wide. 
Some of the major developers and Logistics Parks building on this road are DLF, Ansal, DRS Logistic,

Northern Peripheral Road

Northern Peripheral Road commonly known as Dwarka Expressway road is being developed under the public private partnership (PPP) model. This stretch will connect Dwarka with National Highway 8 at Kherki Dhaula and will pass Pataudi Road. The NPR stretch has been planned as an alternate link road between Delhi and Gurgaon, and is expected to ease the traffic situation on the Delhi-Gurgaon Expressway. The road will also provide connectivity to the much-touted Reliance-HSIIDC SEZ besides the Garhi Harsaru dry depot.
Much like Delhi, Gurgaon too will have a BRT corridor to decongest traffic on the Northern Peripheral Road . The road will be fully developed in March 2012.
Delhi Western Peripheral Expressway, or Kundli-Manesar-Palwal (KMP Expressway), is 

New Manesar Pataudi Road

A new link road has been made by HUDA connecting Manesar with Patuadi road near Wazirpur village. The length of the road is 3.5 KM.  Navbharat Times  dec 11, 2012 

Poor infrastructure

Connectivity to Pataudi road is extremely in bad shape. Also, one cannot take a right turn from the Hero Honda Chowk, as the highway does not have a cut over here. So to reach Pataudi road, commuters have to go straight for another two kilometers till Kherki Dola toll tax collection point and then take a U-turn to come back to Hero Honda Chowk. The widening of Gurgaon-Pataudi Road to 135 metres is complete and the 60 metres sectors roads are under construction.

Villages in Pataudi

Khawaspur-
Babra Bakipur - Balewa - Bapas - Baraheri Rehnwa - Bas Padamka - Bhokhraka - Bhora Kalan - Bhora Khurd - Bhudhka - Bilaspur kalan - Brahmanwas - Brijpura - Chandla Durngarwas - Chhawan - Chhilarki - Dadawas - Darapur - Quni Daultabad - Devla Was - Dinokri - Fakarpur - Fazilwas - Gadaipur -Gawalier - Ghilnawas - Goriawas - Gudhana Gudhana village comes under gurgaon district, it is situated some 5 kilometers from hailey mandi, gudhana village often known as hussainka-gudhana, actually these are 2 different villages called in a single go of word. - Hakdarpur - Haliaki - Hausanka - Heraheri - Inchhapuri - JANAULA - Jasat - Jatauli - Khalilpur - Khanpur - Khetiawas - Khor - Kukrola - Langra - Lohchab - Lokera - Lokri - Mahniawas - Malikpur - Mangwaki - Mau - Mirzapur - Mozabad - Mujaffra - Mumtazpur - Nanu Khurd - Nanukalan - Narhera - Nurgarh - Nurpur - Pahari - Parasoli - Pathredi - Rajpura - Rampur - Ransika - Rathiwas - Saiad Shah Pur - Shahpur Jat - Sherpur - Sidhrawali - Sluts - Tatarpur - Telpuri - Turkapur -Uncha Majra, Mangwaki(Noorgarh)








