[[Postum]]

CATEGORIES: 1895 introductions, Brand name beverage products, Coffee substitutes, Post Foods brands, Utah cuisine

Postum is a powdered roasted-grain beverage once popular as a coffee substitute. The caffeine-free beverage was created by Postum Cereal Company founder C. W. Post in 1895 and marketed as a healthful alternative to coffee. The Postum Cereal Company eventually became General Foods, which was bought by Kraft Foods. Post was a student of John Harvey Kellogg, who believed that caffeine was unhealthy. 
The "instant" drink mix version was developed in 1912, replacing the original brewed beverage. Postum is made from wheat bran, wheat, molasses, and maltodextrin from corn. This 10‑calorie beverage was caffeine-free, fat-free, trans-fat-free, sodium-free, and kosher. In addition to the original flavor, there was a coffee-flavored version. 

History


Postum quickly became popular, making Post wealthy. The aggressive advertising, with the mysterious slogan "There's a Reason", warned against coffee and caffeine's alleged dangers, and promoted the benefits of Postum. When imitations appeared, the company introduced a cheaper drink, Monk's Brew, identical to Postum, then discontinued it after competitors left the market. Instant Postum appeared in 1911.
Although the Postum Cereal Company explicitly stated in its advertising that Postum did not taste like coffee and was not a coffee substitute,
Postum was sometimes marketed by a cartoon ghost named Mister Coffee Nerves, The company sponsored the radio shows Lum and Abner, Beulah and The Aldrich Family, and the radio version of Father Knows Best.  
Postum was popular with members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and part of Mormon culture for many years because they abstain from coffee.
The US government used Postum as a code name for Polonium,Injecting Polonium into Humans, Federation of American Scientists, December 12th, 2006 by Steven Aftergood used in the Urchin style nuclear weapon initiators.
Kraft discontinued production of Postum in 2007.





Further reading




