[[Grace, Replaced]]

CATEGORIES: NBC network shows, 1999 television episodes, Will & Grace episodes

"Grace, Replaced" is the eighteenth episode of the first season of the American television series Will & Grace. It was written by Katie Palmer and directed by series producer James Burrows. The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company (NBC) in the United States on April 8, 1999. Actors Molly Shannon, Leigh-Allyn Baker, and Tom Gallop guest starred on "Grace, Replaced".
In the episode, Grace's (Debra Messing) job forces her to work overtime, which leads to Will (Eric McCormack) feeling neglected. As a result, he seeks solace in the company of a new neighbor, Val (Shannon). Meanwhile, Jack (Sean Hayes) is annoyed that he has to perform community service for assaulting a meter maid.
Before the airing, NBC moved the program to Thursdays at 8:30 p.m., after it was a success in the Tuesday lineup. "Grace, Replaced" was the first episode to debut on the Thursday slot. Since then, the episode has generally received positive reviews from television critics. According to the Nielsen ratings system, it was watched by 12.9 million viewers, which resulted in the episode attracting its highest ratings of the season.

Plot

Will (Eric McCormack) feels neglected by his best friend, Grace (Debra Messing), as she spends a lot of time with her work. When Will calls Grace to confirm for a lunch date, Grace cannot go as she is too busy creating interior designs. Later, while doing his laundry, Will meets his new upstairs neighbor, Val (Molly Shannon). Immediately, the two take a liking to one another. The next day, Will visits Grace at work and introduces Val to her. After the two leave, Karen (Megan Mullally)—Grace's friend and socialite assistant—tells Grace that she did not like the way Will and Val acted towards one another. Grace, however, refuses to accept what Karen implies.
Meanwhile, after slapping a meter maid, Jack (Sean Hayes) is ordered to work 40 hours of community service, picking up garbage, and while he does this is forced to wear an orange jumpsuit. Jack is annoyed that he has to do community service. While doing community service he visits Karen at Grace Adler Designs. While there, Jack goes through a trash bag and sees Soon-Yi Allen's phone bill. Jack shows Karen the bill which quickly results in the two prank calling Soon-Yi.
At Will and Grace's apartment, Will and Val play Pyramid against Will's friends Ellen (Leigh-Allyn Baker) and Rob (Tom Gallop). Grace, who comes home, is shocked when her Pyramid record with Will—2 minutes and 14 seconds—is the same as Will and Val's. Before leaving, Grace is horrified that Will called her Val. While at her office, Grace learns that Will is sick. She goes home to attend to him and is surprised to see Val there. Grace tells her that since she is home that Val can go. Val, however, does not leave. This results in the two fighting. The fight, however, is broken by Will and tells them to work the situation out. Grace admits she felt jealous of Val as she believed Val had replaced her, due to her not being there for Will. Will, however, reassures Grace that no one can replace her as his best friend. As a result, Grace and Val make up.

Production

"Grace, Replaced" was written by Katie Palmer and directed by series producer James Burrows.

Reception

"Grace, Replaced" brought in 12.9 million American viewers upon its original broadcast in the United States, In a report in The Star-Ledger it said that the decision of Will & Grace airing on Thursdays was a good benefit on behalf of NBC as the program was "the only watchable comedy".
The episode received generally positive reception. Alan Sepinwall and Matt Zoller Seitz of The Star-Ledger were complimentary towards "Grace, Replaced", writing that the episode "is a winner, packed with witty dialogue."
Critics praised Shannon's performance in the episode. Bark wrote, "... Shannon is winningly glossy and brassy this episode. Someday soon she'll have her own sitcom. Bet on it." Tom Feran of The Plain Dealer reported that Shannon's appearance on the show would make "a good introduction for viewers curious about Will & Grace."






