[[Frente!]]

CATEGORIES: ARIA Award winners, Australian alternative rock groups, Musical groups established in 1991, Musical groups disestablished in 1996, Musical groups reestablished in 2004, Musical groups disestablished in 2005, Victoria (Australia) musical groups, Musical groups reestablished in 2010, Australian folk music groups

Frente!  Kelly Street", which reached No. 4 in 1993. Their debut album, Marvin the Album, also issued in December, which appeared at No. 5 on the ARIA Albums Chart. "Labour of Love" was re-issued in 1994 as a CD single with a cover version of New Order's "Bizarre Love Triangle" included. Australian rock music historian, Ian McFarlane, felt the group's "quirky, irreverent, acoustic-based sound was at odds with the usual guitar-heavy, grunge trends of the day. The band's presentation had a tweeness about it that could have been off-putting if not for its genuine freshness and honesty".

History

Frente! were formed in Melbourne as Frente in 1989 by Simon Austin on guitar and backing vocals, Angie Hart on lead vocals, Tim O'Connor on bass guitar, and Mark Picton on drums and recorder.
Frente! signed with Mushroom Records's White Label which issued their second EP, Clunk, in April 1992. Kelly Street", which reached No. 4 and was certified platinum for shipment of 70,000 units. McFarlane described it as a "summery sugar-pop" tune with a "breezy, slightly kooky video clip". O'Connor had written the track after moving to Kenny Street but incorrectly told his friends he was going to Kelly Street; the record label misspelt the first word but the group decided to keep the error and its lower case. Initially Hart was positive about the track, "it's a really happy song for me. It's about making all the right decisions and feeling really confident about what you're doing". Hart changed her mind after it was parodied on TV's The Late Show as "Accidentally Was Released" – in 2005 she reiterated, "I still hate it".
On 24 November 1992 their debut album, Marvin the Album, was released, which peaked at No. 5 on the ARIA Albums Chart. It was produced by Daniel Denholm (Club Hoy), Michael Koppelman (Prince) and the band. The album was certified platinum in Australia. On the ARIA End of Year Charts for 1992 "Ordinary Angels" finished at No. 20 and " The album was also nominated for 'Best Cover Art' (by Hart and Louise Beach) and "Ordinary Angels" was nominated for 'Best Video' (directed by Robbie Douglas-Turner). Another single, "No Time", appeared in early 1993, which reached the Top 50 by March. In July that year Hart appeared nude for a cover story in Juice, with carefully positioned beads and her hand. By that time Alastair Barden (ex-King Idiot, Maelstrom) had replaced Picton on drums.
In 1994 Frente! toured Europe and the US to promote the international version of Marvin the Album on Mammoth Records. Allmusic's Alex Henderson felt that "after several listens, one starts to realize just how strong this abstract pop-folk-rock release is". The US re-release of "Labour of Love" managed No. 9 on the Modern Rock Tracks chart. "Ordinary Angels" appeared on the 1994 soundtrack for the US TV series Melrose Place. By year's end, due to constant touring, O'Connor left and was replaced on bass guitar by Bill McDonald (ex-Hot Half Hour, Deborah Conway Band, Rebecca's Empire).
On Good Friday in 1995 Hart recorded vocals for an Australian single, "Tingly", by Pop! released in September, which reached No. 92. Frente! has a track on the compilation album, Saturday Morning (5 December 1995), a cover version of "Open Up Your Heart (and Let the Sunshine In)". During 1995 Frente! recorded their second album, Shape, in Spain with Ted Niceley (Fugazi), David M. Allen (The Cure, Sisters of Mercy), Cameron McVey aka Booga Bear (Neneh Cherry) and the band producing.
During 1996 the group toured Europe, Asia and US for three months to promote the album. They used Frasier Brindley on keyboards while touring. John Everson of Illinois Entertainer, interviewed Hart in September and described Austin as her "on-again, off-again boyfriend", Hart detailed "Simon and I had a lot of shit to work out. We went out for awhile and then we broke up and then we went on tour. It goes in and out of being fine". In Canada in August and then Australia during December, they supported Alanis Morissette on her tour, promoting Jagged Little Pill. Morissette's guitarist, Jesse Tobias, became Hart's boyfriend. In January 1997 Frente! performed on the Melbourne leg of the Big Day Out, in July that year they issued another CD single, "Goodbye Goodguy". Tobias had joined Frente! for their final tour before the band broke up late in 1997 – Hart and Tobias married and formed a duo, Splendid.

Post breakup appearances

In late 2003 Frente! founders Austin and Hart, who were both living in the US, resumed song writing together. The show also featured other early 1990s Melbourne bands: The Glory Box, The Hollowmen and The Fauves. In 2011 Frente! performed at the Brisbane Festival in the Speigeltent.
In March 2014 it was announced that Austin and Hart will tour as Frente!, performing 9 concerts around Australia during May and June 2014, to mark the 21st anniversary of Marvin the Album. A special 2 CD anniversary edition of the album will also be released on May 16.

In popular culture

" The song "Jungle" from Shape featured in the an episode of the British television series Teachers.

Discography

Studio albums

Extended plays

Singles






