[[Aaron Allston]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, 2014 deaths, 20th-century American novelists, 21st-century American novelists, American film directors, American science fiction writers, Deaths from heart failure, Dungeons & Dragons game designers, Film directors from Texas, People from Corsicana, Texas, Role-playing game designers, Role-playing game writers, University of Texas at Austin alumni, Writers from Texas

Aaron Dale Allston (December 8, 1960 – February 27, 2014) was an American game designer and author of many science fiction books, notably Star Wars novels. His works as a game designer include game supplements for role-playing games, several of which served to establish the basis for products and subsequent development of TSR's Dungeons & Dragons game setting Mystara. His later works as a novelist include those of the X-Wing series: Wraith Squadron, Iron Fist, Solo Command, Starfighters of Adumar. He also wrote two entries in the New Jedi Order series: Enemy Lines I: Rebel Dream, and Enemy Lines II: Rebel Stand.  Allston wrote three of the nine Legacy of the Force novels: Betrayal, Exile, and Fury, and three of the nine Fate of the Jedi novels: Outcast, Backlash and Conviction.

Early life and education

Aaron Dale Allston was born December 8, 1960 to Tom Dale Allston and Rose Binford Boehm in Corsicana, Texas.dentonfuneralhome. He was an avid fan of science fiction from an early age and by high school was the secretary and reporter for his high school Science Fiction Club.

Career

Allston was a circulation manager, assistant editor, and editor of Space Gamer magazine, He branched into fiction, and in the mid-1990s wrote five original novels.
He began writing on the Star Wars X-Wing series in 1997, when the primary sequence writer Michael Stackpole could not handle the entire workload. Allston produced a new edition of Champions for Hero Games in 2002. In 2006, Allston launched the The Legacy of the Force series with a hardcover entitled Betrayal.
In 2005, Allston made his directorial debut on the independent film Deadbacks, which he also wrote and produced. The film went into post-production but was never released.google.com/+AllenVarney/posts/8ogyNeuYUgY
Allston lived in Round Rock, Texas.  For a short time, he worked for the Austin American-Statesman newspaper.

Health issues and death

In early April 2009 Allston had a heart attack and underwent an emergency quadruple bypass surgery, the first book in the Fate of the Jedi series.
On February 27, 2014, Allston collapsed during an appearance at VisionCon in Branson, Missouri, apparently from a massive heart failure. He died later that day in Springfield, Missouri at the age of 53.Net story on Allston's death

Selected bibliography

Non tie-in

=Doc Sidhe=

Star Wars

=X-Wing=

=The New Jedi Order=

=Legacy of the Force=

=Fate of the Jedi=

Terminator

Role-playing games






