[[David Corn]]

CATEGORIES: 1959 births, George Polk Award recipients, American journalists, American male writers, American magazine editors, American political pundits, American political writers, 20th-century American novelists, Brown University alumni, Living people, New York Press people, The Nation (U.S. magazine) people, Place of birth missing (living people)

David Corn (born February 20, 1959) is an American political journalist and author and the chief of the Washington bureau for Mother Jones.tv opposite James Pinkerton or other media personalities.
In February 2013, he was named winner of the 2012 George Polk Award in journalism in the political reporting category for his video and reporting of the "47 percent story," Republican nominee Mitt Romney's videoed meeting with donors during the 2012 presidential campaign.
As an author, Corn's output includes nonfiction and fiction and generally deals with government and politics. Corn has also been a book reviewer. On one occasion, he criticized his own organization when Nation Books published the translation of a controversial French book on Osama bin Laden and the 9/11 attacks. Forbidden Truth: US-Taliban Secret Oil Diplomacy and the Failed Hunt for Bin Laden, by Jean-Charles Brisard and Guillaume Dasquié, suggests that the attacks resulted from a breakdown in talks between the Taliban and the United States to run an oil pipeline through Afghanistan. Corn argued that publishing "contrived conspiracy theories" undermined the ability to expose actual governmental misbehavior. "French 9/11 Theory Finds Voice in the U.S." Los Angeles Times, July 3, 2002, p. E1.

Books

Corn's first book was a 1994 biography of longtime Central Intelligence Agency official Ted Shackley, which received mixed reviews. The book used Shackley's climb through the CIA bureaucracy to illustrate how the Agency worked and to follow some of its Cold War-era covert operations. In the Washington Post, Roger Warner called it "an impressive feat of research"; but, in the New York Times, Joseph Finder claimed Corn was seriously distorting history to blame Shackley for a series of CIA failings. "The Spy as Bureaucrat". Washington Post, October 23, 1994, p. WBK1. "The Spy in the Gray Flannel Suit". New York Times, October 23, 1994, p. A22.
Corn moved on to fiction with a contribution to Unusual Suspects (1996), a paperback collection of crime stories published as a fundraiser to combat world hunger. "They Wrote the Book on Fund-Raising". Washington Post, May 15, 1996, p. B1. His first novel, Deep Background, was a conspiracy thriller about the assassination of a president at a White House press conference and the ensuing investigation. Reviews praised Corn's mastery of the political atmosphere and characters, although they split on whether this was a virtue or, coming at the conclusion of the Clinton years, already all-too-familiar territory.. "The West Wing". New York Times Book Review, October 10, 1999, p. 25.
With the arrival of George W. Bush, Corn became a harsh critic of the President. His next book, The Lies of George W. Bush, charged that Bush had systematically "mugged the truth" as a political strategy; and he found fault with the media for failing to report this effectively. The book also broke with journalistic practice for its explicit charge of lying, a word usually avoided as editorializing. "Trust Buster". Washington Post, December 18, 2003, p. C3. "Chapter and verse on the need for regime change". Los Angeles Times, March 14, 2004, p. R3.
In particular, Corn criticized many of the arguments offered to justify the 2003 Invasion of Iraq; and he challenged New York Times columnist William Safire for claiming links between Saddam Hussein and Al-Qaeda. "The Privileges of Opinion, the Obligations of Fact". New York Times, March 28, 2004, p. 4.2. In Hubris, written with Michael Isikoff of Newsweek, Corn analyzed the Bush administration's drive toward the invasion.

The Plame affair

Corn was personally involved in the early coverage of the controversy over leaks to the media of the name of CIA officer Valerie Plame. After Robert Novak revealed Plame's identity in his July 14, 2003, column, Corn was the first to report, three days later, that Plame had been working covertly;Corn, David. "Nigergate Thuggery". The Nation, August 4, 2003. "What a Load of Armitage!" Wall Street Journal, September 15, 2006, p. A12. and he raised the possibility that the leak of her identity violated the Intelligence Identities Protection Act. "A Hot-Water Leak". Washington Post, October 1, 2003, p. C1.
Novak, for his part, disputed that Plame had been a covert operative at the time her identity was revealed. He also objected to the negative portrayal of himself in Hubris, for which he blamed Corn more than Isikoff. He said of Corn, "Nobody was more responsible for bloating this episode." Novak felt that Corn was too close with former ambassador Joseph Wilson, Plame's husband and a key figure in criticism of the administration's arguments for invasion.'" The Weekly Standard, October 16, 2006.

Mitt Romney "47 Percent" video and George Polk Award

In announcing Corn's being awarded the George Polk Award for 2012, the sponsors wrote:  David Corn of Mother Jones will receive the George Polk Award for Political Reporting for a story that rocked the nation and perhaps cost Mitt Romney the Presidential election. Through persistent digging and careful negotiation with a source, Corn secured a full recording of Romney at a $50,000-a-plate Florida fundraiser declaring that 47 percent of Americans — those who back president Obama — are "victims" who are "dependent upon government" and "pay no income tax." Corn worked for weeks to obtain the recording, but it was his years of high-impact journalism that helped lead him to the source of the recording. Furthermore, it was Corn's extensive previous reporting on Romney that convinced the source to trust him with its release.[ref]
 "LIU Announces 2012 George Polk Awards in Journalism" (press release), February 18, 2013.[/ref]
David Corn's story that introduced the secret tape was published in Mother Jones on September 17, 2012. 2-20-2013For the story about how and why Corn obtained the tape, see Paul Farhi, "How Mother Jones got the Romney '47 percent' story," Washington Post, September 18, 2012.

Publications

Notes




