[[Bob Anderson (fencer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1922 births, 2012 deaths, English expatriates in Canada, English fencers, Olympic fencers of Great Britain, Fencers at the 1952 Summer Olympics, English male film actors, People from Gosport, Royal Marines personnel of World War II, English choreographers, Film choreographers, English stunt performers

Robert James Gilbert "Bob" Anderson (15 September 1922 – 1 January 2012) was an English Olympic fencer, and a renowned film fight choreographer, with a cinema career that spanned more than 50 years and included films such as Highlander, The Princess Bride, The Mask of Zorro, The Lord of the Rings and Die Another Day. He was regarded as the premier choreographer of Hollywood sword-fighting, and during his career he coached many actors in swordsmanship, including Errol Flynn, Sean Connery, Antonio Banderas, Viggo Mortensen and Johnny Depp. He also appeared as a stunt double for Darth Vader's lightsaber battles in Star Wars Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back and Star Wars Episode VI: Return of the Jedi.

Biography

Anderson was educated at The Royal Hospital School, in Raleigh House. It was here that he began to fence.
Anderson joined the Royal Marines and won several combined services titles in the sport of fencing. He served in the Mediterranean during World War II.com, 2 January 2012
As a competitive fencer, he represented Great Britain at the Helsinki 1952 Summer Olympic Games, He finished tied for fifth in the team sabre event at Helsinki in 1952.
After his retirement from fencing competition, he studied under Prof. Roger Crosnier and was appointed the first official British National Coach, in charge of the National Training System, the day he was awarded his full Professorship. He succeeded Prof. Crosnier as President of the British Academy of Fencing. During the late 1950s to the 1970s he travelled around Britain, and between fencing courses he combined his official duties with television and film work. Eventually emigrating to Canada, he went on to become technical director of the Canadian Fencing Association in Ottawa.
Anderson's cinema career began in 1953 when he choreographed fights for and coached Errol Flynn in The Master of Ballantrae. During rehearsal for a scene he accidentally slashed Flynn on his thigh, leading to notoriety in Hollywood as "the man who stabbed Errol Flynn". He went on to work as a stunt performer and/or fight choreographer in films such as The Guns of Navarone and the Bond films From Russia With Love and Casino Royale. His stature in Hollywood was cemented when he was selected by Stanley Kubrick in 1974 to act as the sword master for Barry Lyndon.
Anderson subsequently went on to be involved in all three Published under title "Giving Some Pointers". David Prowse, who played Vader, said he did his own swordplay in Star Wars but afterward, "having one of the principals do his own stunts made filmmakers very weird from an insurance point of view."
Anderson continued to work in cinema for the next 30 years, and was responsible for the swordsmanship in many films, including Highlander, The Princess Bride, The Three Musketeers, The Mask of Zorro, Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl and The Lord of the Rings film trilogy. Shortly before his death he was working on The Hobbit. He had a reputation for being a perfectionist, with director Martin Campbell giving him the nickname "Grumpy Bob". Anderson was interviewed at length for the 2009 documentary on cinematic sword-fighting, Reclaiming the Blade, where he commented, "I never took up the sword, I think the sword took me up."

Death

Anderson died on New Year's Day, 2012 in a West Sussex hospital at the age of 89.
After his death his widow, Pearl, and daughter, Simone, visited the Royal Hospital School and donated Anderson's swords, medals and movie footage for the school's tercentenary museum.

Filmography

Miscellaneous crew

Stunts

Actor



Notes




