[[New England Collegiate Baseball League]]

CATEGORIES: New England Collegiate Baseball League, Summer baseball leagues, 1993 establishments in the United States, College baseball leagues in the United States

The New England Collegiate Baseball League (NECBL) is a 12-team collegiate summer baseball league founded in 1993 and sanctioned by the NCAA and Major League Baseball.  Each NECBL team plays an eight-week, 44-game schedule during June and July, with a playoff in early August.  Like the Cape Cod Baseball League and other amateur leagues, the NECBL is a showcase for top college-level players, giving professional baseball scouts a chance to see prospective pros playing against each other.  Along with the Cape Cod Baseball League, Northwoods League, and Coastal Plain League, it is considered one of the top summer leagues in the country and is a part of the National Alliance of College Summer Baseball. 
Founded in 1993, the NECBL began its direction under George Foster, former Cincinnati Reds and New York Mets All-Star and Major League Baseball home run leader, and Emmy Award-winning television producer/director Joseph Consentino. Play started in 1994 and today the NECBL has become a strong twelve-team league that plays in all six New England states.  The NECBL became a 13-team league in 2013 with the addition of teams in Rhode Island (Ocean State Waves), Massachusetts (Plymouth Pilgrims) and New York (Saratoga Brigade) (the league's first team to operate outside New England).
The NECBL's current commissioner is Sean McGrath, former general manager of the North Adams SteepleCats. McGrath replaced Mario Tiani, who retired following the 2012 season.

Current franchises

(see individual team websites below)

Former teams

=Relocated or renamed teams=

'''

=Defunct Teams=

'''

Season structure

For the current season, the league is divided into two six-team divisions, the North Division and the South Division.  During the regular season, teams play in-division opponents a total of six times, three games at home and three away.  Teams play out-of-division opponents twice, one game at home and one away.  These games make up the 42 game regular season schedule.  When doubleheaders are scheduled due to inclement weather, NECBL rules dictate that they are two seven-inning games.  NECBL regular season games have 2 umpires, while All-Star and playoff games have 3 or 4 umpires.  The top four teams from each division qualify for the playoffs.  In the division semifinal round the first seeds play the fourth seeds and the second seeds play the third seeds, respectively, in best-of-three series.  The winners of the division semifinals advance to the division finals, where they play a best-of-three series against their fellow division finalist.  The division champions advance to the NECBL championship series, where they face each other in a best-of-three series to decide the NECBL champion.

Past champions

In the NECBL's history, the most successful team is the Newport Gulls, with five league championships and nine championship series appearances.  The defunct North Shore Navigators franchise had four league titles.  The Keene Swamp Bats have three.  Three franchises have won two championships, the Sanford Mainers, the Vermont Mountaineers, and the defunct Central Mass Collegians.  The Mystic Schooners have won one championship, when the team was known as the Eastern Tides in the league's inaugural 1994 season.com, URL accessed July 22, 2009

Notable alumni

The following former NECBL players have gone on to play in Major League Baseball.

Media

All NECBL games are broadcast online through the NECBL Broadcast Network, with Teamline providing both audio, for all games, and video, for select games.com, URL accessed June 4, 2010. Archived June 4, 2010
On May 14, 2010, the league signed an agreement with Pointstreak.  Pointstreak provides "real-time scoring, official statistics, and administration services" to the NECBL.  A highlight of Pointstreak's services is Game Live, a real-time statistics feature providing play-by-play for every NECBL game.com, URL accessed June 4, 2010. Archived June 4, 2010



Notes



Team websites


