[[Charge!!]]

CATEGORIES: The Aquabats albums, 2005 albums, Documentary films about music and musicians, 2006 video albums, Nitro Records albums

Charge!! is the fourth studio album by American rock band The Aquabats, released on June 7, 2005 by Nitro Records.
After spending nearly six years in partial hiatus, Charge!! was The Aquabats' first studio album to showcase the band's radical shift in structure and sound, featuring a reduced five-member line-up and a reinvented musical style of New Wave-influenced rock music. Released to largely positive reviews and several successful international tours, Charge!! effectively revitalized The Aquabats' then-faltering career into the new century.



Following their dismissal from Goldenvoice Records in 2000, The Aquabats entered a lengthy period of relative inactivity, bringing much of their touring and recording plans to a standstill and resulting in the eventual departure of several of the band's key members, including the loss of their once prominent horn section. In 2004, The Aquabats independently released the EP Yo! Check Out This Ride! in an attempt to generate label interest, successfully signing to Nitro Records later in the year and commencing work on a new studio album in the fall.
While the lyricism of Charge!! continues in the typical Aquabats tradition of comedic self-referential narratives and pop culture and geek culture-oriented satire, the music introduced a bold new sound for the band, featuring a predominant focus on guitar and keyboard-driven rock, punk and Devo-influenced New Wave rather than the ska-driven eclecticism of their earlier albums. Notably, Charge!! was the first Aquabats studio album not to feature brass instruments, indeed one of the most remarked upon aspects of the album by reviewers; in a 2006 interview, Jacobs stated that the band attempted to write a saxophone solo into one of the album's songs but ultimately felt it sounded too out of place.
Charge! would be the final Aquabats album to feature longtime guitarist Corey Pollock (Chainsaw) as an official member, as he would eventually leave the band in 2006 as a result of their increased touring activity interfering with his day job. However, until The Aquabats! Super Show! solidified The Aquabats' image as a five-piece unit in 2012, Pollock continued to perform with the band as a second guitarist at their California shows and contributed guitar tracks to their subsequent studio material.

Release and promotion

After months of online hype, The Aquabats officially announced Charge!! on their website on April 1, 2005, unveiling the album's title, artwork, track listing, release date and corresponding tour, all of which had been kept secret until then.
Although the album was leaked through peer-to-peer file sharing for nearly a month prior to its official release, Charge!! charted modestly upon release, reaching #21 on Billboard Copies of the album were packaged with Aquabats trading cards featuring pictures of the band and song lyrics. Although the cards were produced in sets of thirteen, each CD came with only two, with an insert humorously instructing fans to buy more CDs in order to collect them all.
In promotion of the album, a music video for "Fashion Zombies!" was shot during the summer of 2005 and released online on July 12, 2005, and on September 23, 2005, The Aquabats made their debut appearance on national television on the G4 program Attack of the Show, performing "Fashion Zombies!" and "Nerd Alert!".

Touring

On June 11, 2005, mere days after the release of Charge!!, The Aquabats embarked on a well-promoted twelve-week tour of the US entitled the Teenage Pajamas From Outer Space Tour, supported by New Wave band The Epoxies and rockabilly group The Phenomenauts.

Reception

Critical reaction to Charge!! was generally positive, with many reviewers praising The Aquabats' transition in genre. Johnny Loftus of Allmusic gave the album four stars out of five, remarking that the band had "refocused its musical and ideological attack" during the six years since their previous studio album: "Intact are the pop references, zany in-jokes, and Batman villain fetishism... It doesn't loiter awkwardly between punk, pop, ska, and broad humor — it keeps the pressure on with a catchy guitar- and keyboard-driven blend of anthemic choruses and appropriately squawky elements."
Tim O'Neil of PopMatters also commented on the band's change of sound, writing that "The Aquabats' current strategic manifesto bears a strong resemblance to some of No Doubt's great late-period tactical accomplishments, especially on portions pertaining to the plague of 'Fashion Zombies!' and the propaganda manifesto 'Look at Me, I'm a Winner!'. Ironically, considering their near wholesale abandonment of the ska strategy, the greatest victory on Charge!! comes on the only battle to utilize the almost totally discredited Ska Force to full effect, the ebullient 'Waterslides!

Special One-Year Anniversary Edition

In June 2006, The Aquabats released a tongue-in-cheek "One-Year Anniversary" re-issue of Charge!!, featuring three previously unreleased bonus tracks from the original recording sessions, a DVD and brand new album art by artist Brandon Bird. Printed in a limited run, the anniversary re-issue was made available only through The Aquabats' website and live shows.

DVD contents

Track listing

All songs written by The Aquabats.

Charts

Personnel

The Aquabats

Production




