[[MTV2 (Canada)]]

CATEGORIES: English-language television stations in Canada, Canadian digital cable television networks, Bell Media, Television channels and stations established in 2001

MTV2 is a Canadian English language Category A specialty channel. MTV2 is a lifestyle and general entertainment channel aimed at youth and teen audiences.
MTV2 is owned by Bell Media, with the MTV2 name licensed from the American service MTV2, which is owned by MTV Networks, a division of Viacom.

History

On November 24, 2000, the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) announced the licensees of the new, much-sought after, category 1 digital services. Craig Media, in partnership with TD Capital Group Ltd, was granted a licence for a youth lifestyle service known as Connect.
Nonetheless, in August 2001, Craig Media announced that it had reached an agreement with MTV Networks to license programming and the MTV brand in Canada for the channel,TV Land, MTV and Craig Broadcast Systems to Launch New Canadian Services in September; PR Newswire; 2001-08-21 prompting a pre-launch name change to MTV Canada. Prior to the channel's launch, Craig purchased TD Capital Group's interest in the channel and it was launched on October 18, 2001. MTV Canada aired a mix of Canadian made programs, including Pepsi Breakout and MTV Select, as well as American MTV shows such as TRL and The Real World.
CHUM soon filed complaints with the CRTC, arguing that MTV Canada was violating its conditions of licence, exceeding its limit of 10 per cent music videos, becoming a direct competitor to MuchMusic.
However, these changes were soon rendered moot as Craig was acquired by CHUM Limited on December 1, 2004,CHUM completes $265 million purchase of Craig Media and financing Fasken Martineau prompting MTV Networks to exercise its right, due to a clause in its contract, to terminate the licensing agreement with Craig if a change in control were to happen. CHUM was required to pay $10 million CAD in licensing fees to MTV Networks for the time remaining in their contract. The contract termination also meant that MTV Networks was no longer able to retain interest the channels (except for TV Land Canada, indicating that Viacom's sale of their stake since the purchase could also be because of the company's strained relationships with CHUM Limited concerning the MTV-branded music channels because CHUM (with Cablevision's Rainbow Media) launched MuchUSA to compete against MTV).

2005-present

On June 9, 2005 CHUM announced it would rebrand the channel as Razer, a change that took effect on June 30 of that year. Later in the year, Bell Globemedia (later CTVglobemedia) struck a licensing agreement with MTV Networks to launch its own MTV channel (previously known as talktv) in early 2006.MTV Returns to Canada Bell Globemedia press release 2005-09-28
In July 2006, Bell Globemedia announced that it would purchase CHUM for an estimated $1.7 billion CAD, including its interest in Razer.
On August 1, 2008, Razer was relaunched as MTV2.S. counterpart. Because of their respective licences, it airs music videos and music programming unlike the current main MTV channel in Canada, making it also slightly similar to the American MTV.
Ownership changed hands again when on September 10, 2010, BCE (a minority shareholder in CTVglobemedia) announced that it planned to acquire 100% interest in CTVglobemedia for a total debt and equity transaction cost of $3.2 billion CAD. The deal was approved by the CRTC on March 7, 2011CRTC approves BCE's purchase of CTVglobemedia and closed on April 1 of that year, when CTVglobemedia was rebranded Bell Media.Bell completes acquisition of CTV, launches Bell Media business unit CNW 2011-04-01

Programming

Presently, MTV2 does not carry the same programs as it's American counterpart.

Logos






