[[Electric double-layer capacitor]]

CATEGORIES: Capacitors, Emerging technologies, Energy conversion

Electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLC) are, together with pseudocapacitors, part of a new type of electrochemical capacitors See also Brian E. Conway in Electrochemistry Encyclopedia: Electrochemical Capacitors — Their Nature, Function and Applications called supercapacitors, also known as ultracapacitors. Supercapacitors do not have a conventional solid dielectric. The capacitance value of an electrochemical capacitor is determined by two storage principles:
Double-layer capacitance and pseudocapacitance both contribute to the total capacitance value of a supercapacitor. Pseudocapacitance can increase the capacitance value by as much as an order of magnitude over that of the double-layer by itself.
Supercapacitors are divided into three families, based on the design of the electrodes:
Supercapacitors have the highest available capacitance values per unit volume and the greatest energy density of all capacitors. They can have capacitance values of  While existing supercapacitors have energy densities that are approximately 10% of a conventional battery, their power density is generally 10 to 100 times as great. This makes charge and discharge cycles of supercapacitors much faster than batteries. Additionally, they will tolerate many more charge and discharge cycles than batteries.
In these electrochemical capacitors, the electrolyte is the conductive connection between the two active electrodes. This distinguishes them from electrolytic capacitors, in which the electrolyte is the cathode and thus forms the second electrode.
Supercapacitors are polarized and must operate with the correct polarity. Polarity is controlled by design with asymmetric electrodes, or, for symmetric electrodes, by a potential applied during manufacture.
Supercapacitors support a broad spectrum of applications for power and energy requirements, including:

Concept

In a conventional capacitor, energy is stored by moving charge carriers, typically electrons, from one metal plate to another. This charge separation creates a potential between the two plates, which can be harnessed in an external circuit. The total energy stored in this fashion increases with both the amount of charge stored and the potential between the plates. The amount of charge stored per unit voltage is essentially a function of the size, the distance and the material properties of the plates and the material in between the plates (the dielectric), while the potential between the plates is limited by the breakdown field strength of the dielectric. The dielectric controls the capacitor's voltage. Optimizing the material leads to higher energy density for a given size.
EDLCs do not have a conventional dielectric. Their electrochemical properties, the so-called "electrical double layer", result in the effective separation of charge despite the vanishingly thin (on the order of nanometers) physical separation of the layers. The lack of need for a bulky layer of dielectric and the porosity of the material used, permits the packing of plates with much larger surface area into a given volume, resulting in high capacitances in small packages.
In an electrical double layer, each layer is quite conductive, but the physics at the interface between them means that no significant current can flow between the layers. The double layer can withstand only a low voltage, which means that higher voltages are achieved by matched series-connected individual EDLCs, much like series-connected cells in higher-voltage batteries.
EDLCs have much higher power density than batteries. relatively slow charge and discharge times. Capacitors can be charged or discharged at a rate that is typically limited by the heat tolerance of the electrodes.
While existing EDLCs have energy densities that are perhaps 1/10 that of a conventional battery, their power density is generally 10 to 100 times as great. This makes them most suited to an intermediary role between electrochemical batteries and electrostatic capacitors, where neither sustained energy release nor immediate power demands dominate.

History

see Supercapacitor#History

Construction

File:Electric double-layer capacitor (Activated carbon electrode - Tube type).PNG|Schematic construction of a wound supercapacitor
1.Safety vent, 3.Aluminum can, 5.Separator, 7.Collector, 9.Negative pole
File:Electric double-layer capacitor (Activated carbon electrode - BOX type).PNG|Schematic construction of a supercapacitor with stacked electrodes
1.Negative electrode,
3.Separator

Each EDLC cell consists of two electrodes, a separator and an electrolyte. The two electrodes are often electrically connected to their terminals via a metallic collector foil. The electrodes are usually made from activated carbon since this material is electrically conductive and has a very large surface area to increase the capacitance. The electrodes are separated by an ion permeable membrane (separator) used as an insulator to prevent short circuits between the electrodes. This composite is rolled or folded into a cylindrical or rectangular shape and can be stacked in an aluminium can or a rectangular housing. The cell is typically impregnated with a liquid or viscous electrolyte, either organic or aqueous, although some are solid state. The electrolyte depends on the application, the power requirement or peak current demand, the operating voltage and the allowable temperature range. The outer housing is hermetically sealed.

Comparisons

Advantages of supercapacitors include:
Disadvantages include:

Materials

see also Supercapacitor#Materials
In general, EDLCs improve storage density through the use of a nanoporous material, typically activated charcoal, in place of the conventional insulating dielectric barrier. Activated charcoal is an extremely porous, "spongy" form of carbon with an extraordinarily high specific surface area—a common approximation is that 1 gram (a pencil-eraser-sized amount) has a surface area of roughly  and thus are "stacked" (connected in series) to supply higher voltages.
Activated charcoal is not the "perfect" material for this application. The charge carriers it provides are far larger than the holes left in the charcoal, which are too small to accept them, limiting the storage. The mismatch is exacerbated when the carbon is surrounded by solvent molecules.
 Higher performance devices are available, at a significant cost increase, based on synthetic carbon precursors that are activated with potassium hydroxide (KOH).

Research materials

see Supercapacitor#New developments

Properties

see Supercapacitor#Comparisation of technical parameters

Applications

see Supercapacitor#Applications

Market

see Supercapacitor#Market








