[[Santa María (ship)]]

CATEGORIES: Exploration ships, Individual sailing vessels, Nautical lore, Replica ships, 15th-century ships, Christopher Columbus, Three-masted ships, Carracks, Age of Sail individual ships, Age of Discovery ships

La Santa María de la Inmaculada Concepción (Spanish for The Holy Mary of the Immaculate Conception), or La Santa María, was the largest of the three ships used by Christopher Columbus in his first voyage. Her master and owner was Juan de la Cosa.

History

The Santa María was probably a medium sized nau (carrack), about   The Santa María, being Columbus' largest ship, was only about this size, and the Niña and Pinta were even tinier, at only 50 to 75 tons burden and perhaps 15–18 meters (50 to 60 feet) on deck  (updated dimensional estimates are discussed below in the section entitled Replicas).

Shipwreck

The Santa María was built in Castro-Urdiales, Cantabria, in Spain's north-east. It seems the ship was known to her sailors as Marigalante, Spanish for "Gallant Maria".  The naos employed on Columbus's second voyage were named Marigalante and Gallega. "Columbus's Ships". 1997. Accessed 21 May 2012. Bartolomé de Las Casas never used La Gallega, Marigalante or Santa María in his writings, preferring to use la Capitana or La Nao.
The Santa María had a single deck and three masts. She was the slowest of Columbus's vessels but performed well in the Atlantic crossing. After engaging in festivities and drinking, Columbus ordered that the crew continue sailing to Cuba late into the night. One-by-one the crew kept falling asleep until only a cabin boy was steering the ship which caused the ship to run aground off the present-day site of Cap-Haïtien, Haiti on December 25, 1492, and was lost. Realizing that the ship was beyond repair, Columbus ordered his men to strip the timbers from the ship. The timbers from the ship were later used to build a fort which he called La Navidad (Christmas) because the wreck occurred on Christmas Day, north from the modern town of LimonadeHaïti histoire - 7 Bord de Mer de LimonadeArticle du Florida Museum of Natural History (see map, and the photograph).
The anchor of the Santa María now resides in the Musée du Panthéon National Haïtien (MUPANAH), in Port-au-Prince, Haiti.wiley.1111/j.1468-0033.2011.01744.x/full

Crew

Columbus's crew was not composed of criminals as is widely believed. Many were experienced seamen from the port of Palos in Andalusia and its surrounding countryside, as well as from the region of Galicia in northwest Spain.  It is true, however, that the Spanish sovereigns offered an amnesty to convicts who signed up for the voyage; still, only four men took up the offer: one who had killed a man in a fight, and three friends of his who had then helped him escape from jail. The Life of Christopher Columbus, Ch. IX. 1891.
Despite the romantic legend that the Queen of Spain had used a necklace that she had received from her husband the King as collateral for a loan, the voyage was principally financed by a syndicate of seven noble Genovese bankers resident in Seville (the group was linked to Amerigo Vespucci and funds belonging to Lorenzo di Pier Francesco de Medici). Hence, all the accounting and recording of the voyage was kept in Seville. This also applies to the second voyage, even though the syndicate had by then disbanded.
The crew of the Santa Maria is well-known, albeit in many cases, there are no surnames and the crewman's place of origin was used to differentiate him from others with the same given name.

Crew list

Replicas

 

Little is definitively known about the actual dimensions of this vessel, since no documentation or illustration has survived from that era.   Since the 19th century, various notable replicas have been publicly commissioned or privately constructed.

Quadricentennial

Interest in reconstructing the Santa María started in Spain at around 1890 for the 400th anniversary of Columbus's voyage. An 1892 reconstruction, by the Spanish government, depicted the ship as a nao.New York Times, April 26, 1893

West Edmonton Mall

A replica was built during Expo 86 and anchored in "Deep Sea Adventure Lake" at  West Edmonton Mall.  Built at False Creek in Vancouver, the ship was hand-carved and hand-painted and then transported in flatbed trucks across the Rocky Mountains to Edmonton, Alberta.WEM Santa Maria page

Quincentennial

A replica, depicted as a nao, was commissioned by the city of Columbus, Ohio.
Dana Rinehart, the 50th mayor of Columbus, christened the ship as part of the 500th anniversary of its voyage.  The replica remains a tourist attraction.

Madeira

A functional replica was built on the island of Madeira, between July 1997 and July 1998, in the fishing village of Camara de Lobos. The ship is  wide. In 1998, the Santa María represented the Madeira Wine Expo 98 in Lisbon, where she was visited by over 97 thousand people in only 25 days. Since then thousands more have sailed and continue to sail aboard that Santa María which is situated in Funchal.Santa María de Columbo



Notes


