[[Richard Garfield]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, Board game designers, Collectible card games, Living people, Magic: The Gathering, Whitman College faculty, University of Pennsylvania alumni, American game designers

Richard Channing Garfield (born June 26, 1963, Philadelphia) is the American game designer who created Magic: The Gathering, the first collectible card game (CCG). Magic debuted in 1993, and its success spawned many imitations. Garfield first became passionate about games when he played the roleplaying game Dungeons & Dragons, and Magic is similar to a roleplaying game in many ways. Garfield and Magic are in the Adventure Gaming Hall of Fame. Retrieved 22 June 2013.

Early life and family

Garfield was born in Philadelphia, and spent his childhood in many locations throughout the world as a result of his father's work in architecture. His family eventually settled in Oregon when he was twelve. Garfield is the great-great-grandson of U.S. President James A. Garfield (1831–81), and his great-uncle invented the paper clip. He's also the nephew of Fay Jones, who, already an established artist, illustrated one Magic card for him.Mark Rosewater, 'Blogatog: Stasis'
While always having an interest in puzzles and games, his passion for games began when he was introduced to Dungeons & Dragons.
Garfield had designed his first game by the time he was 13.

Education and career

In 1985, he received a Bachelor of Science degree in computer mathematics. He joined Bell Laboratories, then decided to continue his education and attended the University of Pennsylvania, and studied combinatorial mathematics.
While searching for a publisher for RoboRally, which he designed in 1985, Wizards of the Coast began talking to Garfield through Mike Davis, but the game looked too expensive for a new company like Wizards to produce.
Garfield studied under Herbert Wilf and earned a Ph.D. in combinatorial mathematics from Penn in 1993. His thesis was The distribution of the binomial coefficients modulo p.
Magic: The Gathering launched in 1993. Playtesters began independently developing expansion packs, which were then passed to Garfield to edit. Garfield left academia to join Wizards of the Coast as a full-time game designer in June 1994. Garfield managed the hit game wisely, balancing player experience with business needs and allowing other designers to contribute creatively to the game. With his direction, Wizards established a robust tournament system for Magic, something that was new to hobby gaming.
Wizards finally published Garfield's RoboRally in 1994.
In 1999, Garfield was inducted into the Adventure Gaming Hall of Fame, as was Magic. List of Winners, Origins Game Fair. Retrieved 22 June 2013. He was a primary play tester for the Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition bookset, released by Wizards in 2000. He eventually left Wizards to become an independent game designer.
He still sporadically contributes to Magic: The Gathering. He has shifted more of his attention to video games, having worked on the design and development of Schizoid and Spectromancer.

Games designed

A partial list of games designed by Garfield:






