[[Virtua Racing]]

CATEGORIES: 1992 video games, Arcade games, Racing video games, Sega 32X games, Sega-AM2 games, Sega arcade games, Sega Genesis games, Sega Saturn games, Head-to-head arcade games

Virtua Racing or V.R. for short, is a Formula One racing arcade game, developed by Sega AM2 and released in October 1992.  Virtua Racing was initially a proof-of-concept application for exercising a new 3D-graphics platform under development, the "Model 1". The results were so encouraging, that Virtua Racing was fully developed into a standalone arcade title. Though its use of 3D polygonal graphics was predated by arcade rivals Namco (Winning Run in 1988) and Atari (Hard Drivin' in 1989), Virtua Racing had vastly improved visuals in terms of polygon count, frame rate, and overall scene complexity, which all contributed to a greater sense of immersion. Virtua Racing is regarded as one of the most influential video games of all time, for laying the foundations for subsequent 3D racing games and for popularizing 3D polygonal graphics among a wider audience.
The original arcade game has three levels, designated into difficulties. Beginner is "Big Forest", intermediate is "Bay Bridge" and expert is "Acropolis". Each level has its own special feature, for example the amusement park in "Big Forest", or the "Bay Bridge" itself, or the tight hairpin of "Acropolis".
VR introduced the "V.R. View System" by allowing the player to choose one of four views to play the game. This feature was then used in most other Sega arcade racing games (and is mentioned as a feature in the attract mode of games such as Daytona USA). It was later ported to home consoles, starting with the Mega Drive/Genesis in 1994.

Arcade cabinet versions

V.R. was released in a "twin" cabinet – the standard and most common version, which is effectively 2 complete machines built into a single cabinet. The Twin cabinets for the USA were manufactured by contract at Grand Products, Inc. in Illinois for Sega and were built using Wells-Gardner 25" monitors, nearly all of which had Zenith picture tubes with a manufacturing defect that caused them to fail after a few years of use. As a result of this, many V.R. machines were parted or thrown out and are an uncommon sight today. The Twin cabinet that was sold in the rest of the world was built by Sega in Japan and used 29" Nanao monitors.
Also available was an upright (UR), which was a single-player cabinet using the same force-feedback steering as the twin. 
There was also a Deluxe version, known as the V.R. DX cabinet type, which is also a single-player machine and has a 16:9 aspect-ratio monitor (the first use of a widescreen aspect ratio monitor in an arcade game), and 6 airbags (3 on each side) built into the seat that will inflate and "nudge" the player when cornering, and one more airbag on the player's back that inflates under braking. The seat is also adjustable via "forward" and "back" buttons using air pressure. V.R. DX's force-feedback steering also uses two pneumatic cylinders to rotate the steering wheel, which differ from the electric motor-and-clutch system that the upright and twin versions use (which have no inbuilt air system), so the steering feel is quite different.
Virtua Formula was released in 1993. It was unveiled at the opening of Sega's second arcade amusement park Joypolis, where a whole room with 32 machines was dedicated to the game. Virtua Formula was effectively a "super DX"  version of V.R. and the player sat in a full-motion hydraulically actuated Formula One car 'replica' in front of a 50-inch screen. Most of these units were converted into Sega's second-generation Indy car simulator, Indy 500, and are commonly found at larger Sega Gameworks locations in the USA.
All versions of Virtua Racing are linkable up to 8-players; meaning 4 twin units or 8 DX, UR, or Virtua Formula cabinets can be linked together using fiber-optic cables. In addition this, there was an optional display known as the Live Monitor that would sit on top of the twin cabinets and replay action shots of what was occurring on the live players in a "virtual sportscast" by a virtual commentator, "Virt McPolygon".

Home console versions

Mega Drive/Genesis

Due to the complexity of the Model 1 board, a home console version seemed unlikely, until 1994 when a cartridge design incorporating the Sega Virtua Processor on an extra chip was created to enable a version on the Mega Drive/Genesis. It was more expensive than other games, initially retailing at £70 in the United Kingdom and US$100 in the United States. Despite being severely scaled down and uses the machine's low-res 256 x 192 mode, it was still technically impressive, and was very well received by reviewers, with some of them claiming it to be the most impressive 16-bit game ever created from a technical standpoint. In September 1994, Famitsu magazine's Reader Cross Review gave the Mega Drive version of the game an 8 out of 10.読者 クロスレビュー: V.R.(バーチャレーシング). Weekly Famicom Tsūshin. No.299. Pg.38. 9 September 1994. Mega placed the game at #4 in their Top Mega Drive Games of All Time.Mega magazine issue 26, page 74, Maverick Magazines, November 1994
 
 "..." (Diehard GameFan magazine, June 1994 issue)

The game was incompatible with Majesco's re-released Genesis 3 from 1998, and would not work on any Mega Drive equipped with a Sega 32X.
The Sega 32X version also known as Virtua Racing Deluxe was released in 1994, developed by Sega AM2, and published by Sega under the Sega Sports label. It performed much closer to the original arcade, included two extra cars ("Stock" and "Prototype") and two new tracks ("Highland" and "Sand Park"). Due to the poor sales of the 32X, the game was not as popular as its Mega Drive predecessor.

Saturn

The Sega Saturn version, previously known by the working title Virtua Racing Saturn, was released in 1995 and developed and published by Time Warner Interactive. The Saturn release has the game soundtrack as standard Red Book audio, which can be listened to in any CD player. The Saturn version also includes seven new courses and four new cars. Unlike other versions, it features Grand Prix mode, where players drive a series of cars and the tracks to earn points. 

Playstation 2

A remake was released for the PlayStation 2 under the Sega Ages 2500 label known as Virtua Racing: FlatOut. It was released in Japan in 2004 and in North America and Europe in 2005 as part of the Sega Classics Collection. It includes three new courses and four new cars.






