[[Julian Gray]]

CATEGORIES: 1979 births, Living people, People from Lewisham, English footballers, Association football midfielders, Arsenal F.C. players, Crystal Palace F.C. players, Cardiff City F.C. players, Birmingham City F.C. players, Coventry City F.C. players, Fulham F.C. players, Barnsley F.C. players, Walsall F.C. players, Nea Salamina Famagusta FC players, Premier League players, The Football League players, Expatriate footballers in Cyprus

Julian Raymond Marvin Gray (born 21 September 1979) is an English footballer who last played for Walsall.
He previously played in the Football League and Premier League for Arsenal, Crystal Palace, Cardiff City, Birmingham City, Coventry City, Fulham, Barnsley and Walsall, and in Cyprus for Nea Salamis Famagusta.

Club career

Gray was born in Lewisham, in south London. He began his football career with Arsenal as a trainee. After a few seasons he made the switch across London to join Crystal Palace for £500,000 in 2000. He is an attacking left winger, can also play as an auxiliary striker, and has learnt full back duties so he can help out in defence. Following his move to Palace Gray was instrumental in The Eagles' success and played a major part in helping them achieve promotion in the 2003–04 season,
Gray's contract expired in June 2004, allowing him to sign for Birmingham City on a free transfer. He played a number of games in his first season in the Midlands and remained a key part of manager Steve Bruce's plans up until the 2005–06 season, but found himself out of the first team after the Blues' promotion, and was released in May 2007.
He joined Coventry City on 10 July 2007.
In July 2009 Gray went on Sheffield United's pre-season tour of Malta as part of a trial with the club,
On 15 September 2009 Gray signed for Barnsley, initially on a monthly contract.
He joined Walsall in February 2010,
After leaving Walsall when his contract expired, Gray spent two seasons in Cyprus with Nea Salamis Famagusta. He returned to England in 2013, and trained with former club Walsall before signing a contract with them on 27 September, to run until January of the following year.






