[[Robin Wright]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 births, Actresses from San Diego, California, Actresses from Texas, American film actresses, American soap opera actresses, Living people, People from Dallas, Texas, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, American television actresses, American television directors, Women television directors, Best Drama Actress Golden Globe (television) winners, TIME 100 Most Influential People in the World, TIME 100 (2014)

Robin Gayle Wright (born April 8, 1966) is an American actress and singer. She was previously credited as Robin Wright Penn. From 1984 to 1988, she starred in the television series Santa Barbara as Kelly Capwell, which earned her multiple Daytime Emmy nominations. She made the transition to film, starring in The Princess Bride, Forrest Gump (earning her a Golden Globe Award nomination), Toys, Message in a Bottle, Unbreakable, The Conspirator, Moneyball and The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo.  She also appears as Claire Underwood in the Netflix series House of Cards, for which she was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series, and for which she won the Golden Globe in 2014 for best actress in a TV series (drama), making her the first actress to win a Golden Globe for an online-only web television series. From 1996 to 2010, Wright was married to actor Sean Penn, with whom she has two children.

Early life

Wright was born Robin Gayle WrightAccording to the State of Texas. Texas Birth Index, 1926-1995. Searchable here  in Dallas, Texas, the daughter of Gayle (née Gaston), a national director in  Mary Kay cosmetics salesforce, and Freddie Gayle Wright, a pharmaceutical executive. She was raised in San Diego, California. She attended La Jolla High School and Taft High School in Woodland Hills, Los Angeles.

Career

She was listed as one of twelve "Promising New Actors of 1986" in John Willis' Screen World, Vol. 38. 1986. Wright first became famous on television, playing Kelly Capwell on the soap opera Santa Barbara, which earned her three Daytime Emmy nominations.
It wasn't until early to mid-'90s that she rose to fame after her roles as Buttercup in The Princess Bride and Jenny Curran in Forrest Gump, the latter role garnering her Golden Globe Award and Screen Actors Guild nominations for Best Supporting Actress. Wright was offered the role of Maid Marian in Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves, but turned it down because she was pregnant. She had to back out of the role of Abby McDeere in The Firm (1993), with Tom Cruise, upon discovering that she was pregnant with her second child, son Hopper Penn.
In 1996, she married Sean Penn and changed her name to Robin Wright Penn. The same year, she starred in the film adaptation of Daniel Defoe's Moll Flanders for which she received a Satellite Nomination for Best Actress in a Drama. She went on to co-star with her husband in the 1997 film She's So Lovely, for which she was nominated for a Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actress. One of her most recent successes was a supporting role in the television film Empire Falls as Grace Roby, mother of Ed Harris's character Miles Roby. Wright received her third Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for this role.
In 2013, Wright starred in Netflix's series House of Cards, as Claire Underwood, the spouse of Kevin Spacey's character, Congressman Francis Underwood. On July 18, 2013, Netflix earned the first Primetime Emmy Award nominations for original online only web television for the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards.

Personal life

From 1986 to 1988, Wright was married to actor Dane Witherspoon, whom she met in 1984 on the set of the soap-opera Santa Barbara.
In 1989, Wright became involved with actor Sean Penn following his divorce from Madonna. Their daughter Dylan Frances Penn was born on April 13, 1991. Their son Hopper Jack Penn was born on August 6, 1993. Wright and Penn married in 1996. Their relationship became on-again and off-again in the late 2000s. Divorce plans were announced in December 2007,
In February 2012, it was reported that Wright had begun dating actor Ben Foster.
She is the Honorary Spokesperson for the Dallas, Texas-based non-profit The Gordie Foundation."The Gordie Foundation Announces HAZE Documentary and Robin Wright Penn as Part of the 2009 AFI DALLAS International Film Festival" 3/19/2009, Foundation web site

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations








