[[WFUV]]

CATEGORIES: Fordham University, Adult album alternative radio stations in the United States, Radio stations established in 1947, College radio stations in New York, NPR member stations, Radio stations in New York, 1947 establishments in New York

WFUV, 90.7 FM in New York City, is Fordham University's 47,000-watt effective radiated power noncommercial radio station, with studios on its Bronx campus and its antenna atop nearby Montefiore Medical Center. First broadcast in 1947, it has had an air staff which includes New York radio veterans Dennis Elsas and Vin Scelsa.  Other full-time air staff members include Rita Houston (program director and host of the program The Whole Wide World), Darren DeVivo, Carmel Holt and Corny O'Connell.

Background

The station is a National Public Radio affiliate. It had originally been a 3,500-watt station until February 21, 1969.  when its effective radiated power was increased to 47,000 watts, and began broadcasting in stereo on March 31, 1973 weekly in the New York area and thousands more worldwide on the Web (wfuv. The station is known for its adult album alternative format (a mix of adult rock, singer-songwriters, world and other music, formerly branded as "City Folk"), as well as Celtic music. Other programs include genres such as folk music and early pop and jazz. National programs heard on WFUV include World Cafe, American Routes, Mountain Stage and The Thistle & Shamrock.  In-studio interviews and performances are also a prominent feature of its programming.  On-air guests have included Radio Hall of Famer Arthur Godfrey (in 1947), Pete Hamill, Steve Buscemi, Tim Robbins, The Jefferson Airplane, The Association, Graham Nash, Roger McGuinn, Suzanne Vega, Jimmy Webb, Peter, Paul & Mary, Cyndi Lauper, Sting, Bo Diddley, Judy Collins, Lou Reed, Brian Wilson, Robert Klein, Kevin Bacon, Dick Cavett, Glen Campbell, Ringo Starr, Joshua Bell, Paul Simon, Art Garfunkel, Robbie Robertson, Los Lobos, Tony Bennett, Utah Phillips, William (Rosko) Mercer, Dave Herman, John Zacherle, Steve Post, The New York Rock & Roll Ensemble, Digger Phelps, The Bad Plus, Buddy Guy, Rosanne Cash, Elvis Costello, Ani DiFranco, Jackson Browne, Ben Harper, Richard Barone, The Decemberists, Moby, Uncle Tupelo, Josh Ritter, Neil Young, Of Monsters and Men, Mavis Staples and Norah Jones (in her radio debut).  WFUV has introduced many other new artists over the years.
The station's call letters stand for "Fordham University's Voice."  Though operated as a professional public radio station, WFUV's mission also includes a strong training component for Fordham students.  Students receive intensive instruction and are heard on the air in news and sports programming.  WFUV's alumni, including Charles Osgood of CBS-TV & radio, Bob Keeshan (Captain Kangaroo), film producer Jack Haley Jr., Raymond Siller (Johnny Carson's head writer) and actor Alan Alda, have had a significant impact on broadcast and entertainment history.  News department alumni are/were heard on many stations and networks nationally.  These include Richard Hake of WNYC in New York, Chris Reilly, an anchor on WNYC & WINS in New York, Kathleen Maloney, a WINS & WABC in New York reporter, Tom O'Hanlon, a reporter on WCBS in New York, and Greg Kelly, a journalist on Fox News Channel.  
The sports department has produced several notable alumni, including the legendary Brooklyn/Los Angeles Dodgers announcer and Baseball Hall of Famer Vin Scully, two-time Emmy Award-winning sports anchor Sal Marchiano for WPIX-TV in New York, Yankees announcer Michael Kay, New York Times sportswriter Jack Curry, USA Today & New York Times sportswriter Malcolm Moran, Knicks announcer and "The NBA on ABC" sportscaster Mike Breen, Nets announcer Chris Carrino, Knicks announcer Spero Dedes, New York Giants announcer Bob Papa, WFAN's "Talking Baseball" host Ed Randall, who is also heard on MLB.

History

WFUV's rock music shows were formerly hosted by Fordham students, including
-  the renowned Pete Fornatale, whose first show began in November 1964, when he was a sophomore, and who returned to WFUV in 2001 after a 30-year hiatus, remaining until his 2012 death
- former WFUV Program Director Bill Crowley of Air America Radio, 
- Pat Dawson of NBC News
-  Gary Stanley, sportscaster on WCBS in New York City.  
- Ozzie Alfonso and Ted May, who was known as "Ed" May on WFUVwent on to win Emmy Awards as directors of Sesame Street.  
Daily rock music programming was begun in February 1970 by then Program Director Lew Goodman.  Prior to that the programming was a mix of classical, popular and ethnic music, including Bill Shibilski's Polka Party, which was broadcast from 1964 till 2001, and Fordham University sports broadcasts. Many chamber music and piano recitals were broadcast live from now-defunct Studio B in the 1950s.
WFUV was on the verge of going off the air in September 1968, due to budgetary cuts by the university, but the student-staff went on strike and organized rallies and demonstrations to save the station that were attended by students and faculty.
WFUV has been a  public radio station since 1988.  In 2005 the studios, offices, and transmitter moved from the third floor of Keating Hall on Fordham's Rose Hill campus in the Bronx, where it had been since 1947, to Keating Hall's basement. The move allowed the station to improve its equipment and gain more space. Its antenna was moved in 2006 from atop an unfinished tower on the Rose Hill campus (it was previously atop Keating Hall) to atop Montefiore Medical Center on Gun Hill Road, one of the highest locations in the Bronx.
On April 22, 2010, WFUV announced an additional transmitter in the Newburgh/Beacon area along the Hudson River north of New York City.  The frequency is 94.5.




