[[Jade Dernbach]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 births, Living people, Surrey cricketers, Cricketers at the 2011 Cricket World Cup, England Twenty20 International cricketers, England One Day International cricketers, South African people of Italian descent, English cricketers, Sportspeople from Johannesburg, NBC Denis Compton Award recipients, South African emigrants to the United Kingdom, Melbourne Stars cricketers, Alumni of St John's College, Johannesburg

Jade Winston Dernbach (born 3 March 1986) is a cricketer who plays for Surrey County Cricket Club and England. He made his first-class debut in 2003 and won the NBC Denis Compton Award in 2004 and 2009.
Although born in South Africa and initially schooled at St John's College, he moved to England as a child and gained British citizenship, making him eligible for the national team. After impressing for the England Lions in the West Indies in the early part of 2011, he was called up to the senior team as a replacement for Ajmal Shahzad for the knock out stages of the 2011 Cricket World Cup and made his Twenty20 and ODI debuts later that year against Sri Lanka.
Derek Pringle described him in The Daily Telegraph as a fast bowler who is capable of obtaining conventional and reverse swing, as well as of deceiving the batsman by bowling a variety of slower balls.England v Sri Lanka: Jade Dernbach proves that variety is the spice of one-day international cricket life Retrieved 11 July 2011

Personal life

Dernbach was born in Johannesburg, South Africa to a South African father and an Italian mother and consequently currently possesses an Italian passport.
Although born in South Africa, after his first call-up to the England squad, he stated that "I don't owe anything to South Africa. I was just born there, did a bit of schooling there, my whole cricket career has been based in the UK, and UK is my home. I want to give everything I can to England cricket, that's the country I love and that's the country that has given me everything I have now."
In 2013, Dernbach became the first UK-based athlete to pose for a PETA "Ink Not Mink" advertisement, showing off his arm and chest tattoos on behalf of the anti-fur campaign.
He is a fan of Arsenal.

County cricket

Dernbach is a graduate of Surrey's youth academy, having initially joined when aged 14.

International cricket

In 2010, Dernbach was selected for the England Performance Programme tour of Australia and subsequent England Lions tour of the West Indies where they participated in the domestic Regional Four Day Competition. In the latter, he took 19 wickets at an average of 15.63, making him the leading English bowler.
He was called up to the senior team as a replacement for Ajmal Shahzad for the knock out stages of the 2011 Cricket World Cup but was not picked to play.
At the beginning of the English season, he was then picked for the Lions to face the touring Sri Lankans. He took 9 wickets in the match, although the Lions ultimately lost the match. However his performance saw him included in the senior squad for the second Test after an injury to James Anderson. He had to wait until the limited overs games to make his debut; taking 1–18 in his first Twenty20 International and 2–25 in his first ODI.
Dernbach was a member of the England ODI squad for their match against Ireland in August 2011.
As of 29 March 2014, Dernbach holds the unfortunate record of having both the worst career economy rate in ODI history for bowlers bowling 1000+ balls and also the worst career economy rate in T20I history for bowlers bowling 300+ balls.






