[[Yankees–Red Sox rivalry]]

CATEGORIES: Boston Red Sox, Major League Baseball rivalries, New York Yankees

The Yankees–Red Sox rivalry is a sports rivalry between the New York Yankees and Boston Red Sox baseball teams of Major League Baseball (MLB). The two teams have competed in MLB's American League (AL) for over 100 years and have since developed one of the fiercest rivalries in sports. In 1919, Red Sox owner Harry Frazee sold star player Babe Ruth to the Yankees, which was followed by an 86-year period in which the Red Sox did not win a World Series. This led to the popularization of a superstition known as the "Curse of the Bambino", which was one of the most well-known aspects of the rivalry.
The rivalry is often a heated subject of conversation, especially in the home region of both teams, the Northeastern United States. (when the Yankees won).
The Yankees and the Red Sox finished tied for first in 
The Yankee–Red Sox match-up is regarded by some sports journalists as the greatest rivalry in sports.

Background

Since before the start of the American Revolution, Boston and New York have shared an intense rivalry as cities. For more than a century after its founding, Boston was arguably the educational, cultural, artistic, and economic power in the United States. Boston's location as the closest American port to Europe and its concentration of elite schools and manufacturing hubs helped maintain this position for several decades. During this time period, New York was often looked down upon as the upstart, over-populated, dirty cousin to aristocratic and clean Boston.
In the 19th century, however, New York's economic power soon outpaced Boston's, fueled by possession of the terminus of the Erie Canal, which spurred massive growth in the manufacturing, shipping, insurance and financial services businesses. Another factor was its more rapid population expansion in comparison to Boston, driven by the growth of these industries, by New York's popularity as an immigration port of entry, and enhanced by a larger population base to begin with, even prior to the construction of the Canal – on the eve of the Revolution, New York, with 30,000 people, had nearly twice the population of Boston, with about 16,000. By the start of the 20th century the original dynamic, centered on Boston, had completely shifted as New York became the focus of American capitalism (especially on Wall Street); this change was reflected in the new national pastime.

Early history: Glory of the Red Sox

The Red Sox were one of the most successful teams in baseball from 1901 to 1918.
Years later, on April 11, 1912, the Highlanders debuted their pinstripes in a game against Boston, by then known as the Red Sox. The 1912 team would go on to win a team record 105 games and their second World Series title, defeating the New York Giants.
Six years later, the Chicago Cubs scored two runs off of Babe Ruth in game 4 of the Series, snapping his then record World Series scoreless inning streak at  However, the Red Sox won the game 2–1, and went on to capture their fifth Series title, their third in four years, and fourth in seven years.
The Yankees would however receive one notable moment of glory against the Red Sox during this era. On April 24, 1917 Yankee pitcher George Mogridge threw a no-hitter at Fenway Park, the first in the ball park's history and first in Yankee history. It would also turn out to be the Yankees only no-hitter where they allowed a run as they would win the game 2–1.

Babe Ruth sold to Yankees

In 1916, Harry Frazee purchased the Red Sox, on credit, for $500,000. Despite Ruth's success with the Red Sox, owner and Broadway producer Frazee lost his patience with Ruth, who had threatened to hold out in lieu of a larger contract and become a distraction. After the Red Sox finished sixth in the American League in 1919, Frazee, needing money to finance a Broadway musical, No, No Nanette, sold pitcher-turned-outfielder Babe Ruth to the Yankees.
Ruth's arrival in New York simultaneously launched the Yankee dynasty while ravaging the Red Sox. While the Red Sox's five World Series titles were a record at the time, 1918 would be the team's last championship for 86 years. Meanwhile, Ruth's home run-hitting prowess anchored the Yankee line-up, which became known as "Murderers' Row" in the late 1920s. The Yankees reached the World Series seven times during Ruth's New York years, winning four. This abrupt reversal of fortunes for the Red Sox marked the beginning of the supposed "Curse of the Bambino." But it was not the Ruth deal alone that reversed the fortunes of both clubs. Frazee also sold many other players to the Yankees.
Robert W. Creamer reported that "the loan was made and relations between the two clubs continued to be cordial, with Frazee sending player after player to the Yankees over the next few seasons for more and more cash. This was no accident. Frazee and Yankees owner Jacob Ruppert were friends, and American League president Ban Johnson's attempts to drive Frazee out of the game had caused the five teams loyal to Johnson to make no deals with the Red Sox as long as Frazee owned the club, leaving only the Yankees and White Sox as trading partners. When the White Sox's reputation was destroyed in the Black Sox Scandal, Frazee's only option for trades was to deal with the Yankees.
The Red Sox soon became a baseball disaster area, finishing dead last nine times in eleven seasons."

Curse of the Bambino

From 1920 through 2003, the Yankees won 26 World Series championships and 39 pennants, compared to only four pennants for the Red Sox. In every year that the Red Sox won the pennant—1946, 1967, 1975 and 1986—they lost the World Series four games to three, leaving them with no World Series titles. However, the Yankees finished second in the standings to the Red Sox twice, in 1986 and 1995.

1920s and 1930s: First Yankee dynasty

Just two years after Ruth's sale, he went on to have a record setting season—statistically, one of the greatest in major league history for a batter. This propelled the Yankees to capture their first pennant and face their rival Giants. On October 5, 1921, the Yankees appeared in and won the their very first World Series game.
The Yankees would eventually move across the Harlem River to the Bronx into Yankee Stadium. On April 18, 1923, both the Red Sox and Yankees played for the first time at the Yankees new home.
Several lesser known moments in the rivalry occurred during the 1930s. Pitcher Red Ruffing was traded in 1930 from the Red Sox to the Yankees.

1940s–1960s: Teddy Ballgame, Joltin' Joe the Yankee Clipper

The rivalry intensified in 1941 when Ted Williams of the Red Sox batted .406, becoming the last player to bat over .400 in a season. Despite his accomplishment, Williams lost the AL MVP race to the Yankees' Joe DiMaggio, who holds the record for a hitting streak, with 56 straight games in which he had a hit.
The Red Sox won 15 games in a row in 1946.
Former manager for the Yankees, Joe McCarthy came out of retirement after a feud with Yankee ownership to sign with the Red Sox as their manager in 1948.
A year later, the Red Sox entered the final series of the season at Yankee Stadium needing only one win over the Yankees to advance to the World Series.
The 1951 season opened up at Yankee Stadium. The Yankees defeated the Red Sox, which was PA announcer Bob Sheppard first game. Sheppard would go on to serve PA duties at Yankee Stadium for another 56 years. On September 28 of that year, Yankees pitcher Allie Reynolds pitched a no-hitter against the Red Sox.
Starting in 1949, the Yankees began a streak of five consecutive World Series titles from 1949 to 1953 and breaking their previous streak of four straight titles from 1936 to 1939. They would also go on to win 14 pennants in 16 years starting in 1949.

1961–1980: Milestones, fights, neck and neck finishes and the Bucky Dent game

The 1961 season saw the chase of Babe Ruth's 1927 single season home run record by Roger Maris and Mickey Mantle.
The next year in 
Years later in 1967, Red Sox pitcher Billy Rohr came within a single strike of a no-hitter at Yankee Stadium. Howard's contribution would be instrumental in the 1967 World Series, but he and Yastrzemski would lose to Bob Gibson and the St. Louis Cardinals four games to three.
In 1973, the American League decided to adopt the designated hitter rule.
After the Yankees' loss to the Reds, owner George Steinbrenner committed to sign marquee free agent Reggie Jackson to help win a championship.
In 1978, the Red Sox, led by Jim Rice, Carl Yastrzemski, Fred Lynn and catcher Carlton Fisk, and managed by future Yankee coach Don Zimmer, A one-game playoff was scheduled in Boston to determine who would win the AL East pennant for 1978.
Boston pitted former Yankee pitcher Mike Torrez against the Yankees' Cy Young Award winner, Ron Guidry, who took a 24–3 record into the game.

1980s and early 1990s

1980s: No championships

The 1980s was the only decade that neither the Yankees nor the Red Sox won a World Series. but the Yankees seriously contended in the Red Sox' playoff years (1986 and 1988).
The Yankees lost the World Series in  One of the game's greatest hitters, Wade Boggs, struck out to end the game. This was the first no-hitter thrown by a left-hander at Yankee Stadium and the first no-hitter by a Yankee since Don Larsen's perfect game against Subway Series rival Brooklyn Dodgers in Game five of the 1956 World Series and the first regular no-hitter by a Yankee since 1951.
On October 4, 1986, Righetti once again made history against the Red Sox when he saved both games of a doubleheader against them, finishing the season with 46 saves,, when Randy Myers saved 53 games for the Chicago Cubs; Righetti still owns the AL record for left-handers.
Righetti's teammate, first baseman and defending American League MVP Don Mattingly, came into the last game batting .352, second in the league to Boston's Wade Boggs. With Boggs sitting out the game, Mattingly needed to go 6 for 6 to win the batting title. Although Mattingly would hit a home run in his first at bat and a double later on, he fell short and Boggs won the batting title. Mattingly would be named most outstanding player that year by the press, but fell short to Boggs' teammate Roger Clemens in the AL MVP voting.
Despite Righetti's pitching on the last day of the season, the Red Sox still won the division and marched on in the playoffs. The Yankees' bad performance during the 1980s came when the Red Sox faced the Yankees' cross-town rivals, the New York Mets, in the World Series. The New York Times called the series a "painful series".
In game six of the World Series, Boston (leading the series three games to two) took a 5–3 lead in the top of the 10th inning. In the bottom half of the frame, Red Sox reliever Calvin Schiraldi retired the first two batters, putting the team within one out of winning the World Series. However, the Mets scored three unanswered runs, tying the game on a wild pitch from Bob Stanley and winning it when Boston first baseman Bill Buckner allowed a ground ball hit by the Mets' Mookie Wilson to roll through his legs, scoring Ray Knight from second base. In the seventh game, the Red Sox took an early 3–0 lead, only to lose 8–5. The collapses in the last two games prompted a series of articles by George Vecsey of The New York Times fueling speculation that the Red Sox were "cursed".
The 1987 season saw rivalry at the end of the season, as on September 29, Yankee first baseman Don Mattingly set a MLB record by hitting his sixth grand slam home-run of the season against the Red Sox
The competitiveness of the teams continued the following year. Co-captains Ron Guidry and Willie Randolph had led the Yankees to first place two weeks after the All-Star break started.

1990–1995

The tone of baseball rivalries changed in the early 1990s; fraternization between players who had moved to different teams or knew each other from various ventures kept baseball rivalries to a "friendly" level. However, Major League Baseball's 1994 divisional re-alignment solidified the rivalry between the Yankees and Red Sox. Prior to the realignment, the American League East Division contained seven teams, spread out over a wider geographical area, including the Cleveland Indians and the Milwaukee Brewers.
In the early to mid-1990s, the two teams were seldom equally good. The Yankees had the worst record in the American League when the Red Sox won their third division title in five years in 1990.
In 1990, Boston Globe columnist Dan Shaughnessy wrote a book titled The Curse of the Bambino, criticizing the Red Sox for the sale of Babe Ruth, and publicized the curse. Yankee fans also taunted the Red Sox with signs saying "1918!", "CURSE OF THE BAMBINO," pictures of Babe Ruth, and wearing "1918!" T-shirts each time they were at the Stadium.
On June 6, 1990, before a Yankees–Red Sox game at Fenway Park, the Yankees fired Bucky Dent as their manager, making Fenway Park the scene of his worst moment as manager, although he had his greatest moment as a player there. He said that "if Dent had been fired in Seattle or Milwaukee, this would have been just another event in an endless line of George's jettisons. But it happened in Boston and the nightly news had its hook." He also said that "the firing was only special because....."
On July 30, almost two months after firing Dent at Fenway Park, Steinbrenner was suspended from day-to-day operations of the Yankees.
Mel Hall's game-winning three-run home run in the ninth inning gave the Yankees a dramatic Memorial Day win over the Red Sox in 1991. Announcer John Sterling accentuated the word "the" when saying "the Yankees win!" This accentuation would become a characteristic trademark of Sterling for the rest of his broadcasting career.
The 1993 season saw long-time Red Sox fan favorite Wade Boggs defect to the Yankees after eleven seasons with Boston. Later in September 1993, the Yankees defeated Boston at Yankee Stadium via a last-moment reprieve. Trailing 3–1, Mike Stanley's apparent fly out with two outs in the ninth was nullified by a fan running on to the field prior to the pitch being thrown. The umpire had called time and when play resumed, Stanley singled. The Yankees would rally to score three runs and win on a Mattingly single.
The Yankees' 1980s demise and downfall continued into the early 1990s and was at its frustrating peak in 1994, when they finished with the best record in the American League in a season that was prematurely halted by the 1994–95 Major League Baseball strike,
The strike was the harbinger of the 
Beginning with the 1995 playoffs, every playoffs have featured the Yankees and/or the Red Sox. As of 2012, the two rivals have made up 25 out of 34 possible playoff appearances, with the two teams reaching the playoffs in the same year eight times (1995, 1998, 1999, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2007, and 2009).

1996–2003: Yankee dominance and first postseason meetings

Late 1990s: Yankee dynasty

A year after captain Don Mattingly's retirement in 1995, the Yankees won the 1996 World Series. It was their first in 18 years and the first of former Red Sox player Wade Boggs' career, coming almost 10 years to the day he lost it to Mets. Boggs celebrated the victory with a memorable moment of jumping on the horse of a NYPD officer during the celebration.
The Yankees did not reach the World Series in 1997, but came back with one of the better seasons in baseball history in 1998, which culminated in a win over the San Diego Padres in the 1998 World Series. The Red Sox, too, made the playoffs in 1998, but as a Wild Card. They ultimately lost their ALDS. However, they did not seriously contend for the division title.
About four months after victory, the Yankees controversially traded fan favorite David Wells to the Toronto Blue Jays for Roger Clemens, a fan favorite with the Red Sox between 1984 and 1996. Clemens was coming off two consecutive season with the Blue Jays where he had won both the pitching triple crown and the Cy Young Award in both 1997 and 1998.
Once the  Yankee manager Joe Torre, manager for the American League team, replaced starting shortstop Nomar Garciaparra of the Red Sox with Derek Jeter. Garciaparra received a standing ovation from the fans after Jeter came in to replace him (they also embraced each other at this time). Later in the game, when he came to bat, Jeter gave Garciaparra a tribute by mimicking his batting stance. Nine years later, in a similar fashion, Red Sox manager Terry Francona managed the American League team at the All-Star Game at Yankee Stadium, in the stadium's final season.
On September 10, 1999, Chili Davis' second-inning home run was the only hit by the Yankees against Pedro Martínez, who struck out 17 Yankees—the most strikeouts against a Yankee team ever. The teams finished first and second in their division and both made the playoffs in the same season. This led to the very first post-season meeting in the longtime rivalry.

=1999 ALCS: First postseason meeting=

In 1999, the Yankees and Red Sox faced each other for the first time in the ALCS. The Yankees were the defending World Series champions and in the midst of a run of three consecutive World Championships, while Boston had not appeared in the ALCS since 1990. The Yankees won the first game of the ALCS against the Red Sox on a 10th-inning walk-off home run by Bernie Williams off Boston reliever Rod Beck. The game was the first actual postseason meeting between the rivals because the one-game playoff in 1978 technically counted as a regular season game. Despite intense buildup to this historic, first-ever postseason meeting between the two longtime rivals, the series proved to be somewhat anticlimactic, with New York winning the series four games to one.
The lone bright spot for the Red Sox came in Game 3 at Boston's Fenway Park, in what had been a much anticipated pitching match-up of former Red Sox star Roger Clemens, who was now pitching for the Yankees, and Boston ace Pedro Martínez. Martínez struck out twelve and did not allow a run through seven innings of work; Clemens was hit hard, giving up five earned runs and only lasting two innings of a 13–1 Red Sox victory. The loss to Pedro Martínez was the Yankees' only postseason loss, as the team went 11–1.
The following year at Fenway Park, the Yankees beat the Red Sox 22–1, handing Boston its most lopsided home loss ever.
A year later, David Cone, one of the key players in the then-most recent Yankee dynasty, started for the Red Sox against the Yankees at Yankee Stadium to the sound of a standing ovation despite playing for the arch-rival Red Sox. Mussina had come within one strike of pitching a perfect game against the Red Sox at Fenway Park. Carl Everett's 9th-inning two-out, two-strike single was the only baserunner allowed by Mussina in a 1–0 Yankee win. Coincidentally, David Cone was the last Yankee pitcher to throw a perfect game, in 1999.
On September 10, the two teams had a game against each other rained out.

2001–2003: Unbalanced schedule

Major League Baseball changed its scheduling format beginning in 2001, further intensifying division matchups throughout the league.
In 2002, the Red Sox asked the Yankees for permission to interview one of George Steinbrenner's assistants, former Yankees general manager Gene Michael, for their vacant general manager position, but Steinbrenner declined their request.

=2003 ALCS=

Both teams would face off in the ALCS once again in 2003.
Due to the unbalanced schedule, when Boston forced the ALCS to a full seven games, the seventh game set a major league record for the rivalry between the two teams: it marked the first time two major league teams have played more than 25 games against each other over the course of a single season.
In the top of the fourth inning of Game 3 of the ALCS at Fenway Park, Red Sox starting pitcher Pedro Martínez hit Yankee batter Karim García, prompting an argument between the two players, which ended with both teams clearing the benches but no punches being thrown. After reviewing the incident, MLB Commissioner Bud Selig said he was "very disappointed" by the behavior of the participants and fined Martínez $50,000, Ramírez $25,000, García $10,000, and Zimmer $5,000.
In game seven at Yankee Stadium, the Red Sox held a 5–2 lead through seven innings due to an ineffective start by Roger Clemens,
A post game interview by Red Sox first baseman Kevin Miller shows just how emotional the rivalry can get when he says "It was like we were all back in high school, like we'd all just gotten beat in the state playoffs, and everyone was going to graduate...You don't see that much at this level" talking about the Red Sox locker room after the loss. Many professional athletes don't show the same emotions that ran through them in high school and college after a loss, but strong rivalries like this one will
Despite winning the American League pennant, the Yankees lost the World Series to the Florida Marlins, when the future Red Sox pitcher, Josh Beckett pitched a five-hit performance in the deciding game of the series.

2004–present: Curse broken

2004: Red Sox win World Series

In an effort to build up their lineup, the Red Sox set up a potential deal that would send reigning AL MVP Alex Rodriguez to Boston and Red Sox Manny Ramírez and other players to Texas.
New Red Sox pitcher Curt Schilling, who had confounded New York in the 2001 World Series as an Arizona Diamondback, appeared at an ice hockey game in Boston wearing a "Yankee hater" hat.
That year, the Red Sox won an eventful season series against the Yankees. A 13-inning comeback win for the Yankees on July 1 was punctuated by a catch from Derek Jeter, who ran and dove into the stands at full speed and came out with facial lacerations when Trot Nixon hit a pop up in an area deep behind third base.
Despite their success in the rivalry series, the Red Sox still finished second to the Yankees in the AL East for the seventh straight season.

=2004 ALCS: The curse is broken=

This was the series everybody wanted to see because of what happened in the 2003 ALCS.
Outfielder Johnny Damon said of Boone's home run: "If we do advance to the World Series and win, it's a better story that we went through New York. We needed to get back here. This is where a lot of hearts were broken, and we're in a perfect seat to stop the hurting."
The Yankees won the first three games of the series.
In Boston, celebrations marking their win over the Yankees was marred by a tragedy. Moments after the Red Sox beat the Yankees, Victoria Snelgrove, an Emerson College junior, was mortally wounded after being hit in the eye by a non-lethal crowd control projectile fired by police.
When the Red Sox held their World Series victory parade, Manny Ramírez was handed a sign by one of the spectators part of the way through the parade, which read, "Jeter is playing golf today. This is better!" He held on to this sign for the rest of the parade.

2005–2009: Yankees and Red Sox both win World Series

When the two teams played for the first time at Yankee Stadium, on April 3, Yankee fans started new taunts, saying "The Curse of 1918 is finally over (86 years). Let the new curse 2090 begin." The Red Sox won the game 8–1.
Just days later, Yankee right fielder Gary Sheffield's cap was knocked off by a Red Sox fan while trying to pick up a fair ball in right field at Fenway Park. In response, Sheffield pushed the fan. The conflict was quickly stopped by security guards. The fan was ejected from the game for interfering with play and eventually stripped of his season tickets. The season ended with both teams, already with guaranteed playoff berths, playing each other for the division crown on the last day of the season in a game that had the Yankees come out on top.
The Red Sox acquired starting pitcher Josh Beckett, who pitched a complete game shutout for the Marlins against the Yankees to end the 2003 World Series, the end of the 2005 season.
The Yankees defeated the Red Sox at Fenway Park and completed a five-game sweep of the Red Sox in the first five-game series between the teams in 33 years, evoking memories of 1978's "Boston Massacre". The Yankees outscored the Red Sox 49–26 and pushed their division lead from 
During the third inning of a 2007 game at Fenway Park, Manny Ramírez, J.D. Drew, Mike Lowell, and Jason Varitek hit four consecutive home runs off Yankee pitcher Chase Wright, powering a comeback from a three-run deficit and completing a three game sweep of the Yankees at Fenway Park for the first time since 1990.
The Red Sox went on to win all of their games against the Colorado Rockies in the World Series. Series MVP Mike Lowell remarks, upon receiving his trophy, that "the Red Sox are expected to win." Controversy erupted during the eighth inning of the final game when Alex Rodriguez's agent Scott Boras announced that Rodriguez had decided to opt-out of his contract, in what was seen by many as an attempt by Boras to overshadow the series.
The off-season after the 2007 Series showed a war of words between management of both teams. Boston GM Theo Epstein called Yankee pitcher Mike Mussina a "bad apple" for complaining about the Yankees' 
In 2008, the Red Sox clinched a playoff berth and eliminated the Yankees from playoff contention, bringing an end to the Yankees' streak of 13 consecutive postseason appearances dating back to 1995.
In the 2008 off-season, first baseman Mark Teixeira signed an eight year, $180 million contract with the Yankees.
In August, the Yankees had 23 hits and the Red Sox had 12 in a 20–11 Yankees victory where the total runs scored (31) is the most runs collected by both teams in the history of their rivalry.
Both teams made the playoffs in 2009. During the ALDS, the Yankees defeated the Minnesota Twins to face the Angels who had knocked out the Red Sox. The Yankees beat the Angels and went on defeat the Philadelphia Phillies in the 2009 World Series 4–2 to earn their 27th World Series title and their first championship since the Curse of the Bambino died.

2010–present: Yankees fall short, Red Sox champions again


In July, with the passings of Bob Sheppard, public address announcer for the Yankees, on July 11 at the age of 99, and principal owner and managing partner of the Yankees, George Steinbrenner, at the age of 80, both teams opened the second half at their respective stadiums with a moment of silence for Steinbrenner and Sheppard.
In .
During the series the final weekend of the season, Russell Martin of the Yankees said of the Red Sox about their collapse that "I hate the Red Sox" and that "anything to get the Red Sox out would be awesome for me."
In response to the historic September collapse by the Red Sox, they hired outspoken manager Bobby Valentine to take Francona's place. After his signing, Valentine immediately inserted himself into the rivalry when he said he hated the Yankees.
On the weekend series of April 20–22, 2012, the Red Sox celebrated the 100th anniversary of Fenway Park against the Yankees, who they played to open up the park. The Yankees came back from down 9-0 to win 15-9 the next day, the largest deficit they have ever overcame. They won the season series 13–5, their best record against the Red Sox since 2001, when they also went 13–5 against them, and swept the final three-game series of the season at Yankee Stadium to clinch the AL East while the Red Sox finished last in the division for the first time since 1992 with their worst record since 1965.
After the 2012 season, Kevin Youkilis, who the Red Sox traded to the Chicago White Sox earlier in the season, signed with the Yankees as a free agent. He had previously clashed with Joba Chamberlain when he was with Boston.
On Opening Day April 1, 2013 at Yankee Stadium, the Yankees and Red Sox honored the victims of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting in Newtown, Connecticut, located in between New York and Boston. On September 15, 2013, the Red Sox honored Yankees closer Mariano Rivera in his final game in Fenway Park, in which both the Red Sox fans and players gave Rivera a standing ovation when he entered the field. The Red Sox took the regular season series over the Yankees 13-6. The Red Sox finished the season with the best record in the American League and went on to defeat the St. Louis Cardinals in the 2013 World Series to capture their eighth World Series title, while the Yankees failed to make the playoffs.
On December 3, 2013, one month after winning the 2013 World Series, Boston outfielder Jacoby Ellsbury and the Yankees agreed in principle to a seven-year $153 million deal, including an option for an eighth year that could increase the value of the contract to $169 million.
On April 10, 2014, Yankees pitcher Michael Pineda was seen to have been using pine tar in a Yankee-Red Sox game at Yankee Stadium. Red Sox manager John Farell did not have a chance to get Pineda ejected that game. However, on April 23, 2014, at a Yankee Red Sox game in Fenway Park, John Farell noticed that Pineda was using pine tar again. John Farell walked to the home plate umpire and got Pineda ejected from the game in the 2nd inning. 

Geography

Using Facebook Like button data, Ben Blatt of the Harvard College Sports Analysis Collective found in 2012 that Red Sox fans are east of the New York State-Vermont/Massachusetts border, and Yankees fans are west. Blatt wrote, "I had thought that it was possible that Red Sox Nation might extend into northern New York or Yankee territory might extend into Vermont. This turned out not to be the case". Connecticut divides support between the two teams; he found that 56.6% of Facebook users in Hartford, often cited as being on the border between the two teams' fans, supported the Yankees. While Blatt found that identifying an exact border within the state was impossible, Guilford and Middletown are almost exactly divided, with 50.7% in each supporting the Yankees.

Violence over rivalry

There have been occasions that there have been arrests because of violence over the rivalry. In May 2008, a Yankees fan in Nashua, New Hampshire was arrested and charged with reckless second-degree murder for killing two people outside a bar, which resulted from an argument over the rivalry. During the final series of the 2010 season, Boston Police arrested a Yankees fan for stabbing a Red Sox fan over an argument about the rivalry.

Rivalry outside of baseball

Don Mattingly had appeared in public service announcements airing on the Spike TV network advocating fathers to spend time with their children as part of the "True Dads" campaign to encourage men to take an active role in their children's lives. Mattingly jokes at the end of the commercial about the impatience of one of the characters in the commercial by calling him a Red Sox fan.
On April 13, 2008, rumors of a construction worker burying a Red Sox jersey in the concrete of the New Yankee Stadium were verified after anonymous tips led to the location of the jersey. The worker, identified as Gino Castignoli, had buried a David Ortiz jersey in what would become a service corridor in the hopes of cursing the new stadium. After extracting the jersey from underneath two feet of concrete, Yankees' President Randy Levine indicated that the shirt would be donated to the Jimmy Fund to be auctioned for the charity long associated with the Red Sox.

Politics

On October 23, 2007, former New York City mayor Rudolph Giuliani, who is a Yankee fan, said at a New Hampshire event for his presidential campaign that he was going to cheer for the Red Sox during their World Series appearance against the Colorado Rockies. Topps parodied this in a 2008 baseball card altered to depict Giuliani on the field with the Red Sox as the team celebrated their 2007 World Series championship.Topps issue fake card of Giuliani celebrating World Series win with Red Sox
A month later, he was asked about his support for the Red Sox by one of the questioners in a YouTube Republican Presidential Debate run by CNN. In response to the mayor's answer, former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney, who was in office during the Red Sox 2004 win, claimed that all Americans are united in hatred of the Yankees.
Former New York City Public Advocate turned New York City Mayoral candidate Bill de Blasio openly supported the Red Sox during his campaign. De Blasio won the general election by a huge margin in 2013.

Other sports

In 2002, when the New England Patriots held their victory celebration after winning their first Super Bowl and the first championship for the city of Boston since the Celtics won the 1986 NBA Championship, linebacker Larry Izzo fired up the crowd, chanting "Yankees suck!"
The rivalry was played out during Super Bowl XLII in February 2008, as it was a showdown between football teams from each metropolitan area, the New York Giants and the New England Patriots.
During the 2008 NBA Finals between the Boston Celtics and the Los Angeles Lakers, movie director Spike Lee, a season ticket holder of the New York Knicks, wore a Yankee jersey and cap at Game 3 of the Finals in Los Angeles. Lee sat behind the Boston bench while loudly cheering for the Lakers, though he has a friendship with Ray Allen of the Celtics.
For the 2010 NHL Winter Classic outdoor ice hockey game held at Fenway Park, Boston Bruins then-backup goaltender Tuukka Rask had artwork on his "special event" goalie mask's upper front area depicting a roaring bear with a ripped New York Yankees home "pinstripe" jersey falling from its lower jaw.
In 2011, Miami Heat star LeBron James of the NBA worked a deal with Red Sox owner John Henry to take partial ownership of Henry's soccer subsidiary Liverpool Football Club of the Premier League. James was criticized in the New York media for spurning New York due to his being a purported Yankee fan.
The New York–Boston rivalry being evident in other sports has been attributed to the rivalry. For example, the rivalries between the New York Jets and the New England Patriots in the National Football League and the New York Knicks and the Boston Celtics in the National Basketball Association.

Broadcasts on television

The nature of the rivalry has led to games between the two teams being broadcast on national television. Whenever the two teams play a weekend series, the Friday game is broadcast on MLB Network, the Saturday game is broadcast on Fox, while the Sunday game is broadcast on either TBS in the afternoon or ESPN as part of Sunday Night Baseball; the New England Sports Network in the Boston market and the YES Network in the New York City market always carry games not assigned on either FOX or on ESPN's Sunday Night Baseball. Whenever they play games during the week, there are games broadcast on MLB Network and ESPN.
When the games are broadcast on Fox, Joe Buck and Tim McCarver call the game and, thus the duo has called many significant moments in the rivalry.

Ratings

The broadcasts of the games between the rivals have led to an increase in television ratings.
Since 2003, ratings for Yankees–Red Sox games on Fox have averaged 2.6 percent of homes—44 percent better than other weeks, while ESPN has averaged 3.96 million viewers for Yankees–Red Sox games on Sunday nights, compared to the average of 2.18 million for all other games. Game 7 of the 2003 ALCS drew a 17.1 rating, the highest for a League Championship Series game since Game 6 of the 1993 National League Championship Series.
In 2004, the first game between the two teams drew a 3.6 national rating, and with an average audience of 5.3 million, it was the most-watched regular-season telecast since Mark McGwire's record-breaking home run game.
In 2011, the three-game series between the two teams on the weekend of August 5–7 drew large television viewers.






