[[Telus Mobility]]

CATEGORIES: Mobile phone companies of Canada, Telus, 1984 establishments in Canada

TELUS Mobility is a division of TELUS Communications which sells wireless services in Canada on its numerous networks. It currently has three different networks based on four different technologies: CDMA, HSPA+, and LTE on its mainstream networks, plus iDEN via its Mike division. As of Q4 2013, TELUS is Canada's second largest cellphone provider with a subscriber base of over 7.8 million of which 86% on postpaid plans and 14% are on prepaid plans.com/2014/02/13/telus-ended-2013-with-7807000-wireless-subscribers-77-of-postpaid-subs-have-a-smartphone/  
As of 2014, TELUS Mobility is in the process of completing the purchase of Public Mobile. Public Mobile operates a CDMA network in southern Ontario and southern Quebec.  The purchase of Public Mobile will increase TELUS' subcriber base to 8.0 million.
Since 2008, TELUS has operated a MVNO named Koodo Mobile. Koodo is targeted at high school, college and university students, much like the now-defunct Amp'd Mobile Canada that preceded it in 2007.

History

1980s

TELUS Mobility (AGT Mobility)was formed in 1982 to provide an analog mobile network for Alberta's natural resources industries. It was the first mobile phone network in Canada. Analog services were available to the general public since 1986.

1990s

In 1992, TELUS launched North America's first digital mobile network. After being acquired by BC Telecom in 1998, TELUS Mobility expanded its coverage to British Columbia.TELUS Mobility 1999 The following year it acquired Clearnet Communications and QuébecTel to expand its coverage to the eastern provinces. All these acquisitions, along with a tower sharing agreement with then-primarily Eastern Canada based Bell Mobility, allowed TELUS Mobility to serve a coast to coast CDMA network in all Canadian provinces.

2000s

TELUS Mobility discontinued its AMPS analog network in February 2008, and launched its HSPA+ network in November 2009. Following both events, TELUS began a slow phasing out of CDMA devices, especially those that support both AMPS and CDMA technologies.

2010s

TELUS Mobility launched its LTE network in February 2012, and it stopped selling CDMA devices, except those on clearance.
In 2013, TELUS was approved by the Canadian government to purchase Public Mobile.
On March 27, 2014, Telus' Public Mobile customers were notified that Public Mobile's existing CDMA network would be shut down by August 2014, and that customers wishing to continue service would need to buy phones compatible with Telus' 4G network.

Networks

TELUS Mobility partners with Bell Mobility to operate three different kinds of nationwide networks in Canada.  Both companies offer a legacy CDMA network from coast to coast in Canada's provinces, as well as an HSPA+ network with newer technology but slightly less coverage, and an LTE network which is only available in certain cities.  TELUS Mobility also sells services on an Integrated Digital Enhanced Network (iDEN) via its Mike brand, which is exclusive to TELUS and not offered by any Bell brands.

AMPS (discontinued)

Due to the age and security problems of this technology, TELUS Mobility discontinued its AMPS analog mobile network in 2008. TELUS offered landlines to customers affected by this network's shutdown in rural areas, as digital signals are less reliable than analog ones in such areas.

CDMA

Since the late 1990s, TELUS Mobility has operated a proprietary CDMA network with 3G Evolution-Data Optimized (Ev-DO) enhancements, but ceased expanding it towards the late 2000s.  This is due to its limited worldwide popularity and roaming possibilities, and TELUS' increased focus on HSPA+ and LTE technologies.cbc.html, CBC announcement.  Since launching its LTE network, TELUS has discontinued selling CDMA devices. The CDMA network remains available for customers with legacy devices.
Most of rural Manitoba, some of Northern Ontario, and a few other rural regions are exclusively served by the CDMA network.
On September 18, 2013, at a conference with investors, TELUS' Chief Financial Officer stated that he expected that TELUS' CDMA network would shut down within two years.Telus weighs mothballing legacy wireless network to cut costs
On October 17, 2013, an internal memo from Telus revealed that TELUS' CDMA Ev-DO network in British Columbia and Alberta (except Calgary and Edmonton) would be shut down on March 31, 2014.  The internal memo also noted that the Telus' CDMA network would shut down in 2015.
Public Mobile, which Telus purchased in 2013, operates a CDMA network.  On March 27, 2014, Public Mobile customers were notified that this network would be shut down by August 2014, and that customers wishing to continue service would need to buy phones compatible with Telus' 4G network.Telus's decision to shut Public Mobile angers consumers

iDEN

When TELUS Communications acquired Clearnet Communications in 1999, this included an Integrated Digital Enhanced Network (iDEN) branded as Mike by Clearnet. TELUS Mobility continues to maintain the network to this day, with the same logo and branding.  The only difference is that any references to Clearnet have been changed to TELUS.
In October 2013, launched TELUS Link, a push-to-talk service over HSPA+, LTE, and wifi. This service runs on iOS, Android, and Blackberry devices, and is intended to replace the iDEN network.  According to Telus, the iDEN network would remain active for at least two years after the launch of TELUS Link.TELUS launches Link, the LTE-powered push-to-talk network
On February 13, 2014, TELUS released its fourth quarter 2013 results.  TELUS noted that, "Effective with the fourth quarter of 2013, and on a prospective basis, we have adjusted postpaid wireless subscribers to remove Mike subscriptions, as we have ceased marketing the Mike       product and started to turn down the iDEN network. Cumulative subscriber connections include an October 1, 2013 adjustment to remove from the postpaid wireless subscriber base approximately 94,000 Mike subscribers representing those who, in our judgment, are unlikely to migrate to our new services."| TELUS Reports Fourth Quarter 2013 Results and Announces 2014 Financial Targets

HSPA+

On November 5, 2009, TELUS launched HSPA+ services the day after Bell launched its such network.  The launch of this additional network allowed TELUS to become the third Canadian carrier to offer iPhone products. The HSPA+ network meant that TELUS saved money by avoiding the purchase of expensive CDMA-based devices while obtaining the more popular HSPA devices at a lower cost.
The combined single-channel HSPA+ network is available to 97% of the Canadian population, but there are cases where CDMA service is available where HSPA+ service is not. It provides download speeds of up to 21 Mbit/s, with typical speeds ranging between 4 and 6 Mbit/s.  About 70% of the Canadian population are located in TELUS' dual-channel coverage areas, which doubles the maximum throughput to 42 Mbit/s with typical speeds of 7 to 14 Mbit/s.3G+ network
This network operates on the frequencies of 850/1900 MHz. Although Rogers Wireless and its brand Fido operate HSPA+ networks separate from TELUS and Bell, they transmit using the same frequencies.  While TELUS and Bell use the HSPA+ standard as established by the GSM group, neither company operates a basic 2G GSM network.
TELUS' HSPA+ network coverage is in all Canadian provinces and two territories, but it is not possible to drive in Canada between the Pacific coast and the Atlantic coast without going through areas without any cellular coverage, as there are gaps in cellular coverage in British Columbia, Manitoba, and Ontario.Coverage within Canada | Travel | Plans | TELUS Mobility

LTE

LTE service for TELUS launched on February 10, 2012 through a partnership with Bell.  
As of February 2014, LTE coverage is primarily in mid to large sized cities, and is a fraction of the coverage area of TELUS' HSPA+ network.  Sherbrooke, QC and Brandon, MB are the largest Canadian communities without LTE coverage from TELUS.

Products

Telus' product lineup mainly consists of smartphones but also includes a few feature phones.  Smartphones are currently sold with one of four operating systems preloaded: Android, BlackBerry OS, iOS or Windows Phone.
TELUS also sells several mobile broadband modems for use with its mobile broadband service.  All modems currently sold support HSPA+ and LTE, and can connect to a personal computer via an  Universal Serial Bus (USB) port, while some also provide Internet access to multiple devices via Wi-Fi and thus do not require a wired connection.

Services

Voice

TELUS Mobility sells a variety of voice plans.  These include a fixed amount of minutes plus unlimited calling on weeknights, weekends and with up to four other TELUS lines on the same account.  Caller ID and a basic voicemail for up to three messages are also included as calling features, although airtime is charged for accessing the latter.  All voice plans except for the least expensive one also allow the choice of one additional feature: double minutes, five favourite numbers or unlimited Canada-wide SMS/MMS messaging.  For the five favourite numbers, unlimited calling is available in either local or Canada-wide options while messaging to these numbers is Canada-wide.
Partners Skype and Telehop offer long distance services for TELUS Mobility customers.  The first service uses Voice over IP (VoIP) and requires a mobile broadband connection, while the latter uses traditional telephony through the dialing code #100.  The Telehop service, which deducts minutes when used during weekdays, cannot be use for calls terminating in Canada or the United States.

Mobile Internet

TELUS offers several Internet-only and smartphone plans and add-ons for customers wishing to access mobile broadband.  Only one plan can be added per device, and certain plans are only available for certain devices.
Some grandfathered customers have an unlimited mobile Internet plan or add-on.  These are usually limited to older and slower CDMA devices and normally cannot be used for tethering unless the device is a mobile broadband modem.

Mobile payment

TELUS Mobility postpaid customers with a compatible smartphone can subscribe to Rdio or Skype and be billed for the service on their monthly bill.  Use of either service on the TELUS Mobility network requires a subscription to one of the provider's data plans or add-ons.Rdio | TELUS Mobility

Controversy

Project Cleanfeed Canada

In November 2006, supposedly to prevent access to child pornography sites, TELUS and many other Internet service providers agreed to partner with Cybertip.ca with the latter organization's Project Cleanfeed Canada. This project is an initiative which backers claim is designed to block access to child pornography on the Internet via an encrypted blacklist of known sites that host images of prepubescent children. TELUS Mobility customers using mobile Internet services cannot access the sites blocked by the project.
The initiative has been denounced, as it is fundamentally a censorship system applied to public communications.[ref]
[/ref]  Critics point out, that, among other problems common to censorship systems, it could easily later be re-purposed, perhaps quietly or too quickly to stop, for whatever desired object, that may have nothing whatsoever to do with the reasons backers claimed to have built/to be building it for.  See Project Cleanfeed: Censorship in Canada.

Sale of pornography

In 2007, TELUS Mobility began selling in-house pay-per-download pornographic entertainment, including explicit pictures and videos, via its phones.World Business Briefing | Americas: Canada: Pornography Service Halted

Incoming text message fee

In July 2008, TELUS Mobility and Bell Mobility simultaneously introduced charges of 15¢ for every incoming text message received by all customers not subscribed to a text messaging plan. Critics were quick to point out that there is no way of blocking incoming message fees and suggested TELUS and Bell were price fixing as both had announced the fees simultaneously. Both companies have been sued by frustrated consumers and subscribers, as they demand change in text charges.canada.html?id=037f5454-2f18-4c3f-808c-f6240c5191b2 Many customers were frustrated because this fee also applies to existing customers with ongoing contracts.ctv.Telus Mobility.   Retrieved March 29 2014 All monthly rate plans include at least unlimited domestic messaging.  Retrieved March 29 2014 Additionally, Telus Media Inquiries agent Shawn Hall explained in a press release that charges elicited from unwanted message spam can be waived at the customer's request.   Retrieved March 29 2014.

Philanthropy

From 2008 to 2011 inclusively, TELUS Mobility sold pink BlackBerry phones.  This included the BlackBerry Curve and the BlackBerry Pearl consumer models.

Retail presence

TELUS Mobility has its own corporate retail stores and also allows third parties to become exclusive dealers. Best Buy, Future Shop, Loblaw Companies and Walmart stores in Canada provide TELUS products along with prepaid and postpaid services, although some Loblaw-branded stores do not sell prepaid phones or any phones at all.  Additionally, Zellers stores sell prepaid feature phones and top-up vouchers.  Loblaw stores have a special booth, called The Mobile Shop, where the phones are displayed.







 
 

