[[Sida cordifolia]]

CATEGORIES: Ayurveda, Medicinal plants, Flora naturalised in Australia, Invasive plant species, Sida, Herbal and fungal stimulants, Plants used in Ayurveda, Plants described in 1753

Sida cordifolia (bala, country mallow, heart-leaf sida or flannel weed) is a perennial subshrub of the mallow family Malvaceae native to India. It has naturalized throughout the world, and is considered an invasive weed in Africa, Australia, the southern United States, Hawaiian Islands, New Guinea, and French Polynesia.

Description

S. cordifolia is an erect perennial that reaches  wide. The flowers are dark yellow, sometimes with a darker orange center, with a hairy 5-lobed calyx and 5-lobed corolla.
As a weed, it invades cultivated and overgrazed fields, competing with more desired species and contaminating hay.

Medicinal use

S. cordifolia is used in Ayurvedic medicine (Sanskrit:-BALA).
It is used in neurological ailments,especially in Stroke rehabilitation.
Known as "malva branca", it is a plant used in Brazilian folk medicine for the treatment of inflammation of the oral mucosa, blenorrhea, asthmatic bronchitis and nasal congestion,Franzotti EM, Santos CV, Rodrigues HM, Mourão RH, Andrade MR, and Antoniolli AR. (2000). "Anti-inflammatory, analgesic activity and acute toxicity of Sida cordifolia L. (Malva-branca)." J. Ethnopharmacol. 72 273-7. stomatitis, of asthma and nasal congestionCNS pharmacological effects of the hydroalcoholic extract of Sida cordifolia L. leaves. Franco CI. Morais LC. Quintans-Júnior LJ. Almeida RN. Antoniolli AR. Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 98(3):275-9, 2005 Apr 26. and in many parts of Africa for various ailments, particularly for respiratory problems.
A 50% ethanolic extract of Sida cordifolia tested on rats showed potent antioxidant and antiinflammatory activity comparable with the standard drug deprenyl. on quinolinic acid induced neurotoxicity Swathy S.S., Panicker S., Nithya R.S., Anuja M.M., Rejitha S., Indira M.  Neurochemical Research 2010 35:9 (1361-1367)
The plant has demonstrated anti-pyretic and anti-ulcerogenic properties.K., Muralidharan A., Natarajan B., Varadamurthy S., Venkataraman S.  Fitoterapia 2008 79:3 (229-231)
The aqueous extract of Sida cordifolia stimulates liver regeneration  in rats. Silva RL. Melo GB. Melo VA. Antoniolli AR. Michellone PR. Zucoloto S. Picinato MA. Franco CF. Mota Gde A. Silva Ode C. Acta Cirurgica Brasileira. 21 Suppl 1:37-9, 2006.

Phytochemistry

The following alkaloids were reported from S. cordifolia growing in India:S. Ghosal, R. B. P. S. Chauhan, and R. Mehta (1975). "Alkaloids of Sidia Cordifolia." Phytochem. 14 830-832. β-phenethylamine, ephedrine, pseudo-ephedrine, S-(+)-Nb-methyltryptophan methyl ester, hypaphorine, vasicinone, vasicinol, choline, and betaine.
No tannin or glycosides have been identified from the plant. The roots and stems contain the alkaloid ephedrine, normally observed in the different varieties of the gymnosperm genus Ephedra. Recent analyses have revealed that ephedrine and pseudoephedrine constitute the major alkaloids from the aerial parts of the plant, which also show traces of sitosterol and palmitic, stearic and hexacosanoic acids. The flavones: 5,7-dihydroxy-3-isoprenyl flavone (1) and 5-hydroxy-3-isoprenyl flavone (2), β-sitosterol and stigmasterol have been isolated from the plant.K., Rahman A.K.M.M., Ahmad M.U., Bachar S.C.  Phytochemistry Letters 2008 1:4 (179-182) The analgesic alkaloid (5′-Hydroxymethyl-1′-(1,2,3,9-tetrahydro-pyrrolo 2,1-b quinazolin-1-yl)-heptan-1-one) has also been found. with analgesic and anti-inflammatory activities Sutradhar R.K., Matior Rahman A.K.M., Ahmad M., Bachar S.C., Saha A., Guha S.K.  Iranian Journal of Pharmacology and Therapeutics 2006 5:2 (175-178) Sterculic, malvalic and coronaric acids have been isolated from the seed oil, along with other fatty acids (Chem. Ind. 1985. 483).






