[[Mudanjiang]]

CATEGORIES: Cities in Heilongjiang

Mudanjiang ( from Vladivostok, Russia.  In 2011 Mudanjiang had a GDP of RMB 93.48 billion with a 15.1% growth rate.
Its population is 2,798,723 at the 2010 census whom 805,584 live in the built up area made of 4 urban districts.

History

Mudanjiang was originally the populated by the Sushen 2,300 years ago. Ancient Sushen(肃慎) lies in nowaday valley of Mudan River, established Mo State(貊国). "Dongjingcheng site", Naver encyclopedia
The city of Mudanjiang is named after for the Mudan River (literally, "Peony River") flowing through it. Czarist Russia built a train station for the Chinese Eastern Railway(КВЖД, KVZhD) in Mudanjiang in 1903, after which local development started boosting. Both Chinese and Russian settlers established themselves here. Mudanjiang was little more than a large village until the 1920s. By that time, Mudanjiang was strongly overshadowed by the nearby county town of Ningan (Former Ninguta). However, merchants from several countries including France, Russia, Britain and Denmark set up sub-agencies in Mudanjiang during this period, which led the trade area of the city to a rapid expansion.
After the Japanese invasion of Manchuria began on September 19, 1931, the whole Manchuria was seized by Japan following the Mukden Incident. Mudanjiang experienced a substantial growth in the 1930s under the Japanese occupation. Mudanjiang also became a military and administrative center going by the name Botankou, particularly after the railway from Tumen to Jiamusi was constructed in 1933. By that time several light industries including light engineering, lumbering, and food processing was established in the town. On December 1, 1937, Botankou City was established by Manchukuo government, administerring five counties. On October 15, 1938, Japanese Government set up a consulate in Botankou and promoted Botankou as a municipality directly under the Manchukuo Government. As Manchukuo collapsed, Mudanjiang was captured by Soviet Army on August 14, 1945. Glantz, "August Storm: The Soviet 1945 Strategic Offensive in Manchuria". Leavenworth Papers No. 7, Combat Studies Institute, February 1983, Fort Leavenworth Kansas.
Mudanjiang was controlled by the Communist force and became the capital of Songjiang Province in 1948. However, after Songjiang Province was merged into Heilongjiang Province on June 19, 1954, Mudanjiang was reduced to a prefecture-level city.

Geography

Mudanjiang, spanning from 128° 02' to 131° 18' E longitude and 43° 24' to 45° 59' N latitude, is located in southeastern Heilongjiang province. It is also the province's southernmost prefecture. Neighbouring prefectures are:
It also borders Russia's Primorsky Krai to the east. The average elevation in the prefecture is .

Climate

Mudanjiang features a monsoon-influenced, humid continental climate (Köppen Dwa) with hot, humid summers and very cold and dry winters; spring and autumn are brief. However, winter temperatures here are far warmer than much of the rest of the province, and the city's basin location helps protect it from biting winds. The monthly 24-hour average temperature ranges from .
、

Administrative divisions

Economy

In 2010, the city's GDP rose 18.5% to RMB 78.1 billion, ranked fourth in Heilongjiang Province after Harbin, Daqing and Qiqihar.2010年牡丹江市国民经济和社会发展统计公报 Tourist industry and light manufacturing are the mainstays of Mudanjiang's economy. Mudanjiang's pillar industries include accessory industry for automobiles, paper making, forest industry, petrochemicals, new materials, pharmacy and energy industry.8% to US$9 billion in 2010, making up three-fourth of Heilongjiang Province's gross.

Development Zones

Transport

Railway

Mudanjiang is a railway hub in eastern Heilongjiang Province. Binsui(Harbin-Suifenhe) Railway and Tujia(Tumen-Jiamusi) Railway meet here. Trains from Mudanjiang Railway Station connect the city with Beijing, Jinan, Dalian, Harbin, Changchun and several other cities in China.

Air

Mudanjiang Hailang Airport  is the second largest international airport in Heilongjiang Province. It operates daily flights to Beijing, Dalian and several other major cities in China. In addition there are also scheduled international flights between Mudanjiang and Seoul and Inchoen in South Korea.

Highway

Mudanjiang is linked to the national highway network through the G11 Hegang–Dalian Expressway and Manzhouli-Suifenhe Highway.

International relations

Mudanjiang is twinned with:

File:MDJ passeggiata.jpg|Walking along the Mudan River
File:MDJ monumento ai caduti di guerra.jpg|Monument to the women fallen in war
File:MDI via principale.jpg|The main street of the city
File:MDJ vista sul fiume.jpg|Panoramic view on the river






