[[Gaara]]

CATEGORIES: Child characters in anime and manga, Comics characters introduced in 2000, Fictional avatars, Fictional characters who can duplicate themselves, Fictional characters with earth or stone abilities, Fictional generals, Fictional Japanese people in anime and manga, Fictional mass murderers, Fictional ninja, Male characters in anime and manga, Naruto characters, Orphan characters in anime and manga

 is a fictional character in the Naruto manga and anime series created by Masashi Kishimoto. Kishimoto designed Gaara as a foil to the series' titular character, Naruto Uzumaki, as the two were born through similar circumstances, but develop vastly different personalities as they deal with their troubled upbringing. Initially introduced as an antagonist, Gaara is a ninja affiliated with Sunagakure, and is the son of Sunagakure's leader, the Fourth Kazekage. He was born a demon's host as part of his father's intention to have a weapon to restore their village. However, a combination of being ostracized by the Sunagakure villagers, his early inability to control the Tailed Beast, and the notion that his deceased mother called him her curse on the village caused Gaara to become a ruthless killer who believes his own purpose is to kill his enemies. It is only after meeting Naruto Uzumaki that Gaara gains a change of perspective as he eventually becomes Sunagakure's Fifth Kazekage and gains acceptance by his people.
Gaara has appeared in several pieces of Naruto media, including two of the featured films in the series, the third original video animation, and several video games. Numerous anime and manga publications have commented on Gaara's character. IGN labeled the disparity between Naruto and Gaara as "emotional" and "a tad creepy". Anime News Network called Naruto's fight against Gaara the high point of the entire series. Among the Naruto reader base, Gaara has been popular, placing high in several popularity polls, and always making it to the top ten characters. Numerous pieces of merchandise have been released in Gaara's likeness, including plush dolls, key chains and action figures.

Creation and conception

Naruto author Masashi Kishimoto created Gaara as a foil to the series' protagonist, Naruto Uzumaki. He and Naruto have a similar background: he was rejected by his peers and fellow villagers for being the host of a tailed beast, Shukaku, a situation that Kishimoto describes as "very much like Naruto's". Gaara's development from this state into a highly withdrawn, sadistic character was intended to induce sympathy for him from readers, as it was contrasted against Naruto's development into a cheerful troublemaker.
Gaara's initial attire, along with the costumes of his siblings, was difficult for Kishimoto to draw on a weekly basis. Because of this, Kishimoto gave the three of them simpler costumes towards the end of Part I; Gaara received an outfit with an upright collar. In addition to being easier to draw, it was used to demonstrate the change in relationship between Gaara and Naruto following their previous fight. Kishimoto cites The Matrix, one of his favorite movies, as an inspiration for Gaara's new costume, and he considers it to be his favorite costume of the three siblings.

Appearances

In Naruto

Before he was born, Gaara's father, the Fourth Kazekage, had Chiyo make Gaara into the Jinchuriki for the tailed beast 
Gaara first appears in the series when he is sent to Konohagakure, a rival ninja village, to take part in the Chunin Exams alongside his older siblings Kankuro and Temari. In truth, he is sent in order to infiltrate Konohagakure in preparation for an invasion by Sunagakure and its ally, Otogakure.
In Part II of the series, three years after the failed attempt to retrieve Sasuke, Deidara, a member of the criminal organization Akatsuki, is sent to Sunagakure to capture Gaara. Deidara manages to capture Gaara by threatening Sunagakure, and the members of the Akatsuki extract Shukaku from his body. Later healed by Tsunade, who was aided by Orochimaru, Gaara departs with the other Kage to site of their side's battle with Madara and Obito. There, after using his former Jinchuriki status to free him, Gaara is reunited with Shukaku as they assist Naruto and the other tailed beasts against Madara. During the battle, Gaara manages to make his peace with Shukaku while thanking the tailed beast for ensuring that he would meet Naruto.

Appearances in other media

Gaara has made several appearances outside of the Naruto anime and manga. He is present in the second and sixth Naruto feature films, Naruto the Movie 2: Legend of the Stone of Gelel and Naruto Shippuden the Movie: The Will of Fire. In the former, he protects the Land of Wind from an assault by Haido, the antagonist of the film, and later battles the lightning user Ranke, one of Haido's subordinates, and defeats her,

Reception

Gaara has ranked highly in the popularity polls for the series, continuously placing in the top ten.
Anime and manga publications have mostly praised Gaara's character. IGN noted that Gaara was an "anti-Naruto", possessing a "dark, solemn character" as opposed to Naruto's continuous cheer and excitement. and Anime News Network noted him as one of the best voice actors in the series.
Gaara's promotion to leader from Sunagakure in Part II of the series was deemed as the most surprising development in the series by Briana Lawrence from Mania Entertainment.




