[[Adult FriendFinder]]

CATEGORIES: Internet properties established in 1996, Erotica and pornography websites, Online dating services, Penthouse (magazine), Companies formerly listed on NASDAQ

Adult FriendFinder (AFF) is an online sex and swinger personals community website. It allows members to meet new friends or sex partners.
The site was founded by Andrew Conru. It claims to have over 30 million members.startupjournal.html In 1996, the site was launched as FriendFinder, a more traditional online dating service, but Conru created Adult FriendFinder as a spinoff when members began uploading home-made Internet pornography.
The parent company had difficulty finding venture capital due to the adult nature of its signature property.
AFF ranks among the 100 most popular sites in the United States and is a major competitor to leading personals sites such as Match.
In 2009, hip-hop artist Flo Rida debuted the video for "Touch Me" on the site, which his representatives called "a very sexy brand".



Joining and creating a profile is free; however, users cannot access certain features without a paid membership, which comes in three levels, Silver, Gold and VIP. Members can use the blog system to write their own blogs and respond to others in the community. Free members also have access to regular chat lobbies. Paying users can view others' profiles and access communication services such as e-mail, private chat rooms, webcams, blogging, and a webzine. Members can purchase subscription upgrades for benefits such as higher search rankings. Members can broadcast their webcams publicly to each other. Chat room viewers can page the broadcasting member to ask to initiate a personal chat session.
Adult FriendFinder has a popular affiliate programs, whereby webmasters refer users to the site and are compensated up to $1.01 per unique click.Can you earn $1 for each unique visit on AFF
The site won the 2010 XBIZ Award for "Dating Program of the Year".
On September 17, 2013, the parent company FriendFinder Networks Inc. filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.com/2013/09/adultfriendfinder-bankruptcy/

Criticism

There is controversy over the true ratio of male to female members. The AFF disclaimer reports that the user database is rarely purged of expired members or those who have not logged on in years, and that they reflect anyone as being "online" if they have logged on within an hour. They have also been criticized for having excessively high numbers of fake profiles and for their stated policy that:
They have also been criticized for a larger-than-average number of members who are prostitutes "looking for clients".Adult Friend Finder Dating Site Review - Adult Friendfinder
Their matching system counts free members too and the site have also been criticized for presence such members in the list of members suggested to you by automatic matching system.com Review



Notes




