[[Wolfsbane (band)]]

CATEGORIES: English heavy metal musical groups, English rock music groups, Musical groups established in 1984, Musical groups disestablished in 1994, English hard rock musical groups

Wolfsbane are an English heavy metal band. Formed in 1984, the band remained active until lead singer Blaze Bayley went on to join Iron Maiden in 1994. After a couple of reunion shows in 2007 and 2009, Wolfsbane officially reunited in June 2010. To date, Wolfsbane have released four studio albums, one live album, two compilation albums, two EPs and three demos. In 2012 a lost 'Live in the Studio' recording was found in Jase Edwards' loft and was mastered and released as a special, 'available only on tour', making it a rare limited edition.

Biography

Career (1984-1994)

Wolfsbane were formed in 1984 in Tamworth, England. They signed to Def American records, and Rick Rubin produced their first album, Live Fast, Die Fast, released in 1989.
Prior to this they had recorded three demos entitled Wolfsbane (1985), Dancin' Dirty (1987) and Wasted but Dangerous (1988). This last one, recorded at Square Dance Studios, Derby, U.K., illustrates the band in its youngest, rawest state . They were the supporting act for Iron Maiden's UK division of their No Prayer on the Road tour in 1990. Wolfsbane's second release, an EP titled All Hell's Breaking Loose Down at Little Kathy Wilson's Place, was released the same year. The band's second full studio album Down Fall the Good Guys, was released in 1991, giving them their only UK Chart entry with their single "Ezy" charting at No. 68.
Being an English band, signed to an American record label did not work out well for them. Def American dropped Wolfsbane as they felt that the band were not selling well enough. This did not stop the band from being voted as the UK's best unsigned act in 1993. The same year, the band released a live album, Massive Noise Injection, through the Bronze Company label.
The band released their third studio album, often considered to be the band's best work, the self-titled Wolfsbane, in 1994, again on the Bronze Company label. A limited edition of this album included the EP Everything Else. However, when Bruce Dickinson left Iron Maiden, Blaze Bayley got the audition as their new singer and left Wolfsbane later on that year. Wolfsbane disbanded as a result.

Post-breakup (1994-2007)

Jason Edwards, Jeff Hateley, and Steve 'Danger' Ellett, the remaining members of Wolfsbane, joined with Jez Spencer to form the band Stretch in 1995. They released a 6-track mini-album World of Stretch on the Cottage Industry label.
Wolfsbane had a loyal fan base which they referred to as the HMS (Howling Mad Shitheads) which adorned many of the band's t-shirts.

One off shows and reunion (2007-present)

On 9 September 2007, Wolfsbane reformed for a one off short set at the Rock of Ages Festival in Tamworth. This was followed by their first UK tour in 13 years, with the band playing five dates as support for the The Wildhearts in December 2007. Their next tour came in December 2009 supporting The Quireboys on their 'A Little Bit of What You Fancy 20th Anniversary Tour'.
Jason Edwards is currently a record producer, having most recently produced and mixed the self titled Wildhearts album and the new Blaze Bayley album Promise and Terror. He also mixed two tracks on Ginger Wildheart's 555 album and recorded and produced two bonus tracks for Ginger's Hey! Hello! project as well as mixing tracks for German punk band Radio dead Ones. He is also one of three guitarists in Ginger & The Sonic Circus (project of Ginger, songwriter/frontman of the Wildhearts, and plays guitar for The God Damn Whores, alongside 'Random' Jon Poole (formerly of Cardiacs, previously stand-in bassist for The Wildhearts and also in the Sonic Circus), Denzel (also of the Sonic Circus), and Robochrist.
Blaze Bayley subsequently left Iron Maiden and embarked on a career with his own band, BLAZE and later a new line up with the Blaze Bayley Band. During Blaze Bayley's tour in support of his then new album, Promise and Terror, tensions rose within the band. In the end of May 2010, both manager Anna Di Laurenzi and drummer Larry Paterson left the band to join Sinocence who had been the support band on the first leg of the tour. A couple of weeks later, in early June, Wolfsbane announced that they would be reuniting full-time and release a new album in 2011. Blaze Bayley continues to perform as a solo artist alongside singing with Wolfsbane.
On 12 March 2011, it was announced that Wolfsbane would release their new EP, Did It for the Money, on 9 April.roadrunnerrecords.net/news.
On 7 October 2011, it was announced that Wolfsbane would release their new album in 2012. Titled Wolfsbane Save the World, it will be available on the band's official website as well as via the merchandise stand on the band's upcoming tour.roadrunnerrecords.net/news.aspx?mode=Article&newsitemID=164302
On 24 October 2011 the band started their UK tour to promote their new album "Wolfsbane save the world". The album will be released early next year.wolfsbanehms.
Footage from the 2011 UK tour can be seen on the Official Wolfsbane YouTube channel.youtube.com/watch?v=Ivm6vC88QAs
On 15 December 2011 a video of the song "Smoke and Red Light" was added to the official Wolfsbane YouTube channel.youtube.
On 17 October 2012 the band embarked on a 11 date U.K tour. Special guest Givvi Flynn joined the band on stage for four of the shows to perform the epic 'Illusion of Love'. On sale at the show was an album previously unreleased by the band entitled "The Lost Tapes: A Secret History." This album was only available on sale during the tour making it extremely rare.

Members

Discography

Studio albums

Live albums

Compilation albums

EPs

Demos




Wolfsbane JB's DEC 2009 




