[[Guy Chambers]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, 1963 births, English songwriters, English record producers, The Waterboys members, Ivor Novello Award winners, Musicians from London, Alumni of the Guildhall School of Music and Drama

Guy Antony Chambers is an English songwriter, musician and record producer, best known for his work with Robbie Williams. He has been a part of 48 Gold/Platinum certified albums (UK and US) including 14 (UK) number 1 albums, and 22 (UK) Top 10 singles including six (UK) number 1 singles.

Biography

Chambers wrote music from an early age and had performed in London when he was just 11. When he was 15, Chambers composed and performed in a rock opera for his school in Liverpool. From 18, he studied composition and piano at the Guildhall School of Music, London, winning the composition prize in 1985. While at the Guildhall, Chambers started to record his own songs and performed with a band called 'The Burmoe Brothers' releasing their first single, featuring Marc Almond "Skin" on Some Bizarre Records in 1984. After graduating, he toured as a keyboard player with, among others, Julian Cope and The Waterboys before joining World Party in 1986. He co-wrote, with Karl Wallinger, on the band's most successful album: Bang!. He appeared on The Mission's Carved in Sand, providing the orchestral arrangement and keyboards for the song "Grapes of Wrath" and was producer for the short-lived group Stress with their eponymous debut album.
In 1992 Chambers formed his own band The Lemon Trees and wrote, produced and performed with them until they disbanded in 1995. The band only released one album, though a second one was completed but not released because the record company didn't like it. Following the end of The Lemon Trees, Chambers spent time writing successfully with Cathy Dennis and others until an opportune meeting facilitated by music industry veteran Paul Curran with Robbie Williams in January 1997.

Work with Robbie Williams

Chambers collaborated as songwriter, producer and musical director on Robbie Williams' first five solo albums, which all reached number 1 in the United Kingdom and have globally sold over 40 million records to date. He also collaborated with Williams' latest album Swings Both Ways, which became the 1000th number 1 album in the UK, and Williams' 11 number 1 album, equalling Elvis Presley.
Chambers co-wrote a variety of Williams' best known tracks, including "Rock DJ", "Feel", "Millennium", "Let Me Entertain You", "Angels", "Supreme", "No Regrets" and "Eternity".
For his work with Williams, Chambers won three BRITS, three Ivor Novello awards, a Q classic Songwriter award, MTV Video Music Award for Best Special Effects (for "Rock DJ") and an MMF best produced record award for I've Been Expecting You.
Chambers has since co-written the song "Blasphemy" for Robbie Williams' 2009 album Reality Killed the Video Star.
Chambers has collaborated with Williams in their sixth album together, Swings Both Ways which was released on 18 November 2013

Recent work

November 2013: Swings Both Ways becomes the 1000th number 1 in the UK. Williams has now had 11 number 1 albums, equalling Elvis Presley. If you include his number 1s with Take That, he has been in pole position 15 times - the same as The Beatles.
September 2013: Swings Both Ways was announced by Williams in September 2013. It was released in the UK by Island Records on 18 November 2013. The album features cover versions of well known songs, as well as six new tracks written by Williams and Guy Chambers, who also produced the album. Swings Both Ways also features duets between Williams and Lily Allen, Michael Bublé, Kelly Clarkson, Olly Murs and Rufus Wainwright.
In September 2013, Chambers was writing new material with Bang Bang Bang.
August 2013: Chambers has been working with Maverick Sabre in his new West London studio on new material for the artist.
January 2013: Chambers has been working on new material and production for Rufus Wainwright.
November 2012: Guy and Robbie Williams are reunited onstage for Robbie's sell-out shows at the 02. This marked a very special moment for the songwriting duo as they haven't performed on a stage together for ten years.
October 2012: Guy Chambers, Steve Rotheram MP and Kenny Dalglish called a press conference in the Houses of Parliament on Wednesday 25 October 2012 to announce the release of the charity single "He Ain't Heavy ... He's My Brother" - a cover of the Hollies classic which aims to raise funds - and seek justice for - the Hillsborough families who lost 96 loved ones in the historic football disaster of 1989. Artists who have already pledged their support and will feature on the single include: Paul McCartney, Mick Jones, Robbie Williams, Paloma Faith, Beverley Knight, Pete Wylie, Holly Johnson, Dave McCabe, Ren Harvieu, Paul Heaton, Hollie Cook, Jon McClure, John Power, Gerry Marsden, Rebecca Ferguson, Paul Heaton, Shane MacGowan, Melanie C with many more. Speaking the press conference Guy said: '"I am deeply honoured to be asked to produce this record for the 96. If we can help to raise money to support the families' legal battle so that they finally get their time in court then our job will be done. I spent my teenage years in Liverpool and feel a deep affection for both its musical heritage and the unique solidarity of its people."' The single was released on 17 December 2012 and all proceeds will go to the families. The single was 2012's Christmas No. 1
2011: Chambers has also been working with English singer-songwriter's Katy B and Charlene Soraia on their new material.
2011: Chambers teams up with English singer/rapper Example co-writing the song "Microphone" which featured on Example's number 1 album, Playing In The Shadows. In the same year, Chambers worked with Marlon Roudette in which he produced and co-wrote Roudette's single "New Age". The track was initially in released in Germany for radio airplay in July 2011 and then officially released the next month. It went on to become number 1 in the German singles charts the week of its release and remained at the top of the charts for 8 consecutive weeks. The single was certified Platinum in Germany and Switzerland, and Gold in Austria.
2011: A track Guy had written with Julian Lennon entitled "Never Let You Go" was released on Lennon's comeback album Everything Changes. Guy also plays bass on the track. 2011 also saw Chambers working with BBC2 for two three-part programmes: Goldie's Band: By Royal Appointment airing in April and Secrets of a Pop Song which aired throughout July. Both series' displayed Chamber's songwriting talent and ability to share his experience with others. Goldie's Band… saw Chambers acting as a musical mentor to a group of disadvantaged, young musicians, put together by Goldie, and ultimately leading the group to a performance in Buckingham Palace. The series Secrets Of A Pop Song explored the process of successful songwriting, collaborating with artists to write a new song each week – a ballad, an anthem and a breakthrough single - with a variety of celebrated musical contributors divulging the secrets of the trade along the way. Through the series, Chambers worked alongside Mark Ronson to create a breakthrough single, acclaimed singer-songwriter Rufus Wainright to create a ballad, and British band Noisettes to compose an anthem. Guy & Rufus' World War III features on the digital version of Rufus' latest album Out of the Game.
2011:  Guy collaborates with Berlin-born/based star, SCHMIDT to co-write her debut album Femme Schmidt.
2010 began with Chambers working on the single "World Behind My Wall" released by pop/rock band, Tokio Hotel, who embarked on a large European tour, picking up MTV Best Group and NRJ Best International Band Awards. Chambers also co-wrote Tokio Hotel's track, "Pain Of Love" which featured on their album, Humanoid. Katie Melua's album The House, released 24 May 2010, included five co-written songs for her new album produced by William Orbit. Tracks include "I'd Like To Kill You", "The Flood" (first single), "A Happy Place", "A Moment of Madness" and "Tiny Alien"
Chambers' work in 2010 also includes the track "Virtual Friend", co-written with Armin van Buuren for his new album, Mirage. He will write a song for the winner of the Eurovision Song Contest 2010 Lena Meyer-Landrut for her bid to represent Germany again in the Eurovision Song Contest 2011.
Following on from The Isis Project, Chambers wrote the album Songs for a Boy written for his son, Marley and was released as an EP with Sophie Hunter (The Isis Project). The alternative-folk EP was co-produced with Richard Flack
2009 saw Chambers writing with Beverley Knight, co-writing the song "100%", also the name of her album. 2009 also included work with French artist Christophe Willem on his second record Cafeine, co-writing with Matt Hales from Aqualung on the single "Heartbox" and co-writing with Cathy Dennis on "Sensitized", a duet with Kylie Minogue, for Cathy's solo record, due out in 2009.
Additional work that year involved new work with British artists Julian Perretta, Katie Melua, Random Impulse, Marlon from Mattafix and Taio Cruz.

The Orgasmatron

From 2010, Chambers created a monthly live-music experience, 'The Orgasmatron' was at The Monarch on Chalk Farm Road. The Orgasmatron celebrates a wide variety of live acts and musical genres picked by Chambers himself, to present the music he knows including big names, rising stars, DJs and dancers. Those previously involved in the ongoing project included Mark Ronson, Paloma Faith, Beverley Knight, Example, Goldie, William Orbit, Gary Kemp, Steve Norman, Noisettes and Matt Cardle.

Charity work

In December 2012, Guy Chambers, Steve Rotheram MP and Kenny Dalglish released the charity single "He Ain't Heavy ... He's My Brother" - a cover of the Hollies classic which aimed to raise funds for various charities associated with - and seek justice for the Hillsborough families who lost 96 loved ones in the historic football disaster of 1989.
Artists featured on the single included: Paul McCartney, Mick Jones, Robbie Williams, Paloma Faith, Beverley Knight, Pete Wylie, Holly Johnson, Dave McCabe, Ren Harvieu, Paul Heaton, Hollie Cook, Jon McClure, John Power, Gerry Marsden, Rebecca Ferguson, Paul Heaton, Shane MacGowan, Melanie C as well as many others. All proceeds went to the families affected by the tragedy.
The single was released on 17 December 2012 and went on to take the coveted Christmas number one position for 2012 on the UK Singles Chart, beating The X Factor winner James Arthur, who was number one the previous week, and a host of social network campaigns supporting novelty acts such as Eddie Stobart Truckers and the One Pound Fish Man.
At the press conference in October 2012 Guy said: "I am deeply honoured to be asked to produce this record for the 96. If we can help to raise money to support the families' legal battle so that they finally get their time in court then our job will be done. I spent my teenage years in Liverpool and feel a deep affection for both its musical heritage and the unique solidarity of its people."
As well as working on the Justice Collective single, Chambers is a supporter of many charities including:

The Lemon Trees discography

Albums

Singles include

Writer's discography

Albums

Tracks featured on the following albums:

Singles

Films

Orchestral arrangements

Awards






