[[Rosario Marchese]]

CATEGORIES: 1952 births, Italian emigrants to Canada, University of Toronto alumni, Living people, Ontario New Democratic Party MPPs, People from Calabria, Politicians from Toronto, Canadian schoolteachers

Rosario Marchese (born January 1, 1952) is a politician in Ontario, Canada.  He is a member of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario, representing the downtown Toronto riding of Trinity-Spadina for the Ontario New Democratic Party.

Background

Marchese arrived in Canada with his family in 1961.  He received a Bachelor of Arts degree in English, French and Philosophy from the University of Toronto in 1978, and later received a Bachelor of Education degree.  He taught English and French in Toronto and Mississauga.  He is also fluent in Italian. As well, he served as Vice-President of the National Congress of Italian Canadians (Toronto), Toronto Public Library Board trustee, and Multilingual Literacy Centre Chair.

Political life

In 1980, he ran for school trustee in Ward 4 but finished third behind incumbents Patrick Case and Peter Davis. 
He served on the Toronto school board from 1982 to 1990. During this period, he was an advocate of lingual and racial rights, worked to establish international language programs, alternative schools and school childcare, and helped to end the practice of streaming students into narrow learning programs. 
In 1985 and again in 1988, Marchese voted with other trustees to raise their salaries 35% and 86% respectively. By the end of 1988 salaries had increased from about $18,000 to $44,000. Trustees who supported the increase argued that the salary was too low to attract good candidates. Sheila Cary-Meagher, said, "You have to stop and think... about the people who want to run for the job and who, if we keep it a rich person's ghetto, can't do it," she said. In both years trustees rejected citizen recommendations for lower increases.

Provincial politics

In 1990, Marchese was elected to the Ontario parliament in the provincial election of 1990, defeating incumbent Liberal Bob Wong by about 1500 votes in the riding of Fort York. 
The NDP won a majority government and Marchese was appointed as the Minister of Culture and Communications on October 1, 1990. 
As a replacement for his cabinet position, Marchese was appointed as parliamentary assistant to Premier Bob Rae focusing on constitutional affairs.
In June 1994, he introduced a private member's bill to give Toronto the ability to regulate after hours clubs. The party decided to take over the bill and expanded it to encompass the entire province. It was passed on November 24, 1994.

Cabinet positions

In opposition

The NDP were defeated in the 1995 election, although Marchese managed to increase his margin of victory against Wong who ran again for the Liberals. He has been re-elected three times since then.
During his tenure in opposition he has served as critic for several portfolios and has been NDP caucus chair since 2007.



Notes

Citations




