[[Cahaba, Alabama]]

CATEGORIES: National Register of Historic Places in Dallas County, Alabama, Former United States state capitals, Populated places established in 1818, Ghost towns in Alabama, Reportedly haunted locations in Alabama, History of Alabama, Archaeological sites in Alabama, Archaeological sites on the National Register of Historic Places in Alabama, Alabama in the American Civil War, Geography of Dallas County, Alabama, Protected areas of Dallas County, Alabama, Parks in Alabama, Alabama State Historic Sites, Former county seats in Alabama

Cahaba, also spelled Cahawba, was the first permanent state capital of Alabama from 1820 to 1825.  It is now a ghost town and state historic site.  The site is located in Dallas County, southwest of Selma. Stuart. Dead towns of Alabama, pp. 66-67. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 1977. ISBN 0-585-26563-1.

History

Capital

Cahaba had its beginnings as an undeveloped town site at the confluence of the Alabama and Cahaba Rivers. At the old territorial capital of St. Stephens, a commission was formed on 13 February 1818 to select the site for Alabama's state capital. Cahaba was the site chosen and was approved on 21 November 1818.  Due to the future capital being nothing more than wilderness, Alabama's constitutional convention was forced to find temporary accommodations in Huntsville until a statehouse could be built. Governor William Wyatt Bibb reported in October 1819 that the town had been laid out and that lots would be auctioned to the highest bidders.  The town was planned on a grid system with streets running north and south named for trees and those running east and west named for famous men.  The new statehouse was a two-story brick structure, measuring 

Antebellum

The town would remain the county seat of Dallas County for several more decades.  The town eventually recovered from losing the capital and reestablished itself as a social and commercial center. Cahaba, centered in the fertile "Black Belt", became a major distribution point for cotton shipped down the Alabama River to the port of Mobile. The addition of a railroad line in 1859 triggered a building boom in the town of Cahaba. On the eve of the American Civil War, more than 3,000 people called Cahaba home.
During the Civil War, the Confederate government seized Cahaba's railroad and reappropriated the iron rails to extend another nearby railroad of military importance. A large cotton warehouse on the riverbank along Arch Street was stockaded for use as a prison, known as Castle Morgan from 1863 to 1865.  In February 1865 another flood inundated the town, causing much additional hardship for the roughly 3000 Union soldiers held in the prison, and for the town's citizens.  Confederate General Nathan Bedford Forrest and Union General James H. Wilson discussed an exchange of prisoners, captured during the Battle of Selma, in Cahaba at the Crocheron mansion.

Postbellum

In 1866, the county seat was moved to nearby Selma, with businesses and families following. Within ten years,  many of the houses and churches were  dismantled and moved away.  During Reconstruction, the vacant courthouse became a meeting place for freedmen seeking new political power. A new rural community of former slave families replaced the old urban center. These families turned the vacant town blocks into fields and garden plots, though soon, even this community largely disappeared. Prior to the turn of the century, a former slave purchased most of the old town site for $500. He had the abandoned buildings demolished for their building materials and shipped by steamboat to Mobile and Selma.  By 1903, most of Cahaba's buildings were gone; only a handful of structures survived past 1930.

Modern

Although the area is no longer inhabited, the Alabama Historical Commission maintains Cahaba as a state historic site and as an important archaeological site. It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1973.  Visitors to this park can still see many of the abandoned streets, cemeteries, and ruins of this former state capital.

Folklore

The town, and later its abandoned site, was the setting for many ghost stories during the 19th and 20th centuries.  One of the most widely known is that of a ghostly orb in a now-vanished garden maze at the home of C. C. Pegues.  The house was located on a lot that occupied a block between Pine and Chestnut streets.  The purported haunting was recorded with "Specter in the Maze at Cahaba" in 13 Alabama Ghosts and Jeffrey.

Gallery

Image:Vine Street Cahaba.
Image:St Lukes Episcopal Martins Station 1. Luke's Episcopal Church at Martin's Station (approximately 15 miles from Cahaba) in 1934.
Image:Cahaba Methodist Church.
Image:Kirkpatrick House Cahaba. The two-story brick slave quarters remains intact, however.
Image:Dallas Academy.
Image:Perine Mansion Cahaba.
Image:Perine Mansion.
Image:Crocheron mansion.
Image:Castle Morgan.





Bibliography




