[[Lullabies to Paralyze]]

CATEGORIES: Queens of the Stone Age albums, 2005 albums, Albums produced by Joe Barresi, Albums produced by Josh Homme, Interscope Records albums, English-language albums

Lullabies to Paralyze is the fourth studio album by Queens of the Stone Age, released on March 21, 2005. The album has been certified gold in the UK, where it has sold over 100,000 units. It is also the band's first album to be released after Nick Oliveri was fired from the band. Josh Homme and Mark Lanegan are the only members from the previous album, Songs for the Deaf, to play on this album and it's the first album to feature drummer Joey Castillo and guitarist Troy Van Leeuwen.

Background

The album title Lullabies to Paralyze was intended to bridge Lullabies with its predecessor Songs for the Deaf by naming it after a line in "Mosquito Song", the final track on Songs for the Deaf. The "deluxe limited edition" of the album includes a bonus track and a bonus DVD containing "a look behind the scenes and special bonus footage". Videos were produced for singles "Little Sister", "In My Head" and "Burn the Witch", as well as "Everybody Knows That You Are Insane" and "Someone's in the Wolf".
The album was delayed during 2004 because of some changes to the line-up: bassist, vocalist, and co-songwriter Nick Oliveri was fired and on-off vocalist Mark Lanegan went on tour with his own band.
Lanegan can still be heard singing on several songs of the album as well as contributing lyrics. Because of this turmoil, there had been rumours that Lanegan had left the band, which Josh Homme eventually clarified in several interviews was never the case.


Critical reception

The album received generally positive reviews, although slightly lower than its predecessor, the average score being 78 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 31 professional reviews.
Kevin Forest Moreau awarded it 3rd best album of the year 2005, Billboard magazine ranked it 7th best album, Magnet magazine ranked it 9th, and Filter magazine considered it 10th best album of the year 2005.
JustPressPlay ranked it #31 on its list of the Top 100 Albums of the 2000s
Lullabies To Paralyze was certified gold in the UK on April 15, 2005 with sales exceeding 100,000 copies.

Track listing

All tracks written by Joshua Homme, Troy Van Leeuwen and Joey Castillo, except where noted. All lyrics written by Homme, except additional lyrics on "Medication", "Tangled Up in Plaid" and "Long Slow Goodbye" by Mark Lanegan.

The "Hidden Finale" later appears as the main riff in the song "Running Joke", a b-side that appears on Era Vulgaris.

Bonus tracks

LP version

The LP version of the album was released by AntAcidAudio and contains a different cover to the CD version. The sides are named Once, You, Were & Lost, after a line from "Someone's in the Wolf", with each containing a mixture of the CD's album and bonus tracks. 

Outtakes

Bonus DVD

Limited Tour Edition Bonus UK CD

Live from Earthlink in Atlanta, GA March 19, 2005.
Most online retailers list the songs on the bonus CD as the March 19, 2005 show in Atlanta, but at least "The Lost Art of Keeping a Secret" and "Regular John" are actually from the show in Washington, DC on March 27, 2005.
The final item on the song listing (located behind the CD in the normal version, or inside the booklet in the deluxe edition), below "Long Slow Goodbye" reads:
During that time, the band assumed that the tapes of that song were either lost or stolen. A live version of this song can be found on the DVD release Over the Years and Through the Woods. Homme commented, "The tapes got lost. Actually, they were just at another studio, but we falsely accused everyone in the world of theft."Josh Homme, 09/2005 interview with RollingStone.com

Personnel

As common for Queens of the Stone Age recordings, Lullabies does not feature one single line-up but rather a core group of Homme, Castillo and Van Leeuwen that would also form the tour line-up, as well as other contributors, mostly close friends to the band.

Band lineup

Guest appearances

Charting positions

Album

Singles

Certifications




