[[Baghdadi Jews]]

CATEGORIES: Iraqi diaspora, Jewish Iraqi history, Jews and Judaism in India, South Asian Jews, Jewish Chinese history, Jewish ethnic groups

Baghdadi Jews, also known as Iraqi Jews, are Jewish emigrants from Baghdad and elsewhere in Iraq, some of whom were merchant traders settled on trade routes, and some of whom fled religious persecution and formed immigrant communities in their new homelands. Baghdad and Iraq in general used to have one of the largest, if not the largest Jewish community in the Middle East and Central Asia, and these new immigrant communities also included Jews as part of the Persian and Mughal courtiers.jcpa.htm Records of Jewish tradesmen traveling from Baghdad can be found from the early 17th century, and around the mid-19th century a large portion of the community started immigrating to South and South-east Asia as well as to the west, creating new communities while preserving their unique traditions.

Baghdadi Jews presence in Asia

The main Baghdadi Jewish communities in Asia are found in India,Weil, Shalva. 2009 India's Jewish Heritage: Ritual, Art and Life-Cycle, Mumbai: Marg Publications published in 2002; 3rd edn.. Yangon (Rangoon), Singapore, and Shanghai. The majority of Baghdadi Jews lived in the Indian cities of Mumbai(Bombay) and Kolkata (Calcutta). The ethnic Jewish community in Penang is now extinct with the passing of its last member in 2011. Some smaller Jewish communities, such as the one in Bangkok, trace their first founders to Baghdadi Jewish traders who worked and settled down in the region.Weil, Shalva. 2012 "The Unknown Jews of Bangladesh: Fragments of an Elusive Community", Asian Jewish Life, 8:16-18. 

History

The Zoroastrians and the Jews in Middle East had been migrating to other regions, specially India to escape persecution in the medieval ages. Due to social conditions, the Jews traditionally took trade & commerce as their source of livelihood in Europe and elsewhere. In 1730, Joseph Semah arrived in Surat from Baghdad and established the Surat Synagogue and Cemetery. There was already an established Baghdadi Jew community by then with its center in Surat. Surat was a main trading port in the 16th and 17th centuries; the East India Company used the city as a trade transit point, beginning in 1608.  Surat is located in Western India, in Gujarat State, and is the modern commercial capital of Gujarat. Arabic-speaking Jews came to India as traders in the wake of the Portuguese, Dutch and British. These "Baghdadis," as they came to be known, especially the Sassoons of Bombay and the Ezras of Calcutta, eventually established manufacturing and commercial houses of fabulous wealth.jcpa.htm
Lentin, Samuel Sifra (ed) Shalva Weil. " The Jewish Presence in Bombay." India's Jewish Heritage: Ritual, Art and Life-Style. Marg Publications:Mumbai. 2009.[/ref] The majority came from Iraq, thus giving the community its name, though smaller groups came from other countries such as Syria and Afghanistan and assimilated into the Baghdadi group.  Unlike other Indian Jewish communities, whose oral traditions attest to their presence in India as long as 2000 years ago, the Baghdadi communities were established comparatively recently (in the past few centuries). 2009 'The Heritage and Legacy of Indian Jews' in Shalva Weil (ed.) India's Jewish Heritage: Ritual, Art and Life-Cycle, Mumbai: Marg Publications in 2002; 3rd edn., pp. 8-21.
Weil, Shalva. 2008 'Jews in India', in M.) Encyclopaedia of the Jewish Diaspora, Santa Barbara, USA: ABC CLIO.(3: 1204-1212)[/ref]
Sir David Sasson is the most illustrious name of this community of Jews. 2009 India's Jewish Heritage: Ritual, Art and Life-Cycle, Mumbai: Marg Publications published in 2002; 3rd edn.. In Mumbai, the Jewish community was concentrated in the Jacob Circle (now renamed Gadge Maharaj Chowk) area in Central Bombay. They had totally integrated themselves with the society around them. Their dress used to be traditionally Indian. Their womenfolk wear saree; and bangles. Their surnames and family names were like those of other Indians. Their culinary habits are also influenced by Indian. 2009 India's Jewish Heritage: Ritual, Art and Life-Cycle, Mumbai: Marg Publications published in 2002; 3rd edn..
Persian speaking Jews closely related to Baghdadi Jews from Afghanistan and Iran came with the Ghaznavad, Ghori and Mughal invasions of Mahmud (11th century), Muhammad (12th century) and Babur (16th century). The most obscure of Indian Jews, they were traders and courtiers of the Mughals. Jewish advisors at the Court of Akbar the Great in Agra played a significant role in Akbar's liberal religious policies and built a synagogue there. In Delhi, one Jew was tutor to the Crown Prince, Dara Shikoh; the teacher and student were later assassinated by Aurangzeb when he usurped the throne. These Jews got assimilated in the local population as no trace or community remains.jcpa.htm
The community largely emigrated abroad following Indian independence following Zionism. 1994 'India, Zionism In'; 'Indian Jews in Israel', in Geoffrey Wigoder (ed.) The New Encyclopedia of Zionism and Israel, Associated University Presses, pp. 651-653. They primarily feared that an independent India would become hostile to Jews like Pakistan, and also emigrated out of economic concerns, fearing that India would become communist once the British left.blogs.com/2012/04/03/a-childhood-passage-to-israel-for-baghdadi-jews-of-india/ After Indian independence, there was a continuous migration of Baghdadi Jews to Israel. Many others went to the United States and United Kingdom. 2013 "Jews of India" (1: 255-258); "Ten Lost Tribes" (2: 542-543), in Raphael Patai and Haya Bar Itzhak (eds.)  Jewish Folklore and Traditions: A Multicultural Encyclopedia, ABC-CLIO, Inc.

Cuisine

Indian Baghdadi cuisine is an Indian hybrid cuisine, with many Arab, Turkish, Persian and Indian influences. Cooper, John in (ed) Shalva Weil "The Life-Cycle of Baghdadi Jews of India" India's Jewish Heritage: Ritual, Art and Life-Cycle, Mumbai: Marg Publications published in 2002; 3rd edn., 2009. pp. 100-109. Famous Baghdadi dishes include Beef curry, Baghdadi Biryani and Baghdadi Jewish parathas. A Baghdadi version of Tandoori chicken is also popular (using lemon juice to cook the chicken instead of cream used in the usual Indian recipe).  Other Jewish Baghdadi communities have mixed their original Iraqi Jewish dishes with influences from the local cuisine where they settled.

Notable Baghdadi Jews

Yosef Hayyim, halachist, kabbalist and leader of Sefardic jewery
Yehuda Tzadka, haredi rabbi and rosh yeshiva of Porath Yosef
Yitzhak Kaduri, haredi rabbi and kabbalist








