[[Libertarian perspectives on LGBT rights]]

CATEGORIES: Controversies within libertarianism, LGBT rights

Libertarian perspectives on LGBT rights illustrate how libertarian individuals and political parties have applied the libertarian philosophy to the subject of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) rights.

By country

France

=Liberal Alternative=

The Liberal Alternative party states: "We wish to make marriage a private affair, whether religious or not, composed simply of two consenting adults, without regard for sex, and with no further obligation beyond going to the local magistrate/city hall to notify the state about the union. This form of civil union would replace the PACS symbolically. Recognition of marriage is, of course, possible.''"Libertés individuelles

New Zealand

=Libertarianz=

Libertarianz stated in their platform that the party "fully supports the concept of a civil union and would also support allowing marriages between same sex couples, and indeed polygamous marriages or marriages between people who are already related—in all cases as long as all parties are adults and consenting."Libertarianz - Civil Unions The organization ceased to exist in February 2014.

Russia

=Libertarian Party of Russia=

The Libertarian Party of Russia has been one of the most active vocal opponent of the 2013 Russian law banning "propaganda of homosexuality" among minors.  Libertarian Party activists have participated in a demonstrations in front of the Moscow City Duma against the adoption of the law. At a 2012 picket, the Libertarian Party announced its opposition to homophobic laws restricting people's right to freedom of speech.

United States

=Libertarian Party=

The Libertarian Party's position on LGBT rights has remained unchanged since it was created in 1972. In 1975, Ralph Raico, helped to create the "Libertarian For Gay Rights" caucus within the party, and subsequently published "Gay Rights: A Libertarian Approach".
The second LGBT rights organization to operate from a libertarian perspective was the Libertarians for Gay and Lesbian Concerns.  The organization held its first national convention in 1985, and sought to promote libertarianism to LGBT Americans.Walter Wheeler
During the 1980s, the organization was affiliated with the Libertarian Party of the United States.org One of its activities was the production of a lavender pamphlet, to distribute at gay pride events, that explained the libertarian perspective on LGBT rights.  Some of the libertarian views mentioned in the brochure are the following:
The brochure then went onto explain that libertarians opposed efforts to prohibit private sector discrimination because people have the right to be wrong, and that peaceful persuasion was the better method to deal with prejudice than civil rights legislation.
In the 1990s this organization was joined by the classical liberal-libertarian LGBT rights organization called the Gays and Lesbians for Individual Liberty.Gays and Lesbians for Individual Liberty
As of 2007, the LGLC have a mailing addressrevolution: libertarian groups and the GLIL web page has not been updated since 2003.

==Outright Libertarians==

The active LGBT libertarian organization is the Outright Libertarians.  Founded in 1998, the organization is also affiliated with the Libertarian Party of the United States and takes many of the same position that the Libertarians for Gay and Lesbian Concerns did in the 1980s.

==Local Law Enforcement Hate Crimes Prevention Act of 2009==

In 2009, the Libertarian Party came out against H.R. 1913, a purposed hate crime bill that would add to the federal hate crime statute the categories of sexual orientation, gender identity, and disability. The reason the Libertarian Party opposed the purposed hate crimes bill was because it would violate equal justice under the law by creating different classes of victims for the same crime. THe Libertarian Party also accused attempt by legislators to buy the support of the LGBT community while still opposing same-sex marriage and repealing Don't ask, don't tell.

==United States v. Windsor==

In 2013, the Libertarian Party applauded the U.S. Supreme Court's decision, United States v. Windsor, to strike down Section 3 of the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) as unconstitutional. The Libertarian Party has supported same-sex marriage since its founding in 1971.

==Libertarian Party platform on LGBT rights==

The Libertarian Party of the United States takes the following positions relevant to LGBT rights:Platform of the Libertarian Party

=Republican Party and libertarians=

The Librarian Party platform and Republican Party platforms are generally at odds of each other concerning LGBT rights.
LGBT Republicans and conservatives organizations will often make libertarian arguments concerning LGBT rights. Organizations such as GOProud and the Log Cabin Republicans often advocate for LGBT issues in a way that illustrates some common ground between American conservatives and libertarians.
Yet, LGBT Republican and conservative organizations may also differ with the libertarian perspectives on LGBT rights, such as the Log Cabin Republicans' support for the Employment Nondiscrimination Act

==GOProud==

GOProud, an organization representing conservative and libertarian gay men, lesbians, and LGBT allies, support same-sex marriage at a state by state level, establishing domestic partner tax equity, and repealing the Defense of Marriage Act, Don't ask, don't tell policy in the United States military.  GOProud has not official position Employment Nondiscrimination Act
On January 18, 2013, GOProud officially came out in support of same-sex marriage at a state by state level.

==Republican Liberty Caucus==

===Republican Liberty Caucus state chapters===

In 2010, the Republican Liberty Caucus of Texas denounced the new state Republican Party platform that supported criminalization of sodomy and making same-sex marriage a felony. Texas RLC Denounces Anti-Gay Planks in Party Platform. UnitedLiberty. Retrieved April 19, 2011.
In 2012, the Republican Liberty Caucus of New Hampshire supported an amendment, introduced Free State Project Rep. Seth Cohn, on the House floor that would take government entirely out of marriage. Carolyn McKinney, chairwoman of state's Republican Liberty Caucus, said the group has not taken a position on the repeal same-sex marriage bill, which presents "a little bit of a rift among the libertarian types." and "There's two different minds when it comes to this bill: The first is obviously the individual liberty aspect, that people should be allowed to do what they want to do,"MATTHEW SPOLAR Gay marriage repeal bill no sure bet. concordmonitor. Retrieved December 28, 2013.

=Democratic Party and libertarians=

The Librarian Party platform and Democratic Party platforms share common ground on LGBT rights, in such areas as supporting same-sex marriage and opposition to state sanctioned discrimination against LGBT people.

==Democratic Freedom Caucus==

The Democratic Freedom Caucus, is a libertarian-leaning caucus within the Democratic Party. The Democratic Freedom Caucus takes the libertarian position that people of any race, ethnicity, minority opinion, gender, or lifestyle should have the same legal rights as everyone else, laws should not discriminate against any group, and should also not favor one group over another.








