[[Adam Curtis]]

CATEGORIES: Alumni of Mansfield College, Oxford, BAFTA winners (people), BBC people, 1955 births, People educated at Sevenoaks School, Living people, English journalists, English television producers, English documentary filmmakers

Kevin Adam Curtis (born 1955) is an English film maker. His best known work is The Century of the Self (2002), a film that examined how Freud's theories of the unconscious shaped the development of public relations and advertising. He says, "My favourite theme is power and how it works in society", and his works explore areas of sociology, philosophy and political history. 2012 He describes his work as journalism that happens to be expounded upon through the medium of film. His films have won six BAFTAs. He has been closely associated with the BBC throughout his film making career.

Biography

Curtis was born in 1955 as Kevin Adam Curtis in Kent.co. His family had a left wing background.The Telegraph Interview
Curtis completed a Bachelor of Arts in Human Sciences at Mansfield College, Oxford, which included courses in genetics, evolutionary biology, psychology, politics, anthropology and statistics. He started a PhD, during which he tutored in Politics, but while on the course became disillusioned with academia.
He applied to the BBC, and was hired to make a film for one of the BBC training courses, comparing designer clothes in pop music videos to the design of weapons. He subsequently obtained a post on That's Life!, a programme that often placed serious and humorous content in close juxtaposition.

Politics

Of his general political outlook, Curtis has said:  People often accuse me of being a lefty. That's complete rubbish. If you look at The Century of the Self, what I'm arguing is something very close to a neo-conservative position because I'm saying that, with the rise of individualism, you tend to get the corrosion of the other idea of social bonds and communal networks, because everyone is on their own. Well, that's what the neo-conservatives argue, domestically... I don't really have any. I change my mind over different issues, but I am much more fond of a libertarian view. I have a more libertarian tendency... 

Films

Curtis cites John Dos Passos' USA Trilogy, which he first read aged 13, as the greatest influence on his film making. You can trace back everything I do to that novel because it's all about grand history, individual experience, their relationship. And also collages, quotes from newsreels, cinema, newspapers. And it's about collage of history as well. That's where I get it all from. 
Other influences include Robert Rauschenberg, Émile Zola, and Max Weber
Curtis makes extensive use of archive footage in his documentaries. He has acknowledged the influence of recordings made by Erik Durschmied and to "constantly using his stuff in my films". "That kind of footage shows just how dull I can be," he admits, a little glumly. "The BBC has an archive of all these tapes where they have just dumped all the news items they have ever shown. One tape for every three months. So what you get is this odd collage, an accidental treasure trove. You sit in a darkened room, watch all these little news moments, and look for connections." 
The Observer adds "if there has been a theme in Curtis's work since, it has been to look at how different elites have tried to impose an ideology on their times, and the tragicomic consequences of those attempts."

Awards

Curtis received the Golden Gate Persistence of Vision Award at the San Francisco International Film Festival in 2005. In 2009 Sheffield Doc/Fest awarded Curtis the inaugural Sheffield Inspiration Award for his inspiration to documentary makers and audiences.

Blog

Since 2004 Curtis has hosted a blog on the BBC website. By 2011 his page was consistently the most popular on the BBC website, and he has tentative plans to expand the offering.

Filmography






