[[Trajectory of a projectile]]

CATEGORIES: Ballistics

In physics, the ballistic trajectory of a projectile is the path that a thrown or launched projectile will take under the action of gravity, neglecting all other forces, such as friction from air resistance, without propulsion.
The United States Department of Defense and NATO define a ballistic trajectory as a trajectory traced after the propulsive force is terminated and the body is acted upon only by gravity and aerodynamic drag.
The following applies for ranges which are small compared to the size of the Earth. For longer ranges see sub-orbital spaceflight.

Notation

In the equations on this page, the following variables will be used:
Ballistics (gr. βάλλειν ('ba'llein'), "throw") is the science of mechanics that deals with the flight, behavior, and effects of projectiles, especially bullets, gravity bombs, rockets, or the like; the science or art of designing and accelerating projectiles so as to achieve a desired performance.
A ballistic body is a body which is free to move, behave, and be modified in appearance, contour, or texture by ambient conditions, substances, or forces, as by the pressure of gases in a gun, by rifling in a barrel, by gravity, by temperature, or by air particles. A ballistic missile is a missile only guided during the relatively brief initial powered phase of flight, whose course is subsequently governed by the laws of classical mechanics.

Conditions at the final position of the projectile

Distance traveled

The total horizontal distance (d) traveled.
When the surface the object is launched from and is flying over is flat (the initial height is zero), the distance traveled is:
Thus the maximum distance is obtained if θ is 45 degrees. This distance is:
For explicit derivations of these results, see Range of a projectile.

Time of flight

The time of flight (t) is the time it takes for the projectile to finish its trajectory.
As above, this expression can be reduced to
if θ is 45° and y0 is 0.
The above results are found in Range of a projectile.

Angle of reach

The "angle of reach" (not quite a scientific term) is the angle (φ) at which a projectile must be launched in order to go a distance d, given the initial velocity v.

Conditions at an arbitrary distance x

Height at x

The height y of the projectile at distance x is given by
The third term is the deviation from traveling in a straight line.

Velocity at x

=Derivation=

The magnitude |v| of the velocity is given by
where Vx and Vy are the instantaneous velocities in the x- and y-directions, respectively.
Here the x-velocity remains constant; it is always equal to v cos θ.
The y-velocity can be found using the formula
and
The formula above is found by simplifying.

Angle  \theta required to hit coordinate (x,y)

The two roots of the equation correspond to the two possible launch angles, so long as they aren't imaginary, in which case the initial speed is not great enough to reach the point (x,y) you have selected. The greatest feature of this formula is that it allows you to find the angle of launch needed without the restriction of y = 0.
Derivation
First, two elementary formulae are called upon relating to projectile motion:
Solving (1) for t and substituting this expression in (2) gives:

Catching balls

If a projectile, such as a baseball or cricket ball, travels in a parabolic path, with negligible air resistance, and if a player is positioned so as to catch it as it descends, he sees its angle of elevation increasing continuously throughout its flight. The tangent of the angle of elevation is proportional to the time since the ball was sent into the air, usually by being struck with a bat. Even when the ball is really descending, near the end of its flight, its angle of elevation seen by the player continues to increase. The player therefore sees it as if it were ascending vertically at constant speed. Finding the place from which the ball appears to rise steadily helps the player to position himself correctly to make the catch. If he is too close to the batsman who has hit the ball, it will appear to rise at an accelerating rate. If he is too far from the batsman, it will appear to slow rapidly, and then to descend.
Proof
The total time for the flight, until the ball is back down to the ground, from which it started, is given by:
The tangent of the angle of elevation of the ball, as seen by the catcher, is:
The quantity in the brackets will not be zero except when the ball is on the ground, therefore, while the ball is in flight:
The bracket in this last expression is constant for a given flight of the ball. Therefore the tangent of the angle of elevation of the ball, as seen by the player who is properly positioned to catch it, is directly proportional to the time since the ball was hit.

Trajectory of a projectile with air resistance

