[[Hull and Barnsley Railway]]

CATEGORIES: Railway companies established in 1880, Railway lines opened in 1885, Hull and Barnsley Railway, LNER constituents, 1880 establishments in England

The Hull Barnsley & West Riding Junction Railway and Dock Company (HB&WRJR&DCo.) was opened on 20 July 1885. It had a total projected length of 66 miles but never reached Barnsley, stopping a few miles short at Stairfoot. The name was changed to The Hull and Barnsley Railway (H&BR) in 1905. Its Alexandra Dock in Hull opened 16 July 1885.
The main line ran from Hull to Cudworth, with two other lines branching off at Wrangbrook Junction, the South Yorkshire Junction Railway to Denaby, and The Hull & South Yorkshire Extension Railway, an eight-mile branch to Wath-upon-Dearne, opened 31 March 1902. The company also had joint running powers on the Hull and Barnsley and Great Central Joint Railway (Gowdall and Braithwell Railway).
Before the Grouping of 1923, the line was taken over by the North Eastern Railway. Following incorporation into the LNER, duplicated infrastructure was closed or reduced in function – notably Cannon Street station and the Springhead Locomotive Works.
Closure of the greater part of the main line itself came during the time of British Railways. As of 2011 the elevated line in Hull with some of the extensions and alterations added by the NER and LNER are still in use and referred to as the Hull Docks Branch and has the Engineers' Line Reference of HJS.

Background

By the 19th century the coalfields of southern Yorkshire were producing large amounts of coal, the industrialised midland region was making manufactured goods, and the new industrial towns of the West Riding of Yorkshire and of Lancashire were producing cloth and other goods. Thus opportunities for trade, export and profit existed along the east coast of England as well as along the Humber and the tributary rivers feeding it.
Goole had risen from nothing as a port on the Ouse with the creation of the Knottingley to Goole Canal in 1826 by the Aire and Calder Canal Company; the port, built to generous specifications rapidly gained inward and outward trade – much to the chagrin of Hull, and spurred the development of the extension of the Leeds to Selby Railway to Hull which opened in 1840.
Additionally as a competitor to the port of Hull (and equally well placed for European trade), Grimsby began to grow after the 1840s when the Ashton-under-Lyne and Manchester Railway Company built a rail connection, and the Royal Dock was completed in 1852.
Hull had expanded rapidly during the 18th century with shipping tonnages increasing over ten times in that period, and numerous docks supplementing and connecting Old Dock (Queen's Dock) being built by the Dock company in the 19th : Humber Dock (Prince's Dock) 1809, Junction Dock 1829, by 1846 Railway Dock connected to the Hull & Selby Railway (later part of the NER), as well as Victoria Dock (1850), Albert Dock (1869) and St. Andrews Dock (1883). to build a line to Hull, including bridge over, and tunnels under the Humber were being actively promoted by Hull merchants.
The situation became untenable when in 1872 with the NER refusing or unable to transport shipments from the port, deliveries of fish delayed, and a general traffic jam on the rails:The running powers granted by the NER to the Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway to its goods depot at Kingston Street (1873) in Hull may have exacerbated the situation.  
The plans finally found fruition in 1880 in the charge of Col. Gerald Smith (a Hull banker) and through the cooperation of the Hull Corporation (including sale of land to the railway, and an investment of £100,000) and despite the opposition of the NER (which had been instrumental in blocking previous plans.); the Bill of Parliament being passed with minor alterations on 26 August 1880. The company The Hull, Barnsley and West Riding Junction Railway and Dock Company (formed 1879) began work on the new line and associated deep water dock which was completed by 1885.

The HB&WRJ Railway and Dock company

In full, the Hull, Barnsley and West Riding Junction Railway and Dock company.

Construction (1880–1885)

For construction of the line Parliament authorised a share issue of £3,000,0000 and loans of £1,000,000 The contractors were Messrs. Lucas and Aird (see John Aird & Co. and Lucas Brothers). 
The line was one of the earlier built with the aid of steam navvies. The spoil excavated by men and machines from tunnels and cuttings was used to build embankments elsewhere 
The Weedley Tunnel was not originally planned; the track was to skirt the hill to the south. However unstable ground meant that the line tunnelled through the hill instead. 24 The South Kirby tunnel passed through magnesian limestone to reach the lower beds of sandstone, and clay. Excavation of tunnels and cuttings included the practice of tunnelling into the rock, placing charges then moving up the contractors wagons and detonating the charges so that the blasted rock would fall into the wagons. 20
One of the notable features of the line was the number of bridges it required, this was due to the elevated nature of the Hull section where it crossed both roads, waterways, and the NER. Additionally, being built after the Railway Mania of the 1840s it had to cross numerous already existent lines in southern Yorkshire. Over one hundred bridges were required with over 20 within the urban area of Hull.C.T. Goode in Railways of Hull quotes a figure of 35 within the town boundary (undated), whilst G.D. Parkes (The Hull and Barnsley Railway) notes  nine substantial underline bridges ... in the first four miles. A survey using Ordnance Survey maps of the period shows that there were more than 20 within the urbanised area. Later developments in Hull led to the construction or alteration of further bridges.
The majority (eighty eight) of the bridges were of plate girder construction with usually three plate sides (one central) supporting cross beams on which the track was supported. For longer spans a girder "N" truss design was usedA close variation or example of the Pratt truss These larger bridges incorporate rollers on one end to allow for the thermal expansion of the bridge. For other long spans, and for the two swing bridges on the line (Ouse and Hull bridges) open girder truss of approximately parabolic shape (open truss bowstring) were used. Both swing bridges were manufactured by Messrs. Handyside of Derby.
In addition to wrought iron bridges brick arches were also used, both for crossing small dykes and country lanes, as well as the abutments to bridges and in place of embankments on short sections between bridges.
At Beverley Road, Willerby & Kirk Ella, North Cave and Wallingfen were two story buildings with the upper story accessing the embanked track. Stations were built in the English Queen Anne revival style – with decorative external brick courses between floors and brick lintels, minor embellishments on other brick structures such as bridge buttresses roughly echoed the same style.
In July 1884 work stopped for 5 months, due to failure to raise funds through a share issue to pay the workers. Parliament allowed the additional debts to be taken for the work to continue, by completion the total share issue was £6,000,000 and the loans £3,500,000. At this point the line was almost complete but the subsequent cost cutting meant that the planned grand terminus close to the centre of Hull was never built.

Description of the Line and assets

=Hull to Springhead=

Much of the assets of the Hull Barnsley and West Riding Junction Railway and Dock Company (HB&WRJR&DCo) lay in Hull. The line terminated in Hull at three main points: Alexandra Dock; for import and export of goods by sea, Cannon Street station; a goods station and also the passenger terminus, and Neptune Street goods station; the main goods terminus.
The HB&WRJR&DCo's main asset was Alexandra Dock. At the time of its construction it was the largest in Britain at ). After Sculcoates junction and the Beverley and Barmston drain came Beverley Road junction where the line from Cannon Street station coming from the south-east joined the westward travelling main line.
The branch to Cannon Street station first passed Beverley Road station, almost immediately after the junction. Beverley Road station was a two-story building with the upper story accessing the embanked track. the line then curved south and after a 1 in 50 descent reached the level again and terminated at Cannon Street. Initially Cannon Street was intended to be a carriage shed with the main station building situated closer to the centre of town at Charlotte street near Kingston Square where the company's offices where located.
From Beverley Road junction the main line continued west crossing Newland Avenue, and the NER's Hull to Cottingham line before reaching a triangle of track (or Wye) where a line turned south to terminate at Neptune Street goods station.
Before reaching Neptune Street a smaller goods station at Dairycoates branched to the east of the north–south track.
From the wye of track at Springbank junctions on the route towards Barnsley the line continued west past the Springhead works. The works were built on greenfield land north of the main line outside the urbanisation of Hull, and expanded considerably post opening. At Springhead south of the main line there was a through goods loop which also gave access to considerable sidings operated from 1908 onwards.

=Springhead to Aire junction=

Beyond Springhead the line continued on embanked track towards Willerby and Kirk Ella station, then crossing the small shallow valley at Eppleworth in the foothills of the Yorkshire Wolds by a brick viaduct and then South Cave station and North Cave station.
Beyond North Cave the land is flat, and the line turned steadily south-west aiming for Barnsley, passing through Newport, then Sandholme, then Eastrington station before passing over the NER's Hull to Selby Line followed by Howden and Barmby stations. The next major obstacle of the River Ouse was crossed by a swing bridge at Long Drax. The minor station of Drax preceded a crossing under the NER's Selby to Goole Line after which was Carlton station and then the first of the junctions with other Railways through which the Hull and Barnsley obtained much of its traffic.

=South of Aire junction=

Almost immediately after a bridge crossing over the river Aire, a branch heading north-south joined the line at Aire junction; this was jointly operated by the H&BR and Great Central Railway which opened in 1916 and was known as the Hull and Barnsley and Great Central Joint Line.
Less than a mile south-west of Aire junction a westward junction (Gowdall junction) connected the H&BR to the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway (L&YR) at Hensall junction via a short chord. The main line continued south-west and crossed over the same L&Y line (the Wakefield, Pontefract and Goole Railway then owned by the L&YR). About a mile further on the line crossed over the NER main line to Selby (the former East Coast Main Line via Shaftholme and Selby. The line then crossed the Knottingley and Goole Canal, then went over another L&YR line (connecting Knottingley to Shaftholme junction) before arriving in Kirk Smeaton station.
After Kirk Smeaton the terrain becomes hilly again, but with Magnesian Limestone (see Dolostone) replacing the softer chalk found in the Wolds; after a cutting the line entered the 
After Upton the line crossed over the Swinton and Knottingley joint line (Midland and North Eastern railways), shortly after a branch west from Hemsworth East junction connected the line to the West Riding and Grimsby joint line  which was operated by the Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire (after 1897 the Great Central) and Great Northern railways; which was then passed over by the continuation of the H&BR main line. The next station was Hemsworth.
The final tunnel on the line was Brierly tunnel which is  long. The line then passed westward through Brierly junction where a southward-turning chord connected with the Dearne Valley line on which the H&BR had running powers. A northward continuation of the Dearne Valley line was then passed under.
Finally Cudworth was reached: first was Cudworth Goods station; then Cudworth North junction, where the line split into two main branches; a third branch west joined the Midland Railway via goods exchange sidings. The westernmost of the two main branches crossed the Midland Line by girder truss bridge, then a spur to Monk Bretton station left west, whilst the final part of the line continued to Stairfoot junction where it joined the Great Central main line. The easterly branch ran to Cudworth station where there was a platform, but no connection.
The line's second locomotive depot was found at Cudworth, as well as marshalling yards. The whole main line as built was double tracked.

Operation and events (1885–1922)

The HB&WRJR&DCo. began business with large amounts of debt, and within a year of its opening a price war had begun between the Hull Dock Company and the Hull and Barnsley on dock charges, and between the Hull and Barnsley and the NER on transit charges. Neither of the two Hull-based companies could expect to win against the much larger North Eastern Railway. By 1887 the HB&WRJR&DCo. was seeking a way out of debt and approached the Midland Railway for a possible merger. Reasonable terms were made, but the proposal was rejected by the shareholders of the Hull company. An amalgamation by the NER itself was then proposed, which would have included the NER paying off the HB&WRJR&DCo.'s debts; this scheme too was rejected.
The Hull and Barnsley, unable to pay its debts, went into receivership for two years until 1889. The Hull Dock Company amalgamated with the NER in the early 1893, – requiring another act of parliament – one condition of which was that in the event of the NER building another dock in Hull (which had already been planned in 1891 as part of an unsuccessful merger attempt between the H,B&WRJ and the NER. Additionally an agreement was reached that there would be no reduction in dock duties without prior agreement or discussion.
In 1894 the South Yorkshire Junction Railway opened. Though independent, it was worked by Hull and Barnsley engines, and connected the company to more collieries.
In the following years of the 1890s various proposals, including another to merge the NER and HB&WRJR&DCo., and others for expansion of the Hull docks came, but were blocked by one party's interests or another's. Finally in 1899 both railway companies had agreed to the construction of a new dock, to the east of Alexandra Dock, access to which was from the HB&WRJ's elevated line via an extension from Alexandra Dock, and from a joint line branching off the H&BR at Bridges Junction.
In 1902 an extension from Wrangbrook junction opened, connecting to Wath and further collieries. From 1905 cooperation with the Midland allowed trains to run all the way to Sheffield via Cudworth; the same year Edward Watkin nephew of Sir Edward Watkin became general manager of the company.
After exiting receivership, the fortunes of the Hull and Barnsley recovered and it began to pay reasonable dividends on ordinary stock. In 1905 the Hull Barnsley and West Riding Junction Railway and Dock Company officially changed its named to the shorter Hull and Barnsley Railway. The same year running powers were obtained and a junction made with the Dearne Valley Railway. Also in that year the National Radiator company opened in Hull.
Construction of the new dock – "King George V Dock" – was completed by 1914.
In 1916 the Hull and Barnsley and Great Central Joint Railway opened, adding to the number of collieries from which the company could transport coal.

Rolling stock and vessels

=Locomotives=

The H&BR never manufactured any of its own locomotives, all being built elsewhere. The first types in use were of the design W. Kirtley (Locomotive Superintendent of the London, Chatham and Dover Railway) who was acting as a consultant. Matthew Stirling (son of Patrick Stirling of 'Stirling Single' fame) was the first and only Locomotive superintendent of the H&BR during its independence, and who undertook the rebuilding of some of Mr. Kirtley's designs, as well as contracting the construction of his own designs to various builders. His locomotives were typically domeless, and many of the original Kirtley engines were also rebuilt without domes.
Kirtley's locomotives were painted black with grey lining. other locomotives carried the initials "H&BR".
A total of 186 engines were operated by the Hull and Barnsley Railway, on merging into the NER the locomotives were briefly renumbered by adding 3000 to the original number. Following the incorporation into the LNER soon after the surviving locomotives were assigned numbers between 2405 and 2542, in no specific order. Most except the H&BR Class F3 (LNER Class N13) were withdrawn between 1930 and 1940, the B Class beginning withdrawal earlier in 1925. The last F3 was withdrawn in 1956.

=Rolling stock=

Initially the railway used 

=Ships and watercraft=

The company operated a number of vessels in relation to the construction, operation and maintenance of the Alexandra Dock; those vessels included:

History 1922–present

As part of the NER (1922–1923)

The Railways Act 1921 ended the company's independence; from 1 April 1922 the Hull & Barnsley Railway became part of the NER.
 43 old engines were decommissioned at this time.
Incorporation into the NER was just part of a larger scale of consolidation throughout the British railway system, and on 1 January 1923 the NER along with the Hull and Barnsley line became part of the London and North Eastern Railway (LNER).

As part of the LNER (1923–1948)

Cannon Street station in Hull ceased to be used a passenger station in 1924, this coincided with the construction of a chord to the NER line just north-west of Walton street level crossing to the elevated line.The chord allowed through running between the H&BR outside Hull and Paragon station
Mainline freight work commonly used the ex Great Central Robinson 2-8-0 locomotives (later classified as LNER Class O4). The NER Class P1 0-6-0, NER Class Y 4-6-2T, NER Class T and NER Class T2 0-8-0 locomotives inherited from the NER also replaced Hull and Barnsley types on other freight work.
In 1929 a halt west of Springhead works and sidings was constructed, The same month the Springhead Halt opened passenger services between Wath and Kirk Smeaton ended.
Passenger services between South Howden and Cudworth ceased in 1932.

As part of British Railways (1948–1994)

Mainline freight continued to be worked by 2-8-0 locomotives, with WD Austerity 2-8-0 being ubiquitous. 8F type 2-8-0 locomotives also became common on the southern sections of the line, after through working ended (1958). (A large number of the class were purchased by the LNER from the war department after the Second World War, and in 1948 by the British Transport Commission.)
In 1951 a single sided station halt (Boothferry Park Halt railway station) was built on the branch in Hull between Springhead south junction and Neptune street to serve the Hull City Football club (directly situated next to the line), the service ended in 1986.
The locomotive shed at Cudworth closed in 1951.
Passenger services between Hull and South Howden ended in 1955. Through freight on the same line ended in 1958, with complete closure between Little Weighton and Wrangbrook junction in 1959. Freight working on remaining sections west of Hull (Springhead) closed completely in the next decade; the section between Moorhouse and Wrangbrook: 1963, between Little Weighton and Springhead : 1964, between Wrangbrook and both Monckton as well as Sproatbrough in 1967, Cudworth to Monckton in 1968. 
In Hull the bridge over the NER main line at Hessle road was removed in 1962 and the elevated H&BR dock branch section became connected to the Hull to Selby line at Hessle road junction as part of a scheme to reduce the number of level crossings in Hull by routing all rail traffic to east Hull via the elevated Hull and Barnsley Line. 
All traffic from Cudworth to Wranbrook junction ended in 1967. The branch to Cannon street closed completely in 1968. By 1970 the only parts of the line still with traffic were the Hull elevated section, and a few short sections with industrial uses. Alexandra Dock closed in the 1980s and the rail connection was removed, subsequently the dock re-opened but without a rail connection.
Part of the elevated line to King George Dock was converted to a single line in 1988 and one train working introduced, four years later increased amounts of imports; specifically coal; meant that staffed (tokenised) working was reintroduced in 1992.
Part of the path of the line between Hensall and Drax was opened for Merry Go Round trains to Drax Power Station in 1972,

Post privatisation (1994–)

=Hull Docks Branch enhancements=

In 2007 over £10 million was allocated to a project to increase capacity on the former Hull and Barnsley Railway branch to the Hull docks. Network Rail, Associated British Ports, Yorkshire Forward, Hull City Council and The Northern Way were involved in funding or supporting the scheme.
 The work was to include partial re-doubling of the line, remedial and replacement work on the numerous bridges, and signalling upgrades, and to increase the line speed to 
In late 2007 the Network Rail gave the contract to GrantRail
Work on the ABP owned portion of the track was carried out by Trackwork Ltd. of Doncaster, at a cost of over £2.5 million.
In 2013 two bridges were replaced on the docks branch: a minor bridge (James Reckitt Avenue) replaced at a cost of about £1 million, and a major bridge replacement costing £3.2 million to replace a bridge over the Spring Bank West road.

Use of closed parts of the line

Drapers Metal merchants used the Sculcoates, and later part of the former Neptune Street goods yards as part of their scrap metal business – during the 1960s many steam locomotives were dismantled there.
The cutting at Little Weighton, and nearby chalk quarries were used after closure (from 1969) as a landfill facility; filling of the quarries and cutting was approaching completion by 2008. After 2008 a site on the cutting near Willerby has been used as a recycling facility.
In rural areas the embankments and earthworks remain as boundaries between fields, the trackbed west of Weedley tunnel forms part of the Yorkshire Wolds Way and High Hunsley Circuit walks, and a section of the embankment between Kirk Ella and Hull also carries a footpath whilst a section further west is covered by the B1232 road. A section over 2 miles long north of Newport is now part of the eastern end of M62 motorway. A number of the stations have been converted into private residences.
The areas of disused land west and east of Calvert Lane in Hull (formerly Springhead works and sidings and the land between Springbank East, West and South junctions) have become a wildlife habitat,

Preservation

The Hull & Barnsley Railway Stock Fund owns and restores the few surviving vehicles which once belonged to the H&BR. Two coaches, two wagons and a tool van are kept on the North Yorkshire Moors Railway. No locomotives have survived.

Notes



Primary sources

Other sources

=Locomotives and rolling stock=

=Infrastructure and construction=

Further reading

Images



Historical

Remains post closure


