[[Zaleplon]]

CATEGORIES: Acetanilides, Nitriles, Nonbenzodiazepines, Pyrazolopyrimidines

Zaleplon (marketed under the brand names Sonata, Starnoc and Andante) is a sedative-hypnotic, almost entirely used for the management/treatment of insomnia. It is a nonbenzodiazepine hypnotic from the pyrazolopyrimidine class.
Sonata (US) is manufactured by King Pharmaceuticals of Bristol, TN. Gedeon Richter Plc. manufactures zaleplon under the brand name Andante. Starnoc has been discontinued in Canada. It is prescribed rarely in the United Kingdom; with zopiclone being the preferred Z-drug by the National Health Service (NHS).

Medical uses

Zaleplon is effective in the management/treatment of insomnia, primarily characterized by difficulty falling asleep. Due to its ultra-short elimination half-life, zaleplon may not be effective in premature awakenings.
It may result in an impaired ability to drive the next day, though it has proven promising when compared to other sedative-hypnotics and next day residual sedation.
Zaleplon or any nonbenzodiazepine should never be combined with any alcoholic beverage as both substances modulate GABAA receptor sites, and in a synergistic manner increase the chances of fatal respiratory depression and asphyxiation from vomiting.

Special populations

Zaleplon is not recommended for chronic use in the elderly.
When compared with benzodiazepines, nonbenzodiazepines (including zaleplon) appear to offer few significant advantages in efficacy or tolerability among elderly individuals. Long-term use of sedative-hypnotics for insomnia has traditionally been discouraged for reasons that include concerns about such potential adverse drug effects as cognitive impairment, anterograde amnesia, daytime sedation, musculo-skeletal impairment, and subsequently an increased risk of harm to oneself (e.g. falling) and to others (e.g. automotive accidents). Though, quite obviously as the body and brain age, these aforementioned phenomena are expected events, as they occur daily regardless of ingestion of a sedative-hypnotic. Thus, statistically significant and empirical evidence are arguably still absent as dramatic precautions and conclusions are drawn irrespective of the debilitating realities that accompany insomnia and the fact that these medicines do indeed provide assistance to millions of elderly individuals. It is important to distinguish between the extrapolation of potential side effects relative to the vast number of examples, wherein the sedative-hypnotic has proven therapeutically beneficial and appropriate.
In addition, some contend the efficacy and safety of long-term use of these agents remains to be enumerated, but there is nothing concrete to suggest that long term use poses any direct harm to a person.

Adverse effects

The side effects of zaleplon are similar to the side effects of benzodiazepines, although with less next-day sedation,
Zaleplon may prompt day-time or next-day residual sedation.
Available data cannot provide a reliable estimate of the incidence of dependence during treatment at recommended doses of zaleplon (typically 5–20 mg before bed).  Other sedative-hypnotics have been associated with various signs and symptoms of a withdrawal syndrome, following abrupt discontinuation, ranging from mild dysphoria and insomnia to more serious cases that include abdominal and muscle cramps, vomiting, sweating, tremors, and convulsions. Following, abrupt cessation, the seizure threshold is further lowered, wherein coma and death are possible outcomes if untreated.
Some evidence suggests that zaleplon is not as chemically reinforcing and exhibits far less rebound effects when compared with other nonbenzodiazepines, or Z-drugs.

Mechanism

Zaleplon, like zolpidem, zopiclone or eszopiclone are all specific agonists at the benzodiazepine GABAA α1 sub-receptor site. It also modulates the GABAA sub-sites, α2 and α3, to a lesser degree. It has no statistical significance as an anticonvulsant. However, as a pyrazolopyrimidine, zaleplon has served as a novel chemical platform, from which new anxiolytics, will hopefully arise. Much like zolpidem, as an imidazopyridine and also a full agonist at the GABAA α1 sub-receptor site, has been reviewed considerably with some novel contributions. See also: alpidem.

Pharmacology

Zaleplon selectively binds with high efficacy to the benzodiazepine site (ω1) on the α1-containing GABA-A receptors which help produce the primary therapeutic hypnotic properties. The ultra-short half-life gives zaleplon a unique advantage over other hypnotics because of its lack of next day residual effects on driving and other performance related skills.
A meta-analysis of randomised controlled clinical trials which compared benzodiazepines against zaleplon or other Z-drugs such as zolpidem, zopiclone and eszopiclone has found that there are few clear and consistent differences between zaleplon and the benzodiazepines in terms of sleep onset latency, total sleep duration, number of awakenings, quality of sleep, adverse events, tolerance, rebound insomnia and daytime alertness.
Zaleplon has a pharmacological profile similar to benzodiazepines, that is characterized by an increase in slow wave deep sleep (SWDS) with rapid onset of hypnotic action. Zaleplon is a full agonist for the benzodiazepine α1 receptor located on the GABAA receptor complex in the body, with lower affinity for the α2 and α3 sub-sites. It selectively enhances the action of GABA similar to, but more selectively than benzodiazepines. Zaleplon, although not a benzodiazepine, maintains a very similar chemical structure nonetheless; known for inducing hypnotic effects via α1 sub-receptor sites, anxiolytic and muscle relaxant effects via α2 and α3 sub-sites, with negligible anticonvulsant properties (via α5 sub-site), as zaleplon action is modulated at benzodiazepine receptor sites. The elimination half-life of zaleplon is about 1–1.5 hour. The absorption rate of zaleplon is rapid and the onset of therapeutic effects is typically breached within 5–15 minutes following ingestion.
Zaleplon should be understood as an ultra short acting sedative-hypnotic drug for the treatment of insomnia. Zaleplon increases EEG power density in the delta frequency band and a decrease in the energy of the theta frequency band 

Chemistry

Pure zaleplon in its solid state is a white to off-white powder that has very low solubility in water as well as low solubility in ethanol and propylene glycol. It has a partition coefficient in octanol/water that is constant (log PC = 1.23) when the pH range is between 1 and 7.

Pharmacokinetics

Zaleplon is primarily metabolised by aldehyde oxidase, and its half-life can be affected by substances which inhibit or induce aldehyde oxidase. Taken orally, zaleplon reaches full concentration in approximately one hour.  It is extensively metabolised into 5-oxozaleplon and 5-oxodesethylzaleplon (the latter via desethylzaleplon), with less than 1% of it excreted intact in urine.

Interactions

Cimetidine, rifampicin and thioridazine cause interactions with zaleplon.
Cimetidine alongside grapefruit, are known to increase blood plasma concentrations of benzodiazepines metabolized by the P450 CYP3A4 liver enzyme (e.g. alprazolam), as well as increasing the time by which the drug leaves the body, effectively extending the half-life and enhancing effects to potentially toxic levels. Thus, given the similarities between zaleplon and benzodiazepines, particularly in effect, and not just chemical structure, it is reasonable to take precautions (e.g. inquire at a pharmacy) before one consumes cimetidine (or grapefruit) while also taking zaleplon.
Smoking tobacco/ingesting nicotine as well as caffeine likely reduces blood plasma concentrations of zaleplon, as sedative-hypnotic efficacy is diminished. This impact is shared by all GABAergics, whether nonbenzodiazepines, benzodiazepines, barbiturates, carbamates, quinazolines or alcohol.

Recreational use

Zaleplon has the potential to be a drug of abuse, and has been found to have an abuse potential similar to benzodiazepine and benzodiazepine-like hypnotics.nlm.gov/dailymed/archives/fdaDrugInfo.
Some individuals use a different delivery method than prescribed, such as insufflation, to induce effects faster.  thumb|right|180px| Sonata 10mg capsules.
Insufflation of the drug causes loss of yield, as zaleplon is not entirely water soluble, and may cause damage to the nasal passageways as well as sinuses.
A common effect of zaleplon abuse is the occurrence of (typically short-lived) hallucinations. Fewer visual and auditory hallucinations/disruptions with the use of zaleplon than with other drugs in the nonbenzodiazepine class (e.g. zolpidem and the "Ambien Walrus").  However, continuous ingestion is extremely unlikely precisely because of zaleplon's quick onset of action.
The combination of alcohol and zaleplon can result in fatal respiratory depression and asphyxiation from vomiting.






