[[Saad Hariri]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, Living people, Hariri family, Georgetown University alumni, American University of Beirut trustees, Lebanese billionaires, Lebanese people of Iraqi descent, Lebanese Sunni Muslims, Members of the Parliament of Lebanon, Movement of the Future politicians, Prime Ministers of Lebanon, Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur, Saudi Arabian people of Lebanese descent

Saad-eddine Rafiq Al-Hariri (

Early years

Saad Hariri was born in Riyadh, Saudi ArabiaHis Excellency Deputy Saadeddine Rafiq Hariri Arab Decision. He graduated in 1992 from the McDonough School of Business at Georgetown University with a major in Business Administration. a place on the 2006 Forbes list of richest people in the world.

Business activities

Prior to entering politics, Hariri served as the chairman of the executive committee of Oger Telecom, which pursues telecommunication interests in the Middle East and Africa. In addition, Hariri was the chairman of Omnia Holdings and a board member of Oger International Entreprise de Travaux Internationaux.

Political career

On 20 April 2005, Hariri family announced that Saad Hariri would lead the Movement of the Future, an essentially Sunni movement that was created and led by his late father. He is also the leader of the March 14 Alliance, a coalition of political groups born out of the Cedar Revolution which, through mass popular demonstrations and Western support, led to the withdrawal of Syrian troops from Lebanon in 2005 after a 29-year presence.
In 2007, French President Jacques Chirac awarded  Saad Hariri the "Legion d'Honneur" (Knight of the Legion of Honor).

Prime ministership

Government collapse

On 12 January 2011, minutes after Hariri posed for pictures with President Barack Obama in the Oval Office, the opposition parties resigned from the cabinet, as an objection for the inability of the government to take detrimental decisions, causing his unity government to collapse. In fact, Hezbollah and its allies withdrew from the government due to political tensions arose from investigations of the assassination of Rafiq Hariri. Hezbollah operatives had been accused of the assassination of Rafiq Hariri.
Hariri remained caretaker Prime Minister for another four months after the collapse of his cabinet. The new Lebanese government was finally formed on 13 June 2011 and is headed by Najib Mikati. Mikati created a Hezbollah-led government coalition.

Arrest warrant

On 12 December 2012, Syria issued an arrest warrants against Hariri, Future bloc deputy Okab Sakr and Free Syrian Army official Louay Meqdad in regard to the allegations of arming and providing financial support for Syrian opposition groups. Upon this, Hariri released a statement, indicating that Bashar Assad is a "monster". Lebanese judicial sources argued that the arrest warrant would likely to be ignored by Lebanon and that since both Hariri and Saqr have parliamentary immunity, they cannot be prosecuted.

Personal life

Hariri holds dual citizenship, Lebanese and Saudi Arabian.
His net worth has fluctuated since the death of his father. Current figures usually vary between 1.5 and 2 billion USD. However, according to Forbes, as of 2011 he is the 595th richest person in the world with a net worth of $2 billion.

Awards

In 2007, Hariri was awarded the Legion of Honour.

Corruption

There has been a lot of prognosticating about Hariri's financial fate. Leaks about the volume of losses at the company and their effect on the various institutions that belong to the former prime minister, inside and outside Lebanon, are endless. There are also rumors spreading that Saudis are angry with the young Hariri and have turned off the tap of financial aid that had flowed his way politically and electorally since his father's assassination.





|-


