[[Niall Tóibín]]

CATEGORIES: 1929 births, Living people, Irish male film actors, Irish male comedians, Irish male soap opera actors, Irish male stage actors, Irish male television actors, Jacob's Award winners, People from Cork (city)

Niall Tóibín (born 21 November 1929) is an Irish comedian and actor. Born in Cork into an Irish speaking family,IrishInBritain - Interview With Niall Toibin By Gerry Molumby Tóibín grew up on the north-side of the city in Bishop's Field.M., Caught in a Free State, Ballykissangel, Far and Away, and Veronica Guerin, and has played Brendan Behan too. He was awarded honorary lifetime membership of the Irish Film and Television Academy (IFTA) in 2011.

Early life

Tóibín was born in 1929 in Cork, Ireland, the sixth of seven children, born to Siobhán (née Ní Shúileabháin) and Seán Tóibín, native Irish speakers. His parents married in 1917. His father, Seán Tóibín, was born in Passage West, County Cork, and his parents came from Waterford and West Cork. Seán Tóibín was a teacher in the School of Commerce in Cork city and the author of two books, Blátha an Bhóithrín and Troscán na mBánta, on wayside and meadowland flowers, both written in the Irish language. His mother, Siobhán Ni Shúileabháin, came from Beaufort, County Kerry.
Niall was born on the southside of Cork city in Friars' Walk. He was raised with Irish and has used the language in his professional career, notably in the film Poitín. His siblings include Siobhán, Tomás (a poet), Diaglán, Filmin, Góbnait and Colm Tóibín.
As a child he sang in the cathedral choir and the Opera House in Cork. In his teens he joined a drama society attached to the Keating Branch of the Gaelic League. He was educated by the Irish Christian Brothers at the North Monastery (North Mon) after which he left Cork for a job in the Civil Service in Dublin in January 1947.
In 1957, Tóibín married Frances Judith "Judy" Kenny (Died 26 June 2002; aged 70) in Dublin, and has five children, including Sean, Muireann, Aisling, Sighle and Fíona Toibin, and six grandchildren.

Career

Tóibín started acting in the 1950s and spent fourteen years with the Radio Éireann Players.
From Ryan's Daughter and Bracken in the 1970s, to The Ballroom of Romance, The Irish R.M., Brideshead Revisited (TV serial) and Caught in a Free State in the 1980s, and, more recently, Far and Away, Ballykissangel and Veronica Guerin, Toibin's entertainment career in television, film and theatre has spanned over four decades. He has also acted for the radio, such as his guest appearance in the BBC Radio 4 series Baldi.
Tóibín divides his time between New York and his home in Dublin. He married Judy Kenny in 1957, has five children and six grandchildren (grandchildren's names are Niall (named after him), Ella, Jack, Billy, Francie and Barry).
In 2005 he "cemented" his hands outside the Gaiety Theatre, Dublin. He made a speech saying, "It will be a proud day for me. My appearances on the Gaiety stage are without doubt the highlights of my career and I am honoured to have been asked to give my prints," said the former Ballykissangel star, who was joined by five of his six grandchildren to celebrate the event.
He played Dr. Paul O'Callaghan in the first series of the Irish TV programme The Clinic.
He played Judge Ballaugh, alongside with Cate Blanchett, in Jerry Bruckheimer's film Veronica Guerin.

Awards

In 1973, Tóibín won a Jacob's Award for his performance in the RTÉ comedy series, If The Cap Fits.
On 29 October 2002, Tóibín accepted a Best Actor Award in a Dublin ceremony.
Tóibín received an Honorary Doctor of Arts Degree from University College Cork (UCC) on 4 June 2010.
Tóibín was honoured with the Irish Film and Television Academy's (IFTA) Lifetime Achievement Award at a ceremony at the Irish Film Institute on 3 November 2011.






