[[The Regina Monologues]]

CATEGORIES: The Simpsons (season 15) episodes, 2003 television episodes, London in fiction, Cultural depictions of Tony Blair

"The Regina Monologues" is the fourth episode of The Simpsons fifteenth season, and originally aired November 23, 2003 in the United States. It was written by John Swartzwelder, and directed by Mark Kirkland. The episode sees the Simpson family travel to England on holiday. There, they meet several celebrities including Tony Blair, Evan Marriott, Ian McKellen and J. K. Rowling, who all appear as themselves. Meanwhile Abraham Simpson journeys to find Edwina, his long lost love, who is voiced by Jane Leeves.

Plot

Mr. Burns withdraws a $1000 bill from an ATM, but he drops it and an updraft carries it away to the Simpsons' house, where it is found by Bart and Milhouse. Marge makes Bart and Homer put up fliers so that the person who lost the bill can reclaim it. No one can describe it correctly so Lisa suggests that they spend the money on a vacation, but then decide against it because Homer always manages to ruin any trip they go on. After realizing he can make money from the bill, Bart displays it in a museum in his tree house. Mr. Burns visits and reclaims his money, forcing Bart to close his museum. However, Bart has made over $3000 from the museum so they decide to spend the money on a vacation for Marge. Grampa suggests they go to London, where he hopes to meet his long-lost love Edwina. During World War II, he made love to her after claiming he was going out to the front lines the next day, not realising that he was shipping out the next day (D-Day).
Upon their arrival in London the family is greeted by Tony Blair, whom Homer mistakes for Mr. Bean. They visit London's tourist attractions, and later meet J. K. Rowling and Ian McKellen. Grampa tries to contact Edwina whilst Bart and Lisa go on a "sugar rush" after discovering the joys of British chocolate. Homer and Marge rent a Mini Cooper and start to drive around London but get stuck on a roundabout. After literally driving in circles for hours, Homer decides to break out of it, plows straight through the gates of Buckingham Palace and slams into Queen Elizabeth II's horse-drawn carriage.
Homer is put on trial for causing harm to the Queen as well as wrecking her carriage. He calls the Queen an impostor, since her luggage is inscribed "H.R.H." which he believes is short for "Henrietta R. Hippo". The Queen, highly offended, demands that he be executed. He is taken away to the Tower of London to await his execution, where it is planned for his head to be stuck on a pike. The rest of the family call him from outside and Lisa tells him that he can use a secret tunnel that Sir Walter Raleigh built to escape. However, the tunnel leads straight into the Queen's bedroom, and she calls her guards. Homer pleads with the Queen to find it in her heart to forgive him and she allows him to leave the country on the condition that he take Madonna as well. As they prepare to leave, Edwina appears and introduces Grampa to her daughter Abbie, who looks and sounds like an English female version of Homer. Fearing that he is most likely the father, Abe runs away quickly.

Production

"The Regina Monologues" is (as of 2012) the last regular episode written by longtime Simpsons writer John Swartzwelder (though Swartzwelder was credited for contributing to the script to The Simpsons Movie).
Tony Blair recorded his part for the episode in April 2003,
J. K. Rowling recorded her part via satellite from her home in Scotland,
The writers originally drew up a list of ten British celebrities they wanted to appear in the episode. Jean commented "We thought about it, we didn't ask. I've heard of him because my daughter plays soccer."

Reception

The episode originally aired in America on November 23, 2003 on Fox,
When Blair left office in 2007, it was reported that his successor as Prime Minister, Gordon Brown, was also being lined up to guest star on the show. Animator Dan Povenmire noted that American audiences would probably require subtitles to understand what Brown was saying.
The episode has become study material for sociology courses at University of California Berkeley, where it is used to "examine issues of the production and reception of cultural objects, in this case, a satirical cartoon show", and to figure out what it is "trying to tell audiences about aspects primarily of American society, and, to a lesser extent, about other societies". Some questions asked in the courses include: 






