[[Copperhead (DC Comics)]]

CATEGORIES: Characters created by Bob Haney, Comics characters introduced in 1968, DC Comics metahumans, DC Comics supervillains, Fictional bisexual males, Fictional contortionists, Fictional criminals, LGBT supervillains, Fictional reptilians

Copperhead is a DC Comics supervillain, he firstly appeared in The Brave and the Bold #78, June (1968) and was created by Bob Haney and Bob Brown.

Fictional character biography

"John Doe"

The criminal known as Copperhead first appeared in Gotham City in a snake costume. He committed numerous thefts before finally being apprehended by Batman and the first Batgirl. Copperhead then turned to more deadly pursuits as a super-assassin, constricting victims to a suffocating death with his costume's tail. During this time, he would become obsessive about his target and think of nothing until the target was dead, which proved to be a weakness at times as he would ignore anything he did not consider immediately relevant. Copperhead used the travel opportunities his freelance career afforded him to pursue his hobby of collecting transistor radios.
Although a master contortionist, Copperhead was largely powerless without his snake-skin costume. He later sold his soul to the demon Neron in exchange for more power, being transformed into a deadly Snake/Man hybrid.Manhunter #1 (October 2004)
In Blackest Night crossover, Copperhead has been identified as one of the deceased entombed below the Hall of Justice. He is listed as "John Doe", as his real name had never been discovered.Blackest Night #3 He is destroyed by the combined efforts of seven Lanterns during the Black Lanterns' attack on Coast City. 4) #50

Nathan Prince

Teen Titans #56 featured a team of villains called the "Terror Titans", legacy villains whose mantles are inherited from older villains. One of the members shown is identified as Copperhead and appears visually as the character prior to the deal with Neron. The story did not reveal any information about the character or provide context with regard to previous stories.
In the subsequent Terror Titans miniseries, it is revealed that the second Copperhead's true identity is "Nathan Prince", and he is the only member of the Terror Titans who does not have a family connection to his predecessor. As a child, Nathan drowned his baby sibling out of jealousy, and even attempted to kill his parents. Unable to go through with it, he instead ran away to live on the streets, where he would solicit himself, having sex with older men, after which he would kill and rob them. It is still unknown how Prince came to work for Clock King. During The Dark Side Club's metahuman battles, the heroine TNTeena is badly injured, and Clock King tasks Copperhead with watching over her as she recuperates. Copperhead complies, and over time, falls in love with her.Terror Titans #5 Nate and the rest of the Terror Titans are then sent to assist the Martyr Militia, a group of brainwashed metahumans, in destroying Los Angeles, but the tables are turned by Ravager and Miss Martian, who uses her telepathy to undo the brainwashing. The Terror Titans flee to their base, only for Clock King to kill Disruptor, and leave them to be apprehended by the metahumans. Two weeks later, Nate breaks his fellow Terror Titans out of custody, and the group swear revenge on Clock King.Terror Titans #6

The New 52

In The New 52 (a reboot of the DC Comics universe), Copperhead has been radically changed. Although this appears to be the "John Doe" version of Copperhead, he is depicted as an anthropomorphic snake man as opposed to being a villain wearing a snake costume. Copperhead appears as a member of the Secret Society of Super Villains. He knocks out Catwoman after she had knocked out Professor Ivo while in the Secret Society of Super Villains' hideout. 3 #4
During the "Forever Evil" storyline, Steve Trevor encounters Copperhead, Deathstroke, and Shadow Thief at the White House when he is looking for the President.R.G.U.S. #1 Later, Copperhead, Deathstroke, Shadow Thief, Blockbuster, and Giganta turn up in Wayne Industries with Power Ring to fight Batman, Lex Luthor, and other heroes and villains who are against the Crime Syndicate. Copperhead is about to kill Batman when Deathstroke betrays them and shoots him in the head, killing him. Forever Evil #5

Powers and abilities

Copperhead's contortionist skills allow him to fit himself into incredibly small spaces (such as chimneys). He originally wore a snake-themed costume. The suit was a weave of metallic and elastic fibers coated in vulnerable points (such as the chest) with Kevlar, making it bulletproof and impenetrable to almost any cutting edged weapon. The costume had been treated with a highly slippery water- and heat-proof silicon gel, allowing Copperhead to slide along any surface and slip out of tight spots. The tail could be stretched several feet and was strong enough to snap bone and shatter stone. The suit's helmet contained two seven-inch-long fangs which were capable of piercing human skin, and were coated in a potent neurotoxin derived from copperhead snakes. The toxin could paralyze a person almost instantly, and death would follow within 30 minutes. Later, Copperhead sold his soul to the demon Neron and was transformed into a human-snake hybrid. His reflexes and agility were greatly increased, and he gained venomous fangs, a forked tongue, claws, and a prehensile tail.
In "Terror Titans", Clock King mentions that the second Copperhead does not have any superpowers, meaning he utilizes a snake-themed suit, like the original once did.Teen Titans #59
The Copperhead from "The New 52" was similar to the John Doe version, but is an anthropomorphic snake with snake-like abilities.

In other media

Television

Film

Video games

Toys






