[[The Oval (Belfast)]]

CATEGORIES: Association football venues in Northern Ireland, Glentoran F.C., Sports venues in Belfast, Buildings and structures in the United Kingdom destroyed during World War II, Association football venues in County Down

The Oval is a football stadium in Belfast, Northern Ireland, which has been home to Glentoran F.C. since 1892. It was given to Glentoran by the Lord Mayor of Belfast. The Oval was bombed during the Belfast blitz of World War II, and was out of use until 1949 when it was rebuilt with assistance from Cliftonville and Distillery. It had a new stand built in 2000 but requires consistent maintenance to fulfill health and safety requirements and its capacity is currently restricted to 5,056. The Oval has occasionally hosted the final of the Irish Cup as well as hosting the final of the County Antrim Shield and the Setanta Cup.

History

From 1882 to 1886, Glentoran used Ormeau Park as their home ground. They moved to Westbourne in Ballymacarrett for six years until 1892. They then moved to The Oval. Initially it was on Dee Street, however in 1903 The Oval's pitch was rotated 90 degrees to its current location.
In 1941 the Oval was bombed in the Belfast blitz, destroying both grandstands and leaving a crater in the pitch. Grosvenor Park was used as a temporary home for Glentoran, while The Oval was rebuilt with the help of fellow Belfast clubs Cliftonville and Distillery, until August 1949. In 1953 the main grandstand was built.
In September 1995, Glentoran had an advertising board with "JESUS" in white letters on a black background erected at The Oval. This became known as the "Jesus sign". It remained at the ground until 2010; Glentoran officials removed it, saying that they needed the space to sell advertising because of the club's financial troubles and because the sign had garnered no income for Glentoran for several years.
In 2005, after a match between Glentoran and rival team Linfield, Linfield fans broke down a gate in The Oval to access the pitch and throw objects at Glentoran fans in the main stand after both sets of fans had been throwing missiles at each other beforehand. 
In 2008, The Oval was the site of a protest by the Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster against a decision by the Irish Football Association to allow football matches to be played on Sundays, a first in Northern Ireland due to traditional sabbatarianism. The protesters were concerned that regular Sunday matches would attract churchgoers away from attending church.
In the 21st century, the Oval has been dilapidated and has required constant repairs to fulfill Heath and Safety requirements for Glentoran to host its home matches there.

Location and design

The Oval is located near the Port of Belfast, and Harland and Wolff's Samson and Goliath cranes are visible from inside the stadium.
The stadium's capacity is 26,556, but was estimated in 2010 by the Northern Ireland Assembly to have a safe capacity of 5,056 under safety legislation. Linfield's manager David Jeffrey criticised these restrictions and said that they were "murdering local football." The main stand holds 2,720 and the Railway stand holds 2,070. The Oval's record attendance is 55,000 for a European Cup Winners Cup match against Rangers on 27 September 1966. ISBN 0-00-218305-6
The design of the main stand is very similar to the one at Springfield Park, former home of Wigan Athletic. This was also built in 1953

Finals

In previous years, the Oval was used to host the final of the Irish Cup as one of Northern Ireland's biggest stadiums along with Windsor Park, with the location of the final often being decided on a coin toss. During the 1985 Irish Cup final, Glentoran supporters released a cockerel and a pig that had been painted blue onto the pitch to antagonize Linfield supporters.






