[[Djimi Traoré]]

CATEGORIES: 1980 births, Living people, People from Saint-Ouen, Seine-Saint-Denis, French people of Malian descent, Malian footballers, French footballers, Mali international footballers, Association football defenders, Stade Lavallois players, Liverpool F.C. players, RC Lens players, Charlton Athletic F.C. players, Portsmouth F.C. players, Stade Rennais F.C. players, Birmingham City F.C. players, AS Monaco FC players, Olympique de Marseille players, Seattle Sounders FC players, Premier League players, The Football League players, Ligue 1 players, Ligue 2 players, Major League Soccer players, Malian expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in England, Expatriate soccer players in the United States, Malian expatriates in the United Kingdom

Djimi Traoré (born 1 March 1980) is a footballer who currently plays for Seattle Sounders FC in Major League Soccer. A left back or centre back, he is also a member of the Malian national team. At club level, he previously played for Laval, Liverpool – with whom he won honours including the 2005 Champions League – Lens, Charlton Athletic, Portsmouth, Rennes, Birmingham City, Monaco and Marseille.

Club career

Liverpool

Traoré started his career at home club Laval before moving on to Liverpool.
He spent the 2003–04 season, Houllier's last at the club, in the reserve team, of which he was captain, and almost left Liverpool for their Merseyside neighbours Everton on the 2004 transfer deadline day but remained at Liverpool. He scored his first and what turned out to be only Liverpool goal during this season, in the UEFA Cup against FC Steaua Bucureşti.
Traoré's career appeared to have been revitalised by Rafael Benítez. While the defender had appeared poor positionally, and seemed reluctant to attack, particularly during the 2004–05 season, he showed more willingness to support the left winger, as well as improving his positional play.
Traoré scored an own-goal in the third round of the 2004–05 FA Cup against then Championship side Burnley, as he attempted a turn and drag-back within his own six-yard box. It turned out to be the only goal of the game and handed Burnley a 1–0 victory over their Premiership opponents.
Traoré remained a regular at Liverpool, and eventually made the starting line-up as Liverpool qualified for the Champions League Final that season, against AC Milan. After conceding the free kick that led to Paolo Maldini's goal in the opening minute, contributed to his winning a Champions League medal as Liverpool fought back from 3–0 down to draw 3–3 and beat Milan on penalties.
In the 2005–06 season, Traoré found his first team appearances limited, with John Arne Riise and Stephen Warnock also starting regularly at left back. It was to be his last season with Liverpool, and, although he had played some part in Liverpool's pre-season in 2006, he was sold to Charlton Athletic for £2 million on 8 August 2006.Charlton snap up Faye and Traore BBC News

Charlton

Traoré was sent off on his Addicks debut on 19 August, after receiving two yellow cards, the latter of which was for preventing a free kick being taken. This was the fifth time in eight seasons a Charlton player had been sent off on the first game of the season. On 16 December he conceded a penalty against Liverpool, his former club, for a tackle on Jermaine Pennant. He was soon deemed surplus to requirements at Charlton. After only half a season at the Valley, Traoré was allowed to leave the club by new manager Alan Pardew, joining Portsmouth.

Birmingham City

On 10 February 2009 Traoré joined Birmingham City, then of the Football League Championship, on a three-month emergency loan.

AS Monaco

On 18 June 2009 Traore signed a two-year deal with AS Monaco, moving from Portsmouth after his loan period at Birmingham expired.

Olympique Marseille

On 18 August 2011 Traoré signed a one-year contract with Ligue 1 club Olympique de Marseille. He was an unused substitute as Marseille won the 2012 Coupe de la Ligue Final,

Seattle Sounders FC

On 23 February 2013 Traoré signed with MLS club Seattle Sounders FC after a successful preseason trial.

Statistics

Statistics accurate as of match played 11 September 2013.

Honours

Liverpool
Monaco
Marseille








