[[Jakalope]]

CATEGORIES: Canadian electronic music groups, Musical groups from Vancouver, Musical groups established in 2003, 2003 establishments in Canada

Jakalope is a Canadian Indie Pop/Rock group. They are named for the fictional animal of the same name, although the animal's name is more commonly spelled jackalope. The band was formed in 2003 by noted Canadian industrial musician and producer Dave "Rave" Ogilvie most famous for his studio work with such acts as Skinny Puppy, David Bowie, Nine Inch Nails, and Marilyn Manson. The band gained much popularity after playing the opening theme song to seasons 4—7 of the TV series Degrassi: The Next Generation.

History

Beginnings and It Dreams

Jakalope began in 2003 as an open-concept project headed by Dave Ogilvie.  His conceptual aim was towards new musical genre rooted in industrial rock (for which Ogilvie is famed), but would be able to flow smoothly between searing rock and melodic pop. It was around this time that Ogilvie became acquainted with the vocal stylings of Katie B while she was working at Bryan Adams' The Warehouse Studio in Vancouver, British Columbia. The two of them had instant chemistry, and Katie took her position center stage as the front woman of Jakalope.
Their debut album, It Dreams, was released in 2004, and spawned the hit singles and videos "Pretty Life", and "Feel It". The 3rd single  was "Go Away", but the video received little play on MuchMusic and was unsuccessful compared to the two previous singles. In 2005 It Dreams was released in Japan.
For this album, the band collaborated with a large number of guest musicians, including Trent Reznor (who contributed production work, as well as song writing, and instrumentation), Kat Bjelland and members of Acid Polly Sloan, Monster Magnet and Malhavoc.
The cover art for It Dreams received the Juno Award for Best CD/DVD Artwork Design of the Year in 2005, and was designed by artist Vincent Marcone.

Born 4

In early October 2005, The Orange Record Label confirmed  that Jakalope would return to the studio in late October to record their next album, Born 4.  The first single off the new album, "Upside Down (And I Fall)", was released to radio in March 2006. There was some controversy with the release date constantly changing, from an initial date set for spring 2006. Due to undisclosed reasons the release date was postponed several times, until the release on October 3.
Trent Reznor returned as co-producer and other guests on the second album include Allie Sheldan (Rio Bent), Thom D'arcy (Small Sins), Bob Pantella (Monster Magnet), Alex Lifeson (Rush), Jeremy Fisher and Bill Rieflin (Ministry, R.E.M., Married To Music). Vincent Marcone returned once more to do the CD design.
Born 4 was released on June 7, 2006 in Japan, and on October 3 in Canada.  It is now  available for purchase on iTunes in both the United States and Canada.

Katie B's Departure and the arrival of Chrystal Leigh

In spring 2007, frontwoman Katie B. left the band to pursue a solo career. She summarizes her experience with Jakalope as a time where she "grew as a songwriter, a performer, an artist, and learned many a valuable lesson".com The split is said to be amicable and there is no ill will between the two parties.
The spot of lead singer was eventually filled by Chrystal Leigh, former lead singer for now-defunct Vancouver band The Perfect Strangers. She also fronted the Chrystal Leigh Band during a stint in Kelowna, and contributed supporting vocals to the song 'Vertebrae' by Closing Iris. Of Chrystal, Ogilvie has said "I was blown away by her personality, her voice, and the fact that she's a piano player," recounts Ogilvie, before dishing, "I was dying to have someone to collaborate with, who actually is a musician and not just a singer." Quote taken from Jakalope's official bio on their official Myspace
For the next few years, Jakalope would remain quiet as they slowly put together new material and searched for a new label. They still played the occasional show, such as playing at the 2009 Juno Festival The Juno Fest Schedule and released the occasional song via their Myspace.

Things That Go Jump In The Night

First, the band released two new songs, via their official MySpace, the first titled "Delicious" and the second, a cover of a Julee Cruise song, "Falling". Ogilvie announced that the album would be named Delicious. Another song, titled "Last Song", was released via the official Jakalope fansite. A remix of "Delicious" by Alkatraz was also released to their Myspace.
In August 2009 Jakalope released yet another new song, titled "a.k.a. Cupcake",Jakalope releases a new song via YouTube through their YouTube account and announced that final recording for their new album had begun.
In February 2010, the band announced that they had signed to 604 Records Announcement that the band joined 604 Records and soon after announced that filming of a video for their upcoming single, titled "Witness",announcement of new single's name would be taking place in the coming week.
In March 2010 the band announced via Twitter that the first single would be released at the end of March and the new album would be out by the end of May.Tentative announcement of single and album release dates
On May 19, 2010 Jakalope posted 3 new songs on their MySpace page, "Witness", "Baby Blue" and "Combine", as well as a trailer for their upcoming music video for "Witness".
On July 13, 2010, "Witness", the first single from the band's forthcoming album, was made available through the iTunes Store. A remix named "Witness (Kevvy Mental Remix)" by Kevin James Maher was also made available for purchase.apple.com/us/album/witness/id379945449?i=379945456
Chrystal Leigh announced that the next music video would be for the song Magnolia.

Members

Due to the nature of the band, there are constantly rotating members, however the core members of the band are:

Past Members

Discography

Albums

Singles

Trivia

The song "Pretty Life" was featured in the Canadian produced show "Lost Girl", which currently airs on Showcase in Canada.






