[[Sculpture of the United States]]

CATEGORIES: American sculpture

The history of sculpture in the United States begins in the 1600s "with the modest efforts of craftsmen who adorned gravestones, Bible boxes, and various utilitarian objects with simple low-relief decorations."Craven, Wayne, ''Sculpture in America'', Thomas Y. Crowell Company, New York, 1968, p. 1 American sculpture in its many forms, genres and guises has continuously contributed to the cultural landscape of world art into the 21st century.

Folk art

There is frequently art in well-made tombstones, iron products, furniture, toys, and tools—perhaps better reflecting the character of a people than sculptures made in classical styles for social elites. One of these specific applications, the carving of wooden figureheads for ships, started in the Americas as early as 1750Pinckney, Pauline A. ''American Figureheads: And Their Carvers'', W.W. Norton & Company, Inc. NY  1940 p.29 and a century later helped launch the careers of Samuel McIntyre and  the country's first famous sculptor, William Rush (1756–1833) of Philadelphia,.V., ''Shipcarvers of North America'', Dover Publications, New York,  1972 c.1962  p. 26-40  The tradition begun then continues today in the folk sculpture style known as Chainsaw carving.

File:Folk art.jpg|Gravestone from Boston, 1736 (?)
Image: ship-figure-head. 1830, Art Institute of Chicago
Image: Preacher1830. 1830, Art Institute of Chicago
Image: William-Rush-Jackson.jpg|William Rush—portrait of General Andrew Jackson, 1815, Art Institute of Chicago

The Italian years

In the 1830s, the first generation of notable American sculptors studied and lived in Italy, particularly in Florence and Rome, creating in the  Neoclassic style. At that time, Italy "provided the proper atmosphere, brought the sculptor close to the great monuments of antiquity, and provided museum collections that were available to study."Rogers, Millard F., ''Randolph Rogers: American Sculptor in Rome'', University of Massachusetts Press, 1971 p. 13 They also gave the artists access to the carvers of Italy who translated their clay works into marble. During this period the themes from which the subjects of sculptural works were chosen tended to be drawn from antiquity, the exceptions being portraits (whose subjects were frequently shown wearing Roman or Greek garb) or works that included Native Americans.  These artists  included Horatio Greenough (1805–1852), Hiram Powers (1805–1873), Thomas Crawford (1814–1857), Thomas Ball (1819–1911) and his son-in-law William Couper (1853–1942), Harriet Hosmer (1830–1908), Chauncey Ives (1810–1894), Randolph Rogers (1825–1892) and (somewhat later) William Henry Rinehart (1825–1874)., ''White Silence: Greenough, Powers and Crawford, American Sculptors in Nineteenth-Century Italy'', University of Miami Press, Coral Gables, 1972 p. xiii

Image: Abdiel-Greenough2.jpg|Horatio Greenough, Abdiel 1838-43
File:David by Thomas Crawford.jpg|Thomas Crawford, David Triumphant, 1848
File:The Greek Slave.jpg|Hiram Powers — The Greek Slave, Raby Castle,  1844
File:Nydia-3, Randolph Rogers.jpg|Randolph Rogers, Nydia, the Blind Flower Girl of Pompeii, 1856
File:CIvesNJ.jpg|The Willing Captive by Chauncey Ives, Newark, New Jersey 1871 

19th-century American women sculptors

American women also became active sculptors during the Italian Period despite the sexism of the age. Among the women who acquired both commissions and fame were Edmonia Lewis, Harriet Hosmer, Anne Whitney, Vinnie Ream and Emma Stebbins). K. Hall and Co.  Boston,  1990

File:Zenobia SLAM 4067.jpg|Harriet Hosmer, Zenobia in chains, 1857, Saint Louis Art Museum
File:Bethesda angel jeh.JPG|Emma Stebbins' Bethesda Fountain
File:Vinnie Ream - Lincoln.jpg|Vinnie Ream's Lincoln
File:Charles Sumner statue (Cambridge, MA) - Anne Whitney sculptor.JPG|Charles Sumner by Anne Whitney

The Paris years

In the decades following the Civil War American sculptors began more and more to go to Paris to study — falling in with the more naturalistic and dramatic style exemplified by the works of Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux (1827–1875) and Antoine-Louis Barye (1796–1875) and other French sculptors.  Among these Americans were Augustus Saint-Gaudens, Frederick MacMonnies and Daniel Chester French.

File:Adams-memorial-SaintGaudens.jpg | Adams Memorial Augustus Saint-Gaudens
Image: Lincoln_statue.C.
Image: French-detail-Lincoln.jpg|Lincoln (detail), 1916, Daniel Chester French, Art Institute of Chicago
File:Princeton Battle Monument.jpg|MacMonnies' Princeton Battle Monument

Home grown

American sculpture of the mid- to late 19th century was often classical and often romantic, but it showed a special bent for a dramatic, narrative, almost journalistic realism (especially appropriate for nationalistic themes) as witnessed by the frontier life depicted by Frederic Remington. This was the beginning of the style of "Western Art" that continued with Alexander Phimister Proctor and others through the 20th into the 21st century.

File:Cowboy at Rest.jpg|Cowboy at Rest by Solon Borglum, 1904
File:Philly Remington 1908.JPG|Cowboy by Frederic Remington, 1908
File:5047 mfa dallin appeal spirit-esmall.jpg|Appeal to the Great Spirit by Cyrus Dallin, 1909
File:McKnight.jpg|Hudson McKnight Memorial, by Alexander Phimister Proctor, 1931

Wildlife sculptors (Animaliers)

The naturalism of the French school, exemplified by Antoine Barye, had a great impact on the first sculptors of American wildlife.  The first generation of American animaliers included, Edward Kemeys, Edward Potter (who occasionally worked with Daniel Chester French, producing horses for his equestrian statues), Alexander Phimister Proctor (who executed mounts for Augustus Saint-Gaudens' riders), Charles Russell,  Herbert Haseltine, Albert Laessle and Anna Hyatt Huntington.P. Dutton, New York, 1973

Image: Kemeys-Panther.jpg|Edward Kemeys (1833-1907), Locked in Death, 1886
File:Rittenhouse Sq goat.jpg| Albert Laessle, Billy, 1914

Public monuments

The years following the American Civil War saw a huge increase in the number of public monuments erected in the United States.  "By far the most prevalent monument features a fully equipped Confederate soldier (the same prototype held true for Union monuments) in a realistic pose."Widener, Ralph W., ''Confederate Monuments: Enduring symbols of the South and the War Between the States'', Andromeda Press, Washington D.C. 1982, introduction
This style of monument was popularized by sculptor Martin Milmore who created one of the first ones in 1868.  Milmore's own monument, authored by Daniel Chester French, Death and the Sculptor remains one of America's "noble tributes."[ref]Taft, Lorado, ''The History of American Sculpture'', The Macmillan Company, New York,  1925
p. 255[/ref]
As the century closed, the pace of monument-building quickened in the great cities of the East, especially those erected to memorialize the Civil War. Several outstanding sculptors emerged, most of them trained in the beaux-arts academies of Paris. Daniel Chester French stands out, as do Frederick William Macmonnies, Hans Schuler, and Lorado Taft. This tradition continued to the 1940s with Charles Keck, Alexander Stirling Calder and others and the use of figurative sculpture in monuments persists into the 21st Century.  After the middle of the 20th Century  sculpture used in public monuments was increasingly abstract.

File:Milmore 1.jpg|Civil War monument, by Martin Milmore in York, Pennsylvania,  1872
Image: Robert Gould Shaw Memorial. Gaudens
File:USMC War Memorial Sunset Parade 2008-07-08.S. Marine Corps War Memorial, located in Arlington, Virginia, 1954, designed by Felix de Weldon
Image:Vietnam-memorial-soldier.jpg|A Marine at Vietnam Veterans Memorial on July 4, 2002, designed by Maya Lin

Carving mountains

There are at least three major mountain sculptures in the United States.  These are Mount Rushmore, Stone Mountain, and Crazy Horse Memorial.  Gutzon Borglum, an accomplished sculptor with such pieces as Seated Lincoln and a variety of other public monuments, oversaw the sculpture of Mount Rushmore in the Black Hills in South Dakota.  The monument was finished after his death by his son Lincoln Borglum.
Gutzon Borglum also was responsible for starting the Stone Mountain project in Georgia but had a falling-out with its overseers.  The monument was then taken up by Augustus Lukeman, who died during its carving in 1935.  The memorial was finished by Walker Hancock and was considered complete in 1972.
The Crazy Horse Memorial in the Black Hills of South Dakota depicts the Oglala Lakota warrior Crazy Horse riding a horse and pointing into the distance.  It was begun in 1948 by sculptor Korczak Ziolkowski and continued after his death by his wife, Ruth, and several of their children.  The face was dedicated in 1998.

Image:Mountrushmore.  Sculptures of George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Theodore Roosevelt, and Abraham Lincoln represent the first 150 years of American history.
Image:Stone mountain closeup mosaic.jpg|Stone Mountain in Georgia

Architectural sculpture

Public buildings of the last quarter of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century provided an architectural setting for sculpture, especially in relief. Karl Bitter, Lee Lawrie, Adolph Alexander Weinman, C. Paul Jennewein, Rene Paul Chambellan, Corrado Parducci, and many others worked in the simple, sometimes narrative style that fit these spaces.  Much of this work was created by anonymous sculptors and carvers.

File:Am Arch Sculpt 2.jpg|North America, Philadelphia City Hall, Alexander Milne Calder, sculptor, 1870s
File:Am Arch Sculpt 4. 1925
File:Am Arch Sculpt 9.jpg|Cane Cutter, Louisiana State Capitol,  Lee Lawrie, sculptor,  1929
File:Am Arch Sculpt 7.jpg|River Traffic, Kansas City City Hall, Walker Hancock, sculptor, 1937

Twentieth century

As the century began, many young European sculptors migrated to the free, booming economy across the Atlantic, and European trained sculptors account for much of the great work created before 1950.  These include  Elie Nadelman, Albin Polasek, Gaston Lachaise and Carl Milles.

Image:Elie Nadelman New York State Theater by David Shankbone.jpg|Elie Nadelman sculpture in the New York State Theater

Modern Classicism

Several notable American sculptors joined in the revitalization of the classical tradition at this time, most notably Paul Manship, who "discovered" archaic Greek sculpture while studying on a scholarship in Rome. C. Paul Jennewein and Edward McCartan were also leaders in this direction who fit easily with the art-deco tastes of the 1920s.
In the 1930s and 1940s, the ideologies that rent European politics were reflected in associations of American sculptors. On the right was the group, mostly native-born, mostly old-school classical, mostly modelers of clay, who founded the National Sculpture Society, led by the heiress and sculptor Anna Hyatt Huntington and preserved in the sculpture park that she endowed — Brookgreen Gardens in South Carolina.

File:Diana by Augustus Saint-Gaudens 01.jpg| Augustus Saint-Gaudens, Diana (1892–93)
File:Girl w duck Rittenhs Sq.jpg | Paul Manship, Duck Girl, 1916
File:Darlington Memorial Fountain. Paul Jennewein, Darlington Memorial Fountain, 1922
File:Brookgreen Gardens Sculpture6.jpg| Edward McCartan, Dionysus, 1923

American Expressionism

On the left, often immigrant, often expressionistic, was the New York-based Sculptors Guild, with an emphasis on more current themes and direct carving in wood or stone. Its most famous member was William Zorach.

File:William Zorach, Moses, 1952.JPG| Moses, William Zorach, 1952

African-American sculptors

With the Harlem Renaissance, an African-American sculpture genre emerged. Richmond Barthé was an  outstanding example. Augusta Savage was a sculptor and teacher. Other contemporary sculptors include Elizabeth Catlett, Martin Puryear, Jerry Harris, Thaddeus Mosley, and Richard Hunt.

Image: RichmondBarthe-boxer.jpg|Richmond Barthé Boxer (the Cuban featherweight, Kid Chocolate), 1942
Image:Jerry Harris.jpg|Jerry Harris Dogon mother and child

The turn toward abstraction

Some Americans, such as Isamu Noguchi, had already moved from figurative to nonfigurative design, but after 1950, the entire American art world took a dramatic turn away from the former tradition, and America led the rest of the world into a more iconoclastic and theoretical approach to modernism.
Within the next ten years, traditional sculpture education would almost completely be replaced by a Bauhaus-influenced concern for abstract design. To accompany the triumph of abstract expressionist painting, heroes of abstract sculpture such as David Smith emerged, and many new materials were explored for sculptural expression. Louise Nevelson pioneered the emerging genre of environmental sculpture.
However, during this period a group of  American sculptors persisted in creating works in their pre-war, modern/classical-style. These include  Milton Horn, Donal Hord, Charles Umlauf, Joseph Erhardy, and John Henry Waddell.

Gallery of Modernist American sculpture

File:Gaston lachaise floating figure. 5 from an edition of 7, National Gallery of Australia
File:JacobEpstein DayAndNight.
File:Jacques Lipchitz, Birth of the Muses (1944-1950), MIT Campus.
Image: Wfm calder.jpg|Alexander Calder, L'empennage (1953)
File:Agricola I.JPG|David Smith, (1906-1965)
Agricola I, 1952, Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington, DC.
File:John Chamberlain at the Hirshhorn.
Image:Tonysmith freeride sculpture.jpg|Tony Smith, Free Ride, 1962, 6'8 x 6'8 x 6'8 (the height of a standard US door opening), Museum of Modern Art, New York
Image:UntitledGoldBox1964.jpg|Larry Bell, Untitled 1964, bismuth, chromium, gold, and rhodium on gold-plated brass; Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden
File:104_0422.JPG|Isamu Noguchi, Heimar, 1968, at the Billy Rose Sculpture Garden, Israel Museum, Jerusalem, Israel
File:George Rickey Ri10.gif|George Rickey, Four Squares in Geviert, 1969, terrace of the New National Gallery, Berlin, Germany
File:Judd Muenster.JPG|Donald Judd, Untitled 1977, Münster, Germany
File:RichardSerra Fulcrum2.jpg|Richard Serra, Fulcrum 1987, 55 ft high free standing sculpture of Cor-ten steel near Liverpool Street station, London
Image:Untitled slab painting, resin and fiberglass sculpture by John McCracken, 1981, Smithsonian American Art Museum.jpg|John McCracken, Untitled slab painting, resin and fiberglass sculpture 1981, Smithsonian American Art Museum

Pushing the boundaries of art

The figure returned in the 1960s, but without the beaux-arts figurative tradition, sometimes even as life-casts like those George Segal made with plaster. Jim Gary created life-sized figures composed of metal washers and hardware almost invisibly welded together, as well as those of stained glass and even used automobile parts and tools in his sculptures.
Concerns for the qualities of forms and design continued — but usually without representing a human figure. Minimalist sculpture by artists such as Richard Serra and Norman Carlberg often replaced the figure in public settings. Sculpture of the late 20th century was mostly a playful exploration of the boundaries of what could be called art.

Minimalism

The Minimalist style reduces sculpture to its most essential and fundamental features. Minimalists include Tony Smith, Donald Judd, Robert Morris, Larry Bell, Anne Truitt, and Dan Flavin;

Site-specific movement

Site specific and environmental art works are represented by artists: Donald Judd, Richard Serra, Robert Irwin, George Rickey, and Christo and Jeanne-Claude led contemporary abstract sculpture in new directions. Artists created environmental sculpture on expansive sites in the 'land art in the American West' group of projects. These land art or 'earth art' environmental scale sculpture works exemplified by artists such as Robert Smithson, Michael Heizer, James Turrell (Roden Crater) and others
The land art (earth art) environmental scale sculpture works by Robert Smithson, Michael Heizer, James Turrell and others.

Postminimalism

Artists Bill Bollinger, Eva Hesse, Sol LeWitt, Jackie Winsor, Keith Sonnier, Bruce Nauman, and Lucas Samaras, among others were pioneers of Postminimalist sculpture.
Also during the 1960s and 1970s artists as diverse as Stephen Antonakis, Chryssa, Walter De Maria, Dan Flavin, Robert Smithson, Robert Irwin, Claes Oldenburg, George Segal, Edward Kienholz, Duane Hanson, and John DeAndrea explored abstraction, imagery and figuration through Light sculpture, Land art, and installation art in new ways.

Late 20th century revival of figurative sculpture

Other kinds of sculpture grew in importance, some evolving from the work of leaders in ironwork during the early 1900s who included Samuel Yellin. A center for the western style of American sculpture developed at Loveland, Colorado, and many studios, magazines, and even a museum (the National Cowboy & Western Heritage Museum in Oklahoma City) pursued this interest. A neo-Victorian style emerged, pioneered by the sculptor Frederick Hart. 

Image: Horn-chicago.
Image: KeysToCommunity.


Other genres of sculpture

The art-doll and ceramic sculpture communities also grew in numbers and importance in the late 20th century, while the entertainment industry required large-scale, spectacular (sometimes monstrous or cartoon-like ) sculpture for movie sets, theme parks, casinos, and athletic stadiums. Industrial product design, especially automobiles, should not be ignored.  An example is Randolph Parducci's (brother of Corrado Parducci) sculptures created for the famous chariot race scene in the movie Ben Hur.

Legal issues regarding photographs

United States courts have consistently held that sculptors maintain an intellectual property right to sculptures and are entitled to compensation if photographs are used for commercial purposes.  The rights apply even if the sculptor no longer owns the sculpture or is even in a public space.  The sculptor however could sign away those rights.  Some other countries such as Germany give permission to take the photographs via the concept of Panoramafreiheit.
On February 25, 2010, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit ruled 2-1 that the Frank Gaylord, sculptor of the Korean War Veterans Memorial was entitled to compensation because an image of it was used on a 37 cent postage stamp and he had not signed away his intellectual property rights.  The appeals court rejected arguments that the photo was transformative. The Government – amlawdaily – February 25, 2010
In 2002 amateur photographer and retired Marine John All paid was $1,500 to use one of his photographs of the memorial on a snowy day for the stamp  In 2006 sculptor Frank Gaylord enlisted Fish & Richardson to make a pro bono claim that the Postal Service had violated his Intellectual property rights to the sculpture and thus should have been compensated.  The Postal Service argued argued that Gaylord was not the sole sculptor (saying he had received advice from federal sources – who recommended that the uniforms appear more in the wind) and also that the sculpture was actually architecture.  Gaylord won all of his arguments in the lower court except for one…the court ruled the photo was fair use and thus he was not entitled to compensation.  Gaylord appealed and won the case on appeal. On April 22, 2011, The US Court of Claims awarded Gaylord $5,000.





 






