[[California Miramar University]]

CATEGORIES: Distance education institutions, Distance Education and Training Council, Education in San Diego, California, Unaccredited institutions of higher learning in California, Educational institutions established in 1977, Colleges accredited by the Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools, 1977 establishments in California

California Miramar University (CMU) is a for-profit higher education institution in San Diego, that offers  degree and certificate programs through distance education, a combination of on-line and classroom (hybrid) delivery and traditional classroom delivery. It is nationally accredited through Distance Education and Training Council (DETC) and Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools (ACICS).
California Miramar University is approved by the United States Department of Education California Miramar University Financial AidCalifornia Miramar University Financial Aid
California Miramar University was approved and certified by the Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) in the Student and Exchange Visitor Information System (SEVIS) on September 17, 2012. SEVP Certified Schools SEVP and SEVIS are administrated by the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, the principal investigative arm of the United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS). CMU offers immigration status sponsorship for international ESL, certificate and degree program students through a student visa (I-20).

History

The California Post-Secondary Education Commission and Distance Education and Training Council and California Miramar University list CMU date of establishment as 2005.calmu.html
According to California Miramar University's website, CMU purchased the assets of Pacific Western University – California, including its State of California approval status, in late 2005. As part of the asset sale, an institutions transition plan was implemented that called for PWU (California) to relocate to San Diego and teach out all active students over 18 months.calmu.html   
Pacific Western University (California) (PWU California) was located in Los Angeles from February 1977 to 2005.  
According to a 2006 article in Inside Higher Education, it was reported that PWU (California) intended to change its name.  The article reported that PWU (California) was under new ownership and management, had changed location and wanted to emphasize that the new ownership no longer had any connection with PWU Hawaii. The article said that the school wanted to distance itself from past controversies and that it intended to filed for national accreditation.[ref]
</ref> 
In early 2007 the conditions of the asset transition were complete and the California State Approval was officially transferred to CMU.  At that time Pacific Western University (California) ceased operations.  Later that year California Miramar University filed for accreditation.  As part of the accreditation process the accrediting agency ruled that CMU and PWU California were separate schools that operated with separate academic standards.  The accreditation agencies stipulated that graduates of Pacific Western University (California) would not be eligible to receive CMU diplomas or transcripts and that the records of the two schools should be held separate. To comply with accreditation requirements, CMU transferred copies of all PWU – California institutional and student records to Education Services, which now serves as the official custodian of records for all PWU students.bppe.ca.shtml  

Accreditation

On June 6, 2009, California Miramar received accreditation by the Distance Education and Training Council (DETC), and on December 18, 2009, CMU was awarded a second accreditation from the Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools (ACICS).
Prior to 2007 CMU received approval to operate from the California Bureau for Private Postsecondary and Vocational Education (BPPVE). The BPPVE was not a recognized accreditor, nor did its approval serve as a substitute for educational accreditation. State Approval meant that the Bureau had determined and certified that each approved institution had met minimum standards as established in state law for integrity, financial stability, and educational quality. To qualify for approval, an institution had to meet standards with regard to course objectives, and content of courses; physical space; equipment and instructional materials. Other approval criteria included the education, experience and qualifications of instructors and administrators; maintenance of student records; compliance with health and safety codes; and policies for refunding unused tuition and fees. State approval was also a prerequisite in order for a private institution to become accredited. Obtained December 17, 2006. California Miramar University is California State Approved by means of accreditation under the California Private Postsecondary Education Act of 2009, section 94890. (BPPE) BPPE Official Website

Recognition

On August 22, 2011, California Miramar University's MBA Program was listed as one of the top ten MBA programs in San Diego by the San Diego Business Journal, ranked by enrollment.

Degree programs

California Miramar University offers the degree programs and certificate programs in English as a Second Language (ESL) and Hospitality Management as well as undergraduate level degrees in Public Administration and Business Administration. The Bachelor level program in Business Administration include seven separate majors.  The graduate level degrees include six separate majors in the Masters of Business Administration degree program, Master of Science degree programs in Strategic Leadership, Taxation and Trade for Executives, Telecommunications Management, and four separate majors in the Doctor of Business Administration degree program.

Pacific Western University Controversies prior to 2006

Prior to the founding of California Miramar University in 2005 and the asset sale of Pacific Western University (California) in that same year,  PWU California was the subject of criticism concerning the unaccredited nature of its programs.
In May 2004 the US Government Accountability Office presented the results of an eight-month examination titled "Diploma mills:  Federal Employees Have Obtained Degrees from Diploma Mills and Other Unaccredited Schools, Some at Government Expense" to the U.S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs.S. Senate, May 11, 2004 According to the report the investigation was conducted to determine whether the federal government had paid for, or governmental officials possessed, degrees from unaccredited schools. After the passage of the Homeland Security Act, Section 4107 of tile 5, U.S. Code was amended. After this act became law in 2002, the federal government could pay for the cost of academic degree training for federal employees only if the college or university providing that training was accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting body. As the basis of the report, the GAO searched the Internet for nontraditional, unaccredited post-secondary schools that offered degrees that met their search criteria. The Senate Committee official transcriptHearings Before The Committee on Governmental Affairs United States Senate, One Hundred Eighth Congress Second Session May 11 and 12, 2004 references Pacific Western University in Los Angeles and Pacific Western University in Hawaii as two of the unaccredited schools the GAO found online and mentioned during the hearing.
Later that year, investigative reporters from television station KVOA of Tucson, Arizona, noted that PWU was one of seven schools discussed in the GAO report,"Investigators: Degrees for Sale" (archived at the Internet Archive), KVOA News 4, Tucson, Arizona, November 16, 2004Clarification, KVOA News 4, Tucson, Arizona, December 13, 2004 and reported that Pima Community College in Tucson had reduced the salaries of two faculty members who previously had been paid at the PhD level based on their degrees from PWU. In a subsequent clarification of the original article KVOA reported that one of the two professors contacted the station and disagreed that PWU was a diploma mill. The professor did not feel misled by Pacific Western, as the station reported, because the professor said it was approved by the California Department of Education to be an educational institution and to award degrees.
Internationally, the media responded similarly to Pacific Western University and the GAO Report. This article also noted that PWU was listed as approved on two California state websites.Accredited or Unaccredited?, by Martin Kiely, National Guild of Hypnotists

Alumni

Memberships

CMU is DANTES/VA DSST approved and offers several special programs for members of the United States Military, enabling members of the armed forces to continue their education through both distance, hybrid and classroom based learning, even while on active duty. In some cases, military experience and coursework may be accepted as transferable units.
CMU is also a member of the following organizations:








