[[Solar analog]]

CATEGORIES: Solar analogs

Solar-type star, solar analogs, and solar twins are stars that are particularly similar to the Sun.  The classification is a hierarchy with solar twin being most like the Sun followed by solar analog and then solar-type. Observations of these stars are important for understanding better the properties of the Sun in relation to other stars and the habitability of planets.

By similarity to the Sun

Defining the three categories by their similarity to the Sun reflects the evolution of astronomical observational techniques. Originally, solar-type was the closest that similarity to the Sun could be defined. Later, more precise measurement techniques and improved observatories allowed for greater precision of key details like temperature, enabling the creation of a solar analog category for stars that were particularly similar to the Sun. Later still, continued improvements in precision allowed for the creation of a solar twin category for near-perfect matches.
Similarity to the Sun allows for checking derived quantities — like temperature, which is derived from the color index — against the Sun, the only star whose temperature is confidently known. For stars which are not similar to the Sun, this cross-checking cannot be done.

Solar-type

These stars are broadly similar to the Sun. They are main-sequence stars with a B-V color between 0.48 and 0.80, the Sun having a B-V color of 0.65. Alternatively, a definition based on spectral type can be used, such as F8 V through K2 V, which would correspond to B-V color of 0.50 to 1.00. This definition fits approximately 10% of stars, so a list of solar-type stars would be quite extensive.
Solar-type stars show highly correlated behavior between their rotation rates and their chromospheric activity (e.g. Calcium H & K line emission) and coronal activity (e.g. X-ray emission). As solar-type stars spin-down during their main-sequence lifetimes due to magnetic braking, these correlations allow rough ages to be derived. Mamajek & Hillenbrand (2008) have estimated the ages for the 108 solar-type (F8V–K2V) main-sequence stars within 16 parsecs of the Sun based on their chromospheric activity (as measured via Ca H & K emission lines).
The following table shows a sample of solar-type stars within 50 light years that nearly satisfy the criteria for solar analogs, based on current measurements.

Solar analog

These stars are photometrically similar to the Sun, having the following qualities:
Solar analogs not meeting the stricter solar twin criteria include, within 50 light years and in order of increasing distance:

Solar twin

These stars are more similar to the Sun still, having the following qualities:
The following are the known stars that come closest to satisfying the criteria for a solar twin. (The Sun is listed for comparison.)
Some other stars are sometimes mentioned as promising solar twin candidates, particularly: Beta Canum Venaticorum (see references for Turnbull & Tarter), 37 Geminorum (see references for Turnbull & Tarter) and 16 Cygni B (Porto de Mello et al. 2000). However, all three have temperatures and/or luminosities that are too high for true solar twins. Furthermore, Beta Canum Venaticorum and 37 Geminorum have too low metallicities for solar twins. Finally, 16 Cygni B is part of a (very wide) binary system and is very old for a solar twin (at least 7 to 8 Gyr). Beta Canum Venaticorum is mentioned above as a nearby solar analog.

By potential habitability

Another way of defining solar twin is as a "habstar" — a star with qualities believed to be particularly hospitable to an Earth-like planet. Qualities considered include variability, mass, age, metallicity, and close companions.
The requirement that the star remain on the main sequence for at least 3 Ga sets an upper limit of approximately 1.5 solar masses, corresponding to a hottest spectral type of F5 V. Such stars can reach an absolute magnitude of 2.5, or 8.55 times as bright as the Sun, at the end of the main sequence.
Non-variability is ideally defined as variability of less than 1%, but 3% is the practical limit due to limits in available data. Variation in irradiance in a star's habitable zone due to a companion star with an eccentric orbit is also a concern.
Terrestrial planets in multiple star systems, those containing three or more stars, are not likely to have stable orbits in the long term. Stable orbits in binary systems take one of two forms: S-Type (satellite or circumstellar) orbits around one of the stars, and P-Type (planetary or circumbinary) orbits around the entire binary pair. Eccentric Jupiters may also disrupt the orbits of planets in habitable zones.
Metallicity of at least 40% solar (Fe/H = -0.4) is required for the formation of an Earth-like terrestrial planet. High metallicity strongly correlates to the formation of hot Jupiters, but these are not absolute bars to life, as some gas giants end up orbiting within the habitable zone themselves, and could potentially host Earth-like moons.
One example of such a star is 





 

Further reading


