[[George Smith (rugby union)]]

CATEGORIES: 1980 births, Australian rugby union players, Australian people of Tongan descent, Australia international rugby union players, Rugby union flankers, Brumbies players, Stade Français rugby players, Suntory Sungoliath players, IRB Awards winners, Members of the Order of Australia, RC Toulonnais players, Australian expatriate rugby union players, Expatriate rugby union players in France, Expatriate rugby union players in Japan, Australian expatriates in Japan, Australian expatriates in France, Sportspeople from Sydney, Living people

George Smith  (born 14 July 1980) is an Australian rugby union player. He is a flanker for Suntory Sungoliath in Japan, though he is more known for his 12 years (2000–10,13) at the ACT Brumbies in Super Rugby, earning 142 caps.
He made his Test debut in 2000 against France in Paris and won 111 caps for Australia, 110 before retiring from international rugby on 5 February 2010 and one final cap against the British and Irish Lions on 6 July 2013. He is the second most capped Wallaby forward behind Nathan Sharpe, and is the second most capped flanker in rugby union behind Richie McCaw. He holds the world record as the youngest player to have played 100 test matches at 29 years and 4 days.

Career

Junior career

Smith was born in Manly, Sydney. He began playing rugby with the Warringah Roos, before moving on to play the majority of his junior career with the Manly Vikings, and Tupou College in Tonga, playing a year above his age group in the Sydney junior rugby competition. Once that team had reached its age limit (18 years old) and moved on to the colts competition, Smith remained in the Sydney junior rugby competition, this time lining up in his correct age group for the Seaforth-Balgowlah Raiders.
He then progressed to playing in the Manly 1st grade Colts side who also won a premiership in 1999. It was during that season that Smith Made his first grade debut at Nepean Rugby Park against The Penrith Emus. During his junior career he was selected for many representative teams, including Manly, Sydney, Northern Zone, NSW, and Australian Under 16s.
Smith also had a successful school career, first at Balgowlagh Boys' High School, then at Cromer High School, where, along with Tongan international John Payne, he won the Australian Schools Championship. He played for the Australian Schoolboys team in 1998.
He was signed to the ACT Brumbies by Eddie Jones in 1999. He made his Super 12 debut in just his first year of professional rugby in 2000, playing against the Sharks, and he scored a try in the Brumbies Super 12 Final loss to the Canterbury Crusaders. In a remarkable year, Smith was also capped for the first time in the Wallabies end of season tour against France.

Senior career

Smith was a key player for the Wallabies from 2000–09.
He is often voted Players' Player of the Year,
He won Australian Super 14 Player of the Year four years in a row between 2006 and 2009.[ref]
</ref>
In 2007 the breakdown specialist capped off another remarkable season claiming awards including: the Brett Robinson Award as the Brumbies' Players' Player for the fifth consecutive year; Super 14 Player of the Year;Flanker George Smith wins Super 14 Australian player of the series award – International Herald Tribune and the Rugby Union Players' Association 'Rugby Medal for Excellence'. These recognitions underlined his position as one of rugby's most respected players, reinforced further when he became the Wallabies 75th captain, against Canada at the 2007 Rugby World Cup.
2008 was a big year for Smith. He captained the Brumbies and the Wallabies  and became the first player to win the John Eales Medal, twice. In addition, Smith won the "Super 14 Player of the Year Award", for the third consecutive year and the Brett Robinson Award as the Brumbies' Players' Player of the year for the sixth consecutive year.
He also reached a personal milestone during the season, when he made his 100th Super Rugby appearance against the Cheetahs in round six. In a memorable double for the Smith family, George's younger brother, Brumbies teammate Tyrone, was named rookie of the year. In the international arena, the older Smith also became both the most capped flanker and the most capped forward – the latter being previously held by John Eales.
On 5 February 2010, Smith announced his retirement from international rugby. 2010 was expected to be his last in Super Rugby. and former Brumbies' scrum-half Matt Henjak.
In 2010, he was selected in the French Barbarians to play at blindside flanker (number 6) against Tonga.
In March 2011, Smith played for the Australia XV team alongside fellow Tongan, Lisiate Tafa, in the Southern Hemisphere Charity Fundraiser against the Pacific Barbarians.
In April 2011, Smith become the highest paid Australian rugby player by signing with Japanese club, Suntory Sungoliath, on a $3.3 million deal.
On 25 February 2013, the Brumbies announced he would return to Australia on a short term contract, for the 2013 Super Rugby season.
On 23 June 2013, after recovering from a knee injury, Smith was recalled to the Australian squad for the series against the British and Irish Lions.

Personal life

Smith, who is of Tongan background, is the older brother of fellow Brumbies player and Tongan rugby league international Tyrone Smith.
He was easily recognised on the field by his dreadlocked hair style until late 2006 – when he decided to sell his dreadlocks for charity.[ref]

</ref> He told the Daily Telegraph "I wouldn't expect much for the (dreadlocks), but anything for the charity would be great.". They were given to a charity for younger people with cancer.
Smith was the face of Australian version of Electronic Arts' video game Rugby 2005.





Bibliography




