[[1984 Formula One season]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 in Formula One, Formula One seasons

The 1984 Formula One season was the 35th season of FIA Formula One motor racing. It featured the 1984 Formula One World Championship for Drivers and the 1984 Formula One World Championship for Manufacturers which were contested concurrently over a sixteen-race series1985 FIA Yearbook, Red section, pages 84–85 which commenced on 25 March, and ended on 21 October.
In the Championship for Drivers, the season became a duel between McLaren's Alain Prost and Niki Lauda. Lauda eventually prevailed by the smallest margin in Formula One history – half a point – despite Prost winning 7 races to Lauda's 5, and despite Prost winning the last two Grands Prix of the year.

Team and driver changes

Season summary

The season had been expected to see a continuation of the Brabham-Renault-Ferrari battle, with supporting roles for McLaren, Williams and Lotus. McLaren however had stolen a march on its competitors thanks to its TAG turbo engine and the John Barnard-designed MP4/2. The combination of dual World Champion Lauda, nine time Grand Prix winner Prost, the TAG-Porsche and the MP4/2 quickly becoming the class of the field.
FISA had introduced new fuel economy rules aimed at reducing speeds, ruling that cars powered by turbocharged engines would only have 220 liters of fuel per race, with re-fueling now banned (the tank had to be 220L, but teams were free to try and squeeze more in if they could, which some tried with methods such as freezing the fuel inside the tank). TAG, while still a sponsor with Williams, became a partner with McLaren team boss Ron Dennis, and commissioned German sports car manufacturer Porsche to design and build what would become the TAG-Porsche V6 turbocharged engine. Porsche had extensive experience with similar economy rules due to its participation in endurance racing and this translated in superior fuel economy.
Reigning world driver's champion Nelson Piquet and his Brabham-BMW were usually the fastest combination on track, but appalling early season reliability where the reigning Drivers' World Champion failed to score a point in the first seven rounds due to numerous engine and turbo failures before his back-to-back wins in Canada and Detroit, meant he was never able to challenge consistently, and by half way through the season it was apparent he wouldn't be able to defend his title.
The season saw a titanic battle between both McLaren drivers Niki Lauda and Alain Prost. Prost had been sacked by Renault two days after the 1983 season ended after failing to win the championship (Prost had openly criticised Renault for failing to develop the RE40 during the season, resulting in the loss of both the Drivers' and Constructors' championships). Fast and ambitious, the Frenchman quickly established his dominance over his teammate, especially in qualifying, though Lauda's race driving saw him often a match for his younger team mate.
Austrian Niki Lauda had returned to F1 in  to have ever won the title without achieving a single pole position in the season.
Prost though can be considered unlucky not to have won his first World Championship. He won 7 races to Lauda's 5, and was robbed of a potential 4.5 points after Monaco Clerk of Course Jacky Ickx controversially stopped the Monaco Grand Prix after just 31 laps due to the dangerous conditions brought on by constant rain. Prost won the race from the Toleman of Ayrton Senna and the Tyrrell of Stefan Bellof, but only half points were awarded due to the race being stopped before half-distance. The controversy stemmed from Ickx not consulting with the race stewards before he stopped the race, an action which saw his suspension from being the Clerk of the Course. It was rumored that Ickx, who at the time a driver in the factory backed Rothmans Porsche Sportscar team, had stopped the race when he did so that the Porsche engined McLaren would win and not the Hart engined Toleman of F1 rookie Senna. At the time Senna had been showing what would become legendary wet weather driving skills and was catching the more experienced Prost very quickly. Senna actually passed the slowing Prost as they crossed the line when Ickx held out the red flag (Prost had slowed down having already been told on the team radio that the race had been stopped), but the regulations ruled that the results were taken from the previous lap, where Prost was in the lead. Almost going unnoticed in Senna's late race charge for the lead, was that the Cosworth V8 powered Tyrrell of Bellof was catching Senna as fast as the Brazilian was catching Prost. Toleman mechanics later confirmed that had the race not been stopped, Senna would not have finished as the TG184 had suffered serious suspension damage.
During the season, the Tyrrell team had its results stripped after a technical infringement. Soon after the podium ceremony for the Detroit Grand Prix in which Martin Brundle had finished in a brilliant second place, word arrived that the officials had found impurities in the water injection system on his Tyrrell 012 and lead balls in the rubber bag containing the water. Samples of the water were shipped to France and Texas for analysis and found to contain significant levels of hydrocarbons. Team boss Ken Tyrrell was called to a meeting of the FISA Executive Committee on July 18 and, based on the impurities in the water, which had been topped up during a pit stop, was accused of refueling the car during the race. (Refueling had been banned prior to the 1984 season and remained illegal until 1994). The team was disqualified from the remainder of the World Championship and lost the 13 points they had already gained, though they were allowed to and did continue to race, though they did not appear for the final three races of the season. However, they were unable to score any championship points. Many in the paddock felt for Tyrrell as they believed the penalty far outweighed the crime and that FISA boss Jean-Marie Balestre had used the system to make an example of the British-based team, with some privately believing that the penalty would not have been anywhere near as severe had it been manufacturer-based teams Ferrari or Renault who committed the offence.
McLaren dominated the season, with Prost winning 7 races to equal the season wins record set by Jim Clark in , and Lauda winning 5, making the McLaren MP4/2 the most dominant single season car in the sports history to that point. The team also scored four 1–2 results during the season to easily win the Constructors' Championship with a then-record 143.5 points, some 86 points in front of second-placed Ferrari. McLaren won 12 of the season's 16 races, with Brabham's reigning World Champion Nelson Piquet scoring two wins, and Michele Alboreto (Ferrari) and Keke Rosberg (Williams-Honda) each winning a single race.
For Japanese giant Honda, Rosberg's win in the Dallas Grand Prix would be the first of 40 wins for their turbocharged V6 engines until the turbos were banned following the  season. It was also Honda's first win in Formula One since John Surtees had won the 1967 Italian Grand Prix at Monza driving the V12 powered Honda RA300 in its debut race.

Drivers and constructors

Season review

1984 Drivers' Championship final standings

Points towards the 1984 Formula 1 World Championship for Drivers were awarded on a 9–6–4–3–2–1 basis to the first six finishers in each race.
 Half points were awarded at the Monaco Grand Prix as less than 75% of the scheduled distance was completed.
|
|}

1984 Manufacturers' Championship final standings

Points towards the 1984 Formula 1 World Championship for Manufacturers were awarded on a 9–6–4–3–2–1 basis to the first six finishers in each race.






