[[General Trias, Cavite]]

CATEGORIES: Municipalities of Cavite

 
The Municipality of General Trias (Filipino: Bayan ng General Trias) formerly San Francisco de Malabon, is a first class municipality in the province of Cavite, Philippines. According to the 2010 census, it has a population of 243,322 people in a land area of 81.46 square kilometers.
With the continuous expansion of Metro Manila, the municipality is now included in Manila's conurbation which reaches Lipa City in its southernmost part.

History

General Trias used to be called by many names. During the earlier Spanish era, it was often referred to as Las Estancias (the ranches), which was once a part of Cavite el Viejo, the present-day Kawit. It was also called Malabon Grande. The name Malabon was speculated to have been derived from either the local term "maraming labong," meaning plenty of bamboo shoots, a main ingredient of a popular local delicacy; or "mayabong," referring to the trees and other plants once abundant in the place. At any rate, the first reference seems to be more probable because General Mariano Trías, a noted writer, adopted the nom de guerre "Labong," a word he often used in his writing and conversation. Grande, on the other hand, was affixed to the appellation because at the time, the place was a vast wilderness covering Sitio Tejero, frequently called by the revolutionary as Salinas (present-day Rosario), Sta. Cruz de Malabon or Malabon el Chico (present-day Tanza) and Tierra Alta (present-day Noveleta). When the town was made independent from Cavite el Viejo, it was finally called with its popular name San Francisco de Malabon, in honor of patron saint, Saint Francis of Assisi (1181-1200).

First Cry of Cavite

The first uprising in Cavite known as the "First Cry of Cavite" occurred in San Francisco de Malabon about ten o'clock in the morning of August 31, 1896, when the town tribunal was attacked by Filipino revolutionaries led by Mariano Trías, Diego Mojica and Nicolas Portilla in Pasong Kalabaw (now known as Sta. Clara). The second incident followed at twelve noon at Tierra Alta and the third in Cavite el Viejo between two and three o'clock in the afternoon.

Tejeros Convention

A chapter of the Katipunan known as Balangay Mapagtiis had already been in existence in the place for sometime. The Sangguniang Bayang Magdiwang headed by General Mariano Álvarez of Tierra Alta and the Sangguniang Bayang Mapagtiis of San Francisco de Malabon later merged under the name Magdiwang Council with General Alvarez as president. The Magdiwang Council hosted the Tejeros Convention on March 22, 1897 in a friar estate house in Sitio Tejero wherein Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo was elected president and Mariano Trías, then lieutenant general, as vice-president in a Revolutionary Government replacing the Katipunan.
On February 28, 1914, Legislative Act No. 2390 was passed, changing the town's name to Malabon. Later, on February 24, 1920, another Legislative Act No. 2889 was approved, finally renaming the town after one of its most famous son, General Mariano Trías y Closas.

Barangays

General Trias is politically subdivided into 33 barangays:

Demographics

Religion

A vast majority of General Trias residents are Roman Catholics. The Iglesia ni Cristo (INC) has a significant presence in the municipality as well, especially in Barangay F. Manalo (named after the first INC executive minister), where most residents are INC members. Other religious institutions which also have a presence in the municipality includes, but are not limited to, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), the Seventh-day Adventist Church, Ang Dating Daan of Eliseo Soriano, and the Evangelical Churches.

Economy

Industrialization has become the centerpiece of the municipality's development plans and programs. Several major industrial estates, such as Gateway Business Park, a world class business community in Javalera and the New Cavite Industrial City (NCIC) in Manggahan, have chosen General Trias to be their home base. The Cavite Export Processing Zone (CEPZ) occupies about 0.60 square kilometres of land belonging to General Trias. 110 factories operate in the CEPZ. There are still four industrial estates being developed. One is the Eagle Ridge Golf and Country Club and Residential Estate, which has an area of 7 square kilometres. The others are the Golden Gate Industrial Park (Phase I) in Buenavista II and Golden Gate Industrial Park (Phase II) in Panungyanan while the rest are found at Barangay Manggahan, Barangay San Francisco and along Governor's Drive.
The master plan for General Trias is to achieve an agro-industrial and residential balance. Current developments include the construction of the General Trias Auditorium and Sports Complex at General Trias Memorial Elementary School Grounds in Barangay San Juan I, cementing of roads from Barangay Santiago to Governor's Drive and road widening of Barangay Tejero to San Juan II, the building of General Trias Municipal Hall-Manggahan Annex and completion of a 2-storey Training Center Building at Barangay Pinagtipunan.
Housing development is also on the upsurge with 45 subdivisions in the area like Maravilla, Bel Aldea, Metrosouth, Tierra Nevada, Metropolis Greens, Eagle Ridge, Pasadena Heights I, Stanford City and Governor Hills. General Trias will also have its biggest Real Estate development, The Lancaster New City Cavite that is to develop on General Trias' 1200 Hectare land (and still expanding) that will give way to a Bus terminal towards Metro Manila directly.
The 20,000 square metre public market in between Barangay Corregidor and Sampalucan is said to be more or less worth Php 39,000,000.00. General Trias is considered one of the new frontiers of growth and development in the CALABARZON area as attested by the giant industrial subdivisions located in the town.
General Trias will soon be accessible with the C6 Expressway's construction Connecting the North and South of Luzon and the CALA (Cavite-Laguna)Expressway's development connecting CavitEx to SLEx. The much awaited expansion of the Light Rail Transit Line 1 from Baclaran to Bacoor, Cavite will also provide fast access from General Trias to the Prime Financial Center of the Philippines, Makati City.

Festival

General Trias celebrates their Valenciana Festival every year. and became part of their culture.

Education

The municipality is home to several educational institutions, most notably the Cavite campus of Lyceum of the Philippines University, and the General Trias campus of the Cavite State University, which was established in 2012.
Also in General Trias are several private and public elementary and high schools, such as Diego Mojica Memorial School, Saint Francis School, Bethel Academy, Colegio De San Francisco, Gov. Ferrer Memorial National High School, Academy of Saint John, San Francisco De Malabon Parochial School, Centennial Academy of the Blessed Trinity and Gen. Artemio Ricarte Memorial School.

Landmarks

Notable people



Images

File:Cavitejf3150_02.JPG|Dusk welcome arch
File:GeneralTrias,Cavitejf2640 01.JPG|Tejeros River
File:GeneralTrias,Cavitejf2668 11.JPG|Public market
File:GeneralTrias,Cavitejf2987 09.JPG|1897 Heritage House of Estefania Potente
File:GeneralTrias,Cavitejf2889 05.JPG|Town hall facade






