[[The Big Trail]]

CATEGORIES: 1930 films, American films, English-language films, 1930s Western (genre) films, Black-and-white films, United States National Film Registry films, Films directed by Raoul Walsh

The Big Trail is a 1930 lavish early widescreen movie shot on location across the American West starring John Wayne in his first leading role and directed by Raoul Walsh.
In 2006,  the United States Library of Congress deemed this film "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant", and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry and saying
"the plot of a trek along the Oregon Trail is aided immensely by the majestic sweep provided by the experimental Grandeur wide-screen process used in filming."

Plot

A large caravan of settlers attempt to cross the Oregon Trail. Breck Coleman (John Wayne) is a young trapper who just got back to Missouri from his travels near Santa Fe, seeking to avenge the death of an old trapper friend who was killed the winter before along the Santa Fe Trail for his furs, by Red Flack (Tyrone Power, Sr.) and his minion Lopez (Charles Stevens). At a large trading post owned by a man named Wellmore, Coleman sees Flack and suspects him right away as being one of the killers. Flack likewise suspects Coleman as being somebody who knows too much about the killing. Coleman is asked by a large group of settlers to scout their caravan west, and declines, until he learns that Flack and Lopez were just hired by Wellmore to boss a bull train along the as-yet-unblazed Oregon Trail to a trading post north of Oregon, owned by another Missouri fur trader. Coleman agrees to scout for the train, so he can keep an eye on the villains and kill them as soon as they reach their destination. The caravan of settlers in their Prairie schooners would follow Wellmore's ox-drawn train of Conestoga Wagons, as the first major group of settlers to move west on the Oregon Trail. The action takes place between 1837 and 1845., 1837 and March 1845. This is historically accurate, as the first major wave of settlers on the Oregon Trail was in 1843 (though the details were completely different).
Coleman finds love with young Ruth Cameron (Marguerite Churchill), whom he'd kissed accidentally, mistaking her for somebody else. Unwilling to accept her attraction toward him, Ruth gets rather close to a gambler acquaintance of Flack's, Thorpe (Ian Keith), who joined the trail after being caught gambling. Coleman and Flack have to lead the settlers west, while Flack does everything he can to have Coleman killed before he finds any proof of what he'd done. The three villains' main reason for going west is to avoid the hangman's noose for previous crimes, and all three receive frontier justice instead. The settlers trail ends in the Willamette Valley of Oregon, where Coleman and Ruth finally settle down together amidst giant redwoods.

Cast

Production

Director Walsh offered the lead to Gary Cooper, who couldn't accept it.
Legend has it that the director Raoul Walsh had co-star Tyrone Power, Sr. almost beaten to death for forcing himself on the leading lady, Marguerite Churchill.  Power would die just a year later from a heart attack.
The expensive shot-on-location movie was a box office bomb, possibly because it was widescreen release during a time when theatres would not change over due to the encroachments of the Great Depression.
The Big Trail was shot in an early widescreen process using 70 mm film called 70 mm Grandeur film which was first used in Fox Movietone Follies of 1929. 
The wagon train drive across the country was pioneering in its use of camera work and the scenery from the epic landscape.

Preservation and re-releases

In the early 1980s, the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, which housed the 65 mm nitrate camera negative for The Big Trail, wanted to preserve the film but found that the negative was too shrunken and fragile to be copied and that no film lab would touch it. They went to Karl Malkames, a cinematographer and a specialist and pioneer in film reproduction, restoration, and preservation. He immediately designed and built a special printer to handle the careful frame-by-frame reproduction of the negative to a 35 mm anamorphic (CinemaScope) fine grain master.
The 70 mm version was seen on cable television at a time when only the 35 mm version had been released to VHS and DVD.

Two versions

Beyond the format difference, the 70 mm and 35 mm versions vary substantially from each other.  They were shot by different cameras, and footage for each format was edited separately in the cutting room.  Some scenes were shot simultaneously by both cameras, the only difference being the angle (with the better angle usually given to the 70 mm camera).  Some scenes were shot first by one camera, and then retaken with the other camera.  The 70 mm cameras could not focus well up close, so the shots were mainly panoramas with very few close-ups. The 35 mm cameras could move in and focus at short distances.  Thus scenes in the 70 mm version might show two characters talking to each other in the same take, while in the 35 mm would have close-up shots cutting back and forth between the two characters.
In the editing of the films, some scenes were edited out for one version but allowed to remain in the other version. The 35 mm version was edited to be shorter (108 minutes rather than 122 minutes), so many scenes in the 70 mm version are not found in the 35 mm film. However, there are a few scenes in the 35 mm version not found in the 70 mm.
The 70mm version has been released on VHS as well as DVD in its widescreen original, but also reformatted to fit a traditional TV screen, despite the availability of the 35 mm version which is closer to that format.  The 35 mm version is included along with the 70 mm version in the 2008 2-disc DVD release.

Foreign language versions

A fairly common practice in the early sound era was to produce at least one foreign-language version of a film for release in non-English speaking countries, an approach later replaced by simply dubbing the dialogue.  There were at least four foreign-language versions made of The Big Trail, using different casts and different character names:



Further reading

Notes






