[[Raëlism]]

CATEGORIES: New religious movements, Nontheism, Raëlism, Religious faiths, traditions, and movements, Religious organizations established in 1974, UFO religions

Raëlism (also Raelianism or the Raëlian Movement) is a UFO religion that was founded in 1974 by Claude Vorilhon, now known as Raël. It is numerically the world's largest UFO religion. An adherent of Raëlism is a Raëlian.
The Raëlian Movement teaches that life on Earth was scientifically created by a species of extraterrestrials, which they call the Elohim. Members of this species appeared human and when having personal contacts with the descendants of the humans they made, they previously misinformed (on purpose) early humanity that they were angels, cherubim or gods. Raëlians believe messengers, or prophets, of the Elohim include Buddha, Jesus, and othersNickerson, Colin, CANADIAN CULT SAYS FIRST HUMAN CLONE IS NEAR BIRTH, Boston Globe. 20 December 2002. Retrieved 21 March 2011. (highlight)Krishtalka, Leonard, Cloning Spawns Silliness, Lawrence Journal-World. 31 December 2002. Retrieved 21 March 2011. (highlight)Davis, James D., UFO-BASED FAITH PROMOTES CLONING MEMBERS BELIEVE CONSCIOUSNESS CAN BE TRANSFERRED TO CREATE ETERNAL LIFE., South Florida Sun-Sentinel. 9 August 2001. Retrieved 21 March 2011. (highlight) who informed humans of each era. 27 November 2002.. Retrieved 21 March 2011. (highlight) The founder of Raëlism, members claim, received the final message of the Elohim and that its purpose is to inform the world about Elohim and that if humans become aware and peaceful enough, they wish to be welcomed by them.
The Raëlian Church has a quasi-clerical structure of seven levels. Joining the movement requires an official apostasy from other religions.
Raelian ethics include striving for world peace, sharing, democracy and nonviolence. Palmer (2004). Aliens adored: Raël's UFO religion, Page 62 Sexuality is also an important part of the Raëlian doctrine. The Raëlian Church has attracted some of its priests and bishops from other religions despite having liberal views of sexuality.
Raël founded Clonaid (originally Valiant Venture Ltd Corporation) in 1997, but then handed it over to a Raëlian bishop, Brigitte Boisselier in 2000. In 2002 the company claimed that an American woman underwent a standard cloning procedure that led to the birth of a daughter, Eve (b. 26 December 2002). Although few believe the claim, it nonetheless attracted national authorities and the mainstream media to look further into the Raëlians' cult status.
The Raëlians frequently use the swastika as a symbol of peace, which halted Raëlian requests for territory in Israel, and later Lebanon, for establishing an embassy for extraterrestrials.  The religion also uses the swastika embedded on the Star of David.about.htm  Starting around 1991, this symbol was often replaced by a variant star and swirl symbol as a public relations move, particularly toward Israel.

History

The beginnings of Raëlism are rooted in the claims of a French former automobile journalist and race car driver Claude Vorilhon. In his books The Book Which Tells the Truth (1974) and Extraterrestrials Took Me to their Planet (1975), Vorilhon alleges that he had alien encounters with beings who gave him knowledge of the origins of all major religions.
The movement traces its beginnings to a conference in Paris, France of two thousand people in 1974. Retrieved 1 December 2006. From there, the MADECH organization was born. The name MADECH is a double acronym in the French language. The first stands for "Movement for the welcoming of the Elohim, creators of humanity" ('Mouvement pour l'accueil des Elohim, créateurs de l'humanité)'' while the second stands for "Moses preceded Elijah and the Christ" ''(Moise a devancé Élie et le Ch'rist). By 1976, Raël transformed MADECH into the International Raelian Movement.com. 16 January 2003. Retrieved 15 September 2007.
From 1980 to 1992 Raël and his movement became increasingly global. In 1980 Claude Raël's fifth Raëlian book Sensual Meditation was published and formal publication of the Raëlian Messages in the Japanese language beganHarmony Revolution, Japanese Raëlian Movement. Retrieved 2 November 2006. as part of the Raëlian mission to Japan.
On 26 December 2002, Brigitte Boisselier, a Raëlian Bishop and CEO of a biotechnology company called Clonaid announced the birth of baby Eve, supposedly the first-ever human clone. The announcement ignited much media attention, ethical debate, doubt, criticism, and claims of a hoax. Spokespeople for the movement, including Claude Vorilhon, have suggested that this is one of the first steps in achieving a more important agenda. They claim that through cloning they can combine an accelerated growth process with some form of mind transfer, and in such, may achieve eternal life. 27 December 2002. Retrieved 10 February 2007.com. Retrieved 10 February 2007.

Member hierarchy

|- align=center
|
|- align=center
|colspan=3 bgcolor="#DDDDDD" width="360"|Level 0:
Trainee
|-
|style="align: right"|SourcesRaelianews: Downloads, Raelian Contact Newsletter. Retrieved 12 July 2007.
|}
|}
The structure of the Raëlian Church is hierarchical, with seven levels ascending from level 0 to level 6. The top four levels consist of "Guides". The level 6 guide, known as the "Guide of Guides", has the final say on who becomes a level 5 "Bishop Guide" or a level 4 "Priest Guide". Bishops and priests promote lower-level members one level at a time during annual seminars. Each bishop or priest can propose a new guide as long as the candidate is from a level below his or her own. Guides can assist "Regional Guides"—level 3 and aboveWong, Jan, Clone artist, The Globe and Mail. 7 April 2001. Retrieved 12 July 2007.—in their assigning of non-guide members to levels 3 ("Assistant Priests"), 2 ("Organizers") and 1 ("Assistant Organizers").
Members of the Raëlian structure begin as level 0 "trainees" during annual seminars. The Raelian structure claimed in 2007 to have about 2,300 members,For our pleasure..., Raelian Contact 331. 7 April 2007. Retrieved 25 April 2007 170 "Raëlian guides",Raelian Press Site, The International Raëlian Movement. Retrieved 25 April 2007. and 41 bishops.org. 27 September 2006. Retrieved 17 July 2007.  Claude Vorilhon has held the highest position for three seven-year terms. Spring 2000. Retrieved 25 April 2007.

Women-only groups

Women make up only a third of the membership in the Raëlian Church, though two anecdotes in the Raëlian Contact newsletter report female majorities joining the movement's Asian Mongolian chapter. 25 October 2005. Retrieved 13 July 2007. 14 April 2007. Retrieved 24 June 2007. Women such as Brigitte Boisselier, the Chief Executive Officer of Clonaid, play a powerful role in the Raëlian Church. There are two major groups of women in the Raëlian Church.
The Order of Angels, founded in the 1990s, consists of over a hundred Raëlian women who call for femininity and refinement for all of humanity. 7 March 2005. Retrieved 17 July 2007.net. Retrieved 18 April 2007. The initiation rites include declaring an oath or making a contract in which one agrees to become defender of the Raëlian ideology and its founder Raël."Sensual seminars" and flying saucers, Agence France-Presse. 22 September 2005. Retrieved 13 March 2007. 7 October 2003. Retrieved 10 January 2007. The Order of Angels has its own hierarchy of "rose angels" and "white angels" which, as of 2003, are six and 160 women, respectively.  After the Clonaid human cloning claim made the headlines, the Daily Telegraph wrote that members of the order not only provided sexual pleasure for Raël, but also helped donate eggs for efforts towards human cloning. Promise of as much sex as you want and everlasting life, The Daily Telegraph. 27 December 2002. Retrieved 13 March 2007.  A few days later, Time magazine wrote that French chemist Brigitte Boisselier was an Order of Angels member. 5 January 2003. Retrieved 12 May 2007.  Around this time, cult specialist Mike Kropveld called the Order of Angels "one of the most transparent movements" he had witnessed, though he was alarmed by the women's promise to defend Raël's life with their own bodies.
Raël has instructed some women members to play a pro-sex feminist role in the Raëlian Church. "Rael's Girls" is another group of women in the movement which are against the suppression of feminine acts of pleasure, including sexual intercourse with men or women.  Rael's Girls solely consists of women who work in the sex industry.  In contrast to the teachings of the world's major religions, the women of Rael's Girls say there is no reason to repent for performing striptease or being a prostitute.I-Team: Alien Nation, Raelians Moving Headquarters to Las Vegas, WorldNow and KLAS. 8 May 2007. Retrieved 8 May 2007. Retrieved 1 June 2007.  This organization was set up to counteract the influence of the "JC's girls" mission of the Christian ex-stripper Heather Veitch. 10 May 2006. Retrieved 10 June 2007. Rael's Girls and its founder Raël were featured in a pictorial in the October 2004 issue of Playboy. 16 September 2004. 10 August 2007.

Rites and practices

Initiation

=Ceremony=

The major initiation rite in the Raëlian Church is the "baptism" or "transmission of the cellular plan" and is performed by upper-level members in the Raëlian clergy known as guides. 27 December 2002. Retrieved 3 May 2007.
The Raëlian baptism is known as transmission of the cellular plan where "cellular" refers to the organic cells of the body and the "plan" refers to the genetic makeup of the individual.  This Raëlian baptism involves a guide member laying water onto the forehead of the new member.

=Ceremonial dates=

Baptisms can only be performed on four special days in the year. The dates mark anniversaries in the Raëlian calendar.
The dates are the 6 August, which marks the anniversary of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima in 1945,RaelAfrica.org. Retrieved 9 August 2006.

Sensual Meditation

Sensual Meditation is the set of exercises made public by Claude Vorilhon in his book La méditation sensuelle. The first of these exercises is usually taught in Raëlian Seminars.

Other activities, outreach and advocacy

Throughout the history of Raëlism, members of the Raëlian Church have toured public settings advocating masturbation, condoms and birth control. Promise of as much sex as you want and everlasting life, The Daily Telegraph. 31 December 2002. Retrieved 13 March 2007. Raëlians hope that genetically modified foodRaël, Yes to Human Cloning
Raëlians have founded Clonaid, a company that envisions that someday human beings can be scientifically recreated though a process of human cloning, and Clitoraid, an organization whose mission is to oppose female genital mutilation."On s'en est fait passer une p'tite vite!", Cyberpresse.ca. 5 December 2006. Retrieved 21 September 2007.org. Retrieved 9 August 2006.

UFO exhibits

Raëlian structure members have set up exhibitions about their beliefs of extraterrestrial intelligent designers sending crop circles,Bourgeaux, Par Pierre, CROP-CIRCLES in the Streets of Switzerland, Raëlian Contact 309. 23 May 2006. Retrieved 6 August 2006. UFOs, and spaceships for their arrival at an embassy. Retrieved 28 November 2006. While there have been smaller meetings of Raëlians and non-Raëlians, annual Raëlian seminars have been typically larger. Retrieved 6 August 2006. Retrieved 6 August 2006. Retrieved 6 August 2006.

Seminars

Raëlian structure members who run the seminars have organized group exercises involving meditation with the senses. James R. Lewis, an authority on fringe religious movements, spoke of Raëlians who practiced a Raëlian exercise called Sensual Meditation and discovered "playing fields" where "radical self-reconstruction," "new forms of authority," and "new modes of self-relating" were encouraged.Lewis, The Gods have landed: new religions from other worlds
Music has been a feature of large gatherings, where at night, Raëlians have had multiethnic cabaret performances. Seminarists have used colored bracelets to indicate whether they wanted to be alone, be in a couple, or simply meet people., The Leader of UFO Land, Washington Post. 17 January 2003. Retrieved 3 May 2007.
On a yearly basis, Raëlian members organize seminars that are often attractive to the sexually adventurous. 7 August 1999. Retrieved 3 June 2007. News KNBC called the annual Raëlian seminars "a cross between a nudist camp and new-age retreat." A Spanish television agency reported Raëlian men and women in cross-dressing plays. Activities such as observations of one's own private parts and masturbation with them disturbed Brigitte McCann, a Calgary Sun reporter who entered one of the Raëlian seminars. Susan J. Palmer said a French journalist went to a Raëlian Seminar in 1991 and taped couples having sexual intercourse in tents.  These tapes gained widespread negative publicity—with news stories that described these practices as perverted and a form of brainwashing. Palmer, The Rael Deal, Religion in the News, Summer 2001, Vol. 4, No. 2. The tents were actually put up for the privacy of attendees whom were sharing dormitories and the person was ejected by the Raelians for misrepresentation for the sake of sensationalism of their so-called research, so called infiltration is encouraged by the Raelians to clear up myths perpetrated by the media and rogue researches.

Activism

Raëlians routinely advocate sex-positive feminism and genetically modified food. They also have protested against wars and the Catholic Church.
Pro-GMO: On 6 August 2003, the first day of Raëlian year 58 AH,International Committee Against Christian Calendar Imperialism, icacci. Retrieved 30 March 2007. a tech article on the USA Today newspaper mentions an "unlikely ally" of the Monsanto Company, the Raëlian Movement of Brazil.  The movement gave vocal support in response to the company's support for genetically modified organisms particularly in their country.  Brazilian farmers have been using Monsanto's genetically engineered soy plant as well as the Roundup herbicide to which it was artificially adapted.  The Raëlians spoke against the Brazilian government's ban on GMOs."With friends like these, Monsanto needs no enemies", USATODAY. Retrieved 13 March 2007.
Anti-war: In 2006, About 30 Raëlians, some topless, took part in an anti-war demonstration in Seoul, Korea. Retrieved 13 March 2007. In 2003, Raëlians in white alien costumes bore signs bearing the message "NO WAR ... ET wants Peace, too!" to protest the 2003 Invasion of Iraq. 15 March 2003. Retrieved 13 March 2007.
Topless rights of women: Several Raëlian groups in the United States have organized annual protests, claiming that women should have the same legal right to go topless in public that men enjoy without fear of arrest for indecent exposure.gotopless.org. Retrieved 23 August 2010.  This is known as topfreedom. Some have called this a publicity stunt designed to recruit members. Go Topless Day is their annual event, with women protesting topless except for nipple pasties to avoid arrest.  It is held near 26 August, the anniversary of the day women were given the USA right to vote."Men Wear Bras So Women Can Go Topless", gotopless. Retrieved 23 August 2010.
Anti-Catholic: In 1992 Catholic schools in Montreal, Canada objected to a proposed condom vending machine as contrary to their mission. In response, Raëlian guides, in an event dubbed "Operation Condom", gave the Catholic students ten thousand condoms. The Commissioner of Catholic schools for Montreal said they could do nothing to stop them. Retrieved 4 March 2007.
In July 2001, Raëlians on the streets attracted Italians and Swiss people as they gave leaflets protesting the existence of over a hundred child molesters among Roman Catholic clergy in France.  They recommended that parents should not send their children to Catholic confession.  The Episcopal vicar of Geneva sued the Raëlian Church for libel but did not win.

Converts from other religions

Raëlians do not believe in a god (or other deity), but in extraterrestrials. Former clergy of mainstream religions have joined the Raëlian Church, especially in Quebec. Susan J. Palmer: search terms are susan j palmer aliens adored teaching skills. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 2004. Retrieved 19 April 2007. The structure of the movement had promoted some of them to the level of Priest or Bishop due to "extensive Bible training and teaching skills".
Two ex-Roman Catholic Priests, Victor Legendre and Charles-Yvan GirouxGroups hurl accusations at anti-cult organization, Montreal Gazette. 1 April 1993. Retrieved 19 April 2007. converted to Raëlianism. A former bishop of the The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) joined the Raelian Movement so he could be openly gay. The Raëlian, Mark Woodgate, stated that 8% of Raëlians worldwide are former Latter-day Saints. Religiously mixed couples are common, especially with spouses who are Christians or Buddhists. Retrieved 2 December 2006.

Intentional controversy

Susan J. Palmer, a sociologist from Canada, has studied the movement since 1987Review of Aliens Adored: Rael's UFO Religion by Publishers Weekly, Publishers Weekly. Retrieved 4 June 2007. and says the movement intentionally stirs a moderate level of controversy to maintain membership.  For example, Rael and the group attempt to tie their views with topical matters, ranging from Tiger Woods' promiscuity to strained relations in the Middle East, in regular online postingsRaelianews: News, Raelianews. Retrieved 10 March 2010. and press releases.org. Retrieved 10 March 2010. This view is shared by Mike Kropveld—the executive director of an anti-cult organization with the name Info-Cult—who says the controversy leads to criticism by both religious and non-religious people.
Raëlian organizers made deliberate attempts to "shock, titillate, and capture the media's imagination".Lewis, Controversial New Religions

Beliefs

Theologian of new religious movements, George D. Chryssides, described the Raëlian Church as being in an "early developmental stage" and that their beliefs distance it from a "dominant intellectual climate".Partridge, UFO Religions
Chryssides states that Raëlism is discernible from other UFO religions for its heavy support for physicalism and repudiation of supernaturalism.
Raëlians believe that throughout the ages, members of the Elohim civilization sent different prophets, including Moses, Jesus, Buddha and many others whose role was guide humanity and to prepare humans for the future, all of whom were created as a result of a sexual union between a human woman and one of the Elohim. To Raëlians, this was possible because the Elohim had advanced DNA synthesis and genetic engineering. The Elohim later reduced the frequent visits so that humans were largely left to progress on their own, until the time of the Apocalypse/Revelation when they would send their final messenger and disclose themselves at an extraterrestrial embassy, establishing political and economic ties.
Raëlians believe that sex is a normal, natural and healthy part of life and encourages people to be true to their natural sexuality.org. 8 December 2006. Retrieved 11 April 2008. They promote healing from damaging messages from strict puritanical belief systems and social stigmas that stifle one's natural sexuality. Acceptance of masturbation, homosexuality, bisexuality, pansexuality, naturism and any legal, safe and consensual adult activity is promoted as part of a healthy and long life, and this is used to attract young converts to the religion.org. 9 December 2006. Retrieved 11 April 2008. Raelians believe that sexuality is a gift of pleasure to mankind from the Elohim.org. 21 February 2005. Retrieved 11 April 2008. The Raëlian book Let's Welcome our Fathers From Space says that new advanced extraterrestrial civilizations will ultimately practice a final religion or "religion of the infinite" that involves ubiquitous practice of Sensual Meditation.
According to Giancarlo Genta and Jason Colavito, writers who have influenced Raëlian beliefs include Zechariah Sitchin and Erich von Däniken.Genta, Lonely Minds in the Universe: The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence

Voluntarism

Raëlians are encouraged to do as they feel right, whether that matches the rules of the culture in which they live or not. According to Susan J. Palmer, a majority of loosely affiliated Raëlian Movement members have often strayed from following rules concerning "diet, drugs, and sexual activity" as described in the Raëlian books. Sometimes, they will not attend monthly meetings or pay a tithe in proportion to their income. Only the more committed members who do follow such rules can remain in the movement's structure.
According to Michel Beluet, the former director of a Raëlian-built museum called UFOland, the only pressure exerted on members is to attend annual Raëlian seminars, which allows members convinced of Raël's enthusiasm to voluntarily tithe.

Human cloning

As opposed to the scientific definition of reproductive cloning which is simply the creation of a genetically identical living thing, Raëlians seek to both genetically clone individuals, rapidly accelerate growth of the clone to adulthood through a process like guided self-assembly of rapidly expanded cells or even nanotechnology
In the final stages of development, hitherto unknown information contained within undamaged DNA would be enough to bring others back from the dead
Claude Vorilhon told lawmakers that banning the development of human cloning was comparable to outlawing medical advances such "antibiotics, blood transfusions, and vaccines."

=Clonaid=

Raël founded Valiant Venture Ltd Corporation in 1997, to research human cloning. The company name was later changed to Clonaid and handed over to Raëlian bishop, Brigitte Boisselier in 2000. In 2002, Brigitte Boisselier, as chief executive of Clonaid, claimed that a human baby was conceived through cloning technology.  Around this time, Clonaid's subsidiary BioFusion Tech claimed to have in possession a cell fusion device that assisted the cloning of human embryos. 13 July 2002. Retrieved 19 July 2002.  The Vatican said that experimenters expressed "brutal mentality" for attempting to clone human beings. 28 December 2002. Retrieved 29 April 2007.[/ref] Pope John Paul II criticized the experiment which he believes threatens the dignity of human life. Retrieved 29 April 2007.  In response, the leader of the Raëlian Church dismissed the Pope's ethical concerns, calling them an "accumulation of religious prejudices."
In response to Raël's association with Clonaid, South Korean immigration authorities at the airport denied him entry into their country in 2003. 3 August 2003. Retrieved 12 March 2007  This decision led to the quick cancellation of the planned Raëlian seminar which seven hundred registered for.  Raëlians of South Korea were instructed by Raël to protest near the Ministry of Health and Welfare that ordered him to leave. Officials detained Raël for nine hours at Incheon International Airport before he and his wife Sophie de Niverville left for Tokyo from where they would take another plane on their way back to Canada.  Raël responded by saying that Korean officials treated him like a "North Korean" and that he would wait for an apology before coming back to Korea. 6 August 2003. Retrieved 7 July 2009.

Ethics

=LGBT issues=

The Raelian movement defends the rights and freedoms of gays and lesbians, recognises gay marriage and ordains gay clergy.A modern nation is a nation where gays and lesbians are free retrieved 4 August 2013 Some Raelian leaders have performed licensed same-sex marriages.A Raelian official licensed to perform legal marriages for same-sex couples in Hawaii retrieved 4 August 2013

=Sensuality and pleasure=

According to the book Maitreya by Claude Vorilhon, love involves experiencing different varieties and possibilities that allow one to break habits in order to make life more pleasant and interestingRaël, Maitreya
Raëlians say they encourage adult homosexual, bisexual, and heterosexual relationships and that society should recognize them legally. Retrieved 9 September 2007. Some Swiss government authorities responded to Raëlians' views about Sensual Meditation with a fear that Raëlians are a threat to public morals for supporting liberalized sex education for children. They express the view that such liberalized sex education teaches youngsters how to obtain sexual gratification which would encourage sexual abuse of underage children.

=Views on pedophilia=

Sexual predators and guides who force missionary ideas against members are excommunicated by the Raëlian Church for a minimum of seven years—the amount of time Raëlians believe it takes for all of a person's biological cells to be regenerated.  In 2006 Raëlians in Los Angeles, California condemned acts of pedophilia which Raelians consider a disease, particularly those associated with celibate Catholic priests, saying that minors and adults should not be mixed in the act of sex. 11 December 2006. Retrieved 13 March 2007. Authorities of the Swiss canton of Valais claimed that Raëlians support a doctrine of "complete sexual liberty", and they denied an application by Raël to live in their area. 19 February 2005. Retrieved 13 March 2007. The website Raelianews.Pedophilia accusations are pure discrimination, Raelianews. 23 August 2007. Retrieved 18 March 2011.

Structure of the Universe

Raëlian cosmology as proposed in 1973 by Raël states that the observable universe has no creator and is infinite in time and finite in size and surrounded by infinite space.
In Raëlian cosmology, our observable universe is an "atom" of a much larger level of matter (and possibly organism) and subatomic particles in our bodies also possess universes like our own, but on a much smaller scale.  This pattern, atom within universe within atom, is believed to be infinitely repetitive, from the infinitely small, to the infinitely large.
Because of the difference of mass, the activity of life inside in a living thing's atoms would undergo many millennia before enough time passes for that living thing to take a single step.  Raëlians believe the universe is infinite in time and space and lacks a center. Because of this, one could not imagine where an ethereal soul would go.
The Raëlian cosmology is meditated upon during the fourth activity in the rite of Sensual Meditation.

Intelligent Design

=Creation of life on Earth by extraterrestrials=

In his book The Message Given to me by Extraterrestrials (now republished as Intelligent Design: Message from the Designers 2006 ISBN 2-940252-20-3), Claude Vorilhon claims that on 13 December 1973, he found a spacecraft shaped like a flattened bell that landed inside Puy de Lassolas, a volcano near the capital city of Auvergne. A 25,000-year-old human-like extraterrestrial inside the spacecraft named Yahweh said that Elohim was the name that primitive people of Earth called members of his extraterrestrial race—who were seen as "those who came from the sky". Yahweh explained that Earth was originally void of life, with thick clouds and shallow seas, but the Elohim came, broke apart the clouds, exposed the seas to sunlight, built a continent, and synthesized a global ecosystem. Solar astronomy, terraformation, nanotechnology, and genetic engineering allowed Elohim to adapt life to Earth's thermal and chemical makeup.
Yahweh gave materialistic explanations of the following:
According to Vorilhon, Elohim contacted about forty people to act as their prophets on Earth,
John the Baptist,
Muhammad,
From the Raëlian point of view, religious texts indicate that the Elohim would return at the age of Apocalypse or Revelation (unveiling of the truth). Humans from another world would appear to drop down from the sky and meet in the embassy they have asked Raël to build for them and share their advanced scientific knowledge with humanity.  Thus, one of their stated main goals of the Raëlian movement is to inform as many people as possible about this extraterrestrial race."An Embassy for Extraterrestrials", International Raëlian Movement. Retrieved 20 July 2007.

=Humanity's chance of creating life on other planets=

Raëlians believe that humanity would be able to create life on other planets only if humanity is peaceful enough to stop war. In that case, humanity could travel the distances between stars

A coming judgement

Raëlians do not believe that an ethereal soul exists free of physical confinement.  Vorilhon expressed an interest in cloning Hitler for war trials and retroactive punishment."Cult Bids to Clone Hitler for War Trial", Daily Record. 9 August 2001. Retrieved 18 September 2007.  Raël also mentioned cloning as the solution to terrorism by suicide attacks, as the perpetrators would not be able to escape punishment by killing themselves if the Elohim recreated them after their attacks. 21 September 2001. Retrieved 6 April 2007.

Embassy for Extraterrestrials

Raëlians believe that life on Earth—as well as many religions of the world—was the work of extraterrestrial influence.  They believe these were scientists and that ancient people saw them as "gods" and gave the name "Elohim". Retrieved 3 August 2007.  Raëlians believe that the Embassy for Extraterrestrials or "Third Temple"Yoel Ben Assayag, A Dinner With the Messiah, Raelian Contact 320. 10 October 2006.  Retrieved 15 February 2007WORDS OF OUR BELOVED PROPHET, Raelian Contact 317. 24 August 2006.  Retrieved 15 February 2007OUR BELOVED PROPHET IN ACCRA, Raelian Contact 257. 4 January 2006. Retrieved 15 February 2007 is to support an official contact with Extraterrestrial Elohim and their messengers of the main religions at the "New Jerusalem". Retrieved 15 February 2007.
The Raëlian Embassy for Extraterrestrials is the vision of the International Raëlian Movement to establish an embassy, at a base cost of $20 million, with a landing pad that would serve as spaceport for extraterrestrial spaceships.  The funding of the embassy has been reported over time by the media.  Its location is intended to be in neutral territory, preferably Jerusalem, and would be surrounded by acres of campground capable of supporting about 144,000 people or more than twice the estimated Raëlian membership as of 2005.
On 16 April 1987, the Chicago Sun-Times estimated the funding for the "cosmic kibbutz" at $1 million.  In 1997-1998, the funding had risen to $7 million. and in October, the funding had reached $20 million. Clones of Aliens Are Among US?, Insight on the News. 29 October 2001. Retrieved 17 July 2007. (highlight)

=Proposed architecture and location=

The International Raëlian Movement envisions having an entrance with an aseptic chamber leading to a conference room for twenty-one people as well as a dining room of the same capacity.  In the plan are seven rooms for the purpose of receiving human guests into the embassy.  The embassy building, along with the swimming pool, would be in the center of a large park and protected from trespassing by a wall−a maximum of two stories-to surround the entire complex's circumference.  Trees and bushes are to be planted in the outskirts of the wall's area.  The walls are to have a northern and southern entrance.  The landing pad for the embassy should be able fit a spaceship of twelve meters of diameter or 39'4" on its terrace.  The terrace is to be above the rooms in the torus, which are for extraterrestrials only.  The seven rooms directly underneath the landing pad would be protected from occupants of other rooms with a thick metal door.  Finally, the International Raëlian Movement wants to avoid military and radar surveillance of the airspace above the embassy.  Buildings for administration, food and water provisions, and state-of-the-art sanitation and communication systems are part of this vision. Retrieved 17 July 2007.  A nearby replica of the Raëlian Embassy for Extraterrestrials open to the public is expected to show visitors what it is like inside the real one.
On 13 December 1997, the leader of the International Raëlian Movement had decided to extend the possibility of building the embassy outside of Jerusalem and also allow that a significant portion of the embassy property be covered with water.  The area of the proposed embassy property is still envisioned at a minimum of 3.47 square kilometers, with a radius of at least 1.05 kilometers. Retrieved 17 July 2007.

A form of meritocracy

In his book Geniocracy, Raël outlined his plan for a peaceful worldwide political union that, while democratic, would require members of the electorate to meet a minimum standard of intelligence. The thresholds proposed by the Raëlians are 50% above average for a candidate and 10% above average for a voter.
Raelians deride the current state-system as inadequate for dealing with contemporary global issues that are typical of Globalisation, such as Environmentalism, Social Justice, Human Rights, and the current economic system. In line with this, Geniocracy proposes a different economic model called Humanitarianism.
Raël recommends a world government with 12 regions.  Inhabitants would vote for which region they want to be part of.  After the regions are defined, they are further divided into 12 sectors after the same principle of democracy is applied.  While sectors of the same region are defined as having equal numbers of inhabitants, the regions themselves may have different levels of population, which would be proportional to its voting power.

=Status=

The current difficulty in the ideas of Geniocracy is that the means of assessing intelligence are ill-defined. One idea offered by Rael in Geniocracy is to have specialists such as psychologists, neurologists, ethnologists, etc., perfect or choose among existing ones, a series of tests that would define each person's level of intelligence. They should be designed to measure intellectual potential rather than accumulation of knowledge.
The lack of scientific rigour necessary for inclusion of Geniocracy as properly testable political ideology can be noted in number of modern and historical dictatorships as well as oligarchies.  Because of the controversies surrounding Geniocracy, Raël presents the idea as a classic utopia or provocative ideal and not necessarily a model that humanity will follow.
In Raël's book, Extraterrestrials took me to their planet, Raël claims that an extraterrestrial gave him the idea of Economic Humanitarianism. Under the establishment of Economic Humanitarianism, people would not have ownership of businesses or exploitable goods created by others. Instead, people would rent each of them for a period of 49 years. The founders would be able to receive the rents for up to 49 years or when they die, which ever is later. Any rents not inherited by relatives after 49 years would go to the State.
In his much later book, Maitreya, Raël says the road to a world without money is capitalism and globalisation, as opposed to communism.  Capitalism would allow those who contribute much to society to also contribute to its scientific and technological development. Under capitalism, society would produce as much money as it can.  The money would become important in the short run as nanotechnology quickly lowers the cost of goods while putting many people out of work.

Religious symbol

Raelians believe in reclaiming the swastika by restoring its historical meaning as a symbol of peace and good luck.org. 2008. Retrieved 10 April 2008. Swastika has been used for millennia in the East as a religious symbol of peace and harmony.
In 1991, a Montreal anti-cult organization called Info-Cult made statements against the Raëlian Church with an article on Le Devoir, branding Raëlians as promoters of fascism and racism, due to the church's use of the swastika as part of their logo and the Raëlian description of an extraterrestrial global government in which those less than ten percent above average intelligence are excluded from the electorate. Outside Info-Cult's office, Raëlians spoke against the act of discriminating against a religious minority. On 2 January 1992, a dozen people protested against the use of the swastika in the Raëlian logo in Miami's Eden Roc Hotel. The use of the swastika and other Raelian practices has led to criticism from the group Hineni of Florida, a Jewish anti-cult organization. 3 January 1992. Retrieved 8 June 2007. (highlight)
In February 1991, the Raëlian Church modified their symbol. The official reason given was a request from the Elohim to change the symbol in order to help in negotiations with Israel for the building of the Extraterrestrial Embassy to greet the anticipated Elohim space vessels, although the country continued to deny their request. 11 April 2001. Retrieved 4 March 2007. In 2005, the Israeli Raëlian Guide Kobi Drori stated that the Lebanese government was discussing proposals by the Raëlian movement to build their interplanetary embassy in Lebanon. However, one condition was that the Raëlians not display their logo on top of the building because it mixes a swastika and a Star of David. According to Drori, the Raëlians involved declined this offer, as they wished to keep the symbol as is. 18 November 2005. Retrieved 13 March 2007.  From 1991 to 2007, the official Raëlian symbol in Europe and America did not have the original swastika, but Raël, founder and leader of the Raëlian Movement decided to make the original symbol, the Star of David intertwined with a swastika, the only official symbol of the Raelian Movement worldwide.org. 17 January 2007. Retrieved 20 October 2007."

Reception

The anti-cult organization Info-Cult claimed that Geniocracy was a fascist ideology. In 1995, a parliamentary commission issued a report through the National Assembly of France that categorized the Raelian Movement (Mouvement Raëlien) as a "secte" have classified the International Raëlian Movement as a religion.
In 2005, two Wired News reporters were welcomed into a Raëlian seminar and had permission to videotape it. They believe the footage they took makes it clear that the Raelian Movement is a cult which should disband.  A Raëlian guide said in a Wired interview that he is not ashamed of what is shown and that he has no concerns about this incident. 31 August 2005. Retrieved 13 March 2007.A VERY SPECIAL SEMINAR IN LAS VEGAS (Note: Only the French language version is available.), Raelian Contact 273. 26 May 2005. Retrieved 26 June 2007. (French, raelianews.org version)
The estranged former wife of Vorilhon characterised him as a 'cult leader' and claimed he brought groups of female Raëlians home and held orgies which affected the children from an early age. He wrecked my life and our children's., ''Mail on Sunday/12 January 2003.





Cited texts




