[[Jens Voigt]]

CATEGORIES: Cyclists at the 2000 Summer Olympics, Cyclists at the 2004 Summer Olympics, Cyclists at the 2008 Summer Olympics, German male cyclists, German Tour de France stage winners, German Giro d'Italia stage winners, Living people, Olympic cyclists of Germany, People from Grevesmühlen, 1971 births, Sportspeople from Mecklenburg-Vorpommern

Jens Voigt (born 17 September 1971) is a German professional road bicycle racer for UCI ProTeam  Voigt is known for his propensity to attack, and for his positive racing attitude. He is capable of repeated attacking, holding a high tempo, and breaking away from the peloton. He has worn the yellow jersey of the Tour de France twice, though he has never challenged for the overall title due to his lack of ability in the mountains. In cycling folklore, he is considered as one of the best rouleur riders to this day.
Voigt is generally popular with cycling fans, both for his aggressive riding style and his affable, forthright and articulate style in dealing with the public and media.USA Pro Cycling Challenge profile: Jens Voigt

Personal life


Voigt and his wife Stephanie have six children, the youngest being born January 2011.

Biography

Early life

Voigt was born in Grevesmühlen, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, about 100 km north-east of Hamburg, East Germany, in the same area as Tour de France winner Jan Ullrich. Voigt was encouraged by his parents to participate in sports, since he often got into troubles as a youngster thanks to his excessive energy. His early performance indicated he had good endurance potential, and he joined a national sports school at age 14 and trained in cycling and track and field.

Career debut

He won the Peace Race in 1994 and topped the UCI "Challenge Mondial Amateurs" rankings in December 1994.
In 1998, with the support of his former Australian Institute of Sport Sports Director, German-born Heiko Salzwedel he moved to the big French team ) where he spent the five years amassing 20 wins, among them a day in the maillot jaune in the 2001 Tour de France, and a stage in the 2001 Tour de France. Voigt played a part in Jan Ullrich's 2000 Olympic Games win for the German team.

2004

In 2004, Voigt joined his former Crédit Agricole teammate Bobby Julich with a move to , as Saxo Bank was then known. Being tempo specialists, they formed a strong pair as they dominated the 2004 and 2005 LuK Challenge race, a two-man time trial.
Voigt rode the 2004 Tour de France for Team CSC captain Ivan Basso. Voigt and team mate Jakob Piil were often in breakaways, covering the break for CSC. On the 15th stage, Voigt was in a break as Ullrich attacked up the Col de l'Echarasson, leaving race leader Lance Armstrong and 2nd-placed Basso. With Armstrong's team unable to pull Ullrich back in, Voigt was ordered back from his breakaway to help Basso defend his place. Voigt saw Ullrich ride past as he waited for his captain, before he single-handedly closed the gap to Ullrich. Next day was a time trial up the Alpe d'Huez with 900,000 spectators at the roadside. Voigt was heckled by German fans calling him Judas for his effort to ruin fellow German Ullrich's chances. Voigt criticised German TV-channel ARD for starting a witch-hunt against him and pleaded that he was paid by Team CSC, not Germany and that (as he stated in Overcoming) thanks to his help, Ullrich won his olympic gold medal in 2000.com, 22 July 2004

2005

At the start of 2005, Voigt won the Tour Méditerranéen, ahead of teammates Fränk Schleck 2nd and Nicki Sørensen 4th. Voigt won the first UCI ProTour event, the prologue time trial of the 2005 Paris–Nice, a race Julich won overall. Voigt nearly won the 2005 classic Liège–Bastogne–Liège when he was beaten on the line by Alexandre Vinokourov, Voigt having been on a breakaway almost the entire race.
After a strong placing in the stage 1 time trial of the 2005 Tour de France, Voigt was only trailing race leader Armstrong by 1 minute and he tried hard to take the overall lead. He took part in many attacks, and the 9th stage, before the first rest day, finally got in a break-away that lasted to the line. He finished third, 3 minutes ahead of Armstrong. Voigt's time in the maillot jaune would be short-lived however, as he fell to 168th at stage 10 after a fever, and he was eliminated for failing to finish stage 11 within the time limit. Voigt ended 2005 as 29th on the UCI ProTour individual rankings.

2006

The 2006 season started at a slower pace for Voigt compared to 2005 in order to save energy and be in a position to help Basso in his quest to win the 2006 Giro d'Italia and 2006 Tour de France races.com, 29 April 2006 His only result until the Giro in May was an attack on the fifth stage of the Tour of the Basque Country, but he had to settle for second behind stage winner Thomas Voeckler.
For the Giro d'Italia, Voigt rode in support of Basso. Following Team CSC's team time trial win on stage 5, Voigt found himself second, trailing race leader Serhiy Honchar by six seconds. During the first mountains, Voigt helped Basso take the overall lead, while he slid down the board and finished 37th. On mountainous stage 19, Voigt and Julich were in a 20-man break, but as Team CSC was leading the peloton to defend Basso's first place, Voigt and Julich did not work. Up the last climb, Voigt was alone with Spanish rider Juan Manuel Gárate, but as Voigt did not think he had done enough to deserve the victory, he let Garate take the win.com, 26 May 2006 Voigt finally got his first win of the season in the Ster Elektrotoer race in June. Here he won stage 4 and helped teammate Kurt Asle Arvesen to the overall win, two weeks before the Tour de France.
In the days before the Tour, Basso was suspended by Team CSC after his name had been brought up in the Operación Puerto doping investigation. Carlos Sastre became team captain. Voigt took the role of early attacker, to lessen the load for the team, and he formed or joined unsuccessful breakaways on several stages. On the memorable stage 13 from Béziers to Montélimar, the longest stage of the 2006 Tour at 231 km, Voigt got in a five-man breakaway which finished 29 minutes and 58 seconds ahead of the main bunch. At the line, Voigt outsprinted Óscar Pereiro to take his second Tour stage win. On stage 15, Voigt helped Fränk Schleck from Luxembourg, pulling hard in the break with teammate David Zabriskie of the USA, which eventually gave Schleck the win. Voigt finished the 2006 Tour 53rd, helping Sastre finish 4th.

2007

In February 2007, Voigt won the third stage of the Tour of California, which had numerous climbs. After the bunch caught 17 escapees, Levi Leipheimer of 

2008

Jens Voigt started his season by taking part in the Paris-Nice and the Tour of California, where he did not obtain high personal results. In March, Voigt grabbed his fourth success on the short stage race Critérium International, registering a victory on stage 2 in the process.

2009

Voigt started the season well by winning the Critérium International for the fifth time in his career, tying Frenchman Raymond Poulidor's record while grabbing a stage win, the points classification and the mountains classification.

2010

Voigt started his last season with team manager Bjarne Riis by participating in the Tour Down Under and the Vuelta a Mallorca. He got his first top ten result of the year in the Vuelta a Andalucia, just short of the podium in fourth position.

2011

The 2011 season was to be the first one of his career in which he would not achieve a victory. He joined the newly formed 

2012

In 2012, Voigt was the oldest rider of the World Tour teams at 40 years old when the season started.

2013

In May, at the Tour of California, Voigt contributed to creating an echelon on stage 5, splitting the peloton in half with  Even at 41 years of age, he attacked on the penultimate stage of Tour de France, and won the combative award of the day before he was caught by the overall contenders, just few kilometers into the final ascent.eurosport.com/photos/cycling-photos-slideshow/le-tour-france-2013-stage-20130720-165408-744.html

Doping views

According to Voigt, he never doped, and was always against the practice. At the end of October 2012, Voigt wrote a long blog entry to address the turmoil caused by the Lance Armstrong-USADA doping affair, and related in it his personal experiences, stating that he "just never doped". Voigt argued that it was impossible for him to imagine that he would be regarded as a doper, and cheater by his children if he took performance-enhancing drugs. Tyler Hamilton felt Voigt was jeopardizing his fight against doping in autumn 2012. While the American has no proof, he is convinced that Voigt doped. Voigt reacted by saying that he never heard about doping while he was on the CSC team. Hamilton felt this statement was like "spitting in my face", and "the most ridiculous thing I read in my life".at, 2012-11-05.Voigt: Jeg er nødt til at forsvare mig, 2012-11-01.

Palmarès






