[[Frank Rich]]

CATEGORIES: 1949 births, Living people, American columnists, American essayists, American people of German-Jewish descent, American people of Russian-Jewish descent, American political writers, American progressives, American theater critics, Critics employed by The New York Times, George Polk Award recipients, The Harvard Crimson people, The New York Times columnists, Jewish American writers, Journalists from Washington, D.C., People from Manhattan

Frank Hart Rich, Jr. (born June 2, 1949) is an American essayist, op-ed columnist and writer who has—most notably—held various positions within The New York Times from 1980 to 2011.
On March 1, 2011, it was announced that he would be leaving the Times to become an essayist and editor-at-large for New York magazine starting in June 2011.

Early life and education

Rich grew up in Washington, D.C., the son of a German Jewish father, Frank Hart Rich, whose family was long-settled in Washington D.C., and a Russian Jewish mother, Helen, whose family originally settled in Manhattan, but moved to Washington after the stock market crash of 1929.
He attended Harvard College in Cambridge, Massachusetts. At Harvard, he became the editorial chairman of The Harvard Crimson, the university's daily student newspaper. Rich was an honorary Harvard College scholar and a member of Phi Beta Kappa, and received a Henry Russell Shaw Traveling Fellowship. He graduated in 1971 with an A.B. magna cum laude in American history and literature.

Career

Before joining the New York Times in 1980, Rich was a film critic for Time and the New York Post, and film critic and senior editor of New Times Magazine. In the early 1970s, he was a founding editor of the Richmond (Va.) Mercury.

Theatre criticism

Rich served as chief theatre critic of the New York Times from 1980 to 1993, earning the nickname "Butcher of Broadway" for his power over the prospects of Broadway shows. He first won attention from theatre-goers with an essay for The Harvard Crimson about the theatre musical Follies (1971), by Stephen Sondheim, during its pre-Broadway tryout run in Boston. In his study of the work, Rich was "the first person to predict the legendary status the show eventually would achieve". The article "fascinated" Harold Prince, the musical's co-director, and "absolutely intrigued" Sondheim, who invited the undergraduate to lunch to further discuss his feelings about the production. Everything Was Possible — The Birth of the Musical Follies. New York: Knopf.  pp. 116, 193–195.  ISBN 0-375-41328-6.
A collection of Rich's theatre reviews was published in a book, Hot Seat: Theater Criticism for The New York Times, 1980–1993 (1998).  He also wrote The Theatre Art of Boris Aronson, with Lisa Aronson, in 1987.

Media and political criticism

In 1994, Rich became an op-ed columnist for the New York Times; from 2003 to 2011, he wrote regularly for the Times on mass media and public relations, particularly its coverage of U.S. national politics. His columns, now appearing in New York Magazine, make regular references to a broad range of popular culture—including television, movies, theatre and literature—and draw connections to politics and current events. His columns are published in the International Herald Tribune, the international edition of the Times. 
As a political commentator, Rich has been criticized by Bill O'Reilly, host of The O'Reilly Factor, a talk show on the Fox News Channel.  Rich is critical of Fox News, accusing it in 2004 of having a politically conservative media bias.
In a January 2006 appearance on The Oprah Winfrey Show, a syndicated weekday talk show, commenting on the James Frey memoir scandal, Rich expanded on his usage in his column of the term truthiness to summarize a variety of ills in culture and politics. "Journalists Speak Out". Accessed May 17, 2010
His book, The Greatest Story Ever Sold: The Decline and Fall of Truth from 9/11 to Katrina (2006), criticized the American media for what he perceived as its support of George W. Bush's administration's policies following the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks.
Rich dismissed the historical-drama film The Passion of the Christ (2004), directed by Mel Gibson, as "nothing so much as a porn movie, replete with slo-mo climaxes and pounding music for the money shots", and praised Christopher Hitchens's description of it as "a homoerotic 'exercise in lurid sadomasochism' for those who 'like seeing handsome young men stripped and flayed alive over a long period of time'".  "Mel Gibson Forgives Us For His Sins". The New York Times. Retrieved July 7, 2010.
A July 2009 column focused on what Rich believes is the bigoted nature of the U.S. president's detractors.

Awards

In 2005, Rich received the George Polk Award given annually by Long Island University in Brookville, New York, to honor contributions to journalistic integrity and investigative reporting.

Criticism

In 2011, The New Republic named him one of the "Most Over-Rated Thinkers" of the year, calling him "an utterly conventional pundit of the old salon liberal variety".

Personal life

Rich is married to Alexandra Rachelle Witchel, who writes for the New York Times, as "Alex Witchel". He has two sons from his previous marriage to Gail Winston; as of 2010, one, Simon Rich, was a writer for Saturday Night Live, a live, late-night television sketch comedy and variety show, and the other, Nathaniel Rich, is a novelist and was an editor for The Paris Review.

Memoir

Frank Rich's memoir Ghost Light (2000) chronicles his childhood in 1950s Maryland through his college years, with a focus on his lifelong adoration of the theatre and the impact it had on his life.

Bibliography






