[[Millennium (Backstreet Boys album)]]

CATEGORIES: Backstreet Boys albums, 1999 albums, Jive Records albums, Albums produced by Max Martin, Recording Industry Association of America Diamond Award albums, Albums certified gold by the Polish Producers of Audio and Video, Albums produced by Rami Yacoub

Millennium is the third album (second in the United States) by American boy band Backstreet Boys. It was a highly anticipated follow-up to both their U.S. debut album, and their second internationally released album. It was their first album to be released in both the U.S. and internationally in the same form, at the same time.
In the United States, it holds the record for most shipments in one year, with 11 million in 1999. It was nominated for five Grammy Awards and spawned four Top 40 singles, including the single "I Want It That Way". Three of the singles, "I Want It That Way", "Larger than Life" and "Show Me the Meaning of Being Lonely", became some of their most successful and remembered hits of all time, with "I Want It That Way" becoming their biggest hit to date. Millennium has since become one of the best-selling albums of all time, selling over 30 million copies worldwide.

Singles

Four singles were released from the album.

Tour

The album was supported by the Into the Millennium Tour which started from June 2, 1999 and ended on March 15, 2000 with a total of 123 shows in 84 cities spanning three legs.
The concert at Georgia Dome, Atlanta, was the 5th most attended concert in American history and the most attended concert by a pop artist.

Critical reception

Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic gave the album 4 stars out of 5, writing, "Millennium has no pretense of being anything other than an album for the moment, delivering more of everything that made Backstreet's Back a blockbuster."

Commercial performance

Preceded by the worldwide hit single "I Want It That Way", anticipation for Millennium was high. All versions of Britney Spears's debut album ...

Track listing

Charts and certifications

Charts

End-of-decade charts

Certifications

Personnel

Credits for Millennium adapted from Allmusic. Allmusic. Retrieved on 2011-09-29.






