[[Kapunda Road Royal Commission]]

CATEGORIES: South Australian royal commissions

The Kapunda Road Royal Commission is a royal commission created by the Government of South Australia to inquire into the circumstances surrounding the hit and run death of Ian Humphrey and the circumstances around the trial and conviction of Eugene McGee. The Royal Commissioner is Greg James QC. The first hearing of the Commission was on 12 May 2005 and the report was scheduled to be delivered on 20 June 2005.

Background

Ian Humphrey was riding a bicycle on Kapunda Road, north of Adelaide, when he was struck by driver Eugene McGee, an Adelaide barrister and former police prosecutor, at 5:05 pm on 30 November 2003. McGee did not stop or render assistance.

Timeline

30 November 2003

12:30pm: Eugene McGee arrives at the Wheatsheaf hotel outside Gawler,  north of Adelaide, to have lunch with his brother Craig and mother Marjorie. The tables order docket shows three bottles of white wine, a glass of port and a glass of beer were purchased.

3:50pm: Eugene and Craig McGee leave the hotel to take their mother home to Kapunda,  north of Gawler.

3:40 - 4:00pm: Ian Humphrey leaves his home at Evanston Park to cycle to Freeling on the Kapunda/Gawler road.
  
4:30 - 4:50pm: Eugene McGee leaves his mothers house to return to Adelaide.
    
4:50pm: Occupants of a car travelling through Kapunda noticed a dark blue/green 4WD travelling in the same direction which began overtaking them in a dangerous manner on the right. A passenger thought that the driver may have been drinking.

5:00pm: Antoni Zisimou saw a green Mitsubishi Pajero driving erratically and swaying over the centre line at a speed of about  zone.

5:05pm: Ian Humphrey is struck and killed.

5:05pm: A car was ahead of McGee travelling in the same direction. The driver saw the impact in his rear view mirror. His wife noted the registration number of McGee's vehicle and telephoned police.

5:08pm: Benjamin & Irene Voroniansky who were driving in the opposite direction stop and call an ambulance. They estimate the speed of the Mitsubishi Pajero leaving the scene to be .

5:11pm: Eugene McGee makes the first of three phone calls to his lawyer David Edwardson.

5:33pm: Phones his wife Barbara.

5:37pm: Phones his brother Craig.

5:42pm: Phones his mother Marjorie.

5:50pm: Phones his brother Craig. Police attend the home of Eugene McGee.

5:50 – 6:46pm: McGee makes six phone calls to relatives.

6:49pm: Craig McGee phones Eugene McGee.

6:50pm: Police attended Eugene McGee's mothers house in Kapunda and speak to Craig McGee who informs police he has not spoken to or seen his brother and does not have his mobile phone number.

6:57pm: Craig McGee phones Eugene McGee to inform him that the police had been, are looking for him and that they know his car was involved in the accident.

7:24pm: Sergeant Mills phones McGee's wife Barbara who tells him she hasn't heard from McGee and doesn't know his whereabouts.

7:30pm: Diana Gilcrist arrives at accident scene while searching for her overdue husband Ian Humphrey.

7:30pm: Craig McGee drives his brother back to Adelaide via the Kapunda/Gawler road. They are stopped at a police roadblock set up to find Eugene McGee but do not identify themselves.

7:40pm: A reporter arrived at Marjorie McGee's house in Kapunda and finds Eugene McGee's car there.

8:50pm: After being informed the car has been located, Police call at Marjorie McGee's house but find it locked up with no one at home.
 
9:09pm: Matthew Selley phones Sergeant Mills and states he is a solicitor representing Eugene McGee. Selley requests the "state of play" with regard to the collision. Mills asks for Selleys phone number so that Sergeant Hassell can speak to him.

9:10 - 10:05pm:Sergeant Hassell makes several phone calls to Selley to make arrangements to interview Eugene McGee.

10:05pm: Police phone Selley who states Eugene McGee is willing to hand himself in the following morning.

10:10pm: Police phone Selley who gives them an address in Norwood where they can speak to McGee.

11:30pm: Police speak to McGee who reads from a prepared statement. McGee is arrested and taken to the City Watchhouse. Both Sergeant Hassell and Senior Constable Bell noted that they could smell alcohol on McGee while he was in the police car.

Trial

Initially, the department of public prosecutions was unable to find a prosecutor willing to prosecute McGee as he was very well known in the legal community and there were fears that the case would never go to trial. The case eventually went to trial in May 2005 where McGee was acquitted of causing death by dangerous driving, but convicted of the lesser offences of driving without due care and failure to stop and render assistance following an accident. This was due to psychiatric evidence of McGee exhibiting Posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms following the accident being presented in court mitigating his actions. Sandy McFarlane from Adelaide University stated that the PTSD was due to "horrific experiences" during McGee's former career as a police officer and in dealing with the evidence in the Snowtown trials as a solicitor for one of the murderers. McGee admitted he had not sought psychiatric or psychological treatment for the condition until 18 February 2004 (80 days after the incident) and no evidence of his erratic or dangerous driving prior to the accident was given at trial. He was fined $2,250 and was disqualified from holding a driver's licence for twelve months.
However, there was controversy over this conviction and also the alleged reluctance of prosecutors to present evidence from Tony and John Zisimou who saw McGee's blue Pajero 4WD driving erratically at around 160 km/h (100 mph) approximately 1½ minutes before the accident (McGee's vehicle was actually green but television footage showed that at night, and under artificial lighting, it looked blue). Tony Zisimou's car was the third to stop at the scene and John, a nurse, declared the victim deceased and was credited for preserving the scene for police and preventing other witness from leaving before their arrival. There are also alleged anomalies concerning the behaviour of police in not breath testing McGee and the opportunity that major prosecution witness Tony Felice had to give evidence. Felice saw the accident in his mirror and his wife wrote the Pajero's plate number down as it continued down the road. At trial Sergeant Hassell gave evidence that while he knew he had the power to test for alcohol, they were short staffed and under pressure so it was not something he had considered at the time.  
Groups supporting cyclists and victims of crime groups staged a number of protests against the decision of the court and the Government created the Royal Commission.

Royal Commission

Terms of reference

Proceedings

Proceedings commenced on 12 May 2005.
Evidence was heard from lawyers involved in the trial, respected psychiatrists, police officers, witnesses and members of the McGee family. Members of the public also made submissions. Craig McGee exercised his right not to answer questions on the grounds of self-incrimination. McGee was represented by SA Bar Association president Malcolm Blue QC. Blue has since been appointed as a Supreme Court justice.
Chris Tennant of Sydney University and another, "very senior," professor of psychiatry were asked to review the psychiatric evidence and both concluded that the evidence was not credible. Tennant stated; "I've never been more personally outraged about what I personally see as being a, in the common lingo, a mistrial, a travesty of the justice system."Road To Nowhere Part Two Australian Story Program transcript 13 February 2012 
Proceedings concluded on 1 July 2005 with the final report submitted on 15 July.

Recommendations

Retraining of police. More extensive pretrial disclosure of expert evidence. Courts permitted to appoint independent experts. The law be changed to allow police to be able to forcibly enter premises for searches. The penalty for death by dangerous driving to be increased to the same level as manslaughter. Increased penalties for fleeing an accident. Attempting to disguise blood alcohol levels should be an offence.
Commissioner James also produced a second closed (secret) report of recommendations for relevant agencies and ministers. It was the recommendations of this report that led to further charges being laid.

Second trial

Charges of conspiring to pervert the course of justice and perverting the course of justice were laid against McGee and his brother Craig on 26 August 2005 over allegations they worked together to "frustrate, deflect or prevent" the police investigation into the hit and run in order to prevent police gaining "evidence of the blood-alcohol reading and sobriety of Eugene McGee".Archive for the 'McGee Contempt of Court Case' newspaper articles Wheels of Justice accessed 28 September 2013 The stay application was rejected on 14 February 2008,Hit-run lawyer and brother fail in bid to stay charges The Australian 15 February 2008 however, they could not stand trial until 2 February 2010 because their lawyer would be "unavailable" until that date. 

Aftermath

Eugene McGee is still listed with the Law Society as a practising solicitor. Websites advertising his practice list Mr McGee as a defence lawyer for charges of drink driving, culpable driving and dangerous driving offences which has caused anger in the community. Ian Humphrey's widow Di Gilcrist stated, "He is actually profiting from the experience and the stigma that the case has afforded him...It is a sad reflection of the criminal justice system that something so black and white could be manipulated to absolve Eugene McGee of his lack of moral and ethical responsibility" 
In April 2011, a hearing before the Legal Practitioners Conduct Board found McGee was not guilty of "infamous conduct" and ruled that he could continue to practise. The Conduct Board accepted that McGee was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder and ruled that it could only consider his actions in the first few seconds after the crash and could not consider his telephone calls to family, his legal adviser or his actions to avoid police. Following the ruling, Senator Nick Xenophon said that the outcome was a disgrace and that the entire board should be sacked. Attorney-General John Rau stated that he would review the Conduct Board's decision.
On 8 December 2011 Attorney-General John Rau closed the McGee case after Crown legal advice suggested the Conduct Board's decision could not be challenged. Opposition justice spokesman Stephen Wade said that Rau could overturn the Board's ruling not to ban Mr McGee from practising and challenged him to release of the Crown's legal advice. Senator Xenophon told the media; "Show us the advice, otherwise his opinion and his decision not to act lacks credibility...
On 6 February 2012, Eugene McGee apologised on national television for the 2003 hit and run when he appeared in a two-part television special on the case on ABC's Australian Story. Humphrey's family claimed they had been denied justice and that McGee had never apologised to them face-to-face. McGee replied that an apology had been offered through his solicitor years before which had been rejected and that it had not been repeated out of respected for the family's privacy. McGee stated: "Can I take this opportunity to extend my sympathy to the family for their loss. I'm sorry for what occurred and to apologise to them for my reaction to the accident."
Following the Attorney-Generals refusal to release the legal advice supporting his decision not to overturn the Board's ruling, on 18 February 2012, Senator Xenophon made a plea for the public to contact their MPs demanding that Attorney-General Rau take action.






