[[Israir Airlines]]

CATEGORIES: Airlines established in 1996, Airlines of Israel, IATA members, Israeli brands

Israir Airlines Ltd. (

History

Israir Airlines was established in 1989 as Knafei HaEmek (Valley Wings) before changing its name to Israir Airlines in 1996. It is now wholly owned by the Ganden Group. The airline began with domestic services from Eilat Airport, Ben Gurion International Airport, Sde Dov Airport, and Haifa Airport in the north of the country. It expanded its operations to begin international charter flights in 1999, building up a route network that now covers much of Europe, as well as regularly flying to other destinations in Asia, Africa, and North America.
The airline expanded operations across the Atlantic when regular charter service to New York City's Kennedy International Airport was started in June 2004 
In early 2007, the airline announced plans to introduce Sky-Torah scrolls on each of its aircraft.
In early 2008, when restrictions were lifted on Israeli airlines' destinations, Israir applied for designated carrier status on routes from Israel to London, Paris, Berlin, Moscow, Amsterdam, Rome, Budapest, Las Vegas, and Miami - some of which are destinations currently served by the airline as charter routes.

Destinations

Fleet

As of December 2013, the Israir Airlines fleet consists of the following aircraft, with an average age of 2.5 years and that makes the company's fleet the youngest fleet in Israel.:Israir Airlines fleet list at planespotters.net

After Israir was granted permission to operate scheduled service on the lucrative New York-Tel Aviv route, in spring of 2006 it entered talks with both Boeing and Airbus regarding the acquisition of new aircraft to its fleet and replacement of its existing jets   Israir no longer flies to New York.
Israir received the first of the two ATR 72 aircraft it had on order in early July 2011, with the second one expected to follow late in the month.
The ATR 72 replace the ATR 42.

Incidents and accidents

In June 2001, one of Israir's ATR 42-320 aircraft was damaged beyond repair following a heavy landing at Ben Gurion Airport. Despite the aircraft being written off, no passengers were injured in this incident.
On July 6, 2005 a fully loaded Israir 767 accidentally taxied onto an active runway at JFK, and a Douglas DC-8 cargo aircraft narrowly avoided collision by taking off at full throttle above them, with only 45 feet of clearance over the 767..
In May 2007, an Israir Airlines aircraft on a test flight was almost shot down by Israeli F-16 jets after it entered a demarcation zone where airlines are expected to identify themselves.
Later that month, on May 23, an Israir flight had to make an emergency landing following smoke build up in the cabin on approach at Berlin-Schönefeld International Airport. No one was injured in the incident.
In July 2008, an Israir Airlines aircraft flew from Eilat Airport to Ben Gurion International Airport with a small hole in its frame. The hole was discovered by mechanics at Ben Gurion and there is an ongoing probe as to whether or not Israir knew of the hole, which, as it turns out, was caused by Israir workers in Eilat when they crashed a mobile staircase into the aircraft's body. The plane was scheduled to fly to Italy from Tel Aviv, and at an altitude of over 10,000 feet, the plane would most likely have experienced a decompression, possibly explosive, and could have resulted in injuries or fatalities.






