[[Cleveland Amory]]

CATEGORIES: 1917 births, 1998 deaths, American activists, American non-fiction writers, American television critics, Deaths from abdominal aortic aneurysm, Animal rights advocates, Harvard University alumni, The Harvard Crimson people

Cleveland Amory  (September 2, 1917 – October 14, 1998) was an American author who devoted his life to promoting animal rights. He was perhaps best known for his books about his cat, named Polar Bear, whom he saved from the Manhattan streets on Christmas Eve 1977.

Biography

Amory was born September 2, 1917, to Robert Amory and Leonore Cobb Amory, daughter of Chicago architect Henry Ives Cobb. Born into a privileged and established Boston family, Cleveland spent the first half-century of his life as a social historian, novelist, satirist, and cultural critic. "Cleveland Amory."The Animals' Agenda 18.6 (1998): 12. It was not until he was 18, at his mentorship to William Zinsser, that he fostered a realization that journalism was his forum.18 He attended Harvard where he was president of The Harvard Crimson. Upon graduation, Amory became the youngest editor ever of The Saturday Evening Post. He took part in many campaigns such as the one waged by Paul Watson and the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society against whaling and sealing. In the early 1980s he opened his Fund for Animal's treasury to support a removal by air and land of 580 Grand Canyon burros slated for destruction by the National Park Service. Soon after, he fought a similar battle to prevent the killing of San Clemente Island's goats by the Department of Defense. Amory eventually settled down and got married to a woman named Martha Hodge. He traveled to France in the spring of 1955 with her for his assignment with the Duke and Duchess. "" A Pen as Sharp as a Stiletto": Cleveland Amory as Critic and Activist." Journalism history 32.1 (2006): 13–21. He agreed to ghostwrite her autobiography but after realizing that the former Wallis Warfield Simpson just wanted him to sugar-coat her life, he quickly dumped the project. During the Second World War Amory served in military intelligence in the United States Army from 1941 to 1943. He joined the board of directors of the Humane Society of the United States in 1962, remaining there until 1970.
He also was a television critic for TV Guide during the 1960s and 1970s.
In 1988, he made his only film appearance in the role of Mr. Danforth in Mr. North.
While he spent considerable time as an outspoken reporter and advocate, he still remained committed to his organization Fund for Animals. The Fund struggled during the first decade or so of its existence, but by the time Amory died in 1998, it had a "$2 million budget, more than 200,000 members, and three animal sanctuaries, and had initiated several highprofile animal rescues, including the organic 'painting' of baby harp seals off the Magdelene Islands in Canada to ensure that their fur was worthless to hunters." In 2005, the Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) formed a corporate combination with the Fund for Animals. The HSUS now operates the Cleveland Amory Black Beauty Ranch, a sanctuary for animals in Texas.
Amory was the subject of a 2006 biography Making Burros Fly by Julie Hoffman Marshall.[ref] Foreword by Wayne Pacelle
[/ref] He is also the subject of a 2009 book by Marilyn S. Greenwald, Cleveland Amory: Media Curmudgeon & Animal Rights Crusader.
Amory was inducted into the U.S. Animal Rights Hall of Fame in 2000, for his dedicated work on behalf of animals.U.S. Animal Rights Hall of Fame.

Black Beauty Ranch

Inspired by Anna Sewell's novel Black Beauty, Cleveland Amory established the Black Beauty ranch, a 1,460-acre sanctuary that sheltered various abused animals including chimpanzees, burros and elephants. The Animal Rights Movement. Greenhaven Press: 2003. Located in east Texas in a town called Murchison, this ranch accommodated six-hundred-plus resident animals. One of Black Beauty's most famous resident however, was a 25-year-old chimp named Nim Chimpsky. Amory's goal when creating the animal refuge was to "Create a sanctuary where its inhabitants would roam unfettered and unbothered by human taskmasters." The words on the ranch's gate are actually even taken from the final lines of Sewell's novel, "I have nothing to fear, / and my story end. / my troubles are all over, / and I am at home." This ranch wasn't just an ordinary ranch for animal rights advocate Amory, for him, it was a ranch of dreams. As he explains in his 1997 book Ranch of Dreams, "It was not long after reading Black Beauty for the first time that I had a dream that one day I would have a place which would embody everything black beauty loved about his final home. I dreamed that I would go even a step further- at my place none of the horses would never wear a bit or blinkers or check reins, or in fact have reins at all, because they would never pull a cart. a carriage, a cab, or anything else. indeed, they would never even be ridden- they would just run free." Today, in memory of Cleveland Amory, a stone monument of Amory stands beside the monument of his beloved cat, Polar Bear, whom he rescued from starvation years ago on Christmas Eve.

Works

Books





Further reading




