[[Adrian Grenier]]

CATEGORIES: 1976 births, Male actors from New Mexico, Male actors from New York, American male film actors, American film directors, American film producers, American people of European descent, American people of Mestizo descent, American people of Native American descent, American male television actors, Hispanic and Latino American male actors, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors, Bard College alumni, Living people

Adrian Grenier (born July 10, 1976) is an American actor, producer, director and musician. He is most notable for playing the lead role of  Vincent Chase on the Emmy nominated HBO original series, Entourage.

Early life

Grenier was born in Albuquerque, New Mexico, the son of Karesse Grenier and John T. Dunbar. His parents were never married and he was raised by his mother in New York. He graduated from the Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts and later attended Bard College in New York.

Acting career

In 1997, Grenier left Bard to embark on a film career. He made his film debut in the independent drama, Arresting Gena, then in 1999 played opposite Melissa Joan Hart in Drive Me Crazy and in 2001 starred in James Toback's Harvard Man.
It wasn't until 2004 though, when Grenier landed the lead role of Vincent Chase in the HBO series Entourage that  he gained his most substantial notability and success.Entourage Season 8 Preview, People Magazine, July 2012, Retrieved Mar. 2014  It ran for eight seasons, from 2004-2011, and was nominated for numerous Emmy awards, including Outstanding Comedy Series. 
While filming the Entourage series, in 2006, Grenier played the role of Nate, Anne Hathaway's boyfriend, in the film, The Devil Wears Prada.
In 2013 he starred in the post-apocalyptic film, Goodbye World alongside Gaby Hoffman. It premiered at the 2013 Los Angeles Film Festival where it received good reviews. The film made its cinematic release in the United States on April 4, 2014.com, Mar. 2014, Retrieved Mar. 2014
Grenier stepped back in front of the camera in 2014 to reprise his role of Vincent Chase in the upcoming Entourage film. Filming began in January and it is set to release in June 2015.'Entourage' Movie Starts Shooting, Variety. 2014Entourage Movie Gets A Release date, Hollywood Reporter, Retrieved Mar. 2014

Directing and Producing

Reckless Productions

As a vehicle for Grenier to transition between acting, directing and producing, with some partners, he started Reckless Productions in 2001. The company focused on producing socially minded films. One of its firsts, Shot in the Dark, chronicled Grenier's journey to reconnect with his estranged father, Dunbar, with whom his mother broke up with when he was still a baby. Grenier and Dunbar remained estranged for 18 years until he began work on the documentary in an attempt to forge a relationship with him. The two eventually reunited and continue to remain in contact. This was Grenier's directorial debut and the film premiered at the 2002 Tribeca Film Festival.  HBO distributed the documentary and it premiered on the channel on June 3, 2007.com, Retrieved Mar. 2014
On June 2, 2008, Grenier premiered a new television series, Alter Eco (not to be confused with Fair Trade importers Alter Eco), for which he was the producer. The show aired on the Discovery communications channel, Planet Green and featured Grenier and his team of green experts showing changes that can be made to live a more eco-friendly and sustainable lifestyle.
On September 27, 2010, HBO premiered another documentary by Grenier called, Teenage Paparazzo and it premiered at the Sundance Film Festival. The film focused on 13 year old paparazzi, Austin Visschedyk, and the celebrity obsessed world in which he operates.  It also featured interviews with celebrities such as Lindsay Lohan, Alec Baldwin, and Whoopi Goldberg. Grenier worked on the documentary for three years as a producer. Aside from HBO, Teenage Paparazzo premiered on 40 other outlets around the globe.
In 2010 Grenier began working as a producer alongside director Matthew Cooke on the full length feature documentary, How to Make Money Selling Drugs. The film was a tongue in cheek look at what is considered to be one of the worst domestic policy failures in recent American History. It featured actual dealers and even celebrities commenting on the subject including; 50 Cent, Eminem, Susan Sarandon and David Simon, head writer of acclaimed HBO series, "The Wire." It was released in the summer of 2013 on Amazon.Interview with Adrian Grenier About His New Drug Documentary, Vice.com, Retrieved April 2014

Music

Wreckroom

In addition to being an actor and filmmaker, Grenier is also a musician, playing guitar, bass and drums. He was a member of two New York bands, lead singer in Kid Friendly and drummer in The Honey BrothersTreeHugger.
Grenier's intentions were to create a space for friends to write, perform, and record music. However, the equipped studio eventually evolved, becoming a breeding ground for fresh talent. Run out of his Brooklyn homes basement, more than 50 artists have made use of the space.'Entourage' Guy Starts His Own Music Label, Spin Magazine, May 2013, Retrieved Mar. 2014 One year later Grenier started Wreckroom Records.
Artists are vetted by Grenier and his team: Damien Paris, Mike Frankel, and Brian Koerber. Selected musicians join the team for a full day session, in which they professionally record an original song and film a live-style music video. Wreckroom releases EPs in addition to a video series of cover songs, titled "Under the Covers." Two bands, Missouri "punk 'n' roll" trio Radkey and metal-spined Brooklyn five-piece the Skins, released EPs on the label in 2013.'Entourage' Guy Starts His Own Music Label, Spin Magazine, May 2013, Retrieved Mar. 2014

Other Ventures

In 2009, Grenier launched an eco-themed app for Apple 's iPhone and Google 's Android mobile platform.  The app, called Ecohero, incorporated a barcode-scanning technology to help consumers weigh products' environmental and health impact. Ecohero also contained other functions, such as a carbon calculator and eco-encyclopedia.'Entourage' Star's iPhone App, Forbes. 2014
In December 2009, Grenier and his business partner Peter Glatzer founded the green lifestyle site SHFT. In 2012 Grenier enlisted Cerise Mayo, an expert on food education, to help come up with the SHFT Mobile Kitchen Classroom–a teaching kitchen on wheels to bring lessons on cooking, gardening, and sustainable food to students all around New York City.com, Retrieved Mar. 2014
Also in 2012, Grenier partnered with former Nike designer Justin Hawkins to found Churchkey Can Company, a Seattle-based microbrewery. The brewery's name refers to its flagship beer, which must be opened using a can piercer, or "church key".com, Mar. 2012, Retrieved Mar. 2014
Grenier is an investor and advisor to the mobile video app MONTAJ.com, Jan. 2013, Retrieved mar. 2014 Released in January 2013, MONTAJ allows anyone to create videos like they're a film director using quick snaps of their phone's camera. The idea is that through the app, you can begin to film up to 40 clips with each one being five seconds or less.com, Jan. 2013, Retrieved Mar. 2014

Philanthropic Efforts

Grenier has shown his support for Little Kids Rock, a national nonprofit that works to restore and revitalize music education in disadvantaged public schools, by filming a PSA for the organization.Adrian Grenier: Charity Work, Events and Causes, looktothestars. 2014

Filmography

Film

Television

Producer

Director

Writer






