[[Maryland Route 404]]

CATEGORIES: State highways in Maryland, Roads in Caroline County, Maryland, Roads in Queen Anne's County, Maryland, Roads in Talbot County, Maryland

Maryland Route 404 is a major highway on Maryland's Eastern Shore in the United States. It runs  from Maryland Route 662 in Wye Mills on the border of Queen Anne's and Talbot Counties, southeast to the Delaware state line in Caroline County, where the road continues as Delaware Route 404 to Nassau (near Rehoboth Beach). The Maryland and Delaware state highways together cross the width of the Delmarva Peninsula and serve to connect the cities west of the Chesapeake Bay by way of the Chesapeake Bay Bridge and U.S. Route 50 with the Delaware beaches. Along the way, MD 404 passes through mostly farmland and woodland as well as the towns of Queen Anne, Hillsboro, and Denton. The road is a two-lane undivided highway for most of its length with the exception of the bypass around Denton, which is a four-lane divided highway.
MD 404 was designated in 1940 to run from Matapeake (where the Annapolis-Matapeake ferry across the Chesapeake Bay connected the route to Annapolis), east along present-day Maryland Route 8, Maryland Route 18, and Maryland Route 662 to Wye Mills (where it follows its current routing to the Delaware border). By 1948, the route's western terminus was moved to Maryland Route 2 north of Annapolis, where it headed east across the Chesapeake Bay on the Sandy Point-Matapeake ferry. The MD 404 designation was planned for the Chesapeake Bay Bridge; however, US 50 was extended onto the Eastern Shore and MD 404's western terminus was cut back to its current location in Wye Mills. A few realignments of the route have taken place since then, including a bypass of Queen Anne and Hillsboro, a segment east of Hillsboro by 1960, and the bypass of Denton built in the 1980s.
Since MD 404 is the main route for travelers between the Chesapeake Bay Bridge and the Delaware beaches, the road has a high accident rate. To improve on this situation, the Maryland State Highway Administration is planning to widen the two-lane portions of the route into a four-lane divided highway. A portion of the road east of Tuckahoe Creek in Caroline County received $7.7 million for widening as a part of the stimulus bill signed into law by President Barack Obama in 2009. As of 2013, the road goes from 2 lanes to 4 lanes and then back to 2 lanes several times.

Route description

Queen Anne's and Talbot Counties

thumb|200px|left|Shield for westbound MD 404.
Further east, Old Queen Anne Road splits from MD 404, with MD 404 crossing entirely into Queen Anne's County. It resumes east through some farmland before coming to an intersection with Maryland Route 309 (Starr Road). Past MD 309, the route intersects the northern terminus of Maryland Route 303 (Main Street), which intersects the route as a northbound-only road that provides access to eastbound MD 404. From MD 303, the road heads into wooded areas adjacent to Tuckahoe State Park, crossing the abandoned Chesapeake Railroad right-of-way before crossing the Tuckahoe Creek.

Caroline County

thumb|200px|right|Shields for MD 16, MD 313, and MD 404 along a concurrency. It emerges from the woods into agricultural areas, intersecting Maryland Route 480 (Ridgely Road) near Hillsboro. Past that intersection, the route heads through a mix of woods and residences before intersecting Maryland Route 404 Alternate (Hillsboro Road), where MD 404 heads into a mix of farms and woodland. Unsigned Maryland Route 485 (Saathoff Road) loops to the south of MD 404, returning to the route before the intersection with the southern terminus of Maryland Route 312 (Downes Station Road). The route continues to the southeast through farms, heading toward Denton. As the road approaches Denton, it widens into a four-lane divided highway that heads through rural areas with some residences and businesses. Maryland Route 404 Business (Meeting House Road) splits from MD 404 to head through the center of Denton while MD 404 continues east to bypass Denton to the north.
The route continues east through fields before intersecting Maryland Route 328 (New Bridge Road). Past this intersection, MD 404 crosses over the Choptank River. It continues east as a limited-access road with a diamond interchange with Maryland Route 313 (Greensboro Road) and unsigned Maryland Route 619 (Sixth Street), where some businesses are located. MD 313 forms a concurrency with MD 404 and the two routes turn south, heading along the eastern side of Denton through woodland and then past residential neighborhoods. It turns to the southwest, heading into woods and intersecting Maryland Route 404 Business (Franklin Street/Gay Street) at an at-grade intersection. MD 313 and MD 404 continue as a surface road that turns south and heads through some commercial areas as a  road.
The speed limit increases back to  and the road heads south into farmland, passing by Martinak State Park. It crosses over Watts Creek and comes to an intersection with Maryland Route 16 (Harmony Road), with that route joining MD 313 and MD 404 for a three-way concurrency. The three routes continue southeast, narrowing into a two-lane undivided road that heads through a mix of woods and farms with some homes. The road turns more to the east-southeast, with MD 313 splitting from MD 16 and MD 404 by heading south on Federalsburg Highway in Andersontown. The road turns southeast and in a short distance, MD 16 splits from MD 404 by heading east on Greenwood Road. Past this intersection, MD 404 continues southeast through farmland and woodland to the Delaware border, where the road continues as Delaware Route 404, which runs east to an intersection with Delaware Route 1 in Nassau (near Rehoboth Beach).

History

When Maryland started numbering state highways in 1927, the present-day routing of MD 404 was a state-maintained road between Queen Anne and Denton, even though the road had no assigned number then. The divided portion highway of MD 404 in the Denton area was extended further in the 2000s from the south end of Denton to the Sennett Road intersection east of where MD 16 joins the route.[ref]
