[[Diego Arria]]

CATEGORIES: 1938 births, Living people, Presidents of the United Nations Security Council, Permanent Representatives of Venezuela to the United Nations, Government ministers of Venezuela, Alumni of the London School of Economics, University of Michigan alumni

Diego Enrique Arria Salicetti (born 8 October 1938 - Caracas, Venezuelael-nacional. He was Governor of the Federal District of Caracas in the mid-1970s. Other positions have included Diplomatic Fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations and Visiting Scholar at Columbia University. He was said to be one of the "twelve apostles" (a group of powerful men close to the Presidency) of Carlos Andrés Pérez' first presidency. Frederick, The history of Venezuela, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2005. p134 He has filed charges for crimes against humanity against Hugo Rafael Chávez Frías at the International Criminal Court in The Hague.

Background

Arria was schooled partly in Caracas and partly at the Augusta Military Academy at Fort Defiance, Virginia. He obtained a degree in economic and political science from the University of Michigan. noticias24.C. until he returned to Venezuela in 1969, initially as Director of Tourism in Rafael Caldera's Ministry of Development, and later as president of the CONAHOTU (National Corporation of Hotels and Tourism). Hurst & Co, p178

Political career

Arria resigned as head of CONAHOTU in order to support the presidential candidacy of Carlos Andrés Pérez (CAP) in 1973. Shortly after CAP was elected in March 1974, he appointed Arria Governor of the Federal District (Caracas), at a time when this was one of the most important presidential appointments."the tasks given to federal district governors between 1945 and the 1970s, and the kinds of individuals appointed to this office, suggest that a president viewed naming the federal district governor to be one of his three or four most important appointments." - Steve Ellner, David J. Myers, "Caracas: incomplete Empowerment amid Geographical Feudalism", p103, in David J. Myers, Henry A. Dietz (2002), Capital city politics in Latin America: democratization and empowerment, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2002 In 1976 when he was Governor of the Federal District he went to Chile and asked President Pinochet to release his friend Orlando Letelier; which Pinochet did, but soon after this Letelier was murdered with a car bomb in Washington D.C by Pinochet's order.ideaspublicas.Howard Rae Penniman (1980), Venezuela at the polls: the National elections of 1978, American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, p159 He resigned on 17 March 1978, in order to stand as an independent candidate in the Venezuelan presidential election, 1978;Latin America political report, Volume 12, Latin American Newsletters Ltd., 1978, p89 he came fourth with 1.7% of the votes.usherbrooke.
In 2012 Arria was a candidate for the presidential nomination of the Coalition for Democratic Unity for the Venezuelan presidential election, 2012. Primary elections were held on February 12, 2012, with Henrique Capriles Radonski winning the nomination.

United Nations

Arria was Venezuelan Permanent Representative of Venezuela to the United Nations from 1991 to 1993, Adolfo Raul Taylhardat - Curriculum Vitae and was President of the Security Council (March 1992),United Nations, Presidents of the Security Council : 1990-1999 during Venezuela's membership of the Security Council. Arria later became Special Advisor to Kofi Annan, Secretary General of the UN, He initiated the eponymous 'Arria formula' These meetings are presided over by a member of the Council as service facilitator for the discussion and not by the President of the Council. He was chairman during the massacres at Srebrenica. After visiting the enclave he warned of its impending doom and predicted the massacres saying it was "slow motion Genocide" and the besieged enclave itself as "a concentration camp policed by UNPROFOR".The Biggest Cover-Up in UN History - International Justice - Global Policy Forum

Other

Other positions have included Diplomatic Fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations and Visiting Scholar at Columbia University. He is a member of the Board of Directors of the Institute of the AmericasInstitute of the Americas, Board of Directors, accessed 20 May 2012 and of Freedom Now,Freedom Now, Board of Advisors, accessed 20 May 2012 and of the Board of Advisors of Inter-American Dialogue.BusinessWeek. Arria, accessed 20 May 2012

Ranch expropriation

On April 30, 2010, Arria's ranch "La Carolina" in Yaracuy State was taken over by the Venezuelan government. Minister of Agriculture Elias Jaua "declared that lawyers and historians working for the National Lands Institute (INTI) had not been able to find continuity of ownership deeds in the national register and therefore the lands are "fallow" and return to the State".com, 13 May 2010, It's final: Arria farm declared social property after failure to trace title deeds According to government officials the ranch was unproductive and was a case of idle lands; according to Arria, the farm had 300 cattle and 90% of it was under some form of agricultural development., elnuevodiario.do, 11 May 2010, "Ex embajador de Venezuela dice Chávez le quitó finca por venganza política"




