[[Feminazi]]

CATEGORIES: Fascism, Pejorative terms for people, The Rush Limbaugh Show, Political neologisms, Criticism of feminism, Words coined in the 1990s, Feminism, Dysphemisms, Sexuality and gender-related slurs, Sex- or gender-related stereotypes

Feminazi is a term popularized by radio talk-show host Rush Limbaugh and in use since the early 1990s. It is a portmanteau of the nouns feminist and Nazi. The online version of the Merriam-Webster dictionary defines the term as used in a "usually disparaging" manner, to describe "an extreme or militant feminist".Online dictionary
The term is used pejoratively. by some U.S. conservatives to attack feminists whom they perceive as extreme.

Etymology and usage

In his 1992 book The Way Things Ought to Be, Limbaugh credited his friend Tom Hazlett, professor of economics at the University of California at Davis, with coining the term. Limbaugh, The Way Things Ought to Be, Pocket Books, 1992 p. 193
There were times when Limbaugh almost stopped using the term. According to Slate.com, in 2000:

In 2004, Limbaugh named feminist activists Gloria Steinem, Susan Sarandon, Christine Lahti, and Camryn Manheim as "famous feminazis."The Rush Limbaugh Show, June 22, 2005: "In The Washington Post we get a little story: 'Tips for the Democrats, Hint: Next time don't compare anybody to Hitler.' And by the way, the only reason they're doing it is because Rush Limbaugh invented the term 'feminazi.' That's the sum total of the Washington Post story—Durbin did it because I popularized it first with 'feminazi.'  I haven't used that term on this program in years. But it still gets to 'em, doesn't it? And you know why? chuckles Because it's right. Because it's accurate. ... The feminazis gathered in Washington on Sunday, about a half-million of them it says here, and it was the first big pro-abortion rally in 12 years.... Let's listen to some famous feminazis who were speaking yesterday at the pro-abort anti-Bush rally. In order, they are Gloria Steinem, Susan Sarandon, Christine Lahti and Camryn Manheim."Rush H. Limbaugh, The Way Things Ought to Be, Pocket Books, 1992 p.193
Other political commentators have also made comparisons between militant feminism and totalitarian ideologies. In 1994, Camille Paglia described some feminist groups as "Stalinist" for engaging in what she describes as censorship and quashing of dissent. (2001) Performing the literary interview: how writers craft their public selves. University of Nebraska Press, ISBN 9780803239395, p. 169. In 1983, a year before Limbaugh debuted as a political talk-show host, anarchist Bob Black wrote an essay called "Feminism as Fascism".Feminism as Fascism
In 2012, Limbaugh blamed "feminazis" as the cause of a decades-long trend of penis shrinking."Limbaugh: Penises now '10 percent smaller' and shrinking because of 'feminazis'" Raw Story.

Criticism

In a 1996 interview, Gloria Steinem criticized Limbaugh's use of the term feminazi. According to Steinem, "Hitler came to power against the strong feminist movement in Germany, padlocked the family planning clinics, and declared abortion a crime against the state—all views that more closely resemble Rush Limbaugh's."
John K. Wilson, in his book The Most Dangerous Man in America: Rush Limbaugh's Assault on Reason, cites Limbaugh's definition of the term as meaning "radical feminists whose objective is to see that there are as many abortions as possible" and says "by this definition, there are literally no feminazis."








