[[Day at the Fair]]

CATEGORIES: American pop punk musical groups, Musical groups from New Jersey

Day at the Fair were a pop punk band from Jefferson, New Jersey. They were signed to Rushmore Records.  Currently working with Broken Heart Records.

History

Emerging from the remnants of the two now defunct bands Lanemeyer and Humble Beginnings, Day at the Fair started as a half-electric, half-acoustic recording project. Former Drive-Thru Records employee and main lyricist of the band Chris Barker joined forces with Rob Heiner in 2000, to create the music that would three years later be released on the band's debut CD No Lights on Weldon for Small Records.  No Lights on Weldon contained a Lanemeyer cover, Another Lonely Winter.  Their line-up was completed by Mike Carrol on guitar and Frank Abruzzo on drums, while Rob played bass.
During the two and a half year recording process, Chris commuted back and forth between California and New Jersey (a subject matter that later appeared in several songs of his, including the single "Eastern Homes and Western Hearts"), until finally settling for the east coast. A Day at the Fair was now able to go on tour full-time.
On the Canadian Warped Tour, A Day at the Fair caught the attention of the chairman of Springman Records, who signed them right away. Simultaneously, the band dropped the "A" in their name, Mike left and Frank was replaced by Stephen Weir. Their second CD The Prelude EP was released in March 2004.
Joined by Todd Maisano, they became the third band to be signed by Rushmore Records later that year, given Chris' earlier connections with Drive-Thru Records. After contributing a track to the Drive-Thru/Rushmore Christmas compilation Happy Holidays from Drive-Thru Records, the band released their third album The Rocking Chair Years in May 2005.
While on tour with Allister and Fenix*TX in November 2005, Maisano left the band in order to continue his studies of  chemistry and working towards earning his degree. His replacement, Gary Bender, was announced on January 6, 2006 on the band's MySpace profile.
A month later, the band announced the end of Day at the Fair as they had been known, with member changes and the promise of a new focus on the more melodic side of their music, as demonstrated in tracks such as "Here Lies Our Holiday" (as featured on Happy Holidays from Drive-Thru Records) or "Monday Morning" (from The Rocking Chair Years). They soon began writing and recording an acoustic EP.
On February 17, 2006 Day at the Fair announced what Barker describes as "not a break up, not a hiatus, just a big change..." in reference to the departure of Gary Bender, Rob Heiner and Steve Weir. 
In March 2006, The new lineup of the band embarked on what would be their last tour, with Kevin Sant'angelo replacing Gary Bender on bass, Mike Cipriano replacing Steve Weir on drums and Heiner rejoining for the last 4 shows of the tour. They dropped off the last 2 weeks of that tour and played their last show at Maxwells in Hoboken,NJ in June 2006.
As of July 2, 2006, the band's website no longer functions, and their purevolume page has a message from Barker stating that the band is, for all intents and purposes, no more. However, he hints at forthcoming projects that are in the works. 
Upon recent inspection of the band's Myspace profile, it appears that they have started playing local shows as Day At The Fair again. The reason for this as quoted by Barker is "Not a comeback, But more like a grave you visit to bring flowers." Since the band's "final" shows in Netcong and Hoboken, they have played a few dates every year (in Northern New Jersey, until this year's show in Philadelphia). They have covered Lanemeyer songs and taken requests at these shows as a thank you to longtime fans.
One project that was started is Further North. Featuring Chris Barker on vocals and guitar, Steve Jaworski on guitar and vocals, Kevin Sant'Angelo on bass and Mike Cipriano on drums.  This NJPP supergroup is Jettison and Day at the Fair combined. They have released songs for download on their Myspace page.
Further North has also failed to meet the expectations they set forth for themselves, shortly after adding John Castaldo from Bigwig onto bass and Rob Heiner on guitar.  In retrospect they've said,  "When you get older, love and life stand as a human shield to your ego, till your ego gets old, and gives up on that as well..." "We've made some great memories... Now it's time to be grown up..."
Day At The Fair is currently in the studio recording a follow-up to The Rocking Chair Years to be released on Broken Heart Records.
2013: The Rocking Chair Years was re-released on Vinyl by Broken Heart Records in the summer of 2013.  The double LP was released to positive reviews (ap."  Inside the packaging was a letter written from the band in regards to recording one last record entitled "The Epilouge."  The letter is as followed: "The record you are holding in your hand was released in May of 2005 by three scrappy kids from New Jersey and one dude from Pennsylvania. I once considered it the last thing that we would ever record and release together. Over the last 8 years, we've talked vaguely about recording another album titled "The Epilogue" when the time was right, and we were ready, and we were sure that we could create something else that we were proud of. But as you get older, life gets in the way and your old dreams get put on the back burner behind your priorities, your marriage, your kids, your home. Things change. Music changed; and honestly, I don't even know what it's evolved into anymore. Most of us spend our mornings sitting in traffic listening to talk radio. We aren't the same four kids touring around the country and singing about our dreams because our dreams transformed with our lives. It's nice to look back now, and realize that we have achieved everything that we ever dreamed, wrote about, and shared with all of you. Still, there isn't one thing any of us would take back about this band, our lives, or this particular album. When Larry from Broken Heart Records contacted us about releasing this on Vinyl, we couldn't have been happier. It gave us that one last little push we needed to get up and start writing again. It could take a few months, it could take years, who knows. All I know is that one day we will be proud to release "The Epilogue," just like we proud of this album, so that we can tie up whatever loose ends we left in 2006. Whenever I throw this record on, I am instantly brought back to fond memories from the past. When Larry sent me the proofs for the liner notes, I had to go over the thanks list we wrote in 2005. There were so many people in there that I no longer have any contact with. Wherever you are, I hope that life treated you well also. You supported and justified our lives. You made the memories lasting. You gave us the greatest two year experience any three kids from Jersey and a dude from Pennsylvania ever had. You helped write the stories we will share with our grand kids when we're in our "Rocking Chair Years."
2014: Following the re-release of the Rocking Chair Years on vinyl via Broken Heart Records, Day at the Fair, along with new drummer Dave Patino, entered the studio with producer Rob Freeman (of Hidden In Plain View fame) to record their first single in 9 years titled "The Brightening. " The single, released digitally on ITunes, Bandcamp and Amazon on February 25, 2014 spent weeks at #1 of the punk/hardcore charts as well as breaking the top 100 on Amazon rock charts. Following a serious of interviews to promote the single,  the band stated that a new record was in the works.  Barker is quoted in saying, "I've been working on and off on the last record for the last 9 years.  I don't know when it will come out but I can assure you that one day it will."  In an interview with soundthesignals. I kind of fast tracked this one to the top of the myriad of demo's I've done and thankfully, everyone went along with it. The song itself, I have a very personal connection with so I'm glad they were on board as the first one we would do after 9 years."
The interview itself (
In 2014, DATF has played a reunion show in Stanhope NJ, an acoustic show in Garwood NJ and are slated to play Philadelphia (6/7/14 with The Suicide Pact at the Barbary), NYC and Boston this summer.  Collectively, they will have played more shows in 2014 then they have since 2006.  In a radio interview with new drummer "Dave Patino," he stated, "The new songs are taking shape and everyone is on board. I guess we are up to something good."

Discography

Members

Former members




