[[Ondansetron]]

CATEGORIES: Antiemetics, 5-HT3 antagonists, Imidazoles, Ketones

Ondansetron (INN), originally marketed under the brand name Zofran, is a serotonin 5-HT3 receptor antagonist  used to prevent nausea and vomiting caused by cancer chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and surgery.
It has little effect on vomiting caused by motion sickness, and does not have any effect on dopamine receptors or muscarinic receptors
It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines, a list of the most important medication needed in a basic health system.

Medical uses

Although an effective anti-emetic agent, the high cost of brand-name ondansetron initially limited its use to controlling postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) and chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV).

Cancer treatment

The 5-HT3 receptor antagonists are the primary drugs used to treat and prevent chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) and radiotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (RINV).

Post-operative

A number of medications including ondansetron appear to be effective in controlling post-operative nausea and vomiting (PONV). It is unclear if it is better than or worse than other agents like droperidol, metoclopramide, or cyclizine.

Pregnancy

Ondansetron is used off-label to treat morning sickness and hyperemesis gravidarum of pregnancy. It is typically used after trials of other drugs have failed.

Cyclic vomiting syndrome

Ondansetron is one of several anti-emetic agents used during the vomiting phase of cyclic vomiting syndrome.

Gastroenteritis

Trials in emergency department settings support the use of ondansetron to reduce vomiting associated with gastroenteritis and dehydration.

Special populations

Pregnancy and breast feeding

Animal reproduction studies have not shown evidence of harm to the fetus or impairment of fertility with use of high daily doses of ondansetron. Additionally, a cohort study of over 600,000 pregnancies in Denmark found that ondansetron administration during pregnancy was not associated with a significantly increased risk of spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, major birth defect, preterm birth, low birth weight, or small for gestational age. Ondansetron is in pregnancy category B in the US. It is not known if ondansetron is excreted in breast milk.

Children

Ondansetron has rarely been studied in patients under 4 years of age. As such, there is little data to guide dosage recommendations.

Elderly

It is not necessary to adjust the dosage for elderly patients under 75 years of age. The use of Zofran has not been studied in patients older than 75 years of age, and it is not known if dosage should be adjusted for these patients.

Poor liver function

The maximum recommended dosage for patients with severe liver function impairment is 8 mg/day. In these patients, Zofran is cleared from the body at half to one-third the speed/rate as in healthy patients. The concentration of Zofran in body tissues as opposed to plasma is also higher than in healthy patients.

Adverse effects

Ondansetron is a well-tolerated drug with few side effects. Constipation, dizziness and headache are the most commonly reported side effects associated with its use. It is broken down by the hepatic cytochrome P450 system and it has little effect on the metabolism of other drugs broken down by this system.  Anecdotally, ototoxicity has also been reported if injected too quickly.

QT prolongation

Use of ondansetron has been associated with prolongation of the QT interval, which can lead to the potentially fatal heart rhythm known as Torsade de Pointes. Although this may happen in any patient with any formulation, the risk is most salient with the injectable (intravenous) form of the drug, and increases with dose. The risk is also higher in patients taking other medicines that prolong the QT interval, as well as in patients with congenital long QT syndrome, congestive heart failure, and/or bradyarrhythmias. As such, single doses of injectable ondansetron should not exceed 16 mg at one time. (Oral dosing recommendations remain intact, including the recommendation of a single 24 mg oral dose when indicated.) Electrolyte imbalances should be corrected before the use of injectable ondansetron. Patients are cautioned to seek immediate medical care if symptoms such as irregular heartbeat/palpitations, shortness of breath, dizziness, or fainting occur while taking ondansetron. (2012). FDA Drug Safety Communication: New information regarding QT prolongation with ondansetron (Zofran). Retrieved from 

Overdose

There is no specific treatment for ondansetron overdose; patients are managed with supportive measures. An antidote to ondansetron is not available.

Pharmacodynamics

Ondansetron is a highly specific and selective serotonin 5-HT3 receptor antagonist and with low affinity for Dopamine receptors. The 5-HT3 receptors are present both peripherally on vagal nerve terminals and centrally in the chemoreceptor trigger zone of the area postrema. Serotonin is released by the enterochromaffin cells of the small intestine in response to chemotherapeutic agents and may stimulate vagal afferents (via 5-HT3 receptors) to initiate the vomiting reflex. It is not certain whether ondansetron's antiemetic action is mediated centrally, peripherally, or in both sites.

History

Ondansetron (marketed under the brand name Zofran) was developed in the mid-1980s by GlaxoSmithKline in London. It was granted US patent protection in September 1987,

Society and culture

Publication bias

In 1997, ondansetron was the subject of a meta-analysis case-study published in the British Medical Journal. Researchers examined 84 trials, with 11,980 patients receiving ondansetron, published between 1991 and September 1996. Intravenous ondansetron 4 mg versus placebo was investigated in 16 reports and three further reports which had been duplicated six times. The number needed to treat (NNT) to prevent vomiting within 24 hours was 9.5, with 95% confidence interval 6.9 to 15, in the 16 non-duplicated reports. In the three duplicated reports, the NNT was significantly lower at 3.9 (3.3 to 4.8) with PIn addition, the authors found that the covert duplication of reports on ondansetron was not easy to detect, because of lack of cross-referencing between papers, and that reports containing duplicate findings were cited in eight reviews of the drug. Their analysis was a subject of an editorial in the Journal of the American Medical Association in 1999.

Brand namesDrugs. (n.d.). Ondansetron. Retrieved February 2, 2014, from 

Australia

Bangladesh

Brazil

Canada

China

Germany

India

Indonesia

Iran
Ireland

Japan

Mexico

New Zealand

Philippines

Russia

United Kingdom

United States

Vietnam

Research

Psychiatric disorders

A 2006 double-blind, randomized controlled trial indicated that ondansetron may have value in the treatment of schizophrenia, as an adjunct to haloperidol. The study found the combination to significantly improve negative schizophrenia symptoms, and people taking both drugs experienced fewer of the adverse effects commonly associated with haloperidol.
Early studies have also examined ondansetron as a possible treatment for psychosis resulting from advanced Parkinson's disease. Its apparent benefits despite a lack of any significant antagonistic properties at dopamine receptors or the 5-HT2A receptor raises interesting questions about the etiology of psychosis.
Hewlett and others found that the treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder with Ondansetron 1 mg three times daily was associated with a significant decrease in the Yale Brown Obsessive Compulsive scores in a small (n=8), 8-week, open-label study.

Substance use

Ondansetron lowers the cravings for alcohol, especially in early-onset alcoholics. In one cognitive-behavioral therapy study, ondansetron patients with early-onset alcoholism had fewer drinks per day and reported more days without drinking at all, as compared to the other groups in the study. Also of note, individuals with the LL genotype show significant improvements in alcohol misuse when treated with ondansetron, compared with individuals with the other genotypes of the 5HTTLPR polymorphism, who showed no improvement over placebo.
Researchers at the Stanford University School of Medicine have demonstrated that ondansetron might be useful and effective for treating withdrawal symptoms of opioid addictions. Unlike the existing treatments methadone and buprenorphine, it is not itself an opioid. Additionally, it does not require continued supervision like treatment with clonidine.
The original experiment used mice who were injected with increasing doses of morphine, assayed with naloxone and then underwent haplotypic analysis to isolate a gene candidate. HTR3A which codes for the 5-HT3 receptor emerged as the primary candidate, which suggested 5-HT3 antagonist ondansetron as a possible treatment. The researchers were then able to show using an acute morphine administration model the efficacy in withdrawal symptom control in humans.

Postanesthetic shivering

Two small, placebo-controlled trials have been conducted to assess the efficacy of ondansetron for postanesthetic shivering, a common occurrence after surgery. Ondansetron was found to be as effective as pethidine (meperidine, Demerol) when given as a single IV dose before anesthesia.






