[[Tere Naam]]

CATEGORIES: Hindi-language films, 2003 films, Indian films, Indian film remakes

Tere Naam (In your name) is a 2003 Bollywood musical romantic drama film. It is directed by Satish Kaushik and written by Bala, starring Salman Khan and Bhoomika Chawla in her Hindi film debut.
The film is supposedly based on a true story as the DVD cover says "Unfortunately a true love story", though during the end credits a fictitious disclaimer is shown.
Tere Naam was release on 15 August 2003 and was major success at the box office. Salman was highly praised for his portrayal of Radhe Mohan and the role is widely considered to be his finest performance till date.

Plot

Radhe Mohan (Salman Khan), a rowdy ex-college boy who, after a ragging (hazing) session, loses his heart to first year student Nirjara (Bhumika Chawla), a traditional Brahmin girl. Just when Nirjara reciprocates his love, Radhey is attacked by a gang of thugs, loses his mind and is admitted to an ashram where, it is hoped, the more traditional means of treatment could have a therapeutic effect on him.
Eventually he returns to normal, and rushes back to Nirjara's house, only to find that she has committed suicide, because her family were forcing her to marry Rameshwara (Ravi Kishan). After accepting this fact he returns to the ashram.

Cast

Reception

Tere Naam garnered overwhelmingly buoyant reviews. Subhash K Jha of Times of India waxed lyrical about Salman claiming that the  actor had outshone even Dilip Kumar and Amitabh Bachchan. " Obsessive unrequited love has been done by many actors in the past from Dilip Kumar in Mehboob Khan's Andaz to Amitabh Bacchan in Parwana to Shah Rukh Khan in Anjaam. But none has done it with such stunning physical and emotional aggression. Salman takes over the show with gut-wrenching and finally devastating impact."

Box office

Tere Naam opened to packed houses and took the nation by storm. The response to Tere Naam surpassed that of Gadar Ek Prem Katha, Lagaan, Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham, Main Prem Ki Diwani Hoon and Koi... Mil Gaya. Jodhpur saw almost a dozen people donning Salman's Tere Naam hairstyle for the first day's show. And this was the place where Salman Khan had received the maximum flak after his black buck case.
Komal Nahta reported in Film Information that the collections at Meerut's Nandan cinema have broken records over the last five years. Two hours after the advanced booking counter for the film opened for the first time, the theatre sold Rs 3 lakh (Rs 300,000) worth of tickets.rediff.htm
Taran Adarsh told of India that the advance booking for Tere Naam is the best ever in five years.  In the north, 'record-breaking' is the term being bandied about.
The film altogether grossed 32 crore and was Super Hit at the box office. It was the third highest grossing movie of the year.Bollywood films of 2003#Top grossing films

Home Video

In addition to the DVD mentioned above, the film became available on Blu-ray Disc on 13 December 2010 by Eros International.blu-ray.com/movies/Tere-Naam-Blu-ray/18433/

Awards

Winner:
Nominated:

Soundtrack

The soundtrack of the film contains 10 songs. The music is composed by Himesh Reshammiya and Sajid-Wajid with lyrics penned by Sameer. The songs of the film were extremely popular and it was one of the best soundtracks of 2003.

Tracklist






