[[Marsha Norman]]

CATEGORIES: 1947 births, Living people, Alumni of women's universities and colleges, American dramatists and playwrights, American screenwriters, Juilliard School faculty, Writers from Kentucky, People from Louisville, Kentucky, People from Manhattan, Pulitzer Prize for Drama winners, University of Louisville alumni, Women screenwriters, Agnes Scott College alumni, American women dramatists and playwrights

Marsha Norman (born September 21, 1947) is an American playwright, screenwriter,  and novelist. She received the 1983 Pulitzer Prize for Drama for her play 'night, Mother. She wrote the book and lyrics for such Broadway musicals as The Secret Garden, for which she won a Tony Award and the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Book of a Musical, and The Red Shoes, as well as the libretto for the musical The Color Purple. She wrote the book for the musical The Bridges of Madison County.  She is co-chair of the playwriting department at The Juilliard School.

Biography

Early years

Norman was born in Louisville, Kentucky. As a child, she read and played the piano. She later began attending productions by the newly founded Actor's Theatre of Louisville. She received a bachelor's degree from Agnes Scott College and her Masters degree from the University of Louisville. "Marsha Norman" agnesscott. She taught young children and adolescents in mental institutions and hospitals. These were perhaps her biggest influence on her writing, especially a 13-year-old girl who influenced her play Getting Out."Marsha Norman" louisville. Graham Brown School and Prestonia Elementary School in Louisville.

Career

Norman's first play Getting Out was produced at the Actors Theatre of Louisville and then Off-Broadway in 1979.'Getting Out', 1979 lortel.'Getting Out' samuelfrench.
Norman's success with Getting Out led her to move to New York City where she continued to write for the Actor's Theatre of Louisville. Her full-length play, Circus Valentine was produced at the Humana Festival in 1978. The play concerns a travelling circus and its star attraction, Siamese twins. The Humana Festival, The History of New Plays At Actors Theatre of Louisville books.com, SIU Press, June 19, 2008, ISBN 0809328496, , p.60 and Appendix Her next play, night, Mother'', would turn out to be her best-known work, given its Broadway success and its star-powered film version. night, Mother brought Norman a great deal of recognition. The play, dealing frankly with the subject of suicide, won the 1983 Pulitzer Prize for DramaDrama, see 1983 pulitzer.org, accessed August 1, 2013 the Hull-Warriner, and the Drama Desk Award. However, her follow-up play, Traveller in the Dark received scathing reviews from the New York critics, some of whom were as blunt to say she could not have written it. According to an interview in The New York Times, "Ms. Norman stayed away from the theater and turned to screenplays, including a 1986 movie adaptation of " 'Night, Mother" that starred Sissy Spacek and Anne Bancroft and failed to impress critics. She was in high demand in Hollywood, though not always for films that she liked, or that studios would approve."Stanley, Alessandra. "Theater:Marsha Norman Finds Her Lost Key to Broadway" The New York Times'' (webcache.com), April 21, 1991
Norman wrote the book and lyrics for the musical The Secret Garden, an adaptation of the  Frances Hodgson Burnett novel The Secret Garden, and won the Tony Award for Best Book in 1991. Her work in musical theatre continued with the book and lyrics for the musical The Red Shoes, which ran on Broadway in 1993. Her one-act play, Trudy Blue, was produced Off-Broadway in 1999. That play revolved around a woman who is mistakenly told that she has two months to live. "Review: 'Trudy Blue' " curtainup.Gans, Andrew. 2005-2006 "Tony Nominations Announced; 'Drowsy' Leads Pack With 13 Noms" playbill.Gans, Andrew.  "Norman and Brown's Trumpet of the Swan Begins Kennedy Center Run Dec. 4" playbill. The musical premiered at the Williamstown Theatre Festival on August 1, 2013 and opened on Broadway on February 20, 2014."The Verdict: Critics Review 'The Bridges of Madison County'" playbill.com, February 21, 2014
Norman's works for television and film include the film version of night Mother. She has written the television films Face of a Stranger (1991),Face of a Stranger tcm.com, accessed August 2, 2013Custody of the Heart (2000),Custody of the Heart tcm.The Audrey Hepburn Story tcm.Works marshanorman.com, accessed August 2, 2013
Norman currently serves on the faculty of the Juilliard School in New York City, and is Vice-President of the Dramatists Guild of America. She was honored at the 2011 William Inge Festival for Distinguished Achievement in the American Theatre.com

Bibliography

Note: plays or musicals unless otherwise indicated






