[[Same-sex marriage in Denmark]]

CATEGORIES: Same-sex marriage in Denmark

Same-sex marriage became legal in Denmark on 15 June 2012. Lov om ændring af lov om ægteskabs indgåelse og opløsning, lov om ægteskabets retsvirkninger og retsplejeloven og om ophævelse af lov om registreret partnerskab The bill for legalization, introduced by the government of Helle Thorning-Schmidt, was approved by the Folketing on 7 June 2012 and received Royal Assent on 12 June 2012. Same-sex couples were previously recognised through registered partnerships. Denmark is the eleventh country in the world to legalise same-sex marriage.

History

Registered partnership

Registered partnerships (Danish: registreret partnerskab) in Denmark were created by a law enacted on 7 June 1989, the world's first such law, and came into force on 1 October 1989. Published: 2 October 1989. Accessed: 7 June 2012 It was extended to Greenland on 26 April 1996,Yuval Merin, Equality for same-sex couples. Published in 2002. and later amended in 1999. Three attempts to expand the law in May 2003, L 146 Forslag til lov om ændring af lov om registreret partnerskab, lov om en børnefamilieydelse og lov om børnetilskud og forskudsvis udbetaling af børnebidrag
Registered partnerships had almost all the same qualities as marriage.  All legal and fiscal rights and obligations were like those of opposite-sex marriage, with the following two exceptions:
Divorce for registered partners followed the same rules as opposite-sex divorces. Registered partners had to meet one of the following residency requirements to form a union: (1) one partner had to be a Danish citizen and be resident in Denmark, or (2) both parties must have been resident in Denmark for two years. Citizens of Finland, Iceland, and Norway were treated as Danish citizens for purposes of the residency requirements. Additionally, the Justice Minister could order that a citizen of any other country with a registered partnership law similar to Denmark's be treated as a citizen of Denmark.
In 2006, lesbian individuals and couples were given the right to have access to artificial insemination treatment.
On 17 March 2009, the Folketing introduced a bill that gave same-sex couples in registered partnerships the right to adopt jointly.Gay adoption on the lawbooks
Registered partnership was by civil ceremony only, but the Church of Denmark allowed priests to perform blessings of gay couples.The Evangelical Lutheran Church In Denmark & Homosexuality
On 15 June 2012, the registered partnership act was repealed and replaced by the new gender-neutral marriage law.

Same-sex marriage

In 2006, five Social Liberal MPs introduced a resolution that asked the Government to draft a gender-neutral marriage law. The resolution was debated in Parliament and opposed by members of the conservative governing coalition. B 76  Forslag til folketingsbeslutning om at indføre en ægteskabslovgivning, som ligestiller homoseksuelle med heteroseksuelle. The Minister for the Family, Carina Christensen, argued that registered partners already had the same rights as married partners except the ability to marry in church, and thus that gender-neutral marriage was unnecessary.
In January 2008, the Social Liberal Party's Equality Rapporteur, Lone Dybkjær, once again called for gender-neutral marriage (kønsneutrale ægteskab). R vil indføre kønsneutrale ægteskab
The Copenhagen Mayor for Culture and Recreation, Pia Allerslev, from the liberal then-governing Venstre party, also publicly supported same-sex marriage, S og V vil kalde homo-vielser for ægteskab, Politiken, 24 August 2009
In June 2010, the Parliament once again debated a same-sex marriage bill proposed by the opposition parties. It was rejected on a 52-57 vote. B 122 Forslag til folketingsbeslutning om at indføre en kønsneutral ægteskabslovgivning, så homoseksuelle par og heteroseksuelle par bliver ligestillede
In October 2011 Manu Sareen, Minister for Equality and Church Affairs in the new Danish government, announced that the government was seeking to legalize same-sex marriage by spring 2012. One bill introduced a gender-neutral definition of marriage and allowed same-sex couples to marry either in civil registry offices or in the Church of Denmark. Existing registered partnerships would have the option of converting to a marriage, while no new registered partnerships will be able to be created. According to the other bill, individual priests would be allowed to refuse to conduct same-sex marriages. Other religious communities would also be allowed to conduct same-sex marriages but would not be compelled to do so. The bills were under consultation process until 22 February 2012. Forslag til Lov om ændring af lov om medlemskab af folkekirken, kirkelig betjening og sognebåndsløsning 
On 14 March 2012, the government submitted both bills to Parliament.
A set of bills to extend Danish law to the Faroe Islands was submitted to the Løgting on 20 November 2013. If approved, they would enter into force on 1 April 2014. Løgtingssetan 2013 Mál: 53 Viðgerð: 2
Similar legislation regarding Greenland is also being proposed and, if approved, would take effect on 1 July 2014.

Public opinion

YouGov poll, conducted between 27 December 2012 and 6 January 2013, found that 79% of Danes supported same-sex marriage, 16% were opposed and 6% had no opinion.YouGov / EMEA Survey Results






