[[Malibu's Most Wanted]]

CATEGORIES: 2003 films, Teen comedy films, American comedy films, Warner Bros. films, Gang films, Hip hop films, Films set in Los Angeles, California, Films set in Malibu, California, Films directed by John Whitesell

Malibu's Most Wanted is a 2003 comedy film written by and starring Jamie Kennedy and co-starring Taye Diggs, Anthony Anderson, Blair Underwood, Regina Hall, Damien Dante Wayans, Ryan O'Neal and Snoop Dogg. The film is written by the creators of MADtv, Fax Bahr and Adam Small, who also serve as producers.
The character of "B-Rad" originally appeared in Jamie Kennedy's hidden camera show The Jamie Kennedy Experiment,  but started in his stand-up routine when he was starting out. The film was given a PG-13 rating by the MPAA. In order to keep the rating, the film's end-credits were edited to prevent the movie from receiving a R rating.

Plot

Bill Gluckman (Ryan O'Neal) is a wealthy Jewish man, running for governor of California. His son Bradley or "B-Rad" (Jamie Kennedy) is trying to become a successful rapper. B-Rad's dreams of being a rapper started when he was little, when his maid Gladis was listening to rap music while cleaning. Ever since then, B-Rad has been determined to be the biggest rapper there ever was.
After Bill's campaign manger Tom Gibbons (Blair Underwood) gets irritated with B-Rad's constant interruptions with the election, Bill decides that B-Rad see a psychiatrist,  Dr. Feldman (Jeffrey Tambor). Dr. Feldman tells B-Rads parents that B-Rad has a serious case of "Gangstaphrienia". Tom then has an idea, to hire two actors, PJ (Anthony Anderson) & Sean James (Taye Diggs) to try and scare B-Rad back to normal. Although Bill thinks it could get dangerous, he reluctantly agrees. With the help of PJ's cousin Shondra (Regina Hall), they kidnap B-Rad and take him to the ghetto. Shondra tries to convince B-Rad if he stops acting like a gangster, they will let him go. B-Rad tries to tell Shondra he can't, it's who he is. The actors then try plan B, forcing B-Rad to rob a convenience store owned by a Korean family. Later, realizing that they forgot to call and tell the owner that the robbery was fake, PJ and Sean begin to worry the plan will fail and they will go to jail. B-Rad finds his emergency stash of cash in his pants and pays for the alcohol he was supposed to steal. B-Rad then lies to them and says he stole it. When they find a receipt in the back, B-Rad says he stole that too.
The actors try taking him to a scary movie to get him to stop trying to be a gangster. All B-Rad does is get scared and screams and throws popcorn all over the place, ruining the movie. At this point PJ and Sean are frustrated and decide to take B-Rad to a club and have him compete in a rap battle. B-Rad ends up getting thrown off the stage due to using the N word in his bars. He's thrown In a dumpster while the actors laugh at him historically. B-Rad feels as if he never could rap, until Shondra changes his mind. After she cheers him up, they kiss. B-Rad takes it too far and gets on top of Shondra only to be thrown off the bed by her. She storms out of the room and B-Rad takes a nap. He dreams about a rat by the name of Ronnie Rizzat (Snoop Dog) and he tells to just be himself, but the rat "would rather eat garbage then listen to his tired ass rhymes". His dream ends and B-Rad hears the actors on the phone with Tom. B-Rad then realizes the whole thing was a joke, including him and Shondra.
Angry, B-Rad storms out of the house. Sean and PJ follow him outside only to be held hostage by a real gangster Tec (Damien Dante Wayans) who is also Shondra's ex-boyfriend, who B-Rad encountered at the club. Tec and his crew kidnap B-Rad and the actors and take them to an empty parking lot. Tec calls Tom and tells him if Bill wants to see his son again, they have to give him $500,000. Tom has another plan, if they kill B-Rad, Bill will get more votes for his campaign. Tom tells Tec there's no deal. Tec points a gun at B-Rad and a pack of other gangsters pull up and start shooting at B-Rad and the others. B-Rad then takes two guns, hops on the roof of a car, and starts aiming fire at all of them. Scaring them away, Tec realizes B-Rad is gangster himself. He then makes B-Rad one of them, leaving the actors to be tied up and brought to a party. While at the party, everyone sees B-Rad on television shooting at the gangsters, a security camera caught everything. Worried and realizing he needs to be a better father to B-Rad, Bill tells Tom what happened and asks Tom to help him. Tom however is more focused on the election, which Bill he's not going to lose his son over. Tom now frustrated with Bill yells at him and says that if anything happens to B-Rad he can turn it around. Bill, realizes that Tom's hopping that something bad will happen to B-Rad in order to get votes and fires Tom before driving to south central to find his son. B-Rads crew Hadji (Kal Penn), Mocha (Nick Swardson), and Monster (Keili Lefkovitz) also see the news and grab their best weapons to save him. Shondra shows up to the party, after seeing the news as well. Shondra sees PJ and Sean and asks where B-Rad is, they tell her only to be shut up by other gangsters there. Shondra enters a bedroom, where B-Rad and two other woman are taking off his pants. Shondra acts like his baby mama to get them to leave. B-Rad gets mad and shoots his foot, not thinking the gun is real. Realizing it is, he jumps around the room in pain. Shondra tries to help him as Tec walks in, thinking Shondra is hooking up with B-Rad. Tec is furious and threatens to shoot them both.
Bill crashes threw the wall and tries to reason with everyone, only to be held at gunpoint. B-Rads crew crashes threw the wall as well and point their guns at Tec and his crew. Bill apologizes to B-Rad for not always being there for him and accepts B-rad for who he is. Accepting his apology, they hug. Tec is still angry, and ruins the moment with him and his crew pointing there guns at B-Rads crew. B-Rad decides to rap, only annoying Tec. B-rad then begins to take the weapons not wanting any violence. Mocha, agreeing with B-rad accidentally fires his gun, which hits Monster in her chest armor, causing her to accidentally shoot B-rad with her spear gun, resulting in him dropping Hadji's rocket launcher, which fires right into the oven. Everyone runs out of the house just before it blows up. B-rad is treated for his wounds while Shondra talks to him. B-rad had trouble telling what was real and what wasn't, so Shondra kisses him to help him. Shondra also ends up opening her own salon and she and B-Rad get back together. Bill Gluckman wins the election for Governor of California, and is glad to have his son with him.

Cast

Cameos

Reception

The movie received mostly negative reviews. It has a 31% on Rotten Tomatoes, with the general consensus being "The movie has a good satirical idea and does some nice things with it, but not enough."

DVD Release

Malibu's Most Wanted was released to theaters on April 18, 2003. 









