[[The Quick Draw McGraw Show]]

CATEGORIES: Hanna-Barbera series and characters, Television series by Warner Bros. Television, Yogi Bear, American animated television series, 1950s American animated television series, 1960s American animated television series, 1959 American television series debuts, 1966 American television series endings, CBS network shows, American Broadcasting Company network shows

The Quick Draw McGraw Show is the third cartoon television production created by Hanna-Barbera, starring an anthropomorphic cartoon horse named Quick Draw McGraw following their success with The Ruff & Reddy Show and The Huckleberry Hound Show. The show debuted in syndication in the fall of 1959, sponsored by Kellogg's. Voice actor Daws Butler performed the lead character, Quick Draw. The series featured 3 cartoons per episode, one each by Quick Draw McGraw & Baba Looey, father and son dog duo Augie Doggie & Doggie Daddy and cat and mouse detectives Snooper & Blabber.
Michael Maltese crafted most of the episode stories. Screen Gems originally syndicated the series, followed later by Rhodes Productions, Taft H-B Program Sales, Worldvision Enterprises, then Turner Broadcasting, and now Warner Bros. Television (through their 1996 purchase of Turner). Currently, the show is aired on the Cartoon Network's sister channel, Boomerang, the Canadian station Teletoon Retro and occasionally on the Infinity channel, broadcasting in the Middle East.

Segments

Quick Draw McGraw and Baba Looey

Quick Draw (voiced by Daws Butler) was usually depicted as a sheriff in these short films set in the American Old West. Quick Draw was often accompanied by his deputy, a Mexican burro called Baba Looey (voiced by Daws Butler and his name being a word play on Desi Arnaz's hit song called "Babalu").  Although technically the side-kick, or deputy, to the main character of Sheriff Quick Draw, Baba Looey is often portrayed as the more thoughtful half of the duo; at times realizing some detail about a given situation and trying desperately without success to caution Quick Draw of a trap or other danger. 
Quick Draw was assisted in some cartoons by his bloodhound Snuffles (voiced by Butler), who refused to work until he was given a dog biscuit, after which he would hug himself and spring into the air, floating back down to Earth. 
Quick Draw spent a number of cartoons as his alter ego, the masked El Kabong, who used a guitar (a "Kabonger") to bash bad guys into submission. Writer Michael Maltese said the character was inspired by actor Douglas Fairbanks, Sr. as Zorro. 3, 1960.

Augie Doggie and Doggie Daddy

A young dachshund named Augie Doggie (voiced by Daws Butler) and his father Doggie Daddy (voiced by Doug Young impersonating Jimmy Durante) has different misadventures in their life.

Snooper and Blabber

A detective cat named Super Snooper (voiced by Daws Butler impersonating Ed Gardner as the character Archie from the radio show Duffy's Tavern) and his sidekick Blabber Mouse (voiced by Daws Butler, originally voiced by Los Angeles radio announcer Elliot Field). In several cartoons, they had a private secretary named Hazel (voiced by Jean Vander Pyl), who was never seen on screen.

Episodes

Augie Doggie and Doggie Daddy

Main article: Augie Doggie and Doggie Daddy

Snooper and Blabber

Main article: Snooper and Blabber

Quick Draw McGraw

Voice cast

DVD release

A DVD release of the series for the H-B classics collection was originally announced by Warner Bros. for 2006 but was later cancelled due to the poor condition of the masters and the music right issues. In 2006, a Warner spokesperson said of the DVDs, "They were pulled because significant remastering work needed to be researched." Four episodes are available on dvd. Two on Saturday Morning Cartoons 1960s Vol. One and Two on Saturday Morning Cartoons 1960s Vol.2.

Production credits

1959
Produced And Directed: William Hanna, Joseph Barbera
Voice: Daws Butler, Don Messick, Doug Young
Additional Voices: Julie Bennett, Vance Colvig, Elliot Field, Peter Leeds, Hal Smith, Jean Vander Pyl
Story Director: Alex Lovy
Story: Michael Maltese
Story Sketches: Dan Gordon
Titles: Lawrence Goble
Musical Director: Hoyt Curtin
Production Supervision: Howard Hanson
Animation: Kenneth Muse, Lewis Marshall, Carlo Vinci, Dick Lundy, George Nicholas, Don Patterson
Additional Animation: Ed Love, C. L. Hartman, Harry Holt, John Boersema, Ed de Mattia, Robert Bentley, La Verne Harding, Ed Parks, Don Williams, Hicks Lokey, Paul Sommer, Virgil Ross, Bob Carr, Art Davis, Gerard Baldwin, Manuel Perez, Brad Case
Layout: Dick Bickenbach, Walter Clinton, Tony Rivera, Ed Benedict
Additional Layout: Dan Noonan, Jack Huber, Paul Sommer, Don Sheppard, Noel Tucker, Lance Nolley, Iwao Takamoto
Backgrounds: Montealegre, Robert Gentle, Art Lozzi, Richard H. Thomas, Joseph Montell
Additional Backgrounds: Neenah Maxwell, Anthony Rizzo,
Quick Draw McGraw A Hanna-Barbera Production
C MCMLIX By Hanna-Barbera Productions
Approved MPAA Certification No. 12797
RCA Sound Recording
This Picture Made Under the Juridiction of the IATSE-IA Affiliated with A.F.L.-C.I.O.

Quick Draw McGraw in other languages








