[[Submission (2004 film)]]

CATEGORIES: 2004 films, Dutch short films, Films directed by Theo van Gogh, Islam-related controversies in Europe, Documentary films about violence against women, Documentary films critical of Islam

Submission is a 2004 English short film directed by Theo van Gogh and written by Ayaan Hirsi Ali (a former member of the Dutch House of Representatives for the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy); it was shown on the Dutch public broadcasting network (VPRO) on August 29, 2004. The film's title is a direct translation of the Arabic word "Islam" (see also the etymology and meaning of the word). As a result of the film, van Gogh was assassinated by a Muslim fundamentalist.

Content

The film tells the story of four fictional characters played by a single actress wearing a veil,Review of Submission by Phil Hall but clad in a see-through chador, her naked body painted with verses from the Koran. The film contains monologues of these women and dramatically highlights three verses of the Koran that give authority to men over women (), by showing them painted on women's bodies.

Motivation

Hirsi Ali has said "it is written in the Koran a woman may be slapped if she is disobedient. This is one of the evils I wish to point out in the film". And that is insulting."Slaughter And 'Submission', Creator Of Dutch Film Vows Sequel Despite Muslim Death Threats - CBS News
Director of the film, Theo Van Gogh, who was known as a highly controversial and provocative personality,Lim, Dennis: The Village Voice, November 16th, 2004  "he was most famous for being a radical-libertarian loudmouth. A political columnist who got fired from almost every newspaper in the country, he delighted in blurring the line between free speech and hatemongering—he insisted on calling conservative Muslims 'goatfuckers.'"Review of Submission by Phil Hall "In his own career, van Gogh was a minor figure within Dutch culture who was known for writing rude political columns and creating films designed to challenge the sensibilities of Dutch audiences–which was no mean feat, given that nation's excessively liberal social environment." called the film a "political pamphlet."Simons, Marlese. "Ex-Muslim turns her lens on a taboo", The New York Times " 'Of course it's a political pamphlet; that's undeniable,' said Theo van Gogh, who directed the film and insisted....."

Reception

The film drew praise for portraying the ways in which women are abused in accordance with Islamic law, as well as anger for speaking against the teachings of God. The questions raised in the film deserve to be asked: is it divine will to assault or kill women? Is there holiness in holding women at substandard levels, denying them the right to free will and independent thought? And ultimately, how can such a mindframe exist in the 21st century?" Dennis: The Village Voice, November16th, 2004 An other (unnamed) critic referred to the stories told in this film as "simplistic, even caricatures."
After the movie's broadcast on Dutch television, newspaper De Volkskrant reported claims of plagiarism against Hirsi Ali and Van Gogh, made by internet journalist Francisco van Jole. Van Jole said the duo had "aped" the ideas of Iranian-American video artist Shirin Neshat. Neshat's work, which made abundant use of Arabic text projected onto bodies, had been shown in the Netherlands in 1997 and 2000.

Assassination of Theo Van Gogh

On November 2, 2004, Theo van Gogh was assassinated in public by Mohammed Bouyeri, a Dutch-Moroccan Muslim with a Dutch passport. A letter,'Jihad Manifesto'  - A call to destroy America and all "unbelievers", English translation - letter left on Theo Van Gogh's body by the militant Islamist killer, Militant Islam Monitor. It was addressed to Ayaan Hirsi Ali and called for a jihad against kafir (Kafir is a disbeliever or infidel), against America, Europe, the Netherlands, and Hirsi Ali herself. Following the murder of Van Gogh, tens of thousands gathered in the center of Amsterdam to mourn Van Gogh's death. There were fire-bombings of mosques and Muslim schools, and counterattacks against Christian churches. Besides Bouyeri, eleven other Muslim men were arrested and charged with conspiracy to assassinate Hirsi Ali. 20, 2006
After the murder of Theo van Gogh, Submission gained international fame. It was withdrawn from the International Film Festival Rotterdam. The film had been scheduled to be shown on Sunday during a discussion on freedom of speech in film at the festival. Because of the violent murder of Van Gogh, the producer of Submission, Gijs van de Westelaken, said, "We do not want to take any chance of endangering anyone else who participated in the film."Submission: Part I (2004) (TV) - News The film was shown on television in three European countries.
Hirsi Ali has stated she would like to make a sequel to the movie because "By not making 'Submission Part II,' I would only be helping terrorists believe that if they use violence, they're rewarded with what they want." When asked if she would submit to threats against her life, she said "Not me."Slaughter And 'Submission', Creator Of Dutch Film Vows Sequel Despite Muslim Death Threats - CBS News



Women in Muslim societies:
Other controversies:






