[[The White Company]]

CATEGORIES: 1891 novels, Novels by Arthur Conan Doyle, British historical novels, Hundred Years' War literature, Works originally published in Cornhill Magazine, Novels first published in serial form

The White Company is a historical adventure by Arthur Conan Doyle set during the Hundred Years' War. The climax of the book occurs before the Battle of Nájera. Doyle became inspired to write the novel after attending a lecture on the Middle Ages in 1889.  After extensive research, The White Company was published in serialized form in 1891 in Cornhill Magazine.
The novel is relatively unknown today, though it was very popular up through the Second World War. In fact, Doyle himself regarded this and his other historical novels more highly than the Sherlock Holmes adventures for which he is mainly remembered.
The "White Company" of the title is a free company of archers, led by one of the main characters.  The name is taken from a real-life 14th-Century Italian mercenary company, led by John Hawkwood.

Plot

At the age of twenty, the young Alleyne, son of Edric, intelligent, skilled, and well-liked, though sheltered and naive, leaves the Catholic abbey where he has been raised and goes out to see the world, in accordance with the terms of his father's will. The same day, the abbot banishes John of Hordle, for worldly behavior: great appetite, teasing, and flirting. At the Pied Merlin inn, they make friends with veteran archer Sam Aylward who has returned to England from France to recruit for the White Company of mercenaries. Aylward has brought a request for Sir Nigel Loring of Christchurch to take command of the company. Aylward and John continue to Christchurch, while Alleyne detours to visit his older brother, the "socman" or landlord of Minstead, whose fierce reputation has grown to wickedness.
The brothers meet for the first time since Alleyne was an infant and Alleyne finds that his brother is still furious their father gave three hides of land (80–120 acres) to the monastery for the boy's support. The socman threatens a lovely maiden, Maude, who escapes with Alleyne's aid and they flee on foot to find her squire and horse. Maude makes a striking impression on the abbey-raised young man. When she hears that Alleyne intends to rejoin his friends to approach Sir Nigel Loring, Maude laughs.  Alleyne meets up again with Aylward and Hordle John, and the three friends meet Sir Nigel and his formidable wife Mary. Alleyne is taken on as squire to Sir Nigel and as tutor to his daughter, who Alleyne discovers is the same Maude he saved from his evil brother. When the men eventually depart for France, the young couple admit their love, but only to each other. En route to Gascony, our heroes destroy pirates, then report to the court of the Prince of Wales in Bordeaux.
After adventures fearful and funny, the valiant fighters lead the White Company to join the Prince. The Spanish and French attack them in a narrow ravine, where the mighty warriors are almost all destroyed and the Company must disband. John and Alleyne, badly wounded, survive, but Sir Nigel and Aylward are missing and presumed dead. The English go on to win the Battle of Nájera, fulfilling the mission. The Prince knights Alleyne in his sick bed and, as the former socman has died, Sir Alleyne Edricson becomes the new socman of Minstead. He returns victorious with John as his squire, to snatch Maude from the doors of the nunnery and marry her.. En route back to rescue their friends, all reunite for a happy ever after.

Characters

Main characters

Other characters

Historical figures who appear as characters in the novel

There was a real knight named Sir Nigel Loring at the time the novel is set, but the historical record supplied few details and his role in the book is largely Doyle's invention. He is known to have been an original member of the Order of the Garter, and to have been in the Black Prince's bodyguard, particularly at the Battle of Poitiers on 19 September 1356. He was also, as a member of the Prince's war council, and his chamberlain, part of the delegation that negotiated a truce at Bordeaux, following that battle. As a reward for his role in that battle, he was granted 83 pounds per annum by the Prince.

Influence

Amory Blaine, the protagonist in F. Scott Fitzgerald's This Side of Paradise, reads The White Company early in the book. Several of the characters in S. M. Stirling's Emberverse novels share names with characters from this book and are apparently descendants and/or reincarnations of the characters, and Stirling has acknowledged its influence on his own writing. Two minor character names appear in the Hollywood film A Knight's Tale, specifically "Delves of Dodgington" (Delves of Doddington in the novel) and "Fowlehurst of Crewe" as fake names for the characters Roland and Wat respectively.






