[[Gravion]]

CATEGORIES: 2002 anime television series, 2004 anime television series, ADV Films, Adventure anime and manga, Anime featured in the Super Robot Wars series, Comedy anime and manga, Gonzo (company), Mecha anime and manga, MF Bunko J, Super Robots, Ecchi anime and manga, Anime with original screenplays

 was released and aired from January 8 to March 25 in Japan, running for twelve additional episodes, answering the questions generated from the first series.
Both Gravion and Gravion Zwei are created and directed by Masami Ōbari with mecha designs from Kunio Okawara. Both series were released in the United States by ADV Films.

Plot

In Gravion, Eiji Shigure is sent a letter from his missing older sister Ayaka Shigure. His search for her leads him to Klein Sandman, a mysterious billionaire and Eiji secretly infiltrates his enormous Saint-Germain Castle while he is hosting a party for Earth Federation Alliance (EFA) leaders, in order to find her. Unfortunately, he is tricked into piloting the G-Attacker, one of four Gran Divas, in a mission to defeat the mechanical extraterrestrials called the Zeravire. The Gran Divas are machines secretly created by Sandman himself, who states Eiji's unique G-Factor allows him to pilot it. Although reluctant, Eiji becomes part of Sandman's Earthgertz, the planet's only defensive team to prevent the Zeravire from destroying humanity, by combining the Gran Divas with the Gran Kaiser to form the titular mecha, Gravion.
In Gravion Zwei, the Zeravire invasion seems to have stopped. However, when it rises back up all of a sudden, the Earthgertz and its trump card, the super robot Gravion, is needed to defend the Earth again. In the meantime, the EFA creates their own weapons to counter the Zeravire, the Gran Trooper. As they attempt to fend off the Zeravire, the Earthgertz and the EFA must set aside their differences, confront their pasts and unveil the mysteries of the Zeravire, in order to end their impending threat once and for all.

Characters

Eiji Shigure

Protagonist of the series, 17 year-old Eiji Shigure is searching for his older sister Ayaka Shigure, after he receives a letter from her. Upon finding information she is last seen in service to billionaire Klein Sandman, Eiji enters Sandman's Saint-Germain Castle to find her, but is unknowingly recruited into the Earthgertz as pilot of the Gran Diva, the G-Attacker. He reluctantly stays with the Earthgertz to assume piloting responsibilities, but above all, will leave once he finds Ayaka in Sandman's castle. In Gravion Zwei, he pilots the Geo Mirage.
Easily angered, Eiji carries a short temper and is annoyed by the carefree and clueless Toga, the other boy in the castle, who has no outside interaction prior to Eiji's arrival, or the feisty Luna, who picks on him for not being more like Toga. Regardless, Eiji is reasonable in his rash decisions and develops a close friendship with the rest of his teammates, knowing firsthand how real the Zeravire threat is, thus willing to see the menacing mechanical beings stopped by helping the Earthgertz in their mission. 

Luna Gusuku

An energetic, friendly 14 year-old girl, Luna Gusuku teases Eiji for her amusement and befuddles him for not being as straight and decent like Touga. One of two pilots of the G-Driller Gran Diva and born in Okinawa, she came to Klein Sandman's castle at a young age, meeting Toga Tenkuuji first. Her father Isana Gusuku disappears while working for the billionaire, and has since stayed in Sandman's castle, eventually enrolling into the Earthgertz. In Gravion Zwei, she pilots the Geo Javelin. 

Touga Tenkuuji

The only other boy in Klein Sandman's castle, 17 year-old Touga Tenkuuji is a very kind and gentle person with a smile almost always on his face. Toga claims he has been inside the castle all his life, never knowing any other human interaction besides the Earthgertz and Sandman's countless maids. Extremely athletic and physically strong, he is the pilot of the Gran Kaiser, the robot that combines with the four Gran Divas to form the Gravion.
Touga has one of the highest G-Factors among the Earthgertz, thus is capable of withstanding the pressures of piloting the Gran Kaiser. It is Sandman's wish that Touga's interaction with Eiji Shigure will help him develop his human side, and though Toga learns more of the environment outside the castle, his views are simplistic and childish in nature, such as putting victory over the Zeravire first above conserving human life, something which Eiji does not approve Touga of.
Originally an orphan, Touga was raised at an orphanage sponsored by Sandman. Frequently bullied by some of the other children, another orphan was there to help him through his time at the orphanage, until Sandman adopted him and took him to Saint-Germain Castle. 

Eina

One of the many maids working in Klein Sandman's castle, Eina treats all members of Earthgertz and the other maids well. Easily frightened, Eina finds simple arguments harsh and battles against the Zeravire to be unbearable, but does her best in her piloting duties as the second driver of the G-Driller. She has cared and looked after Touga Tenkuuji since his arrival into Klein Sandman's Saint-Germain Castle. In Gravion Zwei, she pilots the Geo Javelin alongside Luna Gusuku.
In Gravion Zwei, Eina reveals herself as one of Sandman's Proto Gran Divas. It took Sandman nearly 50 years to create her current, artificial body. After she is destroyed following a Zeravire attack, her memories are immediately transferred to her original body, located inside the Sol Σ Gravion, stored on the moon. 

Mizuki Tachibana

The only female adult member of Earthgertz, the busty Mizuki Tachibana is the pilot of the Gran Diva, the G-Striker, who loves her alcohol, but is also the most rational member among her teammates. A skilled hacker, she looks up to Ayaka Shigure when she first arrived at Klein Sandman's castle and claims Ayaka as her best friend, though is still in question at her sudden disappearance. In Gravion Zwei, she pilots the Geo Stinger.
Her name is actually an alias; in Gravion Zwei, she reveals herself as a sleeper agent, working for the EFA intelligence division. Upon stealing development data on the Gravion, she returns to her superiors, in order to provide them the means to counter the Zeravire threat. For her services, she is given a lush, island estate, but returns to the Earthgertz shortly, citing boredom as her primary reason. 

Leele

A shy girl who lives isolated within the castle's south tower, Leele claims her parents died in a fire years ago. She has no memories following the accident, which has left her traumatized and the sight of raging blue flames easily puts Leele into an extremely frightened state. Raised by Klein Sandman, she secludes herself from others, but opens up to her fellow Earthgertz teammates when they realize she is the pilot of the G-Shadow Gran Diva. Leele is occasionally seen with her pet ferret Lolotte. In Gravion Zwei, she pilots the Geo Caliber.
Leele's full name is Leele Zeravire, the daughter of Zieg Zeravire and Lufira Zeravire. Before her home planet of Llambias was destroyed, thus the origin of her lost memories, she was placed in a stasis capsule and sent by her uncle Hugi Zeraire into space, following the signal of her father's vessel. Her escape ship failed to enter warp travel, thus arrived on Earth at a later time, yet her own subjective time was different, thus she only aged a few months. Sandman finds her and takes her into Saint-Germain Castle. 

Raven

An enigmatic, masked man who works for Klein Sandman, Raven is completely loyal to his master, never sharing any personal information about himself. Raven oversees the Earthgertz's training, combat simulations and attack situations against the Zeravire, and occasionally answers to the EFA about Sandman's involvement in the extraterrestrials' invasion, in place of Sandman himself.
In Gravion Zwei, it is revealed the current Raven is actually Ayaka Shigure, Eiji Shigure's sister. The mask holds the memories of the original Raven, a former colleague of Zieg Zeravire on his homeworld of Llambias. The previous holder of Raven's mask was Luna Gusuku's father Isana, before he passed it down to Ayaka. 

Klein Sandman

The handsome, billionaire businessman and commander of the Earthgertz, Klein Sandman's knowledge of science and technology allows him to build the Gran Divas and the Gran Kaiser to battle the Zeravire. Sandman selects people with a high tolerance on the effects of gravity, a genetically inherited trait he calls the G-Factor, to become the pilots of his machines. When it seems the Zeravire are too much to handle for Earthgertz, Sandman approves of combining the Gran Divas and the Gran Kaiser into Gravion. In Gravion Zwei, he pilots the Gran Sigma.
Sandman was originally Zieg Zeravire, a scientist from the ecologically devastated planet of Llambias and the husband to Lufira Zeravire. In order to stop further contamination and to prevent an all-out war between the neighboring world of Selias, due to Llambians forcing themselves to immigrate there, Sandman creates the Genesis Machine Gran Sigma, the prototype to the Gran Kaiser, in hopes of restoring Llambias' environment. Unfortunately, his brother-in-law Hugi Zeravire creates the Genocidron System, an automatic, robotic network programmed for extermination. He intended to use it on the Selians, as a means to spare enough Llambians if war was to occur, but Sandman did not wish to see lives sacrificed. Following a brief struggle with Hugi, he accidentally destroys the control device to the Genocidron System, making the machines indiscriminately destroying both worlds.
Upon escaping Llambias, Sandman and Raven flee to Earth. In order to conceal his identity, he takes the name and appearance of the actual Klein Sandman, an 18th-century aristocrat.  To provide himself the means to prepare for the Zeravire, Sandman genetically suppresses his own G-Factor, giving him immortality and turning his hair purple from its original blond.  Some time before Eiji's arrival at Saint-Germain Castle, a spacecraft lands on Earth that followed his escaping vessel, carrying his daughter, Leele Zeravire. Sandman never knew of her survival until then.
Klein Sandman makes an appearance in Juusou Kikou Dancouga Nova, which is also directed by Masami Obari. 

Faye Xin Lu

Appearing in Gravion Zwei, Faye Xin Lu is captain of the G-Soldiers squadron in the EFA military. Very serious and committed to her line of duty, she was an orphan at the same orphanage sponsored by Sandman, meeting Toga Tenkuji for the first time, protecting him from frequent bullies. In fact, Faye was initially selected to be trained as the pilot of the Gran Kaiser, for she had a similar, if not, higher G-Factor than Toga, but Sandman made a last-minute decision and selected him, instead.  This last-minute switch leaves Faye feeling embittered towards both Toga and Sandman, causing her to attempt to surpass Toga and even at one point take advantage of his fragile mental state.  However, upon being saved by Sol Gravion, she reconsiders and dismisses her grudge.  She pilots Grantrooper Unit 1, armed with the Graviton Rang weapon based on God Gravion's Graviton Crescent.  It can also draw energy from the other four units for its Graviton Lightning Detonator, based on the Graviton Arc. 

Mecha

God Gravion

The main mecha of the series used by the Earthgertz as the last line of Defense from the Zeravire invasion. God Gravion heavily resembles Flame Breaster Fighbird  from The Brave Fighter of Sun Fighbird, an earlier work from Kunio Okawara. The mech is composed of five units:

=Gran Kaiser=

Core unit of the Gravion and piloted by Toga Tenkuji, the Gran Kaiser is a humanoid robot. Built upon the power of gravity, the Gran Kaiser is capable of entering Elgo Form, where its power is magnified significantly, strengthening its attacks. However, placing the Gran Kaiser in this configuration places a high degree of physical stress on the pilot, thus, only a well-trained individual with a high G-Factor can effectively use the machine to its fullest.  The Gran Kaiser is essentially a duplicate of the original Gran Sigma created by Sandman as a genesis machine, completed and modified for a greater focus on combat. The two machines are thus capable of utilizing almost all of the same equipment, with any performance difference between the two being inappreciable.
The Gran Kaiser can also utilize separate weapons independent of itself, such as mecha-sized handguns, rocket launchers and a Gatling gun. When combined into the God Gravion with the four Gran Divas, the Gran Kaiser can unleash a wave of pure gravity energy from its forehead jewel called the Graviton Arc. The God Gravion also used an experimental sword called the Graviton Breaker for the first and only time in the first series, until Klein Sandman summons the Chōjū Ken, a powerful two-handed sword kept hidden on the moon for the God Gravion. Also known as the White Steel Fang, the machine is capable of performing the  technique. Much like God Gravion resembling Flame Breaster Fighbird, Gran Kaiser resembles Fighbird's regular form.

=G-Attacker=

Representing Gravion's right leg, the fighter jet-like G-Attacker is piloted by Eiji Shigure (his sister, Ayaka, was the original pilot until her disappearance) and the counterpart to the G-Striker. There is no externally visible difference between it and the G-Striker, but their internal payload differs. The G-Attacker is fitted with payloads of gravity-powered Graviton Missiles.

=G-Striker=

Representing Gravion's left leg, the fighter jet-like G-Striker is piloted by Mizuki Tachibana and the counterpart to the G-Attacker. This unit holds compartments for the Graviton Rifle and the whip-based Graviton Viper,  but can also fire rounds of the Graviton Vulcan and Graviton Laser.  The G-Striker and G-Attacker can combine side-by-side by folding up one wing, and are capable of underwater movement, but this combination and ability is seen only briefly.

=G-Driller=

The only two seater Gran Diva, the G-Driller mounts a pair of powerful drills and cannons and acts as the God Gravion's arms, with Luna Gusuku piloting the left and Ena piloting the right. With the G-Driller Gran Diva, Gravion can utilize the Graviton Buster, firing short bursts of gravity energy or launch one half of the G-Driller from its arms as the Graviton Pressure Punch or both of them as the Double Pressure Punch and the Graviton Tornado Punch, where the G-Driller configures to its drill mode, then fired like the Pressure Punch. The Pile Tornado Punch is used with both of the arms in drill mode, with the second one boosting the first.  On its own, the G-Driller can split into its two halves to function independently, or act as large roller skates for the Gran Kaiser.  The G-Driller's drills are also capable of converting into large propellers for underwater movement, and in this mode can deploy handles for the Gran Kaiser to hold onto.

=G-Shadow=

A special jet shaped like a stealth bomber, it unloads multiple warheads from a high altitude for invisible runs, akin to the actual B-2 Spirit. Leele is the G-Shadow's pilot, and when combined into the God Gravion, its wings can detach, forming a boomerang. Powered by gravity energy, the boomerang slices through Zeravire armor as the Graviton Crescent. The jewel crest on the G-Shadow can also detach as a sword hilt and handle for use as the Graviton Sword, where the blade energizes into metal from gravity energy.  The G-Shadow can also transform into a submarine-like configuration wherein the wings fold and a propeller is deployed from the underside, or dock with the G-Driller with one half attached to either side of the main body.  The latter combination is often utilized for oversea battles or if Leele is incapacitated, allowing Luna and Ena to use the G-Shadow's weapons without her.

=Gran Fortress=

If there is ever a need to deliver the Gran Kaiser and the Gran Divas away from Saint-Germain Castle, the Gran Fortress battleship is fitted to hold and support the units, taking the Earthgertz directly into an encounter with the Zeravire.  In addition to serving as a transport for each of the Gran Divas, the Gran Fortress can also serve as a riding platform for the combined God Gravion, allowing the unit to launch and transport to the combat zone without needing to perform the lengthy combination during combat or provide it with additional speed and flight capability during battle.  It is unseen if the Gran Fortress can serve this purpose for the other iterations of Gravion as well.

Sol Gravion/Sol Σ Gravion

Appearing in Gravion Zwei, this is the upgrade to Gravion, where the Gran Kaiser combines with the upgraded Gran Divas:

=Geo Javelin=

Replacing the G-Driller, it is the only two seater of the new Gran Divas, the Geo Javelin mounts one drill in the front and a cannon on top of it, and acts as the arms of Sol Gravion, and Sol Σ Gravion, with Luna piloting the left and Eina piloting the right. With the Geo Javelin Gran Diva, Sol Gravion can launch the left arm for the Sol Graviton Pressure Punch or both of them for the Sol Graviton Spiral Crusher Punch in which Sol Gravion connects both of its hands together and then launches them at the enemy as they spin around in a drill-like motion, and can use Graviton energy to extend the drill for the Sol Graviton Breaker

=Geo Stinger=

Replacing the G-Fighter, it is piloted by Mizuki, and represents the left leg of Sol Gravion and Sol Σ Gravion. It is not shown to have compartments for the Graviton Viper or the Graviton Rifle, but it has been shown to be able to use the Graviton Lasers.

=Geo Caliber=

Replacing the G-Attacker, it is piloted by Leele, and represents the right leg of Sol Gravion and Sol Σ Gravion. Like the G-Attacker before it, it can use Graviton Missiles.

=Geo Mirage=

Replacement for the G-Shadow, and piloted by Eiji. With the Geo Mirage's cannons, Sol Gravion can use the Sol Graviton Cannon or the stronger Sol Graviton Nova which is used like the Graviton Arc, but generates more power from the cannons. It can summon the Chōjū Ken in the same fashion as the Graviton Sword, as it seems the Chōjū Ken was originally being summoned from Sol Gravion's chestplate.
These new Gran Divas, originally stored on the moon, can also merge to form the battleship G-Gradius.  This configuration can be used as a riding platform by the Gran Kaiser in much the same method that the Gran Fortress was used by God Gravion.  Klein Sandman's personal unit, the Gran Sigma, is also capable of combining with the new Grand Divas to form the Sol Σ Gravion, and it is originally delivered in this configuration, piloted at first by Ena and then by Eiji.  Unlike God Gravion, Sol Gravion utilizes a connection with the user's mind to create increased energy based on their emotions.  The Sol Flames it produces as a result can fuel its enormous destructive potential or provide it with equal creative potential, enabling it to use Ena's love for her companions to restore the beaten God Gravion and Grantroopers to full strength.

God Σ Gravion

Using another set of Gran Divas specifically meant for the Gran Sigma, Klein Sandman combines them with his personal unit to form the God Σ Gravion. Appearing in Gravion Zwei, its design and weaponry are different from the original God Gravion, but shares many similarities, with the added Graviton Lancer that can execute the Graviton Break attack, stored in the remodeled G-Striker.  The Graviton Lancer was seen briefly in the finale of Gravion as one of the weapons under consideration for construction as a last-ditch addition to God Gravion. God Σ Gravion heavily resembles Thunder Baron from The Brave Fighter of Sun Fighbird, an earlier work from Kunio Okawara.

Ultimate Gravion

Upon fusing the Sol Gravion and Σ Gravion, the Ultimate Gravion is born. Appearing in Gravion Zwei, this machine boasts the greatest power out of all the Earthgertz's machines. Its main weapon is the . Its combination sequence and final attack are similar to those of Great Fighbird.

Gran Troopers

Also called G-Soldiers, these transformable, non-combining mass production units are modeled after the Gran Kaiser by the EFA military. Five units are assigned to the military's G-Soldiers. Each unit is designed to replicate a different one of the Gran Kaiser's weapon systems. Faye Xin Lu uses the first G-Trooper in Gravion Zwei, with the Graviton Arrow mounted on its forearms which can combine into a single bow weapon or be thrown as a boomerang, replicating the Graviton Crescent attack (though the attack is dubbed "Graviton Rang" by Faye).  The five G-Troopers can also share their energy with Faye's unit to allow it to use the chest-mounted Lightning Detonator finisher.  While initially successful against the Zeravire, the G-Troopers prove insufficient to combat the stronger and more numerous Zeravire that appear near the series' end.

Zeravire

The main antagonists of the series, all of them are part of the Genocydrone system made by Hugi Zeravire.  The Zeravire are designed to exterminate all life on a planet, adapting their technology as needed if they encounter resistance, in order to allow Goma to engulf the planet and completely remake it into a primordial state, allowing new life to flourish.  Destroyed Zeravire rapidly biodegrade so that they will provide nutrients for the newly recreated world.  All of the Zeravire have a special segment of their programming which prohibits them from knowingly causing any harm to Leele Zeravire, and forces them to freeze or self-destruct if they attempt to do so.

Types

Appears in episode 1.
Larger variation of the warrior class, appears in episode 2.
Appears in episode 3.
Appears in episode 4.
Appears in episode 5.
Designed for reconnaissance, appears in episode 6.
Appears in episode 7.
Appears in episode 8 in three different variations.
Kamikaze variation, appears in episode 10.  Its body charges up a large beta ray pulse which would irradiate everything within a mile's radius, and uses tentacles to defend and shield itself in the meantime.  One such tentacle captures Cecile, one of the castle's maids, creating a point of friction between Toga and Eiji over Toga's willingness to sacrifice her to defeat the Zeravire, but she is ultimately rescued and the Neutron Bomb Zeravire defeated by the Graviton Crescent.
Appears in episodes 11 and 12.
Appears in episode 13 and acts as the final boss of the first series.  It was specifically designed to counter all of God Gravion's weapons.  It has two forms, the first featuring an enormous lower body resembling a large brick, which it uses to crush the EFA's newest anti-Zeravire machine in one blow.  This form is defeated by the G-Breaker, causing it to reveal its lighter second form.  This form is primarily armed with a large chainsaw-like blade, which allows it to destroy the G-Breaker along with all of Gravion's other weapons before it is finally defeated by the Choju Ken.

Gravion Zwei

Is essentially a warrior class variation, appears in episode 1.
Capable of surviving in lava, appears in episode 3.  It draws energy from a volcano located near a hot springs resort the team was staying at, forcing God Gravion to drag it out of the volcano and destroy it with the Choju Zan.
A warrior class variation that can survive underwater, appears in episode 4.  Its body is armed with multiple tentacles with which it can attack.  It drains power from a geothermal plant on the ocean's floor to fully mature, then attempts to challenge Gravion.  With Toga having been temporarily blinded through oxygen deprivation, the Clione Zeravire initially gains the upper hand until Leele guides his Choju Zan attack against it.
Smaller variations of soldier class used to assist Clione Zeravire, appear in episode 4.
Appears in episode 5.  It absorbed the entire Grand Island amusement park and the island it was located on, attempting to target the Gravion pilots at first with human-scaled Zeravire soldiers and then a larger form made from a ferris wheel before revealing its true scale.  It was the largest Zeravire encountered on Earth, and easily defeated God Gravion until it recognized Leele, forcing it to self-destruct.
One of the early versions of the Zeravire, appear in episode 6.
Early versions of the warrior class, appear in episode 6.
Transformable version of Egg Zeravire, appears in episode 7.  It combines with the Gran Kaiser during its moment of vulnerability during combination, turning its body red and forcing it to use Graviton Arc repeatedly against the others.  It is damaged and forced to separate by a suicide attack from Ena, but recombines into a Gravion-like form and attacks before being destroyed by the Grantroopers.
Appear in episode 8.  It is destroyed by the Grantroopers, though its destruction releases a large amount of anti-graviton particles that are used to assist Gate Zeravire.
Appears in episode 9.  The lower half of its body forms a large open triangle which creates a spatial distortion, allowing it to create a gate through which enormous amounts of Zeravire can be summoned.  IT initially overwhelms the Grantroopers and God Gravion, but is destroyed by the combined efforts of God Gravion and Sol Sigma Gravion.
Appears in episode 9.  Its body splits open to form an iron maiden-like device which impales and crushes its victim within.  It manages to defeat God Gravion, but is destroyed in one attack by the arriving Sol Sigma Gravion.
Three hologram-like zeravire used as field commanders, appear in episodes 10 and 11.  Holograms of them are destroyed by Sol Gravion's Sol Graviton Nova, while the real things are deployed to defend Goma, only to be defeated by the Grantroopers and God Sigma Gravion.
A zeravire specifically designed to counter Sol Gravion, appears in episode 12.  Its body was created using the condensed energy from both Llambias and Selias.
The source of all Zeravire, appears throughout series although it's true form is revealed in episode 12.  Goma is a large-scale genesis machine much like Gran Sigma, but founded on the idea that creation cannot exist without destruction, it must destroy a planet in order to create a new one.  It normally takes a sphere-like form, but can open into an enormous robotic form.  It attempts to ram itself into Earth in robot form, only to be destroyed by Ultimate Gravion.

Episodes

Main Article see: List of Gravion episodes

Songs

First Season

Second Season

Releases & Merchandise

Gonzo has released three volumes, both on DVD and VHS. Studio Half Eye released a special Ultimate Gravion Toy for the Saishou Henkei line for promoting the series in Japan, while Yamato released GNU-DOU God Gravion and GN-U Gran Kaiser figures in December 2008.
The individual Japanese DVD releases for the first series also had special limited editions. Each volume came with a figure of the respective front cover's character for that DVD for a total of six figures (covering each of the main Gravion pilots in their pilot suits). In addition each figure also had some parts for the God Gravion which could be completed if all the six limited edition DVDs with their corresponding figures were bought by the consumer.
Both Gravion and Gravion Zwei are included as entries in Super Robot Wars Z from the series of video games called Super Robot Wars for the PlayStation 2. Gravion Zwei is also included in the latest two-part game, The 2nd Super Robot Wars Z for the PlayStation Portable, making an appearance in both Hakai-Hen (Break the World Chapter) and Saisei-Hen (Rebirth Chapter).




