[[Repo Man (film)]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 films, 1980s comedy films, 1980s crime films, 1980s science fiction films, American films, American comedy science fiction films, American criminal comedy films, English-language films, Spanish-language films, Films directed by Alex Cox, Films about drugs, Films set in Los Angeles, California, Films shot in 35mm, Films shot in Los Angeles, California, Independent films, Punk films, Universal Pictures films

Repo Man is a 1984 American science fiction crime comedy film directed by Alex Cox. It was produced by Jonathan Wacks and Peter McCarthy, with executive producer Michael Nesmith, and stars Harry Dean Stanton and Emilio Estevez.

Plot

The film opens outside of Goffs, California in the Mojave Desert. A 1964 Chevrolet Malibu driven by Dr. J. Frank Parnell is pulled over by a policeman. The cop opens the trunk, sees a blinding flash of white light, and is instantly vaporized, leaving only his boots behind.  
Otto Maddox, a young punk rocker living in Los Angeles, gets fired from his boring job as a supermarket stock clerk. His girlfriend leaves him for his best friend. Depressed and broke, Otto is wandering the streets when a man named Bud drives up and offers him $10 to drive a car out of the neighborhood. 
Otto follows Bud in the car to the "Helping Hand Acceptance Corporation" (a small automobile repossession agency), where he learns that the car he drove was being repossessed. He refuses to join Bud as a repossession agent, or "repo man", and goes to his parents' house.  He learns that his burned-out, pot-smoking, ex-hippie parents have donated the money they promised him for finishing school to a crooked televangelist.  He decides to take the job since it pays cash. 
Otto soon learns that, as Bud had told him, "the life of a repo man is always intense." He enjoys the fast living, drug use, car chases, the thrill of hot-wiring cars, and good pay. His old life seems boring by comparison.
After repossessing a flashy red sedan, Otto sees a girl named Leila running down the street. He gives her a ride to the United Fruitcake Outfit, where they have sex in the backseat. On the way, Leila shows Otto pictures of aliens that she says are in the trunk of a Chevy Malibu. She claims that they are dead but still dangerous because of the radiation that they emit. Meanwhile, Helping Hand and its repo rivals receive a $20,000 bounty notice for the Malibu. Most assume that the car is drug-related, because the bounty is so far above the actual worth of the car. 
Parnell finally arrives in LA, but he is unable to meet up with his waiting UFO compatriots because of a team of government agents lead by a woman with a metal hand. When he pulls into a gas station, the Rodriguez brothers nab the car. They stop for sodas because the car's trunk is so hot. While they are out of the car, a trio of Otto's punk friends who are on a crime spree steal the Malibu. 
After they visit a night club, Parnell tricks the punks into opening the trunk, killing one of them, and allowing him to take the car back. Later, he picks up Otto and drives aimlessly before collapsing from all the radiation he has been exposed to in the car. Otto takes the car back to Helping Hand and leaves it in the lot. The car is stolen from the lot, and a chase ensues with all the characters involved. By this time, the car is glowing bright green because it is so irradiated. Eventually, the car makes its way back to the Helping Hand lot, where anyone who approaches it bursts into flames. The lunatic Miller, who works at Helping Hand, is able to get in the car and slide behind the wheel. He beckons Otto into the Malibu, which lifts straight up into the air. The film closes with the car zooming around downtown LA and then off into the stars.

Cast

Reception

Repo Man received near-universal acclaim and is considered by many as one of the best films of 1984.
Roger Ebert wrote:

Awards

Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy & Horror Films
Boston Society of Film Critics Awards
Mystfest
American Film Institute Lists

Soundtrack

The soundtrack features songs by various punk rock bands such as The Plugz, Black Flag, the Circle Jerks, Suicidal Tendencies, Iggy Pop and others. The film score was created by Tito Larriva and Steven Hufsteter of The Plugz.

Sequels

Waldo's Hawaiian Holiday

According to the documentary A Texas Tale of Treason, Cox wrote a sequel to Repo Man which, though filming started, was never finished.
Chris Bones saw the script on Cox's website and asked, and received, permission to adapt the script into a graphic novel. The book, Waldo's Hawaiian Holiday,

Repo Chick

On December 3, 2008, a sequel was reported to be going into development with the working title Repo Chick. The story would be set against the backdrop of the 2008 recession and the resulting boom in repossession that extends far beyond cars and homes. The bulk of the film was shot in front of a green screen, with backgrounds filmed and composited in during post-production. The film premiered on September 8 at the Venice Film Festival. It was released to DVD in the United Kingdom on February 7, 2011, and the following day in North America.






