[[IAI Heron]]

CATEGORIES: Israeli military reconnaissance aircraft 1990–1999, IAI unmanned aerial vehicles, Twin-boom aircraft, Medium-altitude long-endurance unmanned aerial vehicles, Pusher aircraft, Unmanned military aircraft of Israel

The IAI Heron (Machatz-1) is a medium-altitude long-endurance unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) developed by the Malat
(UAV) division of Israel Aerospace Industries. It is capable of Medium Altitude Long Endurance (MALE) operations of up to 52 hours' duration at up to 10.5km (35,000 ft). It has demonstrated 52 hours of continuous flight, but the effective operational maximal flight duration is less, due to payload and flight profile. There is a new version, Heron TP, also known as IAI Eitan.
On 11 September 2005, it was announced that the Israel Defense Forces purchased US$50 million worth of Heron systems.

Design and development

Heron navigates using an internal GPS receiver, and either a pre-programmed flight profile (in which case the system is fully autonomous from takeoff to landing), manual override from a ground control station, or a combination of both. It can autonomously return to base and land in case of lost communication with the ground station. The system has fully automatic launch and recovery (ALR) and all-weather capabilities.
Heron can carry an array of sensors, including infra-red and visible-light surveillance, intelligence systems (COMINT and ELINT) and various radar systems, totaling up to . Heron is also capable of target acquisition and artillery adjustment.
The payload sensors communicate with the ground control station in real-time, using either direct line of sight data link, or via an airborne/satellite relay. Like the navigation system, the payload can also be used in either a fully pre-programmed autonomous mode, or manual real-time remote operation, or a combination of both.

Super Heron

At the Singapore Air Show in February 2014, IAI unveiled the Super Heron refinement of the Heron UAS.  The Super Heron has a heavy fuel 200 horsepower engine that increases its rate of climb and performance.  Its range is .com, 11 February 2014

Operational history

The Heron saw significant use during Operation Cast Lead in Gaza of 2008–2009. During the deployment, each brigade combat team was assigned a UAV squadron for close support. This was the first Israeli operation in which UAVs, helicopters, and fighter jets were allocated to ground forces directly without IAF central command authorizing sorties. Air-support controller teams operated alongside brigade commanders at the front emphasizing the brigade commander's utilization of direct air assets.
Other countries operating the Heron include Singapore, India and Turkey. In early July 2013, the Heron reached 15,000 flight hours over Afghanistan.com, 22 July 2013

Heron variants

Operators

Specifications








