[[Krrish]]

CATEGORIES: Sequel films, Superhero films, Film superheroes, 2006 films, Hindi-language films, Indian films, Indian science fiction films, Films set in Himachal Pradesh, Films shot in Singapore, 2000s science fiction films

Krrish () is a 2006 Indian science fiction superhero film directed, produced, and written by Rakesh Roshan, and starring Hrithik Roshan, Priyanka Chopra, Rekha and Naseeruddin Shah. It is the second film in the Krrish series, being the sequel to Koi... Mil Gaya, and relates the story of Krishna, the son of the previous film's protagonists, who inherits his father's superhuman abilities. After falling in love with Priya, he follows her to Singapore, where he takes on the persona of "Krrish" to keep his identity secret while saving children from a burning circus. From that moment on he is regarded as a superhero, and must later thwart the plans of the evil Dr. Siddhant.
Krrish was conceived to be a film of global significance and a trendsetter in Indian cinema, with visual effects on par with those from Hollywood. To that end, the effects team was aided by Hollywood's Marc Kolbe and Craig Mumma, and the stunts were choreographed by Chinese martial arts film expert Tony Ching. The music was composed by Rajesh Roshan, with the background score by Salim-Sulaiman. Filming was done to a large extent in Singapore as well as India. The film was released worldwide in June 2006 at a cost of over  and on 1000 prints, both near-record amounts for an Indian film at the time.
Krrish received mixed reviews from critics in India, but was widely appreciated by audiences, who gave it a record opening week at the box office. The film became the second highest earning Indian film of 2006 and grossed a worldwide total of . It was given a "blockbuster" rating by Box Office India. The film won both the National and Filmfare awards for special effects, while actor Hrithik Roshan received praise and numerous best actor awards for his role. The third film in the series, Krrish 3 has released in 2013. The film is also being dubbed into Tamil and Telugu.

Plot

Five-year-old Krishna Mehra undergoes an intelligence quotient test by a professor, who suspects that his family has superpowers. His grandmother Sonia (Rekha) takes the young Krishna to a remote mountain village to conceal his unique abilities. Years later, Krishna (Hrithik Roshan) meets Priya (Priyanka Chopra) and her friend Honey (Manini Mishra) when Krishna's friend Bahadur (Hemant Pandey) takes the girls camping near his home. Krishna saves Priya from a hang glider accident and falls in love with her when spending time with her.
After returning home to Singapore, Priya and Honey are fired by their boss (Archana Puran Singh) for taking a non-permitted extension of 5-days in their vacation. In order to keep their jobs, Honey suggests her boss making a television program about Krishna. Aware of Krishna's love towards her, Priya calls him to join her in Singapore. Krishna's grandmother objects to him leaving, saying that people will want to take advantage of his abilities. She then explains that his father Rohit was hired by Dr. Siddhant Arya (Naseeruddin Shah) to design a computer that could see the future in order to prevent wars and help prepare against natural disasters. However, Rohit later found out that the purpose of the computer was not for good and he destroyed the machine. Rohit reportedly died in a laboratory accident that night, with Krishna's mother dying of a broken heart shortly thereafter. Krishna promises his grandmother that he will never reveal his powers, so she permits him to go. In Singapore, during the program's production, Krishna keeps his word and reveals nothing exceptional about himself. Priya and Honey are once again fired.
Krishna later meets with Kristian Li (Bin Xia), who attempts to raise funds to pay for his young sister's leg surgery. He invites Krishna and Priya to the Great Bombay Circus, where during the performance a fire beaks out in the tent. Several children remain trapped in the blaze, and Krishna is faced with the dilemma of saving the children without revealing his abilities. He dons a broken black mask and puts his jacket on inside-out, creating the persona of Krrish. Later, when Kristian Li sees Krrish fighting some goons and removing his mask, he discovers his friend Krishna as Krrish. As Krrish is being offered a reward for his deeds, Krishna asks Kristian to assume the identity, so that he can pay for his sister's surgery.
Meanwhile, Priya also comes to know that Krishna is Krrish when she sees the footage from her video camera. She and Honey decide to release the footage on TV to make Krishna a star. Krishna arrives and overhears them talking about how Priya had lied to him, and how they will reveal his identity. Just before Priya confesses to Honey that she has genuinely fallen in love with Krishna, he leaves, dejected.
After being confronted by Krishna at his hotel about what she said, Priya realises her mistake and stops her boss from revealing Krrish's identity. She then meets Vikram Sinha (Sharat Saxena), who has been searching for Krishna for years. He informs them that Krishna's father Rohit is still alive, and that after completing the machine, he and Rohit tested it and saw Siddhant holding a gun to Rohit's head. Rohit understood that Siddhant was going to kill him and then use the machine for his own selfish needs. He was able to destroy the machine, before being taken prisoner by Siddhant.
Meanwhile, in the present timeline, Siddhant has rebuilt the computer after many years. He uses it to reveal his future and sees Krrish killing him. Siddhant then kills Kristian, thinking that he is Krrish. Krishna later follows Siddhant to his island lair. When Siddhant looks into the future again, he sees the same thing, and is shocked to see Krrish still alive and on his island.
When Krrish enters the compound, there is a vicious fight with Siddhant's thugs. Krrish eventually defeats them and saves Priya and Rohit. In the final scene, Krrish wounds Siddhant. Before he dies, Siddhant asks Krrish who he is, and Krishna reveals himself. After revealing to Rohit that he is his son, Krishna takes Priya and his father back to India, reuniting him with Sonia. Rohit then uses the computer to call Jadoo, whose spaceship can be seen from a distance.

Cast

Additional minor parts were portrayed by: Akash Khurana as young Krishna's Catholic school principal, Kiran Juneja as Priya's mother, Yu Xuan as Kristian Li's little sister, and Preity Zinta as Rohit's wife Nisha in a flashback cameo.

Production

Development

In November 2004, the Roshans confirmed he would produce a sequel to Koi... Mil Gaya (2003).
Rakesh Roshan wanted Krrish to be a trendsetter in Indian cinema, with visual effects on par with Hollywood films. He hired Hollywood special effects experts Marc Kolbe and Craig Mumma, who had both previously worked on such films as Independence Day, Godzilla and Sky Captain, to help create the visual effects for the film.
Additional production credits include: Farah Khan – dance choreographer, Samir Chanda and Sham Kaushal – art directors, Baylon Fonesca and Nakul Kamte – sound, Nahush Pise – makeup artist, Sham Kaushal – assistant action director.

Filming

Krrish was the first Indian film to be shot in Singapore under the Singapore Tourism Board's Film-in-Singapore subsidy scheme, and more than 60% of the film was shot there. The Singapore police were on location to block roads and protect the filming equipment, such as when the film's action scenes required two 250-foot high industrial cranes. Author Audrey Yue noted that the film shoot benefited Singapore by leading to domestic and Indian film-induced tourism.
Filming also took place in Manali and Film City in Mumbai.
Indian firm Prasad EFX assigned a team of more than 100 VFX specialists to work with Marc Kolbe and Craig Mumma to create the visual effects for the film.

Music

The film's soundtrack, composed by Rajesh Roshan, was released on 28 April 2006 by T-Series. Lyricists included Ibraheem Ashk, Nasir Faraaz, and Vijay Akela. Salim-Sulaiman provided the background score. It became the seventh best selling Bollywood soundtrack of the year.

Critical reviews of the soundtrack were generally favourable, though some in the media called it a disappointment. Joginder Tuteja of Bollywood Hungama gave the album a rating of 3.5 out of 5 stars, saying that it was "another good outing for Bollywood music lovers." He especially praised the songs "Chori Chori", "Koi Tumsa Nahi", and "Pyaar Ki Ek Kahani."

Release

The final budget of Krrish came to 

Critical reception

=India=

Krrish received mixed reviews from critics in India.

=Overseas=

Overseas reviews were consistently positive. The Rotten Tomatoes aggregate rating is 100%, based on 7 reviews, with an average rating of 7 out of 10.

Box Office

Krrish had a good opening week, One week after Krrish was released, another superhero film, Superman Returns was released in India. Rakesh Roshan stated, "I was a little skeptical that Superman might hurt me, but fortunately it didn't." In fact, Krrish fared better at the box office in India than Superman Returns did.

Accolades

Krrish was one of India's possible nominations for the 2007 Academy Award for Best Foreign Film, but the country ultimately chose Rang De Basanti as its pick.
Hrithik Roshan won other acting awards that year, including the Star Screen Award Best Actor, The film also took Best Picture honours at the Matri Shree Media Awards.23 scribes felicitated with Matri Shree awards - Hindustan Times
In a showing of the film's popularity with children, Krrish swept the major film categories at the Pogo Amazing Kid's Awards, which are voted on by children across India. Winners were: Hrithik Roshan (Most Amazing Actor — Male), Priyanka Chopra (Most Amazing Actor — Female), Krrish (Most Amazing Film), Special Effects in Krrish (Most Amazing Moment in a film).





Further reading

 
 




