[[Roman numerals]]

CATEGORIES: Numerals, Numeral systems, Roman mathematics, Latin alphabet

Roman numerals, the numeric system used in ancient Rome, employs combinations of letters from the Latin alphabet to signify values.  The numbers 1 to 10 can be expressed in Roman numerals as follows:
The Roman numeral system is a cousin of Etruscan numerals.  Use of Roman numerals continued after the decline of the Roman Empire.  From the 14th century on, Roman numerals began to be replaced in most contexts by more convenient Hindu-Arabic numerals; however this process was gradual, and the use of Roman numerals in some minor applications continues to this day.

Reading Roman numerals

Roman Numerals, as used today, are based on seven symbols:Alphabetic symbols for larger numbers, such as 
Numbers are formed by combining symbols and adding the values. So , one thousand, fifty and ten, a five and a one.
Symbols are placed from left to right in order of value, starting with the largest. However, in a few specific cases, 
An example using the above rules would be 1904: this is composed of 1 (one thousand), 9 (nine hundreds), 0 (zero tens), and 4 (four units).  To write the Roman numeral, each of the non-zero digits should be treated separately.  Thus 1,000 = .
Below are some examples of the modern use of Roman Numerals.

Alternative forms

The "standard" forms described above reflect typical modern usage rather than a universally accepted convention. Usage in ancient Rome varied greatly and remained inconsistent in medieval and modern times.
Roman inscriptions, especially in official contexts, seem to show a preference for additive forms such as 
Such variation and inconsistency continued through the medieval period and into modern times, even becoming conventional. Clock faces that use Roman numerals normally show .
At the beginning of the twentieth century, confusion over the correct representation of 900 (conventionally 

History

Pre-Roman times and Ancient Rome

Although Roman numerals came to be written with letters of the Roman alphabet, they were originally independent symbols. The Etruscans, for example, used  happened to be letters in their alphabet.

=Hypotheses about the origin of Roman numerals=

==Tally sticks==

One hypothesis is that the Etrusco-Roman numerals actually derive from notches on tally sticks, which continued to be used by Italian and Dalmatian shepherds into the 19th century.
Thus, .
The tenth . This at least was the etymology given to it later on.
Meanwhile, 1000 was a circled or boxed X:  "thousand".

==Hand signals==

Alfred Hooper has an alternative hypothesis for the origin of the Roman numeral system, for small numbers. The River Mathematics (New York, H. Holt, 1945). Hooper contends that the digits are related to hand signals. For example, the numbers  results from either crossing of the thumbs, or holding both hands up in a cross.

==Intermediate symbols deriving from few original symbols==

A third hypothesis about the origins states that the basic ciphers were 

Middle Ages and Renaissance

Minuscule (lower case) letters were developed in the Middle Ages, well after the demise of the Western Roman Empire, and since that time lower-case versions of Roman numbers have also been commonly used: . The use of a final j is still used in medical prescriptions to prevent tampering with or misinterpretation of a number after it is written. Course in Pharmaceutical and Chemical Arithmetic, 3rd ed. (LaFayette, IN: Burt-Terry-Wilson, 1906). p25 Retrieved on 2010-03-15. Materia Medica: Pharmacology, Therapeutics and Prescription Writing for Students and Practitioners, 2nd ed. (Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders, 1919) p582 Retrieved on 2010-03-15.
[/ref]
Numerals in documents and inscriptions from the Middle Ages sometimes include additional symbols, which today are called "medieval Roman numerals." Some simply substitute another letter for the standard one (such as "A" for "V", or "Q" for "D") while others serve as abbreviations for compound numerals ("O" for XI", or "F" for "XL"). Although they are still listed today in some dictionaries, they are long out of use, and are mentioned here only in passing. Dictionary of Latin Abbreviations. 1912.
Chronograms, messages with a numbers encoded into them, were popular during the Renaissance era.  The chronogram would be a phrase containing the letters .  By putting these letters together, the reader would obtain a number, usually indicating a particular year.

Modern use

By the 11th century Hindu–Arabic numerals had been introduced into Europe from al-Andalus, by way of Arab traders and arithmetic treatises. Roman numerals however proved very persistent, remaining in common use in the West well into the 14th and 15th centuries, even in accounting and other business records (where the actual calculations would have been by abacus). Their eventual almost complete replacement by their more convenient "Arabic" equivalents happened quite gradually; in fact Roman numerals are still used today in several niche contexts. A few examples of their current use are:
In astronomy, the natural satellites or "moons" of the planets are traditionally designated by capital Roman numerals appended to the planet's name.
In chemistry, Roman numerals are often used to denote the groups of the periodic table. 
They are also used in the IUPAC nomenclature of inorganic chemistry, for the oxidation number of cations which can take on several different positive charges. 
They are also used for naming phases of polymorphic crystals, such as ice.
In earthquake seismology, Roman numerals are used to designate degrees of the Mercalli intensity scale.
In music theory, the diatonic functions are identified using Roman numerals. See: Roman numeral analysis.
In musical performance practice, individual strings of stringed instruments, such as the violin, are often denoted by Roman numerals, with higher numbers denoting lower strings.
In pharmacy, Roman numerals are used in some contexts, including  (See the sections below on "zero" and "fractions".)
In photography, Roman numerals (with zero) are used to denote varying levels of brightness when using the Zone System.
In Tarot, Roman numerals (with zero) are also used to denote the cards of the Major Arcana.
In theology and biblical scholarship, the Septuagint is often referred to as  (this translation of the Old Testament into Greek is named for the legendary number of its translators, septuaginta being Latin for seventy).
In computing, Roman numerals may be used in identifiers which are limited to alphabetic characters by syntactic constraints of the programming language. In LaTeX, for instance, \labelitemiii refers to the label of an item in the third level  of a nested list environment.

=Modern non-English-speaking use=

Capital Roman numerals are still occasionally used to denote centuries (e.g.,  refers to the eighteenth century) in English. This style is much more widely followed in continental Europe.
In many European countries mixed Roman and Hindu-Arabic numerals are used to record dates (especially in formal letters and official documents, but also on tombstones). The month is written in Roman numerals while the day is in Hindu-Arabic numerals: 14..1789 is 14 June 1789.
In parts of Europe it is conventional to employ Roman numerals to represent the days of the week in hours-of-operation signs displayed in windows or on doors of businesses,Beginners latin, Nationalarchives.uk, Retrieved December 1, 2013 and also sometimes in railway and bus timetables. Monday is represented by , which is the final day of the week. The hours of operation signs are tables composed of two columns where the left column is the day of the week in Roman numerals and the right column is a range of hours of operation from starting time to closing time. The following example hours-of-operation table would be for a business whose hours of operation are 9:30 AM to 5:30 PM on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays; to 7 PM on Tuesdays and Fridays; and to 1 PM on Saturdays; and which is closed on Sundays.
In several European countries Roman numerals are used for floor numbering.
In Italy, where roads outside built-up areas have kilometer signs, major roads and motorways also mark 100-metre subdivisionals, using Roman numerals from  | 17" thus marks kilometre 17.9.

Special values

Zero

The number zero does not have its own Roman numeral, but the word nulla (the Latin word meaning "none") was used by medieval computists in lieu of 0.  Dionysius Exiguus was known to use nulla alongside Roman numerals in 525. Bede: The Reckoning of Time (725), Liverpool: Liverpool Univ. Pr., 2004. ISBN 0-85323-693-3. Edited by Peter S. Baker and Michael Lapidge. Early English Text Society 1995. ISBN 978-0-19-722416-8.  About 725, Bede or one of his colleagues used the letter N, the initial of nulla, in a table of epacts, all written in Roman numerals.C. W. Jones, ed., Opera Didascalica, vol. 123C in Corpus Christianorum, Series Latina.

Fractions

Though the Romans used a decimal system for whole numbers, reflecting how they counted in Latin, they used a duodecimal system for fractions, because the divisibility of twelve  for whole numbers from six to nine.; Makowski, John F., "Literary Evidence for Roman Arithmetic with Fractions", Classical Philology 96 (2011): 376–399.
Each fraction from 1/12 to 12/12 had a name in Roman times; these corresponded to the names of the related coins:
The arrangement of the dots was variable and not necessarily linear. Five dots arranged like (:·:) (as on the face of a die) are known as a quincunx from the name of the Roman fraction/coin. The Latin words sextans and quadrans are the source of the English words sextant and quadrant.
Other Roman fractional notations included the following:

Large numbers

Modern use of Roman Numerals involves relatively small numbers (theoretically, up to 3,999); in historical times a systematic method was obviously needed for representing much larger numbers. There were at least two such systems. In one, a horizontal overline line was used above a particular numeral (or part of it) to multiply the number concerned by one thousand times;
thus:
Adding further vertical lines before and after the numeral might also be used to raise the multiplier to (say) one hundred thousand, or a million.
thus:
This needs to be distinguished from the custom of adding both underline and overline to a Roman Numeral, simply to make it clear that it IS a number, e. g. .
In the second system, 500 (usually written as "D") was written as |Ɔ, while 1,000, was written as C|Ɔ instead of "M". This is a system of encasing numbers to denote thousands (imagine the , respectively, and subsequently influenced the adoptions of "D" and "M" in convertional Roman numerals.
In this system, an extra s are used to denote 5,000, 50,000, etc. For example:
Sometimes .





Sources




