[[University of New Hampshire at Manchester]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 1985, Manchester, New Hampshire, University of New Hampshire, Public universities and colleges in New Hampshire, Universities and colleges in Hillsborough County, New Hampshire, Visitor attractions in Manchester, New Hampshire

The University of New Hampshire at Manchester (or UNHM) was established in 1985 as the sixth college of the University of New Hampshire. Located in Manchester, UNH Manchester provides associate's, bachelor's, and master's, with special emphasis on programs that address urban issues. UNH Manchester has a collaborative agreement with the neighboring New Hampshire Institute of Art that allows students interested in pursuing a degree in Fine Art to transfer into the Institute's BFA program.  The college also has an articulation agreement with the Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences campus in Manchester which allows students to dual enroll in the pre-pharmacy or physician assistant programs. UNH Manchester also has established an international partnership with the Institute at Palazzo Rucellai in Florence, Italy, which allows students from its Politics and Society program to study abroad.
Each semester approximately 1,500 students commute to the city campus to take classes in the University Center building, where the college moved during the 1999 through 2001 academic years from its old campus on Hackett Hill near Hooksett, New Hampshire; for more than a decade, the college had maintained both campuses, with the bulk of the campus and most support functions on Hackett Hill and limited class offerings in the former textile mill building. Due to its central location in Manchester, the largest city in the state, UNH Manchester is within a thirty minutes' drive of half the state's population. For this reason, and the lack of on-campus housing, the school considers itself to be the University's "commuter college."
University Center is located at 400 Commercial Street on the banks of the Merrimack River in Manchester's historic millyard.  The  building, built in 1880, formerly housed the machine shop of the Amoskeag Manufacturing Company.
UNH Manchester is a college of the University of New Hampshire. The University of New Hampshire is accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges, Inc. Students graduating from UNH Manchester join the more than 130,000 alumni who have graduated from the University of New Hampshire.

Academics

The University of New Hampshire at Manchester offers thirteen minors.Academics
Undergraduate degrees include:
UNH Manchester provides its students with a more affordable UNH education on a commuter campus.  Flexible course scheduling gives the student the opportunity to choose from day, evening, and weekend classes.
In addition to independent research and internship opportunities, the college provides valuable student resources, such as workshops and tutoring, through the Center for Academic Enrichment (CAE).

Study away

Students can take advantage of opportunities to study outside of the United States through University-managed programs such as the Florence Summer Program, University exchange programs, or University-approved programs. The National Student Exchange also allows a student to take a semester at a public college or university anywhere in the United States or its territories.

Student life

Activities

UNH Manchester offers a variety of student events and activities where students make friends, get involved, develop leadership skills and enjoy a complete university experience.
Students participate in a number of student-led recreational or special-interest clubs. Academic program clubs sponsor activities related to the major field of study such as electrical engineering, political science or Sign Language interpretation. The Office of Student Activities encourages UNH Manchester students to get involved in co-curricular activities, to reach out to student organizations to help them grow organizationally, and to provide on-going training and support to all student organizations recognized by the university.Student Activities; a complete listing of groups and organizations

Publications

MillworksMillWorks and ''Campus ConnectionsCampus Connections tell the UNH Manchester story and connect the students and community to the campus. Readers can learn about student achievements, faculty research and the outcomes of community partnerships, and more. The publications are coordinated by the Marketing and Community Relations Office.

Public programs

UNH Manchester connects student, faculty and staff research and knowledge with the community through public programs and events. Brown bag luncheon lectures, the Sidore lecture series, Music in the Mills supported by the Frederick Smyth Foundation, films, and book clubs provide people who live and work in the region with an opportunity to learn and discover.






