[[Volkshalle]]

CATEGORIES: Nazi architecture, 20th century in Berlin, Nazi Germany, Buildings and structures in Berlin, Unbuilt buildings and structures in Germany

The  ("Hall of Glory"), was a huge domed monumental building planned by Adolf Hitler and his architect Albert Speer for Germania. The project was never accomplished.
The word Volk had a particular resonance in Nazi thinking. The term völkisch movement, which can be translated to English as "the people's movement" or "the folkish movement", derives from ), racially unpolluted and with its roots in the German soil of the Heimat (homeland).

Hitler and Hadrian's Pantheon

Just as Augustus's house on the Palatine was connected to the temple of Apollo, so Hitler's palace was to have been connected by a cryptoporticus to the Volkshalle, which filled the entire north side of the forum.  This truly enormous building was, according to Albert Speer,Speer, Erinnerungen, 167. inspired by Hadrian's Pantheon, which Hitler visited privately on May 7, 1938.  But Hitler's interest in and admiration for the Pantheon predated this visit, since his sketch of the Volkshalle dates from about 1925. Hermann Giesler records a conversation he had with Hitler in the winter of 1939/40, when Hitler was recalling his "Roman Impressions" ():
Hitler's impressions of the Roman Pantheon were revived when on June 24, 1940 he made a tour of selected buildings in Paris, with the German architects Albert Speer, Hermann Giesler and Arno Breker, including the Paris Panthéon, which seems to have disappointed him.  His disappointment is independently recorded by GieslerGiesler 391. and Breker.
The sketch of the Volkshalle given by Hitler to Speer shows a traditional gabled pronaos supported by ten columns, a shallow rectangular intermediate block and behind it the domed main building.  Giesler notes that the pronaos of the temple in Hitler's sketch is reminiscent of Hadrian's Pantheon and of the style of Friedrich Gilly or Karl Friedrich Schinkel.  However, there was little about Speer's elaboration of the sketch that might be termed Doric, except perhaps for the triglyphs in the entablature,Larsson 79. supported by the geminated red granite columns with their Egyptian palm-leaf capitals, previously employed by Speer in the portico outside Hitler's study on the garden side of the new Chancellery.
Speer's Monster-Building ( greater in diameter than Speer's Volkshalle.
The resemblance of the Volkshalle to the Pantheon is far more obvious when their interiors are compared.  The large niche (50 metres high by 28 metres wide) at the north end of the Volkshalle was to be surfaced with gold mosaic and to enclose an eagle  high, which rose to meet the base of the coffered ceiling suspended from steel girders sheathed on the exterior with copper.
The three concentric tiers of seats enclosing a circular arena  in diameter owe nothing to the Pantheon but resemble the seating arrangements in Ludwig Ruff's Congress Hall at Nuremberg, which was modeled on the Colosseum.  Other features of the Volkshalle's interior are clearly indebted to Hadrian's Pantheon: the coffered dome, the pillared zone, which here is continuous, except where it flanks the huge niche on the north side.  The second zone in the Pantheon, consisting of blind windows with intervening pilasters, is represented in Speer's building by a zone above the pillars consisting of uniform, oblong shallow recesses.  The coffered dome rests on this zone.  The design and size of the external decoration of this Volkshalle, are all exceptional and call for explanations that do not apply to community halls planned for Nazi fora in other German cities.
The temple-like nature of the domed building was noted by Speer, who surmised that the building was ultimately intended for public worship of Hitler, his successors and the German Reich, that is, it was to be a dynastic temple/palace complex of the kind Augustus built on the Palatine, where his modest house was connected to the temple of Apollo.
Hitler's aspirations to Hegemony over Europe and the establishment of the New Order, already evident from architectural and decorative features of the new Chancellery, are even more clearly expressed here.  External symbols suggest that the domed hall was where Hitler as cosmocrat ().  Speer in his Playboy magazine interview states:
Nevertheless, Giesler remarked that Hitler never made plans for world domination and that to suggest as much is not only nonsense ().

In fiction

Robert Harris' 1992 novel Fatherland takes place in an alternate history in which Nazi Germany won WWII and in which the Volkshalle was actually built. Several of the book's scenes take place in and around it. Harris carefully used Speer's plans, with the building being depicted as being 300 m (1,000 ft) high. 
As depicted in the book, the building would indeed have had its own "weather," with the breathing and perspiration of 150,000 occupants precipitating in the high dome; but rather than consider this a problem, Nazi propaganda would boast of it. In a real-world corollary to the fiction concerning the Volkshalle, the indoors condensate characteristic imagined for the Volkshalle has actually been observed happening within the Kennedy Space Center's immense Vehicle Assembly Building, if its own massive dehumidification systems have not been turned on.
The Volksholle also appears in the alternate history novel In the Presence of Mine Enemies by Harry Turtledove.
Volkshalle also appears in Wolfenstein: The New Order's alternate 1960s.



Similar architecture commissioned by Joseph Stalin for Moscow:



Further reading


