[[Queen Margaret University]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 2007, 19th century in Scotland, Queen Margaret University, Universities in Scotland, Education in East Lothian, 2007 establishments in Scotland, Drama schools in Scotland

Queen Margaret University (formerly Queen Margaret University College and Queen Margaret College) is a modern university located in Musselburgh, East Lothian near Edinburgh in Scotland. It is named after Saint Margaret, wife of King Malcolm III of Scotland.

History

Queen Margaret University was founded in 1875, as The Edinburgh School of Cookery and Domestic Economy, by Christian Guthrie Wright and Louisa Stevenson, both members of the Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association.  The School was founded as a women-only institution, with twin aims of improving women's access to higher education and improving the diets of working class families.  Teaching was initially delivered via lectures at the Royal Museum, supplemented by a programme of public lectures and demonstrations delivered nationwide, but in 1877 the School established a base at Shandwick Place, in Haymarket.
The school moved in 1891 to Atholl Crescent, expanding its courses and offering residential places to students.  In 1909, the School was designated a Central Institution and brought under the public control of the Scottish Education Department.  The first Principal appointed was Ethel De la Cour.
In 1961, the College acquired its Corstorphine campus, purchasing a portion of the Clermiston estate from developers.  The campus was first occupied by the College in 1970, opened by Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester who was Patron of the institution until her death in 2004.  In 1972, the name Queen Margaret College was adopted to dissociate the College from the narrow field of domestic science.  Thereafter, the College broadened its range of courses, especially in the paramedical and healthcare fields.  The following institutions have since been absorbed by Queen Margaret College:
In 1992, the Privy Council granted Queen Margaret College powers to award its own taught degrees, and in 1998, the College was granted full degree powers, which enabled it to award its own research and higher degrees. As a result, in 1999 the College took the name Queen Margaret University College. After further improvements to the college, the institution was awarded full university status, becoming Queen Margaret University in January 2007.QM relocates

Campuses

Former campuses

Before moving to a new campus in Musselburgh, Queen Margaret University had been based in campuses in Corstorphine (to the West of Edinburgh), in Leith, and at the Gateway Theatre – Scotland's International Drama Centre – (a former television studio previously owned by Scottish Television) on Elm Row, Leith Walk.

Musselburgh campus

In 2007-2008, the university brought together students from its three campuses in Edinburgh by moving to a new purpose-built campus in Musselburgh, just east of Edinburgh. Costing £100 million, the new campus covers  and holds educational buildings, a students union, a small gym and halls of residence of more than 800 rooms.
QMU has been "touted as the country's greenest University campus". site from low-grade farmland into landscaped parkland.
The relocation provoked a negative reaction from some students and student union protesters after building firm Carillion failed to complete the campus on time. Drama students were stranded at the already sold Gateway Theatre for several months, and student union and sports facilities were uncompleted as of December 2007: both the Drama School and Student Union facilities opened in March 2008. The new campus has provoked mixed reactions from students and members of the public, with some considering the campus to be a benchmark in design.

=Learning Resource Centre=

The Learning Resource Centre (LRC) comprises approximately 4500 m2 of the main academic building. Located at the heart of the campus, it provides library, IT and AV services to students, staff and visitors of the university. The LRC consists of a facility for both directed and self-directed study, based on an integrated library and information service provision. The LRC has 1,000 study spaces organised as a mixture of silent and group study areas, bookable group study rooms, training rooms, assistive technology, student learning support and a postgraduate study room.

=Education Resource Centre=

The Education Resource Centre provides audio-visual services to the university. This includes the provision of AV equipment in classrooms and lecture theatres as well as more specialised services such as graphics, photography, video-conferencing and TV studio facilities.

Asia Campus

The Queen Margaret University, Asia Campus opened in April 2008 and provides business degrees to about 1,600 students. The campus is located in a former school building in the Balestier District of Singapore and is a joint venture with a private education provider.

Sustainability commitment

In 2012, QMU won a silver award in the UK Green Apple Awards (education category) for its work in ensuring that environmental awareness and sustainability are key components of QMU's daily work. Th University also won the  Scottish Green Apple trophy  in autumn 2012. 
QMU won the e-Government National Award 2010 

Organisation

School of Arts and Social Sciences

Following restructing in early 2010, the Schools of Social Sciences, Media and Communication and Drama and Creative Industries were merged. The Acting Dean is Dr Richard Butt.  The School offers courses in media, film, public relations, psychology, drama and performance, costume design and production, cultural management, arts management, festival management, acting for stage and screen, social justice, and psychology and sociology . 
QMU is part of the Scottish Drama Training Network 
The School is the only institution in Scotland that is accredited by the Chartered Institute of Public Relations to deliver the postgraduate CIPR Diploma in Public Relations.
BA (Hons) in Media graduate, Agata Jagodzinska, was awarded for Best Writer at the BAFTA in Scotland New Talent Awards 2012.

School of Health Sciences

The School of Health Sciences offers courses in dietetics, nutrition and biological sciences; nursing; speech and language therapy, audiology, occupational therapy and art therapy; physiotherapy; podiatry; radiography; art psychotherapy, dance movement psychotherapy and music therapy.
The subject area of Speech and Hearing Sciences won the Queen's Anniversary Prize for research into the clinical applications of speech technology in 2002 carried out in the Speech Science Research Centre.

Research

The university has the highest proportion of research active staff of all the 'modern' Scottish universities and develops pioneering expertise that cuts across its specialist fields. The university has three flagships: health and rehabilitation; creativity and culture; and sustainable business.
Queen Margaret University has four research centres:
In the last five years, researchers in the institution have secured, as principal investigators, research grants from the UK Research Councils (e.g. EPSRC, ESRC, MRC). In addition, researchers have attracted income from the NHS, Chief Scientist Office, central and local government and major charities and industry, e.g. Kelloggs, Mars, Postwatch.
The university operates an open access repository of the research output of the university, called eResearch, with the intention of making the work of researchers open and available to the public via the web.

Recent achievements

Queen Margaret University has just launched a new Master's degree in gastronomy. This is a unique qualification and the first of its kind in the UK, which will allow students to engage with the broad range of issues connected with food, provenance, diet, health, and nutrition. The degree is not just about food, but also encompasses the cultural, historical, and anthropological aspects of Scotland as well as the science of food, the marketplace, and all the political and economic issues that relate to food.
Queen Margaret University is the first higher education institution in the east of Scotland to host the Children's University. The Queen Margaret Children's University aims to help school children, aged between 7 and 14 years of age, become confident learners and broaden their horizons. It will be the second Children's University established in Scotland but the first initiative for young people in the east of the country. 
The South East Scotland Academies' Partnership (SESAP) is a ground breaking collaboration which is helping young people maximise their educational opportunities and develop transferable skills; smooth the transition between school, college, university and employment; and support the development of Scotland's most important industries. The Academy model was borne out of a highly successful collaboration between Queen Margaret University, Edinburgh College and East Lothian Council which, in 2012, launched the East Lothian Hospitality and Tourism Academy.
In 2012, QMU became the first university in Scotland to have a Business Gateway  on campus.
Queen Margaret University researchers in food and drink in partnerships with Advanced Microwave Technologies Ltd (AMT),won two major awards for innovation and partnership in 2012 for their collaboration to explore the application of microwave technologies to the food and drink sector.[ref]
</ref> They were awarded 'Sustained Partnership of the Year.' Queen Margaret University was the only new university to win an award at the event. 
In June 2012 the management team at Queen Margaret University was presented with the Times Higher Education  Leadership and Management Team Award  This award represents outstanding leadership, management, financial and business skills in the UK higher education institution sector.
Scotland's First Minister, Alex Salmond announced in May 2010 that QMU was to be the official host of the archives for Homecoming Scotland 2009. The Homecoming Scotland Archive  will provide the University with a unique opportunity to collect, catalogue and preserve materials associated with Scottish Homecoming 2009 for the benefit of people in both Scotland and across the world. Conceived by QMU's International Centre for the Study of Planned Events, the idea to host the archive allows the University to harness its expertise in event management, tourism and IT solutions with the aim of safeguarding the legacy of Homecoming Scotland 2009.

Principal and Vice Chancellor

Petra Wend joined Queen Margaret University as Principal and Vice-Chancellor in September 2009. She originally read Italian and French Language and Literature, and Education at the University of Münster in Germany and gained a PhD in Italian Language and Literature at University of Leeds. Following a series of positions at UK universities, she joined Oxford Brookes University as Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic) and Deputy Chief Executive in 2005.

Notable alumni

Notable graduates include:

Honorary graduates






