[[James Cowles Prichard]]

CATEGORIES: 1786 births, 1848 deaths, People from Ross-on-Wye, Alumni of the University of Edinburgh, English philologists, English anthropologists, British ethnologists, 19th-century English medical doctors, Fellows of the Royal Society, Fellows of the Ethnological Society of London, Proto-evolutionary biologists, History of mental health in the United Kingdom, History of psychiatry

James Cowles Prichard, MD, FRS (11 February 1786 – 23 December 1848) was an English physician and ethnologist. His influential Researches into the Physical History of Mankind touched upon the subject of evolution. He was also the first person to name senile dementia. C. 1835. Treatise on Insanity. London. p. 92

Life

He was born in Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire. His parents Thomas and Mary Prichard were Quakers: his mother was Welsh, and his father of an English family who had emigrated to Pennsylvania. Within a few years of his birth in Ross, Prichard's parents moved to Bristol, where his father now worked in the Quaker ironworks of Harford, Partridge and Cowles. Upon his father's retirement in 1800 he returned to Ross. As a child Prichard was educated mainly at home by tutors and his father, in a range of subjects, including modern languages and general literature. 
Rejecting his father's wish that he should join the ironworks, Prichard decided upon a medical career. Here he faced the difficulty that as a Quaker he could not become a member of the Royal College of Physicians. Therefore he started on apprenticeships that led to the ranks of apothecaries and surgeons. The first step was to study under the Quaker obstetrician Dr Thomas Pole of Bristol. Apprenticeships followed to other Quaker physicians, and to St Thomas' Hospital in London. In 1805, he entered medical school at Edinburgh University, where his religious affiliation was no bar. Also, Scottish universities were in esteem, having contributed greatly to the Enlightenment of the previous century.
He took his M.D. at Edinburgh, his doctoral thesis of 1808 being his first attempt at the great question of his life: the origin of human varieties and races. C. 1808. De generis humani varietate. Edinburgh: Abernethy & Walker. Later, he read for a year at Trinity College, Cambridge, after which came a significant personal event: he left the Society of Friends to join the established Church of England. He next moved to St John's College, Oxford, afterwards entering as a gentleman commoner at Trinity College, Oxford, but taking no degree in either university.
In 1810 Prichard settled at Bristol as a physician, eventually attaining an established position at the Bristol Infirmary in 1816.
In 1845 he was made one of the three medical Commissioners in Lunacy, having previously been one of the Metropolitan Commissioners, and moved to London. He died there three years later of rheumatic fever. At the time of his death he was president of the Ethnological Society and a Fellow of the Royal Society.

Works

In 1813 he published his Researches into the Physical History of Man, in 2 vols, on essentially the same themes as his dissertation in 1808. The book grew until the 3rd ed of 1836-47 occupied five volumes; second-4th ed. published under title: Researches into the Physical History of Mankind. The 4th edition was also in 5 volumes.1st ed.: London: Printed for John and Arthur Arch, Cornhill; and B. and H. Barry, Bristol, 1813. 2nd ed.: 2 vols. London: printed for John and Arthur Arch, Cornhill, 1826 3rd ed.: 5 vols. Sherwood, Gilbert and Piper; and J. and A. Arch, 1836-1847 4th ed.: 5 vols. London: Houlston and Stoneman, and J. and A. Arch (publisher varies). v. l. On the origin and dispersion of organized beings. 4th ed. 1841 -- v. 2. Physical ethnography of the African races. 3d ed. 1837 -- v. 3. History of the European nations. 3d ed. 1841 -- v. 4. History of the Asiatic nations. 3d ed. 1844 -- v. 5. History of the Oceanic and of the American nations. 1847. Reissue of 1st ed.; edited and with an introductory essay by George W. Stocking, Jr. (Classics in Anthropology.) Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973 ISBN 0-226-68120-3. 
The central conclusion of the work is the unity of the human species, which has been acted upon by causes which have since divided it into permanent varieties or races. The work is dedicated to Blumenbach, whose five races of man are adopted. Prichard differed from Blumenbach and other predecessors by the principle that people should be studied by combining all available characters.

Evolution

Three British men, all medically qualified and publishing between 1813 and 1819, William Lawrence, William Charles Wells and Prichard, addressed issues relevant to human evolution. All tackled the question of variation and race in humans; all agreed that these differences were heritable, but only Wells approached the idea of natural selection as a cause. Prichard, however, indicates Africa (indirectly) as the place of human origin, in this summary passage:
This opinion was omitted in later editions.Morton, Leslie. 1970. A Medical Bibliography (Garrison & Morton): an annotated checklist of texts illustrating the history of medicine. London: Deutsch. entry #159

Anthropology

Prichard was influential in the early days of ethnology and anthropology. He stated that the Celtic languages are allied by language with the Slavonian, German and Pelasgian (Greek and Latin), thus forming a fourth European branch of Indo-European languages. His treatise containing Celtic compared with Sanskrit words appeared in 1831 under the title Eastern Origin of the Celtic Nations. An essay by Adolphe Pictet, which made its author's reputation, was published independently of the earlier investigations of Prichard. 1837. De l'affinité des langues celtiques avec le sanscrit. Paris: Académie Française.
In 1843 Prichard published his Natural History of Man, in which he reiterated his belief in the specific unity of man, pointing out that the same inward and mental nature can be recognized in all the races. C. 1843. The Natural History of Man, &c. London: Baillière. Prichard was an early member of the Aborigines' Protection Society.

Psychiatry

In medicine, he specialised in what is now psychiatry. In 1822 he published A Treatise on Diseases of the Nervous SystemOpen Library page (pt. I), and in 1835 a Treatise on Insanity and Other Disorders Affecting the Mind, in which he advanced the theory of the existence of a distinct mental illness called moral insanity. Prichard's work was also the first definition of senile dementia in the English language. Augstein has suggested that these works were aimed at the prevalent materialist theories of mind, phrenology and craniology. C. Prichard's Concept of Moral Insanity: a medical theory of the corruption of human nature", Medical History; 1996, 40: 311-343; (PDF), at p. 316. She has also suggested that Prichard was influenced by the somatic school of German Romantic psychiatric thought, in particular Christian Friedrich Nasse, and (eclecticly) Johann Christian August Heinroth; this in addition to an acknowledged debt to Jean-Étienne Dominique Esquirol. 319 and 314.
In 1842, following up on moral insanity, he published On the Different Forms of Insanity in Relation to Jurisprudence, designed for the use of persons concerned in legal questions regarding unsoundness of mind.Open Library page

Other works

Among his other works were:

Family

He married Anne Maria Estlin, daughter of John Prior Estlin. They had ten children. xviii, Google Books.

Notes




