[[Yeshivat Akiva]]

CATEGORIES: Private high schools in Michigan, Educational institutions established in 1964, High schools in Oakland County, Michigan, Private middle schools in Michigan, Private elementary schools in Michigan, Schools in Southfield, Michigan

The school's mission

Akiva Hebrew Day School, or  ישיבת עקיבא  - Yeshivas Akiva  was founded in 1964docs.com/g/GooglePM/DTNB/lib00279,0F75019378596584. Akiva is a Nursery through 12th grade Jewish Modern Orthodox school in Southfield, Michigan. It promotes a love of Am Yisroel(the nation of Israel), Eretz Yisroel(the land of Israel) and al Pi Toras Yisroel(according to the Torah of Israel), together with an intense commitment to the Torah way of Life. Most Akiva graduates go to a year study in Israel, and then on to high-ranked colleges in the United States and Israel.

Early childhood education

The Early Childhood Program includes a variety of programs, such as yoga and gross-motor classes. Children have Hebrew-immersion, learning Hebrew with an Israeli teacher. Enrichment classes for Nursery children provide a way of mixing students through other classes and focusing on other strengths. Some enrichment options are singing - Shir La La as well as the Tumble Bus.

Elementary school

The Akiva elementary school has a half-day of Judaic studies classes and a half-day of secular studies classes. While this curriculum is more challenging than a conventional day school, it is necessary in order to give "the best of both world" to students. Elementary school students participate in a variety of extras, art, gym, and yoga.

Middle School/Upper school

In the past, the Akiva "upper school" started in 7th grade. In the 2007-2008 school year, 6th grade became a transition year, with similar periods as the 8th and 8th grade.  The sixth grade is thus able to participate in upper school activities as well.

High school/Upper school

Judaic studies at Akiva include Halacha, Hashkafa, Torah Sheba'al Peh (Oral Torah), Chumash, Navi, Ivris and Jewish history. Secular studies include math, science, social studies, English and history. Akiva also offers AP and honors classes.  There is an active student government and a variety of extra-curricular activities.

Chidon Hatanach

The school participates in the Chidon Hatanach (National Bible Contest) competition, under the direction of Mrs. Libat Aviv. (Best Hebrew teacher ever!) At the 2006 national Chidon Hatanach competition, both Dovi Nadel and Elizabeth Goldmeier were finalists. In the 2007 chidon hatanach competition, Nadel and Goldmeier both qualified for the international competition in Israel. In the 2008 international competition in Israel, both made the final round. This was the first time in Chidon history, where two finalists were from the same school. Goldmeier finished eighth, while Nadel finished third overall.

Akiva sports

The Akiva basketball team is called the Pioneers. Both boys and girls schools have been in national tournaments in New York, 
At one point in the 1980s, Akiva hosted an annual tournament called the Akiva Invitational. This basketball torment has been revived in recent years.
Akiva's elementary school has a soccer team as well.
In the late 1980s, Akiva had a floor hockey team as well, known as the Cougars.
All sports are played in the Meer Family Gymnasium which was constructed in 2003. The gym has locker facilities, bleachers, an office and a climbing wall.

School facts

Akiva moved into the current building, (the former home of Congregation Beth Achim) on 12 Mile Road in 1999, in preparation for the 2000-1 school year.127 It had previously been located in three other locations, most recently on Southfield Road in Lathrup Village. There are plans of a new building on the old premises.
The school colors are blue and yellow, and more recently blue and white.
Yeshivas Akiva is located on the Schostak family campus.
In 2008, Akiva opened the "lower level", for high school use. The lower level has new classrooms, lockers and bathrooms.

Adimin Team

Rabbi Klugerman-Head of School (Head of Snow day calling)
Rabbi Tzvi Klugerman brings with him over two decades of experience in education concentrating on administration and teacher training. Rabbi Klugerman was the Middle School principal at the Melvin J. Berman Hebrew Academy in Rockville, MD. He has held pulpits in Brooklyn, NY and Norwich, Connecticut, and served as the Hillel rabbi at the University of Maryland in College Park. Rabbi Klugerman also worked as chaplain at a state mental health hospital in Connecticut and was the Head Lifeguard at Camp Morasha in Lake Como, Pennsylvania, for ten years. While studying at the seminary he spent over five years under the tutelage of Rabbi Dovid Lifshitz, the Suvalker Rav, and was a member of the Kollel l'hora'ah for two years. Rabbi Klugerman holds a BA in Jewish Studies from Yeshiva University, an MA in Education from the George Washington University, and has pursued graduate studies in Jewish history at the University of Maryland. He is currently matriculated in the Doctoral program of Gratz College. Please visit Rabbi Klugerman's blog on Education at Akiva.
Mrs. Sklar-Assistant Principal
Kathy Sklar, High School Assistant Principal, went to the University of Michigan through post masters, is certified in several areas from grade 5-12, and is predominantly a social science teacher with credentials in French and English. Mrs. Sklar is currently in her 25th year at Akiva. Aside from teaching High School AP social studies classes, Mrs. Sklar deals with curriculum, attendance, and behavioral issues. Mrs. Sklar is a mentor for new faculty, and works closely with all upper school faculty. She is the advisor for the National Honor Society, EIMATAI, Schusterman, AIPAC on Campus, Stand With Us on Campus, Panim, and YUNMUN. Additionally, Mrs. Sklar is the liaison for Yeshiva University and Stern College, and she works with the Israel School Programs to acquaint our students with their staff.
Rabbi Lieb-Principal for Grades 1-8
Rabbi Aaron Leib received a B.A. in Philosophy and Jewish History from Yeshiva University as well as his Rabbinic Ordination from YU's Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary. Rabbi Leib has held positions at the Hampton Synagogue in West Hampton Beach, New York, Congregation Ahavath Torah Englewood, New Jersey, and at the Hebrew Academy of the Five Towns and Rockaway (HAFTR) High School. Originally from Chicago (and yes he's still a Bears fan), he studied under the saintly Rabbi Meyer Juzint zt"l and follows his teaching dictum that stresses, "a Rebbe's job is not to show how much he knows but how much the student knows." He believes that our job as educators is to facilitate bringing out the potential that is contained within each student. Rabbi Leib previously taught in our elementary school and currently teaches in our High School.
Rabbi Ney-Dean of Students 6-12
Rabbi Jeff Ney is the Upper School Dean of Students at Akiva. He holds a B.A. from Yeshiva University in Psychology, a master's degree in Jewish Education from YU's Azrieli Graduate School of Jewish Education and Administration, and Rabbinic Ordination from YU's Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary. While in semicha, he was also a fellow in the Ner Le'elef Leadership Training Program. Rabbi Ney has previously held positions at the Young Israel of Scarsdale, and the Manhattan Jewish Experience (MJE). While in college, Rabbi Ney co-founded the Organization for the Resolution of Agunot (ORA), a non-profit organization that assists women in procuring writs of divorce from recalcitrant husbands according to the highest standards of Jewish law. Rabbi Ney has also worked for the Federation of Employment and Guidance Services (FEGS), where he was a team member of Project Liberty, a mental health team that trained police officers and firemen throughout NYC to deal with stress management and PTSD in the aftermath of 9/11.
Mrs. Parshan-Director of Early Childhood Center
Lisa Parshan, Director of the Early Childhood Center has worked at Akiva since 2007 when she joined the faculty as the first grade General Studies teacher; in 2008 she became director of the Early Childhood Center. Lisa holds a Master's of Arts in teaching from Western Governor's University and a Bachelor of Arts with a major in Psychology from York University. Lisa's energy and enthusiasm are evident every time she interacts with students, young and old. Lisa feels strongly that a safe, warm, and loving atmosphere helps even the youngest learners reach their highest developmental, social and academic potential. Being the head of an Early Childhood Program is a multi-faceted position which includes coordinating curriculum, parent-programming, and family outreach. Lisa is the mother of four Akiva students, the youngest currently in Kindergarten.
Mrs. Batt-Director of Curriculum and Assessment for Grades K-5
Mrs. Anita Batt received her Master's in Elementary Education from Western Governors University. She has over 20 years of experience in education, and has worked with at-risk students in a variety of settings, including public school systems and Jewish day schools. Mrs. Batt has experience in developing educational interventions that ensure every student has access to the curriculum. She is particularly interested in identifying areas of strengths and weaknesses of students and helping teachers develop strategies that reach all types of learners. In her role as Director of K-5 Curriculum and Assessment, Anita plans to use her passion for teaching and her skills in educational strategies to ensure that all students are enveloped in a rich, relevant learning environment that is developmentally and academically appropriate for them. Anita's husband, Yitz and her four children proudly support her passion for teaching.
Mrs. Martin-Director of Student Services and Guidance
Roberta Martin, Director of Student Services at Akiva since January 2000, is a licensed clinical social worker. She obtained her BSW from Wayne State University and her MSW at The University of Michigan. Ms. Martin works with students from Nursery through the 12th grade, and provides consultation for teachers and parents on a variety of issues that impact students' success at school. This includes social, emotional, cognitive and behavioral matters impacting student progress and achievement. She believes in the school's responsibility to meet the needs of the "whole student." Ms. Martin provides guidance and counseling by meeting with individuals and groups of students regarding healthy lifestyle choices – she facilitates a six-week series for 5th graders, and meets regularly with elementary and middle school classes regarding appropriate personal and social conduct and behaviors. She also coordinates the school safety monitor program. She facilitates and coordinates the college application process for seniors, and begins working with students on the process early in their high school career. Ms. Martin is the project manager for the School Improvement Plan / accreditation project.
Jordana Wolfson-Director of Admissions
Jordana Wolfson entered her career in Jewish Communal Service in the Planning & Agency Relations Department of the Jewish Federation of Metropolitan Detroit, where she worked with area Jewish Day Schools and Jewish Education agencies to set priorities and evaluate the effectiveness of their services. Jordana later served as the Director of the Early Childhood Center of Adat Shalom Synagogue, was a teacher in the Florence M. Melton Adult Mini-School Parent Education Program and was the K-4 Division Head at Hillel Day School. Jordana holds a Master's Degree in Social Work from the University of Maryland, a Master's Degree in Jewish Studies from Baltimore Hebrew University and a Specialist of Arts Degree in Educational Leadership from Eastern Michigan University. In addition to her role as Director of Admissions at Akiva, Jordana is also a mentor for the Jewish Early Childhood Leadership Institute and provides consultation and mentoring for Directors from Jewish Early Childhood Centers across the country.
Scott Cranis-Executive Director
Scott Cranis has 20 years of experience in Jewish Communal Leadership roles. He spent a decade as the Administrative Director of Hillel Day School of Metropolitan Detroit, overseeing the school's growth into the largest of its kind in North America. He then went on to serve as the Regional Director of the United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism. Scott earned a B.A. in Political Science from the University of Michigan and an M.B.A. with a concentration in Finance from Wayne State University. He is a native Detroiter and glad to be part of the Akiva administrative team.

Founders

The following people are listed on the founding documents of Akiva:
Ithamar Koenigsberg,
Dr. Charles Levi,
Rabbi James I. Gordon,
Rabbi Hayim Donin,
David Berris,
Phillip Stollman, 
Seymour Ribiat, 
Jerome Kelman, 
Dr. Jacob E. Goldman, 
Elliot Steiman, 
Fayga Dombey,
Raiselle Snow, 
Rabbi Max Kapustin, 
Rabbi Israel Halpern.
Rabbi Gordon was the rabbi of Young Israel of Oak-Woods at the time, and Akiva's first home was in that synagogue, until 1972.; Raphael, Marc Lee. The American Synagogue: A Historical Dictionary and Sourcebook, Greenwood Press, June 30, 1996, p. 181.






