[[Ganz Works]]

CATEGORIES: Manufacturing companies of Hungary, Shipbuilding companies of Austria-Hungary, Rail vehicle manufacturers of Hungary, Tram manufacturers, Electrical engineering companies, Companies of Austria-Hungary, Motor vehicle manufacturers of Austria-Hungary, Companies established in 1844

The Ganz (Ganz vállalatok, "Ganz companies") electric works  in Budapest is probably best known for the manufacture of tramcars, but was also a pioneer in the application of three-phase alternating current to electric railways. Ganz also made: ships (Ganz Danubius), bridge steel structures (Ganz Acélszerkezet), high voltage equipment (Ganz Transelektro). Some engineers employed by Ganz in the field were Kálmán Kandó and Ottó Bláthy. The company is named after Ábrahám Ganz.  In 2006, the power transmission and distribution sectors of Ganz Transelektro were acquired by Crompton Greaves,Ganz is now CG Retrieved 2009-11-28. but still doing business under the Ganz brand name, while the unit dealing with electric traction (propulsion and control systems for electric vehicles) was acquired by Škoda Holding and is now a part of Škoda Electric.

History

Before 1919, the company built ocean liners, dreadnought type battleships and submarines, power plants, automobilesIván Boldizsár: NHQ; the New Hungarian Quarterly - Volume 16, Issue 2; Volume 16, Issues 59-60 - Page 128Hungarian Technical Abstracts: Magyar Műszaki Lapszemle - Volumes 10-13 - Page 41 and fighter aircraft.Ivan Berend: Case Studies on Modern European Economy: Entrepreneurship, Inventions, and Institutions - PAGE: 151
The company was founded by Abraham Ganz in 1844. He established his own iron foundry in Buda in the Kingdom of Hungary. Consequently this factory played an important role in building the infrastructure of the Hungarian Kingdom and the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
At the end of the 19th century, the products of the Ganz and Partner Iron Mill and Machine Factory (hereinafter referred to as Ganz Works) promoted the expansion of alternating-current power transmissions.

Determinant Engineers

Many engineers contributed to or had an impact on the Ganz Works:
Károly Zipernowsky participated in construction of 60 power stations; he acted as the first professor of electric engineering of the Budapest University of Technology and Economics (hereinafter referred to as BMGE).Ganz Works - the 19th century
András Mechwart invented the hard cast rolling mill, which revolutionized the milling industry. Hirlapkiad́o Vállalat: The Hungarian Economy, Volumes 26-27 - Page: 34 
Miksa Déri developed the repulsion motor for elevators of buildings with alternating current. He also participated in construction of Vienna's electric supply.
His whole life, Ottó Titusz Bláthy worked at the Ganz Works. His basic job was the construction and patenting of induction flow meter of 1889 used today. He invented the Turbogenerator in 1901. In the 1930s, he initiated the Hungarian production of turbogenerators. Winter Meeting: Discussions and closures of abstracted papers from the winter meeting, New York, NY, January 30-February 4, 1977 - Page: XXIV.
Kálmán Kandó was the first who recognised that an electric train system can only be successful if it can use the electricity from public networks. After realising that, he also provided the means to build such a rail network by inventing a rotary phase converter suitable for locomotive usage. He developed high-voltage three phase alternating current motors and generators for electric locomotives; he is known as "the father of the electric train".

Power plants, generators and transformers

In 1878, the company's general manager András Mechwart (1853–1942) founded the Department of Electrical Engineering headed by Károly Zipernowsky (1860–1939). Engineers Miksa Déri (1854–1938) and Ottó Bláthy (1860–1939) also worked at the department producing direct-current machines and arc lamps.
The first turbo-generators were water turbines which propelled electric generators. The first Hungarian water turbine was designed by the engineers of the Ganz Works in 1866, the mass production with dynamo generators started in 1883.sze.pdf
In cooperation, Zipernovsky, Déri and Bláthy constructed and patented the transformer (see Picture 2). The name "transformer" was created by Ottó Titusz Bláthy.
The transformer patents described two basic principles. Loads were to be connected in parallel, not in series as had been the general practice until 1885. Additionally, the inventors described the closed armature as an essential part of the transformer. Both factors assisted the stabilization of voltage under varying load, and allowed definition of standard voltages for distribution and loads. The parallel connection and efficient closed core made construction of electrical distribution systems technically and economically feasible.
It is noteworthy that the Ganz Works built the first transformers using iron cover of enameled mild iron wire, and started to use laminated core of today at the end of 1885.
Following introduction of transformer, the Ganz Works changed over to production of alternating-current equipment successfully. (For instance, Rome's electric supply was resolved by hydroelectric plant and energy transfer of long distance.)Hungarian Inventors and their Inventions
The first specimen of the kilowatt-hour meter (electricity meter) produced on the basis of Hungarian Ottó Bláthy's patent and named after him was presented by the Ganz Works at the Frankfurt Fair in the autumn of 1889, and the first induction kilowatt-hour meter was already marketed by the factory at the end of the same year. These were the first alternating-current wattmeters, known by the name of Bláthy-meters.

Internal combustion engines and vehicles

Beginning of gas engine manufacturing is linked to the names of Bánki and Csonka in our Company in 1889.
Produced Engines which designs and licences were sold for Western European partners (mostly U.K. and Italy):
1889 the first four-stroke gas engine was built by the Ganz factory
1893 the manufacture of the paraffin- and petrol-fuelled engine with carburettor
1898 the start of the manufacture of the engines with the Bánki water injection system
1908 the introduction of a new petrol engine type, the series Am
1913 the manufacture of the Büssing petrol engines for truck vehicles
1914-1918 the manufacture of fighter plane engines
1916 the manufacture of petrol engines, type Fiat
1920 the usage of petrol engines for suction gas engine operation
1924 Mr. György JENDRASSIK started his engine development activity
1928 there was finished the first railway Diesel engine according to the plans of Ganz-Jendrassik
1929 the first export delivery of a railway engine according to the System of Ganz-Jendrassik
1934 there was an engine reliability World Competition in the USSR where the Ganz engine achieved the best consumption in its category
1944 the first application of the engine type XII JV 170/240 in the motor-train set
1953 modernization of the Diesel engines System Ganz-Jendrassik type
1959 the union of the Ganz factory and the MÁVAG company, establishing of the Ganz-MÁVAG

Railways

The Ganz Works identified the significance of induction motor and commissioned Kálmán Kandó (1869–1931) to develop it. After construction of different types, Kálmán Kandó initiated the development of railway electric traction with induction motor of alternating current by the Ganz Works. The first-ever electric rail vehicle manufactured by Ganz Works was a 6 HP pit locomotive with direct current traction system. Later on Kálmán Kandó initiated the application of asynchronous motors for traction purpose. The first Ganz made asynchronous rail vehicles (altogether 2 pieces) were supplied in 1898 to Évian-les-Bains (Switzerland) with a 37 HP asynchronous traction system. The Ganz Works won the tender of electrification of railway of Valtellina Railways in 1897. Under the management and on the base of plans of Kálmán Kandó, three phase electric traction (two upper wires + rails) of feed 3 kV and 15 Hz - produced by a different power station - was realized for thirty years from 1902.
After World War I, in the frames of the Ganz Works, Kálmán Kandó constructed one-phase railway electric system of 16 kV and 50 Hz incipient all over the world. Its main attribute was the feed by normal network, so additional power station became unnecessary. Consequently, Hungarian electric traction could be formed according to the country's energy management. Kálmán Kandó adapted the speed-torque curve to electric traction through changing the phase number and pole number. Kálmán Kandó incorporated a phase shifter in the locomotives which governed speed levels.
Because of early death of Kálmán Kandó, László Verebély continued the work for the Hungarian Railways (MÁV). Moreover, he managed the construction of a nationwide power station (Bánhida) supplying as the railways as Budapest with electric power by transmission line of 110 kV. He elaborated the first plans of the nationwide cooperation of electric energy. In the 1930s he organized the Department of Electric Stations and Railways of the BMGE, so he became a professor of a significant branch of heavy current engineering.energosolar.htm
In 1959 Ganz merged with the MÁVAG company and was renamed Ganz-MÁVAG.

Shipbuilding

As Ganz Danubius, the company became involved in shipbuilding before, and during, World War I. Ganz was responsible for building the dreadnought Szent István, supplied the machinery for the cruiser Novara, and built U-boats at its shipyard in Budapest, for final assembly at Fiume. Several U-Boats of the U-27 class were completed, and a number of other types were laid down, remaining incomplete at the war's end.gwpda.htm Sieche article on KuK U-Boats The company built some ocean liners too.

Aircraft

The first Hungarian "aeroplane factory" was founded by Ganz Company and Weiss Manfréd Works in 1912.
During World War I, the company made many types of Albatros and Fokker fighter planes.
The world's first turboprop jet was the Jendrassik Cs-1 designed by the Hungarian mechanical engineer György Jendrassik. It was built and tested in the Ganz factory in Budapest between 1939 and 1942. It was planned to fit to the Varga RMI-1 X/H twin-engined reconnaissance bomber designed by László Varga in 1940, but the program was cancelled. Jendrassik had also designed a small-scale 75 kW turboprop in 1937.

Rail Rolling Stock

In 1982 - 1983 Ganz-Mávag supplied an order for electric multiple units to New Zealand Railways Corporation for Wellington suburban services. The order was made in 1979, and was for 44 powered units and 44 trailer units, see New Zealand EM class electric multiple unit. 
left|thumb|A series V63 Ganz-Mávag electric locomotive of Hungarian State Railways
In 1976 Ganz-Mávag supplied ten 

After World War II

In 1947, the Ganz Works were nationalised and in 1949 they became independent and six big companies came into existence, e.g. the Ganz Transformer Factory. In 1959, Ganz Wagon and Machine Factory merged with the MÁVAG Locomotive and Machine Factory under the name of Ganz-MÁVAG Locomotive, Wagon and Machine Works. Of the products of the Works, outstanding results were born in the field of the manufacture of diesel motor-railcars and motor trains. Traditional products included tramcars as well, with which, first of all, the tramway network of Budapest was provided by the Works. In the meantime the Foundry workshop was closed down.
In 1974, the locomotive and wagon Works were merged under the name of Railway Vehicle Factory and then the machine construction branch of went through significant developments. The production of industrial and apartment house lifts became a new branch. Ganz-MÁVAG took over a lot of smaller plants in the 1960s and 1970s and their product range was extended. Besides others, they increased their bridge-building capacity; they made iron structures for several Tisza Bridges, for the Erzsébet Bridge in Budapest, for public road bridges in Yugoslavia and for several industrial halls.
The Ganz Shipyard experienced its most stirring times during the four decades following nationalisation: in the course of this period 1100 ship units were produced, the number of the completed seagoing ships was 240 and that of floating cranes was 663. As a result of the great economic and social crises of the 1980s the Ganz-MÁVAG had to be reorganised. The company was transformed into seven independent Works and three joint ventures.
In 1989, the British company Telfos Holding gained a majority of the shares in Ganz Railway Vehicle Factory Co. Ltd. The name of the company was changed to Ganz-Hunslet Co. Ltd. In the course of 1991 and 1992, the Austrian company Jenbacher Werke obtained 100% of the company's shares and consequently the railway vehicle factory now is a member of the international railway vehicle manufacturing group, Jenbacher Transport Systeme. At present, the Ganz Electric Works, under the name of Ganz-Ansaldo is a member of the Italian industrial giant, Ansaldo. The Ganz Works were transformed into holdings. Ganz-Danubius was wound up in 1994. The Ganz Electric Meter Factory in Gödöllő became the member of the international Schlumberger group.






