[[Police academy]]

CATEGORIES: Police academies


A police academy is a training school for new police recruits, also known as a law enforcement academy.

Australia

In Australia, each of the states and mainland territories run a centralised academy for training of personnel of law enforcement agencies within the state or territory.
Police academies ensure that officers meet basic local, state, and federal standards. Graduation from an approved academy program is usually required before a new police officer is placed on active duty.
The New South Wales Police College, Victoria Police Academy, Queensland Police Academy, Tasmania Police Academy, South Australia Police Academy, Northern Territory Police Academy, Western Australia Police Academy and the Queensland Police Academy are the state police initial training institutions. The smaller yet distinguished Australian Federal Police College located in Barton trains AFP initial recruits.

Bangladesh

In Bangladesh Bangladesh Police Academy imparts training to the new entrants of Bangladesh Police. It also arranges other courses including refreshers' course.

Cyprus

In the Republic of Cyprus the Cyprus Police Academy (Greek: Αστυνομική Ακαδημία Κύπρου) is the main educational institution for law enforcement officers. It was founded in 1990 in succession to the Police Training School. It is recognised as a higher education institution by the Cyprus Council for the Recognition of Higher Education Qualifications and operates under the Ministry of Justice and Public Order as a Police Unit in the organisational structure of the Cyprus Police. It works on a permanent basis, both for the education of Cadet Constables and for the training of all Police members irrelevant of their rank as part of their continuing education. Some law relevant courses are also conducted for none Police Officers.

Czech Republic

In the Czech Republic Police Academy named College (University), where he taught security specialization for police, public administration and private security services. Some branches are open and civilians, and some are only for police officers, firefighters, soldiers, etc. The schools are open to bachelor's degrees, Master's and doctoral.
Basic training center for new police officers are called 'secondary police schools' and they must go through every police officer.
In this system still exist "senior police schools' that have educational status of 'further education', where they learn specialization that do not need College.
Officers may also have civilian specialized studies on civilian college anywhere in the world if it is recognized in the Czech Republic.
Municipal police have several training centers, where some larger cities have their own and others are conducting training in private licensed agencies.

Estonia

In Estonia, Estonian Academy of Security Science is located in Tallinn. Academy consist four colleges. One is Police and Border guard college in Muraste and in Paikuse.

Finland

Finnish Police recruits are trained in the Police College of Finland, or POLAMK. It is located in Tampere, Finland and consists of various teaching facilities and related premises, including a vehicle training track and a training area for realistic police operations. POLAMK requires its candidates to be Finnish citizens, completed at least a vocational qualification or upper secondary school studies or the matriculation examination, of good health, have no criminal background, and to possess certain traits evaluated by psychological exams. The Security Police will perform a basic security check of the applicant. Matters considered in the statement from the Security Police include penalties and convictions, arrests for drunkenness, racist attitudes and security and other risks. Applicants must possess at least a short-term driving licence by the end of the application period. At least one year's work experience by the end of the application period. A maximum of 9 months of the military service will be counted as work experience.polamk.nsf/pages/C5EEF61FF46D5B24C22573D3004545CE

Indonesia

In Indonesia, Akademi Kepolisian or abbreviated as AKPOL is the main institute, training center, and school for new recruits/cadets joining the Indonesian National Police Force to becomed highly trained and professional officers. The academy is located in Semarang, Central Java

India

In India, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy is the national institute for training of Indian Police Service (IPS) officers before they are sent to their respective Indian state cadres for carrying out their duties. The academy is located in Hyderabad, India.

Philippines

During the 1980s, the Philippine National Police Academy in Cavite served as a school for selected enlisted personnel and civilians to join as a Police/Fire Lieutenants in the defunct Integrated National Police. After the merging of the Philippine Constabulary and INP in January 1, 1991 it became the primary officers school for the new Philippine National Police, the Bureau of Fire Protection and the Bureau of Jail Management and Penology, all under the Department of the Interior and Local Government. The Philippine National Police Academy graduates are automatically appointed as Inspectors/Lieutenants in the Philippine National Police, Bureau of Fire Protection, and the Bureau of Jail Management and Penology according to their choice of public safety curriculum during their cadetship. This is under the supervision of the DILG and the Philippine Public Safety College.

Poland

Police high school is located in town Szczytno. Police school are in Piła, Słupsk, Katowice and in Legionowo. In Ketrzyn, Koszalin and Luban they have border guard training center.

Romania

Police academy is located in Bucureşti. They are training only officers (Bachelor (3 years), master degree (2 years) and Dr (3+1 years)).
Border police school and center for training is located in Oradea Avram Iancu. Coast guard center is in Constanta. Center for training border police personnel is in Iași and one in Orsova.

Slovak Republic

In the Slovak Republic Police Academy named College (University), where he taught security specialization for police, public administration and private security services. Some branches are open and civilians, and some are only for police officers, firefighters, soldiers, etc. The schools are open to bachelor's degrees, Master's and doctoral.
Basic training center for new police officers are called 'secondary police schools' and they must go through every police officer and municipal police officer.

Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka, in 2008 established the Sri Lanka Police Academy bring together several police training institutions including the Sri Lanka Police College.

Turkey

Police Academy established in 1937 to recruit police chiefs. Also in 1938 a police college (high school) established in Ankara in order to prepare students for Police Academy. Today police academy recruits police officers in 26 school located in different parts of Turkey and police chiefs in one school located in Ankara.

United Arab Emirates

In UAE, the Emirates either train their own Police force or get trained by academies of other Emirates. There are mainly two academies, one in Abu Dhabi and the other in Dubai.

Abu Dhabi

In the Abu Dhabi Police Academy the study programme includes practical and field training. After successful completion of the programme the student shall be awarded a Bachelor's Degree in Law and Policing Sciences.
An Institute for officers training affiliated to the Police College was established in 1992. In 2002, the system of study in the College was changed to incorporate training theory programs and field work.
The four years duration of study are divided into two levels of study consisting of eight terms:

=Basic level – two years=

One year for theoretical study and another for field work.

=Advanced level – two years=

These two levels are preceded by an introductory period for the physical and psychological preparation of the students. After successful completion of the study and training programmes the student will be awarded a Bachelor's degree in Police Sciences and Criminal Justice.

Dubai

The Dubai Police Academy was founded in 1987, and was granted autonomy from the police force as long as it retains some affiliation with Dubai Police General Headquarters. It was fully inaugurated in 1989 in the presence of Sheikh Maktoum Bin Rashid Al Maktoum. In 1992, degrees offered by the academy were made equal to degrees from universities.
The first class was from 1987 to 1988, and consisted of 51 cadets and 30 full-time students, some of whom were existing police officers. they graduated in 1991. During the academic year of 1996–1997, students from other Arabic countries such as Yemen and thePalestinian Territories were admitted.

United Kingdom

All candidates for the 43 police forces for England and Wales must be over the age of 18½; of a reasonable standard of physical fitness, with good health and eyesight; and be a British citizen, a Commonwealth citizen with no restrictions on his or her stay here, or a citizen of the Republic of Ireland. All serve two years as probationary constables, which will be spent training in both academic and practical situations. As from 2007, all training has been managed by the National Policing Improvement Agency.

United States

Police academies exist in every state and at the federal level. Each state has an agency which certifies police academies and their programs. Most states have minimum physical and academic standards for cadets to achieve before they can enter an academy and graduate. There may be additional or higher standards required for later certification as a police officer. While some states allow open enrollment in police academies, many require cadets to be hired by a police department in order to attend. Departments and/or state certifying agencies may also require individuals to pass background checks, psychological evaluations, polygraph exams, drug screenings and qualify with a firearm and demonstrate driving skills, as conditions of employment/certification.

Connecticut

In Connecticut, police officer recruits receive a certification to enforce the General Statutes. Their training is conducted at "The Connecticut Police Academy" located at 285 Preston Avenue, in Meriden, CT.ct. This basic training course is certified by Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies (CALEA).

Florida

In Florida, police academies are primarily run by community colleges or state agencies. All law enforcement officers in the state are certified as such by a governing body appointed by the governor called the Criminal Justice Standards and Training Commission under the Florida Department of Law Enforcement. All applicants must pass a state examination and be hired by a law enforcement agency within 4 years to be considered certified.

Iowa

In the state of Iowa, the Iowa Department of Public Safety (DPS) is the governing body that sets standards in the state for all law enforcement applicants, firefighter applicants, and EMT applicants, all qualifying officers must go through a Federal background investigation before taking the Federal Civil Service Exam, once the applicant has completed the Civil Service Exam with an acceptable grade, he then must pass a physical examination, which includes a certain number of push-ups, sit-ups, and a timed one mile run, the time of the run, and the number of physical activities are set to the age of the applicant, no applicant can be under the age of 18, or over the age of 45. All applicants are then screened as to their criminal status, the applicant must have a clean record going back ten years before they can be considered for a position, the only marks that can be considered acceptable would be no more than two speeding tickets in a one year period, no other convictions of any kind can appear on the applicants record, the applicant cannot be a convicted felon. The applicant is then placed on a probationary status, and placed as a ride-along with an experienced officer for a period not exceeding one year before being placed to the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy (ILEA), located in Johnston, IA on the grounds of Camp Dodge (Iowa National Guard Base). The applicant then undergoes a training period of 13 weeks at the Academy before graduating, gaining their shield, and sidearm, and being assigned with their applying departments. For any applicant to the Iowa Department of Criminal Investigation, they must first hold a Bachelors Degree in Criminal Justice before being considered for a position, then, they undergo the same treatment as any other police applicant. All police department application procedures are regulated by the Iowa Department of Public Safety. ILEA is run by the DPS, and covers all police training in the state, including individual city police officers, County Sheriff's deputies, and Iowa State Patrol troopers.

Maryland

In Maryland, the Maryland Police and Correctional Training Commission is the civilian governing body that sets standards for law enforcement personnel within the state. Most major law enforcement agencies operate their own academy in which recruits must pass over 550 objectives including (but not limited to): criminal and traffic law, officer safety techniques, defensive tactics, report writing, a 40-hour block of emergency vehicle operations, a 40-hour block of First Responder, and a 40-hour block of weapon training.state.md.Recruiting.org Many colleges such as the University of Maryland and other community colleges offer police academy instruction as well.umd.edu

Michigan

In Michigan, in order to become any law enforcement officers, any and all applicants have the option to be certified by the Michigan Commission on Law Enforcement Standards or MCOLES. All persons wishing to become police officers in the State of Michigan must be certified through MCOLES. Cadets must pass a physical fitness exam as well as a reading and writing exam. Applicants also cannot have any felonies, weapons violations, or a history of domestic violence posted on their criminal records. Police academies are most often part of community colleges, city or county police and sheriff departments, or the Michigan State Police.
At the end of the police academy, candidates take the MCOLES test. Upon successful completion, candidates are 'certifiable' and have a period of one year to obtain a job (if not sponsored by an agency). If a candidate is unable to obtain a police job within that year, and if the candidate wishes to be considered in the future, he/she must attend a two-week re-certification course, which adds another year to the window of opportunity.

Vietnam

The Vietnam People's Police Academy is one of the leading schools of the Vietnam People's Public Security, training the officers with university degrees and postgraduate force police.
People's Police Academy under the management of the Ministry of Public Security
Schools located in Tu Liem district, Hanoi, Vietnam
Websites: 

History

On 15 May 05, 1968, the People's Police was established with formerly Department of the Public Security Police Central (now the Academy of the People's Security).

Task








