[[Blepharoplasty]]

CATEGORIES: Oculoplastic surgery

Blepharoplasty (Greek: blepheron, "eyelid" + plassein "to form") is the plastic surgery operation for correcting defects, deformities, and disfigurations of the eyelids; and for aesthetically modifying the eye region of the face. With the excision and the removal, or the repositioning (or both) of excess tissues, such as  skin and adipocyte fat, and the reinforcement of the corresponding muscle and tendon tissues, the blepharoplasty procedure resolves functional and cosmetic problems of the periorbita, which is the area from the eyebrow to the upper portion of the cheek.
The operative goals of a blepharoplastic procedure are the restoration of the correct functioning to the affected eyelid(s), and the restoration of the aesthetics of the eye-region of the face, which are achieved by eliminating excess skin from the eyelid(s), smoothing the underlying eye muscles, tightening the supporting structures, and resecting and re-draping the excess fat of the retroseptal area of the eye, in order to produce a smooth anatomic transition from the lower eyelid to the cheek.
In an eye surgery procedure, the usual correction or modification (or both) is of the upper and the lower eyelids, and of the surrounding tissues of the eyebrows, the upper nasal-bridge area, and the upper portions of the cheeks, which are achieved by modifying the periosteal coverings of the facial bones that form the orbit (eye socket). The periosteum comprises two-layer connective tissues that cover the bones of the human body: (i) the external layer of networks of dense, connective tissues with blood vessels, and (ii) the internal, deep layer of collagenous bundles composed of spindle-shaped cells of connective tissue, and a network of thin, elastic fibres.

Indications

The thorough pre-operative medical and surgical histories, and the physical examination of the patient's periorbital area (eyebrow-to-cheek-to-nose), determine if the patient can safely undergo a blepharoplasty procedure to feasibly resolve (correct or modify, or both) the functional and aesthetic indications presented by the patient. Sequentially, lower eyelid blepharoplasty can successfully address the anatomic matters of excess eyelid skin, slackness of the eye-muscles and of the orbital septum (palpebral ligament), excess orbital fat, malposition of the lower eyelid, and prominence of the nasojugal groove, where the orbit (eye socket) meets the slope of the nose.
Concerning the upper eyelid, a blepharoplasty procedure can resolve the loss of peripheral vision, caused by the slackness of the upper-eyelid skin draping over the eyelashes; the outer and the upper portions of the field of vision of the patient are affected, and cause him or her difficulty in performing mundane activities such as driving an automobile and reading a book.

Procedures

A blepharoplasty procedure usually is performed through external surgical incisions made along the natural skin lines (creases) of the upper and the lower eyelids, which creases then hide the surgical scars from view, especially when effected in the skin creases below the eyelashes of the lower eyelid. According to the technique applied by the plastic surgeon, the incisions can be made from the conjunctiva, the interior surface of the lower eyelid, as in the case of a transconjunctival blepharoplasty. Such a technique permits the excision (cutting and removal) of the lower-eyelid adipocyte fat without leaving a visible scar, but, the transconjunctival blepharoplasty technique does not allow the removal of excess eyelid-skin. Blepharoplasty, Lower Lid Subciliary (2006). 
A blepharoplasty operation usually requires 1–3 hours to complete. Post-operatively, the initial swelling and bruising consequent to the surgery will subside and resolve with 1–2 weeks; the final, stable results of the blepharoplastic correction will become apparent after several months. The results of a blepharoplasty procedure are best appreciated by comparing pre- and post-operative (before-and-after) photographs of the eye region of the patient.
The anatomic condition of the eyelids, the (wear-and-tear) quality of the patient's skin, his or her age, and the general condition of the adjacent tissues, consequent to the anatomic conditions of the patient, affect the functional and aesthetic results achieved with the eyelid surgery. Additional to the anatomic conditions of the eye region of the patient, the occurrence, or not, of medical complications is determined by factors such as:

Asian blepharoplasty (double eyelid surgery) is a blepharoplasty procedure used to create a supratarsal epicanthic fold in the upper eyelid of the patient who lacks such a crease.

Society and culture

Removal of double eyelids

East Asian blepharoplasty, also known as "double eyelid surgery", is a type of cosmetic surgery where the skin around the eye is reshaped (blepharoplasty). The purpose of the procedure is to create an upper eyelid with a crease (i.e. "double eyelid") from an eyelid that is naturally without a crease (a.k.a. "single eyelid").
Anatomically, there are a number of subtle differences in the upper eyelids of many East Asians, compared with the eyelids of Caucasians.. Several methods can be used to create the double eyelid — including the full-incisional, partial incision and no incision methods (e.g. the DST method). Each has its advantages depending on the patient's anatomy and desires.
East Asian blepharoplasties have been reported to be the most common aesthetic procedure in 
The procedure to alter the natural East Asian "single eyelid" appearance has been a subject of controversy. For example, opponents of the procedure, such as author David Mura, described it as being "indoctrinated by white standards of beauty", Edward Kwak states that many patients who get the procedure done are "not trying to look white", but look like the many Asians who naturally have an eyelid fold.slanteyefortheroundeye.html There is also a belief that double eyelids provide a more energetic appearance, and the procedure is popular among high school graduates in China with the view that it will improve their job prospects.

History

Karl Ferdinand von Gräfe coined the phrase blepharoplasty in 1818 when the technique was used for repairing deformities caused by cancer in the eyelids.
As techniques began developing the ancient Greeks and Romans began writing down and collecting everything they knew involving these procedures. Aulus Cornelius Celsus, a first-century Roman, described making an excision in the skin to relax the eyelids in his book De Medicine.bmc.htm

Laser

Laser blepharoplasty is the performance of eyelid surgery using a laser instead of a scalpel.  Laser blepharoplasty is often combined with laser eyelid rejuvenation, as the two procedures can be performed in conjunction.
Historically there has been some contention as to the categorisation of laser treatment on upper or lower eyelids as blepharoplasty, which is itself by definition surgical.  The statutory definition of surgery and that supported by the American College of Surgeons states that surgery is the "treatment ... by any instrument causing localized alteration or transportation of live human tissue, which include lasers.." .facs.pdf






