[[Refractive index]]

CATEGORIES: Optics, Concepts in physics, Optical mineralogy, Glass physics, Dimensionless numbers, Physical quantities

In optics the refractive index or index of refraction n of a substance (optical medium) is a dimensionless number that describes how light, or any other radiation, propagates through that medium. It is defined as 
where c is the speed of light in vacuum and v is the speed of light in the substance. For example, the refractive index of water is 1.33, meaning that light travels 1.33 times slower in water than it does in vacuum. (See typical values for different materials here.)
The refractive index determines how much light is bent, or refracted, when entering a material. This is the historically first use of refractive indices and is described by Snell's law of refraction,
  | author = Hecht, Eugene 
  | title = Optics
  | publisher = Addison-Wesley
  | year = 2002
  | isbn = 0-321-18878-0}}</ref>
The refractive index varies with the wavelength of light. This is called dispersion and causes the splitting of white light into its constituent colors in prisms and rainbows, and chromatic aberration in lenses.
Light propagation in absorbing materials can be described using a complex-valued refractive index. The imaginary part then handles the attenuation, while the real part accounts for refraction.
The concept of refractive index is widely used within the full electromagnetic spectrum, from x-rays to radio waves. It can also be used with wave phenomena such as sound. In this case the speed of sound is used instead of that of light and a reference medium other than vacuum must be chosen.[ref]
</ref>

Definition

The refractive index n of an optical medium is defined as the ratio of the speed of light in vacuum, c = , and the phase velocity vphase of light in the medium,
The phase velocity is the speed at which the crests and the phase of the wave moves, which may be different from the group velocity, the speed at which the pulse of light, or the envelope of the wave, moves.
The definition above is sometimes referred to as the absolute index of refraction to distinguish it from definitions where the speed of light in other reference media than vacuum is used. Historically air at a standardized pressure and temperature have been common as a reference medium.

History

Thomas Young was presumably the person who first used, and invented, the name "index of refraction", in 1807. 
At the same time he changed this value of refractive power into a single number, instead of the traditional ratio of two numbers. The ratio had the disadvantage of different appearances. Newton, who called it the "proportion of the sines of incidence and refraction", wrote it as a ratio of two numbers, like "529 to 396" (or "nearly 4 to 3"; for water). 
Young did not use a symbol for the index of refraction, in 1807. In the next years, others started using different symbols: 
n, m, and µ. Exponent des Brechungsverhältnisses is index of refraction

 The symbol n gradually prevailed.

Typical values

For visible light most transparent media have refractive indices between 1 and 2. A few examples are given in the table to the right. These values are measured at the yellow doublet sodium D-line, with a wavelength of 589 nanometers, as is conventionally done. Gases at atmospheric pressure have refractive indices close to 1 because of their low density. Almost all solids and liquids have refractive indices above 1.3, with aerogel as the clear exception. Aerogel is a very low density solid that can be produced with refractive index in the range from 1.002 to 1.265.[ref]
