[[Robert Falcon Scott]]

CATEGORIES: Robert Falcon Scott, 1868 births, 1912 deaths, English people of Scottish descent, English explorers, Explorers of Antarctica, Commanders of the Royal Victorian Order, Recipients of the Polar Medal, Deaths by starvation, Deaths from hypothermia, Antarctic expedition deaths, Officiers of the Légion d'honneur, People from Plymouth, People of the Victorian era, People of the Edwardian era, Recipients of the Cullum Geographical Medal, Royal Navy officers, People educated at Stubbington House School

Robert Falcon Scott, CVO (6 June 1868 –  29 March 1912) was a Royal Navy officer and explorer who led two expeditions to the Antarctic regions: the Discovery Expedition, 1901–04, and the ill-fated Terra Nova Expedition, 1910–13. During this second venture, Scott led a party of five which reached the South Pole on 17 January 1912, only to find that they had been preceded by Roald Amundsen's Norwegian expedition. On their return journey, Scott and his four comrades all died from a combination of exhaustion, starvation and extreme cold.
Before his appointment to lead the Discovery Expedition, Scott had followed the conventional career of a naval officer in peacetime Victorian Britain, where opportunities for career advancement were both limited and keenly sought after by ambitious officers. It was the chance for personal distinction that led Scott to apply for the Discovery command, rather than any predilection for polar exploration. However, having taken this step, his name became inseparably associated with the Antarctic, the field of work to which he remained committed during the final twelve years of his life.
Following the news of his death, Scott became an iconic British hero, a status maintained for more than 50 years and reflected by the many permanent memorials erected across the nation. In the closing decades of the 20th century, the legend was reassessed as attention focused on the causes of the disaster that ended his and his comrades' lives, and the extent of Scott's personal culpability. From a previously unassailable position, Scott became a figure of controversy, with questions raised about his competence and character. Commentators in the 21st century have on the whole regarded Scott more positively, emphasising his personal bravery and stoicism while acknowledging his errors, but ascribing his expedition's fate primarily to misfortune.

Early life

Family

Scott was born on 6 June 1868, the third child out of six and elder son of John Edward and Hannah (née Cuming) Scott of Stoke Damerel, near Devonport, Devon. Although his father was a brewer and magistrate, there were naval and military traditions in the family, Scott's grandfather and four uncles all having served in the army or navy. In later years, when Scott was establishing his naval career, the family would suffer serious financial misfortune, but his early childhood years were spent in comfort.
In accordance with the family's tradition, Robert and his younger brother Archibald were predestined for careers in the armed services. Robert spent four years at a local day school before being sent to Stubbington House School, Stubbington, Hampshire, a cramming establishment preparing candidates for the entrance examinations to the naval training ship 

Early naval career

In July 1883, Scott passed out of Britannia as a midshipman, seventh overall in a class of 26.
In March 1888 Scott passed his examinations for sub-lieutenant, with four first class certificates out of five.
During the research for his dual biography of Scott and Roald Amundsen,Scott and Amundsen, later republished as The Last Place On Earth. See Sources section. polar historian Roland Huntford investigated a possible scandal in Scott's early naval career, related to the period 1889–90 when Scott was a lieutenant on .
In 1894, while serving as torpedo officer on the depot ship 
Promotion, and the extra income this would bring, now became a matter of considerable concern to Scott.

Discovery Expedition 1901–1904

The British National Antarctic Expedition, later known as the Discovery Expedition, was a joint enterprise of the RGS and the Royal Society. A long-cherished dream of Markham's, it required all of his skills and cunning to bring the expedition to fruition, under naval command and largely staffed by naval personnel. Scott may not have been Markham's first choice as leader but, having decided on him, the older man's support remained constant.
Experience of Antarctic or Arctic waters was almost entirely lacking within the 50-strong party and there was very little special training in equipment or techniques before the ship set sail.
The expedition had both scientific and exploration objectives; the latter included a long journey south, in the direction of the South Pole. This march, undertaken by Scott, Ernest Shackleton and Edward Wilson, took them to a latitude of 82° 17′ S, about .
At the end of the expedition it took the combined efforts of two relief ships and the use of explosives to free Discovery from the ice.

Between expeditions

Popular hero

Discovery returned to Britain in September 1904. The expedition had caught the public imagination, and Scott became a popular hero. He was awarded a cluster of honours and medals, including many from overseas, and was promoted to the rank of captain.
Scott's next few years were crowded. For more than a year he was occupied with public receptions, lectures and the writing of the expedition record, The Voyage of the Discovery. In January 1906, he resumed his full-time naval career, first as an Assistant Director of Naval Intelligence at the Admiralty and, in August, as flag-captain to Rear-Admiral Sir George Egerton on . Scott was cleared of blame.

Dispute with Shackleton

By early 1906, Scott had sounded out the RGS about the possible funding of a future Antarctic expedition.

Marriage

Scott, who because of his Discovery fame had entered Edwardian society, first met Kathleen Bruce early in 1907 at a private luncheon party.
By this time, Scott had announced his plans for his second Antarctic expedition. Shackleton had returned, having narrowly failed to reach the Pole, and this gave Scott the impetus to proceed.

Terra Nova Expedition 1910–1912

Preparation

It was the expressed hope of the RGS that this expedition would be "scientific primarily, with exploration and the Pole as secondary objects"
Scott did not know that he would be in a race until he received Amundsen's telegram in Melbourne, in October 1910.

First season

The expedition itself suffered a series of early misfortunes, which hampered the first season's work and impaired preparations for the main polar march. On its journey from New Zealand to the Antarctic, Terra Nova was trapped in pack ice for 20 days,
Scott refused to amend his schedule to deal with the Amundsen threat, writing, "The proper, as well as the wiser course, is for us to proceed exactly as though this had not happened".

Journey to the Pole

Scott outlined his plans for the southern journey to the entire shore party, but left open who would form the final polar team. Eleven days before Scott's teams set off towards the pole, Scott gave the dog driver Meares the following written orders at Cape Evans dated 20 October 1911 to secure Scott's speedy return from the pole using dogs:

The march south began on 1 November 1911, a caravan of mixed transport groups (motors, dogs, horses), with loaded sledges, travelling at different rates, all designed to support a final group of four men who would make a dash for the Pole. The southbound party steadily reduced in size as successive support teams turned back. Scott reminded the returning Atkinson of the order "to take the two dog-teams south in the event of Meares having to return home, as seemed likely".

Last march

The deflated party began the 
Meanwhile back at Cape Evans, the Terra Nova arrived at the beginning of February, and Atkinson decided to unload the supplies from the ship with his own men rather than set out south with the dogs to meet Scott as ordered. When Atkinson finally did leave south for the planned rendezvous with Scott, he encountered the scurvy-ridden Edward ("Teddy") Evans who needed his urgent medical attention. Atkinson therefore tried to send the experienced navigator Wright south to meet Scott, but chief meteorologist Simpson declared he needed Wright for scientific work. Atkinson then decided to send the short-sighted Cherry-Garrard on 25 February, who was not able to navigate, only as far as One Ton depot (which is within sight of Mount Erebus), effectively cancelling Scott's orders for meeting him at latitude 82 or 82.30 on 1 March.
With 400 miles (670 km) still to travel across the Ross Ice Shelf, Scott's party's prospects steadily worsened as, with deteriorating weather, frostbite, snow blindness, hunger and exhaustion, and no sign of the dog-teams, they struggled northward.
After walking a further 20 miles, the three remaining men made their final camp on 19 March,  He also wrote his "Message To The Public", primarily a defence of the expedition's organisation and conduct in which the party's failure is attributed to weather and other misfortunes, but ending on an inspirational note, with these words:

Scott is presumed to have died on 29 March 1912, or possibly one day later. The positions of the bodies in the tent when it was discovered eight months later suggested that Scott was the last of the three to die. says that Bowers was probably the last to die, citing evidence on p. 528.

Reputation

Glorification

The bodies of Scott and his companions were discovered by a search party on 12 November 1912 and their records retrieved. Their final camp became their tomb; a high cairn of snow was erected over it, topped by a roughly fashioned cross.
The world was informed of the tragedy when Terra Nova reached Oamaru, New Zealand, on 10 February 1913. Eleven-year-old Mary Steel wrote a poem which ended:

The survivors of the expedition were suitably honoured on their return, with polar medals and promotions for the naval personnel. In place of the knighthood that might have been her husband's had he survived, Kathleen Scott was granted the rank and precedence of a widow of a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath.
An article in The Times, reporting on the glowing tributes paid to Scott in the New York press, claimed that both Amundsen and Shackleton were "amazed to hear that such a disaster could overtake a well-organized expedition".
The response to Scott's final plea on behalf of the dependents of the dead was enormous by the standards of the day. The Mansion House Scott Memorial Fund closed at £75,000 (2009 approximation £5.5 million). This was not equally distributed; Scott's widow, son, mother and sisters received a total of £18,000 (£1.3 million). Wilson's widow got £8,500 (£600,000) and Bowers's mother £4,500 (£330,000). Edgar Evans's widow, children and mother received £1,500 (£109,000) between them..
In the dozen years following the disaster, more than 30 monuments and memorials were set up in Britain alone. These ranged from simple relics (Scott's sledging flag in Exeter Cathedral) to the foundation of the Scott Polar Research Institute at Cambridge. Many more were established in other parts of the world, including a statue crafted by his widow for his New Zealand base in Christchurch.See 
A century of storms and snow have covered the cairn and tent, which are now encased in the Ross Ice Shelf as it inches towards the Ross Sea. In 2001 glaciologist Charles R. Bentley estimated that the tent with the bodies was under about 75 feet (23 m) of ice and about 30 miles (48 km) from the point where they died; he speculated that in about 275 years the bodies would reach the Ross Sea, and perhaps float away inside an iceberg.

Modern reaction

Scott's reputation survived the period after World War II, beyond the 50th anniversary of his death.
In 1979 came the most sustained attack on Scott, from Roland Huntford's dual biography Scott and Amundsen in which Scott is depicted as a "heroic bungler".
The early years of the 21st century have seen a shift of opinion in Scott's favour, in what cultural historian Stephanie Barczewski calls "a revision of the revisionist view".
In 2005 David Crane published a new Scott biography which, according to Barczewski, goes some way towards an assessment of Scott "free from the baggage of earlier interpretations". 
In 2012, Karen May published her discovery that Scott had issued written orders, before his march to the Pole, for Meares to meet the returning party with dog-teams, in contrast to Huntford's assertion that Scott issued those vital instructions only as a casual oral order to Evans during the march to the Pole. This misrepresentation has given a generation of modern scholars since 1979 the impression that Scott had left his subordinates back at base unsure of his intentions, who would consequently have failed to use the dogs in a concerted attempt to relieve the returning polar party when the need arose.

Notes and references

Sources

Books

  | last = Amundsen
  | first = Roald
  | authorlink = Roald Amundsen
  | year = 1976
  | origyear = 1912
  | title = The South Pole
  | publisher = C. Hurst & Company
  | location = London
  | isbn = 978-0-903983-47-1
  | ref = 
  }}
  | last = Barczewski
  | first = Stephanie
  | year = 2007
  | title = Antarctic Destinies: Scott, Shackleton and the Changing Face of Heroism
  | publisher = Hembledon Continuum
  | location = London
  | isbn = 978-1-84725-192-3
  | ref = 
  }}
  | last = Cacho Gómez
  | first = Javier 
  | year = 2011
  | title = Amundsen-Scott: duelo en la Antártida
  | publisher = Fórcola
  | location = Madrid
  | isbn = 978-84-15174-31-8
  | ref = 
  }}
  | last = Cherry-Garrard
  | first = Apsley
  | authorlink = Apsley Cherry-Garrard
  | year = 1970
  | title = The Worst Journey in the World: Antarctic 1910–13
  | edition = 1965
  | publisher = Penguin Travel Library
  | location = Harmondsworth, Middlesex (UK)
  | isbn = 978-0-14-009501-2
  | oclc = 16589938
  | ref = 
  }}
  | last = Crane
  | first = David
  | authorlink = David Crane (historian)
  | year = 2005
  | title = Scott of the Antarctic: A Life of Courage, and Tragedy in the Extreme South
