[[People's Movement of Ukraine]]

CATEGORIES: Dissolution of the Soviet Union, Political parties established in 1989, Political parties in the Soviet Union, Liberal parties in Ukraine, Parliamentary factions in Ukraine, Ukrainian opposition groups, Nationalist parties in Ukraine

The People's Movement of Ukraine (Ukrainian: Народний Рух України, Narodnyi Rukh Ukrajiny) is a Ukrainian centre-right political party. Often it is simply referred to as the Movement (, Rukh). The party is an observer member of the European People's Party (EPP).
The Party gathers most of its voters and support from Western Ukraine.

History

Public movement

Initially organized as the People's Movement of Ukraine for Reconstruction (ie. for Perestroika), Rukh was founded in 1989 as a civil-political movement as there were no other political parties allowed in the Soviet Union but the Communist Party. The founding of Rukh was made possible due to Mikhail Gorbachev's Glasnost policies. The organization has its roots in Ukrainian dissidents — the most notable of them being Vyacheslav Chornovil — yet not excluding the fact that it was accepting various other politically oriented members from liberal communists to integralist nationalists. During March - September 1989 numerous constituent party conferences took place across Ukraine. The first Constituent Congress of the "People's Movement of Ukraine for Reconstruction" took place on September 8–10, 1989 in Kiev. Elected as the first leader of the movement was the Ukrainian poet and screenwriter Ivan Drach.
The official Soviet press and government portrayed members as anti-Semites at first.The Jewish card in Russian operations against Ukraine, Kyiv Post (June 30, 2009)
The biggest public, political, cultural, and social actions were:
At first the movement aimed at supporting Gorbachev's reforms, later People's Movement of Ukraine was instrumental in conducting an independence referendum in the Ukrainian SSR. This was partially due to the Russification policies of the Soviet Union when the USSR Supreme Soviet officially announced the Russian language as the singular official state language of the country in 1989. During Rukh's existence within the Soviet Union, its members were threatened and intimidated. In the western oblasts "Rukh" became colloquially known as an abbreviation for the call Save Ukraine, fellows! (Рятуйте Україну, Хлопці!). Iryna Farion: "The enemy never vanish on its own "like dew in the sun". "2000 weekly". 2012-06-14In the anticipation of Apostle. "Newspaper Den". 2004-1-13

Political party

The movement initially registered by the Ministry of Justice on February 9, 1990 as the political party. After the creation of the Ukrainian Republican Party (URP) in January 1990 and later Democratic Party of Ukraine (DemPU), the People's Movement of Ukraine unofficially existed as a coalition of the those two along with numerous other smaller factions. These parties created a group within the Verkhovna Rada called the Democratic Bloc which stood in opposition to Group 239, headed by Oleksandr Moroz (For the sovereign Soviet Ukraine) (see Ukrainian parliamentary election, 1990). In October 1990 took place the second Party Congress. During the session it was decided to exclude the word Reconstruction (Perestroika), not to be associated with the Communist movement. The head of the Party was elected once again Ivan Drach, while his deputies became Mykhailo Horyn and Oleksandr Lavrynovych. In order to draw closer URP and DemPU was established the Institute of Associative Membership in the Movement. The brittle coalition of the mentioned parties held until the presidential elections in September 1991 when URP and DemPU provided their own candidates as the opposition to Vyacheslav Chornovil.
On February 28 - March 1, 1992 took place the third Party Congress during which it was avoid the schism within the Party by reelecting a leadership triad of Ivan Drach, Mykhailo Horyn, and Vyacheslav Chornovil. The new deputies were M.Burakovsky, V.Lavrynovych. The coalition formally was recognized as dissolved due to both URP and DemPU declared themselves the presidential supporters. The People's Movement of Ukraine declared its opposition and in January 1992 re-registered due to substantial changes of its statues. Soon Ivan Drach has left the party, followed by the acquittance of Mykhailo Horyn in June 1992 together with V. Horyn was soon elected the head of the Ukrainian Republican Party. In December 1992 took place the IV Party Congress which once again revised its statute and the party goals. The party leader was elected Vyacheslav Chornovil, the rest party leadership was left without major changes. During the Congress the party delegates in opposition to Chornovil created the All-National Movement of Ukraine (VNRU), headed by Larysa Skoryk.
The People's Movement of Ukraine was registered by the Ukrainian ministry of Justice as a political party on February 1, 1993. Народний Рух України, Database DATA The parties parliamentary faction did split up in 2 different factions in the spring of 1999 (the breakaway faction was led by Hennadiy Udovenko which highest membership was 19 and ended with 14; the "other" faction ended with 23; meaning that 10 elected People's Movement of Ukraine deputies did not represent any segment of the party anymore by June 2002). E. Sharpe, 2006, ISBN 978-0-7656-1811-5 Right before the 1999 presidential elections another major schism took place within the party. Yuriy Kostenko openly protested against the election of Vyacheslav Chornovil as the party leader and established another party, People's Movement of Ukraine (Kostenko), where Kostenko became the leader of the party. Despite the split a followed party congress elected Vyacheslav Chornovil the party leader. The congress also adopted the signing of an agreement between People's Movement of Ukraine and Reforms and Order Party for a political bloc supporting Hennadiy Udovenko as a single presidential candidate for the next elections. At the parliamentary elections on 29 March 1998, the party received 9,4% of the vote and 46 seats. At the parliamentary elections on 30 March 2002, the party was part of the Viktor Yushchenko Bloc Our Ukraine. Currently, Rukh was a part of the Our Ukraine Bloc, where it represents the right wing of Union's party spectrum. At the parliamentary elections on 26 March 2006, the party was part of the Our Ukraine alliance, and the party's members secured 13 seats in the parliament. At the 2007 parliamentary elections the party was again part of the Our Ukraine–People's Self-Defense Bloc alliance, that won 72 out of 450 seats.
In the 2010 local elections the party won 8 representative in the regional parliament of the Lviv Oblast, 3 representative in the regional parliament of Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast, 1 in Kherson Oblast, 5 in the Supreme Council of Crimea and 3 seats in the city counsels of Lviv and Simferopol. Results of the elections, preliminary data, on interactive maps by Ukrayinska Pravda (8 November 2010)
The party competed on one single party under "umbrella" party "Fatherland", together with several other parties, during the 2012 parliamentary elections Proportional votes & Constituency seats, Central Electoral Commission of Ukraine % of total seats, Ukrayinska Pravda
In 2013 the party split in two parts. The party merged with Ukrainian People's Party in May 2013.Batkivschyna, Front for Change, Reform and Order Party, part of NRU unite for victory – Tymoshenko's address to congress, Interfax-Ukraine (15 June 2013) Tymoshenko re-elected Batkivshchyna leader, Yatseniuk council chair, Ukrinform (15 June 2013)

Political Platform

Directly out of the official website:

Elections history

 

Notes

 Temporarily merged with Batkivshchyna as Fatherland - United Opposition








