[[Travis Kvapil]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, 1976 births, People from Janesville, Wisconsin, Racing drivers from Wisconsin, NASCAR drivers, NASCAR Truck Series champions, ARCA Racing Series drivers, International Race of Champions drivers

Travis Wade Kvapil () is an American stock car racing driver. He competes in the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series, driving the No. 32 Ford for Go FAS Racing, and in the Camping World Truck Series, driving the No. 50 Chevrolet for MAKE Motorsports.

Early career

Kvapil grew up working on cars in his father's garage, and racing was a natural progression for the Wisconsin native. Kvapil began racing in 1992 at the age of 16 at Rockford Speedway, competing in the NASCAR Weekly Racing Series. He went on to win the American Short Tracker division track championship in 1994 at Rockford.  In 1995, he moved up to super late models at Madison International Speedway, 'Wisconsin's Fastest Half-Mile," and was named the track Rookie of the Year. He also became the track's Late Model Champion a year later in 1996. This honor made Kvapil the youngest to ever capture the title at the track at the age of 20.
Kvapil moved to the ARTGO Series, a Midwest asphalt short-track motor-racing touring series. He finished in the top-10 in points from 1998-2000.

NASCAR career

2001–2004

In 2001, Kvapil made his debut in the Craftsman Truck Series driving for Addington Racing in the No. 60 CAT Rental Stores Chevrolet.
In 2002, Kvapil managed to match his win total by winning the O'Reilly Auto Parts 200 at Memphis Motorsports Park. He finished the season with 14 top-10s and finished ninth in the final driver points standings.
Funding issues at Addington caused Kvapil to switch to the No. 16 IWX MotorFreight Chevrolet for Steve Coulter's Xpress Motorsports team in 2003. He won one race during the season at Bristol Motor Speedway for the O'Reilly 200 presented by Valvoline Maxlife. Kvapil finished the season with 22 top-10s in 25 races (88 percent).
Prior to the start of the 2004 season, Kvapil began a partnership with Alexander Meshkin to drive the No. 24 Line-X-Benders and eBay Bang! Racing Toyota. Kvapil came away with his first win of the season during the Line-X Spray-on Truck Bedliners 200 at Michigan International Speedway. The win gave Toyota their first win in the top-tiers of NASCAR. Two months later, Kvapil won at New Hampshire International Speedway. The same season, Kvapil won his first Bud Pole Award in the Craftsman Truck Series at the American Racing Wheels 200 at California Speedway. He finished eight in the final driver standings of the season.

2005–present

At the end of the 2004 season, Kvapil made his first NEXTEL Cup Series start at Martinsville Speedway. Kvapil drove the No. 06 Mobil 1  Dodge, the fourth car on the track from Penske Racing.
Kvapil scored his first ever Sprint Cup Series top-10 at Bristol Motor Speedway when he finished seventh during the Food City 500.
After his departure from Penske, Kvapil signed with PPI Motorsports for the 2006 NASCAR Sprint Cup Season. He drove the No. 32 Tide
In 2007, Jack Roush, owner of Roush Racing, offered Kvapil a seat in the No. 6 Ford F-150 in the NASCAR Camping World Truck Series. Kvapil replaced Mark Martin in the truck, who moved to Ginn Racing, and David Ragan, who was promoted to replace Martin in the No. 6 Ford in the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series.
Roush recognized Kvapil's talents, and helped him move over to the newly formed Yates Racing in the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series in 2008.
In 2009, Kvapil returned to the No. 28, but the team was forced to close after six races due to lack of funding. Kvapil qualified in place of Bob Jenkins and part-time off-road-racer Robby Gordon.
Kvapil returned to the seat of a full-time Sprint Cup ride, driving the No. 34, 37, 38 Long John Silver's Ford for Front Row Motorsports. Kvapil returned to FRM, but signed up to compete for the Camping World Truck Series championship with Randy Moss Motorsports in their #5 Toyota. However, after 10 races Kvapil was released in favor of defending Truck champion Todd Bodine, whose Germain Racing team partnered with RMM to continue running Bodine for 2011. Kvapil stuck with FRM in the Cup Series, driving their #38 for most races until J.J. Yeley swapped rides with Kvapil, with the latter driving FRM's start and park #55.
Leaving FRM after the end of the 2011 season, Kvapil was signed by BK Racing to compete in the Sprint Cup Series for 2012. Kvapil drives the No. 93 Toyota starting with the second race of the year at Phoenix International Raceway with Todd Anderson serving as his crew chief; Kvapil ended the 2012 season in 27th in the Sprint Cup Series, his second best finish in the points since his debut.
However, in 2013, both Kvapil and BK Racing struggled.  Kvapil dropped to 31st in points, recording five top-20 finishes, but 9 DNFs, including five blown engines.  The team released Kvapil shortly before the start of the 2014 season;

Personal life

Travis Kvapil is currently married to his wife Jennifer,
Kvapil competed against fellow Wisconsin native Matt Kenseth at Madison International Speedway. Kvapil, like Kenseth, is an avid Green Bay Packers fan. During the 2006 NASCAR Nextel Cup season, Kvapil and his No. 32 Tide from PPI Motorsports appeared on an episode of Guiding Light.

Legal issues

On October 8, 2013, Kvapil was arrested by the Mooresville, North Carolina police department following a domestic dispute. Kvapil was charged with assault on a female and false imprisonment, and was released on $1,000 bail.

Motorsports career results

NASCAR

(key) (Bold - Pole position awarded by qualifying time. Italics - Pole position earned by points standings or practice time. * – Most laps led.)

=Sprint Cup Series=

=Nationwide Series=

=Camping World Truck Series=

 Season in progress 
 Ineligible for series points






