[[Pisco Sour]]

CATEGORIES: Cocktails with brandy or cognac, Sour cocktails, Pisco, Peruvian alcoholic beverages, Cocktails with bitters, American inventions

A Pisco Sour is a cocktail typical of South American cuisine. The drink's name comes from pisco, which is its base liquor, and the cocktail term sour, in reference to sour citrus juice and sweetener components. The Peruvian Pisco Sour uses Peruvian pisco as the base liquor and adds Key lime (or lemon) juice, syrup, ice, egg white, and Angostura bitters. The Chilean version is similar, but uses Chilean pisco and Pica lime, and excludes the bitters and egg white. Other variants of the cocktail include those created with fruits like pineapple or plants such as coca leaves.
The cocktail originated in Lima, Peru, and was invented by Victor Vaughen Morris, an American bartender, in the early 1920s. Morris left the United States in 1903 to work in Cerro de Pasco, a city in central Peru. In 1916, he opened Morris' Bar in Lima, and his saloon quickly became a popular spot for the Peruvian upper class and English-speaking foreigners. The Pisco Sour underwent several changes until Mario Bruiget, a Peruvian bartender working at Morris' Bar, created the modern Peruvian recipe of the cocktail in the latter part of the 1920s by adding Angostura bitters and egg whites to the mix.
In Chile, historian Oreste Plath attributed the invention of the drink to Elliot Stubb, an English steward of a ship named Sunshine, who allegedly mixed Key lime juice, syrup, and ice cubes to create the cocktail in a bar, in 1872, in the port city of Iquique, which at that time was part of Peru. The original source cited by Plath attributed the invention of the whiskey sour to Stubb, not the Pisco Sour. The oldest known mentions of the Pisco Sour are from a 1921 magazine attributing Morris as the inventor and a 1924 advertisement for Morris' Bar published in a newspaper from the port of Valparaíso, Chile.
Chile and Peru both claim the Pisco Sour as their national drink, and each asserts exclusive ownership of both pisco and the cocktail. Peru celebrates a yearly public holiday in honor of the cocktail during the first Saturday of February. The two kinds of pisco and the two variations in the style of preparing the Pisco Sour are distinct in both production and taste. Thus, the Pisco Sour has become a significant and oft-debated topic of Latin American popular culture.

Name

The term sour refers to mixed drinks containing a base liquor (bourbon or some other whiskey), lemon or lime juice, and a sweetener.

History

Background

The first grapevines were brought to Peru shortly after its conquest by Spain in the 16th century. Spanish chroniclers from the time note the first winemaking in South America took place in the hacienda Marcahuasi of Cuzco.
Already in the 16th century, Spanish settlers in Chile and Peru began producing aguardiente,
According to historian Luciano Revoredo, the preparation of pisco with lemon dates as far back as the 18th century. He bases his claim on a source found in the Mercurio Peruano which details the prohibition of aguardiente in Lima's Plaza de toros de Acho, the oldest bullring in the Americas. At this time, the drink was named Punche (Punch), and was sold by slaves. Revoredo further argues this drink served as the predecessor of the Californian Pisco punch, invented by Duncan Nicol in the Bank Exchange Bar of San Francisco, California.

Origin

The Pisco Sour originated in Lima, Peru.
Some discrepancy exists on the exact date when Morris created the popular cocktail. Mixologist Dale DeGroff asserts the drink was invented in 1915,
The original recipe of the Pisco Sour, as invented by Morris, has not yet been found. According to Peruvian researcher Guillermo Toro-Lira, "it is assumed that it was a crude mix of pisco with lime juice and sugar, as was the whiskey sour of those days." The cocktail's recipe continued to evolve, and the bar's registry shows customers commented on the continuously improving taste of the drink. The last version of the recipe was developed by Mario Bruiget, a Peruvian from Chincha Alta who worked under the apprenticeship of Morris starting on July 16, 1924. Bruiget's recipe added the Angostura bitters and egg whites to the mix.
Morris used advertisements to promote his bar and invention. The oldest known mention of the Pisco Sour comes from an April 22, 1921, edition of the Peruvian magazine Mundial. In the magazine, not only is the Pisco Sour described as a white-colored beverage, but its invention is attributed to "Mister Morris."
Over time, competition from nearby bars and Victor Morris' deteriorating health led to the decline and fall of his enterprise. During this time, due to his worsening constitution, Morris delegated most of the bartending to his employees. Adding to the problem, nearby competitors, such as the Hotel Bolívar and Hotel Lima Country Club, housed bars which took clientele away from Morris' Bar. Moreover, Toro-Lira discovered that Morris accused four of his former bartenders of intellectual property theft after they left to work in one of these competing establishments. In 1929, Morris declared voluntary bankruptcy and closed his saloon. A few months later, on June 11, Victor Vaughn Morris died of cirrhosis.

Spread

After Morris closed his bar, Bruiget began working as a bartender for the nearby Grand Hotel Maury, where he continued to serve his Pisco Sour recipe. His success with the drink led local Limean oral tradition to associate the Hotel Maury as the original home of the Pisco Sour. As other former apprentices of Morris found other work, they also spread the Pisco Sour recipe. During the 1930s the drink made its way into California, reaching bars as far north as the city of San Francisco.
Beatriz Jiménez, a journalist from the Spanish newspaper El Mundo, indicates that back in Peru, the luxury hotels of Lima adopted the Pisco Sour as their own in the 1940s. Jiménez recollected oral traditions claiming an inebriated Ava Gardner had to be carried away by John Wayne after drinking too many Pisco Sours. Ernest Hemingway and Orson Welles are said to have been big fans of what they described as "that Peruvian drink."
In 1984, Bolivian journalist Ted Córdova Claure writes that the Hotel Bolívar stood as a monument to the decadence of Peruvian oligarchy (in Spanish: "Este hotel es un monumento a la decadencia de la oligarquía peruana."). He noted the locale as being the traditional home of the Pisco Sour and recommended it as one of the best hotels in Lima.

Nationality dispute

In Chile, a local story developed in the 1980s attributing the invention of the Pisco Sour to Elliot Stubb, an English steward from a sailing ship named "Sunshine." Chilean folklorist and historian Oreste Plath contributed to the legend's propagation by writing that, according to the Peruvian newspaper El Comercio de Iquique, in 1872 Stubb opened a bar in the then-Peruvian port of Iquique (after obtaining leave to disembark) and invented the Pisco Sour while experimenting with drinks.
Nevertheless, researcher Toro-Lira argues the story "has been recently refuted when it was found that the original historical source, the newspaper El Comercio de Iquique, was mentioning instead the alleged invention of the whiskey sour and not of the Pisco Sour." This claim is further certified by the University of Cuyo, Argentina, which in 1962 published the story of Elliot Stubb and his alleged invention of the whiskey sour in Iquique. An excerpt from the story has Elliot Stubb stating, "From now on ... this shall be my drink of battle, my favorite drink, and it shall be named Whisky Sour" (in Spanish: "En adelante dijo Elliot — éste será mi trago de batalla, — mi trago favorito — , y se llamará Whisky Sour.").

Preparation and variants

The Peruvian and Chilean versions of the Pisco Sour are prepared differently. The Peruvian Pisco Sour cocktail is made by mixing Peruvian pisco with lime juice, simple syrup, egg white, Angostura bitters (for garnish), and ice cubes.
Considerable variations also exist in the pisco used in the cocktails. According to food and wine expert Mark Spivak, the difference is in the way both beverages are produced; whereas "Chilean pisco is mass-produced", the Peruvian version "is made in small batches."
Variations of the Pisco Sour exist in Peru, Bolivia, and Chile. There are adaptations of the cocktail in Peru using fruits such as maracuya, aguaymanto, and apples, or traditional ingredients such the coca leaf.
Cocktails similar to the Pisco Sour include the Chilean Piscola and the Peruvian Algarrobina Cocktail. Piscola is made by mixing pisco with cola.

Popularity

Australian journalist Kate Schneider writes in an article for News.au that the Pisco Sour "has become so famous that there is an International Pisco Sour Day celebration on the first Saturday in February every year, as well as a Facebook page with more than 600,000 likes."
During the 2008 APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting, Peru promoted its Pisco Sour with widespread acceptance. According to Antonio Brack, Peru's Environment Minister, "Pisco Sour has been the 'star' of the APEC Summit, the drink was served in several meetings at the Government Palace and the APEC Summit venue."
American celebrity chef Anthony Bourdain also drew attention to the cocktail when, in an episode of his Travel Channel program No Reservations, he drank a Pisco Sour in Valparaíso, Chile, and said "that's good, but ... next time, I'll have a beer." The broadcaster Radio Programas del Perú reported that Jorge López Sotomayor, the episode's Chilean producer and Bourdain's travel partner in Chile, said Bourdain found the Pisco Sour he drank in Valparaíso as boring and worthless (in Spanish: "A mí me dijo que el pisco sour lo encontró aburrido y que no valía la pena."). Lopez added that Bourdain had recently arrived from Peru, where he drank several Pisco Sours which he thought tasted better than the Chilean version.
In Mexico, singer-songwriter Aleks Syntek controversially posted on Twitter that the Pisco Sour is Chilean. After receiving critical responses to his statement, Syntek apologized and mentioned he was only joking.



Notes



Bibliography




