[[Institute of Education (Dublin)]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 1969, Secondary schools in Dublin (city), Buildings and structures in Dublin (city), 1969 establishments in Ireland

The Institute of Education (IOE) was founded in 1969 by Irish applied mathematics school teacher, Raymond Kearns, Unlike most other Irish secondary schools, the Institute only provides tuition for the final two years of the Leaving Certificate, fifth and sixth year. Currently the student population stands at (approx.) 250 for fifth year and 750 for sixth year.

Programmes

Being a Senior Cycle-only school, The Institute provides several programmes to Leaving Certificate students. Those who wish to study full time at the school are known as day students and pay standard yearly fees of €6,950. Students may also attend the school's Friday evening and Saturday morning intense tuition course with fees based on the number of subjects taken. Intensive five-day revision courses are also available during normal school holidays at Christmas, Easter, winter mid-term break, in May and August. Study skills seminars available in September. From 2009, the Institute launched Health Professions Admissions Test (HPAT) preparation courses.

Self-financing

The Institute is one of very few secondary schools in Ireland that is not funded at least in part by central government through the Department of Education. As a result, the school is not subject to inspections from the Department, is not obliged to follow a certain curriculum and may pay teachers as it wishes, rather than according to the public service wages paid to most teachers in the country. The school is owned by Ray Kearns and family. 

Buildings and facilities

The school is located in a number of refurbished Georgian, terraced houses on Leeson Street in Dublin. It also has two newer buildings at the back of the terraced houses. The Institute has a science laboratory, art room, home economics kitchen, computer laboratory, and a specialised technical drawing classroom. There are two halls for supervised study. There is also a students' canteen.

Academic performance

The Institute is apersonal experience grind school due to its focus on exam results. In 2005, it had the largest number of students sitting the Leaving Certificate of any school in Ireland (710). The Institute sent a higher percentage of its students to third level education than 90% of all other schools in Dublin. 
The Institute of Education is Ireland's leading private tuition college (based on university entrants), sending more students to university than any other school over the past few years. Students are accepted with all levels of ability.

Exambrief

Irish Independent in cooperation with the Institute of Education produce Exam Brief, a yearly six part supplement dedicated to preparation for Leaving and Junior Certificate exams. This supplement is published in February, March and April each year.

Exam Centre

The Institute of Education is an official exam centre for Irish Leaving Certificate and BioMedical Admissions Test.BMAT Exam Centres

Notable Alumni






