[[Vincent Kartheiser]]

CATEGORIES: 1979 births, American male child actors, American male film actors, American male television actors, Living people, Male actors from Minneapolis, Minnesota, University of California, Los Angeles alumni, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors, American environmentalists

Vincent Paul Kartheiser (born May 5, 1979) is an American actor known for playing Connor in Angel and Pete Campbell in Mad Men.

Early life

Kartheiser was born in Minneapolis, Minnesota, the son of Janet Marie (née Gruyé), who ran a nursery, and James Ralph Kartheiser, who sold construction equipment.

Career

Some of Kartheiser's first acting experiences were on stage of Children's Theatre Company in Minneapolis, including roles in Pippi Longstocking, Our Town, Dr. Seuss' The 500 Hats of Bartholomew Cubbins, and Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm.
Kartheiser made his screen debut with a bit role in the 1993 film Untamed Heart. Kartheiser found himself cast in mostly family fare, including The Indian in the Cupboard and a starring role in the film Alaska. The film led to Kartheiser getting the lead role in Masterminds.
Kartheiser next portrayed Bobby, a drug-addicted, homeless street urchin in Larry Clark's Another Day in Paradise. He had two explicit sex scenes with Natasha Gregson, one of which was cut from the film in order to avoid an NC-17 rating. The film earned the young actor significant accolades, and he went on to appear in Strike! (later retitled All I Wanna Do) and Crime and Punishment in Suburbia.
Screened at the 2000 Sundance Film Festival, Crime and Punishment in Suburbia was a moody, updated take on Dostoyevsky's Crime and Punishment, set in a modern high school. Kartheiser later landed a regular role on the supernatural drama series Angel in 2002.  He played Connor, the son of two vampires, Darla and the titular Angel. Upon returning to Los Angeles, Connor's gradually unraveling mental state was among the main focuses of the show's fourth season; he would make two more appearances during its final season.
Returning to film work, Kartheiser starred in the well-received coming-of-age drama Dandelion, which was shown at the 2004 Sundance Film Festival.
Since its 2007 debut, he has played the role of ambitious young ad man Pete Campbell in the television series Mad Men, on AMC.
Along with the rest of the cast of Mad Men, Kartheiser won the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series in 2009 and 2010."Streep, Penn Win Top SAG Awards For Film"
Kartheiser filmed his role as Fielding in the BBC's two-part adaptation of Martin Amis' novel Money in the winter of 2009.  The adaptation began airing on BBC Two on the 23rd of May, 2010.
Kartheiser's short film, Fruit of Labor, made its Orange County debut at the Newport Beach Film Festival in April 2013.of Labor Newport Beach Film Festival 2013 Screenings"
In the summer of 2013, Kartheiser returned to his theatrical roots in Minneapolis to portray Mr. Darcy in an adaptation of Pride and Prejudice at the Guthrie Theater.

Personal life

Kartheiser dated his The Hairy Bird co-star Rachael Leigh Cook for four months in 1998. Kartheiser began dating his Mad Men co-star Alexis Bledel in mid-2012.
In a 2010 interview with The Observer, Kartheiser revealed that he eschewed the extravagant lifestyle of a Hollywood celebrity in favor of simple living.

Film and television credits






