[[I Should Be So Lucky]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 singles, 1988 singles, Dance-pop songs, Songs written by Mike Stock (musician), Songs written by Matt Aitken, Songs written by Pete Waterman, Kylie Minogue songs, Number-one debut singles, Number-one singles in Australia, European Hot 100 Singles number-one singles, Number-one singles in Germany, Irish Singles Chart number-one singles, UK Singles Chart number-one singles, Number-one singles in Switzerland, Song recordings produced by Stock Aitken Waterman, Singles certified silver by the Syndicat National de l'Édition Phonographique, 1987 songs, Mushroom Records singles, Pete Waterman Entertainment singles

{{Infobox single
| Name = I Should Be So Lucky
| Cover =  KylieIShouldBeSoLuckyCover.png
| Artist = Kylie Minogue
| from Album = Kylie
| Released = 29 December 1987
| Format = {{flat list|
| Recorded = October 1987
| Genre = {{flat list|
| Border = yes
| Length = 3:24
| Label = {{flat list|
| Writer = 

"I Should Be So Lucky" is a song performed by Australian recording artist and songwriter Kylie Minogue from her debut studio album Kylie (1988). Released on 29 December 1987 by Mushroom Records and PWL Records, the song became a worldwide breakthrough hit. With its now iconic image of Minogue on the front cover shot by David Levine Photographer
The song was the written and produced by Stock Aitken Waterman for Minogue, and they went on to produce Minogue's first four studio albums. "I Should Be So Lucky" was an international hit, reaching number-one in several countries including Australia, United Kingdom, Japan, Germany as well as making the US Billboard Hot 100 Top 30.

Background and composition

After the success of her debut single "Locomotion" in Australia, Minogue traveled to London to work with Stock Aitken Waterman, a successful British writing and production team. They knew little of Minogue and had forgotten that she was arriving; as a result, they wrote "I Should Be So Lucky" in forty minutes while she waited outside the recording studio. Mike Stock wrote the lyrics for the song in response to what he had learned about Minogue prior to her arrival. He believed that although she was a successful soap star in Australia and very talented, there must be something wrong with her and figured that she must be unlucky in love. Minogue recorded the song in less than an hour, which Stock attributes to her good ear for music and her quick memorization skills. After Minogue finished the recording session she returned home to Australia to continue work on the soap opera, Neighbours.
"I Should Be So Lucky" is a dance-pop oriented song, which features elements of bubblegum pop and new wave music. According to the music sheet on MusicNotes.
"I Should Be So Lucky" received positive to mixed reviews from contemporary music critics, who thought that the song was an instant highlight and good song within the 80's, while some dismissed the lyrical content. Despite this, the song received commercial attention around the world, where the song peaked in the top ten in many countries including Australia, Germany, New Zealand, Japan, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the Dance charts in the U.S.
The song was also known to many in the late 1980s and early 1990s as one of Minogue's signature songs, which many critics entering the song on their best track or worst track list. And additionally, in 2011, "I Should Be So Lucky" was added to the National Film and Sound Archive of Australia's Sounds of Australia registry.National Film and Sound Archive: 'I Should Be So Lucky' on the Sounds of Australia registryNational Film and Sound Archive: 'I Should Be So Lucky' on australianscreen online
An undisputed classic, "I Should Be So Lucky" later appeared on six of Kylie's hit compilations including Greatest Hits (1992), Greatest Hits 1987–1999 (2003), Greatest Hits 87–97 (2003), Ultimate Kylie (2004), her compilation The Best of Kylie Minogue (2012) and The Abbey Road Sessions (2012).

Reception

Critical response

"I Should Be So Lucky" garnered positive reviews from some music critics. Nick Levine, from Digital Spy, called it "standout track".
The song won the Highest Selling Single award at the 3rd annual ARIA Awards.

Chart performance

"I Should Be So Lucky" was released on 29 December 1987. It was a commercial success, reaching atop the Australian Kent Music Report chart for six consecutives weeks, and became her second number-one single after Locomotion.
Elsewhere, "I Should Be So Lucky" peaked on  both the Billboard Hot 100 and  the Hot Dance Club Play. The song reached No. 10 on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart on 4 June 1988 and no. 28 on the Hot 100 on 16 July 1988. In Canada, the song reached at No. 61.

Music video

The music video for "I Should Be So Lucky" was directed by Chris Langman and filmed in November 1987 at Channel 7 Studios in Melbourne, Australia."I Should Be So Lucky" Music Video. kylie.br. Retrieved 10 June 2007. The video features Minogue walking through her home, with scenes of her dancing in front of a colourful chalkboard background intercut throughout. It presented a cute, wholesome, young "girl-next-door" image of Minogue to the public, with scenes of her giggling and making funny faces to the camera.
Another version of the video was made for live television promotion. This version of the video shows Kylie riding in a car with several friends through Sydney with passersby waving to her as she rides by them.
The video premiered in the UK in January 1988."I Should Be So Lucky" Music Video Information. mvdbase. Retrieved 10 June 2007. The complete version of "I Should Be So Lucky" featured in the music video has been released commercially through multiple VHS and DVD collections. Its most recent inclusion is on the companion DVD to her second greatest hits album Ultimate Kylie in 2004. Outtakes from the music video were used in Kylie: The Videos.

As satire

The British satirical programme Spitting Image made a send-up of I Should Be So Lucky entitled Kylie Minogue, in which Minogue is depicted as being brought to life in a way similar to Frankenstein's monster in an old 1930s movie. The action shifts between the laboratory to an apartment similar to that of the original video. The song also pokes fun at her performance in the Australian soap opera Neighbours, in which as Charlene Mitchell, later Robinson she was best known at the time, and implies that she was lucky to have been chosen over other soap stars, namely Paul Henry who was Benny Hawkins in the British drama Crossroads. Stock, Aitken and Waterman are combined together as a large tape player providing creature-Minogue's voice which at one point is distorted to sound like Rick AstleyThe video was available on youtube before being removed
Kylie Minogue is track 4 on the 1990 Spitting Image CD 20 Great Golden Gobs.
British comedians French and Saunders included a send-up of the song during the third season of their show (broadcast 26 April 1990). The sketch features the recording of the song with an orchestra and vocals by three opera divas, played by French, Saunders, and British mezzo-soprano Sarah Walker.

Cover versions and uses in popular culture

The popular sketch comedy television show French & Saunders made a parody of "I Should Be So Lucky". Right after the release of the original song, Brazilian pop artist Simony recorded a version in Brazilian Portuguese entitled "Acho Que Sou Louca" (literally I Think I'm Crazy) . In 1992, the Egyptian pop singer Simon recorded a cover of the song with new lyrics in Arabic titled "Bahibak Aawy". French guitarist Noel Akchote's 2007 album "So Lucky" includes an instrumental cover. In September 2007, a cover version of "I Should Be So Lucky" appeared on the album Dolce Vita by Spanish singer Soraya Arnelas."Soraya Arnelas confirma el track list de "Dolce Vita"". Official Soraya Arnelas Spanish Blog. 1 September 2007. Retrieved 19 December 2007. Also that year, Japanese duo mihimaru GT released a hip hop cover version of the song. It was released as a double A-side single, along with the song "Ai Kotoba", in Japan in November 2007."Discography". mihimaru-GT. Retrieved 19 December 2007. More recent in 2008, Northern Kings recorded a rock version of this song included on their second album Rethroned.
The Kylie Minogue recording features in the 1989 film Cookie.
Irish rock band U2 included snippets of the "I Should Be So Lucky" lyrics into their live version of "Angel of Harlem" on their Australian tour dates upon dedicating their song to Minogue.

Formats and track listings

These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of "I Should Be So Lucky".
(Not available at time of original release. Released for the first time as part of iTunes PWL archive release in 2009.) 

Live performances

Minogue performed the song on the following concert tours:
The song was also performed on:

Credits and personnel

Credits adapted from the Kylie liner notes.

Charts and certifications

Charts

Year-end charts

Certifications

Chart successions








