[[Aerial firefighting]]

CATEGORIES: Aerial firefighting, Wildland fire suppression

Aerial firefighting is the use of aircraft and other aerial resources to combat wildfires. The types of aircraft used include fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters. Smokejumpers and rappellers are also classified as aerial firefighters, delivered to the fire by parachute from a variety of fixed-wing aircraft, or rappelling from helicopters.  Chemicals used to fight fires may include water, water enhancers such as foams and gels, and specially formulated fire retardants.

Terminology

A wide variety of terminology has been used in the popular media for the aircraft (and methods) used in aerial firefighting. The terms Airtanker or air tanker generally refer to fixed-wing aircraft based in the United States; "airtanker" is used in official documentation.S. Court of Appeals The term "waterbomber" is used in Canadian government documents for the same class of vehicles.Aviation Services - Aviation, Forest Fire and Emergency Services, Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources
Air attack is an industry term used for the actual application of aerial resources, both fixed-wing and rotorcraft, on a fire. Within the industry, though, "air attack" may also refer to the supervisor in the air (usually in a fixed-wing aircraft) who supervises the process of attacking the wildfire from the air, including fixed-wing airtankers, helicopters, and any other aviation resources assigned to the fire. The Air Tactical Group Supervisor (ATGS), often called "air attack," is usually flying at an altitude above other resources assigned to the fire, often in a fixed-wing plane but occasionally (depending on assigned resources or the availability of qualified personnel) in a helicopter.
Depending on the size, location, and assessed potential of the wildfire, the "air attack" or ATGS person may be charged with initial attack (the first response of firefighting assets on fire suppression), or with extended attack, the ongoing response to and management of a major wildfire requiring additional resources including engines, ground crews, and other aviation personnel and aircraft needed to control the fire and establish control lines or firelines ahead of the wildfire.

Equipment

A wide variety of helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft are used for aerial firefighting. In 2003, it was reported that "The U.S. Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management own, lease, or contract for nearly 1,000 aircraft each fire season, with annual expenditures in excess of US$250 million in recent years".

Helicopters

Helicopters may be fitted with tanks (helitankers) or they may carry buckets. Some helitankers, such as the Erickson AirCrane, are also outfitted with a front-mounted foam cannon. Buckets are usually filled by submerging or dipping them in lakes, rivers, reservoirs, or portable tanks. The most popular of the buckets is the flexible Bambi Bucket. Tanks can be filled on the ground (by water tenders or truck-mounted systems) or water can be siphoned from lakes, rivers, reservoirs, or a portable tank through a hanging snorkel. Popular firefighting helicopters include variants of the Bell 204 and the Erickson S-64 Aircrane helitanker, which features a sea snorkel for filling from a natural water source while in flight. Currently the worlds biggest helicopter Mil Mi-26 uses a bambi-bucket.

File:Ukrainian MChS Mil Mi-8 Belyakov.jpg|Mil Mi-8 of the Ukrainian Ministry of Emergency Situations taking on water near Nezhin
Image:Kfd-205-N408KC-050428-26cr.jpg|Kern County (California) Fire Department Bell 205 dropping water during a training exercise at the Mojave Spaceport
Image:S-64 Aircrane.jpg|S-64 Erickson Air-Crane photographed at Ioannina airport, Greece
Image:Laco-s70-N160LA-040501-01.jpg|Los Angeles County Fire Department's Sikorsky S-70C Firehawk during a water drop demonstration at Station 129 in Lancaster, California

Airtankers

Airtankers or water bombers are fixed-wing aircraft fitted with tanks that can be filled on the ground at an air tanker base or, in the case of flying boats and amphibious aircraft, by skimming water from lakes, reservoirs, or large rivers.
Various aircraft have been used over the years for firefighting. In 1947, the United States Air Force and United States Forest Service experimented with World War II aircraft dropping water-filled bombs. The bombs were unsuccessful, and internal water tanks were used instead."Water Bombs for Forest Fires" Popular Mechanics, October 1947 Though World War II and Korean War-era bombers were for a long time the mainstay of the aerial firefighting fleet, and are still in useGiant air tanker drops water on Mount Wilson, Associated Press story, September 1, 2009, published in AT&T on-line news newer purpose-built tankers are coming online. The smallest are the Single Engine Air Tankers (SEATs). These are agricultural sprayers that generally drop about  of water or fire retardant solution each drop. Another is the Ukrainian Antonov An-2 biplane which can be fitted with floats that can scoop water from the surface of a body of water. An advantage of the biplane is that it has a lower stall speed than a monoplane meaning it a can fly more slowly over a fire which enhances the accuracy of water or retardant drops. Medium aircraft include the S-2 Tracker (retrofitted with turboprop engines as the S-2T) as used by the California Department of Forestry & Fire Protection (CDF), as well as Conair Group Inc. of Abbotsford, British Columbia, while the Douglas DC-4, the DC-7, the Lockheed C-130 Hercules, P-2V Neptune, Lockheed P-3 Orion and, commercial equivalent, the L188 Electra as used by Air Spray Ltd., of Red Deer, Alberta and others have been used as heavy tankers.
The largest aerial firefighter currently in use is a Boeing 747 aerial firefighter, known as the Evergreen Supertanker that can carry 
The next largest aerial firefighters currently in use is the Russian Ministry of Emergency Situations operates convertible-to-cargo IL-76 airtankers that can carry up to  tanking systems, and a few of Beriev Be-200 amphibians.
Bombardier's Dash 8 Q Series aircraft are the basis of new, next-generation air tankers. Cascade Aerospace has converted two pre-owned Q400s to act as part-time water bomberQ400 Airtanker Conversion and part-time transport for France's Sécurité Civile, one of which is registered   F-ZBMC,Photo of the De Havilland Canada DHC-8-402Q(MR) Dash 8 at the Marseilles-Provence Airport in July 2005 on airliners.. Retrieved 2010-03-12. while Neptune Aviation is converting a pre-owned Q300 as a prototype to augment their P2V aircraft. Air Spray Aviation is also in the process of converting a BAe146 to the role of air tanker at its maintenance facility in Chico, California. Another modern-era passenger jet now being considered for conversion to aerial firefighting in the US, is the McDonnell Douglas MD-80 series.ktvz.html
Similar in configuration to the World War II–era PBY Catalina, the Canadair CL-215 Scooper, and Bombardier CL-415 SuperScooper are designed and built specifically for firefighting. The "Super Scoopers" are not common in the United States where only 2 operate seasonally in southern California. Los Angeles County leases two  CL-415sSeptember 1998 issue of WILDLAND FIREFIGHTER Magazine. Retrieved 2010-03-12. from the Province of Quebec during the fall when the Santa Ana winds are at their worst. 6 American owned CL-215s operate for various State and Federal agencies. Critics of scoopers in the US claim that there is not enough suitable water in fire prone states. CL-215s have been employed with success in North Carolina, Minnesota, Michigan, Wisconsin, Washington, Alaska, Northern Idaho, and Montana.
French "Sécurité Civile" owns 12 Canadair CL-415, 9 Conair Turbo-Firecat and 2 Dash 8. Most pilots are retired naval aviators, less often regular air force pilots or even ex members of acrobatic teams like "La Patrouille de France". It is a high-risk job that requires very skilled pilots.
Croatian Air Force uses six CL-415 planes, as well as the six AT 802s for (mainly) firefighting purposes.
Another amphibian is the Russian Beriev Be-200. It can carry a maximum payload of about  of water, making "scoops" in suitable stretches of water in 14 seconds.  It was successfully used to fight fires in the southern European countries such as Greece and Portugal. Also in Asian countries like Israel.

Image:Fox-firebase-aero union-N920AU-070904-02-24.jpg|Lockheed P-3A Orion N920AU Operated by Aero Union
Image:PZL M18B Dropping Water.jpg|A PZL M-18 Dromader drops water near Mobridge, SD
Image:4316MAT5.jpg|Spanish Canadair CL415
Image:Watertanker IL-76D of IRGC.jpg| An IL-76TD of IRGC performs maneuver in 2012 Iran Kish Air Show

Comparison table of fixed-wing, firefighting tanker airplanes

all links, citations and data sources are listed in the paragraph above. For accident and grounding citations, see paragraph below table.
Category legend: Light: under  - currently only used for the B747 Supertanker.

Leadplanes

The Lead Plane function directs the activities of the airtankers by both verbal target descriptions and by physically leading the airtankers on the drop run. The leadplane is typically referred to as a "Bird Dog" in Canada or "Supervision" aircraft in Australia. The O-2 Skymaster, Cessna 310 and OV-10 Bronco have been used as spotter and lead plane platforms. The Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources has also used the Cessna 337. The Beechcraft Baron was long used as a leadplane or air attack ship, but most were retired in 2003; more common now is the Beechcraft King Air and the Twin Commander 690. A Cessna Citation 500 jet owned by Air Spray Aviation was used by the British Columbia Ministry of Forests beginning in 1995 and used for two fire seasons to lead the very fast, Electra L188 air tanker to the fires. This was the first time a jet aircraft was used as an lead plane or "bird dog". The Department of Environment and Conservation (DEC), in Western Australia operates a fleet of nine American Champion Scouts 8GCBC during the summer months as spotter aircraft and Air Attack platforms. The Provinces of Alberta and British Columbia contract Air Spray Aviation to supply Twin Commander 690 as bird dog aircraft for their air tanker fleets.  Air Spray owns 9 Twin Commander 690 for use as bird dog aircraft.

Fleet grounding

In the United States, most of these aircraft are privately owned and contracted to government agencies, and the National Guard and the U.S. Marines also maintain fleets of firefighting aircraft. On May 10, 2004, The U.S. Forest Service (USFS) and the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) announced that they were cancelling contracts with operators of 33 heavy airtankers. They cited liability concerns and an inability to safely manage the fleet after the wing failure and resulting crash of a C-130A Hercules in California and a PB4Y-2 in Colorado during the summer of 2002. Both aged aircraft broke up in flight due to catastrophic fatigue cracks at the wing roots. After subsequent third-party examination and extensive testing of all USFS contracted heavy airtankers, three companies were awarded contracts and now maintain a combined fleet of 23 aircraft.

Fire retardant

Borate salts used in the past to fight wildfires have been found to sterilize the soil and be toxic to animals so are now prohibited. Newer retardants use ammonium sulfate or ammonium polyphosphate with attapulgite clay thickener or diammonium phosphate with a guar gum derivative thickener. These are not only less toxic but act as fertilizers to help the regrowth of plants after the fire. Fire retardants often contain wetting agents, preservatives and rust inhibitors and are colored red with ferric oxide or fugitive color to mark where they have been dropped. Brand names of fire retardants for aerial application include Fire-Trol and Phos-Chek.
Some water-dropping aircraft carry tanks of a guar gum derivative to thicken the water and reduce runoff.

Tactics and capabilities

Helicopters can hover over the fire and drop water or retardant. The S-64 Helitanker has microprocessor-controlled doors on its tank. The doors are controlled based on the area to be covered and wind conditions. Fixed-wing aircraft must make a pass and drop water or retardant like a bomber. Spotter (Air Tactical Group Supervisor) aircraft often orbit the fire at a higher altitude to coordinate the efforts of the smoke jumper, helicopter, media, and retardant-dropping aircraft; while lead planes fly low-level ahead of the airtankers to mark the trajectory for the drop, and ensure overall safety for both ground-based and aerial firefighters.
Water is usually dropped directly on flames because its effect is short-lived. Fire retardants are typically dropped ahead of the moving fire or along its edge and may remain effective for two or more days. This can create artificial firebreaks where the terrain is too rugged or remote for ground crews to cut fireline.
Aerial firefighting is most effectively used in conjunction with ground-based efforts, as aircraft are only one weapon in the firefighting arsenal. However, there have been cases of aircraft extinguishing fires long before ground crews were able to reach them.
Some firefighting aircraft can refill their tanks in mid-flight, by flying down to skim the surface of large bodies of water. One example is the Bombardier CL-415. This is particularly useful in rural areas where flying back to an airbase for refills may take too much time.  In 2002 an Ontario CL-415 crew was able to refill 100 times within a 4-hour mission, delivering an astounding  { June 1, 2002 Dryden fire # 10 Tanker #271 civil ident C-GOGE } Aquabobs are a useful tool for modern day fighting of wild-fires using water-bombing aircraft. A number of Aquabobs are dropped into a lake, where they slowly fill up with water. The inventor of the Aquabob claims the name comes form the Bobbing action, when the empty Aquabob is dropped into the lake. Many lives have been saved by these, as they significantly speed up the process of re-hydrating water-bombing operations.

Incidents

Urban legends about aerial firefighting

| last = Mikkelson
| first = Barbara
| title = Corpus Crispy
| date = 2007-01-20
| url = 
| accessdate = 2010-02-03 }}[/ref]



Notes






