[[Economy of Russia]]

CATEGORIES: Economy of Russia, History of Russia (1992–present), World Trade Organization member economies

The economy of Russia is the 9th largest economy by market exchange rate and the sixth largest by purchasing power parity (PPP).
The Russian economy is currently labeled as a high income economy and by extension, as a developed country by the World Bank. The country has an abundance of natural resources, including timber, precious metals, and particularly fossil fuels (oil, natural gas, and coal) that can be developed without the constraint of OPEC production quotas and other rules (Russia is not an OPEC member).opec.htm In recent years, Russia's oil and gas production and pipeline projects have been not only a primary source of Russia's economic growth but also a geostrategic lever in the country's relationship with Europe and Asia.org/files/russia_oil_exports.pdf
Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia has undergone significant changes, moving from a centrally planned economy to a more market-based and globally integrated economy. Economic reforms of the shock therapy in the late 1980s and during 1990s privatized many sectors of industry and agriculture, with notable exceptions in the energy and defense-related sectors. Nonetheless, the rapid privatization process, including a much criticized "loans-for-shares" scheme that turned over major state-owned firms to politically connected "oligarchs", has left equity ownership highly concentrated. As of 2011, Russia's capital, Moscow, had the highest number of billionaires of any city in the world.
In late 2008 and early 2009, Russia experienced the first recession after ten years of experiencing a rising economy, until stable growth resumed in late 2009 and 2012.worldbank.GDP.KD.nielsen.html Despite the deep but brief recession, the economy has not been as seriously affected by the global financial crisis, largely because of the integration of short-term macroeconomic policies that helped the economy survive, as well as low levels of sovereign debt. The World Bank predicts growth rates of 1.1 and 1.2 % of GDP in 2014 and 2015 respectively. These weak figures are a consequence of continued depressed domestic demand and low investment activities. The World Bank's analysis did not take into account any assumed scenario relating to the ongoing Russia-Ukraine crisis. However, the related events are considered to have led to political risks that may entail further negative economic consequences.

Background

By the 70s the the Soviet Union entered the Era of Stagnation. The complex demands of the modern economy and inflexible administration overwhelmed and constrained the central planners. The volume of decisions facing planners in Moscow became overwhelming. The cumbersome procedures for bureaucratic administration foreclosed the free communication and flexible response required at the enterprise level for dealing with worker alienation, innovation, customers, and suppliers. During 1975–85, corruption and data fiddling became common practice among bureaucracy to report satisfied targets and quotas thus entrenching the crisis. Since 1986 Mikhail Gorbachev attempted to address the economic issue by moving towards a market-oriented socialist economy.

Economic history

After the Soviet disintegration in 1991, the Russian Federation underwent wide-ranging reforms including privatization and market and trade liberalization were undertaken. The two important and  independent goals – macroeconomic stabilization and economic restructuring – are indicators for a transition from central planning to a market-based economy. The macroeconomic stabilization goal entailed the implementation of fiscal and monetary policies that promote economic growth in an environment of stable prices and exchange rates. The latter, economic restructuring, required the establishment of commercial, and institutional entities – banks, private property, and commercial legal codes— that permit the economy to operate efficiently. The opening domestic markets to foreign trade and investment, thus linking the economy with the rest of the world, was an important aid in reaching those goals, a goal the Gorbachev regime failed to address. At the time of the Soviet Union's demise, the Yeltsin government of the Russian Republic had begun to attack the problems of macroeconomic stabilization and economic restructuring. By mid-1996, results were mixed. The GDP declined until the end of the financial crisis and finally rose in the last year of Yeltsin's administration by 6.5% and continued at about 7% for the next nine years.
Since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia has tried to develop a market economy and achieve consistent economic growth. In October 1991, Yeltsin announced that Russia would proceed with radical, market-oriented reform characterized as "shock therapy", as recommended by the United States and IMF.
The largest state enterprises were privatized by President Boris Yeltsin amid great controversy and subsequently came to be owned by insiders

Recovery

The Russian economy underwent tremendous stress as it moved from a centrally planned economy to a free market system. Difficulties in implementing fiscal reforms aimed at raising government revenues and a dependence on short-term borrowing to finance budget deficits led to a serious financial crisis in 1998. Lower prices for Russia's major export earners (oil and minerals) and a loss of investor confidence due to the Asian financial crisis exacerbated financial problems. The result was a rapid decline in the value of the ruble, flight of foreign investment, delayed payments on sovereign and private debts, a breakdown of commercial transactions through the banking system, and the threat of runaway inflation.
Financial stabilization, monetization, and devaluation were the main catalysts behind Russia's high and steady growth of nearly 7 percent a year from 1999. As of 2009 real GDP increased by the highest percentage since the fall of the Soviet Union at 8.1%, the ruble remains stable, inflation has been moderate, and investment began to increase again. In 2007 the World Bank declared that the Russian economy had achieved "unprecedented macroeconomic stability". During 2000–01, Russia not only met its external debt services but also made large advance repayments of principal on IMF loans but also built up Central Bank reserves with government budget, trade, and current account surpluses. The FY 2002 Russian Government budget assumes payment of roughly $14 billion in official debt service payments falling due. Large current account surpluses have brought a rapid appreciation of the ruble over the past several years. This has meant that Russia has given back much of the terms-of-trade advantage that it gained when the ruble fell by 60% during the debt crisis. Oil and gas dominate Russian exports, so Russia remains highly dependent upon the price of energy. Loan and deposit rates at or below the inflation rate inhibit the growth of the banking system and make the allocation of capital and risk much less efficient than it would be otherwise.
In 2003, the debt has risen to $19 billion due to higher Ministry of Finance and Eurobond payments. However, $1 billion of this has been prepaid, and some of the private sector debt may already have been repurchased. Russia continues to explore debt swap/exchange opportunities.
In the June 2002 G8 Summit, leaders of the eight nations signed a statement agreeing to explore cancellation of some of Russia's old Soviet debt to use the savings for safeguarding materials in Russia that could be used by terrorists. Under the proposed deal, $10 billion would come from the United States and $10 billion from other G-8 countries over 10 years.
On 1 January 2004, the Stabilization fund of the Russian Federation was established by the Government of Russia as a part of the federal budget to balance it if oil price falls. Now the Stabilization fund of the Russian Federation is being modernized. Stabilization Fund of the Russian Federation will be divided into two parts on 1 February 2008. The first part will become a reserve fund equal to 10 percent of GDP (10% of GDP equals to about $200 billion now), and will be invested in a similar way as Stabilization Fund of the Russian Federation. The second part will be turned into the National Prosperity Fund of Russian Federation. Deputy Finance Minister Sergei Storchak estimates it will reach 600–700 billion rubles by 1 February 2008. The National Prosperity Fund is to be invested into more risky instruments, including the shares of foreign companies. 

=Putin's first presidency=

When Vladimir Putin became president in 2000, he continued the market reforms that had been formulated in 1996–97, and his parliamentary majority allowed him to legislate them as Yeltsin never could. In 2003, however, Putin's economic policy started a wave of renationalization, which has had a limited, but negative impact on the economy. In 2004, the international oil prices took off, filling the Russian state treasury and boosting its international reserves. Until October 2007, Putin maintained impressive fiscal discipline with budget surpluses every year from 2000.
Between 2000-2008, Russia's economy saw the nominal Gross Domestic Product (GDP) double, climbing from 22nd to 11th largest in the world. The economy made real gains of an average 7% per year ( 1999: 6.5%, 2000: 10%, 2001: 5.7%, 2002: 4.9%, 2003: 7.3%, 2004: 7.2%, 2005: 6.4%, 2006: 8.2%, 2007: 8.5%, 2008: 5.2% ), making it the 6th largest economy in the world in GDP(PPP). In 2007, Russia's GDP exceeded that of 1990, meaning it has overcome the devastating consequences of the recession in the 1990s.
The industry grew by 75%, investments increased by 125%, and agricultural production and construction increased as well. Real incomes more than doubled and the average salary increased eightfold from $80 to $640.
Inflation remained a problem however, as the government failed to contain the growth of prices. Between 1999–2007 inflation was kept at the forecast ceiling only twice, and in 2007 the inflation exceeded that of 2006, continuing an upward trend at the beginning of 2008.
The Russian economy is still commodity-driven despite its growth. Payments from the fuel and energy sector in the form of customs duties and taxes accounted for nearly half of the federal budget's revenues. The large majority of Russia's exports are made up by raw materials and fertilizers, although exports as a whole accounted for only 8.7% of the GDP in 2007, compared to 20% in 2000.Rosstat Confirms Record GDP Growth Kommersant Retrieved on 5 May 2008

=Medvedev's presidency=

Under Dmitry Medvedev presidency, Russia tried to diversify away from oil dependence and foster a high-technology sector.nytimes.html?_r=0 Arms sales have increased to the point where Russia is second (60% of US arms sales) in the world in sale of weapons, the IT industry has recorded a record year of growth concentrating on high-end niches like algorithm design and microelectronics; Russia is now the world's third biggest destination for outsourcing software behind India and China. The space launch industry is now the world's largest and nuclear power plant companies are going from strength to strength, selling plants to China and India, and recently signed a joint venture with Toshiba to develop cutting edge power plants.
The civilian aerospace industry has developed the Sukhoi Superjet, as well as the upcoming MS-21 project to compete with Boeing and Airbus.
The recent global economic downturn hit the Russian economy hard, resulting in three major shocks to Russia's long-term economic growth, though. Oil prices dropped from $140 per barrel to $40 per barrel, a decrease in access to financing with an increase in sovereign and corporate bond spreads, and the reversal of capital flow from $80 billion of in-flows to $130 billion in out-flows have all served to crush fledgling Russian economic growth. In January 2009, industrial production was down almost 16% year to year, fixed capital investment was down 15.5% year to year, and GDP had shrunk 9% year to year.  21 April 2009. However, in the second quarter the GDP rose by 7.5 percent on a quarterly basis indicating the beginning of economic recovery. Responses to the recovery has been fast – Industrial Production growth remains one of the highest in the world, Billionaires have grown vastly, and Moscow now boasts the highest billionaire population, ahead of New York City. More recently, after 16 years of negotiations, Russia's membership to the WTO was accepted.ruvr.html
In January 2012, Russia hit a record low of inflation of just 4.2%. This record was broken only a month later in February 2012 with inflation dropping to 3.7%. The Russian government, however, expects inflation to be at an aggregate of approximately 6% in 2012.

Macro economy

Gross domestic product

