[[V/Line]]

CATEGORIES: Railway companies of Australia, Rail transport in Victoria (Australia), 1983 establishments in Australia

V/Line is a not for profit regional passenger train and coach operator in Victoria, Australia. It was created after the split-up of VicRail in 1983. V/Line is owned by the V/Line Corporation which is a Victorian State Government statutory authority. V/Line operates to 85 railway stations and a larger number of coach stops, and operates 1,444 rail services and 592 coach services every week across regional Victoria.
The V/Line system carried a record 15,554,638 passengers in the 2011/12 financial year, a 6.2% increase on the previous year, and is the fastest growing rail business in Australia. All train lines experienced patronage increases during the year: Geelong 130,000 additional trips, Bendigo 90,000, Ballarat 110,000, Gippsland 90,000 and Seymour 80,000.  V/Line is also track manager of the Victorian intrastate rail network outside of the Australian Rail Track Corporation and Metro Trains Melbourne leases. It has a fleet of 134 carriages.

History

As a government authority

On 1 July 1983 the Transport Act 1983 took effect and the State Transport Authority was created along with a range of other transport bodies.
This was altered when on 1 July 1989 the Transport (Amendment) Act took effect, merging the State Transport Authority with the Metropolitan Transit Authority to form the Public Transport Corporation. The relationship between the country V/Line and suburban 'The Met' brands was blurred, with the Sprinter trains delivered in the 1993-1995 period appearing in PTC colours but with both PTC and V/Line logos.
In 1995 the freight and passenger rail divisions of V/Line were divided, with a new red, blue and white V/Line Passenger livery unveiled, which remains on some of the fleet today.
In 1999 V/Line Passenger and V/Line Freight were franchised and privatised separately. National Express acquired V/Line Passenger and Freight Victoria acquired V/Line Freight. The V/Line Freight contract included a 45 year lease from the government of most regional track (passenger and freight), with responsibilities for track, signalling and level crossings, with access to passenger sections of track granted to V/Line Passenger.
V/Line operates under a franchise agreement entered into with the Director of Public Transport. The Director also sub leases tracks and other infrastructure which the Director holds under lease from VicTrack, the agency which owns Victoria's rail-related land and infrastructure.

As a corporation

On 29 August 1999 National Express took control of V/Line Passenger. It included all country rail operations in Victoria, with the exception of the West Coast Railway operated Warrnambool line and the Hoys Roadlines operated Shepparton line, previously franchised in 1993. In 2004 operational difficulties hit the two privately operated lines, and they came back under the control of V/Line.
In December 2002 National Express handed in its Victorian rail and tram franchises having been unable to renegotiate financial terms with the State Government.National Express walks out of Australian rail service The Telegraph (London) 17 December 2002Nat Express pull back Down Under The Telegraph (London) 3 September 2004
Full control was taken on 1 October 2003 by changing the shareholding of V/Line, making the government the sole shareholder via a recently created statutory corporation, V/Line Passenger Corporation.
In 2000 the Regional Fast Rail project was launched to upgrade the tracks linking Ballarat, Bendigo, Geelong and the Latrobe Valley to Melbourne. The project, which also included new rolling stock and an expanded timetable of rail services, commenced full operations from December 2005.
In November 2006 Pacific National, who had purchased Freight Australia, entered into an agreement to sell the remainder of its Victorian rail lease of the network back to the Victorian Government for $133.8 m. The sale was completed on 7 May 2007, with V/Line becoming the track manager of the Victorian intrastate network.
In May 2008 it was announced that part of the V/Line fleet would be converted to standard gauge to operate an upgraded Albury-Wodonga line service.
In 2010, the subsidy per passenger trip dropped to $18.68, down from $19.42 in 2009.vline.au/pdf/publications/annualreports/annualreport09-10.pdf
The Transport Integration Act renamed the V/Line Passenger Corporation as V/Line Corporation.

Services

V/Line operates rail services to the regional cities of Ballarat, Bendigo, Geelong, Seymour and Traralgon as well as Ararat, Maryborough, Echuca, Swan Hill, Albury,  Bairnsdale, Warrnambool and Shepparton. In addition, V/Line road coaches connect with many rail services at major stations to serve towns away from the main rail network.Timetables V/Line
Rail services are grouped into two types. As part of the introduction of Myki on V/Line in 2013, and to provide consistent communication to both staff and customers, what were formerly called "Interurban" services became "Commuter" services, and what were formerly called "Intercity" services became "Long Distance" services. Commuter services operate over shorter distances and more frequently than Long Distance services, and the latter usually provide some first-class accommodation, as well as snack bar facilities.
All rail services depart from Southern Cross railway station in Melbourne on the following lines with the exception of one Traralgon service which departs/ terminates at Flinders Street Station
Rail services once extended to Dimboola, Mildura, Cobram and Leongatha but were discontinued in 1993.
The services to Ararat and Bairnsdale were also withdrawn in 1993, but restored in 2004.
The resumption of V/Line services to Leongatha and Cobram has been sought by communities along both of these lines, but much of the track has now been removed. A recent report into the extensions of the Melbourne metropolitan rail system identified the population growth corridor from Cranbourne to Koo-Wee-Rup as a key planning priority.
V/line also runs numerous intrastate and interstate road coach services that may run wholly as a coach service or operate as a coach connecting with a rail service.
Interstate road coach service operated by V/line are:

Ticketing

V/Line currently uses machine printed paper tickets, issued from staffed V/Line stations, selected Metro suburban premium stations, V/Line ticket agents, online or by phone. Passengers boarding services at unmanned stations or roadside coach stops can purchase tickets from the train conductor or coach driver.
Tickets have the origin and destination printed upon them, making them point to point, but the fare itself is based on charging zones.
Ticket types available include single, return, and a range of periodical tickets. From June 2013 the Myki smartcard system began to be rolled out on the V/Line network.myki to start on V/Line commuter services Public Transport Victoria 11 June 2013
Most V/Line services operate on a non-allocated seating basis, but all intercity (long distance) rail services and some coach services require seat reservations.

Fleet

V/Line currently operates a mix of diesel multiple unit (DMUs) and locomotive hauled trains. Most are on broad gauge, however three N class locomotives have been converted to standard gauge to operate the Albury line. The carriage fleet is currently undergoing a refurbishment program, with the Sprinter fleet recently completing their own refurbishment program.
Diesel multiple units:
Locomotives:
Carriages:
Road coaches:
When initially formed, V/Line used the fleet of the Victorian Railways, including a wide variety of diesel and electric locomotives, passenger carriages, railmotors and rail cars, guards vans, and freight vehicles. A division was made between V/Line Freight and V/Line Passenger operations in 1995, with it formalised by July 1997, the locomotive fleet was divided between the two new entities along with the relevant rolling stock. Only the VLocity units have been acquired since this time.

Network access

V/Line also manages and maintains all non-interstate rural rail track in Victoria, including lines that do not see passenger services.

Branding

The initial V/Line visual identity was unveiled in August 1983, with an orange and grey livery for locomotives and passenger rolling stock, along with a white and green V/Line logo with a "stylised capital lettered logo with the V and the L split by a deep slashing stroke".
This remained until 1993 when the Sprinter trains were delivered in the teal and yellow suburban 'The Met' brand colours, but with both The Met and V/Line logos. In 1995, the freight and passenger rail divisions of V/Line were divided, with locomotives in the freight fleet retaining the orange and grey livery with 'V/Line Freight' logos, while passenger carriages and locomotive received the red blue and white 'V/Line Passenger' livery which remains on some of the fleet today. It was also at that time that the V/Line logo was altered, with serifs added to the lettering, and the "deep slashing stroke" was altered to a curved blue line. After National Express took over V/Line, the logo was again altered in 2000, with mixed-case lettering and a curving blue line underneath. In 2006, it was again altered, with the removal of the blue line underneath and addition of a purple line.
The VLocity railcars were delivered from 2005 in a totally new livery of stainless steel with purple and green highlights. In 2007, a new livery was unveiled, consisting of a grey carbody with red, white and purple stripes. Rolling stock in different variants of the livery was released throughout that year, with a consistent version not appearing until 2008, along with a number of repainted locomotives.








