[[Ling Tan]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Malaysian Chinese people, Malaysian female models

Ling Tan whose full name is Tan Mang Ling. Family name is Tan (陈)(陳)(Hokkien dialect) ( She has signed with agencies MUSE MANAGEMENT in New York, Innovative Artists Talent And Literary Agency in New York, Elite Paris, Munich Models, UNO Models in Madrid and Barcelona.
Ling Tan, the first Supermodel from Southeast Asia, has changed the face of fashion with her exotic beauty.  Although she is ethnically Chinese, Ling was born and raised in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.  
She was educated in a Chinese school and speaks four dialects of Chinese as well as Malay and English.
During her first week as a model, an American advertising executive looking for a new face for an ad campaign spotted Ling in a hotel fashion show.   The award winning commercial for Tiger Beer in 1994 propelled Ling to celebrity status in Malaysia.   European and American designers showing their collections in Malaysia were also impressed with Ling's runway prowess and encouraged her to move to New York City. 
A runway favorite, Ling has been seen in hundreds of shows in New York, London, Milan, Rome and Paris.  
From Pret-a-Porter to Haute Couture, Ling has worked with such designers as, Alberta Ferretti, Alexander McQueen, Andrew Gn, Ann Demeulemeester, Anna Sui, Anna Molinari, Badgley Mischka, Balenciaga, BCBG Max Azria, Betsey Jonson, Bill Blass, Blumarine, Burberry, Carolina Herrera, Celine, Chanel, Chloe, Christian Dior, Claude Montana, Costume National, Daryl K, Diane von Furstenberg, DKNY, Donna Karan, Dries Van Noten, Elie Saab, Emanuel Ungaro, Emporio Armani, Escada, Fendi, Genny, Giambattista Valli, Gianfranco Ferre, Giorgio Armani, Givenchy, Gucci, Guy Laroche, Halston, Hermès, Herve Leger, Hugo Boss, Hussein Chalan, Isabel Marant, Issey Miyake, Jean Paul Gaultier, Jill Stuart, John Galliano, John Rocha, Karl Lagerfeld, Kenzo, Lanvin, Louis Vuitton, Maison Martin Margiela, Marcel Marongiu, Matthew Williamson, Michael Kors, Missoni, Moschino, Narciso Rodriguez, Nicole Miller, Nina Ricci, Oscar De La Renta, Paco Rabanne, Pierre Balmain, Ralph Lauren, Riccardo Tisci, Richard Tyler, Rick Owens, Romeo Gigli, Salvatore Ferragamo, Sonia Rykiel, Stella McCartney, Todd Oldham, Tom Ford, Thierry Mugler, Valentino Garavani, Vera Wang, Victoria's Secret, Vivienne Tam, Vivienne Westwood, Yeohlee, Yves Saint Laurent and Zang Toi.  
Ling has also been captured by the legends and masters of fashion photography including, Albert Watson, Alex Cao, Annie Leibovitz, Christophe Jouany, Christophe Kutner, Christophe Rihet, David Bailey, David Seidner, David La Chapelle, Denis Piel, Dominique Isserman, Donald Chiu, Ellen Von Unwerth, Eugenio Recuenco, Feng Hai, Francois Nars, Gian Paolo Barbieri, Gilles Bensimon, Glen Luchford, Giovanni Gastel, Irving Penn, Jean Baptiste-Mondino, John-Paul Pietrus, Leslie Kee, Marc Hom, Marco Glaviano, Mario Testino, Matthew Rolston, Max Vadukal, Michael Thompson, Michel Comte, Michelangelo di Battista, Miles Aldridge, Nadir, Patrick Demarchelier, Peter Lindbergh, Raymond Meier, Sheila Metzner, Steven Meisel, Thiemo Sander, Tom Munro, Torkil Gudnason, Troy Word, Then, Valerie Belin, Vincent Peters, Walter Chin, Wayne Maser and the legendary Richard Avedon, who photographed Ling for the prestigious Pirelli calendar in 1997. 
Ling has appeared on the covers and editorial pages of the world's top fashion magazines including international editions of Vogue, Harper's Bazaar, Conde Nast Traveler, Numero, Marie Claire, Elle, Allure, Amica, L'Officiel, Stern, Visionaire, W, O Magazine New York Magazine and The New York Times Magazine.    
In addition, Ling has been featured in the advertising campaigns for Ann Taylor's 50th Anniversary "50 Women", Banana Republic, Bergdorf Goodman, Bloomingdale's, Bruno Magli, Clairol, Clinique, Daryl K, De Beer's Diamonds, Estee Lauder, Gap, Gucci, Guess? Jeans, Issey Miyake, J.    
Even with all of her amazing accomplishments, Ling still wanted to explore work on the small screen. She has appeared in television commercials for Emporio Armani fragrances, FORD Car, La Poste (France's postal service) and Pantene Hair Color.   
Ling was also featured in George Michael's music video for his hit song "Fast Love." 
Ling was the subject of a biography featured on CNN's Style Network with Elsa Klench and has appeared on the HBO hit series "Sex and The City" and CBS hit series "Blue Bloods." 
Ling Tan recently signed with MUSE MANAGEMENT in New York.
Ling's younger sister, Ein Tan, is also a model.  The sisters appeared together on the covers of Harper's Bazaar Malaysia and Harper's Bazaar Singapore.  






