[[Perri "Pebbles" Reid]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, African-American female singers, African-American singers, American dance musicians, American female singers, American rhythm and blues singers, Musicians from Oakland, California, MCA Records artists, American freestyle musicians, 1964 births

Perri Reid (born Perri Arlette McKissack ), best known by her former stage name, Pebbles,  is an American dance-pop and urban contemporary singer-songwriter. 
She created the contemporary R&B group TLC (group).  She is currently an Atlanta-based minister named Sister Perri.

Early life

Reid was born Perri Arnette McKissack on August 29, 1964 
 Pebbles is one of four children. Her divorced mother raised her family on the income of a waitress and housekeeper.
By age 16, a local musician gave her a production deal which fell through several months later when she got pregnant with her daughter, Ashley. Pebbles married the father. The marriage lasted one year,
While working as a receptionist at an Oakland, California real estate office she met married Smith Engineering & Contract Services executive contractor George L. Smith  After Smith's wife Darlene died of cancer, the two married in 1985. George, his daughter Jennifer; Perri and her daughter Ashley made their home in San Francisco.

Early career

Pebbles got her start in 1981 as a backing vocalist for the percussionist/band leader Bill Summers and the funk band Con Funk Shun. Reid co-wrote one Con Funk Shunsingles, "Body Lovers". 
In 1985 Smith Engineering & Contract Services executive contractor George L. Smith, bankrolled Pebbles with $80,000 for a demo tape and video for "Mercedes Boy". The demo and video led to a contract with MCA. 
Pebbles recorded several hit singles on her own during the late 1980s and early 1990s (including "Girlfriend" and "Mercedes Boy").  She also sang background vocals on Paula Abdul's album Forever Your Girl in 1988. 
Pebbitone and TLC (group)== 
In 1989, Pebbles formed the Atlanta-based production company Pebbitone and founded her own record label, Savvy Records. 
On February 28, 1991, Watkins and Lisa Lopes signed production, management, and publishing deals with PebbitoneTionne WATKINS (T'Boz), Lisa Lopes (Left Eye), Rozonda Thomas (Chilli), Debtors. v. LaFace Records, Pebbitone, Inc., Peri Reid d/b/a Pebbitone Music, Movants (In re Watkins), 390 210 BR 394 (Bankr. Court, ND Georgia, 1997) (Cotten, S.)Retrieved 11-02-2013. with Perri Reid becoming their general manager. The group found its missing third member in Rozonda Thomas.  The girls were signed to LaFace in May 1991 through a production deal with Pebbitone and immediately went into the studio with producers Reid and Edmonds, Dallas Austin, Jermaine Dupri, and Marley Marl to produce their first album. 
The first TLC album, Ooooooohhh... On the TLC Tip, was released on February 25, 1992, by LaFace.  The album was a critical and commercial success, being certified quadruple-platinum within a year and launching a number of US Hot 100 top-ten singles with "Ain't 2 Proud 2 Beg", "What About Your Friends", and "Baby-Baby-Baby" which reached No. 2on the Hot 100. 
CrazySexyCool is the second studio album released by LaFace Records on November 15, 1994. The album peaked at three on the Billboard 200 and spent over two years on the Billboard album charts.  The album spawned two Billboard Hot 100 number one singles, including the worldwide smash hit,"Waterfalls"All four singles from CrazySexyCool reached the top 5 of the US Hot 100, while "Creep" and "Waterfalls" peaked at no. 1, while Red Light Special reached no. 2 and "Diggin' on You" reached no. 5. CrazySexyCool eventually sold over 11 million copies in the US. The album won a 1996 Grammy Award for Best R&B Album and a 1996 Grammy Award for Best R&B Performance by a Duo or Group for "Creep". 
However, in the midst of their apparent success, the members of TLC filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy on July 3, 1995 . 
Eventually, tensions arose between Pebbles and TLC, and the group filed for bankruptcy amid claims that Pebbles was mismanaging their money) was rescinded.
L.A. Reid later said: "TLC wanted Pebbitone out of their lives, and the only way they could get out was to file bankruptcy". Reid claimed that the dispute was "one of the breaking points in my marriage".  The dispute with TLC and the disintegration of her marriage led Pebbles to leave the secular music industry altogether. 

Religious Conversion

In 1997, Pebbles underwent a religious conversion. Under her new stage name "Sister Perri", In 2008, after a thirteen-year music hiatus, Reid released her fourth album and debut gospel album, Prophetic Flows Vol I & II, which peaked at #12 on the Billboard Gospel Album Chart.
In February 2011, Pebbles was named the executive producer/host of Essence's national R&B search.com/news/2011/jul/22/lithonia-singer-wins-essence-rb-star-search.

Personal Life

In July 1989 she married L.A. Reid. In 1995 she divorced Reid . 
In 2000 she married former MLB player Otis Nixon   Perri Reid, Otix Nixon to Marry In Bahamas They divorced in 2004. She married Excel Sharieff in 2010.

Discography

Studio albums

Compilation albums

Singles

=As main performer=

=As featured performer=






