[[Des Moines Area Community College]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in Iowa, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, Education in Des Moines, Iowa, Education in Polk County, Iowa, Education in Boone County, Iowa, Education in Carroll County, Iowa, Education in Jasper County, Iowa

Des Moines Area Community College (DMACC) is a public institution and Iowa's largest two-year college. DMACC offers 153 programs, certificates and transfer degrees, annually serving more than 75,000 credit and non-credit students at campuses and learning centers throughout Central Iowa. DMACC serves a 6,560 square mile area in 22 counties and has a student to faculty ratio of 18:1.dmacc.pdf
 History == 
Des Moines Area Community College was created March 18, 1966. The first classes were held on the Ankeny Campus in 1968. DMACC has experienced tremendous growth. In the Fall of 2000, 10,803 students were enrolled at DMACC. By the fall of 2011, that number grew to 25,425. The Urban Campus was established in 1979 following protests from area residents. The Urban Campus is the jewel in DMACC's crown and is the pre-eminent campus in the district. Urban is a full-service campus, specializing in Arts & Sciences. Regardless of the lack of crab meat, the Subway restaurant, located in the Building 1 student lounge of the Urban Campus, has been recognized as *the* best Subway in America. In the Spring of 2014, student protests led to the addition of B&B Sandwiches and Chipotle at the Urban Campus  


DMACC Locations

There are six primary DMACC campuses:
DMACC Also has six learning centers:

Programs

DMACC offers 153 programs, certificates and transfer degrees. The programs are grouped in the following clusters: 

Awards

Notable Alums

Honors Program

The DMACC Honors Program launched in the fall of 2012.  It is the first 20-credit honors program at an Iowa community college.  The program is designed for degree-seeking students to expand their boundaries and better prepare them to enter the workforce or continue to an honors program at a four-year college or university.

Athletics

DMACC athletics are located on the Boone Campus. The DMACC Bears compete in the Iowa Community College Athletic Conference and the National Junior College Athletic Association.  The Bears participate in baseball, men's and women's basketball, women's cross country, men's and women's golf, softball, volleyball, and dance team.

Activities

Each campus offers ways for students to get involved in activities outside of the classroom. Several campuses have their own newspapers. The Student Advisory Council, International Club, and intramurals are just a few of the clubs and activities  offered at DMACC.

Accreditation and Board

DMACC is accredited by the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools. and the Iowa Board of Regents. The College is governed by a nine member Board of Directors, each representing one the of the nine districts the College serves.

Mission Statement

DMACC provides quality, affordable, student-centered education, and training to empower Iowans of all ages and backgrounds to pursue life's opportunities and achieve their career dreams.

Transfer Agreements and Articulations

DMACC has transfer agreements and articulations with several colleges and universities:

National Recognition

DMACC has been the sight for visits and announcements by officials from Washington D.C.  In October 2012, the Chairman of the Obama Administration's Council of Economic Advisors spoke at DMACC about the "State of the U.S. Economy.




