[[Springs, Gauteng]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places in Ekurhuleni, Populated places established in 1904

Springs is a city on the East Rand in the Gauteng province of South Africa. It lies 50 km (31 mi) east of Johannesburg and 72 km (45 mi) southeast from Pretoria. The name of the city derives from the large number of springs in the area; it has an estimated population of more than 375,000,  It is part of the Ekurhuleni Metropolitan Municipality.
Springs is part of the Ekurhuleni Metropolitan Municipality, which includes much of the East Rand.
Springs was divided during the Apartheid era into the middle- and upper-income white suburbs around the city centre, the Indian area of Bakerton east of the CBD, while blacks were relocated to KwaThema,

History

The city of Springs, east of Johannesburg, is on the East Rand, or what is now known as the Metropolitan area of Ekurhuleni, in the Gauteng Province. It was founded as a coal and gold mining town in 1904, but its history can be traced back to the second half of the 19th century.
From about 1840 farmers moved into the area and declared farms for themselves, especially after the Zuid-Afrikaansche Republiek (South African Republic, later Transvaal) became an independent republic with the signing of the Sand River Convention in 1852. These initial farms were large, but the measurements of the borders were inaccurate and later, when the correct borders of the farms had to be documented, there were several extra or odd pieces of land that did not belong to any farm. These odd pieces of land then became state property. Such an odd piece existed between three neighbouring farms on the Witwatersrand, namely Geduld (meaning 'patience'), De Rietfontein ('the reed fountain') and Brakpan (literally, 'small, brackish lake'). The 685 ha odd piece was given the name 'The Springs' by the land surveyor James Brooks, probably because of all the fountains on the land. Another story is that he wanted to name it after himself, but because his name (Brooks) resembled the Afrikaans word 'broek' (trousers) so closely, he feared that the Afrikaans farmers in the area would mock it.
On 16 September 1884 the official map of The Springs was registered in Pretoria, the Republic's capital. Initially, the land's value was equal to R200. But the discovery of coal and gold and its subsequent mining increased the value considerably.
The coal discovered in The Springs was of a good quality and in 1888 the first contract was signed to mine coal there. Initially mining was on a small scale, but rose when the Great Eastern mine was established. There were a number of corrugated iron houses around the mine and, although there was a few small hotels and general dealers, it was not a town yet. The settlement grew and in 1902 a health committee was appointed to look after the building and location of structures and also the hygiene in the growing township. In 1904 the Grootvlei Proprietary Mines were registered and shafts were sunk. This followed the discovery in 1899 of gold on the farm Geduld and the further discovery of the main reef in 1902.
In April 1904 The Springs was proclaimed a town, called Springs, the health committee replaced by a town council, and it flourished as a mining town. In 1962, Springs produced 10% of the country's gold and 9% of its uranium. However, by the end of the 1960s the last mine in town, the Daggafonteinmyn, (literally: Marijuana fountain mine) was emptied. The town did not die, but instead developed into an industrial centre.
The original 7 km² farm on which the city of Springs was later to be built, The Springs, was surveyed in 1883. Coal was discovered in the area in 1887 and three years later the Transvaal Republic's first railway was built to carry coal from the East Rand coalfields to the gold mines of the Witwatersrand.
Gradually, especially after coal was discovered further east in South Africa in Witbank, the Springs collieries were closed. In the meanwhile, however, gold had also been discovered in the area. A village was laid out in 1904 and in 1908 the first gold mining began. Springs was granted municipal status in 1912. By the late 1930s, there were eight gold mines near Springs, making it the largest single gold-producing area in the world.
Springs is currently one of the industrial centers of the Witwatersrand and also the Eastern Gateway of Gauteng towards Mpumalanga and Northern Kwazulu Natal. Mining has been replaced by manufacturing and engineering industries of economic importance; products of the region include processed metals, chemicals, paper and foodstuffs.

Geography

Climate

Springs has a typical temperate climate with four seasons. The summers are hot with afternoon thunder showers in early summers and drier during January and February which are the two hottest months. The winters are very cold with severe frost and occasional snow, the coldest months being July and August although June is also very cold. August is usually a very windy month continuing into early spring of September with sandstorms and strong winds. The Spring is warm to hot with some afternoon showers. Spring usually starts to show its first time during August although it is officially Springtime from September. The autumns are generally cooler starter with the late rain in the beginning of autumn and getting colder towards the winter with the first frost in late autumn. At times the first signs of autumn can be seen in late February. The average highs during the summers is 32°C (90°F) although it can go as high as 37°C (99°F) which is normal. The record high is 40°C (104°F)  and during the winters 10°C (50°F) and the average lows during the summers is 15°C (59°F) and - 5°C (23°F) although it can normally drop to - 10°C (14°F) and the record low of -15°C (5°F). The average rainfall in Springs is 450 mm (18 inches) per annum.

Fauna and flora

Springs has a Highveld grassland vegetation, which is the general vegetation type of the Highveld which consists the southern half of Gauteng, Western Mpumalanga South Eastern parts of the Limpopo province, most of Freestate, Northern Eastern Cape and South eastern parts of Northwest and Eastern Northern Cape.
Springs as it is said is mostly a grassland with short grass with some smaller succulent plants like the aloe. There are also the plough-breaker which is unique on the Highveld with most part of the plant in the soil. There is also the wetland areas in Springs which has an area of 17 km2 (6.6 mi2) area through the Blesbokspruit and Lesser Blesbokspruit With many water plants and some trees growing nearby too.
The Belssbokspruit Wetland Region in Springs draw over 300 species of birds, including the great flamingo, Egyptian Goose, barn owl, blue kite, blue crane, guineafowl etc. There are also the secretary-bird and the ostrich. There are also many water mammals in that region, otter and lesser otter. There is also the blesbok, mongoose, reed buck, read jackal, black wildebeest, springbok, mountain zebra, the porcupine and other mammals.
There are also different kinds of reptiles like the rinkhals, puffadder brown house snake, aurora house snake and some other lizards. There are also the giant girdled lizard in Springs. There are also the African bullfrog in the wetland areas of Springs.

Economy

Springs as a city is an economic hub in the East Rand with a diverse economy, ranging from manufacturing, commerce, service, hospitality, mining and service providing companies.

Manufacturing

Springs is one of the industrial centres in Gauteng served by four industrial suburbs, which are New Era, Nuffield, Enstra and Fulcrum with smaller industrial areas at Dersley, suburb of Springs, Daggafontein, Selection Park, Selcourt and Strubenvale. There are a couple of manufacturing companies in Springs. The only Kelloggs factory in South Africa is situated in Springs. Springs is also home to Impala Platinum's precious and base metal refineries as well as PFG Building Glass Building Glass, the only producer of float glass on the continent. Zincor, the only zinc producer in Africa, was also located here; its refinery used to produces all South Africa's requirement of this metal and ceasing its production operations in 2011 due to various economic reasons.  Springs is also home to Sappi Enstra Mill, the only paper mill plant of Southern Africa, only paper mill plant in the world that is not next to a river, Element Six Ultra High, an industry in industrial diamonds and beverage cans, manufacturing of cans and Kimberly-Clark in Enstra manufacturing toilet paper, tissues, serviettes and other products. Afrox Healthcare also have a plant in Enstra, Springs specializing in health care products. Then there is also Liebherr Group Africa specializing in heavy construction vehicles, McCain Foods packaging plant in Nuffield, Corobrik Plant near Selcourt specializing in bricks and Kreepy Krauly swimming pool equipment and regulator system manufacturing plant in Nuffield Springs. Mondi Group also have the cartonboard plant and recycling plant in New Era and Sony Ericson phone manufacturing plant also in New Era. There is also the Cobra Water Tap in New Era.  There is also the Kater's Motor Conversion plant in Springs specializing in vehicle conversions for ambulances, police vehicles and other emergency vehicles in Nuffield, Springs. Springs is home to Jachris pty limited, a hose and coupling manufacturer that supplies most of Southern Africas mining houses.

Mining

Springs is also a mining centre with two major types of minerals that is being mined from the city of Springs. Springs is still one of the Gold mining centers in South Africa, which includes the Modder East plant of One Gold and also the Geduld Mine and East Geduld Mine and also the Daggafontein and East Daggafontein mines. Besides gold Springs also have new coal mines towards the east of the city.

Transporting

Springs is also a transporting centre where there are different transporting companies. some of the more known companies are like for example the Van Heerden's Trucking company in Largo, an eastern suburb of Springs and Penta Trucking focusing on cargo transporting from Nuffield, Springs. Then there is the Welthagen Transport in New Era in bulk and container and the Amalgamating Bulk carrier company from Welgedag, Springs which is on bulk transporting.

Springs CBD

Springs also have a well developed CBD with a couple of highrise office buildings like the 18 story Checktown building housing the regional office of Telkom for Gauteng and head office for the trading section and Marketing of Telkom (South Africa), the 12 story Standard Bank building, the 14 story Nongai building that is undergoing restoration and the 13 story Seedfam Towers and also a 14 story Everest Apartment complex.

Shopping centres

There are two major shopping malls in the Springs Downtown serving Springs,  The Avenues and the Palm Springs and Veranda Shopping Centre as well as the Third Street Arcade, Seedfam Tower Arcade, Standard Band Arcade and a newer arcade in Third Street too and the Second Street Mall near the Springs Railway Station. Then there are also a number of shopping centres in the suburbs of Springs like the Selcourt Shopping Center, Strubenvale Shopping Centre, New State Era Shopping Centre, Bakerton Square and also the newer shopping centres like Springsgate and Selcourt Towers and many more shopping centers around Springs and the suburbs.

Other businesses

Service delivery business is also very strong in Springs. Many of them are focusing on business development, consultancy and business solutions in the city. Others are construction businesses and property development. There are also many financial services like the Financial consultancies, auditors and accountants in the city and legal services and property agencies.
There are many restaurants in Springs and catering services and events managements business in the city. Hospitality is also strong as there are many guesthouses in the city and around the city. The Stable Inn is the best known in Springs. Springs is also good served by Takeaway businesses

Culture and sport

PAM Brink Stadium is a sports stadium currently used for soccer and rugby. At Presidents Park there are many Horse Jumping Tournaments that is taking place. Springs have two golf courses, one in Selection Park known as the Springs Country Club and the other one is the Pollack Park Country Club.

Media

Springs is served very good by the Media. There are local newspapers that is operating from Springs. The first one is the Springs Advertiser which is covering the whole of the greater Springs area which also includes KwaThema. Then there is also the African Reporter that is covering KwaThema, Tsakane in Brakpan and Duduza. Springs is also served by a local radio station, the East Rand Stereo on the frequency of 93.9FM Stereo covering the whole of Ekurhuleni Metro, eastern parts of Johannesburg, Heidelberg, Delmas, as far as Secunda in Mpumalanga, Leandra, Deven in Eastern Gauteng with over 300'000 listeners. East Rand Stereo is operating from From Springs where the headquarters are since some satellite studios had been opened in Brakpan and Benoni and Boksburg.

Parks

Springs is also served by a number of parks, about 120 parks, the most known are the Presidents Park where there is horse jumping that is taking place in the northwestern part of the city and also Murray Park with a caravan site next to the Alexander Dam. In Petersfield, Springs there is the Frikkie Deysel Park, the Butler Park in Geduld and the Park of Dersley in Dersley Park. To the Northeastern site of Springs there is the Blesbokspruit Wetland Reserve with a great diversity of birds and plants that can be founded there. Springs also have a Game Reserve near the CBD and then there is the unique park, the Pioneer Park with Dutch characteristics next to the Springs CBD.

Architecture and monuments

Today, Springs is well known for its architecture: it has the second biggest collection of small scale Art Deco buildings in the world, after Miami in Florida, in the United States. These Art Deco buildings were constructed between the two World Wars. Other landmarks include several monuments to important figures in the city's development, like Paul Kruger, and the war cemetery where many Coloured soldiers are buried who died during the Second World War fighting in the Allied Forces. There is also the War Monument at the northern entrance of the Springs CBD, The Old Springs Fire Station and also the Dutch Windmill in the Pioneer Park, Springs. There is also a small scale replica of the Voortrekker Monument in the Springs CBD near the library. 
Springs also boast with an art gallery next to the Springs Library and at the front of the Springs Railway station there is an old orange tree planted by the Dutch people when Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands visited the old South African Republic during the time of Paul Kruger, President of the ZAR as he was accompanying her. 
Springs also boast in the Springs civic Theatre where many productions are done. The Springs Civic Centre and City Hall is also a unique building complex as it rested on the hey logs with water underneath on which the building complex rest.

Transportation

Springs is served by a very good transportation system, by both the roads and by the rail lines and is also close to the OR Tambo International Airport in Kempton Park by which the city is also served. Springs is also very good connected to the OR Tambo International Airport via the N12 and R21.

Road transportation

Springs is served by two national highways, the N12 which is an east/west freeway, connecting Springs with Witbank to the east and with Johannesburg in the west. The N17 which is also an east/west freeway, but which connects Springs with Ermelo in the east and with Johannesburg in the west. Springs is also served by four regional routes, the R29, R51, R554 and the R555. The R29 is an east/west regional route which connects Springs with Benoni northwest of Springs and with Leandra in the east. The north/south R51 which connects Springs with Pretoria in the north and with Nigel, Balfour and Villiers in the south. The R554 with its terminal at the R51 route near the Springs CBD which connects Springs with Alberton and the southern suburbs of Johannesburg and the R555 road with its terminal at the R29 at the War Monument at the northern entrance of Downtown Springs to the northeast that connects Springs with Delmas, Witbank and Middelburg. Springs is also connected with Brakpan through the M46 and Heidelberg via the R42 that runs into the R51 is connected to Springs too.

Railway transportation

Springs is also a major railway hub. Springs is a subhub for the Metrorail Gauteng with the Springs-Johannesburg trains serving Springs, Brakpan, Benoni, Boksburg, Germiston and Johannesburg. Springs also have the Springs Nigel Line serving Springs and Nigel. Springs is also a major hub for Transnet Freight Rail with goods and cargo carriers trains from the Springs, Welgedag and Daggafontein stations connecting Springs with Johannesburg, Ermelo, Witbank, Nelspruit, Pretoria, Vereniging, Klerksdorp, Richards Bay, Durban, Bloemfontein, Pietersburg, Lesotho and Rustenburg. Coal and wood is transported with petroleum and ammonia and cement. Springs is also served by the container services through rail and road,

Suburbs

Although Springs is a highly industrial city, its suburbs are treelike with many parks and also giving some suburban character. The following are the main suburbs of Springs.
Modder East (Eastvale), Dersley, Presidents Dam, Presidents Ranch, Krugersrus, New State Era, Krugersrus Ext, Rowhill, Petersfield, Petersfield Ext, Paul Krugersoord, East Geduld, Geduld, Geduld Ext, Springs Ext, Springs CBD, Lodeyko, Welgedag, Holfontein, Persida, Welgedag Small Holdings, Everest, Gugulethu, Slovo Park, Slovo Park East, Bakerton, Strubenvale, Strubenvale Ext, Grootvlei, Great Valley, Casseldale, Palmiet Kuil, Largo, Aston Lake, Skoon Plaas, Kingway, Lindelani, Edelweiss, Edelweiss Ext, Daggafontein, Daggafontein Ext, Selection Park North, Selection Park South, Selcourt, Struisbult, Pollak Park, Wright Park, Reedville, Dal Fouche, KwaThema.

Education

There are several schools, ranging from pre-primary to secondary schools, and a tertiary college in Springs.

Hospitals and medical services

Springs is also served by the Far East Rand provincial Hospital and three private hospitals, the N17 Hospital, the St Mary Women's Hospital and the Parkland Hospital closer to the Springs CBD. Springs is also served by many clinics, including the White City and KwaThema clinics in KwaThema, Painville clinic and the newly built Springs clinic operated under the Springs Service Delivery as municipal clinics under Ekurhuleni Metropolitan Council. Then there are many private clinics, some of them under Medi Clinic and other private ones, Physiotherapist clinics, Occupational Therapist clinics and also specialists doctors consultancy offices in Springs and the Medical laboratory at the Parklands Hospital, Springs.

Notable natives and residents

Important and well-known people who were born or lived in Springs include Nobel laureate Nadine Gordimer, rock musician James Phillips (musician) and Afrikaans singer Rina Hugo Rina Hugo.
Other famous people who are associated with Springs include:






