[[Copenhagen Zoo]]

CATEGORIES: 1859 establishments in Denmark, Zoos in Denmark, Visitor attractions in Copenhagen, Buildings and structures in Copenhagen

Copenhagen Zoo ( The zoo is noted for its new Elephant House designed by the world-famous British architect Sir Norman Foster. The zoo maintains and promotes a number of European breeding programmes.

History

Copenhagen Zoo was founded by the ornithologist Niels Kjærbølling in 1859. He was given the summer garden of "Prinsess Vilhelmines Have" (The garden of Princess Vilhelmine) by the chief directorate of Copenhagen. The animals that the visitors could contemplate at the opening were eagles, chickens, ducks, owls, rabbits, a fox, a seal in a bathtub and a turtle in a bucket. In the early years the zoo focused on showing as many different types of animals as possible, but as animal welfare later became an issue, the number of different species has dropped in favour of more space to each animal. In 1901 the zoo displayed 25 Indians- men, women and children- in an exhibition where the "brown exotic" people went about their daily lives in palm tree leaf huts constructed in the middle of the zoo.
One of the most notable animals kept there was a male slow worm that lived there from 1892 to 1946 (for 54 years, which is a record among lizards).
Starting in the early 1980s, Copenhagen Zoo has been undergoing a renovations aimed at replacing cages with enclosures which recreate animals' natural environments, giving a better lifestyle to the animals, and a more realistic experience to visitors. Savanna are results of these efforts. The Savanna includes a Hippopotamus House where the hippos can be watched underwater.
The zoo has preserved many of its historical buildings. The oldest building still in use, a stable for yaks, was erected in 1872, and now houses the bactrian camels.

Copenhagen Zoo Tower

A notable and highly visible feature of the zoo is the wooden observation tower.  Its base is similar to that of Eiffel Tower.

Exhibits

Animals which are exhibited at the zoo but not in any of the main areas are for example bactrian camel, American flamingo, scarlet ibis, roseate spoonbill, Dalmatian pelican, turkey vulture, Humboldt penguin, California sea lion, black-capped squirrel monkey, chimpanzee and lion.

The Nordics and the Arctic Ring

In the part of the zoo called "The Nordics" (. Retrieved 19 January 2014

Asia

In the "Asia" () section visitors can see red panda, Asian tapir, Oriental small-clawed otter, leopard, tiger, Asian elephant, and other animals.
The new Elephant House, which opened in June 2008, is designed by Norman Foster in cooperation with the Danish landscape architect Stig L. Andersson. It houses Asian elephants and contains two glass-domed enclosures. One is for six cows and calves and measures 
The paddock's border with Frederiksberg Park, once a  high wall, has been opened up so that people in the park can now watch the elephants. This has been done because the zoo, with its central location is very much a city zoo, wants to integrate with the urban landscape. At the same time it affords the elephants distant views of open parkland and ancient trees.

South America

In the "South America" () section visitors can see species such as capybara, guanaco, greater rhea, Patagonian mara, southern screamer and giant anteater.

Africa

In the part of the zoo called "Africa" () visitors can see species such as white rhinoceros, giraffe, impala, okapi, sable antelope, ostrich, plains zebra, hippopotamus, Abyssinian ground hornbill, Congo Peafowl and caracal.

Islands

In the "Islands" () section visitors can see emu, red-necked wallaby, Tasmanian devil, ring-tailed lemur, kea and other animals.

Tropical Zoo

The "Tropical Zoo" () consists of a rainforest hall with one section for free-ranging birds and another for tropical butterflies. In between the two is a section for reptiles, amphibians and fish.

Children's Zoo

In the Children's Zoo () visitors can see domestic animals like llama, goat, cow, pig, horse, rabbit and chicken.

Rare species

 Giraffe culling controversy == 
A healthy young male giraffe, Marius, was killed on 9 February 2014 on the recommendation of the European Association of Zoos and Aquaria.
YWP released a statement that it had the capacity to accept a further giraffe into its bachelor herd in its state-of-the-art giraffe house built in 2012, and that contact had been made with Copenhagen Zoo but no reply had been received. YWP has previously received a male giraffe of the same age as Marius from Copenhagen Zoo.
The action has been criticized by Stine Jensen from Denmark's Organisation Against the Suffering of Animals, who repudiated the action as unethical. She said, "This situation should not have occurred at all. It just shows that the zoo is in fact not the ethical institution that it wants to portray itself as being, because here you have a waste product - that being Marius. Here we have a zoo which thinks that putting this giraffe down instead of thinking of alternatives is the best option".
Images of the carcass being cut up in front of children and then fed to the zoo's lion population have been circulated by the Associated Press. The zoo spokesperson, Tobias Stenbaek Bro, has been quoted as saying that visitors, including children, were invited to watch as the giraffe was skinned and parts fed to the lions. "I'm actually proud because I think we have given children a huge understanding of the anatomy of a giraffe that they wouldn't have had from watching a giraffe in a photo," Stenbaek Bro said in a telephone interview with the Associated Press.
On 25 March 2014, despite the backlash from the giraffe cull, the Zoo euthanized four lions (two adults and two ten-month old cubs). The Zoo stated that they are introducing a male lion and did not want to disrupt the pride's natural structure and behaviour. The lions were not culled or dissected in public. 

Exhibit gallery

File:Gray Crowned Crane at Zoo Copenhagen.jpg|A Grey Crowned Crane (Balearica regulorumin)
File:Elephants Zoo Copenhagen.jpg|Asian elephants (Elephas maximus) in the grounds of the new Elephant House
File:Kappebavian.jpg|A Hamadryas baboon (Papio hamadryas) in Copenhagen Zoo
File:Copenhagen Zoo - Hippopotamus.jpg|A Hippo (Hippopotamus amphibius) yawning






