[[The Hunger (1983 film)]]

CATEGORIES: 1983 films, 1983 horror films, Bisexuality-related films, British films, British horror films, British LGBT-related films, English-language films, Directorial debut films, Erotic romance films, Erotic thriller films, Films based on horror novels, Films directed by Tony Scott, Films set in the 1980s, Films set in New York City, Films shot anamorphically, Lesbian-related films, LGBT-related horror films, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer films, Vampires in film

The Hunger is a 1983 British horror film directed by Tony Scott, and starring Catherine Deneuve, David Bowie, and Susan Sarandon. It is the story of a love triangle between a doctor who specialises in sleep and ageing research and a vampire couple. The film is a loose adaptation of the 1981 novel of the same name by Whitley Strieber, with a screenplay by Ivan Davis and Michael Thomas.
The film was screened out of competition at the 1983 Cannes Film Festival.

Plot

Miriam Blaylock is a beautiful and dangerous immortal vampire, promising specially chosen humans eternal life as her vampire lovers. As the film begins, her vampire companion is John, a talented cellist she married in 18th century France. The film opens in a night club in New York to a live performance from Bauhaus. There they connect with another young couple who are brought home and fed upon by slashing the throats with a bladed Ankh pendant. The bodies are disposed of by an incinerator in the basement of an elegant New York townhouse John and Miriam live in posing as a wealthy couple who teach classical music. The only student shown is a young tomboy violinist named Alice Cavender.
Meanwhile the story introduces Dr. Sarah Roberts, a gerontologist who specialises in studying the effects of rapid ageing in primates. The opening scene of the night club and gothic performance are laced with scenes of one primate eating another. Later, in the lab, we see that it was a pair of mated primates Dr. Roberts was studying. She and her team, including her boyfriend Tom, are at a loss to explain such behaviour.
Periodically killing and feeding upon human victims allows Miriam and John to possess eternal youth—or at least that is what John was led to believe. Approximately 300 years after his turning, John begins suffering insomnia and ageing rapidly in only a few days; he realises that Miriam knew that this would happen and that her promise of "forever and ever" was only partially true. He will have eternal life but not eternal youth. Feeling betrayed, he seeks out the help of Dr. Sarah Roberts, hoping she will be able to help reverse his accelerating decrepitude. Sarah assumes that John is a hypochondriac or mentally unbalanced and ignores his pleas for help. As John leaves the clinic in a rage, Sarah is horrified to see how rapidly John is ageing. She tries to help, at which point John rebuffs her.
After returning from the clinic, Alice drops by unexpectedly to say that she cannot attend the next day's lesson. While inside, she believes John to be his own father due to the accelerated ageing. In a last attempt to regain his youth, John murders and feeds upon Alice, whom Miriam was grooming to be her next consort when she came of age, to no avail. As John's ageing advances, he begs Miriam to kill him and release him from the agony of his decrepit body. Weeping, Miriam tells him that there is no release. After John collapses in the basement, Miriam carries him into the attic full of doves and places him in a coffin. There are stacks of other coffins and Miriam asks them all to "be good to him tonight." Miriam's former vampire lovers are doomed to suffer an eternal living death, helplessly moaning and trapped in their coffins. Later, a police official comes to the Blaylock residence looking for the missing Alice. Miriam feigns ignorance and claims that her husband is in Switzerland.
Sarah comes looking for John at his home but only finds Miriam. It becomes clear that the two women feel an attraction and Miriam acts upon this as she now feels alone after losing her lover and the young girl she was grooming. In a memorable scene during a piano adaption of The Flower Duet, Sarah says: "Are you making a pass at me, Mrs. Blaylock?" Miriam softly replies: "Miriam, please." They have a sexual encounter during which, without Sarah being fully aware of it, Miriam bites her arm and a blood exchange occurs in which some of Miriam's blood enters Sarah's body. Miriam attempts to initiate Sarah in the necessities of life as a vampire, but Sarah is repulsed by the thought of subsisting on human blood.
Sarah returns home and goes out to dinner with Tom. Clearly possessive and dominating, he becomes argumentative about her 3 hour disappearance at the Blaylock residence of which she is strangely quiet. He moves on to arguing about why she ordered a steak that she wasn't touching. Sarah claimed it was because she wasn't hungry. Next we see Sarah back at home vomiting remnants of her meal into the toilet. The next day at the lab, the team investigates Sarah's blood by Tom's authority. They reveal she has some kind of infection that is taking over. Confused, Sarah returns to the Blaylock residence to confront Miriam about her sudden changes.
Still reeling from the effects of her vampiric transformation, Sarah allows Miriam to put her to bed in a guest room. Sarah's partner, Tom, arrives on Miriam's doorstep, trying to find Sarah. Miriam informs him that Sarah is in the upstairs bedroom. Sarah, starving and desperate, tries to resist the urge to kill Tom but gives in to temptation when Tom refuses to leave her side. Sarah then joins Miriam by the piano and Miriam assures her that she will soon forget what she was and come to love Miriam. As the two kiss, Sarah drives Miriam's ankh-knife into her own throat, attempting to kill herself as she forcibly holds her mouth over Miriam's mouth, forcing Miriam to ingest her blood, possibly working on a hunch regarding the "blood borne metabolic aging disease" and "host" relationship she was told about affecting her blood. Miriam carries Sarah upstairs, intending to place her with her other boxed lovers. There is a rumbling and the mummies of Miriam's previous lovers emerge from their coffins. The mummies drive Miriam over the edge of the balcony. As she rapidly ages, the mummies fall and become dust, ostensibly providing the trapped souls with release.
As the film draws to a close, the police investigator returns only to find a real estate agent is showing the townhouse stripped of all possessions to prospective buyers. Sarah is now in London, standing on the balcony of a chic apartment tower (one of the three towers of the Barbican), in the company of an attractive young man and woman. She is serenely admiring the gorgeous view as dusk falls. From a draped coffin in a storage room, Miriam repeatedly screams Sarah's name (an overlay of the audio from earlier in the film).

Rewritten ending

The final scene of Sarah on the balcony was added at the studio's behest, with a view to leaving the film open-ended and allowing for possible sequels. Sarandon later expressed regret that this sequence seemed to make no sense in the context of the rest of the film: "The thing that made the film interesting to me was this question of, 'Would you want to live for ever if you were an addict?' But as the film progressed, the powers that be rewrote the ending and decided that I wouldn't die, so what was the point? All the rules that we'd spent the entire film delineating, that Miriam lived forever and was indestructible, and all the people that she transformed eventually died, and that I killed myself rather than be an addict ignored. Suddenly I was kind of living, she was kind of half dying... Nobody knew what was going on, and I thought that was a shame."Susan Sarandon, DVD audio commentary, 2004, Warner Bros.

Cast

Music

Howard Blake was musical director on The Hunger. Although a soundtrack has been available since the film's release (Varese Sarabande VSD 47261) this issue omits much of the music used in the film – see Movements section below. Blake also composed the orchestral score for Flash Gordon (1980) alongside rock band Queen, and the Oscar winning animated short film of Raymond Briggs', The Snowman (1982).
Blake's notes on working with director Tony Scott: "Tony wanted to create a score largely using classical music and I researched this, many days going to his home in Wimbledon with stacks of recordings to play to him. One of these was the duet for 2 sopranos from Delibes 'Lakme', which I recorded specially with Elaine Barry and Judith Rees, conducting my orchestra The Sinfonia of London. Howard Shelley joined with Ralph Holmes and Raphael Wallfisch to record the first movement of Schubert's Piano Trio in E flat. Ralph recorded the Gigue from Bach's Violin Partita in E and Raphael the Prelude to Bach's solo cello sonata in G, to which Bowie mimed. I was persuaded to appear in one scene as a pianist, for which I wrote a 'Dolphin Square Blues'. Tony wanted to add a synthesizer score and I introduced him to Hans Zimmer, then working at The Snake Ranch Studio in Fulham but Tony eventually used a score by Michel Rubini and Denny Jaeger with electronics by David Lawson. It is hard however to exactly separate these elements."

Movements

Reception

Bowie was excited to work on the film, but was concerned about the final product. He said "I must say, there's nothing that looks like it on the market. But I'm a bit worried that it's just perversely bloody at some points."
The Hunger was not particularly well-received upon its initial release, and was attacked by many critics for being heavy on atmosphere and visuals but slow on pace and plot. Roger Ebert, of the Chicago Sun-Times, described the film as "an agonizingly bad vampire movie". Camille Paglia writes that The Hunger comes close to being a masterpiece of a "classy genre of vampire film", but that it is "ruined by horrendous errors, as when the regal Catherine Deneuve is made to crawl around on all fours, slavering over cut throats."Paglia, Camille. Sexual Personae: Art and Decadence from Nefertiti to Emily Dickinson. Yale University Press, 1990, p. 268.
However, the film has found a cult following that responded to its dark, glamorous atmosphere. The Bauhaus song "Bela Lugosi's Dead" plays over the introductory credits and beginning. The film is popular with some segments of the goth subculture "The film has gained a small cult in subsequent years, particularly among the gay community who appointed Susan Sarandon as some kind of icon." and inspired a short-lived TV series of the same name. The Hunger currently holds a 46% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 28 reviews.

Remake

On 23 September 2009, Warner Bros. announced it planned a remake of the filmThe Hunger Remake Coming From Warner Bros. with the screenplay written by Whitley Strieber.Gersh Agency books Whitley Strieber








