[[Jacqueline Wilson]]

CATEGORIES: 1945 births, Living people, Academics of Roehampton University, English children's writers, Dames Commander of the Order of the British Empire, Fellows of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, Fellows of the Royal Society of Literature, Guardian Children's Fiction Prize winners, People from Bath, Somerset, Costa Book Award winners, British Children's Laureate, 20th-century British novelists, 21st-century British novelists, 20th-century women writers, 21st-century women writers



Dame Jacqueline Wilson, DBE, FRSL (born 17 December 1945) is an English writer known for her vast and diverse work in children's literature. Her novels commonly deal with such challenging themes as adoption, divorce and mental illness. Addressing such issues has made her controversial because her readers are young."Jacqueline Wilson". Major Authors and Illustrators for Children and Young Adults, 2nd ed., 8 vols. Gale Group, 2002. Reproduced in Biography Resource Center. Retrieved 2 January 2010. From 2005 to 2007 she was British Children's Laureate. For her lifetime contribution as a children's writer, Wilson is U.K. nominee for the biennial, international Hans Christian Andersen Award in 2014.
Wilson is the author of many book series. Her best known work may be the Tracy Beaker series, inaugurated in 1991 by The Story of Tracy Beaker. There have been three sequels and four CBBC television adaptations: The Story of Tracy Beaker, Tracy Beaker Returns, The Dumping Ground and The Tracy Beaker Survival Files.
Several other television adaptations of Wilson's work have been released.

Life and education

Jacqueline Wilson was born in Bath, Somerset, in 1945, Her father, Harry Aitken, was a civil servant; her mother, Margaret 'Biddy' Aitken was a housewife, having various jobs as a dinnerlady and a bakery worker.
She did very well at school. After Latchmere, she attended Coombe Girls' School, which she visits to till now. Kingston University has named the main hall at its Penrhyn Road campus for her, "Jacqueline Wilson Hall". DC Thomson offered the 17-year-old a job after she penned a piece on the horrors of teen discos. She fell in love with a printer named Millar Wilson. When he joined the police force, the couple moved south for his work, marrying in 1965 when Jackie was 19. Two years later, they had a daughter, Emma. They divorced in 2004.'WILSON, Jacqueline', Who's Who 2008, A & C Black, 2008; online edn, Oxford University Press, December 2007 retrieved 30 May 2008. "Born 17 Dec. 1945; d of late Harry Aitken and of Margaret Aitken (née Clibbens) who was known as Biddy; m 1965, William Millar Wilson (marr. diss. 2004); one d".
When Wilson focused on writing, she completed a few crime fiction novels before dedicating herself to children's books. At the age of 40, she took A-level English and earned a grade A. She had mixed success with about 40 books before the breakthrough to fame in 1991 with The Story of Tracy Beaker, published by Doubleday.
Two decades later, Wilson lives in a Victorian villa in Kingston upon Thames. It is filled with books; her library of some 15,000 books extends into the outbuilding at the bottom of her garden.timesonline.co.ece Retrieved 13 August 2008. She remains a keen reader, completing a book a week despite her hectic schedule. Her favourite writers for adults include Katherine Mansfield and Sylvia Plath. She also surrounds herself with old-fashioned childhood objects such as a rocking horse and antique dolls, and has a unique taste in clothes and jewellery, being known for wearing black clothes and an array of large rings.
Wilson is patron of the charity MomentumMomentum in Kingston upon Thames, which helps Surrey children undergoing treatment for cancer (and their families), and she is also patron of The Friends of Richmond Park. Retrieved 30 May 2011.

Style

Wilson's stories have greater choice than most children's books, including such difficult topics as abuse, grief, divorce, foster care and mental illness. Her prose is often interspersed with ink drawings by illustrator Nick Sharratt, who also designs the covers for her books.
She usually writes first person narrative but has occasionally experimented with alternating viewpoints, as in Secrets, The Lottie Project, Little Darlings and Double Act.
She says: "I want to write to every age group, in a way that can prepare them for what happens in the real world, and raise the awareness levels of many life changing situations. I want to be a friend, really."
Wilson, Melvin Burgess, and others have made "social realism" fashionable, Julia Eccleshare wrote in 2001 obituary of Winifred Cawley. Simply to feature "children from less affluent homes" had been almost unknown in the 1950s —when Wilson was a child reader.

Popularity

Over 30 million copies

Awards and honours

Wilson has won many awards including the Smarties Prize and the Guardian Children's Fiction Prize. The Illustrated Mum (1999) won the annual Guardian Prize, a once-in-a-lifetime book award judged by a panel of British children's writers,"Guardian children's fiction prize relaunched: Entry details and list of past winners". theguardian 12 March 2001. Retrieved 2 August 2012. and the annual British Book Awards Children's Book of the Year; it also made the 1999 Whitbread Awards shortlist. The Story of Tracy Beaker won the 2002 Blue Peter People's Choice Award. Girls in Tears was the Children's Book of the Year at the 2003 British Book Awards.
Two of her books were "Highly Commended" runners-up for the annual Carnegie Medal: The Story of Tracy Beaker (1991) and Double Act (1995). (Wilson has not won the annual Medal from British librarians, which recognises the year's best book for children or young adults written by a British subject; recently, simply the best published in the U.K.)
In June 2002, Wilson was given an OBE for services to literacy in schools and from 2005 to 2007 she served as the fourth Children's Laureate. In that role Wilson urged parents and child-care providers to continue reading aloud to children long after they are able to read for themselves. She also campaigned to make more books available for blind people and campaigned against cutbacks in children's TV drama.
In October 2005 she received an honorary degree from the University of Winchester in recognition of her achievements in and on behalf of children's literature. In July 2007 Roehampton University awarded her an Honorary Doctorate (Doctor of Letters) in recognition of her achievements in and on behalf of children's literature.  She has also received honorary degrees from the University of Dundee, the University of Bath and Kingston University.
In the 2008 New Year Honours, Wilson was appointed Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE).
In July 2012, she was also elected an Honorary Fellow of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge.

University of Roehampton

In June 2013, Wilson was appointed Professorial Fellow of University of Roehampton, where she is now a Pro-Chancellor. She teaches modules in both the Children's Literature and Creative Writing master's degree (MA) programs offered by the university. 
In February 2014 it was announced that she will be appointed Chancellor of the University from August 2014.

Adaptations

A dramatisation of Wilson's Double Act, written and directed by Vicky Ireland, was first performed at The Polka Theatre in Wimbledon from 30 January to 12 April 2003, and toured throughout the UK. The playscript was published by Collins Plays Plus. Ireland has also written dramatisations of The Lottie Project (performed at Polka Theatre and San Pol Theatre, Madrid), Midnight, Bad Girls and Secrets, which were also commissioned by the Polka Theatre, and a dramatisation of The Suitcase Kid which was performed at the Orange Tree Theatre, Richmond and later toured throughout the UK. The scripts for these plays were published by Nick Hern Books.
The following books by Wilson have been adapted for TV:
To date, there have been no feature film adaptations of Jacqueline Wilson's novels.

Books

All of Wilson's books are fiction except the two autobiographies listed first.

Autobiographies

Children's book series

=Stevie Day=

=Is There Anybody There?=

=Werepuppy=

=Tracy Beaker=

=Mark Spark=

=Freddy's Teddy=

=Connie=

=Adventure Holiday=

=Girls=

Hetty feather

Popular children's non-series works

Non-series works



Notes



Further reading




