[[Airoli]]

CATEGORIES: Navi Mumbai

Airoli is a developed residential as well as commercial suburb of Navi Mumbai. It is connected to Navi Mumbai's other developed neighborhood Vashi with city bus services provided by BEST, NMMT and local train services.
The Mulund-Airoli bridge has contributed to Airoli's expansion in recent years, as Mulund is Mumbai's one of the busiest suburbs. The bridge also serves as a connection between Airoli and the Nahur station of the central railways. It is one of the only two bridges which connect Mumbai to Navi Mumbai, the other being the Vashi bridge.
The commercial zone includes the print city of The Times Of India, the iGate Knowledge Park (previously known as Patni Knowledge Park), Reliable Tech Park, and Mindspace. Mindspace is an office complex which contains offices of several firms.
The area of Airoli and Diva village was developed by CIDCO (City Industrial Development Corporation) and later on handed over to NMMC (Navi Mumbai Municipal Corporation) for administration. Airoli is divided into 28 sectors, out of which 20 sectors have been developed.

Transportation

Trains: One can reach Airoli by using the Mumbai suburban local train network. You can take a train from Thane going to Vashi / Panvel, or take a train from Vashi going to Thane. It takes around 7–8 minutes in train from Thane to Airoli.
Bus: BEST buses are available from Airoli to Vashi, Chembur, Sion, Mulund, Bhandup, Powai, Dindoshi & Borivali. NMMT buses are available from Airoli to Vashi, Thane, Panvel, Bhayandar, Mulund & Borivali. BEST AC Kinglong & NMMT AC Volvo buses are available from Airoli to Vashi, Dindoshi & Borivali.
BEST Routes in Airoli
NMMT Routes in Airoli
Auto and Taxi: Autos are available at Airoli bridge toll naka for Mumbai and Navi Mumbai. From Toll naka to Airoli or anywhere in navi Mumbai they do not charged as per meter & fare like anything. Share autos are available between Airoli Rly Stn and Reliable Infotech Park, Mindspace and between Airoli Sec 05 and Airoli Rly Stn as well as between Thane and Airoli.

Suburban rail

Airoli is the first railway station from Thane on Thane / Vashi and Thane / Panvel line. The Airoli station falls on the Trans-Harbour link of harbour railway line. All the Racks on this lines are very old & used many years by Western Railway/Central Railway. Fast trains (only twice a day) do not halt here. Airoli is connected to the commercial zone. The railway station is partly connected to the residential areas by buses and autos. The share autos are available to and from railway station. Ticket counters are available only on the western side of station.

Amenities

Courier service companies have small offices in Airoli. 
are present along the main road bordering Sector 6.
Airoli railway station as well as the Airoli bus stand are located at Sector 3. City buses of BEST and NMMT operate from this bus stand. Sector 7 and 8 are the commercial districts in Airoli with banks and businesses, and a small mall being developed called Ripplez. Some of the known retail outlets located in Sector 8 are Belmonte, Bata, Mobile Store, Woodlands (Aero Club). In Sector 18 there is the "Mother Teresa Orphanage" also called "PREM DAAN" which takes care only for women and children (including mentally disabled).

International Diplomatic Enclave

The International Diplomatic Enclave (IDE) has been planned and developed by CIDCO to provide a high security enclave for various countries to establish their consulates in Airoli, Navi Mumbai, so as to provide trade, travel and visa facility to residents of MMR (Mumbai Metropolitan Region).
Highlights
2. Facilities proposed include international school, multiple configuration auditoriums, seminar and conferencing facilities, exhibition spaces, health club, convenience shopping and restaurants, and housing complex
3. Special triple layered security system

Mindspace, Airoli – IT SEZ ::Mindspace:: 

Mindspace, an IT SEZ (Information Technology – Special Economic Zone) is located close to Airoli railway station on the Thane-Belapur road. It is an IT SEZ of 4.5 million sq. ft. or over 100 acres is designed for IT / ITES / BPO companies. The business park has planned work areas and floor plates. A central garden of 5 acres, clubhouse and fitness center are proposed. The buildings are designed around a central arc and interconnected with 4 lane internal roads. According to the original plan, 10 buildings are proposed, out of which 4 are ready.K Raheja 
Following are the organizations which have a setup at Airoli

Banks

National Prominent & Private Banks were the first to set up shop in Airoli. Only recently, major private and public sector banks have started opening their branches.
Apart from ATMs of the banks mentioned above, the following banks have their ATMs in Airoli. DCB (Visa), IndusInd Bank (Visa), Kotak Mahindra Bank (Visa).

Hospitals and Nursing Homes

Schools in Airoli

Colleges in Airoli

Shopping Centre






