[[Russian submarine Kursk (K-141)]]

CATEGORIES: K-141 Kursk accident, Lost submarines of Russia, Maritime incidents in 2000, Oscar-class submarines, Ships built in Russia, Ships of the Russian Northern Fleet, Shipwrecks in the Barents Sea, Submarine accidents caused by torpedoes, Sunken nuclear submarines, 1994 ships, Ships sunk by non-combat internal explosions, Ships lost with all hands

K-141 ''Kursk was an Oscar-II class  nuclear-powered cruise missile submarine of the Russian Navy, lost with all hands when it sank in the Barents Sea on 12 August 2000. Kursk, full name Атомная подводная лодка «Курск», which, translated, means the nuclear-powered submarine "Kursk" "Курск" in Russian, was a Project 949A Антей (Antey'', Antaeus, also known by its NATO reporting name of Oscar II). It was named after the Russian city Kursk, around which the largest tank battle in military history, the Battle of Kursk, took place in 1943. One of the first vessels completed after the end of the Soviet Union, it was commissioned into the Russian Navy's Northern Fleet.

Construction

Work on building Kursk began in 1990 at Severodvinsk, near Arkhangelsk. Launched in 1994, it was commissioned in December of that year.  It was the penultimate Oscar II class submarine designed and approved in the Soviet era. At  she was the largest attack submarine ever built. She was commissioned in 1994.

Capabilities

The Antey design represented the highest achievement of Soviet nuclear submarine technology. They were the largest attack submarines ever built.
The outer hull, made of high-nickel, high-chrome content stainless steel -thick steel pressure hull.N. A. "Kursk Inner Hull Breached." Australian, The (n.d.): Newspaper Source Plus. Web. 7 December 2011. She was designed to remain submerged for up to 120 days.  The sail superstructure was reinforced to allow it to break through the Arctic ice. 
The submarine was armed with  24 SS-N-19/P-700 Granit cruise missiles, and eight torpedo tubes in the bow: four . The weaponry included 18  SS-N-16 "Stallion" anti-ship missiles that were designed to defeat the best Western naval air defenses.
Kursk was part of Russia's Northern Fleet, which had suffered funding cutbacks throughout the 1990s. Many of its submarines were anchored and rusting in Zapadnaya Litsa Naval Base,  from Murmansk. Retrieved on 8 August 2007. Little work to maintain all but the most essential front-line equipment, including search and rescue equipment, had occurred. Northern Fleet sailors had gone unpaid in the mid-1990s.

Deployments

During its five years of service, the Kursk completed only one mission, a six-month deployment to the Mediterranean during the summer of 1999 to monitor the United States Sixth Fleet responding to the Kosovo crisis.

Naval exercise and disaster

Kursk joined the "Summer-X" exercise, the first large-scale naval exercise planned by the Russian Navy in more than a decade, While it was an exercise, the Kursk loaded a full complement of combat weapons. It was one of the few ships authorized to carry a combat load at all times.

Explosion

On the first day of the exercise, the Kursk successfully launched a Granit missile armed with a dummy warhead.  Two days later, on the morning of 12 August, she prepared to fire dummy torpedoes at the Kirov-class battlecruiser Pyotr Velikiy. These practice torpedoes had no explosive warheads and were manufactured and tested at a much lower quality standard. "Raising the Kursk." Sydney Morning Herald. 19 October 2001: 15. Newspaper Source Plus. Web. 7 December 2011. On 12 August 2000, at 11:28 local time (07:28 UTC), there was an explosion while preparing to fire. "A Mystery In The Deep." Newsweek 136.9 (2000): 34. Academic Search Premier. Web. 7 December 2011. The Russian Navy's final report on the disaster concluded the explosion was due to the failure of one of the Kursk's hydrogen peroxide-fueled Type 65 torpedoes. "The Kursk's Loss Offers Lessons." U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, 129.6 (2003): 71. Academic Search Premier. Web. 7 December 2011. A subsequent investigation concluded that HTP, a form of highly concentrated hydrogen peroxide used as propellant for the torpedo, seeped through a faulty weld  in the torpedo casing.

Rescue attempts

Though the Americans, British and Norwegian navies offered assistance, Russia refused all help.  All 118 sailors and officers aboard Kursk perished. The Russian Admiralty initially told the public that the majority of the crew died within minutes of the explosion, but on August 21 Norwegian and Russian divers found 24 bodies in the ninth compartment, the turbine room at the stern of the boat. Captain-lieutenant Dmitri Kolesnikov wrote a note listing the names of 23 sailors who were alive in the compartment after the ship sank.
A potassium superoxide cartridge of a chemical oxygen generator, used to absorb carbon dioxide and chemically release oxygen to enable survival, appears to have been the cause of the survivors' death. The investigation found a cartridge had come in contact with the sea water inside the ninth compartment, causing a chemical reaction and a flash fire. The investigation showed that some men temporarily survived this fire by plunging under water, as fire marks on the bulkheads indicated the water was at waist level at the time.  But the fire consumed all remaining oxygen, killing the remaining survivors.
Russia's then President Vladimir Putin, though immediately informed of the tragedy, was told by the navy that they had the situation under control and rescue was imminent. He waited five days before he ended his holiday at a presidential resort in subtropical Sochi on the Black Sea. Only four months into his tenure as President, the public and media were extremely critical of Putin's decision to remain at a seaside resort, and his highly favourable ratings dropped dramatically. A year later he said, "I probably should have returned to Moscow, but nothing would have changed. I had the same level of communication both in Sochi and in Moscow, but from a PR point of view I could have demonstrated some special eagerness to return."Spectre of Kursk haunts Putin  – BBC News, 12 August 2001 Retrieved on 8 August 2007

Submarine recovery

A consortium formed by the Dutch companies Mammoet and Smit InternationalSmit website on salvage project of Kursk, visited 12 Februari, 2012 was awarded a contract by Russia to raise the vessel, excluding the bow. They modified the barge Giant 4 which eventually raised Kursk and recovered the remains of the sailors.J. (2006): Investigation of Bodies in Water. In: Spitz, W.U. & Spitz, D.J. (eds): Spitz and Fisher's Medicolegal Investigation of Death. Guideline for the Application of Pathology to Crime Investigations (Fourth edition), Charles C. Thomas, pp.: 846-881; Springfield, Illinois.
When the salvage operation raised the boat in 2001, there were considerable fears that preparing to move the wreck could trigger explosions. But the salvage team first cut the bow off using a tungsten carbide-studded cable. This tool had the potential to cause sparks which would ignite remaining pockets of volatile gases, such as hydrogen. The successfully recovered portion of Kursk was towed to Severomorsk and placed in a floating dry dock where extensive forensic analysis was accomplished.
The remains of Kursks reactor compartment were towed to Sayda Bay on Russia's northern Kola Peninsula – where more than 50 reactor compartments were afloat at pier points – after a shipyard had defuelled the boat in early 2003.Retrieved on 8 August 2007. The rest of the boat was then dismantled for scrap.
In the end the bow was not recovered and was destroyed by explosives in 2002. Only small pieces of the bow were recovered (some torpedo and torpedo tube fragments).

Official inquiry results

Finally pushing aside the Navy's long-standing blame on a collision with a foreign vessel, a report issued by the government attributed the disaster to a torpedo explosion caused when high-test peroxide (HTP), a form of highly concentrated hydrogen peroxide, leaked from a faulty weld in the torpedo's casing.

Other explanation

Vice-Admiral Valery Ryazantsev differed with the government's official conclusion. He cited inadequate training, poor maintenance, and incomplete inspections that caused the crew to mishandle the weapon.



Books

Music

Theatre






