[[Dick's Sporting Goods]]

CATEGORIES: Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Sporting goods retailers of the United States, Companies established in 1948, Online retail companies of the United States, Companies based in Binghamton, New York

Dick's Sporting Goods, Inc., or Dick's, is a Fortune 500 American corporation in the sporting goods and retail industries headquartered in Coraopolis, Pennsylvania.
Dick's has 525 stores in 42 states as of July 25, 2011, primarily in the eastern half of the United States. The company also owns Golf Galaxy, Inc., a golf specialty retailer, with 81 stores in 30 states.
Founded in 1948 by Richard "Dick" Stack at the age of 18, the chain has expanded to become one of the largest sporting goods retailers in the world.

History

In 1948, at the age of 18, Richard Stack worked at an Army/Navy store in his hometown of Binghamton, New York, after World War II. At the owner's request, "Dick" explored the idea of expanding the product line to include fishing and camping supplies, but the owner rejected Dick's suggestions, stating that Dick "would never make a good merchant."
When Dick recounted his story later that day, his grandmother advised, "Dick, always follow your dreams," and gave him $300 from her savings. He rented a storefront and opened the first Dick's as a small "bait & tackle" fishing supply store, on Court Street near Howard Avenue.dickssportinggoods.jsp?page=aboutU
In the mid-1950s, the store expanded into the market of general sports merchandise and by the early 1960s, he was able to build and open a new store on the corner of Oliver and Court St., naming it "Dick's Sporting Goods". The store prospered, and Dick eventually opened a second store in Vestal, NY. In the 1970s, the Binghamton store moved next door to an even larger facility. Dick Stack headed the organization until his retirement in 1984.
Dick Stack's son, Edward "Eddie" Stack,succeeded him in the leadership of the company, expanding the two-store business rapidly. Edward W. Stack has served as Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Dick's Sporting Goods since 1984, having started with the company full-time in 1977, and gradually working his way up in a variety of positions including: Store Clerk, Merchandise Manager, Store Manager and President. 
In the early 1990s, Dick's began chain operations, opening additional stores across Upstate New York.

Corporate

The company's e-tailing website dickssportinggoods. Because the e-commerce website is operated under a company separate from Dick's Sporting Goods, the website often carries a wider selection than what is available in the stores with prices occasionally varying. 
Excluding revenues from Chick's, Dick's generated 2007 revenues of $3.965B in fiscal 2003. With the inclusion of Chick's, Dick's now operates over 450 stores - surpassing competitors The Sports Authority in both stores and revenue.

Sponsorship

The company sponsors a number of sporting events, including:
Professional sports teams sponsored by Dick's include the NHL's Pittsburgh Penguins and Colorado Avalanche, and the Colorado Rapids of the MLS.

Lawsuits and legal proceedings

Acquisitions and expansion

Dick's Sporting Goods opened in Florida and California in 1997. Seven years later, the chain acquired the entirety of Galyan's, an Indiana-based sporting chain. They also acquired Golf Galaxy and Chick's in 2007.
Plans were announced in 2010 to open their first store in Washington state (Puyallup) "with six more locations Oregon 'coming soon.'"
On August 16, 2013, Dick's Sporting Goods opened its first Field & Stream Shop in Cranberry Township, Pennsylvania at the site of the former Dick's location in Cranberry (Dick's had moved to a newer location nearby in 2012), operating as a competitor to Cabela's. Dick's has plans to open at least two more Field & Stream Shop locations in Erie, Pennsylvania (on the site of a proposed Cabela's store that Dick's had purchased before Cabela's had a chance to buy it) and Crescent Springs, Kentucky. Dick's had bought the retail-related intellectual property rights to the Field & Stream name from the magazine's owner Bonnier Corporation in 2012 after having licensed the name for several years before. Bonnier remains owner of the magazine.

File:Dicks Sporting Goods Charlotte NC.
Image:Lodge007.
Image:Dicks Store 1. This store has been in operation since the 1960s and is a fraction of the modern stores' sizes.








