[[Hypercoaster]]

CATEGORIES: Hypercoaster roller coasters, Types of roller coasters

A hypercoaster or megacoaster according to Intamin can mean one of two things:
Or, more narrowly:
Out and back steel coasters smaller than 200 feet in both height and drop such as Steel Eel at SeaWorld San Antonio have sometimes been erroneously referred to as hypercoasters.

History

The world's first hypercoaster was Magnum XL-200 by Cedar Point, costing $8,000,000 USD. Cedar Point chose Arrow Dynamics to design and construct Magnum XL-200. Construction on the world's tallest and fastest complete circuit roller coaster (at that time) began in 1988. By May 6, 1989, Magnum XL-200 was ready for riders. Since its debut, Magnum XL-200 has served more than 36 million guests.

Description

Hypercoasters were originally built for speed and airtime, to counter the trend of constructing bigger and bigger looping coasters. To accomplish this the elements of a hypercoaster often include a large first drop, several additional drops of declining height, a large turn or helix and then many airtime-inducing hills. Hypercoasters are commonly designed with an out and back layout, although some hypercoasters, such as Raging Bull, are built with a twisted  design.
Hypercoasters dominate the Amusement Today Golden Ticket Awards. For 2006, Superman: Ride of Steel, now known as Bizarro, located at Six Flags New England was ranked highest at #1. Several hypercoasters followed such as Magnum XL-200 (#3), Nitro (#4), Apollo's Chariot (#5). The hypercoasters make up the majority of the 2006 Top 10 Steel Coasters, filling 8/10 positions.
Hypercoasters were first manufactured by Arrow Dynamics in the late 1980s to early 1990s. Since then, a number of companies, including Bolliger & Mabillard, Intamin, D. H. Morgan Manufacturing, Giovanola and others have designed and constructed hypercoasters.
Notably, there has only been one wooden hypercoaster built, Son of Beast at Kings Island. At the time, Son of Beast was the tallest and fastest wooden roller coaster. Upon its opening, it was also the only wooden roller coaster to feature a vertical loop, thus disqualifying it from the narrower definition of "hypercoaster". However, the loop was removed in 2006 when Cedar Fair Entertainment Company purchased the park from Paramount. It was standing but not operating (SBNO) from 2009 to 2012 due to a number of problems, including guest complaints about the roughness of the ride. Demolition was completed after the 2012 operating season, and the site where it once stood is reserved for future park expansion.

Hypercoasters

The following are a list of all hypercoasters sorted by opening date:
 Denotes a hypercoaster that is also a giga coaster (any full circuit coaster over 300 ft).
 Denotes a hypercoaster that is also a strata coaster (any full circuit coaster over 400 ft).
 Denotes a coaster that fits the broad but not the narrow definition of a hypercoaster.

By height

The following are non-continuous circuit coasters that exceed 200 feet in height or drop, unlike coasters that conform to the hypercoaster "style." However, these shuttle roller coasters are not usually considered hypercoasters.






