[[Rosario, Cavite]]

CATEGORIES: Municipalities of Cavite, Populated places on Manila Bay

 
The Municipality of Rosario (also referred to as Salinas) is a first class urban municipality in the province of Cavite, Philippines.  According to the 2010 census, it has a population of 92,253 people in an area of 5.6 square kilometers, making it the most densely populated city/municipality in Cavite at 16,473 per km2. It is accessible by land and water transportation.Province of Cavite Website - Rosario
With the continuous expansion of Metro Manila, the municipality is now included in Manila conurbation which reaches Lipa City in its southernmost part.

History

On October 22, 1845, Spanish Governor General Narciso Claveria promulgated a Decree for the establishment of a new town comprising Salinas-Leiton and Tierra Alta of San Francisco de Malabon, what is now the town of Gen. Trias. On October 27, Don Juan Arlegui, Vicar-General of the Archdiocese of Manila informed the Politico-Military Governor of Cavite Don Miguel Roca, that he was designated by the Governor-General to look for a person of unquestionable integrity who will be entrusted with the money for the construction of the church building.
On November 3, 1845, presbyter Don Mamerto Ner, who was at that time one of the priests of the Curia of Manila, was appointed parish priest and served until December 1866.
The Municipality of Rosario was originally a part of San Francisco de Malabon (now General Trias, Cavite).  It became an independent municipality in 1846, one year after the founding of the Santissimo Rosario Parish.  Rosario was formerly called Tejero, which may have originated from the word tejer (Spanish to weave) because weaving fish nets was then the main occupation of the women. Rosario was also called Salinas derived from the word sal (Spanish salt) during the Philippine Revolution because salt-making was a prime industry of the town.  The place was likewise called Marcella or Marcelles due to its proximity to the sea ("mar" in Spanish). Rosario was, finally, named in honor of their patroness Nuestra Señora Virgen del Santissimo Rosario, Reina de Caracol or (Our Lady of the Most Holy Rosary).  The second smallest town in Cavite Province, Rosario has now emerged into the "biggest" in terms of its land area nor its per capita income but because of the great transitions that occurred with the town's political, social, cultural and economic developments since 1845.
There are three religious versions for naming the town "Rosario." These are:
The first version says, the image of the Madonna and the Child was found one day floating on the water by a group of kids playing along the seashore. They played with the image, using it as a toy and afterwards hid it in the bushes near the sea. Every time they came back, however, they would see the image already floating leisurely on the water, as if waiting for them. They thought it strange, but could not explain how the image got back to the water.
Not long after their elders learned about the image and took it to an empty nipa shack. Thus began a public adoration of the Madonna and Child. The hut was transformed into a place of worship. News of miraculous happenings attributed to the image spread around. The religious fervor was so great and the people were moved by the image that they decided to adopt it as the patroness of the town and changed the name Salinas Marcella to Rosario.
The different names given to the town are remembered. Marcella exists as one of the national roads of the town. Salinas is associated with the finest and famous smoked fish (Tinapang Salinas) produced by the townspeople.

Geography

Rosario is  south-southwest of Cavite City. It occupies part of the north to northwestern section of the province along the western coast of Luzon.  It is flanked by Noveleta on the east, Manila Bay on the north, General Trias on the southeast and Tanza on the southwest.

Land Area

Rosario has a land area of only 569 hectares, as based on previous data recorded. At present, the municipality has not yet conducted any cadastral survey of its juridical land territory. A total of twenty (20) barangays make up this lowland coastal town.

Barangays

Rosario is politically subdivided into 20 barangays.

Demographics

	
Rosario's total population, according the National Statistics Office as of May 1, 2010, is 92,253.  Rosario's potential labor force comprises 59.25% of the figure given above, with the majority engaged in fishing and trade activities. The growth rate is 3.63%.

Religion

Roman Catholic is the prominent religion of Rosario. There are two Catholic churches. One is in Poblacion, the Church of The Most Holy Rosary Parish, and another one in Ligtong, The Church of San Isidro Labrador. Recently, Islam was introduced by the Maranao business people from Mindanao.

Economy

Fishing is a major economic activity due to the abundant fishing grounds particularly in Barangays Wawa, Sapa Muzon and Ligtong. The Rosario Fish Port in Barangay Sapa is a major fishing port. Predominant cottage industries related to fishing include smoked fish (tinapa) processing, fish drying (daing), fish paste (bagoong) making, fish sauce (patis) making and canning.  Marine species caught within municipal fishing grounds include squid, mackerel, slipmouth, herring, goatfish, tuna, mullet, porgy, shrimp, barracuda, cavalla, snapper, catfish and roundscad.
The Fil-Oil Development and Management Corporation (FMDC) has begun developing .
On November 20, 2009, SM Prime Holdings, the largest mall-operator in the country, opened its 36th mall: SM City Rosario.

Landmarks

List of former Municipal Heads

Gobernadorcillos
Capitan Presidents
Presidente Municipal
Municipal Mayors
Japanese sponsored Mayor
Liberation Military Mayor
Appointed by Pres. Osmena
Appointed by Pres. Roxas
Town Mayor

Education

Primary schools:
Secondary schools:
Tertiary schools:

Images

File:Cavitejf3150_01.JPG|Welcome arch
File:SantoRosarioChurchjf3345 02.JPG|Nuestra Señora Virgen del Santissimo Rosario
File:LigtongChurchRosariojf3207 01.JPG|San Isidro Labrador Parish Church
File:Cavitejf3325.JPG|Town hall
File:Rosario,Cavitejf3296_02.JPG|Rosario commercial center








