[[Into the Night (film)]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 films, 1980s comedy films, Comedy thriller films, English-language films, Films directed by John Landis, Universal Pictures films, Films set in Los Angeles, California

Into the Night is a 1985 American comedy-thriller film directed by John Landis, starring Jeff Goldblum and Michelle Pfeiffer. The film is notable for a large number of cameo appearances made by various filmmakers and directors, including Landis himself. The soundtrack features the songs "Into the Night", "In the Midnight Hour" and "Lucille", performed by B.B. King.
While the picture was being filmed, Landis was still caught up in the controversy surrounding his previous release, Twilight Zone: The Movie (1983), during the filming of which a helicopter accident led to the deaths of Vic Morrow and two child actors.

Plot

Upon discovering that his wife is having an affair, depressed insomniac Ed Okin (Jeff Goldblum) drives to the airport on Herb's suggestion (Dan Aykroyd), where he is surprised by a beautiful jewel smuggler, Diana (Michelle Pfeiffer), who lands on his car and begs him to drive her away from four Iranians who are chasing her. She persuades him to drive her to various locations, and he becomes embroiled in her predicament. After becoming increasingly exasperated with her demands, he discovers that Diana has smuggled priceless emeralds from the Shah of Iran's treasury into the country, and is being pursued by various assorted assailants, including the aforementioned agents of a criminal Iranian expatriate and a British hitman (David Bowie).
The couple's caper gets increasingly out of hand, until Diana is eventually taken hostage by the thugs at the airport; here, Ed shares his ennui with the man holding a gun to Diana's head. The man shoots himself instead. Taken to a motel room by federal agents, they are given a fortune in cash from one of Diana's wealthy friends via a federal agent. Diana showers and Ed finally sleeps. He wakes up after a full night's rest to an empty hotel room, with most of the money gone. However, when he leaves the room, Diana is waiting for him... with the money, a smile, and an offer of a ride.

Cast

Cameo appearances

John Landis appears in the film himself as the mute member of the quartet of Iranian henchmen, alongside:

Critical reception

Into The Night has a rating of 38% on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 21 critics' reviews, indicating a generally negative critical reception.
Some critics saw the large number of cameo appearances by Landis's friends and colleagues as unnecessary and distracting. Roger Ebert in the Chicago Sun-Times wrote: "If I had been the agent for one of the stars, like Goldblum, Michelle Pfeiffer, Richard Farnsworth or Kathryn Harrold, I think I would have protested to the front office that Landis was engaging in cinematic auto-eroticism and that my clients were getting lost in the middle of the family reunion."
Into The Night won the Special Jury Prize of the 1985 Festival du Film Policier de Cognac.

Soundtrack

The score for Into the Night was written by Ira Newborn (tracks "Enter Shaheen" and "Century City Chase"). Newborn also composed two new songs for the film soundtrack "Into the Night" and "My Lucille" (both performed by blues singer B.B. King) and also arranged the classic song "In the Midnight Hour". The vinyl edition of this soundtrack included two songs composed by Ira Newborn, which are not included on the film soundtrack: "Don't Make Me Sorry" (co-written by Joe Esposito), performed by Patti La Belle and "Keep It Light" (co-written by Reginald "Sonny" Burke), performed by Thelma Houston. The official edition of the soundtrack also included songs "Let's Get It On" performed by Marvin Gaye and "I Can't Help Myself (Sugar Pie Honey Bunch)" performed by The Four Tops, both of which appeared during the film. There are no CD issue of this soundtrack, but all songs performed by B.B. King on film soundtrack are available on Classic B.B.
On the vinyl edition there is a John Landis quote about the film soundtrack:
Side one
Side two






