[[Fujiwhara effect]]

CATEGORIES: Vortices, Tropical cyclone meteorology

The Fujiwhara effect, sometimes referred to as Fujiwara interaction or binary interaction, is when two nearby cyclonic vortices orbit each other and close the distance between the circulations of their corresponding low-pressure areas. The effect is named after Sakuhei Fujiwhara, the Japanese meteorologist who initially described the effect.  Binary interaction of smaller circulations can cause the development of a larger cyclone, or cause two cyclones to merge into one. Extratropical cyclones typically engage in binary interaction when within  of each other.

Description

When cyclones are in proximity of one other, their centers will begin orbiting cyclonically (counter-clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere)

Tropical cyclones

Tropical cyclones can form when smaller circulations within the Intertropical Convergence Zone merge.

Examples

=North Atlantic=

Hurricane Iris of the 1995 Atlantic hurricane season interacted with Hurricane Humberto, before interacting and absorbing Tropical Storm Karen during September 3. (2000-11-02). Preliminary Report: Hurricane Iris National Hurricane Center. Retrieved on 2012-11-20.  In 2005, the remnant low of Tropical Depression Thirteen moved northward and then northeastward around a non-tropical low located to the north of the system. It briefly strengthened into Tropical Storm Lee. Thereafter, Lee weakened back to a tropical depression as it moved northeastward and northwestward around the eastern side of the non-tropical low and eventually absorbed the non-tropical low. (2005-12-07). Tropical Cyclone Report: Tropical Storm Lee. National Hurricane Center. Retrieved on 2012-11-20. In the same year, Alpha was absorbed by Wilma.

=Northeast Pacific=

In 1974, Hurricanes Kirsten and  Ione interacted in a Fujiwara interaction, as Ione was pulled north east, while Kristen  was pulled to the north west.about.htm In the same year,
Francesca and Gretchen interacted with each other, until they merged on July 19. In 2001, Gil absorbed Henriette but associated convection totally dissipated during the merger and did not return afterwards. In 2005, Lidia was absorbed by Max. (2006-04-05). NHC Tropical Cyclone Report:  Hurricane Max.  National Hurricane Center.  Retrieved on 2012-11-20.

=Northwest Pacific=

In September 1994, Typhoon Pat and Tropical Storm Ruth completed a full orbit around their centroid before collapsing into a single cyclone.Joint Typhoon Warning Center - Typhoon Pat (PDF)  
In August 1997, Tropical Storm Yule merged with Tropical Depression 16W. 
In October 2009, Typhoon Parma interacted with Typhoon Melor, affecting the movement of Parma. Parma was moving through the South China Sea but made a recurvature move to southeastward, so it made its second and third landfall over northern Luzon. In addition, due to the interaction with Melor, Parma weakened into a tropical storm by October 4. 
In November 2009, Typhoon Nida absorbed Tropical Depression 27W (Urduja) and become a powerful typhoon.  In August 2010, a Fujiwara interaction occurred between Tropical Storm Namtheun and Severe Tropical Storm Lionrock. Namtheun turned southwestward while Lionrock turned eastward. Later, Namtheun weakened into a tropical depression in the Taiwan Strait and was absorbed by Lionrock.  
In August 2012, a Fujiwhara interaction occurred between Typhoon Tembin and Bolaven. Tembin was moving west, when Bolaven caused Tembin to turn east, resulting in a counter-clockwise loop of Tembin which caused torrential rain in Southern Taiwan.

=Southwest Indian Ocean=

In 2008, Tropical Cyclone Fame began orbiting Tropical Cyclone Gula with the stronger storm, Gula, absorbing Fame.

=South Pacific Ocean=

During January 1998, Cyclones Susan and Ron interacted with each other, before Susan absorbed Ron during January 9.

Extratropical cyclones

Binary interaction is seen between nearby extratropical cyclones when within  The precise results of such interactions depend on factors such as the size of the two cyclones, their distance from each other, and the prevailing atmospheric conditions around them.








