[[Gospel in Islam]]

CATEGORIES: Islamic texts

Injil () as well as Indonesian Christians; e.g. Injil Yohanes). Muslims believe this original Gospel to have been altered over time, and the teachings of Jesus lost and replaced with false teachings, often believed to be at the instigation of Paul the Apostle. Muslims believe that the four canonical gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John and lost Gospels, such as that of Peter, contain fragments of Jesus' message, but that the majority of the original teaching has been altered or lost.

Authorship

Although many Western scholars believe that the Injil, in Muslim belief, was a scripture authored by Jesus, the author of the Injil was (in Muslim belief) ultimately God, in a manner similar to the way the Quran was revealed to Muhammad: that God inspired Jesus with the verbatim words of the text which were then written by Jesus' hand.M. Wheeler, Injil Muslims believe that Jesus, who had memorized the revelation, then taught it to all his disciples (al-Hawāriyūn).

In the Quran

The word Injil occurs twelve times in the Quran and refers to the book given to Jesus. Muslim scholars generally agree that Injil refers to the true Gospel, bestowed upon Jesus by God. The word Injil is used in the Quran, the Hadith and early Muslim documents to refer specifically to the revelations made by God to Jesus. Muslims reject that Jesus or any other person wrote the Injil, instead crediting its authorship to God. Many Muslim scholars believe that the Gospel has undergone alteration, that the words and the meaning of the words have been distorted, with some passages suppressed and others added. The Islamic principle of the oneness (Tawhid) and wholeness of God's divinity means that in their view it is impossible for Jesus to be God incarnate or the Son of God, and that the worship of Jesus by Christians is due to later additions. The Quran says of the Gospel:

The Quran further describes the followers of the Gospel, that is the Christians, in a highly positive allegory, saying:


Arab-Christian Injil

Arab Christians use an Arabic Bible, that is the same Bible used by other Christians worldwide, but sometimes refer to it as Injil or more properly "Al-Anajeel" (plural of Injil). The first four books of the New Testament in Arabic are named Injil-Matta, Injil-Markus, Injil-Luka, and Injil-Yohannah. In addition, the canon of the book itself is called Al-Kitab-Ul-Muqaddas, which means "The Holy Book."

Indonesian-Christian and Malaysian-Christian Injil

Indonesian Christians and Malaysian Christians also derived the word from Arabic, thus also used the term for the Gospel. The four Gospels are: Injil Matius, Injil Markus, Injil Lukas, Injil Yohanes. The Bible itself is called as "Alkitab", another name derived from Arabic terms. Indonesian and Malaysian Muslims sometimes call the whole Bible as Injil, without distinction between the Gospels and the Epistles and the Book of Revelation.








