[[Beta Ray Bill]]

CATEGORIES: Characters created by Walt Simonson, Comics characters introduced in 1983, Cyborgs in fiction, Extraterrestrial superheroes, Thor (Marvel Comics)

Beta Ray Bill is a fictional character that appears in comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character first appears in Thor  #337 (Nov. 1983) and was created by writer-artist Walt Simonson.
Debuting in the Bronze Age of Comic Books, the character was initially intended to be a surprise as an apparent monster who unexpectedly proves to be a great hero. As such, Bill becomes the first being outside of the Marvel Universe's Norse pantheon to be deemed worthy enough to wield Thor's hammer, Mjolnir. After an initial rivalry for possession of the weapon, the alien warrior was granted a war hammer of his own, called Stormbreaker, and the two reconciled as staunch allies.
Beta Ray Bill has been featured in other Marvel-endorsed products such as animated television series, video games, and merchandise such as action figures and trading cards. He was voiced by Paul Dobson in the animated DVD film Planet Hulk.

Publication history

Beta Ray Bill debuted in Thor #337 (Nov. 1983), being established as an alien belonging to a race known as the Korbinites. Bill was created by Walt Simonson as a new concept for the title Thor. Simonson said,
During a "Thor Spotlight" panel at the Baltimore Comic Con, August 28, 2010, Simonson further stated:

The character's introduction continued in Thor vol 1 #338-340. He continued to make appearances in Thor sporadically. He appeared in the "Maximum Security" crossover in January 2001 and the Secret Invasion crossover in 2008.  He starred in the 6-issue miniseries Stormbreaker: The Saga of Beta Ray Bill and its two follow-ups, the one-shot Beta Ray Bill: The Green of Eden and 3-issue Beta Ray Bill: Godhunter.

Fictional character biography

1980s

Spy organization S.H.I.E.L.D. detected an alien fleet passing through Earth's solar system, with Director Nick Fury asking Thor to investigate. When Thor finds the advance ship, it scans Thor and perceives him to be a threat.  Unable to stop Thor, the sentient ship - called Skuttlebutt -  revives Beta Ray Bill, who is in suspended animation. Bill battles Thor to standstill, until the ship reaches Earth's orbit, where one of the mystical enchantments of Thor's hammer Mjolnir comes into effect, which means that Thor will revert to his mortal persona of Donald Blake if separated from the hammer for more than sixty seconds. When that happens, Blake is knocked unconscious by Bill, who examines Blake's cane (Mjolnir's "shell" when Thor is in Blake's form) and on striking the cane receives Thor's power and costume.
Once Skuttlebutt arrives on Earth, Bill easily defeats an approaching S.H.I.E.L.D. team and is then transported to Asgard by the King of the Norse gods, Odin, who mistakes Bill for Thor. After some initial confusion, Odin returns Thor to Asgard, and Bill's origin is revealed. Bill's race, the Korbinites, were almost rendered extinct when their galaxy exploded. The remnants of the Korbinite race fled in a fleet of warships, guarded by a sentient ship called Skuttlebutt and a dedicated champion, Beta Ray Bill. Via Korbinite science, Bill was physically augmented and given the attributes of an indigenous wild beast (a process that killed all of Bill's predecessors). Skuttlebutt attacked Thor because the ship recognized the Asgardian magic as similar to that of the previous global threat, and assumed the Korbinites were being threatened once again.
On discovering that Bill was worthy enough to lift Mjolnir, Odin proposes a battle to the death in the fiery Asgardian realm of Skartheim to decide who will wield the hammer. Bill and Thor render each other unconscious. Bill's resistance to heat allows him to recover first, however, and he is deemed the winner—but he also saves Thor from going over a lava flow, believing he is too worthy an opponent to die. He tells Thor he saved him as he did not want so worthy an opponent to die, but he feels he needs the hammer to protect his people. After Bill reconsiders his claim to the hammer, Odin creates a compromise by bestowing upon Bill a different hammer — Stormbreaker — which is equal in power to Mjolnir and was created by the same Dwarf. Odin also bestows the ability upon Bill to return to his original Korbinite form by striking Stormbreaker upon the ground. After learning that the mishap that killed most of Bill's people was caused by the fire demon Surtur, one of Asgard's most powerful enemies, Bill agrees to join the Asgardians in a war to stop Surtur and his armies. 1983 - Feb. 1984)
Bill leads many of Earth's heroes against Surtur's forces on Earth while Thor, Odin, and Thor's adopted brother Loki confront Surtur in Asgard. Surtur is eventually defeated, but apparently kills Odin when they both fall through a mystic portal. 1983 - Dec. 1984) Bill remains on Earth, aiding the spaceknight Rom against the threat of the alien Dire Wraiths Rom #65 (Apr. 1985) and foes such as Iron Man opponent Titanium Man. 1985); #357 - 358 (July - Aug. 1985)
Forming an attachment with the Asgardian goddess Sif,Thor #359 (Sep. 1985) Bill aids Thor against the Dark Elf Kurse in a two-part storylineThor #363 (Jan. 1986);Power Pack #19 (Feb. 1986) before returning to his people. Bill eventually returns to battle the Egyptian god Seth Thor #400 (Sept. 1989) and the Juggernaut. 1989)

1990s

Bill remains a staunch ally of Thor and AsgardThor Annual #16 (Jan. 1991); Thor #439 (Nov. 1991); #442 (Jan. 1992); #454 (Nov. 1992); Thor Annual #18 (Jan. 1983) before featuring in a storyline involving a creation of Galactus, Tyrant. 3, #79 (April 1993); #81-82 (June–July 1993) Bill also features in the storyline "Blood and Thunder", attempting alongside Adam Warlock, Thanos and others to deal with the "warrior madness" of Thor in which he is trying to destroy the universe, although at one point he is struck with enough force to destroy a planet. 3, #86-87 (Nov.-Dec. 1993); Warlock Chronicles #7-8 (Jan.-Feb. 1994); Warlock and the Infinity Watch #25 (Feb. 1994); Thor #461 (Apr. 1993); #468 (Nov. 1983); #470-471 (Jan.-Feb. 1994) Together with Thor, Bill joins with other versions of the Thunder God in the Thor Corps against the entity Demonstaff.-Dec. 1993) and has several cosmic adventures. 1995 - Feb. 1996); Thor #492 - 493 (Nov. - Dec. 1995); Silver Surfer'' vol. 3, #111 (Dec. 1995); #122 (Nov. 1996)

2000s

Bill also participates in a battle between the heroes of Earth and several alien races such as the Kree, Shi'ar, and Z'Nox. 2000); #3 (Jan. 2001) and after several adventures with Thor Thor #30 - 33 (Dec. 2000 - Mar. 2001); #39 - 41 (Sep. - Nov. 2001) guest starring in the final storyline, when Thor - determined to end the perpetual cycle of death and rebirth the Asgardians are trapped in - brings about Ragnarök (in Norse mythology this event means the end of Asgard and its gods, as they die in battle against the armies of evil). Although Bill attempts to aid the Asgardians, Thor teleports Bill away as it is not his destiny to die in Ragnarök. 2, #83 - 85 (Oct. - Dec. 2004)
Bill visits his people's new homeworld, where he is attacked by his insane predecessor, Alpha Ray, defeating him just as the cosmic entity Galactus and his herald Stardust arrive. Despite Bill's efforts, Galactus consumes the world and almost kills him, with Bill drifting in space until recovered by Skuttlebutt. After finding an orb containing the souls of many of the Korbinites, Bill revisits a desolate Asgard, and joins forces with Stardust to battle a new demonic menace named Asteroth.
Although victorious, Bill is mortally wounded, and while near death is healed by an unknown entity that also claims the remaining souls in the orb. Placed in the recently deceased body of a war veteran named Simon Walters (a reference to his creator, Walt Simonson) on Earth, Bill has a brief encounter with the villain Boar and the hero Spider-Man. 2005) Bill eventually finds and joins Canadian superhero team Omega Flight against the supervillain team the Wrecking Crew, who release the supernatural Great Beasts. The battle ends with Bill and the Beasts trapped in an alternate dimension. 2007)
During the Secret Invasion storyline,Secret Invasion #1-8 (June 2008 - Jan. 2009) Bill is wounded and captured by the alien Skrulls, who bestow his hammer Stormbreaker on a warrior Super-Skrull called the Godkiller. Thor rescues Bill, although Loki starts a rumor that Bill may be a Skrull, causing some Asgardians to go against him despite Balder telling them to stop. Thor throws Mjolnir at Bill, who catches it proving he really is Bill. After being nursed back to health, the character retrieves his hammer. Although the Godkiller defeats him, with Thor's help he tricks the Godkiller, causing Asgard to fall onto it, killing the Skrull. Thor and Bill then raise the city again.-Dec. 2008)
Bill decides to hunt the cosmic entity Galactus, to avenge the destruction of the Korbinites' second homeworld, and the seeming eradication of his species. After a brief confrontation with the herald, Stardust, Bill is intercepted by the Silver Surfer, who is puzzled by the Korbinite's apparently futile quest to destroy Galactus. During a brief battle, Bill explains that while he understands he cannot hope to destroy Galactus with his power alone, he intends to destroy Galactus by annihilating any and all worlds Galactus seeks to feed from, thus starving him to death. The character's obsession with stopping Galactus eventually results in him being unable to lift his own enchanted weapon, an object that can only be wielded by the worthy. Equipped with alien weapons, Bill finds Galactus  but discovers the entity already under attack by another race. In a moment of conscience, Bill saves Galactus. The grateful entity rewards Bill by creating a Korbinite mate for him, with Bill also regaining the ability to wield Stormbreaker.-Oct. 2009)

2010s

When the universe is invaded during The Thanos Imperative storyline, Beta Ray Bill joins Nova's select group to travel across the Fault and into the Cancerverse.The Thanos Imperative: Devastation #1, March 2011 Annihilators defend Galador from the Dire Wraiths, resulting in a peace between the two groups who have been at war for generations. Later, when trying to end a conflict between warring factions of the Universal Church of Truth, the Annihilators are transported to a Church base on Earth and come into conflict with the Avengers.''Annihilators: Earthfall #1 (Sept 2011)

Powers and abilities

Beta Ray Bill's life force and consciousness were transferred by scientists of his race into the body of an alien carnivorous equine-like beast that had been bionically restructured into a cyborg. Courtesy of highly advanced genetic engineering, the character possesses vast superhuman strength, speed, stamina, and durability, and a highly extended lifespan. Beta Ray Bill is also a superior hand-to-hand combatant. His combat prowess is such that he was able to fight Thor, noted as one of the best hand-to-hand fighters in the Marvel Universe, to a standstill.
Beta Ray Bill's weapon, Stormbreaker, also has the same properties as Thor's hammer, Mjolnir, and includes the ability to transform into a cane when struck upon the ground and return Bill to his unaltered Korbinite form. Bill also possesses the advanced and sentient warship Skuttlebutt.

In other media

Television

Film

Video games

Toys

Collected editions

Some of the characters appearances have been collected in trade paperbacks:






