[[Nancy Lieberman]]

CATEGORIES: Jewish sportspeople, 1958 births, Living people, Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame inductees, Women's Basketball Hall of Fame inductees, Olympic basketball players of the United States, Olympic silver medalists for the United States, Basketball players at the 1975 Pan American Games, Basketball players at the 1976 Summer Olympics, Basketball players at the 1979 Pan American Games, Old Dominion Lady Monarchs basketball players, Sportspeople from Brooklyn, People from Far Rockaway, Queens, Sportspeople from Queens, New York, Phoenix Mercury players, Detroit Shock players, Detroit Shock head coaches, Women's National Basketball Association executives, Point guards, Far Rockaway High School alumni, Jewish American sportspeople, Jewish basketball players, National Basketball Association broadcasters, Texas Legends coaches, Washington Generals players, Women sports announcers, Olympic medalists in basketball, Christians of Jewish descent

Nancy Elizabeth Lieberman (born July 1, 1958), nicknamed "Lady Magic",Nancy Lieberman – Dubbed "lady Magic" – Famous Sports Stars is a former professional basketball player who played and coached in the WNBA.Woolum p 177
In 2000, she was inducted into the Nassau County Sports Hall of Fame. Lieberman is a member of the Basketball Hall of Fame, the Women's Basketball Hall of Fame and the Virginia Sports Hall of Fame.

Early years

Lieberman was born in Brooklyn, New York, on July 1, 1958, to Jerome and Renee Lieberman. She was raised Jewish, and has become a born-again Christian. Her family lived in Brooklyn, when she was born, but soon moved to Far Rockaway, New York where she grew up with her older brother Clifford. While growing up, she was very interested in a variety of sports, playing baseball, softball and football with boys, before settling on basketball as her primary sport. She played basketball primarily on pickup teams with boys, not playing on a girl's team until she was a high school sophomore.
While attending Far Rockaway High School in Queens, New York, she established herself as one of the top women's basketball players in the country by earning one of only 12 slots on the USA's National Team. In 1975, Lieberman was named to the USA Team designated to play in the World Championships and Pan American Games, where she brought home a gold medal 
Lieberman's mother, Renee, was not supportive of her daughter's passion for basketball.  During one instance when Lieberman was practicing dribbling techniques indoors, because it was cold outside, her mother demanded she stop dribbling because of all the noise. When she did not stop, her mother punctured the basketball with a screwdriver. Lieberman found another ball and continued, but her mother punctured that one as well. This continued until five balls were ruined. Nancy then decided she had better go outside before she ran out of basketballs.Grundy p 171
During the school year, she played for her high school team, but in the summer, played with an AAU team in Harlem, the New York Chuckles.Woolum p 176

USA Basketball

At age 17, Lieberman was named to the USA Basketball team roster. She would play for the team in the 1975 USA Women's Pan American Team, three years younger than the next youngest teammates. The games were  originally planned for Santiago, Chile, then Sao Paulo, Brazil and finally held in Mexico City, Mexico in October. The Pan Am team had failed to win the gold in 1967 and 1971. This year, the team would be more successful, compiling a 7–0 record, and winning the gold medal for the first time since 1963.
Lieberman continued with the USA team to the 1976 Olympics in Montreal in the first-ever Women's Olympic Basketball Team Competition. Shortly after turning 18, Lieberman became the youngest basketball player in Olympic history to win a medal as the United States captured the Silver Medal.Nancy Lieberman – HowStuffWorks
Lieberman was named to the team representing the USA at the 1979 William Jones Cup competition in Taipei, Taiwan.  The USA team won all six games en route to the gold medal. Lieberman earned a spot on the Jones Cup All-Tournament Team
Lieberman finished her USA Basketball career with the Pan American Team, at the 1979 games in San Juan, Puerto Rico. Although the team would win most of their games with ease, including a 38 point win over Brazil in the semi-final, they were unable to beat the team from Cuba, and lost the title match 91–86, settling for the silver medal.

College years

From 1976 to 1980, Lieberman attended Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Virginia, and played on the women's basketball team there.
Lieberman earned the nickname "Lady Magic," a nod to Earvin "Magic" Johnson of NBA fame. She led the team in assists each of the four years she was on the team—in her sophomore year she averaged 8.9 per game. Lieberman amassed 2,430 points along with 1,167 rebounds in her collegiate career, producing an average of 18.1 points per game. Lieberman achieved a triple double (40 points, 15 rebounds,  11 assists) against Norfolk State in her sophomore year. Lieberman stole the ball 562 times and assisted a basket 961 times in her college career, believed to be modern records. She is the holder of several single-game and single-season records, including best free-throw shooting percentage in her freshman and sophomore years.
Lieberman earned her degree in Interdisciplinary Studies from Old Dominion University on May 6, 2000.

Professional career

In 1980, Lieberman earned a slot on the 1980 Olympic team, but withdrew from the squad in support of U.S. President Jimmy Carter's boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow.
In the 1980s, she dropped out of college to embark on a professional career in basketball. She played for several basketball teams and leagues, including the Dallas Diamonds of the Women's Pro Basketball League (WBL), 
Lieberman was a contestant on the season 4 Gold Medal Challenge of Champions special of American Gladiators.  She was eliminated after the third event with the lowest score of the three female competitors.
Lieberman's WBL career is featured in the book "Mad Seasons: The Story of the First Women's Professional Basketball League, 1978–1981," by Karra Porter (University of Nebraska Press, 2006).
She was elected to the Basketball Hall of Fame as a player in 1996 and to the Women's Basketball Hall of Fame in 1999. 
In the newly formed WNBA's inaugural year in 1997, Lieberman played for the Phoenix Mercury. At the age of 39, she was the WNBA's oldest player in history.
In 1998, she was hired as General Manager and Head Coach of the WNBA's Detroit Shock. She coached for three seasons but left after accusations, by unnamed players, of a sexual affair with rookie point guard Anna DeForge. After leaving the Shock, Lieberman worked as a women's basketball analyst on ESPN.
On July 24, 2008, at 50 years old, Lieberman signed a seven-day contract with the Detroit Shock, breaking her own previous record as the oldest player in league history. She played one game and had two assists and two turnovers against the Houston Comets. The Comets defeated the Shock 79–61.
On August 13, 2008, she was part of the inaugural class to be inducted into the Hampton Roads Sports Hall of Fame, honoring athletes, coaches and administrators who made contributions to sports in Southeastern Virginia.

Coaching career

In November 2009, Nancy Lieberman became the coach of the Texas Legends in the NBA Development League, an affiliate of the Dallas Mavericks, emerging as the first woman to coach a  professional men's basketball team. Read ESPN report, Lieberman introduced by D-League, November 9, 2009 Lieberman currently lives in Dallas, Texas, near to where she now serves as assistant GM for the Legends and runs a summer basketball camp for boys and girls. This season she will join Fox Sports Oklahoma as an Analyst on the Oklahoma City Thunder Pre & Post-Game shows, Thunder Live.



Notes






