[[Robert Jordan]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 births, 2007 deaths, 20th-century American novelists, 21st-century American novelists, American Episcopalians, American fantasy writers, American military personnel of the Vietnam War, Cardiovascular disease deaths in South Carolina, Deaths from amyloidosis, People from Charleston, South Carolina, The Citadel, The Military College of South Carolina alumni, The Wheel of Time, United States Army officers, Writers from South Carolina, Pseudonymous writers, Recipients of the Bronze Star Medal, Recipients of the Distinguished Flying Cross (United States), United States Navy officers

James Oliver Rigney, Jr, (October 17, 1948 – September 16, 2007) better known under the pen name Robert Jordan, was an American author of epic fantasy. He is best known for The Wheel of Time, which consists of 14 books and a prequel novel. Rigney also wrote historical fiction under his pseudonym Reagen O'Neal, a western as Jackson O'Reilly and dance criticism as Chang Lung. He also ghostwrote an "international thriller" that is still believed to have been written by someone else.

Biography

Jordan was born in Charleston, South Carolina. He served two tours in Vietnam (from 1968 to 1970) with the United States Army as a helicopter gunner. He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross with oak leaf cluster, the Bronze Star with "V" and oak leaf cluster, and two Vietnamese Gallantry Crosses with palm. After returning from Vietnam he attended The Citadel where he received an undergraduate degree in physics. After graduating he was employed by the United States Navy as a nuclear engineer. He began writing in 1977. He was a history buff and enjoyed hunting, fishing, sailing, poker, chess, pool, and pipe collecting. He described himself as a "High Church" EpiscopalianDragonmount, the Robert Jordan blog (June 1, 2007), and received communion more than once a week. He lived with his wife Harriet McDougal, who works as a book editor (currently with Tor Books; she was also Jordan's editor) in a house built in 1797.

Illness

On March 23, 2006, Jordan  disclosed in a statement that he had been diagnosed with cardiac amyloidosis, and that with treatment, his median life expectancy was four years, though he said he intended to beat the statistics. He later posted on his Dragonmount blog to encourage his fans not to worry about him and that he intended to have a long and fully creative life.
He began chemotherapy treatment at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, in early April 2006.

Death

Jordan died at approximately 2:45 p.m. EDT on September 16, 2007, His life was the subject of the feature length documentary The Wit of the Staircase: The Life and Works of Robert Jordan, scheduled for release in late 2012.The Wit of the Staircase

The Wheel of Time

Jordan published 11 books of a total 14 in the main sequence of the Wheel of Time series. Reviewers and fans of the earlier books noted a slowing of the pace of events in the last few installments owing to the expansion of scale of the series as a whole. CROSSROADS OF TWILIGHT (Book). Publishers Weekly; December 23, 2002, Vol. 249 Issue 51, p.50
Because of his health problems, Jordan did not work at full force on the final installment A Memory of Light (later split into three volumes beginning with The Gathering Storm), but blog entries confirmed that he continued work on it until his death, and he shared all of the significant plot details with his family not long before he died.
The Wheel of Time series consists of:
In addition to the main sequence, Robert Jordan also wrote some accessory works:

Other published works

Cheyenne Raiders

Cheyenne Raiders is a western published in 1982 under the pen name Jackson O'Reilly for the Forge imprint of Tor Books.

The Fallon Saga

The Fallon Blood (1980), published under the pen name Reagan O'Neal, was Jordan's second novel and first published novel. It was edited and published by Jordan's future wife, Harriet McDougal, for her personal imprint, Popham Press. After they finished promoting the book on tour, they began dating, and when Jordan asked McDougal to marry him, he began selling his books directly to Tom Doherty at Tor Books. The following two books, The Fallon Pride (1981) and The Fallon Legacy (1982) were published under Tor's Forge imprint. Jordan originally planned to take the series much further:

Conan the Barbarian

Jordan was one of several writers who have written new Conan the Barbarian stories. When Tom Doherty obtained the rights, he needed a novel very quickly, so Jordan's wife Harriet McDougal recommended him because she knew he had written his first novel, Warriors of the Altaii, in thirteen days.

Jordan wrote seven novels in the series:
Some bibliographies also include Conan: King of Thieves; this was actually the working title of the second Conan movie, and hence also the title of Jordan's novelization. Jordan had already been hired to do the novelization and Tor had already applied for an ISBN when the title was changed to Conan the Destroyer.WOT Encyclopaedia
They were packed into two separate volumes:
Jordan also compiled a well-known Conan Chronology.

Unpublished works

Warriors of the Altaii

Warriors of the Altaii is Jordan's first novel, which remains unpublished; it is 98,000 words in length, and he finished it in thirteen days. Donald A. Wolheim at DAW Books made an offer for it, but revoked the offer when Jordan requested a small change in his contract.

Infinity of Heaven

Jordan mentioned several times that he planned another fantasy series set in a different kind of world. He said that it would be a Shōgun-esque series about a man in his 30s who is shipwrecked in an unknown culture which would be similar to Seanchan culture in his Wheel of Time series and world. The books would detail his adventures there and would have been titled Infinity of Heaven.net News
He said that he would have begun writing these after finishing his work on the 12th and final main sequence book of The Wheel of Time. Jordan said, "Infinity of Heaven almost certainly will be written before the prequels, though I might do them between the Infinity books." Also according to Dragonmount. Jordan had particularly stressed that this series would be significantly shorter than The Wheel of Time saga (about 6 books long and essentially two trilogies).



Further reading




