[[Simon Binks]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, Living people, Australian Crawl members, Australian guitarists

Simon John Binks

Biography

Early career

Binks was raised in the Mornington Peninsula suburb of Mount Eliza on the outskirts of Melbourne and educated at The Peninsula School.
Spiff Rouch was a band formed in 1976, it included  Binks and fellow locals James Reyne, Bill McDonough, Guy McDonough, Paul Williams, and Robert Walker. By early 1978, Spiff Rouch had separated and Australian Crawl was formed with Binks (lead guitar), Reyne (lead vocals, piano, harmonica), and Williams (bass guitar), they were joined by James Reyne's younger brother David Reyne (drums) and schoolmate Brad Robinson (rhythm guitar, backing vocals).

Australian Crawl

Australian Crawl performed their first live gig in October 1978. Bill McDonough (drums) replaced David Reyne within the first year.
Binks wrote or co-wrote four tracks for Australian Crawl's 1980 debut album The Boys Light Up as well as guitars (lead, slide, acoustic) and vocals.
Drummer Bill McDonough left early in 1983, the Crawl recorded an EP Semantics with Graham Bidstrup on drums. Of the four tracks, Binks wrote "White Limbo" which was also the B-side of the European single release "Reckless". Mountain climber, Lincoln Hall, quotes lyrics from Binks' song in his book, White Limbo: The first Australian climb of Mt Everest (1985). After the EP, John Watson replaced Bidstrup as drummer.
Phalanx released late in 1983 was a live album which saw Binks and sound engineer Ross Cockle as producers. Australian Crawl toured England supporting Duran Duran in late 1983 but they returned to Australia with Guy McDonough seriously ill and subsequently dying in June 1984. During recording sessions for Between a Rock and a Hard Place Binks resigned, he was replaced by session musicians on guitar and by Simon Hussey (ex Cats Under Pressure) who provided keyboards and songwriting. Between a Rock and a Hard Place was expensive and had less chart success than previous albums; to recoup his investment, Binks returned to the band for their final national tour, recorded in the live album The Final Wave, which was released in 1986.

Later career

Binks played guitar in the Broderick Smith Band in 1988. but didn't produce any recorded materials and subsequently left.
An injury in a 1995 car crash at a North Sydney Council roadworks left Binks slightly brain-damaged with some sensory loss and restriction of finer movements of his right hand, which had prevented him from regaining the high level of skill he had previously shown.

Personal life

By November 1993 Binks was married and they had a child. During his court case v North Sydney Council, evidence was presented that he suffered from migraines most of his life and had been prescribed injections of pethidine by his doctor to combat the pain. Evidence from the court cases reported that Binks was due to separate from his wife Sharon in 2006. He lives with his daughter, Elizabeth, and continues to perform and write music.

Discography

 for full list or for a quick link to albums and singles use infobox below. Studio albums with Binks:






