[[James Hook (rugby union)]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, Living people, Rugby union fly-halves, Welsh rugby union players, Wales international rugby union players, Commonwealth Games competitors for Wales, Ospreys (rugby team) players, People from Port Talbot, British and Irish Lions rugby union players from Wales, People educated at Glan Afan Comprehensive School

James William Hook (born 27 June 1985) is a Wales international rugby union player for French club Perpignan.
Hook's strengths as a player include good distribution skills, great tactical awareness, and reliable goal kicking, but his popularity in Wales is largely also due to his exciting running style, which is a traditional facet of Welsh fly-half play. This has led to comparisons with New Zealand star Dan Carter and legendary countryman Barry John, who himself hailed Hook as "a real star of the future". Hook is Wales fourth highest all-time points scorer behind Neil Jenkins, Stephen Jones and Leigh Halfpenny.

Early and personal life

Hook was born in the southern industrial Welsh town of Port Talbot, the second of three children. His brother Mike Hook was also a professional rugby player, and sister Naidine a keen netball player.
Hook's childhood heroes were Neil Jenkins and Robert Jones – Jenkins because of his kicking ability, and Jones because he played in Hook's favourite position, which was scrum-half, the position he himself played for West Wales at the age of ten.
Hook attended Glan Afan Comprehensive School in the centre of Port Talbot, and Neath College where he started a half back combination with Martin Roberts.
In June 2011, he married model and long-term partner Kimberley Tashara. The couple have a son, born at Singleton Hospital on 23 December 2009.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/james-hooks-baby-arrives-1942739

Career

Club

Hook grew up playing schoolboy rugby with the junior & youth set-ups at various Port Talbot based clubs, such as: Aberavon Quins RFC, Taibach RFC & Corus (Port Talbot) RFC. 
At senior level & before making the step up to regional rugby with the Ospreys, Hook enjoyed great success for Neath RFC, becoming the record holder for the highest individual points tally within a season. He also played for Neath College as a youngster.
Hook played his way into the Ospreys first XV in the 2006–07 Magners League season, giving outstanding performances at both fly-half and inside centre. He kicked a conversion in a Pool 3 match against the Sale Sharks during the 2006-07 Heineken Cup, clinching the Ospreys win following a try from Shane Williams.
In November 2010 it was announced that Hook would not be signing a new contract with the Ospreys.

International

After excelling at under-21 level for Wales, Hook starred for the Welsh sevens team, scoring a match-winning try to defeat South Africa Sevens in the plate final of the 2006 Commonwealth Games. Hook made his international debut against Argentina under new Welsh coach Gareth Jenkins, scoring a late try in the match.
Hook made his home debut for Wales against Australia on 4 November 2006 as a substitute for the injured Stephen Jones. He showed great composure in scoring 13 points as Wales drew the match 29–29 and was named as Wales' Man of the Match. Hook played against the Pacific Islands, scoring a try, and against Canada where he scored 16 points.
During the 2007 Six Nations Championship, Hook played in all of Wales's games, but was hampered by being employed at inside centre, rather than in his preferred position of fly-half for the first four matches. As a result he struggled to make an impact. In the final game against England, however, he was finally switched to fly-half and produced a Man of the Match-winning performance, scoring 22 points in Wales' 27–18 win. He also completed his first "full house" in this match (scoring a drop goal, penalty, try and conversion). The victory was Wales' first over a 'Tier One' rugby nation since the 2006 Six Nations Championship victory over Scotland.
Hook's commanding performance earned him various accolades from rugby greats such as Neil Jenkins and Warren Gatland.
Hook put in a man-of-the-match performance as he helped Wales beat England 26–19 in the first game of the 2008 Six Nations Championship on 2 February 2008.
On 10 February 2008, Hook was selected at fly-half for the 30–15 win over Scotland in the 2008 Six Nations Championship. Hook scored a try and kicked two conversions and a penalty, before being replaced by Stephen Jones in the 58th minute.
In May 2009, Hook was included in the 2009 British and Irish Lions tour to South Africa. He was called into the squad as a utility back to cover his Wales team mate, Leigh Halfpenny, who was forced to withdraw from the beginning of the tour with a thigh injury. He made his British and Irish Lions debut on 3 June, playing against the Lions Super Rugby team. Hook came off the bench in that game to score one try and kick 3 conversions.
In 2010, Hook was selected to the Wales 2010 Six Nations Championship team, playing for the first time at outside centre. 
In January 2011 Hook confirmed he would join French side Perpignan on a three year contract from the start of the 2011-12 season. His contract guaranteed availability for all of Wales's 2011 Rugby World Cup preparatory games. However, there is no clause covering future release outside of the normal International Rugby Board window.BBC - James Hook confirms Perpignan contract






