[[Unsworth]]

CATEGORIES: Geography of Bury, Areas of Greater Manchester

Unsworth is a residential area of the Metropolitan Borough of Bury, in Greater Manchester, England. It is about  north of the city of Manchester and four miles (6.4 km) south of Bury.

History

Toponomy

Unsworth derives from the Old English Hund a personal name and worth an enclosure. It was recorded in 1291 as Hundeswrth and as Undesworth in 1322.

Early History

After the Norman Conquest in 1066, Unsworth was part of the Pilkington estate before passing into the hands of the Earls of Derby in the 15th century.
In the Hearth tax collected in 1666, Unsworth had 40 heaths with no house having six.

Modern History

Unsworth and Castle Brooks were sources of water for local industries such as bleach and dye works, there was also clay for brickworks. During the Industrial Revolution farming, cotton mills, print-works and bleach-grounds provided employment for its inhabitants. Cotton mills operating in the late 19th century were Worthington and Company whose Victoria Mills contained 220 looms producing ticking, nankeens, linen and drills and the Unsworth Finishing Company.
The first major change in the 20th century was the construction of the Royal Air Force's logistics base at nearby Pilsworth in World War II, parts of which remained in use in the early 1980s by shipping firms and other industries.
Unsworth was affected by the construction of the M66 motorway. The road between junctions 3 and 4 passes behind Unsworth Pole and through Back o'th Moss Farm. Construction of the motorway, along with urbanization in the mid-1970s reduced the dairy farm's acreage from 300 to 150 acres,resulted in a loss of the dairy production and lower yields of "hay, corn, barley and potatoes"

Governance

Unsworth
Historically in Lancashire, the village, with the passage of the Local Government Act 1972, became part of the Metropolitan Borough of Bury.

Geography

Unsworth lies on high ground between two brooks running north to Whittle Brook and the River Roch. covering 972 acres of mostly arable land that was boggy until drainage was installed. The Parr Brook joins the River Roch at Blackford Bridge.
The village and surrounding area were urbanised in the 1960s. Transformation began in the 1950s with the construction of housing and the road known as Sunny Bank Road connecting the old village to the A56 arterial road between Bury and Manchester.
Hollins Vale became Bury's third local nature reserve in 2003. It is owned by Vidor Waste Management and managed for the benefit of wildlife and the community by the Hollins Conservation Group. The reserve is home to many species of wildlife such as  linnet, reed bunting, snipe and grey partridge. The birds and small mammals attract predators such as kestrel, sparrowhawk, buzzard, tawny owl, weasel and stoat. Many species of butterfly are part of the ecosystem as is an increasing rabbit population. Since the construction of the M66, the populations of skylark lapwing and hare have disappeared.

Demography

Population change

Religion

Unsworth chapelry included part of the parish of Middleton. St George's Chapel was consecrated in November 1730 on a site provided by the Earl of Derby. The chapel was rebuilt at a cost of £1,500 in 1843. The church is built in brick with a bellcote, and has a graveyard to the north.
In 1846 a chapel was erected by Wesleyan Methodists on Hollins Lane, along with a Sunday school.old-maps.co.html?coords=381938,407616/ 1891-1893 Pre-WWII 1:2,500 - LANCASHIRE AND FURNESS
[/ref] They have since been demolished and replaced by a new Methodist Church.genuki.uk/big/eng/LAN/Unsworth/HollinsLaneWesleyanMethodist.shtml
[/ref]

Landmarks

After the First World War, a war memorial was erected at Unsworth Pole, it contains the names of 55 who died in the First World War and three who died in World War II.
Unsworth Library is part of the Bury Libraries group.librarytechnology.pl?RC=32518
 Local musician Guy Garvey was amongst the opposers, claiming to have written some of his best lyrics (for his band Elbow) at the library, finding it to be "a source of inspiration".manchestereveningnews.co.

Education

The area was the site of Bury's first comprehensive school, built in 1971. Unsworth Comprehensive was renamed Castlebrook High School. The school has been rated as "good" by the education standards office, OFSTED
Unsworth has three primary schools, Unsworth Primary School on Parr Lane, and Bury and Whitefield Jewish Primary School, established in 1984.findajewishschool.co.php

Culture

The home of the ancient Unsworth family was noted for containing an oak table and panel with carvings of Saint George and the Dragon, the Eagle and Child, the Lion and the Unicorn, and the Unsworth Dragon connected with a local legend. Thomas Unsworth supposedly owned the house when a dragon ravaged the area. Bullets from guns had no effect but Thomas Unsworth mortally wounded the dragon by firing his dagger from a musket. The carvings on the panel and table were supposedly made with the dagger.
The Pole or Unsworth Pole was named after the pitch pole fixed by the Earl of Derby which was greased each year for the village's pot fair which was last held over a century ago. The challenge was to climb the greased pole to claim the prize. The last known successful ascender was Adam Holt in 1900. The current pole is not the original which was blown over in a gale, falling into the Bay Horse Inn.bbc.co.uk/history/domesday/dblock/GB-380000-405000/page/19
Public houses include The Lord Clive, named in honour of Clive of India, whose family was reputed to have ties with the area, The Dragon and The Queen Anne. The Bridge Inn at Blackford Bridge was demolished after it was irreparably damaged in a gas explosion in March 1998.

Sport

Unsworth Cricket Club was founded in 1883 on Pole Lane and is a member of the Central Lancashire Cricket League.
Bury Golf Club, founded in 1890 as a 9 hole course at Redvales, moved to Unsworth in 1921 where it has an 18 hole course. The clubhouse, known as Unsworth Hall on the 1932 OS map
Unsworth Junior Football Club has 12 teams ranging from Under 8's to Under 18's. The teams practice at Hillock, and play in the North Bury Junior Footbal League, where the Under 18's team plays in the Premier Division.
Castlebrook Community Sports Centre in the grounds of Castlebrook High School has a floodlit astroturf pitch and two sports halls.bury.uk/index.aspx?articleid=6594



Notes
Bibliography




