[[W]]

CATEGORIES: ISO basic Latin letters, Latin alphabet ligatures


W (named double-u,Pronounced  plural double-ues"W", Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd edition (1989); Merriam-Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged (1993)Brown & Kiddle (1870) The institutes of grammar, p. 19.  Double-ues is the plural of the name of the letter; the plural of the letter itself is written W's, Ws, w's, or ws.) is the 23rd letter in the ISO basic Latin alphabet.

History

The sounds  of Germanic phonology.
The Germanic  was also used in Medieval Latin to represent Germanic names, including Gothic ones like Wamba.
It is from this  digraph that the modern name "double U" derives.
The digraph was commonly used in the spelling of Old High German, but only sporadically in Old English, where the  wynn.
In early Middle English, following the 11th-century Norman Conquest,  gained popularity and by 1300 it had taken wynn's place in common use.
Scribal realization of the digraph could look like a pair of  Vs whose branches crossed in the middle. An obsolete, cursive form found in the nineteenth century in both English and German was in the form of an en whose rightmost branch curved around as in a cursive vee.
The shift from the digraph  is thus gradual, and is only apparent in abecedaria, explicit listings of all individual letters. It was probably considered a separate letter by the 14th century in both Middle English and Middle German orthography, although it remained an outsider not really considered part of the Latin alphabet proper, as expressed by Valentin Ickelshamer in the 16th century,
who complained that
 
 Poor w is so infamous and unknown that many barely know either its name or its shape, not those who aspire to being Latinists, as they have no need of it, nor do the Germans, not even the schoolmasters, know what to do with it or how to call it; some call it we, others call it uu, ... the Swabians call it auwawau"Arm w ist so unmer und unbekannt, dasz man schier weder seinen namen noch sein gestalt waiszt, die Lateiner wöllen sein nit, wie sy dann auch sein nit bedürffen, so wissen die Teütschen sonderlich die schülmaister noch nitt was sy mit im machen oder wie sy in nennen sollen, an ettlichen enden nennet man in we, die aber ein wenig latein haben gesehen, die nennen in mit zwaien unterschidlichen lauten u auff ainander, also uu ... die Schwaben nennen in auwawau, wiewol ich disen kauderwelschen namen also versteh, das es drey u sein, auff grob schwäbisch au genennet." cited after Grimm, Deutsches Wörterbuch.

In  Middle High German (and possibly already in late Old High German), the West Germanic  phoneme  is heard in the Southern German greeting Servus ('hello' or 'goodbye').
In Dutch, it became a labiodental approximant  pronunciation is used at all times.

Usage

In Europe, there are only a few languages that use W in native words and all are located in a central-western European zone between Cornwall and Poland. English, German, Low German, Dutch, Frisian, Welsh, Cornish, Breton, Walloon, Polish, Kashubian, Sorbian and Resian use W in native words. English uses W to represent . English also contains a number of words beginning with a W that is silent in most dialects before a (pronounced) R, remaining from usage in Anglo-Saxon in which the W was pronounced: wreak, wrap, wreck, wrench, wroth, wrinkle, etc.  (Certain dialects of Scottish English still distinguish this digraph.)
In the International Phonetic Alphabet,  is used for the voiced labial-velar approximant, probably based on English.
In Finnish,  and not a separate letter. It is however recognised and maintained in the spelling of some old names, reflecting an earlier German spelling standard, and in some modern loan words. In all cases it is pronounced /v/.
In Danish, Norwegian and Swedish,  more closely to the origin of the loanword than the official /v/ pronunciation.
In the alphabets of most modern Romance languages (excepting far northern French and Walloon), W is used mostly in foreign names and words recently borrowed (le week-end, il watt, el kiwi). The digraph 'ou' is used for , spelled U (with a diaeresis in the Spanish combinations 'güe' and 'güi').
In the Cyrillic alphabet used for the Belarusian language,  is pronounced like English /w/.
The Japanese language uses "W", pronounced /daburu/, as an ideogram meaning "double".
In Arabic, "W" is transliterated using the penultimate letter of the alphabet, و (waw).
In Italian, while the letter "W" is not considered part of the standard Italian alphabet, the character is often used in place of Viva (hooray for...), while the same symbol written upside down indicates abbasso (down with...).
In Vietnamese, W is called 
W is also the symbol for the chemical element tungsten, after its German name, Wolfram.

Name

"Double U" is the only English letter name with more than one syllable, except for the occasionally used, though somewhat archaic, œ (its name is pronounced similar to ethel), the formerly common in print &, ampersand, and the archaic pronunciation of Z, izzard. The initialism "www" for the World Wide Web thus, perhaps ironically, has three times as many syllables as the full name.
Some speakers therefore shorten the name "double u" into "dub" only; for example, University of Wisconsin, University of Washington, University of Wyoming, and University of Western Australia are all known colloquially as "U Dub", and the automobile company Volkswagen, abbreviated "VW", is sometimes pronounced "V-Dub". The fact that many website URLs still require a "www." prefix has likewise given rise to a shortened version of the original, three-syllable pronunciation. W is currently the only English letter whose name is not pronounced with any of the sounds that the letter typically makes. Many others, however, pronounce the "w" as dub-u, reducing it to two syllables. For example, "www" would be six syllables rather than nine, being pronounced, dub-u dub-u dub-u.
In other Germanic languages, including German, its name is similar to that of English V.W: German on Wiktionary In many languages, its name literally means "double v": Spanish doble ve (though it can be spelled uve doble),In American Spanish, it is doble ve, similar regional variations exist in other Spanish-speaking countries French double vé, Icelandic tvöfalt vaff, Czech dvojité vé, Finnish kaksois-vee, etc.
George W. Bush has been given the nickname "Dubya", after the colloquial pronunciation of the name of "W" in Texas.

Computing codes

Other representations



Notes






