[[Vince Lombardi]]

CATEGORIES: 1913 births, 1970 deaths, American football offensive linemen, Army Black Knights football coaches, Fordham Rams football players, Green Bay Packers executives, Green Bay Packers head coaches, New York Giants coaches, Washington Redskins coaches, Washington Redskins executives, National Football League general managers, High school football coaches in the United States, Pro Football Hall of Fame inductees, Knights of Columbus, Knights of Malta, St. Francis Preparatory School alumni, People from Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn, American Roman Catholics, American people of Italian descent, Cancer deaths in Washington, D.C., Deaths from colorectal cancer, Burials in New Jersey

Vincent Thomas "Vince" Lombardi (June 11, 1913 – September 3, 1970) was an American football player, coach, and executive. He is best known as the head coach of the Green Bay Packers during the 1960s, where he led the team to three straight and five total National Football League championships in seven years, including winning the first two Super Bowls following the 1966 and 1967 NFL seasons. Lombardi is considered by many to be one of the best and most successful coaches in NFL history.go. He was enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1971.
Lombardi played football at Saint Francis Prep and Fordham University. He began coaching as an assistant and later as a head coach at St. Cecilia High School. He was an assistant coach at Fordham, at the United States Military Academy, and with the New York Giants before becoming a head coach for the Green Bay Packers from 1959 to 1967 and the Washington Redskins in 1969. He never had a losing season as a head coach in the NFL, compiling a regular season winning percentage of 73.8% (96-34-6), and 90% (9-1) in the postseason for an overall record of 105 wins, 35 losses, and 6 ties in the NFL.

Early years

Lombardi was born on June 11, 1913 in the Sheepshead Bay neighborhood of Brooklyn to Enrico "Harry" Lombardi (1889-1971) and Matilda "Mattie" Izzo (1891-1972).
Matilda's father, Anthony, opened up a barber shop in Sheepshead Bay prior to the turn of the century.
Church attendance was mandatory for the Lombardis on Sundays.

High school

Lombardi graduated from the eighth grade at P.S. 206, aged 15, in 1928.

Fordham University

In 1933, Lombardi accepted a football scholarship
In his senior year (1936), he became the right guard in the Seven Blocks of Granite,

Early career

On June 16, 1937, he graduated from Fordham University. He would also then join the Brooklyn Eagles.

Coaching career

St. Cecilia High School

By 1939, Lombardi wanted to marry his girlfriend, Marie Planitz,

Fordham University

In 1947, Lombardi became the coach of freshman teams in football and basketball at Fordham University. The following year he served as an assistant coach for Fordham's varsity football team, but he was arguably the de facto head coach.

West Point

Following the 1948 football season, Lombardi accepted an assistant's job, at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, a position that would greatly influence his future coaching style. Lombardi served as offensive line coach Following these five seasons at Army, Lombardi accepted an assistant coaching position with the New York Giants.

New York Giants

In 1954, Lombardi, age 41, began his NFL career with the New York Giants. He accepted a job that would later become known as the offensive coordinator position under new head coach Jim Lee Howell. The running back then was expected to run toward any hole that was created. Lombardi referred to this as running to daylight.

Green Bay Packers

=1958=

For the 1958 NFL season, the Packers, with five future hall of famers playing on the team,
Lombardi created punishing training regimens and expected absolute dedication and effort from his players. The 1959 Packers were an immediate improvement, finishing at 7-5. Rookie head coach Lombardi was named Coach of the Year.  The fans appreciated what Lombardi was trying to do, and responded by selling out every game for the 1960 season.  Every Packers home game—preseason, regular season and playoffs—has been sold out ever since.

=1960-66=

In his second year, Green Bay won the NFL Western Conference for the first time since 1944. This victory, along with his well-known religious convictions
Including postseason but excluding exhibition games, Lombardi went on to compile a 105–35–6 (.740 winning percent) record as head coach, and he never suffered a losing season. At the conclusion of the 1966 and 1967 seasons, Lombardi's Packers would go on to win the first two Super Bowls.

=Lombardi Sweep=

As coach of the Packers, Lombardi converted Notre Dame quarterback and Heisman Trophy winner Paul Hornung to a full-time halfback. Lombardi also designed a play for Jim Taylor, the Green Bay fullback—both guards, Jerry Kramer and Fuzzy Thurston, pulled to the outside and blocked downfield while Taylor would "run to daylight" — i.e., wherever the defenders weren't. This was a play that he had originally developed with the Giants for Frank Gifford.  It soon became known as the "Lombardi sweep," though Lombardi openly admitted it was based on an old single wing concept.

=1967 Season=

==Ice Bowl==

Lombardi's Packers hosted the Dallas Cowboys in Green Bay on December 31, 1967 in the NFL Championship Game of 1967. Kramer blocked Jethro Pugh low and Ken Bowman hit Pugh high as Starr followed them into the end zone for the Packer lead and eventual victory.

Washington Redskins

Lombardi stepped down as head coach of the Packers following the 1967 NFL season, staying on as the team's general manager for 1968. He handed off the head coaching position to Phil Bengtson, a longtime assistant, but the Packers finished at 6–7–1 and out of the four team NFL playoffs. In 1969, Lombardi became head coach and general manager of the Washington Redskins.  The 'Skins would finish with a record of 7–5–2, their first winning record in 14 years.  The foundation Lombardi laid was the groundwork for Washington's early 1970s success under former L.A. Rams Coach George Allen.

Personal

Family life

In the fall of 1934 Lombardi's roommate Jim Lawlor introduced him to his cousin's relative, Marie Planitz.google.com/books?id=pin1cc5_ou4C&pg=PA18&lpg=PA18&dq=lombardi+lawlor+cousin&source=bl&ots=Luvq0klPgg&sig=ivz8pDtx5QvIIcUwOXb-k_Cwmlk&hl=en&sa=X&ei=_3WEUYPeMcjPiwKC5YGwCQ&ved=0CEIQ6AEwAg#v=onepage&q=lombardi%20lawlor%20cousin&f=false When Marie announced her ardent desire to marry Lombardi, her father told her that he did not want his daughter marrying an Italian,
"He seemed preoccupied with football even on their honeymoon, and cut it short to get back to Englewood ... 'I wasn't married to him more than one week', she later related, 'when I said to myself, Marie Planitz, you've made the greatest mistake of your life.'"
Marie miscarried her first child with Lombardi. The terrible effect this had on Marie caused her to turn to heavy drinking,
Lombardi's perfectionism,
Lombardi's grandson, Joe Lombardi, was named the offensive coordinator for the Detroit Lions in January 2014.  Lombardi was previously quarterbacks coach for the New Orleans Saints. In the 2009 season, he helped lead the Saints to win the trophy bearing his grandfather's name and Drew Brees to win a Super Bowl MVP award.

World War II deferments

Lombardi did not serve in WWII though he was in his late 20s when WWII broke out. He obtained a series of deferments: his first was a 2-A due to his teaching occupation; in 1943, he obtained a second deferment due to parenthood (3-A); and his final deferment was labelled a 4-A and given in 1944.

Religion

The three constants throughout Lombardi's life were sports, particularly football, family and religion.
During his tenure at St. Cecilia, Lombardi attended Mass every day and "prayed for calm and control: of his temper and ..." his wife's drinking. When Lombardi became head coach of football in 1942, he would lead his team to Sunday Mass before each home game.

Unprejudiced nature

In 1960, on at least one team, a color barrier still existed in the NFL.
An interracial relationship between one of the Packer rookies and a young woman was brought to the attention of Lombardi by Packer veterans in his first training camp in Green Bay.
Lombardi's unprejudiced attitude was not confined to his players' race or ethnicity. Lombardi was aware of tight end Jerry Smith's homosexuality, and upon arriving in Washington, told Smith in confidence that it would never be an issue as long as he was coaching the Redskins. Smith flourished, becoming an integral part of Lombardi's offense, and was voted a First Team All-Pro for the first time in his career, which was also Lombardi's only season as Redskin head coach.com Lombardi invited other gay players to training camp, and Lombardi would privately hope they would prove they could earn a spot on the team.

Illness and death

As early as 1967, Lombardi had suffered from digestive tract problems, and he had refused his doctor's request for him to undergo a proctoscopic exam. He was survived by his wife, parents, two children, and six grandchildren.
On September 7, the funeral was held at St. Patrick's Cathedral in Manhattan. Approximately 1,500 people
During Lombardi's illness, Marie had already "sanctified" Using his father as a model, he eventually became a paid speaker, and author of several books on leadership.'s official website Marie Lombardi died twelve years later in 1982 at age 66 and was interred with her husband.
"Lombardi time" is the principle that one should arrive 10 to 15 minutes early,

Popular culture

In 1968, Lombardi starred in a half-hour motivational film titled Second Effort, that has been called "The best-selling training film of all time".
On 14 December 1973, ABC aired  Legend in Granite starring Ernest Borgnine as Vince. The biographical TV drama focused mostly on his first two years as Packers head coach (1959–1960).Legend in Granite (TV 1973) - IMDb
The Vince Lombardi Service Area on the New Jersey Turnpike is a fitting tribute to the man who worked in the Garden State.
The high school in the 1980 movie Rock 'n' Roll High School was named after Vince Lombardi.
In 1986, the Canadian TV station CHCH aired the TV movie Lombardi: I Am Not a Legend starring Robert Knuckle in the title role that depicted Lombardi's life up until the NFL.
In 1996, Nike aired several commercials featuring Jerry Stiller as the ghost of Lombardi.
ESPN produced the 2005 TV movie Code Breakers that depicted the West Point cheating scandal and its effect on the football program. Richard Zeppieri was cast as Assistant Coach Vince Lombardi.
A play titled Lombardi opened on Broadway at the Circle in the Square Theatre in New York City in October 2010, following an out-of-town tryout at the Mahaiwe Theater in Great Barrington, Massachusetts. The production starred Dan Lauria as Lombardi and Judith Light as his wife, Marie. The play received positive reviews, as did Lauria's performance. "'Lombardi' on Broadway is a smash hit" "Tasty Tidbits" The Union City Reporter; October 24, 2010; pg. 12-13
NFL Films and HBO produced a film about Lombardi that debuted Saturday, December 11, 2010.

Honors

Head coaching record

Sources:

Books

Books written about him



Notes



Sources

Further reading




