[[The Land of Make Believe]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 singles, 2002 singles, Bucks Fizz (band) songs, UK Singles Chart number-one singles, Irish Singles Chart number-one singles, Dutch Top 40 number-one singles, Songs with lyrics by Pete Sinfield, Songs written by Andy Hill (composer), AllSTARS*

"The Land of Make Believe" is a 1981 single by British band Bucks Fizz. It reached No.1 in the UK in early 1982 - the second single by the band to do so. The song was produced by Andy Hill with music by Hill and lyrics by ex-King Crimson member Peter Sinfield. Despite the apparent sugar-coated style of the song, Sinfield later claimed it was a subtle attack on Margaret Thatcher and her government's policy at the time. The song was later covered by pop band allSTARS* for a 2002 single release.



Song information

"The Land of Make Believe" was the second of three UK #1 singles for the British Eurovision winners Bucks Fizz, staying at the top for two weeks in January 1982. It remained on the charts for 16 weeks.
The lyrics are based on a child's dream where ghostly voices lure the child outside to a world where everything is bright and happy, but the child resists. Characters, Superman and Captain Kidd are referenced in the lyrics. The close of the song features a nursery rhyme narrated by Abby Kimber, who was the 11-year old daughter of Bill Kimber, an executive of RCA Records. This was an original piece, penned by Sinfield, and read:
 
 "I've got a friend who comes to tea,

And no-one else can see but me,

He came today, but had to go

To visit you? You never know!"

At the time, radio stations were instructed to fade the song before the narration.Record Mirror, "Sex of One", January 1982
During the recording member Mike Nolan expressed reservations for the song and told producer Andy Hill that it would not be a hit and probably the end for the band. Hill however told Nolan that Bobby G and Cheryl Baker had already recorded their parts of the song and had said that they really liked it. Nolan later admitted that his judgement was obviously wrong.

Music video

The music video was filmed at White City, London swimming baths and is a parody of many childhood stories. It begins in a black and white bedroom, with member Cheryl Baker waking up, and in reference to the film The Wizard of Oz the picture changes to colour, and Baker's clothes are transformed by a Fairy Godmother in the style of Cinderella. She then walks from everyday life, through a gap into a winter wonderland and has to push her way through fir trees, in reference to "The Lion, The Witch and The Wardrobe", before joining the rest of the band on stage. 
The remainder of the video consists of the group performing the song, intercut with brief fantastical scenes. The costumes the group wore in the video were subsequently used in television appearances for the song and many photo-shoots. Member Jay Aston chose the outfits, with the female costumes from Kahn & Bell on London's King's Road and the male costumes from Boy. They cost between £50 and £120 each. British disc jockey Mark Goodier who became famous in the late 1980s features as an extra in the video.

Chart performance and reception

The single was released in November 1981 and became a top 10 hit in December, being placed at No.5 for the Christmas chart. Critical reaction to the song was favourable with Record Mirror stating: "Prejudices and preconceptions aside, it's an excellent record and a worthy successor to 'Don't You Want Me' at the top." Record Mirror, Chartfile, January 1982
"The Land of Make Believe" remains a firm fan favourite and reviews in the press at the time were positive with Smash Hits calling the song "sheer genius" and more recently Q Magazine labelling the song "not half bad" and "an 80s classic".
"The Land of Make Believe" was many times used as the closing number of Bucks Fizz's concerts. During their 1984 tour a lighting effect to simulate falling snow was used to signify the festive feel of the song due to its Christmas-time release. The song was later included on the group's second album, Are You Ready and was later released in a remixed form in 1991 as a bootleg single. A similar version of this was included on a compilation album released in 2005, while a more recent remix of the song was featured on the group's 2008 album, The Lost Masters 2 - The Final Cut. The B-Side of the single was a ballad, "Now You're Gone" featuring lead vocals by Cheryl Baker. The song features the chorus line; "It doesn't feel like Christmas now you're gone" and remains the only festive-themed song recorded by the group. An alternate ending to this song was featured as a hidden track on The Lost Masters 2 - The Final Cut.

Track listing

7" single
12" single (released in Germany only)

Chart positions

allSTARS* Version

"The Land of Make Believe" was the third single by the British band allSTARS*. The single was slightly faster than the original version and had a more euro-pop sound. The music video was set in a circus tent, with each individual member of the band performing tricks e.g. being cut in half, levitating or juggling. The single performed to moderate success, achieving allSTARS*' highest UK chart position of No.9.
Tracklisting
 Other versions ==  
"The Land of Make Believe" has also been recorded by Celine Dion (translated into French: "A Quatre pas D'ici") in 1983 for her album Du soleil au cœur (Hill and Sinfield would later pen her hits "Think Twice" and "Call the Man"). In 1982, German singer Elke Best recorded it as "Land der Phantasie".NME - Harmony Cats Bucks Fizz themselves recorded the song in Spanish as "El Mundo de Ilusion" in 1982. The song (in English) was also recorded by children's group Minipops in 1982 and an anonymous cover version for the Top of the Pops album range.Discogs - We're the Mini Pops






