[[Phaeacius]]

CATEGORIES: Salticidae

Phaeacius is a spider genus of the family Salticidae (jumping spiders), found in sub-tropical China and between India and the Malay Peninsula, including Sri Lanka, Sumatra and the Philippines. Although other spiders can jump, salticids including Phaeacius have significantly better vision than other spiders, and their main eyes are more acute in daylight than a cat's and 10 times more acute than a dragonfly's. The main eyes focus accurately on an object at distances from approximately .
While most jumping spiders are active hunters, Phaeacius is unusually sedentary, generally resting in its unusual flattened pose for hours or days on logs, tree barks, pieces of wood or any other solid surface, where it is very well camouflaged. Its preferred prey is moths and other insects, and jumping spiders. Insects can usually move around an inactive Phaeacius, or even over its body, but if the insect moves between the spider's first pair of legs, Phaeacius lunges extremely quickly to bite the prey. Sometimes Phaeacius takes a more active approach, especially if without prey for a week or more. Phaeacius does not enter webs voluntary, and moves away if it touches one accidentally. It can bite through the threads and pull strongly with its legs, but cannot escape from very sticky webs.
The closest relatives of Phaeacius are in the genus Holcolaetis, and the next closest genera are Portia and Spartaeus.

Body structure

Spiders are chelicerates, which differ from other arthropods in that the usual body segments are fused into only two tagmata, the cephalothorax and abdomen. Jumping spiders have a distinctive rectangular carapace.
The whole body of Phaeacius is  Phaeacius is very well camouflaged; for example, P. malayensis has a body with dull grey and brown markings that resemble the surface of tree trunks in the rainforest.
Jumping spiders generally have large forelegs and short, powerful back legs, and can leap up to 50 times their own length by powerfully extending the third or fourth pairs of legs. In spiders and other chelicerates, there is only one pair of appendages before the mouth, and in spiders these are modified into fangs that inject poison into the prey. Behind the mouth is a pair of pedipalps ("palps" for short), and those of male spiders are quite large and are used for displaying and mating.

Senses

Jumping spiders have eight eyes, the two large ones in the centre-and-front position (the anterior-median eyes, also called "principal eyes"
Spiders, like other arthropods, have sensors, often modified setae (bristles), protruding through their cuticle ("skin") for smell, taste, touch and vibration. Unlike insects, spiders and other chelicerates do not have antennae.

Movement and being undetected

While most jumping spiders walk quickly, in a stop-go gait and jumping over obstacles, the movements of Phaeacius are very unusual. Phaeacius usually uses a "flattened posture" head-down on a vertical surface, with the body, legs and palps pressed against the surface, the hindmost legs upwards and the other legs downwards, and its markings and flattened body make it easily hidden against the bark of a tree trunk. Its habit of walking with its body and legs flattened against a surface helps Phaeacius to be unobtrusive.

Feeding and defence

While almost all jumping spiders are predators, mostly preying on insects, on other spiders, and on other arthropods, Phaeacius does not use the usual hunting tactics. Most jumping spiders walk throughout the day, so that they maximise their chances of a catch, and jump on their prey and then bite it. Unlike most jumping spiders, Phaeacius and other spartaeines do not leap on prey, but lunge from about half the predator's body length away.
Phaeacius is unusually sedentary for a jumping spider, generally resting in the flattened pose for hours or days on logs, pieces of wood or any other solid surface,
However, Phaeacius can adopt other, more active approaches, with different gaits for each. If an insect remains almost stationary while Phaeacius is in the flattened pose and facing the insect, the spider may step slowly forward to its prey, rocking and keeping its flattened pose. To rock, Phaeacius moves about half a body length forward then, without pausing, smoothly back almost to the previous position. It performs about 10 cycles of those movements, progressing by 
When hunting other jumping spiders and when the background matches its coloration, Phaeacius uses "insinuation", in which it waits, sometimes up to an hour, while a jumping spider moves around nearby, and then Phaeacius suddenly turns up to 180° toward the prey and then resumes the flattened pose. Phaeacius then moves a few millimetres toward the prey and resumes the flattened pose. If the prey moves away, Phaeacius continues the insinuation manoeuvre, but if the prey moves toward it, Phaeacius lunges. Other jumping spiders show no awareness of a flattened Phaeacius on a matching background, and apparently survive by luck. When the background does not matches Phaeacius′ coloration, other jumping spiders recognise Phaeacius as a threat.
Sometimes, especially if without prey for a week or more, Phaeacius may approach insects faster, from 
In a test on a background matching its own coloration, Phaeacius was most successful against other salticids and then against moths, and was also successful against flies and hunting spiders. On a non-matching background, Phaeacius was most successful against moths.
Phaeacius does not try to eat other spiders' eggs, does not enter webs voluntarily, and moves away if it touches one accidentally. It can bite through the threads and pull strongly with its legs, but cannot escape from very sticky webs.
When disturbed, some jumping spiders usually run away quickly and leap if chased. Phaeacius stays in its flattened posture unless harassed, when it runs quickly for about 

Reproduction

Before courtship, male spiders spin a small web and ejaculate on to it, and then store the semen in reservoirs on his pedipalps,

Taxonomy and distribution

Phaeacius is a spider genus of the Salticidae family (jumping spiders). Phaeacius is in the subfamily Spartaeinae, which is thought to be primitive.
The genus is found in sub-tropical China and between India and Malaya, including Sri Lanka, Sumatra and the Philippines. The genus was first described by Eugène Simon in 1900, and includes 12 formally described species 






