[[Werner Herzog]]

CATEGORIES: 1942 births, Male actors from Los Angeles, California, Documentary film directors, English-language film directors, German atheists, German documentary filmmakers, German expatriates in the United States, German male film actors, German film directors, German film producers, German opera directors, German screenwriters, German-language film directors, Living people, Mountaineering film directors, People from Munich, German people of Croatian descent

Werner Herzog Stipetić (; born 5 September 1942), known as Werner Herzog, is a German film director, producer, screenwriter, and actor; and an opera director.
Herzog is considered one of the greatest figures of the New German Cinema, along with Rainer Werner Fassbinder, Margarethe von Trotta, Volker Schlöndorff, Werner Schröter, and Wim Wenders. Herzog's films often feature heroes with impossible dreams, American film critic Roger Ebert said that Herzog "has never created a single film that is compromised, shameful, made for pragmatic reasons or uninteresting. Even his failures are spectacular."Ebert, Roger (2006). Awake in the Dark: The Best of Roger Ebert, University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0226182002

Early life

Herzog was born Werner Herzog Stipetić to a German father, Dietrich Herzog, and a Croatian mother, When Herzog was 12, he and his family moved back to Munich. His father had abandoned the family early in his youth. 
Werner later adopted his father's surname Herzog (German for "duke"), which he thought sounded more impressive for a filmmaker.
The same year, Herzog was told to sing in front of his class at school, and he adamantly refused. He was almost expelled. Until he was age eighteen, Herzog listened to no music, sang no songs, and studied no instruments. He later said that he would easily give ten years from his life to be able to play an instrument. At fourteen, he was inspired by an encyclopedia entry about filmmaking, which he says provided him with "everything I needed to get myself started" as a filmmaker—that, and the 35 mm camera he stole from the Munich Film School. "The Secret Mainstream: Contemplating the mirages of Werner Herzog," Harper's, December 2006 In the commentary for Aguirre, the Wrath of God, he says, "I don't consider it theft—it was just a necessity—I had some sort of natural right for a camera, a tool to work with." He won a scholarship to Duquesne University and lasted but three days, but lived in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania creating documentaries for NASA with WQED. Eventually, he chose to study at the University of Munich.google.
In the early 1960s, Herzog worked nightshifts as a welder in a steel factory to help fund his first films. Before leaving school, he bought a house in the UK, in what was likely the Moss Side area of Manchester. There he learned to speak English. In 1966 he worked briefly in television under the auspices of NASA. "Producing Herzog: from a body of images" in The films of Werner Herzog. Edited by Timothy Corrigan. New York: Methuen, 1986, pp. 3–19.
In 1971, while Herzog was location scouting for Aguirre, the Wrath of God in Peru, he narrowly avoided taking LANSA Flight 508. Herzog's reservation was canceled due to a last-minute change in itinerary. The plane was later struck by lightning and disintegrated, but one survivor lived after a free fall. Long haunted by the event, nearly 30 years later he made a documentary film Wings of Hope (2000) about it, which explored the story of the sole survivor Juliane Koepcke.
In a 2011 interview with Salon magazine, Herzog confirmed that he is an atheist.

Career

Besides using professional actors—German, American and otherwise—Herzog is known for using people from the locality in which he is shooting. Especially in his documentaries, he uses locals to benefit what he calls "ecstatic truth." He uses footage of the non-actors both playing roles and being themselves.
