[[Wolfenstein 3D]]

CATEGORIES: 1992 video games, 3D Realms games, 3DO Interactive Multiplayer games, Acorn Archimedes games, Activision games, Amiga games, Amiga 1200 games, AmigaOS 4 games, Apogee games, Apple IIGS games, Atari games, Atari Jaguar games, Browser games, Cancelled Sega Genesis games, Commercial video games with freely available source code, DOS games, Game Boy Advance games, Imagineer games, Id Software games, Interplay Entertainment games, IOS games, Linux games, Mac OS games, Mobile games, NEC PC-9801 games, Shareware, Super Nintendo Entertainment System games, PlayStation Network games, PlayStation 3 games, Single-player-only video games, Video game censorship, Video games with 2.5D graphics, Windows Mobile Professional games, Windows Mobile Standard games, Wolfenstein 3D engine games, Wolfenstein series, World War II first-person shooters, Xbox 360 Live Arcade games, Zombie video games

Wolfenstein 3D is a first-person shooter video game developed by id Software and published by Apogee Software. Originally released on May 5, 1992, for the PC operating system MS-DOS, the game was inspired by the 1980s Muse Software video games Castle Wolfenstein and Beyond Castle Wolfenstein. A promotional version of Wolfenstein 3D was released as shareware, which permitted it to be copied widely. The game was later ported to a wide range of computer systems and video game consoles.
The shareware release contains one episode consisting of ten levels. The commercial release consists of three episodes, which include the shareware episode and two subsequent episodes. Later releases included a three-episode mission pack titled The Nocturnal Missions. The player assumes the role of a World War II Allied spy William "B.J." Blazkowicz, who is trying to escape from Castle Wolfenstein, a Nazi German prison. After the initial escape episode, Blazkowicz carries out a series of missions against the Nazis.
Wolfenstein 3D was a critical and commercial success. It is widely regarded as having helped popularize the genre on the PC and having established the basic run-and-gun archetype for many subsequent first-person shooter games.

Gameplay

Each episode features nine levels (or "maps"), which must be finished sequentially. Levels are completed by reaching an elevator that leads to the next level. The player must fight guards and other enemies while maintaining supplies of ammunition and health. If the player's health falls to zero, the player loses one life and all his or her guns and ammunition, except a pistol with eight rounds. A submachine gun and a rapid-firing chain gun, which all use the same type of ammunition, are also available. The player begins each episode with three lives, and can gain more lives by finding extra-life tokens or by earning 40,000 points. The original version of the game allows the player to save the game at any point, while in most console versions the player must complete each level before saving the game. The players can collect treasures scattered throughout the levels to boost their score. He or she can search for secret walls which lead to caches of treasure, ammunition, and/or health refills. Percentages for collecting treasures, eliminating enemies and discovering secrets discovered are displayed at the end of each level. The player can score additional bonus points by earning a 100% kill, secret, or treasure ratio, or completing the level more quickly than average.
Each episode has a different boss, who must killed in the final mission to complete the episode. Unlike normal enemies, boss enemies are drawn from one angle instead of eight so the player cannot take them by surprise. When first encountered, they are always facing the player. Bosses are initially stationary and do not become active until they see the player. When most bosses are dead, a replay (called a deathcam) of the boss' death is shown and the episode ends. In other levels there is an exit from the stronghold behind the boss; entering it causes the camera to rotate to face Blazkowicz and show him running out and jumping in elation. Each episode has one secret level that can only be accessed when player uncovers a hidden elevator. The secret level of the third episode is a recreation of a level in Pac-Man complete with ghosts, which the player sees from Pac-Man's perspective.

Plot

The first three episodes of the game focus on the protagonist William "B.J." Blazkowicz's efforts to destroy the Nazi regime. Blazkowicz is an American spy of Polish descent. In the first episode, "Escape from Castle Wolfenstein", Blazkowicz has been captured while trying to find the plans for Operation Eisenfaust (Iron Fist) and has been imprisoned in Castle Wolfenstein by the SS. Initially armed with a knife and a Luger P08 obtained by overpowering the guard in his cell, Blazkowicz tries to escape from the prison. He takes on the guards and eventually finds himself face-to-face with Hans Grosse, the head prison guard. In the second episode, "Operation: Eisenfaust", Blazkowicz finds that the operation is real and that the Nazis are creating an army of undead mutants in Castle Hollehammer. He enters the castle and confronts the mad scientist and creator of the mutants Dr. Schabbs, whose defeat signals the end of this biological war. "Die, Führer, Die!" is chronologically the final episode. Fighting Nazi soldiers and attacking the bunker under the Reichstag, Blazkowicz finds himself up against Adolf Hitler, who is equipped with a robotic suit and four chainguns.
The Nocturnal Missions form a prequel storyline focusing on German plans for chemical warfare (Giftkrieg). Like the original episodes, each episode contains ten levels.. "A Dark Secret" deals with the initial pursuit of the scientist responsible for developing the weaponry. Blazkowicz must enter the weapons research facility and hunt down another mad scientist, Dr. Otto Giftmacher (Poisonmaker). "Trail of the Madman" takes place in Castle Erlangen. Blazkowicz's goal is to find the maps and plans of the chemical war, which are guarded by Gretel Grosse, Hans' sister. The story ends in "Confrontation", which is set in Castle Offenbach. The final battle between Blazkowicz and General Fettgesicht (Fatface), the leader of the chemical war initiative, is fought.
Despite the game's historical setting and the presence of Hitler as an episode boss, the game bears no resemblance to any actual Nazi plans or structures. Many of the level designs are highly fanciful; at least three levels heavily feature swastika-shaped room layouts and maps; one level (episode 6, map 3) is built entirely of a tessellation of swastikas.

Development

According to David Kushner, John Carmack's technical achievements with the Catacomb 3-D game engine were a strong starting point for the game concept. The game's development began in late 1991 after id Software decided to heavily rework Castle Wolfenstein. The team was able to use the Wolfenstein title because  Muse Software had allowed the name's trademark registration lapse. to deliver a shareware title. Carmack bought a NeXT machine to aid development.
According to Kushner, the early concept of the game included some innovative stealth concepts, including dragging dead bodies, swapping uniforms with fallen guards and silent attacks as in the earlier Wolfenstein games, which focused on stealth rather than action. These ideas were dropped because they slowed the game down and complicated the controls. Secret walls, which were sections of wall that players could push to reveal a hidden area, were also discussed during development. Designers Tom Hall and John Romero wanted  this feature included because they thought secrets were integral to a good game. Carmack initially resisted the idea, but implementing push walls to his satisfaction late in development.
Wolfenstein 3D was originally designed to use the same 16-color EGA graphics palette as earlier 3D titles such as Hovertank 3D and Catacomb 3-D. At Scott Miller's suggestion, the team implemented the 256-color VGA graphics palette. Adrian Carmack drew each sprite frame by hand using a computer. Wolfenstein 3D for the PC supports PC speaker, AdLib, Disney Sound Source and Sound Blaster sound effects and Adlib and Sound Blaster for music. This was id Software's first use of Pulse code modulation sound effects, which were composed by Bobby Prince.

Engine technology

The game uses ray casting to render the walls in pseudo-3D. This method emits one ray for each column of pixels, checks to see whether it intersects a wall and draws textures on the screen accordingly, creating a one-dimensional depth buffer against which to clip the scaled sprites that represent enemies, power-ups and props. Before Wolfenstein 3D, id Software had used the technology in 1991 to create Hovertank 3D and Catacomb 3-D for Softdisk. Other games using the Wolfenstein 3D game engine or derivatives of it include Blake Stone, Corridor 7: Alien Invasion, Operation Body Count, Super 3D Noah's Ark and Rise of the Triad.
Id Software's John Carmack said the game's engine was inspired by a technology demonstration of Looking Glass Studios' and Origin Systems' first-person role-playing video game, Ultima Underworld: The Stygian Abyss (1991). Carmack said he could make a quicker renderer. (2002). with Paul Neureth and Doug Church, developers of Ultima Underworld. Games that changed the world: Ultima Underworld, Computer and Video Games site. While the Wolfenstein engine lacks many features present in the Underworld engine, such as ceiling or floor height changes, sloped floors and lighting, it ran well on relatively weak PC hardware. The engine uses a vertical scanline scaling algorithm, which unlike later engines and hardware rasterizers, does not calculate the texture coordinate for the pixel at runtime. Instead, a fixed set of several hundred rendering functions is generated during game startup or viewport size change, where all memory offsets are fixed. To keep the number of these procedures small, height{–}which can be easily seen when player is close to the wall but not viewing it at a right angle{–}is quantized.

Release

Id Software planned to release one shareware episode and allow gamers to buy the full trilogy, following the shareware model used profitably to market Commander Keen: Invasion of the Vorticons.  After learning that it took a day to make one level, Scott Miller persuaded the id team to produce another trilogy. This led to the production of The Nocturnal Missions.

Promotion

The game's level episode 2, map 8 (E2M8) features a large, hidden "pushwall" maze consisting of 181 nearly identical rooms. Depending on the path taken, the player can find treasure, an extra life, a surprise encounter with the Hans Grosse boss or a sign reading "Call Apogee Say Aardwolf". This was part of a planned contest in which the first person to find the sign and carry out its instructions would win a prize. However, because level editors and cheat programs for the game were released within days of the full version of Wolfenstein 3D, many players easily found the sign. Additionally, a cheat code that allowed the player to view all of the in-game sprites, including the "Aardwolf" sign was soon discovered and published. As a result, the planned contest was abandoned before it was officially announced or the prize decided upon. The maze and the sign were left in the game as Easter eggs; a text file included with the registered version explained its backstory. The sign was removed in a 1997 commercial re-release by Activision and replaced it with graphics depicting a pile of bones. After completing an episode, the player is given a three-letter code in addition to a total score and time. This was part of a high-score contest that was abandoned for similar reasons to the "Aardwolf" one; the code would have been used to verify that a player gained that score without use of cheat codes.

Ports

Wolfenstein 3D has been commercially ported and sold on over a dozen platforms, ranging from early releases on platforms such as the Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES) (1994) to newer releases on mobile platforms such as the iPad (2010).
Outside of commercial sale, enthusiasts of the game have created ports or reworked versions for other platforms, such as Symbian, the TI-83 series, Maemo, the PlayStation Portable, Wii, Dreamcast, the Dingoo A320, Atari STE, Amiga and the Falcon030. The fan community has also developed numerous add-ons and enhancements for the game.

Reception

Sales and reviews

By the end of 1993, sales of Wolfenstein 3D had reached over 100,000 units, vastly exceeding the shareware game sales record set by the developer's earlier Commander Keen series and providing id with a higher profit margin than sales of the retail counterpart, Spear of Destiny. Wolfenstein 3D was well received by reviewers upon its release. The game twice received 5 out of 5 stars in Dragon in 1993. More recently, Colin Williamson of Allgame awarded Wolfenstein 3D 4½ out of 5 stars and Marc Golding of HonestGamers gave it 7 out of 10. Both modern reviews praised the game's moody soundtrack, evocative sound design and tense gameplay. Golding said players may struggle to remain interested in the game because its sixty levels are similar to each other. A 2009 review by Daemon Hatfield of IGN gave the PlayStation 3 version of the game a score of 8 out of 10, calling it "required playing for any first-person shooter fan" that "remains fun after all these years". He also said that "it's definitely dated and flawed, but this is a game you play for its nostalgic value".Daemon Hatfield, Wolfenstein 3-D Review, IGN, June 15, 2009

Awards and accolades

Wolfenstein 3D won the 1993 "Best Action/Arcade Game" award at the Shareware Industry Awards."2000-1992 Shareware Industry Awards winners", Shareware Industry Awards. Retrieved June 17, 2012. In 1996 it was included on Computer Gaming World's list of the 150 Best Games of All Time" in 1996, on IGN's list of the Top 100 Games of All Time in 2003IGN, "Top 100 Games (2003)". Retrieved 2011-03-09. and 2007,The Top 100 Games of All Time!: 62. Wolfenstein 3-D, IGN, 2007 and on G4's list of Top 100 Video Games of All Time in 2012.#63 Wolfenstein 3D, G4TV, 2012

Hitler

The game's version of the Nazi leader Adolf Hitler was proclaimed the 15th greatest boss in video game history by The Phoenix in 2006;

Controversy

Because of the game's use of Nazi symbols, including the swastika and the Nazi Party's anthem "Horst-Wessel-Lied" as theme music, the game was withdrawn from sale in Germany despite its portrayal of Nazis as the enemy. The use of Nazi symbols is a federal offense in Germany in most contexts, as outlined in  German laws. The Atari Jaguar version was confiscated following a verdict by the Amtsgericht Berlin Tiergarten on December 7, 1994 (Az. 351 Gs 5509/94).Indizierungen – Beschlagnahmen und Einziehung (German) – Translate into English
Due to concerns from Nintendo of America and Bundesprüfstelle für jugendgefährdende Medien, the SNES version was heavily edited as well. All swastikas and Nazi references were removed. Hitler, a boss character in the game, had his moustache removed and was renamed "Staatmeister." Blood was replaced with sweat to make the game seem less violent (for SNES copies distributed in Germany, the enemy blood was turned green). Attack dogs were also replaced by giant mutant rats. Employees of id Software are quoted in The Official DOOM Player Guide about the reaction to Wolfenstein, claiming it to be ironic that it was morally acceptable to shoot people, but not dogs. The opening music was changed as well.

Legacy

Wolfenstein 3D has been termed the "grandfather of 3D shooters", specifically first-person shooters, as it established the fast-paced action and technical prowess commonly expected in the genre, while also bolstering the popularity of the genre. "Wolfenstein 3D DOS Review", All Game Guide. Retrieved May 9, 2011. "Wolfenstein 3D Staff Review", HonestGamers, December 10, 2003. Retrieved May 9, 2011. Hosted on 1Up.Shachtman, Noah. "May 5, 1992: Wolfenstein 3-D Shoots the First-Person Shooter Into Stardom", Wired, May 8, 2008. Retrieved May 8, 2011. It has also been acknowledged as solidifying shareware distribution as a serious and profitable business strategy. The release of id Software's hit game Doom the year after Wolfenstein 3D served as an additional impetus for a wave of imitators. Most of these games were distributed via the same shareware strategy as Wolfenstein 3D.
Wolfenstein 3D introduced a fresh formula to the PC game market that blended together disparate elements from both computer and arcade game genres. Wolfenstein 3D successfully combined the fast pace and quick reflexes of arcade action games that pit the player against multiple enemies that come in increasing waves of speed and complexity, with the first-person perspective of some early role-playing video games (such as Wizardry) that attempted to provide players with an immersive experience.
Although id Software had not designed Wolfenstein 3D to be editable or modified by the players, users did develop character and level editors to create original alterations to the game's content. These efforts strongly influenced id Software to design the later titles like Doom and Quake to be more easily modifiable for the end user.

Sequels and spin-offs

Wolfenstein 3D has been followed by several games based on its protagonist and settings.








