[[Gilbert Morris]]

CATEGORIES: Christian writers, Living people, 20th-century American novelists, 21st-century American novelists, American male novelists, American historical novelists, Writers from Arkansas, Writers from Alabama, 1929 births, People from St. Francis County, Arkansas

Gilbert Morris, (1929-) is a Christy Award-winning, prolific Christian author.  He is also sometimes cited as Gilbert L. Morris or Gilbert Leslie Morris.
Gilbert was born May 24 in Forrest City, Arkansas, the son of Osceola M. and Jewell Irene Gilbert Morris.
He was a pastor for 10 years before becoming Professor of English at Ouachita Baptist University in Arkansas.  He has a Ph.D at the University of Arkansas.  During the summers of 1984 and 1985, he did postgraduate work at the University of London.
He currently lives in Gulf Shores, Alabama with his wife, Johnnie.  He has 3 children, including a daughter, Lynn Morris and a son, Alan Morris, who have both co-written with him. His other daughter is named Stacey Smith. His granddaughter Dixie, who helped write the Dixie Series, also lives in Gulf Shores. She lives there with her husband Brad Downs and their son Jackson Gilbert Downs.
Many of his books are published by Bethany House Publishers.  

Books by Gilbert Morris

He has written many series, and co-authored books with others as well.

House of Winslow Series

This series chronicles the Winslow family from Gilbert, who was on the Mayflower, continuing on through American history until Luke, who fought in World War II. 
Published by Bethany House.
The first part of this series was originally published with one set of covers (starting in 1986), and then in 2004, they started republishing them all with a new set of covers.  Everything from that point on (from The Shining Badge forward) was never published with the original design.  The new covers do not feature a book number, but instead focus on the year the story took place.
The Winslow Breed is a trilogy of prequels.
See also: Winslow Family tree

Appomattox Saga Series

Published by Tyndale House.  Republished beginning in 2000 by Living Books. 

Reno Western Saga

Published by Tyndale House.
This series was originally called Jim Reno Westerns Series, and when the first four books were republished in 1992, they renamed the books and the series.

Price of Liberty Series

Published by W Publishing Group. Co-written with Bobby Funderburk.

Far Fields Series

Published by Stardust Publishers. Co-written with Bobby Funderbuck

American Century Series

Published by Revell Publishers.
This set was originally called the American Odyssey Series.  Each book has been renamed for a new publication beginning in 2005.

Wakefield Dynasty Series

Published by Tyndale House Publishers.

Cheney Duvall, M.D. Series

This series was co-written with his daughter, Lynn Morris
Published by Bethany House: "A trailblazing woman of courage, Cheney Duvall graduates from the first American college to grant degrees to women physicians just as the Civil War ends. Long-standing prejudices have not dissipated, however, and she must prove herself time and again--testing her dedication and the faith that compels her."

Liberty Bell Series

Published by Bethany House. This series shared several characters with the House of Winslow series, especially those of "The Indentured Rebel".
'

Katy Steele Adventures

Published by Tyndale House Publishers. Co-written with his son, Alan Morris.

Spirit Of Appalachia Series

This series was co-written with Aaron McCarver.
Published by Bethany House: "America's first frontier were the misty Appalachian Mountains and the men and women who braved their crossing needed all the faith, courage, and hope they could muster. This series brings together all the romance, excitement, and danger of early frontier life." 

Chronicles Of The Golden Frontier Series

Published by Crossway Books, a division of Good News Publishers. Co-written with J. Landon Ferguson.

Omega Trilogy

Published by Thomas Nelson. Co-written with his daughter and son, Lynn Morris & Alan Morris.

Dani Ross Mysteries

This series was originally known as the Danielle Ross Mysteries.  It has been republished with new names by Crossway Books, a division of Good News Publishers, and also modernized to fit the 2000 world instead of the 90s.
Books in the original series:

Cheney and Shiloh: The Inheritance Series

This is a follow up series to Cheney Duvall, M.D.  Also co-written with his daughter, Lynn Morris
Published by Bethany House: "Cheney Duvall is now married to Shiloh, but that doesn't mean life will get any easier. Shiloh's past continues to come back to haunt them, and the couple finds themselves swept up in adventure and excitement as they use their medical skills to help the needy."

Lions of Judah Series

Published by Bethany House: story of "... ... an exciting series with riveting, action-packed adventures that will entertain, enlighten, and challenge readers to look anew at early heroes of the faith."

Lonestar Legacy Series

Published by Integrity Publishers, a division of Thomas Nelson.  More on this series is available under Lonestar Legacy.

The Creole Series

Published by Thomas Nelson.  Co-written with Lynn Morris.

Singing River Series

Published by Zondervan Publishers.

Jacques & Cleo, Cat Detectives

Published by Harvest House: "For those that love cats--and suspense in the same book, this one is for you."

Wagon Wheel Series

Published by Broadman Holman (B&H Books)

Lady Trent Mysteries

Published by Thomas Nelson

Water Wheel Series

Published by Broadman Holman (B&H Books)

Youth Fiction

Standalone Youth Fiction:

=Barney Buck Series=

Published by Tyndale House.

=Seven Sleepers series=

Published by Moody Publishers.  More on this series is available under The Seven Sleepers (series).

=Bonnets And Bugles Series=

Published by Moody Publishers.

=Time Navigators Series=

Published by Bethany House.

=Dixie Morris Animal Adventures=

Published by Moody Publishers.

=Daystar Voyages Series=

Published by Moody Publishers and co-written by Dan Meeks.

=Too Smart Jones Series=

Published by Moody Publishers.

=Seven Sleeper: The Lost Chronicles Series=

Published by Moody Publishers.
A follow up series to the Seven Sleepers Series.

=Adventures of Kerrigan Kids Series=

Published by Moody Publishers.

Standalone Novels

Resources




