[[Co-operatives UK]]

CATEGORIES: Cooperative federations, Organisations based in Manchester, 1870 establishments in the United Kingdom, Co-operatives in the United Kingdom

Co-operatives UK is "the central membership organisation for co-operative enterprise throughout the UK",
During its history, it has been responsible for the organisation of the Co-operative Congresses, the establishment of both Co-operative Commissions and the creation of the Co-operative College and the Co-operative Party. Its head office is Holyoake House, a Grade II listed building in Manchester built in 1911 in memory of the co-operative activist George Jacob Holyoake, and its membership includes organisations as diverse as the Woodcraft Folk, the Co-operative Group and the Oxted School Young Co-operative. It is controlled by a board elected by its membership, is a member of the International Co-operative Alliance (ICA), the trustee of the Co-operative College, and retains a nominated seat on the National Executive Committee of the Co-operative Party.

Modern organisation

The modern organisation began to take shape when Dame Pauline Green became the first female chief executive of the Co-operative Union on New Year's Day 2000.
The fruit of these closer ties was an increased visibility and role for the Union in the Co-operative Movement.
The organisation went through a two year transitional period before its members voted in December 2002 to rename it Co-operatives UK. The new identity was launched in January 2003, with Green calling the change "our way of showing that the Co-operative Movement now has a single strategic voice in the UK"
Green announced that she intended to retire as chief executive of the organisation in 2009, saying: "I will be 60 at time and I have always intended to retire when I reached that milestone. The Board Co-operatives UK and I agreed that it made sense for me to finish after Co-operative Congress 2009, which is, to all intents and purposes, the end of our co-operative year."
Co-operatives UK continues to work on behalf of the Co-operative Movement as a whole, opposing recommendations from the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) that would have seen co-operative members' share capital classed as debt and "destroyed" the co-operative advantage, and gathering information on the scope and scale of the UK Movement, maintaining a searchable directory of UK co-operatives on its website.

Co-operatives Fortnight

thumb|right|Logo of the first ever Co-operatives FortnightIn 2010, Co-operatives UK co-ordinated the UK's first ever Co-operatives Fortnight, running from 19 June to 3 July. The fortnight was marketed as an opportunity to promote the co-operative alternative – under the slogan "There is an alternative" – to tradition business models, and included over 150 events in every region and devolved nation in the UK, over 3,000 stores promoting the Fortnight nation-wide and over 4,000 people watching the Co-operatives Fortnight film. During the Fortnight, 13 co-operative schools were also established and two parliamentary motions were passed in Westminster and Edinburgh.
The event was made possible by eight "founding sponsors": The Co-operative Group, The Midcounties Co-operative, Midlands Co-operative Society, Anglia Regional Co-operative Society, The Southern Co-operative, Chelmsford Star Co-operative Society, Lincolnshire Co-operative and Channel Islands Co-operative Society. Co-operatives UK are currently analysing the impact of the Co-operative Fortnight.
It was recently confirmed that Co-operatives Fortnight would continue in 2011, between 25 June and 9 July. This year's theme will be "Yours to Share".

History

Foundation

During the resurgence in co-operation following the successes of the Rochdale Pioneers and the Co-operative Wholesale Society (CWS), the Co-operative Movement began to lift itself out of the decade of society failures between 1834 and 1844.
The Co-operative Central Board was established in 1869, before changing its name to the Co-operative Union, and spent the first 40 years of its existence operating out of a variety of rented premises in the Long Millgate district of Manchester. Its purpose was described "propagandist and defensive action" and it listed the objectives of establishing and organising co-operative societies and provided advice and instruction on the co-operative principles.
The initial intention of the Union was that it would support and promote the interests of worker co-operatives but, given the number and financial strength of the consumer co-operatives, these soon began to dominate the organisation.

Holyoake House

In 1906 the co-operative activist George Jacob Holyoake died and the Co-operative Movement decided that to commemorate him by building a permanent headquarters for the Co-operative Union. The building was designed by architect F. E. L. Harris, who had also designed the nearby CWS building in the year of Holyoake's death. It was erected in 1911) and named Holyoake House. A plaque was erected outside the building dedicating the building to Holyoake's memory, reading:
 This building was erected by the voluntary contributions of 794 Co-operative Societies members of the Union to perpetuate the memory of the late George Jacob Holyoake one of the pioneers of Co -operation, who for nearly 70 years was a strenuous worker for liberty and reform. Born 1817. Died 1906. 
Holyoake House is also home to the Co-operative College (although between 1940 and 2001, the College moved to Stanford Hall, near Loughborough), the Association of British Credit Unions Limited (ABCUL)

Promoting the Movement

As well as its responsibility for organising the annual Co-operative Congresses, the Co-operative Union had a wider responsibility for promoting co-operation throughout the UK and worldwide.
The Union was also responsible for the establishment of the Independent Co-operative Commission (sometimes called the Gaitskell Commission after its chair Hugh Gaitskell). During a period of dramatic change in the retail landscape the Union's Central Executive held discussions with the CWS, the Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society (SCWS) and the Co-operative Production Federation before introducing a motion to the 1955 Congress empowering them to establish an inquiry commission "charged with the responsibility of surveying the whole field of co-operative production and marketing, both wholesale and retail". It submitted its findings to the Union for presentation at the 1958 Congress. The Union met the costs of the commission and made its own submission of evidence.

Changing environment

Through the end of the 1960s and the start of the 1970s the working environment of the Union began to change: Britain joined the European Economic Community (EEC) and so closer ties with the ICA were necessary. The retail industry was changing and the Union published its Regional Plan advocating reduction of the number of retail societies (to a "manageable" figure of 50) through mergers. The CWS began taking over some services the Union had traditionally offered, such as its trade Advisory Service, so that the Union had to re-examine and refocus the services it offered its members.

Governance

Co-operatives UK is a co-operative enterprise, and hence controlled by its 470+ members through an elected board of directors. Its board has 18 members, with places divided through the membership as follows:
The current Chair is Ben Reid of Midcounties Co-operative.
As well as its federal members, Co-operatives UK maintains links with other co-operative organisations: it is a member of the International Co-operative Alliance (ICA) and the trustee of the Co-operative College,

General Secretaries and Chief Executives

General Secretaries of the Co-operative Union

Chief Executives of Co-operatives UK






