[[End of Fashion]]

CATEGORIES: Western Australian musical groups, ARIA Award winners, Capitol Records artists, Musical groups established in 2004, Australian power pop groups

End of Fashion was an Australian pop rock band from Perth, Western Australia. As of January 2014, the band is defunct, with former lead singer and guitarist Justin Burford explaining in a Facebook post: "Triple J Australian radio station ended the career path of End Of Fashion, no question." The group gained mainstream attention with its 2005 single, "O Yeah", that was voted into eighth position of the "Hottest 100" poll, compiled by Australian youth radio station, Triple J. The group has released three studio albums.

History

Formation

The band was originally formed as a side-project by guitarists Burford and Rodney Aravena, together with drummer Malcolm Clark and bassist Jonathon Dudman. After two years, Burford and Aravena split from The Sleepy Jackson to devote their full attention to a band they named "End of Fashion". After a series of bass players and drummers—including Vanessa Thornton from Jebediah, Mike Hobbs, Hugh Jennings from Autopilot, and Nicholas Jonsson—the band settled on the line-up of Hobbs as drummer and Tom King as bass guitarist. The band name also represented the band's modus operandi, as Burford explained:
 
 I want to break down the walls – within that context, that image, we can do anything we want no matter whether it's super cheesy or punk, I want to kill fashion, see the end of it.

In 2003, the band started work on its first recording, the four-track EP Rough Diamonds, with former Midnight Oil guitarist, Jim Moginie, as producer. The EP was jointly released through independent label Hello Cleveland! (artwork) and major label EMI.
Triple J added both singles, "Anything Goes" and "Rough Diamonds", to high rotation in the first week of the EP's release,

Debut album

On 25 August 2005, End of Fashion released their self-titled debut album, which was recorded in Oxford, Mississippi, US and was produced by Dennis Herring, who had previously worked with Elvis Costello, Counting Crows and Modest Mouse. The album was certified gold in Australia and New Zealand, and was released in the United States in May 2006.
The band's first single, "O Yeah", reached number 21 on the ARIA Singles Chart,
Their songs have been on the games Thrillville (which featured "She's Love" and "Lock Up your Daughters" on the in-game radio) and FIFA Street 2 (which featured "O Yeah").

Second album

On 15 December 2007, End of Fashion released a new song "Biscit" on the band's official website, Facebook and MySpace pages. In May 2008, the band confirmed on their website that their second album, titled Book of Lies, would be released in September 2008.
In an interview with Time Out Sydney in February 2009, Burford revealed that Simon Fasolo had replaced Tom King as the band's bassist. "He's been a really good friend of ours for years and he's been brought into the fold to take Tom's spot who we encouraged to go pursue his own project. "
The second single released from the album was "Dying for You", a collaboration between Burford and Julian Hamilton of The Presets:

The third single "Down or Down" was released digitally in March 2009 and received radio coverage. During their 2009 Australian tour in support of Evermore, Burford announced that "Force of Habit" would be the fourth single taken from Book of Lies.

Third album and break-up

End of Fashion's third studio album Holiday Trip of a Lifetime was released on 4 May 2012. The album was independently produced and released, with the band writing the album over the period of one year. However, the band members parted ways following the album's release, and Burford's focus shifted towards acting and solo music work. Burford attracted media attention in January 2014 when he identified Triple J as the primary reason for the band's demise, explaining: "'The question becomes, when your entire fan base is tied up in a radio station and that station decides to no longer broadcast your output or even barely acknowledge your existence, where do you go from there?'"  

Side projects

Burford performed a one man cabaret, "Kurt" focusing on the work of Kurt Cobain for the Adelaide Cabaret Festival, which was held from 8 to 10 June 2012.
Burford joined the cast of the rock musical, Rock of Ages, in 2010, following a meeting with producers in New York City, United States (US). Burford played the lead role of Drew Boley.
Burford also appeared in several episodes of the music-based game show "Spicks and Specks", at the time hosted by Adam Hills for the ABC  including:

Discography

Studio albums

Extended plays

Singles

Music videos

Appears on

Awards and nominations







