[[Gustav Wilhelm Wolff]]

CATEGORIES: 1834 births, 1913 deaths, People from Hamburg, British engineers, British people of German-Jewish descent, Irish Anglicans, Irish people of German-Jewish descent, Conservative Party (UK) MPs, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for Belfast constituencies (1801–1922), UK MPs 1886–92, UK MPs 1892–95, UK MPs 1895–1900, UK MPs 1900–06, UK MPs 1906–10, UK MPs 1910, German shipbuilders, English shipbuilders, Burials at Brompton Cemetery

Gustav Wilhelm Wolff (14 November 1834 – 17 April 1913) was a German-British shipbuilder and politician. Born in Hamburg, he moved to Liverpool in 1849 to live with his uncle, Gustav Christian Schwabe. After serving his apprenticeship in Manchester, Wolff was employed as a draughtsman in Hyde, Greater Manchester, before being employed by the shipbuilder Edward Harland in Belfast as his personal assistant. In 1861, Wolff became a partner at Harland's firm, forming Harland and Wolff. Outside shipbuilding, Wolff served as a Belfast Harbour Commissioner. He also founded the Belfast Ropeworks, served as Member of Parliament for Belfast East for 18 years and as a member of the Conservative and Unionist Party and Irish and Ulster Unionist parties.

Early life

Gustav Wilhelm Wolff was born on 14 November 1834 in Hamburg to Moritz Wolff, a merchant and his wife, Fanny Schwabe. Gustav was brought up in the Lutheran Church as his family had converted from Judaism in 1819. In March 1850 aged 15, Wolff left Hamburg to live in Liverpool with his uncle, Gustav Christian Schwabe, a financier. Wolff was educated at Liverpool College; afterwards he served an apprenticeship at the engineers
Joseph Whitworth and Company, in Manchester.

Career at Harland and Wolff

Wolff's early role at Harland and Wolff involved his engineering and managing the yard. Due to Wolff's German Jewish descent,

Outside interests and later life

Wolff had business interests outside Harland and Wolff, including the Belfast Ropeworks, which he founded in the early 1870s with W.H. Smiles, who was the son of Samuel Smiles, a Scottish author. With Wolff as chairman, the firm became one of the largest ropeworks in the world, challenging the Gourock Ropework Company, who were based on the River Clyde in Scotland. Wolff also bought shares in the Union Steamship Company, and became a director; with his influence, he ensured Harland and Wolff received regular orders from the Union Steamship Company. After Wolff's negotiation, the Union Steamship Company merged in 1900 with the Castle Line, which was owned by Donald Currie; the new company formed was the Union-Castle Line. Outside business, Gustav Wolff served as a Belfast harbour commissioner from 1887 to 1893. Wolff, like Edward Harland, served as a Member of Parliament as a member of the Conservative and Unionist Party. Edward Harland and Gustav Wolff were known in the House of Commons as "Majestic" and "Teutonic", the names of two ships that the company built. Wolff was the Member of Parliament for Belfast East from March 1892 to December 1910. He replaced Edward de Cobain who had been expelled from the House of Commons and was later jailed for homosexual offences. Wolff only faced election once; in the 1892 by-election Sir William Charley, Q.C., stood against Wolff as an Independent Conservative. Wolff defeated Charley by a margin of over 2100 votes. Wolff was then returned unopposed until his retirement from parliament in 1910. Afterwards, Wolff was made a freeman of Belfast by the Belfast Corporation. In Parliament, Wolff strongly opposed the Irish Home Rule bills. Despite Wolff's Jewish heritage, he was a member of the Church of Ireland. He also gave money to local causes, including the Ulster Hospital and the Orange Order. Wolff was a member of many different clubs, including the Carlton Club and the Garrick Club. After his retirement from parliament Wolff lived almost exclusively in London, where he died on 17 April 1913 at his home, 42 Park Street. Wolff did not marry and died a bachelor.

Footnotes



 


