[[Vector space]]

CATEGORIES: Abstract algebra, Concepts in physics, Group theory, Linear algebra, Mathematical structures, Vectors, Vector spaces

A vector space is a mathematical structure formed by a collection of elements called vectors, which may be added together and multiplied ("scaled") by numbers, called scalars in this context. Scalars are often taken to be real numbers, but there are also vector spaces with scalar multiplication by complex numbers, rational numbers, or generally any field. The operations of vector addition and scalar multiplication must satisfy certain requirements, called axioms, listed below. An example of a vector space is that of Euclidean vectors, which may be used to represent physical quantities such as forces: any two forces (of the same type) can be added to yield a third, and the multiplication of a force vector by a real multiplier is another force vector. In the same vein, but in a more geometric sense, vectors representing displacements in the plane or in three-dimensional space also form vector spaces. Vectors in vector spaces do not necessarily have to be arrow-like objects as they appear in the mentioned examples: vectors are best thought of as abstract mathematical objects with particular properties, which in some cases can be visualized as arrows.
Vector spaces are the subject of linear algebra and are well understood from this point of view, since vector spaces are characterized by their dimension, which, roughly speaking, specifies the number of independent directions in the space. A vector space may be endowed with additional structure, such as a norm or inner product. Such spaces arise naturally in mathematical analysis, mainly in the guise of infinite-dimensional function spaces whose vectors are functions. Analytical problems call for the ability to decide whether a sequence of vectors converges to a given vector. This is accomplished by considering vector spaces with additional structure, mostly spaces endowed with a suitable topology, thus allowing the consideration of proximity and continuity issues. These topological vector spaces, in particular Banach spaces and Hilbert spaces, have a richer theory.
Historically, the first ideas leading to vector spaces can be traced back as far as 17th century's analytic geometry, matrices, systems of linear equations, and Euclidean vectors. The modern, more abstract treatment, first formulated by Giuseppe Peano in 1888, encompasses more general objects than Euclidean space, but much of the theory can be seen as an extension of classical geometric ideas like lines, planes and their higher-dimensional analogs.
Today, vector spaces are applied throughout mathematics, science and engineering. They are the appropriate linear-algebraic notion to deal with systems of linear equations; offer a framework for Fourier expansion, which is employed in image compression routines; or provide an environment that can be used for solution techniques for partial differential equations. Furthermore, vector spaces furnish an abstract, coordinate-free way of dealing with geometrical and physical objects such as tensors. This in turn allows the examination of local properties of manifolds by linearization techniques. Vector spaces may be generalized in several ways, leading to more advanced notions in geometry and abstract algebra.

Introduction and definition

The concept of vector space will first be explained by describing two particular examples:

First example: arrows in the plane

The first example of a vector space consists of arrows in a fixed plane, starting at one fixed point. This is used in physics to describe forces or velocities. Given any two such arrows, v and w, the parallelogram spanned by these two arrows contains one diagonal arrow that starts at the origin, too. This new arrow is called the sum of the two arrows and is denoted  is defined as the arrow pointing in the opposite direction, instead.
The following shows a few examples: if  has the opposite direction and the same length as v (blue vector pointing down in the right image).

Second example: ordered pairs of numbers

A second key example of a vector space is provided by pairs of real numbers x and y. (The order of the components x and y is significant, so such a pair is also called an ordered pair.) Such a pair is written as . The sum of two such pairs and multiplication of a pair with a number is defined as follows:
and 

Definition

To qualify as a vector space, the set V and the operations of addition and multiplication must adhere to a number of requirements called axioms. In the list below, let u, v and w be arbitrary vectors in V, and a and b scalars in F.
These axioms generalize properties of the vectors introduced in the above examples. Indeed, the result of addition of two ordered pairs (as in the second example above) does not depend on the order of the summands:
Likewise, in the geometric example of vectors as arrows, , since the parallelogram defining the sum of the vectors is independent of the order of the vectors. All other axioms can be checked in a similar manner in both examples. Thus, by disregarding the concrete nature of the particular type of vectors, the definition incorporates these two and many more examples in one notion of vector space.
Subtraction of two vectors and division by a (non-zero) scalar can be defined as
When the scalar field F is the real numbers R, the vector space is called a real vector space. When the scalar field is the complex numbers, it is called a complex vector space. These two cases are the ones used most often in engineering. The most general definition of a vector space allows scalars to be elements of any fixed field F. The notion is then known as an F-vector spaces or a vector space over F. A field is, essentially, a set of numbers possessing addition, subtraction, multiplication and division operations. For example, rational numbers also form a field.
In contrast to the intuition stemming from vectors in the plane and higher-dimensional cases, there is, in general vector spaces, no notion of nearness, angles or distances. To deal with such matters, particular types of vector spaces are introduced; see below.

Alternative formulations and elementary consequences

The requirement that vector addition and scalar multiplication be binary operations includes (by definition of binary operations) a property called closure: that 
In the parlance of abstract algebra, the first four axioms can be subsumed by requiring the set of vectors to be an abelian group under addition. The remaining axioms give this group an F-module structure. In other words there is a ring homomorphism f from the field F into the endomorphism ring of the group of vectors. Then scalar multiplication av is defined as . Bourbaki calls the group homomorphisms f(a) homotheties.
There are a number of direct consequences of the vector space axioms. Some of them derive from elementary group theory, applied to the additive group of vectors: for example the zero vector 0 of V and the additive inverse −v of any vector v are unique. Other properties follow from the distributive law, for example av equals 0 if and only if a equals 0 or v equals 0.

History

Vector spaces stem from affine geometry, via the introduction of coordinates in the plane or three-dimensional space. Around 1636, Descartes and Fermat founded analytic geometry by equating solutions to an equation of two variables with points on a plane curve. They are elements in R2, R4, and R8; treating them using linear combinations goes back to Laguerre in 1867, who also defined systems of linear equations.
In 1857, Cayley introduced the matrix notation which allows for a harmonization and simplification of linear maps. Around the same time, Grassmann studied the barycentric calculus initiated by Möbius. He envisaged sets of abstract objects endowed with operations.
An important development of vector spaces is due to the construction of function spaces by Lebesgue. This was later formalized by Banach and Hilbert, around 1920. Vector spaces, including infinite-dimensional ones, then became a firmly established notion, and many mathematical branches started making use of this concept.

Examples

Coordinate spaces

The most simple example of a vector space over a field F is the field itself, equipped with its standard addition and multiplication. More generally, a vector space can be composed of
n-tuples (sequences of length n) of elements of F, such as
A vector space composed of all the n-tuples of a field F is known as a coordinate space, usually denoted Fn. The case  was discussed in the introduction above.

The complex numbers and other field extensions

In fact, the example of complex numbers is essentially the same (i.e., it is isomorphic) to the vector space of ordered pairs of real numbers mentioned above: if we think of the complex number  as representing the ordered pair (x, y) in the complex plane then we see that the rules for sum and scalar product correspond exactly to those in the earlier example.

Function spaces

Functions from any fixed set Ω to a field F also form vector spaces, by performing addition and scalar multiplication pointwise. That is, the sum of two functions f and g is the function  given by
and similarly for multiplication. Such function spaces occur in many geometric situations, when Ω is the real line or an interval, or other subsets of R. Many notions in topology and analysis, such as continuity, integrability or differentiability are well-behaved with respect to linearity: sums and scalar multiples of functions possessing such a property still have that property.e.g.   Therefore, the set of such functions are vector spaces. They are studied in greater detail using the methods of functional analysis, see below. Algebraic constraints also yield vector spaces: the vector space Fx is given by polynomial functions:

Linear equations

Systems of homogeneous linear equations are closely tied to vector spaces. For example, the solutions of 
|-
| style="text-align:right;"| a 
| + 
| 3b
| + 
| style="text-align:right;"| c
| = 0
|-
| 4a 
| + 
| 2b
| + 
| 2c
| = 0
|}
are given by triples with arbitrary a, . They form a vector space: sums and scalar multiples of such triples still satisfy the same ratios of the three variables; thus they are solutions, too. Matrices can be used to condense multiple linear equations as above into one vector equation, namely
yields , where a and b are arbitrary constants, and ex is the natural exponential function.

Basis and dimension

Bases allow the introduction of coordinates as a means to represent vectors. A basis is a (finite or infinite) set  of vectors bi, for convenience often indexed by some index set I, that spans the whole space and is linearly independent. "Spanning the whole space" means that any vector v can be expressed as a finite sum (called a linear combination) of the basis elements:
where the ak are scalars, called the coordinates of the vector v with respect to the basis B, and bik  elements of B. Linear independence means that the coordinates ak are uniquely determined for any vector in the vector space.
For example, the coordinate vectors  can be uniquely expressed as a linear combination of these vectors:
The corresponding coordinates x1, x2, ..., xn are just the Cartesian coordinates of the vector.
Every vector space has a basis. This follows from Zorn's lemma, an equivalent formulation of the Axiom of Choice.
The dimension of the coordinate space Fn is n, by the basis exhibited above. The dimension of the polynomial ring Fx introduced above is countably infinite, a basis is given by 1, x, x2, ... A fortiori, the dimension of more general function spaces, such as the space of functions on some (bounded or unbounded) interval, is infinite. Under suitable regularity assumptions on the coefficients involved, the dimension of the solution space of a homogeneous ordinary differential equation equals the degree of the equation. For example, the solution space for the above equation is generated by e−x and xe−x. These two functions are linearly independent over R, so the dimension of this space is two, as is the degree of the equation.
A field extension over the rationals Q can be thought of as a vector space over Q (by defining vector addition as field addition, defining scalar multiplication as field multiplication by elements of Q, and otherwise ignoring the field multiplication). The dimension (or degree) of the field extension Q(α) over Q depends on α. If α satisfies some polynomial equation
("α is algebraic"), the dimension is finite. More precisely, it equals the degree of the minimal polynomial having α as a root.

Linear maps and matrices

The relation of two vector spaces can be expressed by linear map or linear transformation. They are functions that reflect the vector space structure—i.e., they preserve sums and scalar multiplication:
An isomorphism is a linear map   If there exists an isomorphism between V and W, the two spaces are said to be isomorphic; they are then essentially identical as vector spaces, since all identities holding in V are, via f, transported to similar ones in W, and vice versa via g.
For example, the "arrows in the plane" and "ordered pairs of numbers" vector spaces in the introduction are isomorphic: a planar arrow v departing at the origin of some (fixed) coordinate system can be expressed as an ordered pair by considering the x- and y-component of the arrow, as shown in the image at the right. Conversely, given a pair (x, y), the arrow going by x to the right (or to the left, if x is negative), and y up (down, if y is negative) turns back the arrow v.
Linear maps V → W between two fixed vector spaces form a vector space HomF(V, W), also denoted L(V, W).
Once a basis of V is chosen, linear maps  is equivalent to the choice of a basis of V, by mapping the standard basis of Fn to V, via φ. The freedom of choosing a convenient basis is particularly useful in the infinite-dimensional context, see below.

Matrices

Matrices are a useful notion to encode linear maps.  They are written as a rectangular array of scalars as in the image at the right. Any m-by-n matrix A gives rise to a linear map from Fn to Fm, by the following
or, using the matrix multiplication of the matrix A with the coordinate vector x:
Moreover, after choosing bases of V and W, any linear map 
The determinant det (A) of a square matrix A is a scalar that tells whether the associated map is an isomorphism or not: to be so it is sufficient and necessary that the determinant is nonzero. The linear transformation of Rn corresponding to a real n-by-n matrix is orientation preserving if and only if its determinant is positive.

Eigenvalues and eigenvectors

Endomorphisms, linear maps . If V is finite-dimensional, this can be rephrased using determinants: f having eigenvalue λ is equivalent to
By spelling out the definition of the determinant, the expression on the left hand side can be seen to be a polynomial function in λ, called the characteristic polynomial of f.. See also Jordan–Chevalley decomposition. The set of all eigenvectors corresponding to a particular eigenvalue of f forms a vector space known as the eigenspace corresponding to the eigenvalue (and f) in question. To achieve the spectral theorem, the corresponding statement in the infinite-dimensional case, the machinery of functional analysis is needed, see below.

Basic constructions

In addition to the above concrete examples, there are a number of standard linear algebraic constructions that yield vector spaces related to given ones. In addition to the definitions given below, they are also characterized by universal properties, which determine an object X by specifying the linear maps from X to any other vector space.

Subspaces and quotient spaces

A nonempty subset W of a vector space V that is closed under addition and scalar multiplication (and therefore contains the 0-vector of V) is called a subspace of V.
The counterpart to subspaces are quotient vector spaces.) choose to start with this equivalence relation and derive the concrete shape of V/W from this. This way, the quotient space "forgets" information that is contained in the subspace W.
The kernel ker(f) of a linear map  Because of this, many statements such as the first isomorphism theorem (also called rank–nullity theorem in matrix-related terms)
and the second and third isomorphism theorem can be formulated and proven in a way very similar to the corresponding statements for groups.
An important example is the kernel of a linear map , which is precisely the set of solutions to the system of homogeneous linear equations belonging to A. This concept also extends to linear differential equations
In the corresponding map
the derivatives of the function f appear linearly (as opposed to f′′(x)2, for example). Since differentiation is a linear procedure (i.e.,  form a vector space (over R or C).

Direct product and direct sum

The direct product of vector spaces and the direct sum of vector spaces are two ways of combining an indexed family of vector spaces into a new vector space.

Tensor product

The tensor product  is linear in the sense above and likewise for fixed v.
The tensor product is a particular vector space that is a universal recipient of bilinear maps g, as follows. It is defined as the vector space consisting of finite (formal) sums of symbols called tensors
subject to the rules 
These rules ensure that the map f from the . See also Yoneda lemma. This is called the universal property of the tensor product, an instance of the method—much used in advanced abstract algebra—to indirectly define objects by specifying maps from or to this object.

Vector spaces with additional structure

From the point of view of linear algebra, vector spaces are completely understood insofar as any vector space is characterized, up to isomorphism, by its dimension. However, vector spaces per se do not offer a framework to deal with the question—crucial to analysis—whether a sequence of functions converges to another function. Likewise, linear algebra is not adapted to deal with infinite series, since the addition operation allows only finitely many terms to be added. Therefore, the needs of functional analysis require considering additional structures. Much the same way the axiomatic treatment of vector spaces reveals their essential algebraic features, studying vector spaces with additional data abstractly turns out to be advantageous, too.
A first example of an additional datum is an order ≤, a token by which vectors can be compared. For example, n-dimensional real space Rn can be ordered by comparing its vectors componentwise. Ordered vector spaces, for example Riesz spaces, are fundamental to Lebesgue integration, which relies on the ability to express a function as a difference of two positive functions
where f+ denotes the positive part of f and f− the negative part.

Normed vector spaces and inner product spaces

Coordinate space Fn can be equipped with the standard dot product:
In R2, this reflects the common notion of the angle between two vectors x and y, by the law of cosines:

Topological vector spaces

Convergence questions are treated by considering vector spaces V carrying a compatible topology, a structure that allows one to talk about elements being close to each other. To make sense of specifying the amount a scalar changes, the field F also has to carry a topology in this context; a common choice are the reals or the complex numbers.
In such topological vector spaces one can consider series of vectors.  The infinite sum
denotes the limit of the corresponding finite partial sums of the sequence (fi)i∈N of elements of V. For example, the fi could be (real or complex) functions belonging to some function space V, in which case the series is a function series. The mode of convergence of the series depends on the topology imposed on the function space. In such cases, pointwise convergence and uniform convergence are two prominent examples.
A way to ensure the existence of limits of certain infinite series is to restrict attention to spaces where any Cauchy sequence has a limit; such a vector space is called complete. Roughly, a vector space is complete provided that it contains all necessary limits. For example, the vector space of polynomials on the unit interval 0,1, equipped with the topology of uniform convergence is not complete because any continuous function on 0,1 can be uniformly approximated by a sequence of polynomials, by the Weierstrass approximation theorem. A norm gives rise to a topology by defining that a sequence of vectors vn converges to v if and only if
Banach and Hilbert spaces are complete topological vector spaces whose topologies are given, respectively, by a norm and an inner product. Their study—a key piece of functional analysis—focusses on infinite-dimensional vector spaces, since all norms on finite-dimensional topological vector spaces give rise to the same notion of convergence. The image at the right shows the equivalence of the 1-norm and ∞-norm on R2: as the unit "balls" enclose each other, a sequence converges to zero in one norm if and only if it so does in the other norm. In the infinite-dimensional case, however, there will generally be inequivalent topologies, which makes the study of topological vector spaces richer than that of vector spaces without additional data.
From a conceptual point of view, all notions related to topological vector spaces should match the topology. For example, instead of considering all linear maps (also called functionals) 

=Banach spaces=

Banach spaces, introduced by Stefan Banach, are complete normed vector spaces. given by 
is finite. The topologies on the infinite-dimensional space ℓ p are inequivalent for different p. E.g. the sequence of vectors :
More generally than sequences of real numbers, functions  are endowed with a norm that replaces the above sum by the Lebesgue integral
The space of integrable functions on a given domain Ω (for example an interval) satisfying {{nowrap| with 

Analysis

Historical references

Further references




