[[Wildland fire engine]]

CATEGORIES: Wildland fire suppression, Wildfires, Fire service vehicles

A wildland fire engine is a fire engine specifically designed to assist in fighting wildfires by transporting firefighters to the scene and providing them with access to the fire, along with water or other equipment. Most commonly used by the United States Forest Service, there are multiple types of wildfire apparatus which are used in different scenarios. According to the National Fire Protection Association, if the apparatus will be used primarily for outdoor and wildland responses, than it is to be considered a wildland fire apparatus and must conform to NFPA 1906.
Depending on where the engine is stationed it may carry as much as twice the national standard in fire hose. In areas where there is rugged terrain that keeps engines from driving directly to the fire, large hose lays are installed to transport water to the fire area. In desert areas with moderate terrain, less hose is used as it is easier to access the fire.

Features

Wildland engines are traditionally smaller than standard fire engines and are primarily used for vegetation fires or wildland fires. They also respond to emergencies in the back country where traditional engines cannot respond. Most wildland engines feature four-wheel drive capability and can thus climb hills and make it through rough terrain. One of the features that makes these engines ideal for vegetation fires is that they can pump water while driving, whereas traditional engines must be put into park to flow water. This pump-and-roll feature allows the engines to make "running attacks" on vegetation fires, a tactic that can help minimize the rate of spread by having a firefighter walk the edge of a fire with a hose line and the engine trailing close behind.

Engine types

In the fall of 2007, the National Wildfire Coordinating Group agreed on a set of standards for all fire engines that are used for wildland firefighting. As structure engines are sometimes used on wildland fires, though primarily for structure protection, they are also included in the NWCG engine typing.
Per the standards there are 7 types of fire engines.

Type 3

The Type 3 Engines are the most common type of wildland fire engine. While they traditionally have four-wheel drive to make driving over rough terrain easier, they can also be produced with standard rear wheel drive.

Type 4

The Type 4 engine trades a smaller pump and less hose for a 50% larger tank. They are required to carry a minimum of .

Type 5

Type 5s are normally used as an initial attack engine atop a medium duty chassis. The GVWR of the chassis is around .

Type 6

Type 6 Engines are usually used as initial attack engines. They are build on a pickup truck frame with a medium duty chassis giving a GVWR of .

Type 7

Type 7s are Patrol vehicle with a small pump and tank. As a light duty vehicle, they are in the range of .
pump and is a multipurpose unit used for patrol, mop
up, or initial attack.

NFPA 1906

Additionally, there are requirements laid out by the National Fire Protection Association in NFPA 1906: Standard for Wildland Fire Apparatus. Some of the many details of the NFPA 1906 include:




