[[Robert Kraft (composer)]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), Place of birth missing (living people), Living people, American composers, American film producers, American film score composers, American record producers, American songwriters, Harvard University alumni, RSO Records artists

Robert Kraft is an award winning American songwriter, film composer, recording artist and record producer. As President of Fox Music from 1994 to 2012, Kraft supervised the music for more than 300 Fox feature films, as well as dozens of TV shows. 

Education

Kraft attended the Lawrenceville School and graduated cum laude from Harvard University in 1976.

Recording and songwriting

Kraft has worked extensively in the recording industry, producing or co-producing such artists as Linda Ronstadt, Dr. John, Bette Midler, Celia Cruz, Tito Puente, Johnny Mathis, Bruce Willis, Jimmy Buffett, Don Henley, George Benson, Ozzy Osbourne, Southside Johnny, Albert Collins, Vonda Shepard, and Melissa Manchester. His songs have been recorded by The Manhattan Transfer, Bette Midler, Roberta Flack, Los Lobos, Diane Schuur, Bruce Willis, Joy Enriquez, Dr. John, and Kermit the Frog. As a solo artist and with his band, Robert Kraft and The Ivory Coast, he has released four albums on RCA, RSO, and Sonic Edge Records. In October 2013, Milan Records released "Consensual Sets", a compilation of Kraft's greatest hits from 1979-1989. In November 2013, VIVID SOUNDS released a boxed set of Kraft's five original CDs, including "Robert Kraft Live at the Newport Jazz Festival, Town Hall NYC, 1980."

Film music

In 1989, Kraft co-produced the Academy Award-winning song, "Under The Sea", plus the Grammy Award-winning double-platinum soundtrack of The Little Mermaid, along with co-authors Howard Ashman and Alan Menken.  In 1992, Kraft was nominated for an Academy Award, a Grammy Award, and a Golden Globe Award for co-writing "Beautiful Maria of My Soul", the theme song from the Warner Bros. feature, The Mambo Kings. Kraft was also the film's composer and Executive Music Producer, producing the Gold soundtrack, which spent four weeks at Number One on Billboard's Latin Music chart. In 1999, Kraft was nominated for a second Golden Globe for co-writing the song, "How Can I Not Love You" for the 20th Century Fox film, Anna and the King, with songwriter Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds and film composer George Fenton. Kraft also co-produced the long-charting soundtrack on Billboard's Jazz charts, Swing Kids.
As a writer, Kraft's other feature film credits include story co-author (with Bruce Willis) and score co-composer (with Michael Kamen) on the Tri-Star film, Hudson Hawk. He produced the Grammy-nominated soundtrack for the Jim Henson Productions' film, The Muppet Christmas Carol, and composed the score to the Warner Bros. feature, Seven Minutes in Heaven. Kraft was songwriter and musical producer on Adventures in Babysitting and Heartbreak Hotel. His television credits include co-writing theme songs for Who's The Boss? and Day by Day, as well as writing new themes for Wide World of Sports and songs for Fame.
Kraft composed the music for the ballet, "Thriller", choreographed by Matthew Diamond. (World Premier, Jacob's Pillow August 1981.) In 1992 Kraft founded the record label, Jim Henson Records, and as the Vice President of Music at Jim Henson Productions, inaugurated their music division.

Fox Filmed Entertainment

Kraft was the chief executive of Fox Music Inc. from 1994 until October 2012, supervising the scores and soundtracks for over 300 Fox Filmed Entertainment motion pictures. Rio, and "Life of Pi". Kraft's division, Fox Music, also supervised the music for Twentieth Century Fox Television hits such as "Ally McBeal" and "X-Files", as well as shows "24", "American Dad!", "Family Guy", and "The Simpsons". Since 1994, television soundtracks from Fox Music have included the worldwide platinum albums from "Ally McBeal" and "X-Files", plus hit compilations from "Buffy the Vampire Slayer", "Dark Angel", "The Simpsons", "Roswell" and "24".
Since Kraft became chief executive in 1994, Fox Music was responsible for the worldwide sales of over 60 million albums, producing 3 Platinum, 6 Multi-Platinum and 6 Gold records. Under his leadership, Fox Music garnered 10 Academy Award nominations, winning 4 Academy Awards, 20 Golden Globe nominations (including 5 Golden Globe Awards), 61 Emmy nominations with 11 wins, and 49 Grammy nominations including 14 Grammy Awards.

Other projects

In 1994, Kraft was elected to the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences' Board of Governors, Los Angeles Chapter. In 1995, Kraft became a member of the Music Branch of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.

Kraftbox Entertainment

In 2013, Kraft founded Kraftbox Entertainment, a Music and Media production and consulting firm. Current projects include "When Albums Ruled The World", a documentary broadcast on BBC 4 (February 2013), "Wheels of Steel"(a comedic series for CBS Studios), and "No Can Do", an original musical feature set in NYC. Additional Kraftbox activities include Music Consulting for Warner Brothers Records, 21st Century Fox Studios, and Maker Studios, the multi-channel network based in Culver City, CA.






