[[Asia League Ice Hockey]]

CATEGORIES: Asia League Ice Hockey, Ice hockey leagues in Asia, Ice hockey in China, Ice hockey in Japan, Ice hockey in South Korea, Ice hockey leagues in Russia, 2003 establishments in Asia, Sports leagues established in 2003

Asia League Ice Hockey (ALH) is an association which operates a professional ice hockey league based in East Asia, with seven teams from Japan, China, and South Korea. The league is headquartered in Japan. At the end of the playoffs every year the winner is awarded The Championship Trophy.
The league was formed in 2003 due to declining popularity in the Japan Ice Hockey League
The league draws most of its players from the home countries of its teams. However, to help build skill and raise the level of competitiveness the league allows each team a certain number of foreign imports on their roster.

History

Champions

2003 – 2008

The league was formed after the collapse of the Korean ice hockey league and dissolution of the Japanese league. It was started with the goal of promoting hockey in Asia as well as helping the various participating countries develop their hockey programs and increase their showing in the Olympics. The first season was a shortened season of only five teams, and played as a tournament rather than a regular season. Four Japanese teams and a Korean team participated. The tournament lasted just two months and each team played four games, two at home and two away, against each other. Due to the shortened tournament format there were no playoffs and the winner was declared from the point tally. The Nippon Paper Cranes won the tournament with 39 points. and Joel Prpic from Kokudo was the assist and points leader with 25 assists and 33 points. Ryan Haruo Kuwabara, of the Cranes, was the scoring leader with 15 goals.
The 2004–05 season was the first full season for the league, and seen by some to be the inaugural season.
The 2005–06 season saw a number of changes to the make-up of Asia League. In the off-season the Golden Amur withdrew from the league due to financial trouble. At the same time it was announced that Kangwon Land was showing interest in entering a team in the league.
Further changes were seen in the league in the 2006–07 season. After the last season The Nordic Vikings were looking for sponsors for the team.
The 2007–08 season started with a further reduction in teams. Harbin and Qiqihar combined into a single team and became owned and operated by the San Jose Sharks. They took the name of their new owner and became the China Sharks.

2008 – present

After several years of many changes to the teams, the 2008–09 season came with only one change. Oji Paper renamed themselves to Oji Eagles in July 2008.
After a season with little change to the make-up of the league, the 2009–2010 saw further change. The San Jose Sharks ended their association with the Chinese team. They pulled out all coaches and players they had sent. The Chinese Ice Hockey Association took over the team and brought in new import players and coaches to replace those lost. The team also changed its name from China Sharks to China Dragon. Mid-way through the previous season the Seibu Prince Rabbits announced that due to financial difficulties they would withdraw from the league at the end of the 2008–09 season.
The 2010–2011 season saw virtually no change to the structure of the season or league. All teams from the previous season remained in the league, and the amount of games remained at 36. The regular season ran from 18 September 2010 to 20 February 2011. After two years of leading the league, Halla slipped to fourth place and Oji Eagles took the regular season honors with 76 points.
In 2013-14, a new Seoul-based team, Sang Mu, joined the league.

Game

Each Asia League Ice Hockey regulation game is an ice hockey game played between two teams and is 60 minutes long. The game comprises three 20-minute periods separated by two 15 minute intermissions. While some teams have television broadcast contracts, they do not take television time-outs like the NHL. At the end of the 60 minute game, the team with the most goals wins. If the game is tied at the end of 60 minutes, the teams play an overtime period. Overtime is five minutes, with four skaters on each team. If the game remains tied after five minutes, then the teams partake in a three player shoot-out, until one team comes out ahead. Prior to the 2008–09 season these games ended in a tie with no shoot-out. In a playoff game the league doesn't use the shoot-out and instead the teams play continual overtime periods of 20 minutes until one team scores.

Imports

Asia League was created primarily for the development of hockey in Asia. The league allows teams to hire a small number of imports to play on the team in order to even out strength as well as increase the level of competitiveness in the league. Playing against more skilled foreign players will allow players from the participating countries to increase their skills and benefit from having some more experienced players on their teams. China is allowed the most imports while the experienced Japanese teams are allowed the fewest. As part of some sponsorship deals China was provided western players from the San Jose Sharks, and the two Chinese teams were provided Swedish players when the Nordic Vikings were active in the league.
Several National Hockey League players have played in the league, including Greg Parks, Esa Tikkanen, Chris Lindberg, Tavis Hansen, Shjon Podein, Jason Podollan, Derek Plante, Steve McKenna, Jarrod Skalde, Joel Prpic, Tyson Nash, Jamie McLennan, Shane Endicott, Wade Flaherty, Kelly Fairchild, Brad Tiley, Ricard Persson, Bryan Young, Claude Lemieux, Brad Fast, Ric Jackman and Cole Jarrett.

Teams

Early in its existence the league hoped to quickly expand to 12 teams but due to some teams having financial difficulties they didn't attain it. In its 2013–14 season, the Asia League Hockey has 8 teams, comprising 4 teams from Japan; 3 teams from South Korea; and 1 from China.

Season structure

Asia League Ice Hockey season is divided into three parts. The late summer and early autumn comprise training camps and exhibition play. After that the regular season takes place, which lasts for several months dependent on the schedule. Finally several teams advance to a post-season playoff. This is an elimination tournament where teams play a "best-of" format to advance through the rounds. The final remaining team is crowned the champion for the year.
The regular season has been changed in almost every season that Asia League has been in operation. The first full season mirrors the two most recent seasons in which all teams play all other teams six times. With the amount of teams changing from season to season in the first few years the league adjusted the schedule each year which often included an unbalanced schedule. Under the current schedule all teams make an away visit to each other team's home rink for a three game series and also play a three game series against that team at their own home rink. In order to minimize travel, teams traveling to other countries will stay there for two weeks and play two teams, except in the case of China who only has one team. Teams going to Japan will play against the Cranes and Eagles on the same trip as they are geographically close together, then in another trip play against the Free Blades and Ice Bucks.
The league ranks the teams by points. A regulation time win is worth three points. If the teams are tied at the end of regulation, both teams receive one point. The team which is victorious either in the overtime period or overtime shoot-out receives an additional point. A regulation time loss is worth zero points.
At the end of the regular season the team which has the most points is awarded the title of regular season champion. The league in the past generally takes a several week break between the regular season and postseason. As with the regular season, the format of the playoffs has varied from year to year. In the 2009–10 season the top four teams advanced to the playoffs and play two best-of-five rounds. The league scheduled the end of the regular season and postseason around the Olympic break. In each round the higher ranked team from the regular season will receive a home-ice advantage and the series will begin play and have the majority of games play in their rink.

Awards

Asia League awards several awards each season in addition to The Championship Trophy. Prior to the 2008–09 season the awards were issued after the postseason but in that season they were issued during the break between the regular season and postseason. The league presents awards for:
All of the awards, except for Best Hockey Town, are sponsored by an organization or individual.







