[[Gardner–Webb University]]

CATEGORIES: Gardner–Webb University, Baptist Christianity in North Carolina, Education in Cleveland County, North Carolina, Universities and colleges in North Carolina, Universities and colleges affiliated with the Southern Baptist Convention, Universities and colleges affiliated with the North Carolina Baptist Convention, Educational institutions established in 1905, Council of Independent Colleges, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, Universities and colleges accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, Buildings and structures in Cleveland County, North Carolina, 1905 establishments in North Carolina

Gardner–Webb University (also known as Gardner–Webb, GWU, or GW) is a private, four-year university located in Boiling Springs, North Carolina, United States,  west of Charlotte. Founded as Boiling Springs High School in 1905 as a Baptist institution, it is currently the youngest North Carolina Baptist university.
Gardner–Webb undergraduates receive a liberal arts education in an environment that fosters "meaningful intellectual thought, critical analysis, and spiritual challenge within a diverse community of learning."
Over 4,300 students attend Gardner–Webb, including both undergraduates and graduates. A total of five professional schools, two academic schools, and 11 academic departments offer nearly 60 fields of study, and GWU's online programs have won multiple awards and recognitions. GWU's Runnin' Bulldogs are NCAA Division I and are part of the Big South Conference.

History

Beginnings

On December 2, 1905, the Boiling Springs High School was chartered as a result of an initiative sponsored by the Kings Mountain Baptist Association (Cleveland County) and the Sandy Run Baptist Association (Rutherford County). The institution served as a place "where the young..." The institution's name, Boiling Springs High School, was decided on October 27, 1905, and its charter was accepted less than two months later by the school's trustees. The town of Boiling Springs is named after the natural springs that can be found on campus. They provided clean water for the school when it began operation in 1907.
J.D. Huggins was made the High School's first principal on July 25, 1907. Although it burned down in 1957, it signified the promise and progress of the school so far.
Boiling Springs High School focused on Christian education, as evident in the school's motto, Pro Deo et Humanitate (for God and Humanity). These words were inscribed upon "the ageless granite arch" on campus, which still exists today.

Expansion and growth

The high school became Boiling Springs Junior College in 1928 due to the changing educational needs of the area. The Great Depression created many obstacles for the College, but its survival was secured by the sacrifices of loyal supporters.
In 1942, Governor O. Max Gardner began devoting his energy, time, and wealth to strengthening the College. On June 15, the trustees voted to change the name to Gardner–Webb Junior College in honor of Gardner and his wife, Fay Webb-Gardner. During the following year, the institution embarked on a $300,000 financial campaign. At the conclusion of this initiative the trustees announced the school to be debt-free.
The decades following World War II were years of physical growth and academic development. New buildings went up as enrollments increased. A major step in the institutions' development was its full accreditation as a senior college in December, 1971. In 1980 the college began a graduate program, which became the Graduate School in the 1990s. The School of Divinity was also founded during this time. The institution officially became known as Gardner–Webb University in January 1993, culminating years of preparation, and by the early 2000s the school had more than 3,200 students and 135 faculty members.

Recent history

Today, Gardner–Webb is a flourishing regional institution, which offers eight distinct degree programs, has a highly qualified faculty and a campus of over 200 acres.

Campus

The main campus is situated on nearly 

Key places

The Tucker Student Center was completed in Fall 2012, and serves as a central place where students and faculty can meet, study, and dine. Made possible because of a $5 million gift from Lisa and Robert Tucker, the donation is the largest one in the University's history. The Student Center's restaurants increase the food options on campus with WOW Cafe (World of Wings), SubConnection, Mein Bowl Authentic Asian Cuisine, and the Broad River Coffee Company.
Dover Campus Center was constructed in 1966 where the Huggins-Curtis building used to be located. It was renovated in 1990 and houses the student cafeteria, lounges, Chick-fil-a, Undergraduate Admissions offices, and Ritch Banquet Hall. The building is named in memory of Charles I. Dover of Shelby, N.C.
The Quad is located in the center of campus, and is the location of the majority of dormitories and academic buildings, including Craig Hall (English), Withrow Science Building, O. Max Gardner Hall (Music), and E. B. Hamrick Hall (Business). It is the location of most of the student activities on campus.
The John R. Dover Memorial Library was built in 1974 to meet the demands of an expanding student body. Students are able to access over 90 databases on topics including literature, religion, music, psychology, nursing and allied health.
The Lake Hollifield Complex is located between Tucker Student Center and University Commons and is named after Mr. and Mrs. Hugh H. Hollifield.
Suttle Wellness Center is located in the University Physical development Complex. It is a health and wellness education and resource center available to all students, faculty, staff, and family members of faculty and staff. The center contains a fitness room complete with state-of-the-art fitness equipment, a recreation room with ping pong, pool, foosball, and air hockey, and a student lounge. The building also contains Bost Gymnasium, a free weight room, an aerobics studio, and the swimming pool.

Academics

Curriculum

There are over 4,300 students enrolled at Gardner–Webb, including the day program, graduate studies, and the GOAL program (Greater Opportunities for Adult Learners). Out of these students, 63% are female and 37% are male, and in all come from a total of 21 foreign countries.
Degrees offered include Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of Science, Associate of Arts, Bachelor of Science in Nursing, Master of Arts in Education, Master of Divinity, Master of Business Administration, Master of Accountancy, International Master of Business Administration, Master of Arts in Counseling, Master of Science in Nursing, Education Specialist, Doctor of Ministry, and Doctor of Education.
There are 147 full-time faculty members, 79% of them with a Ph.D. or equivalent. The average class size is about 25 and the faculty to student ration is 1:15, although some classes may contain close to 30 students.

=GOAL program=

The Greater Opportunities for Adult Learners program offers students opportunities to continue their studies in order to obtain a baccalaureate degree. To be a part of the program, students must have completed 60-64 semester hours from a regionally accredited institution. Courses take place on weekday evenings and occasionally on weekends in sixteen centers reaching across North Carolina, from Supply to Spruce Pine, with the most prominent being on Gardner–Webb's main campus, Charlotte, Hickory, Statesville, and Winston-Salem.

=Noel program=

The Noel Program for Students with Disabilities is designed to assist disabled students with obtaining their degrees. The program offers services for those who are blind, deaf, or learning disabled, and "seeks to provide reasonable accommodations in order for students to receive equal access to a higher education while striving to assist students to obtain the knowledge, skills and confidence to become effective self advocates."

Rankings and reputation

In the 2013 college rankings of U.S. News & World Report, Gardner–Webb was ranked 46th among regional universities in the South.

Scholarships

Gardner–Webb offers its students a variety of competitive, performance based, and other scholarships to help cover the cost of tuition and fees. Five students receive the Academic Fellows Scholarship each year, while two receive the University Fellows Scholarship.
The University offers other scholarships as well, such as the Provost Scholarship, Dean's Scholarship, Achievement Scholarship, Gardner–Webb Scholarship, and Great Choice Scholarships.

Honor code

Gardner–Webb students are expected to follow a strict honor code, signing a pledge upon enrollment to "uphold honesty, integrity, and truthfulness in all realms of University life." These forms are kept in the Office of the Vice President and Dean of Student Development and clearly state that academic lying and cheating will not be tolerated.
Student and faculty responsibilities are clearly outlined in the code, showing that students are fully responsible for their own works and that plagiarism, improper citations, and other forms of unoriginal work are subject to disciplinary actions.
If a student is suspected to have committed academic dishonesty, he or she must undergo a process of warnings, reports, conferences, and Judicial Board hearings based on the severity of the action. While the Board decides the institutional punishment (academic probation, suspension, etc.), the instructor of the student's course will determine the student's grade in the course.
Any student found responsible for a third offense of academic dishonesty will be expelled from the University with the action so noted on the student's transcript.

Accreditations

Gardner–Webb is accredited by the Commission on Colleges of the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools to award Associate, Baccalaureate, Master's degrees and Doctorates."Commission on Colleges: Member, Candidate, and Applicant List." Commission on Colleges Southern Association of Colleges and Schools. 9 Feb 2010. Web. 
In addition several departmental programs are accredited by the appropriate state or national agencies. The Education program is accredited by the North Carolina Department of Public Instruction and the National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE). The Music and Nursing programs are accredited respectively by the National Association of Schools of Music and the National League for Nursing Accrediting Commission. The School of Divinity is accredited by the Association of Theological Schools of the United States and Canada. The Athletic Training Program is accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP). The School of Business is accredited by the Association of Collegiate Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). The University is authorized by the immigration authorities of the United States for the training of foreign students.

Student life

Residence life

Gardner–Webb gives its students a variety of residential opportunities on campus, with nine residence halls, four suite style buildings, and seven apartment buildings. All undergraduate students are required to live on campus unless they live with family, are at least 21 years of age prior to an academic year, have lived in a residence hall for at least six semesters, are part-time students (taking less than 12 hours), are married, or have served in 120 days of active military service.
The residence halls are separated by sex, with girls living in Decker, Spangler, Myers, H.A.P.Y., Nanney, and Stroup. Boys live in Lutz-Yelton(L3 has been known in the past for its outlandish activity and pranks), Mauney, and Royster, although some dorms become co-ed based on the boy:girl ratio on campus. Currently, the student body is 63% female and 37% male.  The dormitories are equipped with free washing machines and dryers, community bathrooms, and residence lobbies equipped for lounging and studying.
Apartments A, B, C, D, E, F, and H, also known as University Commons, are located near the Lake Hollifield Complex. One building contains 12 apartments, each one with a furnished living area, four furnished single bedrooms, a (free) laundry room, two bathrooms, and a fully equipped kitchen area with an oven, stove, microwave, refrigerator, sink, and dishwasher. Although the building is co-ed, each apartment is not.
Suites G, I, and J are located in the same area as the apartments, and are similar to them except that they house eight students per unit instead of four. Each suite contains four bedrooms big enough for two students, two bathrooms, a furnished living room, and a half kitchen with a refrigerator, microwave, and sink. Campus House, located between Nanney Hall and University Commons, also offers suite style living.

Clubs and organizations

Gardner–Webb offers its students opportunities to become involved in a number of activities and organizations around campus. Students work with the Student Leadership and Activities Office to start new organizations.
A wide variety of organizations are available, including honors societies, clubs, performance groups, sports groups, religious organizations and services, and arts and culture groups. Each department has its own honors society, ranging from Beta Beta Beta to Sigma Tau Delta. Alpha Chi is the most prestigious honors society that the school offers, requiring its members to be in the top ten percent of their junior or senior classes. Religious organizations like the Fellowship of Christian Athletes are open to all students and focus on Christian fellowship.

Campus recreation

Gardner–Webb offers multiple recreational activities designed to "enrich the quality of physical, mental, spiritual, and social life of University community members."  The Broyhill Adventure Course, located next to University Commons and Spangler Stadium, offers students a unique outdoor adventure challenge and opportunities to experience climbing and problem solving. The Tucker Student Center also has a three-story tall climbing wall.
The intramural program offers a variety of individual and team sports during both semesters to accommodate student interests and abilities. Any current student, faculty, or staff member may participate. Sports include beach volleyball, kickball, indoor soccer, disc golf, softball, and basketball, among others. Teams can play under male, female, or coed leagues.

Athletics

Gardner–Webb offers 17 varsity sports at the NCAA Division I level, including football, basketball, soccer, wrestling, swimming, track and field, cross country, softball, tennis, volleyball, and golf. Nine of these are men's and eight are women's.
The athletic teams are known as the Runnin' Bulldogs and support the school colors of scarlet, black and white. The bulldogs are part of the Big South Conference, although the men's and women's swim teams belong to the Coastal Collegiate Swim Association.

=Football=

In 2013, Gardner–Webb hired head coach Carrol McCray, former head coach of North Greenville and a Gardner-Webb alumni. The Gardner–Webb football team has played difficult opponents throughout its history, including Georgia Tech, Appalachian State, Mississippi State, Wofford, Ohio, and Pittsburgh.

=Basketball=

Gardner–Webb men's basketball has also been a growing program and continue to do so under head coach, Tim Craft. In 2012, the team played against opponents University of North Carolina and earlier, in the 2007-2008 season, pulled an 84-68 upset win against the University of Kentucky.  They have reached every national tournament on every level except for the NCAA Division I Men's National Tournament.

In 2011, the women's team were Big South Conference champions and were awarded a No. 14 seed in the NCAA Division I Women's Basketball Championship tournament, facing No. 3 seed Miami. This was the first appearance for the team in the tournament.

=Swimming=

In 2012, Gardner–Webb University's men's swimming team placed third at the 2008 CCSA conference, setting several school records and finishing closely behind College of Charleston and Davidson.  The women also placed third at the conference championships.
Before joining the CCSA conference the women's swim team was a part of the NEC.  As of 2007, the women's team was four time NEC conference champions.gwusports.dbml?SPSID=46236&SPID=4172&DB_OEM_ID=10300&ATCLID=801631
In 2012, the women's team won its twelfth consecutive Scholastic All-America (CSCAA) honor, averaging a 3.55 grade average and falling behind schools like Columbia University by .01 and Dartmouth College by .06. The list includes all Division I women's swim teams that average a 3.0 GPA or higher.

=Women's soccer=

Gardner–Webb's women's soccer program has been a consistent winner since 1999 under head coach, Kevin Mounce. Even through the transition from NCAA Division II to Division I, the Runnin' Bulldogs have won matches at an unparalleled pace that the University has never witnessed before. In the past nine years, the team has won a total of six seasons and at least eight matches in a single-season eight times.

Christian focus

As a Baptist founded university, Gardner–Webb offers and exhibits many Christian aspects. The Office of Christian Life and Service encourages and challenges the University community in its Christian growth, offering pastoral care to students, faculty, administration and staff.

Dimensions

Dimensions is a graduation requirement for all Gardner-Webb students. The purpose is to nurture attendants spiritually, intellectually and culturally from the perspective of a Christian world view and to promote a sense of community. This means that a total of six semesters, or 60 dimensions, must be attended before graduation.

Student ministries

Campus Ministries United is an umbrella association that has worked with Gardner-Webb to create student run ministry groups. Each CMU Council is composed of student leaders who well represent the ideas of Christian Life and Service. Along with the University's ministerial staff, the Council seeks to "promote a passionate and enduring devotion to Christ among students of Gardner-Webb." 

Notable alumni



|title = Gardner–Webb University Quick Facts web page
|url = 
|title = Gardner–Webb University Police web page
|url = 
|title = Gardner–Webb University History web page
|url = 
|last = Washburn
|first = Jim
|title = Tennessee Titans Administration web page
|url = 
|title = Undergraduate Catalog
|location = Gardner-Webb University
|date = 2007–2008
|pages = 103–244}}




