[[Kashin (town)]]

CATEGORIES: Cities and towns in Tver Oblast, Tver Governorate

Kashin ( 18,000 (1970).
The telephone code for Kashin is 08234.

History

The town of Kashin was first mentioned in a chronicle under the year of 1238, when it was sacked by the Mongols. It was given by Grand Duke Mikhail Yaroslavich as an appanage to his son Vasily, who founded a short-lived dynasty of local princes. Mikhail Yaroslavich's wife Anna took the veil in Kashin's nunnery and died there on October 2, 1368 and was glorified by the Russian Orthodox Church in 1650 as a holy patroness of all women who suffer the loss of relatives. Her miracle-working relics are preserved in the Ascension Cathedral of Kashin.
In 1382, Kashin was annexed by the Principality of Tver. From 1399 to 1426, it was held by a second dynasty of Kashin princes, which claimed their seniority in the house of Tver. In 1452, Kashin withstood a siege by Dmitry Shemyaka. It finally passed to the Grand Duchy of Moscow in 1486 with the rest of the Principality of Tver. In 1708, the town became a part of Ingermanland Governorate (known since 1710 as Saint Petersburg Governorate), but in 1727 it was transferred to Moscow Governorate. In 1775, Tver Viceroyalty was formed from the lands which previously belonged to Moscow and Novgorod Governorates, and Kashinsky Uyezd with the center in Kashin was established. In 1796, Tver Viceroyalty was transformed into Tver Governorate. On October 3, 1927 Kashinsky Uyezd was abolished and split between Bezhetsky and Kimrsky Uyezds.
On July 12, 1929 the governorates and uyezds were abolished. Kashinsky District, with the administrative center in the Kashin, was established within Bezhetsk Okrug of Moscow Oblast. On July 23, 1930, the okrugs were abolished, and the districts were directly subordinated to the oblast. On January 29, 1935 Kalinin Oblast was established, and Kashin was transferred to Kalinin Oblast. In 1990, Kalinin Oblast was renamed Tver Oblast.

Economy

During the present day, Kashin remains an economically important location in the Tver Oblast. For example, Kashin is home to Veresk, one of the largest alcoholic drink producing companies in the region. Another major business is the mineral water company ERA which produces the Kashinskaya brand of mineral water.
There are also an electric equipment company, a wool factory, and a milk and meat-processing company. There is a resort area near Kashin where many residents of the oblast spend their vacation near the Kashinka River.
Kashinsky District is a primarily an agrarian region where seed and potatoes is grown. Also, cows and poultry are raised around Kashin.

Architecture

There are several architectural monuments in Kashin, including monasteries, churches, and cathedrals. The most ancient of these, a wooden chapel from 1646, was burned to the ground in 1998. The town is also known as a balneological resort.
The town contains thirty-six cultural heritage monuments of federal significance, including the ensemble of the Presentation Monastery and a number of churches built in the 18th and the 19th centuries.

Entertainment

Kashin is home to numerous places of entertainment. During the day, the most popular entertainment locations are the pool house, internet cafes, and computer clubs. One of the computer clubs is located in the former church, Uspensky Sobor, which is now a recreation center.  During the nighttime, the recreation center occasionally hosts a nightclub. On holidays and special dates, the town hosts large festivals which involve dancing, food, and various performances.

Bazaar

Several times a week, a Bazaar takes place in the main square of the town. In it, residents of the town can sell various items, sometimes rare antiques. Also, fruit and vegetables from nearby rural farms are sold.

Culture

The Museum of Local Lore is located in Kashin.

Climate

The mean temperature in Kashin is  in July.

Transportation

There are low-price buses traveling around the town and nearby region throughout the day. For longer range transport, there are shuttle buses traveling to nearby cities: Tver, Moscow, and Yaroslavl. Also, there is a train traveling twice a day throughout Kashin. The morning train travels from Sonkovo to Savyolovo, while the afternoon train travels in the opposite direction. The passengers can easily travel from Savyolovo to Moscow via the elektrichka train. Several times a week, a train from Saint Petersburg passes the station.





Notes

Sources





