[[Colin Franklin (engineer)]]

CATEGORIES: New Zealand astronomers, New Zealand physicists, Canadian astronomers, Canadian scientists, Canadian electrical engineers, Fellows of the Royal Society of Canada, Members of the Order of Canada, University of Auckland alumni, 1927 births, Living people

Colin A. Franklin, CM, FRSC is an engineer and a leading pioneer in Canada's space programme. He played a leading role in the design, construction and application of Canada's first satellite, the Alouette. His extensive work and contribution to Canadian research and industrial development activities in space-related research and manufacturing, have been a significant influence in establishing Canada as a world leader in these fields.

Early life and education

Colin Franklin was born in Hastings, New Zealand in 1927. He was a Physics lecturer at Auckland University in 1952 and a member of the Scientific Defence Corps, Royal New Zealand Air Force from 1953-59. 
In 1953, he received an M.Sc. in Physics from the University of Auckland and in 1957 he received a Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from the Imperial College of Science and Technology, London.

Career

In 1957, Colin Franklin joined the Defence Research Telecommunications Establishment (DRTE) in Ottawa. He was chief electrical engineer for Canada's first satellite, the Alouette 1, He was subsequently chief engineer for the ISIS series of scientific satellites and head of the Space Electronics Laboratory at DRTE.
In 1969 he transferred to the newly created Department of Communications in Ottawa From 1990–1992 he was Chief Scientist at Spar Aerospace Ltd at Sainte-Anne-de-Bellevue, Quebec, Quebec.

Honours and awards

He was appointed to the Order of Canada in 1990. The Award is the ultimate recognition of the individuals behind the Canadian Space program. The Award highlights an outstanding achievement, its socio-economic benefits and the recipient's merits.
In 1995 he was a member of the Canadian Space Agency's Blue Ribbon Review Team for Radarsat-1. In 1998 he participated in a top level risk assessment study for the Canadian Space Agency on industry proposals for the Radarsat-2 contract.  In 2001 he was appointed to a three member Advisory Committee to the Auditor General of Canada for the audit of the Canadian Space Agency. In 2008, he was awarded the Julian C. Smith Medal from the Engineering Institute of Canada  as well as the IEEE Canada McNaughton Gold Medal.






