[[Roksan Audio]]

CATEGORIES: Audio amplifier manufacturers, Compact Disc player manufacturers, Companies established in 1985, Audio equipment manufacturers, Loudspeaker manufacturers, Phonograph manufacturers, 1985 establishments in England

Roksan is a British manufacturer of high fidelity audio products for domestic use, based in North West London, United Kingdom. It is best known for its influential and innovative design for hi-fi equipment, and in particular its Xerxes platform for playing LP records. "Roksan Kandy K2 integrated amplifier". Stereophile 

The company

Roksan Audio Ltd. was formed in 1985 by Tufan Hashemi"Tufan Hashemi of Roksan Audio", Hi-fi Pig, 19 January 2013 & Touraj Moghaddam, graduates of the University of London, Imperial College London & Queen Mary College. The company's first product was launched at a
hi-fi show in London in 1985. "Steady as a Roksan". Hi-fi News & Record Review, June 2008 issue.
The name Roksan itself is derived from the name of Roksana, daughter of the Persian King Darius. This closely reflects the Persian heritage and roots of both Hashemi and Moghaddam. Not surprisingly many of Roksan's product names have references to names of cities, places and famous people of Persia (now Iran)... depuis 1985". On Mag
Moghaddam, having then just obtained his PhD at Imperial College, became dissatisfied with the state of the audio arts when he heard his little TV set more musically satisfying than his already high-end Linn/Naim tri-amped audio system, and began experimentation. He deduced that where the existing turntable design failed was that the cartridge must be held still wherever the groove goes, and thus the mean line traced by the groove relative to the body of the cartridge needed to be constant. His ideas led him away from using the sprung sub-chassis as part of the speed-controlling system. Moghaddam built a prototype using a fire door. Hashemi, a friend who had heard the new prototype turntable and wanted one, teamed up to start the company. The Darius loudspeaker design, based on the re-examination of the relationship between and magnitudes of movements of the tweeter and the woofer, was already in prototype. The concept stunned the trade when it was demonstrated at the 1985 hi-fi show where the Xerxes was launched.
In 1996, the company was acquired by Verity plc, a hi-fi group that owned the Mission, Wharfedale and Quad brands. But when Verity demerged around two years later to concentrate on flat-panel speaker technology, Hashemi and Moghaddam reacquired their company.
According to public records, Touraj Moghaddam resigned his directorships of Roksan on 15 July 2011. "Roksan Xerxes.20Plus Turntable System". Hi-Fi+. Archived from the original on 11 July 2013. He remains at Vertere Acoustics, where he focuses his efforts on cables."The sound of science". The New Europe October–November 2011, pp.190–191 (Courtesy link)

Products

Turntables

thumb|Xerxes.20plus turntable with Tabriz Zi armThe Xerxes, named after the Persian king who "went around having a good time", has been acclaimed by a number of hi-fi reviewers.  This belt-drive turntable without a sprung sub-chassis challenged conventional suspension designs for build and sound quality. "Roksan Xerxes / Artemiz". Hi-Fi Review c/o malcolmsteward.co. 
The design attacked the "high-ground" by eschewing the spring isolation, which was then regarded as a major strength. Instead, it addressed the issues of Groove drag and lateral rigidity, the ultimate objective of which was to stabilise the relationship between cartridge stylus and the spinning record groove. Springs were not considered sufficiently rigid in the lateral plane, and permitted too much rotation of the suspended parts relative to the motor.30  No.1,  January 2007 
While most other designs relied on inertia (through platter mass) to attenuate the problem, Roksan retained a light platter, but addressed drag by mounting the motor on its own bearing and restricted its long-range movement by a small spring, so that the revolving armature could still drive the system. Xerxes was named #53 "Hot Product by Stereophile in 2002.25  No. 11,  November 2002
In 1991, Roksan launched the flagship Touraj Moghaddam Signature (TMS) turntable, named after the company's chief designer and founder. In 2002, the TMS2 replaced the TMS turntable.

Loudspeakers

Roksan was the first company ever to mechanically isolate the speaker tweeter from the bass unit using springs, in their Darius loudspeaker. This design concept has since been followed by other high end speaker manufacturers.

Electronics

Roksan now has over 30 different products which include analogue and digital sources, electronics amplification and loudspeakers for audio as well as home cinema. 
In 2009, following a philosophy of building quality components at an affordable price, Roksan launched the K2 stereo integrated amplifier. At a time when British manufacturers had done away with the phono stage for budget products, the K2 was notable in actually having a 47-ohm input for moving magnet.

Milestones






