[[Dale Meyerrose]]

CATEGORIES: United States Air Force Academy alumni, United States Air Force generals, People from Indianapolis, Indiana, University of Utah alumni, John F. Kennedy School of Government alumni, Haas School of Business alumni, Recipients of the Distinguished Service Medal (United States), Recipients of the Legion of Merit, United States Deputy Directors of National Intelligence, Living people, Recipients of the Defense Superior Service Medal

The Honorable Dale W. Meyerrose, Major General (Retired)  was the first President-appointed, Senate-confirmed Associate Director of National Intelligence/Intelligence Community Chief Information Officer (CIO) and Information Sharing Executive for the Director of National Intelligence (DNI).
Mr. Meyerrose is an internationally respected subject matter expert on leadership, strategic planning, cybersecurity, information technology, intelligence, and military matters. He has more than three and a half decades of business, military, U.S. government, and academic experience. He has been frequently quoted in national, international, and news and trade publications and routinely appeared on nationally and internationally aired programs, including Fox News, CNN, Bloomberg International, MSNBC, and WTOP Federal News Radio.  He has been a much sought-after speaker and panelist at international and national policy and technical conferences and advisor to leading university presidents and deans. 
Mr. Meyerrose is president of the MeyerRose Group, LLC, a company that consults with a wide range of business, government, and academic organizations on strategy, business planning, technology, education, and executive development issues.  He is an visiting associate professor at the School of Information Studies, Syracuse University.  He is a lecturer at Carnegie Mellon University's School of Computer of Science with the Institute for Software Research and director for the Cybersecurity Leadership (CSL) certificate program.  Additionally, Mr. Meyerrose is the President and Chairman of the Board for the Air Force Historical Foundation, Trustee for the U.S. Air Force Academy Falcon Foundation and advisor to the U.S. Air Force Heritage Program.
Mr. Meyerrose was recently a vice president and general manager for Harris Corporation, a Global Fortune 500 company.  He was responsible for leading all aspects of strategy, business development and program execution for cyber growth initiatives across the corporation—and participated in multiple merger and acquisition activities.  

Government career

Mr. Meyerrose was the first President-appointed, Senate-confirmed Associate Director of National Intelligence/Intelligence Community Chief Information Officer (CIO) and Information Sharing Executive for the Director of National Intelligence (DNI).  He managed activities relating to the information technology infrastructure and enterprise requirements of the U.S. Intelligence Community.  He had the procurement approval authority over all information technology items related to the enterprise architectures of all Intelligence Community components.  He directed and managed all information technology-related procurement for the Intelligence Community and ensured that all expenditures for information technology and research and development activities were consistent with government enterprise architectures.  He also led the information sharing strategy and policy for the Intelligence Community.  This position was created by the 2004 Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Protection Act. 
Mr. Meyerrose was an agent of change in the world of government intelligence. With some 16 different agencies involved in the gathering of intelligence, the challenge of seeing the collective whole was dramatized by the intelligence breakdown of September 11, 2001. The breakdown, a product of agency competitiveness and legacy information systems, was greatly due to organizational silos reinforced by the shackles of hierarchy. As Mr. Meyerrose noted of the intelligence community: "We've had this 'need to know' culture for years. Well, we need to move to a 'need to share' philosophy."
Mr. Meyerrose initiated an effort to test and ultimately use blogs as a tool for intelligence gathering. While the blogosphere is well known amongst Internet users, it was new terrain for the secure information culture of the intelligence community. Recognizing the trappings of large scale initiatives, Mr. Meyerrose pursued "thinking big, starting small, and scaling fast" through the use of Web 2.0 technology. He fostered the development of Intellipedia and pilot projects such as a U.S. government-wide focused on avian flu, in which participants numbered in the tens-of-thousands in just a few months. Information sharing contributions were made worldwide, and content and quality grew rapidly, becoming the impetus for information sharing across the U.S. government.

Military career

While on military active duty, Major General Dale W. Meyerrose served as chief information officer of three major U.S. Air Force Commands and three unified U.S. military combatant commands. He was the director of Command Control Systems for the North American Aerospace Defense Command during 9/11, helping to safeguard the air sovereignty of North America. He subsequently became the first chief information officer for U.S. Northern Command, the first modern U.S. military command responsible for homeland defense. General Meyerrose served as the director of communications for coalition task forces supporting post-DESERT STORM operations in Southwest Asia and subsequent combat operations in the Balkan Peninsula. 
In his last military assignment, General Meyerrose was the Director of Command Control Systems, Headquarters North American Aerospace Defense Command, and Director of Architectures and Integration, Headquarters U.S. Northern Command, Peterson Air Force Base, Colorado. He also served as the Chief Information Officer and Air Force Element Commander for Air Force personnel for both commands. General Meyerrose ensured the availability and performance of the command and control systems to safeguard the air sovereignty of North America. For U.S. Northern Command, he created architectures and integrated solutions to support the command's mission to deter, prevent and defeat threats to the United States. He facilitated communications and information sharing for military assistance to civil authorities for incident response responsibilities assigned to Northern Command. 
Born in Indianapolis, Indiana, General Meyerrose entered the Air Force in 1975 after graduating from the United States Air Force Academy. The general wears the master communications badge and is a master parachutist.

Education

Military Assignments

Awards and decorations

Other achievements

Effective dates of promotion




