[[Kevin Cash]]

CATEGORIES: 1977 births, All-Star Futures Game players, Baseball players from Florida, Boston Red Sox players, Cleveland Indians coaches, Dunedin Blue Jays players, Durham Bulls players, Florida State Seminoles baseball players, Gaither High School alumni, Hagerstown Suns players, Houston Astros players, Living people, Major League Baseball catchers, New York Yankees players, Pawtucket Red Sox players, Round Rock Express players, Scranton/Wilkes-Barre Yankees players, Sportspeople from Tampa, Florida, Syracuse SkyChiefs players, Tampa Bay Devil Rays players, Tennessee Smokies players, Toronto Blue Jays players, Toronto Blue Jays scouts

Kevin Forrest Cash (born December 6, 1977) is a former American professional baseball catcher who is currently the bullpen coach for the Cleveland Indians. He has played for the Toronto Blue Jays, Tampa Bay Devil Rays, Boston Red Sox, New York Yankees, Houston Astros and Texas Rangers.

Early life

Cash played for Northside Little League in Florida when they made it to the Little League World Series in 1989. Cash played college baseball for the Florida State University Seminoles under head coach Mike Martin. He bats and throws right-handed. In the summer of 1999, he played for the Falmouth Commodores of the Cape Cod Baseball League.

Major league career

2002-2004: Toronto

Cash played a total of 101 games from  with the Toronto Blue Jays, serving mainly as a backup and defensive replacement.

2005: Tampa Bay

Cash joined the Devil Rays in , the Devil Rays designated Cash for assignment, and after clearing waivers, reported to Triple-A Durham where he spent the entire 2006 season.

2007-2008: Boston

Cash signed a minor league contract with the Boston Red Sox on January 24, . 
On August 17, 2007, Red Sox backup catcher Doug Mirabelli pulled a calf muscle rounding third base in the first game of a doubleheader against the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim. Cash was flown to Boston from Ottawa (where the Pawtucket Red Sox were playing the Ottawa Lynx) to catch in the nightcap of the doubleheader. He made it to Fenway Park after the game had started. He started the game on August 19 against the Angels.
On November 2, 2007, Cash opted for free agency after refusing to accept an outright assignment to AAA Pawtucket. On December 13, 2007, Cash re-signed with the Red Sox to a minor league contract and an invitation to spring training.
On March 25, 

2009: New York

On December 23, 2008, Cash signed a minor league deal with the New York Yankees with an invitation to spring training. season with the Triple-A Scranton/Wilkes-Barre Yankees. On May 8, Cash was called up due to injuries to both Jorge Posada and José Molina. He was optioned to AAA Scranton on May 29 and was placed on the injured reserve list after undergoing surgery to repair a torn rotator cuff.
Released by the New York Yankees' organization on September 5, 2009, Cash announced his retirement from baseball. However, he soon changed his mind, and on January 22, 2010, Cash signed a minor league contract with the Houston Astros.

2010: Houston/Second stint with Boston

On May 5, 2010, Cash was called up to the Astros to replace a struggling J. R. Towles. He had 11 hits in 54 at bats with Houston.
On July 1, 2010, Cash was acquired by the Red Sox for Ángel Sánchez after Jason Varitek went on the disabled list. As the backup catcher for the Red Sox for part of the season, he had 60 at bats and a .133 batting average, compiling just eight hits with the team. He finished the year with .167 average (AL and NL stats combined). He refused a minor league assignment on October 12, and became a free agent.  He signed a minor-league contract with the Texas Rangers on November 11, 2010, and played the entire 2011 season at their Triple-A affiliate in Round Rock.

Post-playing career

On January 8, 2012, Cash announced his retirement. He was announced as an advanced scout for the Blue Jays during the 2012 season.
Shortly after the 2012 season ended, Cash joined Terry Francona's staff with the Cleveland Indians as their bullpen coach. Cash played for Terry Francona during his stints with the Red Sox, and will also be joined by fellow Red Sox alumnus Brad Mills, who will be Cleveland's third base coach. Mills was Terry Francona's bench coach while Cash played for the Red Sox, as well as Cash's manager with the Houston Astros in 2010.

Family

Cash, his wife Emily and their two daughters and son reside in Cleveland, Ohio.

Awards and honors






