[[Rokel River]]

CATEGORIES: Rivers of Sierra Leone, Ramsar sites in Sierra Leone

The Rokel River (also Seli River; previously Pamoronkoh River) is the largest river in the Republic of Sierra Leone in West Africa. The river basin measures 

Geography

The Rokel rises in the . The southern shore is the deepest and forms a natural harbour, which is reported to be the third largest in the world.
Mangrove swamps and the mud flats are the dominant ecosystem (accounting for 19% of the mangrove forest in the country) noted around the river's ria. from the port of Pepel.

Geology

Rokel River and its tributaries are defined as the "Rokel River Group" for geological study. The geological formation in this group is reported to be of the Tabe formation with glacial sediments dominating its eastern edge and are exposed along the river in some stretches; the geological formation noted in the river is granite rocks. The formation is broadly categorized as folded sedimentary rocks. It is also reported that its orogeny belongs to the Pan African thermo-tectonic age of about 550 Ma.

History

Iron ore and alluvial gold mining began in the late 1920s and early 1930s, while the Bumbuna Falls hydroelectric project is underway. 
The Yalunka people established their capital, Falaba, near the source of the Rokel. The site is bounded by Cape Point on the Western Side of the Freetown, by the Bunce River on one of its banks, and the Tagrin Point where areas of the Rokel joins at the southern end of its mouth. 

Development

The Rokel river flow has been measured at three gauge stations. The reported maximum and minimum discharge at Magbass, one of the three stations, are 
The iron ore mining at Marampa is dependent on pumped water supply from the river. A Rokel River Water Rights Agreement (Ratification) Act was signed with the developers of the mines; the mines are in operation since 1933 to 1975 by Sierra Leone Development Company (DELCO) and Astro Minerals from 1983. The water agreement provides "exclusive and preferential rights to the use of the Rokel waters by special agreement" for a period of 89 years from 1 January 1938. The environmental impacts on the downstream users and disposal of tailings from the mining operations have not been addressed. The iron extracted has resulted in reduction of the height of one the ore bearing hills by 
Gold mining in the Sula Mountains and in the Rokel river sediments was an extensive operation undertaken since 1929 in the river and its tributaries after gold was found in the mountains. Steam sediment studies were carried out for assessing the mineral concentration of arsenic. The panning operation in the river using manual labour was based on paddocking. This alluvial gold mining operation has been described as environmentally destructive as forest denudation for the purpose of mining caused extensive erosion of the hills and consequent sedimentation of the river and its tributaries.
The Bumbuna Dam has been developed on the river by building a 

Flora and fauna

The flora in the estuary consists of Mangrove forest. The avi fuana in the area consists of 10,000 birds of 36 species (1995 record). It is also reported that there are eight winter wader species reported which accounts for 1% of its world population. The eight species of palaearctic migrant waders recorded are:



Bibliography


