[[Saul Landau]]

CATEGORIES: American academics, American documentary filmmakers, American journalists, American non-fiction writers, American political writers, Writers on Latin America, Latin Americanists, American poets, California State Polytechnic University, Pomona faculty, University of Wisconsin–Madison alumni, Emmy Award winners, People from Alameda, California, American people of Ukrainian descent, Cancer deaths in California, 1936 births, 2013 deaths, Deaths from bladder cancer, People from the Bronx

Saul Landau (January 15, 1936 – September 9, 2013) was an American journalist, filmmaker and commentator. He was also a professor emeritus at California State Polytechnic University, Pomona, where he taught history and digital media. He was born in the Bronx, New York.

Education

A graduate of Manhattan's Stuyvesant High School, he also earned bachelor's and master's degrees in history from the University of Wisconsin, Madison. Later he worked towards, but never completed, a doctorate at Stanford University.
He donated his early papers and films to the Wisconsin Center for Film and Television Research.reported in The Capital Times of Madison, December 16, 2006

Career

Landau authored 14 books, He also had articles posted in magazines and journals including the Huffington Post  Progreso Weekly  
Cuban diplomat Ricardo Alarcon, said Saul Landau is a "a real combatant with no other weapons than his talent and intellectual integrity"  while awarding him the Medal of Friendship in 2013.counterpunch.org/2013/08/09/saul-landau-a-friend-of-the-cuban-revolution/
Landau was a fellow of the Institute for Policy Studies (IPS) in Washington, D.C. and a senior fellow and former director of the Transnational Institute in Amsterdam.org
He received an Emmy for his film  Paul Jacobs and the Nuclear Gang (1980), which he co-directed with Academy Award-winning filmmaker Haskell Wexler. He won the Edgar Allan Poe Award 1981 for "Best Fact Crime"TheEdgars. He was given the Letelier-Moffitt Human Rights Award for his life's contribution to human rights and also received the Bernado O'Higgins award.
In the early 1960s, he was a member of the San Francisco Mime Troupe and wrote the play "The Minstrel Show."Mime Troupe Archives  UC Ban French Film", Oakland Tribune, November 25, 1964
Landau donated his Latin American-related films and papers to the University of California, Riverside Libraries in 2005.
He frequently appeared on radio and TV shows.
Gore Vidal said, "Saul Landau is a man I love to steal ideas from."

Death

Landau died after battling bladder cancer for two years on September 9, 2013 at his home in Alameda, California. He was 77.

Films

Landau's films are distributed by Round World Productions.roundworldproductions.

Books

