[[Aberthaw]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in the Vale of Glamorgan

Aberthaw () is an area consisting of the villages of East Aberthaw and West Aberthaw and Aberthaw Cement Works, Aberthaw Lime Works, and Aberthaw Power Station, a coal power station plant that was linked to the South Wales Valleys via railway in nearby Fontygary on the coast of South Wales. It is located historically within the parish of Penmark in the Vale of Glamorgan, west of Barry. The two villages of West and East Aberthaw are separated by the River Thaw. The village of East Aberthaw, near Rhoose, has a notable pub and local church. 

Geography

Aberthaw is nearly opposite to Minehead in Somerset, England. The village of East Aberthaw is situated approximately  
The beach in front of the power station, The Leys, is near Gileston and West Aberthaw; it is well known for its sea fishing. Breaksea Point, at the edge of Limpert Bay at Aberthaw, is the southernmost point of Wales, although contested with Rhoose Point.

History

Ancient to medieval times

Aberthaw derives its name from the Welsh word 'aber', meaning estuary or river mouth, of the river Thaw. The existence of a safe, natural harbour provided an early impetus for the area's development and trade.
A small village centred around the intersection of two roads had developed by the medieval period. To the east, what is now Port Road led towards Fonmon and Penmark, whilst to the west, the present Well Road (previously known as Marshe Way) led towards the marshland and a ford across the estuary. The road leading north- south connected the coast with the settlements inland, and as Aberthaw trade flourished, the roads were used for moving imported goods to the markets at St. Athan and Cowbridge.
Of the buildings grouped around the crossroads, the original fabric of Lower Farm House and the once- thatched Rose Cottage and Marsh Cottages can all be dated to the medieval era. The Blue Anchor Inn is likewise of medieval origin, and appears to have been erected in 1380. is also known to have included a small chapel which was possibly located towards the south of the settlement, as suggested by the marking of 'Chapplefeld' on the Evans Mouse map of 1622. This was to serve as a place of worship until being converted to a house at the turn of the 17th century.

1500-1800

In the 16th century, the Aberthaw port, situated to the south east of the village proper, had emerged as a small but thriving harbour. The ships took wool and foodstuffs from Wales and returned with wine, salt, dried fruit and leather from the towns of northern France. Aberthaw port's importance was furthered by the loss of Porthkerry harbour to a 1584 storm, rendering Aberthaw the principal calling- point within South Wales between Cardiff and Swansea. 
By the first half of the 17th century, boats were departing for not only England and France, but also Spain and Ireland. A similarly flourishing trade with the West Indies, chiefly in sugar and tobacco, did not, however, survive the disruption caused by the outbreak of the English Civil War. Within the context of the village, the port played a significant role in the livelihoods of many residents in the 17th century, though not always in a legal manner: smuggling was rife within the Bristol Channel. Buildings such as the fortified Marsh House, built just to the west of the village in 1636, appear to have been used for storage of illegally imported goods, especially tobacco. To the west, the marsh lands were suitable for grazing.

1800-present

Aberthaw's maritime trade continued throughout the 18th century, but by the 1840s, its role as a port declined: the harbour 'is resorted to by a few coasting-vessels of inferior burthen', as the Topographical Dictionary of Wales in 1849 reported. In 1851, Aberthaw had a population of 495 people. Today, the Vale of Glamorgan line remains open. This provides a link to the power station and cement works, and has recently been reopened for passenger traffic.
The establishment of these industries in close proximity to Aberthaw was to result in an increased demand for residential accommodation, and by 1919, two new communities had been added at the northern and southern edges of the village. The community, by this time, had gained a Methodist Chapel and a Mission Room, the latter erected in an Arts and Crafts style on Station Road. Services such as a post office and village shop were also established.
In 1966, Aberthaw Power Station opened, which saw the Thaw river diverted and the remnants of the old port effectively diminished. Beyond the conversion of the former mission hall and a number of former agricultural buildings to residential use, East Aberthaw itself, however, has undergone little development.

Notable landmarks

The principal building is the popular Grade II* listed Blue Anchor Inn, a long low building with walls and low timber beams dated to 1380, with a thatched roof.  
Close by is the Grade II listed Marsh House, an 18th century building with a symmetrical front and a slated catslide roof. The house was of major importance to local trade and smuggling operations, used as a storehouse, especially for tobacco. The Granary is a Grade II listed building dated to the early 19th century and includes stables, a hayloft and granary. The building is now used as a private residence. Also listed is 1 and 2 Marsh Cottage and The Haven. Several other unlisted cottages and houses are of note, such as Upper House Farm within the Conservation Area, and several converted barns. St Athan Boys' Village was a holiday camp located in West Aberthaw, which operated from 1925 through 1991.

Transport

Originally a station on the Barry Railway, and a junction for its connection to the Cowbridge and Aberthaw railway,Website the station closed together with the rest of the line to passengers in the early 1980s. Although the line reopened to passengers in 2002, Aberthaw remains closed except for its signal box, which controls access to Aberthaw Power Station. One kilometre to the north is the B4265 road which connects Barry to Bridgend, via Llantwit Major and St Brides Major. Cardiff Airport is just three kilometres to the north east. From the crossroads, a lane (Well Road) drops down the hill to a tunnel underneath the railway lines. To the east, a similarly narrow lane leads up the slight hill to a farm group (Upper House Farm) and then into open countryside and woodland, beyond which, is the very large limestone quarry.






