[[Someday (I Will Understand)]]

CATEGORIES: 2005 singles, Britney Spears songs, Jive Records singles, Pop ballads, Music videos directed by Michael Haussman, Black-and-white music videos, Songs written by Britney Spears, Song recordings produced by Guy Sigsworth

"Someday (I Will Understand)" is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears. It was written by Spears and produced by herself and Guy Sigsworth. The song was released on 2006, by Jive Records, as the sole single from Spears' first extended play, Britney & Kevin: Chaotic (2005). In July 2004, Spears announced her engagement to American dancer Kevin Federline, later revealing she would be taking another career break to start a family. Spears wrote the song two weeks before knowing she was pregnant with her first child, Sean Preston Federline. A pop ballad, "Someday (I Will Understand)" lyrics refer to a feeling of empowerment as a pregnant woman. A remixed version of the song was included on the 2005 remix compilation, B in the Mix: The Remixes.
"Someday (I Will Understand)" has received mixed reviews from music critics. A few reviewers considered it as a lesson on the singer's history and a "tear-jerker" ballad, while others considered it a non-savable "flop single". The song reached the top ten in Denmark, Sweden and Switzerland and also charted in a number of European countries. An accompanying music video, directed by Michael Haussman, premiered on the finale of Britney & Kevin: Chaotic. Entirely shot in black-and-white, the music video features Spears as a pregnant woman and portrays a transformation of her character. Contemporary critics noted the video as a departure from Spears' previous music videos, while comparing the imagery of it to American entertainer Madonna's Kabbalah makeover.

Background

In July 2004, Spears announced her engagement to American dancer Kevin Federline, whom she had met three months before. The romance received intense attention from the media, since Federline had recently broken up with actress Shar Jackson, who was still pregnant with their second child at the time.
"Someday (I Will Understand)" was composed by Spears on the piano at her house, two weeks before she learned of her pregnancy with Sean Preston. She explained the song came "like a prophecy... when you're pregnant, you're empowered". It was produced by Guy Sigsworth, who previously worked with the singer on "Everytime" (2003). Spears recorded her vocals for the song at Conway Studios in Los Angeles, California, and at Frou Frou Central in London. The piano was played by Spears herself, while all other instruments and mixing were done by Sigsworth. Background vocals for the song were provided by Kate Havnevik.

Critical response

"Someday (I Will Understand)" received mixed reviews from music critics. While reviewing Britney & Kevin: Chaotic, Mike McGuirk of Rhapsody noted, "Britney now sings about either the husband or the kid. (Sorry, people. It's a sad day for the middle-aged American male sicko.) For everyone else, these bonus tracks further Spears' upward path of totally bangin' production and almost uncanny Prince-channeling."

Commercial performance

On September 1, 2005, "Someday (I Will Understand)" debuted at number 46 on the Swedish Singles Chart.

Music video

The music video for "Someday (I Will Understand)" was directed by Michael Haussman. Spears commented that he "did a great job capturing the song, the essence and the emotion" and added that the video had "a different feeling" from any of her previous videos. The music video features a pregnant Spears lying in bed and walking around a house while singing to her unborn child. She also gazes through the window at the Roman sculptures in the garden.
Dana Alice Heller noted that her provocative costuming and dancing are replaced in the video with a solitary, fabric-draped Spears that evokes an ethereal calmness. Heller compared the imagery to Madonna's Kabbalah makeover, but added that while Madonna was "in her thirties after a tabloid head-lining first marriage and a few other misguided relationships, Spears was only twenty-two, making her transformation seem forced". Hayley Butler of Jam! said "the video is a far cry from the snake handling, sweating and skimpy Britney videos of the past. Dressed in a classy silk dress, she runs through gardens, lies in bed and walks through the grass, all with a burgeoning belly." Despite praising the track, Idolator blogger Becky Bain stated that "at this point she still looks like a teenager herself, so it's a little disconcerting seeing her with that huge belly, singing about motherhood."

Track listings

Credits and personnel

Source:

Charts

Release history



 | last = Heller
 | first = Dana Alice
 | title = Makeover television: realities remodelled
 | year = 2007
