[[Starship Enterprise]]

CATEGORIES: Star Trek ships, Star Trek lists

The Enterprise or USS ''Enterprise (often referred to as the "'starship Enterprise'") is the name of several fictional spacecraft, some of which are the main setting for various television series and films in the Star Trek'' science fiction franchise.

Development

According to The Star Trek Encyclopedia, the registry number "NCC-1701" was devised by Matt Jefferies, art director of the first Star Trek series, inspired by an old science fiction cover that Gene Roddenberry liked, with a starship flying through space. Jefferies, who was a pilot, based NCC on 20th century aircraft registration codes. In such 20th century usage, an "N" first letter refers to an aircraft registered in the USA. A "C" for a second letter refers to a civil aircraft. Jefferies added a second "C" because he thought it looked better.
The Franz Joseph Blueprints, the book The Making of Star Trek and a handful of Star Trek novels state that NCC is an initialism for "Naval Construction Contract".
In an interview with the BBC, Jefferies explained that NC was a US designation for commercial vehicles. The Russians used CC CC. He concluded that as common opinion was that any future major space projects would be a combined effort, he would use a combined designation NCC. The 1701 had two functions, it represented the first (01) ship of a 17th federation cruiser design, and that the digits were unlikely to be misread, unlike 6, 8, or 9.
In Gene Roddenberry's original Star Trek pitch, the starship is described as a "United Space Ship," and in two episodes of The Original Series (TOS), Kirk refers to the "United Space Ship Enterprise".

Star Trek: Phase II

Before Star Trek: The Motion Picture, Paramount had planned a new Star Trek television series to have been named Star Trek: Phase II. Early in the production, Ralph McQuarrie had been hired to redesign the ship. The major feature of the redesign was to replace the cigar-shaped secondary hull with a larger, triangle-shaped section. McQuarrie's design was discarded in favor of keeping the general shape of the ship intact.

Depiction

Pre-Federation era

Three spaceships with the name Enterprise predate the United Federation of Planets.
Registry: Enterprise (OV-101)

Class: Space Transportation System 

Service: February 15, 1977 through April 27, 2012 (35 Years)

Commander: Fred Haise, Joe Engle
The space shuttle Enterprise appears in Star Trek: The Motion Picture among a series of illustrations depicting ships named Enterprise. While this is the only real aerospace craft ever to be actually crewed named Enterprise, it was retroactively entered into the Star Trek continuity. In real life the originally selected name for the orbiter was Constitution but was instead named Enterprise due to Star Trek fans and the personal intervention of President Gerald Ford.
Registry: USS Enterprise (XCV 330)

Class: Declaration

Service: circa 2130s

Captain: Unknown
This USS Enterprise (XCV 330) appears in Star Trek: The Motion Picture among a series of illustrations depicting ships named Enterprise. The 1979 Star Trek Spaceflight Chronology describes this "first interstellar liner" as a Declaration-class ship launched in 2123.
Registry: Enterprise (NX-01)

Class: NX

Service: 2151–2161 (10 Years) 

Captain: Jonathan Archer (Scott Bakula), alternate timeline - T'Pol (Jolene Blalock)
The United Earth Starfleet's Enterprise is the main setting of Star Trek: Enterprise (2001–2005).

The Original Series era

Three ships named USS Enterprise are featured in the original Star Trek television series and the first through seventh Star Trek films.
Registry: 

Class: Constitution

Service: 2245–2285 (40 Years) 

Captains: Robert April (James Doohan, Gene Roddenberry), Christopher Pike (Jeffrey Hunter), James T. Kirk (William Shatner), Willard Decker (Stephen Collins) (refit), Spock (Leonard Nimoy) (refit)

The Federation's first Enterprise is the main setting of the original Star Trek series (1966–1969) and The Animated Series (1973–74). Having undergone an extensive rebuilding and refitting, the Enterprise then appears in Star Trek: The Motion Picture (1979) and Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan (1982), before being destroyed in Star Trek III: The Search for Spock (1984).
Registry: 

Class: Constitution refit

Service: 2286–2293 (7 Years)

Captain: James T. Kirk (William Shatner)

This ship first appears at the conclusion of Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home (1986) and is the main setting in the following Star Trek movies which use the original crew. The ship is ordered decommissioned at the end of Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country. Paperwork included with the model kit indicated the ship was mothballed at the Memory Alpha ship museum. Outside other Star Trek book canon, the Shatnerverse novel The Ashes of Eden (1996) depicts the Enterprise-A's removal from the mothball fleet before being destroyed defending the planet Chal.
Registry: USS Enterprise (NCC-1701-B)

Class: Excelsior refit

Service: 2293–2329 (36 Years)

Captains: John Harriman (Alan Ruck), Demora Sulu (Jacqueline Kim), William George and Thomas Johnson Jr. 

Launched at the start of Star Trek Generations (1994). James T. Kirk is missing, presumed killed, after the ship encounters the Nexus energy ribbon on its maiden voyage. According to Star Trek novels, Demora Sulu becomes captain after Harriman. William George, Demora Sulu, and Thomas Johnson Jr. are listed as the official captains in various licensed guides such as the Haynes Enterprise Manual. 

The Next Generation era

Three ships named Enterprise are featured in Star Trek: The Next Generation and four TNG-era films.
Registry: USS Enterprise (NCC-1701-C)

Class: Ambassador

Service: 2332 – 2344 (12 Years)

Captains: Rachel Garrett (Tricia O'Neil), Richard Castillo (Christopher McDonald) 

This ship appears in the Next Generation episode "Yesterday's Enterprise" (1990). It was destroyed attempting to defend the Klingon outpost Narendra III from Romulan attack. Survivors included Tasha Yar (Denise Crosby), whose alternate timeline version from "Yesterday's Enterprise" travels with the ship back in time to the battle over Narendra III. The actions of the Enterprise-C's crew became a catalyst for the alliance between the Federation and the Klingon Empire.
Registry: 

Class: Galaxy

Service: 2363–2371 (8 Years)

Captains: Jean-Luc Picard (Patrick Stewart), William T. Riker (Jonathan Frakes), Edward Jellico (Ronny Cox)

The main setting of Star Trek: The Next Generation (1987–1994). During Star Trek Generations, the Enterprise was lost in 2371 after an attack by a renegade Klingon Bird-of-Prey (commanded by the Duras sisters) caused extensive damage, leading to a warp core breach. Although the saucer section was safely separated before the breach, the shock wave from the exploding engineering hull threw it out of control, and caused it to crash land on Veridian III.
Registry: 

Class: Sovereign

Service: 2372 – Active (as of 2387) (15+ Years)

Captain: Jean-Luc Picard (Patrick Stewart) 

The main setting for the films Star Trek: First Contact (1996), Star Trek: Insurrection (1998) and Star Trek Nemesis (2002).

Alternate Timelines

=Alternate Future=

Registry: USS Enterprise (NCC-1701-D)

Class: Galaxy refit (also known as the "Galaxy II", "Galaxy-X", and "Dreadnought Cruiser")''

Service: circa 2395 

Captain: Admiral William T. Riker (Jonathan Frakes)

In "All Good Things...", the final episode of Star Trek: The Next Generation, the Enterprise-D was shown in an alternate future where it had not crashed during the events of Star Trek Generations, and instead had been made Admiral William T. Riker's personal flagship. The ship has a third nacelle, cloaking ability, a spinal phaser lance, and large phaser cannons on the saucer section.
Registry: USS Enterprise (NCC-1701-J)

 Class:  Universe

Service: 26th century 

Captain(s): Unknown

The "Azati Prime" episode of Star Trek: Enterprise involves time travel and features a scene in which the Enterprise-J appears. The Enterprise-J operates in a possible timeline during the 26th century. In this timeline, the Enterprise-J participated in the Battle of Procyon V, a climactic battle in which the Federation successfully drove the invasive trans-dimensional beings known as the Sphere Builders back into their own realm.  The ship's crew included a descendant of the Xindi scientist Degra.Star Trek Azati Prime
