[[Sakurajima Line]]

CATEGORIES: Rail transport in Osaka Prefecture, Lines of West Japan Railway Company, 1067 mm gauge railways in Japan, Railway lines opened in 1898, Railway lines opened in 1961

|}
The . The entire line lies within Konohana-ku, Osaka, and connects the Osaka Loop Line to Universal Studios Japan.
The nickname "Yumesaki Line" was determined in a public poll upon the opening of Universal Studios Japan and the Universal City station. While it was not the number one choice, its pleasant sound together with the vision of the area around the Sakurajima Line and USJ being a place where Osaka's dreams were continuing to be born made it the perfect choice.
The line is used primarily by a mix of factory workers and tourists. There is also freight traffic running between Suita and Ajikawaguchi.

Stations

Service

In addition to trains that run only within the Sakurajima Line itself, there is also direct service from  stations that alternates during non-peak times. Also, during peak travel seasons, seasonal trains (such as the Universal Express limited express service) will run through to/from the Hokuriku Main Line. However, as the number of visitors to USJ has been on the decline in recent years, those special trains are only rarely used.
In order to transport riders from USJ smoothly in the event of an accident, trains can be run on a single track along the section from Nishikujō to Universal City. In other words, in the event of an accident on the outbound track, the inbound track can be used for service in both directions. Because of that there are signals mounted in both directions at each station.
In addition, while Universal Express trains make their final stop at Universal City, there is no way for them to switch directions at that station. They must proceed to Sakurajima and then switch directions there.

History

Originally the Nishikujō – Sakurajima section was not an independent line, but part of the Nishinari Line, which was originally the private Nishinari Railway. A portion of the Nishinari Line became a part of the Osaka Loop Line when it was completed in 1961, with the rest becoming the Sakurajima Line. With the purpose of providing a commuter route for workers in factories along the line as well as for freight, off-peak daytime hours were quiet along the line. This continued until the construction of USJ, which made tourists the main users of the line.
From the end of operations on the Katsuki Line on April 1, 1985 until the beginning of service on the Miyazaki Kūkō Line on July 18, 1996, the Sakurajima Line was the shortest passenger line among the JR Group companies. (Including freight lines, the shortest at the time was the Shinminato Line in Toyama Prefecture.)
Before the move of Sakurajima Station on April 1, 1999, along the Ajikawaguchi to Sakurajima segment there was a movable bridge over the Hokkō Canal. Although there were few instances when the bridge was flooded and service had to be halted, the canal was filled in the 1990s and the bridge has been unused.
When service began at Universal City Station, there were some protests by local residents and business owners to open a new station ("Haruhinode Station") between Nishikujō and Ajikawaguchi stations. However, not enough demand was forecast and plans were shelved.

Chronology

Rolling stock

Current

=Passenger=

Because the Sakurajima Line is the main access route for USJ, 103 series and 201 series 8-car trains are decorated with USJ advertisements, although previously 103 series 6-car trains also featured USJ-related wrap advertising.

=Freight=

Former

Extension plans

On September 10, 2009, the then Governor of Osaka Prefecture Tōru Hashimoto announced that he was examining a 4 km extension of the Sakurajima Line from  on the Nankō Port Town Line (New Tram).ＪＲ桜島線延伸、ＷＴＣと直結提案　橋下知事、府庁移転へ執念 - Sankei Shinbun, September 9, 2009 This would to improve access to the World Trade Center (WTC) in Suminoe-ku, to which the governor is considering moving the prefectural government offices. Traveling from Osaka Station to the WTC requires at least 30 minutes, and this inconvenience is considered a major obstacle to any move. Although the prefecture is willing to foot at least part of the estimated construction cost of 100 billion yen, there has been no discussion yet of the effect on travel patterns with existing transit agencies/companies.
Of the estimated 4 km length of the extension, approximately 3 km would be underground. Travel times between Osaka and the WTC are expected to drop to 20 minutes if completed.






