[[Virtua Fighter (video game)]]

CATEGORIES: 1993 video games, Arcade games, Cancelled Sega Genesis games, Multiplayer games, Sega 32X games, Sega-AM2 games, Sega arcade games, Sega Saturn games, IOS games, Versus fighting games, Video games developed in Japan, Virtua Fighter, Windows games

 is a 1993 fighting game developed for the Sega Model 1 arcade platform by AM2, a development group within Sega, headed by Yu Suzuki. It is the first game in the Virtua Fighter series, and the first arcade fighting game to feature fully 3D polygon graphics. It has been ported to several home video game consoles including the Sega Saturn and Sega 32X. A port was also released for Microsoft Windows in 1996.



The Virtua label indicates that the onscreen action takes place in 3D. The images were created using wireframes and flat-shaded quads. Beyond 3D, it retained the staple of multiple characters, each with their own distinctive moves.
Unlike other fighting games of the time (such as Street Fighter II or Mortal Kombat), the game relied on a control stick and only three buttons, Punch, Kick, and Guard (block) although different situations and button combinations led to a vast variety of moves for each character.
The player faces all eight characters (including a duplicate of the chosen character) in a pre-determined order, followed by a fight with the game's boss, Dural. Each fight is a best-of-three match, and the player has three ways to win: knocking out the opponent, forcing him/her out of the ring, or having more health left when time runs out.
The game is highly regarded for its in-depth fighting engine and real world fighting techniques, and was considered revolutionary upon release.

Characters

An Arab fighter named Siba was planned, and his character model even appeared on some Virtua Fighter arcade cabinets (though, in some cases, Akira's name was placed under his portrait). He was ultimately dropped, but later appeared in the Sega Saturn Fighters Megamix game.

Reception

Arcade

The original 1993 arcade release of Virtua Fighter was widely lauded for its impressive tech and revolutionary 3D gameplay, with many gamers also responding favorably to the game's grounding in realism as opposed to the superhuman elements (e.g. fireballs or high-flying kicks) found in most 2D fighting games. Some gamers, however, found the game's slow pace hard to adjust to, especially compared to fast-moving 2D fighters like Street Fighter II.
In particular there was criticism that the jumping in the game was too "floaty" and unwieldy but, due to the games focus on more realistic combat compared to other fighting games, aerial combat wasn't a major focus in the game. Therefor this perceived flaw was generally easily overlooked. Additionally one of the challenges to developers of early 3D games was with the way characters jumped and how they controlled during a jump; so most critics saw little reason to judge Virtua Fighter any more harshly than existing 3D titles.

Home versions

On release, Famicom Tsūshin scored the Sega Saturn version of the game a 36 out of 40.おオススメ!! ソフト カタログ!!: バーチャファイター. Weekly Famicom Tsūshin. No.335. Pg.114. 12–19 May 1995. Famicom Tsūshin scored the Virtua Fighter Remix version of the game a 35 out of 40. Weekly Famicom Tsūshin. No.344. Pg.31. 21 July 1995. Famicom Tsūshin scored the Sega 32X version of the game a 30 out of 40. Weekly Famicom Tsūshin. No.358. Pg.30. 27 October 1995. The console port, which was nearly identical to the arcade game, sold at a nearly 1:1 ratio with the Saturn hardware during the Japanese launch.
Edge rated the Saturn version 9/10, stating "Saturn Virtua Fighter has all the pulling power of the arcade version, including the swooping, gliding game camera, the stylish polygon characters, the totally convincing animation and the compulsive gameplay.....

Updates

Virtua Fighter Remix

Virtua Fighter Remix was an update of the original Virtua Fighter with higher-polygon models, texture mapping and some gameplay changes. It was given free to all registered Saturn owners in the US via mail.gamespot.html It also had an arcade release on the ST-V (an arcade platform based on the Sega Saturn) and later ported to Microsoft Windows as Virtua Fighter PC. The game was developed by Sega-AM1.

Virtua Fighter 10th Anniversary

With the 2003 PlayStation 2 release of Virtua Fighter 4: Evolution arriving in time for the series' 10th anniversary, a remake of Virtua Fighter, Virtua Fighter 10th Anniversary, was released exclusively on the PlayStation 2. While the music, stages and low-polygon visual style were retained from the first game, the character roster, animations, mechanics and movesets were taken from Evolution. In the previous PS2 release of Virtua Fighter 4, a button code would make the player's character look like a VF1 model. In Japan, the game was included as part of a box set with a book called Virtua Fighter 10th Anniversary: Memory of a Decade and a DVD. The box set was released in November 2003 and was published by Enterbrain. In North America, the game was included within the home version of Virtua Fighter 4: Evolution, and in Europe it was only available as a promotional item; it was not sold at retail.

Legacy

Though its blocky, plainly detailed polygon fighters were revolutionary in 1993 and were responsible for the game's distinctive look, Virtua Fighters graphics would quickly become obsolete due to rapid advances in polygon technology that allowed for rounder, more detailed, higher-polygon-count character models. In spite of this, Virtua Fighter forever revolutionized the fighting game genre. Up until that time, fighting games (such as Capcom's Street Fighter series) were designed and rendered on sprite-based 2D graphics hardware—both the character animation and background scenery were composed of 2D sprites and tilemaps, which when using multiple layers produced a parallax scrolling effect as the screen moved to follow the characters.
Virtua Fighter dispensed with the 2D primitives, replacing them with flat-shaded triangles rendered in real-time, by the Model 1's 3D-rendering hardware, allowing for effects and technologies that were impossible in sprite-based fighters, such as characters that could move left and right rather than just backwards and forwards, and a dynamic camera that could zoom, pan, and swoop dramatically around the arena.
The popularity of both Virtua Fighter and Sega's 3D racing title, Virtua Racing, were smash hits with arcade gaming audiences, and marked the beginning of video games rendered with 3D graphics.






