[[Leonard McCoy]]

CATEGORIES: Star Trek: The Original Series characters, Star Trek: The Animated Series characters, Star Trek (film franchise) characters, Starfleet officers, Star Trek: The Next Generation characters, Starfleet admirals, Fictional doctors, Star Trek: Phase II characters, Starfleet doctors, Starfleet commanders, Starfleet lieutenant commanders, Fictional characters introduced in 1966

Leonard H. "Bones" McCoy is a character in the American science fiction franchise Star Trek. and its 2013 sequel Star Trek Into Darkness.

Depiction

McCoy was born in Georgia, January 20, 2218.
Kirk orders McCoy's commission reactivated in Star Trek: The Motion Picture (1979); a resentful McCoy complains of being "drafted".
In the Star Trek: The Animated Series episode "The Survivor", McCoy mentions he has a daughter. Chekov's friend Irina in the original series episode "The Way to Eden" was originally written as Dr. McCoy's daughter Joanna, but changed before the episode was shot.Joanna precursor to "The Way to Eden"

Alternate timeline

In the 2009 Star Trek film, which takes place in an "alternate, parallel" reality, McCoy and Kirk become friends at Starfleet Academy, which McCoy joins after a divorce that he says "left him nothing but his bones." This line, improvised by Urban,Star Trek DVD commentary explains how McCoy came to be known as Bones. McCoy later helps get Kirk posted aboard the USS Enterprise.

Development

Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry had worked with Kelley on previous television pilots, Although Roddenberry wanted Kelley to play the character of ship's doctor, he didn't put Kelley's name forward to NBC; the network never "rejected" the actor as Roddenberry sometimes suggested.
Kelley's first broadcast appearance as Doctor Leonard McCoy was in "The Man Trap" (1966). Despite his character's prominence, Kelley's contract granted him only a "featuring" credit; it was not until the second season that he was given "starring" credit, at the urging of producer Robert Justman. Kelley portrayed McCoy throughout the original Star Trek series and voiced the character in the animated Star Trek.
Kelley, who in his youth wanted to become a doctor,
"Exquisite chemistry" among Kelley, William Shatner, and Leonard Nimoy manifested itself in their performances as McCoy, Captain James T. Kirk and science officer Spock, respectively.
For the 2009 film Star Trek, writers Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman saw McCoy as an "arbiter" in Kirk and Spock's relationship.

Reception and cultural impact

McCoy is someone to whom Kirk unburdens himself and is a foil to Spock. He is Kirk's "friend, personal bartender, confidant, counselor, and priest".
An Illinois con artist scammed $25 million in investments for a non-existent "McCoy Home Health Tablet" medical device.
Kelley said that his greatest thrill at Star Trek conventions was the number of people who told him they entered the medical profession because of the McCoy character.
With regard to the 2009 film, The Guardian called Urban's performance of McCoy an "unqualified success",

"He's dead, Jim."

Twenty times on the original Star Trek, McCoy declares someone or something deceased with the line, "He's dead", "He's dead, Jim", or something similar. The phrase so became a catchphrase of the character that Kelley joked that the line would appear on his tombstone, but disliked repeating such lines and refused to say it in The Wrath of Khan when Spock is near death. Kelley and James Doohan (Montgomery Scott) 
agreed to swap their lines, so McCoy warns Kirk against opening the engineering doors while Scott says "He's dead already". The line has entered popular culture as a general metaphor, with uses as diverse as descriptions of an unresponsive electronic circuit,
an example of how to add an audio file to function as an alert sound in a computer system, and an illustrative quote regarding how to know if one's opponent has been destroyed in an action hero game.
USC Literature Professor Henry Jenkins cited Dr. McCoy's "He's dead, Jim" line as an example of fans actively participating in the creation of an underground culture in which they derive pleasure by repeating memorable lines as part of constructing new mythologies and alternative social communities. Google Chrome uses the phrase as an error message when Google Chrome either is terminated with the task manager, or Chrome runs out of memory, and is a common error.

"I'm a doctor, not a(n)..."

Another of McCoy's catchphrases is his "I'm a doctor, (Jim) not a(n)..." statements, delivered by Kelley 11 times The phrase also appears in the 2009 film, in which McCoy (Karl Urban) says "I'm a doctor, not a physicist" to Spock. Similarly, in 2013's Star Trek Into Darkness, McCoy (Urban again) tells Spock, "Damn it, man, I'm a doctor, not a torpedo technician!" Another reference to the catchphrase can be found in Ace Ventura: Pet Detective where actor Jim Carrey searches for clues around a dolphin tank, gets told that he must hurry, and says "Dammit, Jim! I'm a doctor, not a poolman."






