[[USNS Observation Island (T-AGM-23)]]

CATEGORIES: Ships built in New Jersey, 1953 ships, Missile range instrumentation ships of the United States Navy

USNS ''Observation Island'' (T-AGM-23), also known as ex-MA-28, ex-YAG-57, ex-E-AG-154, Empire State Mariner, is the historic naval vessel that in 1969 launched the first Poseidon Fleet Ballistic Missile ever successfully deployed from a vessel at sea, earning the ship and crew the Meritorious Unit Commendation.R. Zumwalt Jr.,  (1971) "Letter: Secretary of the Navy presentation of the Meritorious Unit Commendation"Captain W.C. Dotson, (1971), "Letter to SD2 Rolando S. Caparas, USN: Meritorious Unit Commendation" The ship is currently one of two Missile Range Instrumentation Ships operated by the Military Sealift Command. One of the radars it carries is the AN/SPQ-11 Cobra Judy Passive Electronically Scanned Array radar.
USNS Observation Island operates worldwide, monitoring compliance with strategic arms treaties and supporting U.S. military weapons test programs. Observation Island carries an Air Force shipborne phased-array radar system for collecting data on missile tests. The ship is operated by Military Sealift Command for the Air Force Technical Applications Center at Patrick Air Force Base.
USNS Observation Island was built as a "Mariner" class merchant ship, launched in August, 1953, and was acquired by the Navy in September 1956 for use as a fleet ballistic missile test ship. The vessel was converted at Norfolk Naval Shipyard, and kept in reserve as a Maritime Administration asset from 1972 until 1977. In August 1977, Observation Island was reacquired by the U.S. Navy and transferred to Military Sealift Command, where it was reclassified as T-AGM 23, a missile range instrumentation ship.

History

USNS Observation Island was converted to the first naval ship that had a fully integrated Fleet Ballistic Missile System. No major hull or engineering changes were made to the ship during this conversion. Because of the refit, the ship underwent a shakedown cruise at Guantanamo Bay.
The first at-sea launch of the A-1 Polaris missile was from the USS George Washington (SSBN-598) on July 20, 1960, and was monitored by the Observation Island. The ship was also present for initial tests of the A-2 and A-3 variants of Polaris. It was aboard Observation Island that President John F. Kennedy, on November 16, 1963, witnessed an A-3 Polaris launch, six days before his assassination. While aboard Observation Island, President Kennedy gave his final speech from a U.S. Navy vessel:

Meritorious Unit Commendation

While the Observation Island was stationed at Port Canaveral, adjacent to NASA at Cape Kennedy, Florida, in the very week Apollo 11 was launched from the Cape, the ship also made history by beginning its mission to achieve "the first successful at-sea firing of the POSEIDON Fleet Ballistic Missile." (Admiral E.R. Zumwalt Jr., 1971). The commendation was earned by the 1969 crew and was awarded in 1971 while the ship was stationed at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii for various range survey duties.  In later 71 she was decommissioned for a while, though later she reappeared for other missions as a USNS ship (see above). The success of the mission earned the ship and crew the Meritorious Unit Commendation from the Secretary of the Navy. As taken directly from the Commendation letter sent to crewman SD2 Rolando S. Caparas, (along with cover letter from Commanding Officer, Captain W.C. Dotson), Admiral Zumwalt wrote of the Commendation:
The Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation can be awarded to a unit that has performed service of a character comparable to that which would merit a Bronze Star in a combat situation, or an equivalent award in a non-combat situation to an individual. Photocopies of both letters are inserted below.

Present

In 2008, the USNS Observation Island was part of the U.S. Government program attempting to use an anti-missile missile to shoot down satellites by tracking the satellite before and after the missile launch.

Replacement

USNS Howard O. Lorenzen (T-AGM-25)









