[[Željko Petrović]]

CATEGORIES: 1965 births, Living people, People from Nikšić, Montenegrin footballers, Serbia and Montenegro international footballers, Yugoslav footballers, Yugoslavia international footballers, 1998 FIFA World Cup players, FK Budućnost Podgorica players, GNK Dinamo Zagreb players, Sevilla FC footballers, FC Den Bosch players, RKC Waalwijk players, PSV Eindhoven players, Urawa Red Diamonds players, Yugoslav First League players, La Liga footballers, Eredivisie players, Eerste Divisie players, J. League players, Expatriate footballers in Spain, Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands, Expatriate footballers in Japan, Montenegrin football managers, Boavista F.C. managers, RKC Waalwijk managers, Expatriate football managers in Portugal, Expatriate football managers in the Netherlands, West Ham United F.C. non-playing staff, Expatriate football managers in Japan, Urawa Red Diamonds managers, Yugoslav expatriate footballers, Yugoslav expatriates in Spain, Serbia and Montenegro expatriates in the Netherlands, Serbia and Montenegro expatriates in Japan, Montenegrin expatriate footballers, Montenegrin expatriates in Portugal, Montenegrin expatriates in Japan, Montenegrin expatriates in the Netherlands, Montenegrin expatriates in the United Kingdom, Montenegrin expatriates in Germany, Montenegrin expatriates in Russia

Željko Petrović (Жељко Петровић) (born 13 November 1965 in Nikšić, SR Montenegro, SFR Yugoslavia) is a retired Montenegrin footballer who previously worked as an assistant manager with FC Anzhi Makhachkala.

Club career

Petrović started his footballing career with Budućnost Titograd in 1987, spending 3 seasons there. A move to Dinamo Zagreb in the 1990/1991 season confirmed his place as a talented rightback. He was chosen to represent the national team on 12 September 1990 in the match against Northern Ireland which his team won 2-0.
He signed for Sevilla FC in 1991 and played there alongside Diego Maradona. However, a markedly dry spell at the Spanish club indicated that he was surplus to requirements at the club and he was quick to sign for Dutch club FC Den Bosch in 1992. He assisted the club to promotion to the Eredivisie and was eager to join RKC Waalwijk in 1994. It was at this club which he excelled as an attacking right wingback where he scored 13 goals in total of 2 seasons before joining Dutch giants PSV Eindhoven in 1996.
In his first season at PSV, he showed that he could play well, getting his name in the scoresheet 5 times in the process. In his second season at the club, however, he proved a difficult player to manage and he was also involved in a spat with team captain Arthur Numan. As a result, he saw his first-team chances limited to just 10 appearances for that season.
In 1997 he moved to Japan to play for Urawa Red Diamonds before returning to RKC Waalwijk in 2000 where he finished his playing career.

International career

He was a prominent member of FR Yugoslavia national team through World Cup qualifying process throughout 1996-1997 period, and also represented his country in France 98.Record at FIFA Tournaments - FIFA

Managerial and coaching career

On 21 August 2006 Petrović was appointed as the new head coach of Portuguese team Boavista FC. In his first match as manager, Boavista won 3-0 against Benfica. However, he resigned in October 2006 after only a month and a half in charge. The following 2007-2008 season Petrovic managed RKC Waalwijk to a second place in the Dutch 2nd division and failed to gain promotion to the Eredivisie. In the 2008-2009 season he was Martin Jol's assistant at Hamburger SV.
On 28 July 2010 West Ham United confirmed Petrović as the assistant manager to manager Avram Grant.
Petrović was appointed as the manager of J. League Division 1 side Urawa Red Diamonds on 7 December 2010. However, the Reds fell into the relegation zone as a series of poor results in the season. On 20 October 2011, he was sacked with five games remaining in the season.
In 2012 Petrovic signed with Anzhi Makhachkala as an assistant coach.
On 24 July 2013 Petrovic resigned from the post as Head Coach Guus Hiddink resigned as Anzhi' manager.

Statistics







 


