[[Online pharmacy]]

CATEGORIES: Pharmacies, Health care, Pharmaceuticals policy, Health in the United States

Online pharmacies,  Internet pharmacies, or Mail Order Pharmacies are pharmacies that operate over the Internet and send the orders to customers through the mail or shipping companies.
Online or internet pharmacies might include:

Home delivery

Conventional stationary pharmacies usually have controlled distribution systems from the manufacturer. Validation (drug manufacture) and Good distribution practices are followed.   Home delivery of pharmaceuticals can be a desirable convenience but sometimes there can be problems.
The shipment of drugs through the mail and parcel post is sometimes a concern for temperature-sensitive pharmaceuticals.  Uncontrolled shipping conditions can include high and low temperatures outside of the listed storage conditions for a drug.  For example, the US FDA found the temperature in a mail box in the sun could reach 136 째F (58 째C) while the ambient air temperature was 101 째F (38 째C)[ref]
</ref>
Shipment by express mail and couriers reduces transit time and often involves delivery to the door, rather than a mail box.  The use of insulated shipping containers also helps control drug temperatures, reducing risks to drug safety and efficacy.

Risks and concerns

  | last =
  | first =
  | authorlink =
  | coauthors =
  | title = FDA Alerts Consumers to Unsafe, Misrepresented Drugs Purchased Over the Internet
  | work =
  | publisher = US FDA
  | date = February 2007
  | url = 
  | doi =
  | accessdate =14 July 2011 }}</ref>
  | last =
  | first =
  | title = FDA Operation Reveals Many Drugs Promoted as "Canadian" Products Really Originate From Other Countries
  | work =
  | publisher = US FDA
  | date =December 2005
  | url = 
  | doi =
  | accessdate = 14 July 2011}}</ref>
  | last = Griffin
  | first = R. M.
  | authorlink =
  | coauthors =
  | title = Beyond the Pharmacy, Oneline and mail-order prescription drugs
  | work =
  | publisher = Web MD
  | date = October 2010
  | url = 
  | format =
  | doi =
  | accessdate =14 July 2011 }}</ref>

Discussion

Legitimate mail-order pharmacies are somewhat similar to community pharmacies; one primary difference is the method by which the medications are requested and received. Some customers consider this to be more convenient than traveling to a community drugstore, in the same way as ordering goods online rather than going to a shop.Internet pharmacies get go-ahead
While many internet pharmacies sell prescription drugs only with a prescription, some do not require a pre-written prescription. In some countries, this is because prescriptions are not required. Some customers order drugs from such pharmacies to avoid the cost and inconvenience of visiting a doctor or to obtain medications their doctors were unwilling to prescribe. People living in the United States and other countries where prescription medications are very expensive may turn to online pharmacies to save money. Many of the reputable websites employ their own in-house physicians to review the medication request and write a prescription accordingly.  Some websites offer medications without a prescription or a doctor review.  This practice has been criticized as potentially dangerous, especially by those who feel that only doctors can reliably assess contraindications, risk/benefit ratios, and the suitability of a medication for a specific individual.

International consumers

International consumers sometimes purchase drugs online from online pharmacies in their own countries, or those located in other countries.  Some of these pharmacies require prescriptions, while others do not.  Of those that do not require prescriptions, some ask the customer to fill in a health questionnaire with their order.  Many drugs available online are produced by well-known manufacturers such as Pfizer,  Wyeth, Roche, and generic drugmakers Cipla and Ranbaxy of India and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries of Israel.

U.S. consumers

An attraction of online pharmacies is drug prices. Shoppers can sometimes obtain 50 to 80 percent or more savings on U.S. prices at foreign pharmaciesWith Record Number of Uninsured, Americans Turn to Foreign Pharmacies, Yahoo News, June 11, 2008
The Washington Post reported that ".....U.S. Customs estimates 10 million U.S. citizens bring in medications at land borders each year. An additional 2 million packages of pharmaceuticals arrive annually by international mail from Thailand, India, South Africa and other points. Still more packages come from online pharmacies in Canada."Millions of Americans Look Outside U.S. For Drugs, Washington Post, Oct. 23, 2003 According to a Wall Street Journal/Harris Online poll in 2006, 80 percent of Americans favor importing drugs from Canada and other countries.harrisinteractive.asp?NewsID=1092 Harris Interactive, Sept 16 2006 President Obama's budget supports a plan to allow people to buy cheaper drugs from other countries.reuters.S. consumers face a risk of getting counterfeit drugs because of the rising Internet sales of drugs, with worldwide counterfeit drug sales, offline and online, projected to reach $75 billion by 2010.Risks in Ordering Drugs by Internet on the Rise Newswise,
Independent research published by the National Bureau of Economic Research demonstrates that online pharmacies, U.S. and foreign, verified by certain credentialing entities, sell genuine medication and require a prescription.nber." Bate, Roger and Ginger Zhe Jin and Amarna Mathur. National Bureau of Economic Research. NBER Working Paper No. 17955. Issued in March 2012. In that study, all tested prescription drug orders were found to be authentic when ordered from online pharmacies, international and U.S.-only, approved by PharmacyChecker.S. online pharmacies approved by the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy (NABP) Verified Internet Pharmacy Practice Sites (VIPPS) program or LegitScript, and Canadian-based online pharmacies approved by the Canadian International Pharmacy Association. Nine percent of tested products ordered from non-credentialed online pharmacies were counterfeit.Ibid
There are two verification programs for online pharmacies that are recognized by the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy (NABP). One is VIPPS, which is operated by the NABP and was created in 1999.vipps. Canadian and all non-U.S. online pharmacies that sell prescription medication to Americans, regardless of credentials, are not eligible for approval in the VIPPS and LegitScript programs.S. only standard see  For LegitScript's standards see 

Overseas online pharmacies and U.S. law

Legality and risks of purchasing drugs online depend on the specific kind and amount of drug being purchased.

Enforcement

It is illegal to purchase controlled substances from an overseas pharmacy. A person purchasing a controlled substance from such a pharmacy may be violating several federal laws that carry stiff penalties.

=Mail fraud=

All online pharmacies sell through the internet but must ship the product usually via the mail. The selling of many class (schedule)Drug schedules- Retrieved 2012-12-29 drugs without a valid prescription  (also called Rx-only drugs or legend drugs) is illegal and companies shipping them by mail can be prosecuted for mail fraud (Postal Inspection service) as well as investigations and Federal charges by the DEA, IRS, Homeland Security, Food and Drug Administration's Office of Criminal Investigations, Department of Justice, INTERPOL,NJ.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), Retrieved 2012-12-29

Bulgarian consumers

All Bulgarian online pharmacies must be registered with the Bulgarian drug agency (BDA). BDA controls the trade with medicines and makes analysis when doubting the quality and safety of drugs. A special BDA logo and a Certificate for registration of pharmacy proves the accreditation and the legitimacy of the store. When clicking on the logo, the consumer will be taken to the official page of the Bulgarian drug agency. The web page must deliver an information about the pharmacy's name, address, registration number and it's manager.

UK consumers

In the UK more than 2 million people buy drugs regularly over the internet from online pharmacies; some are legitimate but others  have "dangerous practices" that could endanger children."eBay medicines 'a risk to child health': Study warns of danger from drugs bought on net" "The Observer", June 21, 2009 In 2008, the RPSGB introduced a green cross logo to help identify accredited online pharmacies (from 2010 the internet pharmacy logo scheme is run by the GPhC)."Internet pharmacy logo"GPhC
European registered pharmacists have reciprocal agreements allowing them to practice in the UK by simply getting registered with the General Pharmaceutical Council.
The first internet pharmacy in the UK was Pharmacy2U, which started operating in 1999.
In the UK, online pharmacies often link up with online clinic doctors. Doctors carry out online consultations and issue prescriptions.washingtontimes. Online clinics only prescribe a limited number of medicines and do not replace regular doctors working from surgeries. There are various ways the doctors carry out the online consultations; sometimes it is done almost entirely by questionnaire. Customers usually pay one fee which includes the price of the consultation, prescription and the price of the medicine.








