[[New Wave science fiction]]

CATEGORIES: Science fiction genres, Literary movements, Contemporary literature

The New Wave is a movement in science fiction produced in the 1960s and 1970s and characterized by a high degree of experimentation, both in form and in content, a "literary" or artistic sensibility, and a focus on "soft" as opposed to hard science. New Wave writers often saw themselves as part of the modernist tradition and sometimes mocked the traditions of pulp science fiction, which some of them regarded as stodgy, adolescent and poorly written. "Play with Feeling." New Worlds 129 (April 1963), pp. 123-27.



The New Wave science fiction of the 1960s emphasized stylistic experimentation and literary merit over scientific accuracy or prediction. It was conceived as a deliberate break from the traditions of pulp SF, which many of the writers involved considered irrelevant and unambitious. The most prominent source of New Wave science fiction was the magazine New Worlds under the editorship of Michael Moorcock, who assumed the position in 1964. Moorcock sought to use the magazine to "define a new avant-garde role" for science fictionStableford, Brian (November 1996). "The Third Generation of Genre Science Fiction". Science Fiction Studies 23 (3): 321–330 by the use of "new literary techniques and modes of expression."Ashley, Mike, (2005), Transformations. The Story of the Science Fiction Magazines from 1950 to 1970, pp251-252 It was also a period marked by the emergence of a greater variety of voices in science fiction, most notably the rise in the number of female writers, including but not limited to Joanna Russ, Ursula K. Le Guin and James Tiptree, Jr.

Name

The term "New Wave" is borrowed from the French film movement known as the nouvelle vague. Theories of Science Fiction, James Gunn and Matthew Candelaria (Ed.), Scarecrow Press Inc, Maryland
Gary K. Wolfe, professor of humanities and English at Roosevelt University, identifies the introduction of the term New Wave to SF as occurring in 1966 in an essayMerril, Judith (1966) "Books", pp. 30, The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, January 1966 for The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction written by Judith Merril,  who was indirectly yet it seems unambiguously referring to that term in order to comment on the experimental fiction that had begun to appear in the English magazine New Worlds, after Michael Moorcock assumed editorship in 1964. However, Judith Merril denies she ever used that term.The 1997 Academic Conference On Canadian Science Fiction and Fantasy, Allan Weiss, 1997
Merril later popularized this fiction in the United States through her edited anthology England Swings SF: Stories of Speculative Fiction (Doubleday 1968), although an earlier anthology (Harlan Ellison's Dangerous Visions 1967) has also come to be referred to as a key work of New Wave science fiction.The SF Site featured review: Dangerous Visions, accessed May 10, 2012 
Dangerous visions by Harlan Ellison: Official SFWorld.com review, accessed May 10, 2012

History

Influences and predecessors

Though the New Wave is generally considered to have begun in the 1960s, some of its tenets can be found in H. L. Gold's editorship of Galaxy, a science fiction magazine which began publication in 1950. James Gunn described Gold's focus as being "not on the adventurer, the inventor, the engineer, or the scientist, but on the average citizen,"Gunn, James. "Alternate Worlds: 1949–1965", in Alternate Worlds. The Illustrated History of Science Fiction (N.J.:Prentice-Hall, 1975) and according to SF historian David Kyle, Gold's work was to lead inevitably to the New Wave. 119–120.
The New Wave did not define itself as a development from the science fiction which came before it, but rather reacted against it. The New Wave writers believed that the tropes of the pulp and Golden Age periods had become worn out, and should be abandoned: J. G. Ballard stated in 1962 that "science fiction should turn its back on space, on interstellar travel, extra-terrestrial life forms, (and) galactic wars",Ballard, J. G. (1962) "Which Way to Inner Space?" New Worlds Science Fiction, May. Reprinted in A User's Guide to the Millennium: Essays and Reviews, HarperCollins, London  (1996) and Brian Aldiss said in Trillion Year Spree: The History of Science Fiction that "the props of SF are few: rocket ships, telepathy, robots, time travel..."Aldiss, Brian and David Wingrove (eds.). Trillion Year Spree. The History of Science Fiction (London: Paladin Grafton, 1986) Harry Harrison summarised the period by saying "old barriers were coming down, pulp taboos were being forgotten, new themes and new manners of writing were being explored".) Decade the 1950s (London: Pan Books, 1977)
New Wave writers began to look outside the traditional scope of science fiction for influence, and many looked to the example of beat writer William S. Burroughs, to the point where New Wave authors Philip José Farmer and Barrington J. Bayley wrote pastiches of his work ("The Jungle Rot Kid on the Nod" and "The Four Colour Problem", respectively) and J. G. Ballard published an admiring essay in an issue of New Worlds. G. "Myth Maker Of The 20th century" New Worlds, No. 142, May/June 1964 Burroughs' use of experimentation such as the cut-up technique and his appropriation of science fiction tropes in radical ways proved the extent to which prose fiction could prove revolutionary, and many New Wave writers sought to emulate this style.
Ursula K. Le Guin, one of the women writers to emerge in the 1960s, describes the transition to the New Wave era thus:

This leaves the question as to why "science fiction changed around 1960", why "all the doors seemed to be opening." Rob Latham writing in the New York Review of Science Fiction identifies three trends which he argues are to prevail immediately prior to the advent of any new genre movement. His argument is illustrated by reference to the 1960s New Wave and the emergence of 'cyberpunk' in the 1980s. In both cases the preliminary conditions would be related to changes in technology as well as economic conditions impacting the publication and dissemination of sf, seen as generating a "widespread" sense of malaise among writers and fans, coincidental or coherent with a generational phenomenon, the retirement or obvious decline in productivity of a number of major authors whose output had dominated the previous decade; finally the perceptible emergence of fresh thematic material which might previously have been inhibited by prevailing orthodoxies. 19, No. 10 Latham points out that

Movement

There is no consensus on a precise starting point of the New Wave - Adam Roberts refers to Alfred Bester as having singlehandedly invented the genre,Roberts, Adam. The History of Science Fiction (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005) and in the introduction to a collection of Leigh Brackett's short fiction, Michael Moorcock referred to her as one of the genre's "true godmothers". The Entropy Exhibition (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1983 ISBN 978-0-7100-9310-3). Chapter: "The 'Field' and the 'Wave': The History of New Worlds" in James Gunn and Matthew Candelaria (ed.), Speculations on Speculation. Theories of Science Fiction'' (Maryland: Scarecrow Press Inc., 2005). Page number refer to this reprint)[ref]
For example:
1) Luckhurst, Roger. Science Fiction (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2005)
"What became known as the New Wave in SF was centred in England on the Magazine New Worlds, edited with missionary zeal by Michael Moorcock between 1964 and 1970 …"
2) James, Edward. Science Fiction in the 20th century (Oxford University Press, 1994)
"In April 1963 Michael Moorcock contributes a guest editorial to John Carnell's New Worlds, Britain's leading sf magazine, which effectively announced the onset of the New Wave."
3) Roberts, Adam. The History of Science Fiction (New York: Palgrove Macmillan, 2005)
"It New Wave was initially associated with the London magazine New Worlds, … which was reconfigured as a venue for experimental and unconventional fiction in the 1960s, particularly under the editorship of Michael Moorcock from 1964 …"[/ref]
While the American magazines Amazing Stories, with Cele Goldsmith as editor, and the respected Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction had from the very start had a leaning towards unusually literary stories, Moorcock turned that into a concerted policy. No other science fiction magazine sought as consistently to distance itself from traditional science fiction as much as New Worlds. By the time it ceased regular publication it had backed away from the science fiction genre itself, styling itself as an experimental literary journal.
Under Moorcock's editorship "galactic wars went out; drugs came in; there were fewer encounters with aliens, more in the bedroom. Experimentation in prose styles became one of the orders of the day, and the baleful influence of William Burroughs often threatened to gain the upper hand."Aldiss, Brian W. The Detached Retina (Liverpool University Press, 1995) Judith Merril observed:
 The heresy was beyond the experimental and explicitly provocative as inspired by Burroughs. In all coherence with the literary nouvelle vague'' although not in close association to it, and addressing a much less restricted pool of readers, the New Wave was reversing the standard hero's attitude toward action and science. It illustrated egotism - by depriving the plot of all motivation toward a rational explanation. Theories of Science Fiction, James Gunn and Matthew Candelaria (Ed.), Scarecrow Press Inc, Maryland :87
David Hartwell commenting on Algis J. Budrys writing in the review column of Galaxy magazine notes the "ringing scorn and righteous indignation" with which Budry's discussion vibrates in "one of the classic diatribes against Ballard and the new mode of SF then emergent": 
New Worlds author Thomas Disch would not earn better quotes from Budrys in the December 1966 review for his  "ineptly written" The Genocide, a work of "unrelieved trash" which was filled with a horde of "dumb, resigned victims."
Writing in The Dreams Our Stuff Is Made Of, Thomas Disch observed that:
 It is instructive therefore to read some of what Ballard and Moorcock were writing that engendered such animosity from the established SF community.
In 1963 Michael Moorcock wrote:
In 1962 Ballard had been writing:

Roger Luckhurst points out that Ballard's essay "Which Way to Inner Space?"Ballard, J. G. "Which Way to Inner Space?", New Worlds, 118 (May 1962), 117. Reprinted in: Ballard, J. G. A User's Guide to the Millennium (London: Harper-Collins, page 197, 1996) "showed the influence of media theorist Marshall McLuhan and the 'anti-psychiatry' of R. D. Laing."Luckhurst, Roger. Science Fiction (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2005) Another central concern of the New Wave was a fascination with entropy –  that the world (and the universe) must tend to disorder, to eventually run down to 'heat death'. Ballard provided

Like other writers for New Worlds Zoline uses "science-fictional and scientific language and imagery to describe perfectly 'ordinary' scenes of life", and by doing so produces "altered perceptions of reality in the reader."James, Edward. Science Fiction in the 20th century (Oxford University Press, 1994)
Judith Merril, "whose annual anthologies were the first heralds of the coming of the Wave cult,"Wollheim, Donald A. The Universe Makers. Science Fiction Today (London: Victor Gollancz, 1971) writing in  1967 in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction contrasts the SF New Wave (which she here terms 'The New Thing') in England and the United States:

Judith Merril's annual anthologies (1957–1968"Best SF - reviews and contents of Merril anthologies" Retrieved 2011-01-27), Damon Knight's Orbit series, and Harlan Ellison's Dangerous Visions featured American writers inspired by British writers (although some of the writers anthologized were British). Science Fiction after 1900. From the Steam Man to the Stars (New York: Twayne Publishers, 1997) Brooks Landon, professor of English at the University of Iowa, says of Dangerous Visions that it

The New Wave also had a political subtext.

Eric S. Raymond, looking at the New Wave with an even narrower political focus, observes:
For example, Judith Merril, "one of the most visible -- and voluble -- apostles of the New Wave in 1960s sf"Latham, Rob. "Sextrapolation in New Wave Science Fiction", Science Fiction Studies, Vol. 33, No. 2 (Jul., 2006), pp. 251–274: page 251 remembers her return from England to the United States:

Merril records later "At the end of the Convention week, the taste of America was sour in all our mouths,"Merril, Judith. Better to have Loved. The Life of Judith Merril (Toronto: Between the Lines, 2002)
Roger Luckhurst disagrees with those critics (he gives the example of Thomas Clareson) who perceive the New Wave in terms of rupture, suggesting that such a model

But caution is needed when assessing any literary movement, for example science fiction writer Bruce Sterling, reacting to his association with another SF movement in the 1980s remarked:
Similarly Rob Latham observes:

Bearing this proviso in mind it is still possible to sum up the New Wave in terms of rupture as is done for example by Darren Harris-Fain of Shawnee State University:


Decline and Lasting Influence

In the opening paragraph of an essayLatham, Rob. 'New Worlds and the New Wave in Fandom: Fan Culture and the Reshaping of Science Fiction in the Sixties' in 'Extrapolation'. (Kent State Univ., Kent, OH) (47:2) 2006, pp. 296–315: page 296 on the New Wave Rob Latham relates that

Latham remarks that this analysis by Harlan Ellison "obscures Ellison's own prominent role – and that of other professional authors and editors such as Judith Merril, Michael Moorcock, Lester Del Rey, Frederik Pohl, and Donald A. Wollheim – in fomenting the conflict, …"

In the early 1970s a number of writers and readers pointed out that

The closing of New Worlds magazine in 1970 "marked the containment of New Wave experiment with the rest of the counter-culture. The various limping manifestations of New World across the 1970s … demonstrated the posthumous nature of its avant-gardism.
In an essay The Alien Encounter Professor Patrick Parrinder's states that "any meaningful act of defamiliarization can only be relative, since it is not possible for man to imagine what is utterly alien to him; the utterly alien would also be meaningless."Parrinder, Patrick. 'The Alien Encounter: Or, Ms Brown and Mrs Le Guin' in Science Fiction Studies, Vol. 6, No. 1 (Mar., 1979), pp. 46–58 He continues later:

Veteran science fiction writer Jack Williamson (1908–2006) when asked in 1991: "Did the New Wave's emphasis on experimentalizm and its conscious efforts to make SF more 'literary' have any kind of permanent effects on the field?" replied:
It has been observed that

David Hartwell's maintains that after the New Wave, science fiction had still managed to retain this "marginality and tenuous self-identity":

Isaac Asimov, a science fiction writer who began his career with John W, Campbell in Astounding magazine in the 1940s, said of the New Wave: "I hope that when the New Wave has deposited its froth and receded, the vast and solid shore of science fiction will appear once more."cited in Aldiss, Brian and Wingrove David. Trillion Year Spree. The History of Science Fiction (London: Paladin Grafton, 1988)
Asimov himself was to illustrate just how that "SF shore" did indeed re-emerged, vast, solid—but changed. A biographer of Asimov noted that during the 1960s

Darren Harris-Fain observes on this return to writing SF by Asimov that

Other themes dealt with in the novel are concerns for the environment and "human stupidity and the delusional belief in human superiority", both frequent topics in New Wave SF. Understanding Contemporary American Science Fiction. The Age of Maturity, 1970–2000 (University of South Carolina, 2005)
Commenting in 2002 on the publication of the 35th Anniversary edition of the Dangerous Visions anthology edited by Harlan Ellison, the critic Greg L. Johnson remarked that
Isaac Asimov agrees that "on the whole, the New Wave was a good thing."Asimov, Isaac. Asimov on Science Fiction (London: Granada, 1983) He describes several "interesting side effects" of the New Wave.  Firstly that it brought non-American SF to the fore and that afterwards SF was an international phenomenon. Other changes noted were that

The noted academic writer on science fiction Edward James sums up the New Wave and its impact as follows:

Several factors may have contributed to the "death" of New Wave science fiction. One factor was its assimilation into the larger science fiction mainstream. A second factor was the passing of the radicalism of the 1960s in art as well as life. The New Wave's demise may have been hastened by conscious reaction against it in the SF mainstream. Lester del Rey, an influential editor (who had in fact been published in Ellison's first Dangerous Visions anthology), led a conscious effort to re-assert genre traditions in the 1970s and early 1980s. Pioneers such as Larry Niven (also published in Dangerous Visions) broke new ground with fresh scientific discoveries and imaginative extrapolations. By then, a neo-Campbellian revival of hard science fiction after 1982 at the hands of David Brin, Gregory Benford, Greg Bear and others had emerged. On the other hand, cyberpunk, a movement popularized by Gardner Dozois and editor Ellen Datlow, had made it clear that "the rebellion" had taken on a new form.
Some have seen the emergence of cyberpunk literature as a sequel of sorts to the aims of the New Wave movement. Cyberpunk incorporated several of New Wave's "ancestors," namely Burroughs and Alfred Bester and partially embraced New Wave proponents Harlan Ellison and Samuel R. Delany. The New Weird movement and the genre of slipstream fiction occupies a space similar to that of the New Wave movement, in relationship to the mainstream of science fiction and fantasy. However, they have a far less adversial relationship to their "parent" genres.

Authors

John Brunner is noted as a primary exponent of dystopian New Wave science fiction."The element of dystopia in New-Wave writing was particularly dramatic in the case of John Brunner": entry on New Wave by Peter Nicholls in 






