[[Saint Lawrence Seaway]]

CATEGORIES: Saint Lawrence Seaway, Canada–United States relations, International canals, Locks of Canada, Port authorities in Canada, Ship canals, Transport in Montérégie, Transport infrastructure completed in 1959, Water transport in Canada, Water transportation in North America

The Saint Lawrence Seaway () is the common name for a system of locks, canals and channels that permits ocean-going vessels to travel from the Atlantic Ocean to the Great Lakes, as far inland as the western end of Lake Superior. The Seaway is named for the Saint Lawrence River, which flows from Lake Ontario to the Atlantic Ocean. Legally, the Seaway extends from Montreal, Quebec, to Lake Erie and includes the Welland Canal. This section upstream of the Seaway is not a continuous canal; rather, it consists of several stretches of navigable channels within the river, a number of locks, and canals along the banks of the St. Lawrence River to bypass several rapids and dams along the way. A number of the locks are managed by the Canadian Saint Lawrence Seaway Management Corporation, and others are managed by the American Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation.  The section of the river downstream of Montreal, which is fully within Canadian jurisdiction, is regulated by the offices of Transport Canada in the Port of Quebec.

History

The Saint Lawrence Seaway was preceded by a number of other canals. In 1871, locks on the Saint Lawrence allowed transit of vessels  deep, but was generally too small to allow passage of larger ocean-going ships.
The first proposals for a binational comprehensive deep waterway along the St. Lawrence came in the 1890s. In the following decades the idea of a power project became inseparable from the seaway - in fact, the various governments involved believed that the deeper water created by the hydro project were necessary to make the seaway channels feasible. American proposals for development up to and including the First World War met with little interest from the Canadian federal government. But the two national governments submitted St. Lawrence plans, and the Wooten-Bowden Report and the International Joint Commission both recommended the project in the early 1920s. Although the Liberal Mackenzie King was reluctant to proceed, in part because of opposition to the project in Quebec, in 1932 the two countries signed a treaty. This failed to receive the assent of Congress. Subsequent attempts to forge an agreement in the 1930s came to naught as the Ontario government of Mitchell Hepburn, along with Quebec, got in the way. By 1941, President Roosevelt and Prime Minister King made an executive agreement to build the joint hydro and navigation works, but this too failed to receive the assent of Congress. Proposals for the seaway were met with resistance from railway and port lobbyists in the United States. 
In the post-1945 years, proposals to introduce tolls still could not induce the U.S. Congress to approve the project. Growing impatient, and with Ontario desperate for hydro-electricity, Canada began to consider "going it alone." This seized the imagination of Canadians, engendering a groundswell of St. Lawrence nationalism. Fueled by this support, the government of Louis St. Laurent decided over the course of 1951 and 1952 to construct the waterway alone, combined with the Moses-Saunders Power Dam (which would prove to be the joint responsibility of Ontario and New York: as a power dam would change the water levels, it required bilateral cooperation). Congress in early 1954 approved an American seaway role via the Wiley-Dondero Act.
In the United States, Dr. N.R. Danelian (who was the Director of the 13 volume St. Lawrence Seaway Survey in the U.S. Department of Navigation (1932–1963)), worked with the U.S. Secretary of State on Canadian-United States issues regarding the Seaway and worked for over 15 years on passage of the Seaway Act. He later became President of the Great Lakes St. Lawrence Association to further the interests of the Seaway development to benefit the American Heartland. 
The seaway opened in 1959 and cost C$470 million, $336.2 million of which was paid by the Canadian government. Queen Elizabeth II, Queen of Canada and President Dwight D. Eisenhower formally opened the Seaway with a short cruise aboard Royal Yacht Britannia after addressing the crowds in St. Lambert, Quebec.
The Port of Montreal, which is officially the Eastern inlet to the Seaway, welcomed ships around the year since 1964.Fednav, PR Newswire: "Port of Montreal welcomes first ocean-going vessel of 2014" 1 Jan 2014
The seaway's opening is often credited with making the Erie Canal obsolete, thus setting off the severe economic decline of several cities in Upstate New York. It should be said, however, that by the turn of the 20th Century the Erie Canal had already been largely supplanted by the railroads, and that the economic decline of Upstate New York was precipitated by numerous factors, only some of which had to do with the St. Lawrence Seaway.
The Canadian portions of the Seaway were pseudo-commercialised with a non-profit corporate structure in 1998 by the Canada Marine Act, which also introduced changes to the federal Ports.

Expansion proposal

The Army Corps of Engineers did a study to expand the St. Lawrence Seaway in the near future but it was scrapped in 2011 due to tight budgets.csu.pdf  In the long term the Seaway is planned to be expanded in 2030.  The expansion would allow container ships to traverse into the Great Lakes.  The maximum height clearance would be 150 feet because of the Macinac Bridge, Ambassador Bridge, Blue Water Bridge, and in 2015 the New International Trade Crossing. Maximum water draft would be 35 or 36 feet compared to 27 feet now.  The Port of Montreal at the end of the St. Lawrence River allows 36 foot drafts in the Estuary. The locks would be 1000 × 105 feet.
Compared to the Panama Canal or the Panamax the ship sizes wouldn't be as big on the New SeawayMax.  The Panamax allows for ships that are 190 feet above the water line (air draft) and a water draft of 41.2 feet max.  Ship length is 50 feet shorter and width is the same size as the expansion proposal. 

Locks in the Saint Lawrence River

There are six locks in the Saint Lawrence River portion of the Seaway. From downstream to upstream they are:Great Lakes St. Lawrence Seaway System Map, accessed 2009-07-05

Locks in the Welland Canal

There are eight locks on the Welland Canal.

Lock and channel dimensions

The size of vessels that can traverse the seaway is limited by the size of locks. Locks on the St. Lawrence and on the Welland Canal are  deep.
A vessel's draft is another obstacle to passage on the seaway, particularly in connecting waterways such as the St. Lawrence River. The depth in the channels of the seaway is  upstream of Montreal. Channel depths and limited lock sizes mean that only 10% of ocean-going ships can traverse the entire seaway. Proposals to expand the seaway, dating from as early as the 1960s, have been rejected as too costly, and environmentally and economically unsound. Lower water levels in the Great Lakes have also posed problems for some vessels in recent years.
While the seaway is currently (2010) mostly used for shipping bulk cargo, the possibility of its use for large-scale container shipping is under consideration as well. If the project goes ahead, feeder ships would take containers from the port of Oswego on Lake Ontario in upstate New York to Melford International Terminal in Nova Scotia for transfer to larger ocean-going ships."Oswego Considered For Major Container Port: Plan calls for $3M facility to create first Great Lakes site handling global container shipments", by John Doherty. Syracuse Post-Standard, Wednesday, October 22, 2008
A useful website hosts measurements of wind, water levels and water temperatures,Great Lakes St Lawrence Seaway System: "Environment Information" and a real-time interactive map of Seaway Locks, Vessels and Ports may be of assistance.greatlakes-seaway.html

Ecology

To create a navigable channel through the Long Sault rapids and to allow hydroelectric stations to be established immediately upriver from Cornwall, Ontario and Massena, New York, Lake St. Lawrence was created through the flooding on 1 July 1958 of six villages and three hamlets in Ontario, now collectively known as "The Lost Villages".[ref]
