[[Vint Cerf]]

CATEGORIES: Technology evangelists, American computer scientists, American engineers, Google employees, Members of the United States National Academy of Engineering, 1943 births, Living people, People from New Haven, Connecticut, Van Nuys High School alumni, National Medal of Technology recipients, Stanford University alumni, University of California, Los Angeles alumni, Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients, Turing Award laureates, Fellows of the Association for Computing Machinery, Fellow Members of the IEEE, Japan Prize laureates, Internet Society, Internet pioneers, Members of the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences, Draper Prize winners, Internet Hall of Fame, Recipients of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana, 1st Class

Vinton Gray "Vint" Cerf ( His contributions have been acknowledged and lauded, repeatedly, with honorary degrees and awards that include the National Medal of Technology, the Turing Award,Cerf wins Turing Award Feb 16, 2005 the Presidential Medal of Freedom,2005 Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients from the White House website and membership in the National Academy of Engineering.
In the early days, Cerf was a program manager for the United States Department of Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) funding various groups to develop TCP/IP technology.  When the Internet began to transition to a commercial opportunity during the late 1980s, Cerf moved to MCI where he was instrumental in the development of the first commercial email system (MCI Mail) connected to the Internet.
Cerf was instrumental in the funding and formation of ICANN from the start. He waited in the wings for a year before he stepped forward to join the ICANN Board, eventually becoming chairman. He was elected as the president of the Association for Computing Machinery in May 2012,ACM Elects Vint Cerf as President from the ACM website and in August 2013 he joined the Council on CyberSecurity's Board of Advisors."Advisory Board", Council on CyberSecurity website. Retrieved 27 September 2013.
Cerf is also known for his sartorial style, typically appearing in three-piece suit—a rarity in an industry known for its casual dress norms."Internet pioneer Vint Cerf looks to the future", Todd Bishop, Seattle P-I, 23 July 2007. Retrieved 27 September 2013.

Life and career

Cerf was born in  New Haven, Connecticut, the son of Muriel (née Gray), a housewife, and Vinton Thurston Cerf, an aerospace executive. After receiving his doctorate, Cerf became an assistant professor at Stanford University from 1972–1976, where he conducted research on packet network interconnection protocols and co-designed the DoD TCP/IP protocol suite with Kahn.
Cerf then moved to DARPA in 1976, where he stayed until 1982.
As vice president of MCI Digital Information Services from 1982 to 1986, Cerf led the engineering of MCI Mail, the first commercial email service to be connected to the Internet. Cerf rejoined MCI during 1994 and served as Senior Vice President of Technology Strategy. In this role, he helped to guide corporate strategy development from a technical perspective. Previously, he served as MCI's senior vice president of Architecture and Technology, leading a team of architects and engineers to design advanced networking frameworks, including Internet-based solutions for delivering a combination of data, information, voice and video services for business and consumer use.
In 1992 Cerf and Bob Kahn co-founded the Internet Society to provide leadership in education, policy, and standards related to the Internet.
During 1997, Cerf joined the Board of Trustees of Gallaudet University, a university for the education of the deaf and hard-of-hearing.Dr. Vinton G. Cerf Appointed to Gallaudet University's Board of Trustees, from that university's website Cerf himself is hard of hearing.
Cerf has worked for Google as a Vice President and Chief Internet Evangelist since October 2005. In this function he has become well known for his predictions on how technology will affect future society, encompassing such areas as artificial intelligence, environmentalism, the advent of IPv6 and the transformation of the television industry and its delivery model.The Daily Telegraph, August, 2007
Since 2010, Cerf has served as a Commissioner for the Broadband Commission for Digital Development, a UN body which aims to make broadband internet technologies more widely available.
Cerf joined the board of the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) in 1999, and served until November 2007.
Cerf was a member of the Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov's IT Advisory Council (from March 2002 - January of 2012). He is also a member of the Advisory Board of Eurasia Group, the political risk consultancy.
Cerf is also working on the Interplanetary Internet, together with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. It will be a new standard to communicate from planet to planet, using radio/laser communications that are tolerant of signal degradations including variable delay and disruption caused, for example, by celestial motion.
On February 7, 2006, Cerf testified before the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation's hearing on network neutrality. Speaking as Google's Chief Internet Evangelist, Cerf noted that nearly half of all consumers lacked meaningful choice in broadband providers and expressed concerns that without network neutrality government regulation, broadband providers would be able to use their dominance to limit options for consumers and charge companies like Google for their use of bandwidth.
Cerf currently serves on the board of advisors of Scientists and Engineers for America, an organization focused on promoting sound science in American government. sefora."Govt red tape adds to security threats", Vivian Yeo, ZDNet, 12 October 2009
Cerf is on the board of trustees of ARIN, the Regional Internet Registry (RIR) of IP addresses for United States, Canada, and part of the Caribbean.
During 2008 Cerf chaired the Internationalized domain name (IDNAbis) working group of the IETF.

Awards and honors

Cerf has received a number of honorary degrees, including doctorates, from the University of the Balearic Islands, ETHZ in Zurich, Switzerland, Capitol College, Gettysburg College, Yale University, George Mason University, Marymount University, University of Pisa, University of Rovira and Virgili (Tarragona, Spain), Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Luleå University of Technology (Sweden), University of Twente (Netherlands), Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Brooklyn Polytechnic, UPCT (University of Cartagena, Spain), Royal Roads University (Canada) Polytechnic University of Madrid and Keio University (Japan).
Further awards include:
 | url = 
 | title = Vinton Cerf
 | publisher = Computer History Museum
 | accessdate = 2013-05-23
}}[/ref]

Partial bibliography

Author

Co-author






