[[Manitoba Theatre for Young People]]

CATEGORIES: Culture of Winnipeg, Theatre companies in Manitoba, Children's theatre

Manitoba Theatre for Young People (MTYP) is a theatre for children and young adults in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada performing at the Canwest Performing Arts Centre in The Forks, Winnipeg. MTYP's annual attendance regularly exceeds 100,000 people per year.
Within the theatre complex there are two performance venues: a 315-seat Main Stage and a smaller hall.  The smaller hall does not have theatre seating and as such it is used primarily as a rehearsal hall and multi-purpose room. The building also features four classroom studios, production and wardrobe shops, a greenroom, two full dressing rooms, a box office, and lobby. The theatre is 5,270 square feet in size with a 1,344 square feet stage area. The black-box style theatre seats up to 315 and is reconfigurable. 
Manitoba Theatre for Young People is one of only two TYA (Theatre for Young Audience) institutions in Canada with a permanent residence and is the only Theatre for Young Audiences that offers a full season of plays for teens.
MTYP's mission is to produce entertaining professional theatre, provide training in theatre and portray the experience of Canadian children. 

History

It was originally founded in 1965 as Actors' Showcase and incorporated in 1977. In 1982, Leslee Silverman became the artistic directory, and it became a professional theatre devoted to young people. 
For many years, the theatre operated out of the Gas Station Theatre in the Osborne Village area of the city. 
In 1999 the MTYP moved to The Forks to its new location in the Canwest Performing Arts Centre, a  facility for MTYP and its school. 
The Company has been run by artistic director Leslee Silverman since its inception.

First Season (1982/83)

Programs

The Manitoba Theatre for Young People presents a full season of theatre for young audiences via both public and school shows, as well as 2 productions per year that tour both the city of Winnipeg, and the province of Manitoba.  
MTYP's Theatre School offers Fall, Winter, and Spring sessions, as well as Spring break and Summer camps, including classes for children as young as three years old.  MTYP theatre school provides training for absolute beginners through to pre-professionals, including annual productions performed by teen students in its Young Company and Shakespeare Company, along with various extracurricular performances.  The theatre's Drama Resource program presents performance workshops at the theatre and in schools province wide.
MTYP offers free acting, performing and film training classes to Winnipeg's Aboriginal youth between the ages of 12 and 18. Cultural Connections for Youth (CCAY) supplies more than half of the funding for MTYP's Aboriginal Arts Program.

Finances

The operating budget for the MTYP is $2.2 million. Fundraising accounts for 20% of revenue, government grants accound for 30%, and earned revenue accounts for 50%. Earned revenue consists of theatre tuition, ticket sales and facility rentals.
The current facility cost $5.6 million to build. Although $4 million was raised in a capital campaign, the remainder wasn't completed and as of 2012, the theatre has $182,000 in mortgage payments annually, as there is $1.2 million remaining debt that the theatre owes for the facility.
Between 2006 and 2011, MTYP's then finance and administration manager Kathleen Owen-Hunt embezzled over $90,000 from the theatre. MTYP sued Owen-Hunt and will be recouping a portion of the money.

Awards

The theatre and its artistic director Leslee Silverman have been awarded the following honours:

Alumni

Famous former students of MTYP's theatre school include Adam Beach and Nia Vardalos.




