[[United Airlines]]

CATEGORIES: United Airlines, Airlines of the United States, IATA members, Air Transport Association members, Airlines established in 1933, OpenTravel Alliance, Companies based in Chicago, Illinois, Companies that have filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, Star Alliance

United Airlines, Inc. (commonly referred to simply as "United") is an American major airline headquartered in Chicago, Illinois. United Airlines Official Statistics. Copyright 2013. United is a wholly owned subsidiary of United Continental Holdings following a $3 billion merger in 2010. Since its merger with Continental Airlines, the company boasts more revenue passenger miles than any airline in the world.United Continental Quarterly Earnings
United operates out of 10 (Cleveland ends June 2014) airline hubs in the continental United States, Guam, and Japan.6 million passengers annually with an average of 45,413 passengers daily.  
The company employs over 88,500 people while maintaining its headquarters in Chicago's Willis Tower (formerly known as Sears Tower).5 billion as of October, 2013.Traders Purchase UAL - WKRB
United's main competitors in its domestic market are Delta Air Lines and American Airlines. United is using Continental's air operator's certificate and it surrendered its original certificate when the merger closed.

History

What is now United Airlines originated from the Varney Air Lines air mail service of Walter Varney, who also founded Varney Speed Lines, from which Continental Airlines had originated. Founded in Boise, Idaho in 1926, the carrier flew the first Contract Air Mail flight in the U.S. on April 6, 1926, marking the first scheduled airline service in the country's history.  In 1929, Boeing merged his company with Pratt & Whitney to form the United Aircraft and Transport Corporation (UATC). 74.
In 1933, United began operating the Boeing 247,Davies Air Enthusiast March/April 2007, p. 71. the first all-metal airliner.  It was able to fly a transcontinental flight in 20 hours, making it significantly faster than its predecessors.  After passage of the Air Mail Act in 1934, UATC separated into United Aircraft (the future United Technologies), the Boeing Airplane Company and United Air Lines. 72–73.
After the war, United gained from a boom in customer demand for air travel, with its revenue passenger-miles jumping five-fold in the 1950s, and continued growth occurring through the next two decades.Handbook of Airline Statistics (biannual CAB publication)
In 1954 United Airlines became the first airline to purchase modern flight simulators which had visual, sound and motion cues for training pilots. Purchased for 3 million (1954) from Curtiss-Wright, these were the first of today's modern flight simulators for training of commercial passenger aircraft pilots."Airline Pilots Fly Anywhere in the world – Without Leaving the Ground." Popular Mechanics, August 1954, p. 87.
United merged with Capital Airlines in 1961 and regained its position as the United States' largest airline. In 1968, the company reorganized, creating UAL Corporation, with United Airlines as a wholly owned subsidiary. In 1970, the UAL Corporation acquired Western International Hotels, and its name was later changed to Westin Hotel Company.  The 1970s also saw economic turmoil, resulting in "stagflation" and labor unrest. The 1978 Airline Deregulation Act, resulting in industry shakeups, further added to the carrier's difficulties in a loss-making period.
In 1982, United became the first carrier to operate the Boeing 767, taking its first delivery of 767-200s on August 19.  Then-company CEO Richard Ferris changed United's parent company's name from UAL Corporation to Allegis in February 1987, but following his termination, the company reverted to the name UAL Corp. in May 1988, and divested non-airline properties."United's Parent Is Again UAL." The New York Times."United Once More." TIME. 2
In 1985, United expanded dramatically by purchasing Pan Am's entire Pacific Division, giving it an Asian hub at Tokyo's Narita International Airport, and in 1991 purchased routes to London Heathrow Airport from ailing Pan Am, making it one of two US carriers permitted exclusive access to Heathrow under Bermuda II until "open skies" took effect in 2008 (American Airlines being the other, after it purchased TWA's Heathrow landing slots). The aftermath of the Gulf War and increased competition from low-cost carriers led to losses in 1991 and 1992.  The carrier also launched a low-cost subsidiary in 1994, Shuttle by United a high frequency, west coast-based operation, in an attempt to compete with low-cost carriers; the subsidiary remained in operation until 2001.
In 1995, United became the first airline to introduce the Boeing 777 in commercial service.
During the September 11, 2001 attacks, two of the four airplanes hijacked and crashed by al-Qaeda members were United Airlines aircraft (United Airlines Flight 175 was flown into the south World Trade Center tower; United Airlines Flight 93 was crashed in a field in Pennsylvania after the passengers fought back against the hijackers). An airline industry downturn resulted, and coupled with economic difficulties, skyrocketing oil prices, and higher labor costs, the company lost 
United's bankruptcy operations resulted in furloughing thousands of workers, closing all U.S. city ticket offices, cancelling several existing and planned routes, downsizing its Miami operations, closing maintenance bases, and fleet reductions. The carrier also negotiated cost cuts with employees, suppliers, and contractors, and terminated feeder contracts with United Express carriers Atlantic Coast Airlines and Air Wisconsin. The carrier launched a new, all coach, low-cost carrier named Ted in 2003, and a luxury "p.s." (for "premium service") coast-to-coast service on re-configured 757s in 2004. In 2005, United cancelled its pension plan in the largest such default in U.S. corporate history.
In 2005, United announced it had raised 
On April 16, 2010, United resumed merger talks with Continental Airlines. (The two airlines had previously discussed merging in 2008.)
The Continental–United merger was approved by the European Commission in July 2010 and by the US Justice Department on August 27, 2010.

Predecessors

United Airlines is a combination of a number of air carriers that merged with each other starting in the 1930s with the most recent merger concerning Continental Airlines (which had previously merged with or acquired several airlines during its history) thus reflecting changes in focus of both United and the U.S. air transport market."Corporate And Legal History Of United Airlines And Its Predecessors And Subsidiaries 1925-1955" Chicago: United Airlines. 1965Davies, R.E.G. "Airlines of the United States since 1914". Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press. 1972Fisher, David; William Garvey "The Age of Flight: A History of America's Pioneering Airline"  Greensboro, NC: Pace Communications, 2001
Predecessor air carriers that form the present United Airlines include:
Many of these acquisitions and mergers were completed by Continental Airlines when this carrier was under the ownership and control of Texas Air Corporation from 1982 to 1987. During that time period, New York Air and Texas International Airlines (which were already owned by Texas Air Corporation before this company acquired Continental) were merged into Continental.  As for United, before merging with Continental it had acquired Capital Airlines in the 1960s and had also purchased Pan Am's Pacific Division as well as Pan Am's transatlantic route rights into London Heathrow Airport during the 1980s.

Corporate identity

Brand image

The pre-merger United logo, commonly nicknamed the "tulip", was first developed in the early seventies after the airline commissioned designer Saul Bass to develop a new brand image. The logo skillfully represented the airline's monogram as well as a modernized version of the airline's shield logo  The Saul Bass livery was updated in 1988 to feature larger lettering on the fuselage, with the rainbow stripes on the side moved down to accommodate the new space. This livery was in use until the beginning of 1993, and the last planes to feature this paint scheme were repainted by 1999.
The next livery update came in the early 1990s: the CKS Group-designed "Battleship," a grey and dark blue fuselage with blue stripes on the tail and a smaller "tulip" on the tail. A smaller, more refined version of the rainbow stripes from the previous livery were incorporated as well. This livery debuted on January 11, 1993, and the last mainline plane to wear this livery, N229UA, was repainted on February 20, 2012. Finally, a decade later, the 2004 Pentagram-developed "Rising Blue" featured a white and lighter blue fuselage, along with a cropped version of the tulip on the tail. As of April 2014, some "rising blue" planes remain a part of the merged United's fleet.
In 2011, the newly merged United adopted a livery more consistent with the 1991 livery of Continental Airlines. United has promoted its post-merger logo as reflecting its efforts to attract corporate clients and the airline's worldwide network, but many marketing experts and graphic designers have criticized the logo change, stating that the previous "tulip" logo has stronger brand recognition and is a stronger mark than the Continental globe, while faulting CEO Jeff Smisek and former United CEO Glenn Tilton for devising the "new" brand and livery between the two of them with no outside input.
Logos used by United Airlines since 1974:

Marketing themes

United resurrected its popular "Fly the Friendly Skies" slogan in September 2013. This replaced the slogan "It's time to fly" created in 2004. United's earliest slogan, "The Main Line Airway," emphasized its signature New York-Chicago-San Francisco route, and was replaced in 1965 with "Fly the Friendly Skies". The "friendly skies" tagline was in use until 1996 in its first iteration.
On September 20, 2013 United announced a return of the "Fly the Friendly Skies" slogan in an ad campaign to start the following day. The resurrected slogan will be accompanied by the "Rhapsody in Blue" theme song and a voice over provided by Matt Damon.
United's theme song is George Gershwin's 1924 "Rhapsody in Blue", which it licensed from Gershwin's estate for 

Sponsorships

United is a sponsor of all five of Chicago's major professional sports teams—the Bears, Blackhawks, Bulls, Cubs and White Sox—as well as the U.S. Olympic Team. The Blackhawks and Bulls play their games in the United Center, which the airline holds the naming rights to until 2014.
United has been the official airline of the Denver Broncos since 1996.
Through its merger with Continental, United also became the official airline of the New York Giants and the Houston Astros.

Corporate affairs

Headquarters

In 2007, United Airlines moved its headquarters and its 350 top executives from its headquarters at 1200 East Algonquin Road in suburban Elk Grove Township to 77 West Wacker Drive after considering alternate locations in Denver, Colorado and San Francisco, California., Greg Hinz, and Julie Jonsson. "United HQ heading for Chicago." Crain's Chicago Business. July 13, 2006."United Airlines Foundation." United Airlines. February 5, 2006. Archived from the original on December 24, 2010.  The Elk Grove Village campus was renamed an Operations Center and United Airlines consolidated several of its offices in the suburbs of Chicago into the Elk Grove Village campus."United Airlines Picks Chicago for New Headquarters." United Airlines. July 15, 2006. Archived from the original on July 21, 2011.
After the City of Chicago submitted a 

Other facilities

UAL, United Airline's parent company prior to its merger with Continental Airlines, previously held majority ownership stakes in several major travel and leisure companies. UAL's former subsidiaries include international hotel chains Westin Hotels and Resorts and Hilton Hotels Corporation as well as global car rental company Hertz. UAL sold or spun off most of its assets not related to its core airline operations during the 1980s and 90's.
United formerly owned the Waikiki Seaside Hotel, a hotel in Honolulu, Hawaii which was used by its flight crews and was sold in February 2012.

Environmental strategy

On August 23, 2011, United announced a conversion to paperless flight decks and deployed 11,000 iPads to all United pilots. Each iPad, which weighs less than 1.5 pounds, replaced approximately 38 pounds of paper operating manuals, navigation charts, reference handbooks, flight checklists, logbooks and weather information in a pilot's flight bag. The electronic flight bags (EFBs) replaced conventional flight bags full of paper materials that contains an average of 12,000 sheets of paper per pilot, and as a first for major network carriers, provide pilots with paperless aeronautical navigational charts through an iPad app. The green benefits of moving to EFBs include reductions in, paper use, printing, and fuel consumption. Distribution of the iPads began in early August 2011, and all pilots were using them by the years end.
On November 7, 2011, United Airlines flew the world's first commercial aviation flight on a microbially derived biofuel using Solajet™, Solazyme's algae-derived renewable jet fuel, and fueled with 40 percent Solajet and 60 percent petroleum-derived jet fuel. This was operated by the "Eco-Skies" Boeing 737-800 aircraft on a flight from Houston to Chicago.
On July 12, 2012, United announced an order for 100 Boeing 737 MAX 9s, a new, more fuel efficient version of the Boeing 737 family. These aircraft will be used to replace the less fuel efficient domestic fleet of Boeing 757-200s.
On January 15, 2013, Aviation Partners Boeing (APB) announced that United had placed an order to retrofit its existing Boeing Next Generation 737's Blended Winglets with APB's new Split Scimitar Winglet. The program will consist of retrofitting 737NG's winglets by replacing the aluminum winglet tip cap with a new aerodynamically shaped "Scimitar" winglet tip cap and by adding a new Scimitar tipped Ventral Strake. This modification demonstrated significant aircraft drag reduction over the basic Blended Winglet configuration. The new APB winglet technology will save United more than $250 million per year in jet fuel costs fleet wide.

Labor

All United Airlines pilots are represented by the Air Line Pilots Association. A new Joint Collective Bargaining Agreement was ratified by a majority of the United/Continental pilots on December 15, 2012, which struck down a scope clause that disallowed Continental from outsourcing the flying of regional jets with 70 or more passenger seats.com. Webcache.com (2012-12-15). Retrieved on 2013-08-16.

Destinations

United Airlines flies to 78 domestic mainline destinations and 108 international destinations in 69 countries across Asia, Americas, Europe, Oceania, and Africa not including cities only served by United Express. The carrier, along with British Airways, Delta Air Lines, Emirates, Etihad Airways, Korean Air, Qantas, Qatar Airways, Singapore Airlines and South African Airways, is one of the few airlines that fly to all six inhabited continents.

Route network

United provides worldwide service to Asia, Australia, Africa and Europe. United operates an extensive domestic route network from its eight domestic hubs and is a leading US carrier to Hawaii. United also operates international hubs in Guam and Tokyo.
In 1988, the bilateral (though not reciprocal)
United's international expansion is focused on Asia and Latin America.  United is the leading US carrier to the People's Republic of China, with nonstop flights to Beijing and Shanghai, as well as the former British territory of Hong Kong, from its hubs in Chicago, Los Angeles, Newark, San Francisco and Washington, D.C. In September 2007, United was granted a route from San Francisco to Guangzhou (Never launched).
United inaugurated service to Bahrain on April 18, 2010, United also terminated services to Denmark in September 2012.

Codeshare agreements

In addition to its Star Alliance and United Express partnerships, United codeshares and/or has marketing agreements with the following airlines as of January 2014:

Fleet

Current

United Airlines operates 713 mainline aircraft, with an average age of 13.6 years. As of April 2014, its fleet consists of the following aircraft.

Retired

United had previously retired its entire Boeing 737 and Boeing 767-200 fleet; however, the airline reacquired Boeing 737 and 767-200ER aircraft as a result of its merger with Continental Airlines.
On April 2, 2008, United Airlines temporarily withdrew its entire fleet of Boeing 777 aircraft until functional testing of the fire suppression system could be completed. The move was the latest in a series of temporary groundings by U.S. airlines in late March 2008 following a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) review of compliance with airworthiness directives.
On June 3, 2009, United announced they had submitted proposals to both Boeing and Airbus for an order of up to 150 new aircraft.
In December 2009, United announced it would split a 50-aircraft order between upcoming Airbus A350 and 
United received its first Boeing 787 Dreamliner on September 22, 2012, becoming the first U.S. carrier to do so.  The airline has announced plans to place the Boeing 787 into scheduled passenger service effective November 4, 2012, on U.S. domestic routes from Houston (IAH) to Chicago (ORD), New York Newark (EWR),Washington-Dulles (IAD) and San Francisco (SFO) prior to operating the Dreamliner in scheduled international service. The Dreamliner battery debacleBoeing_787_Dreamliner_battery_problems caused the 787 airliner to be grounded for four months until June 10. CBS News (2013-05-20). Retrieved on 2013-08-16. Meanwhile, its 46 777 aircraft underwent major overhaul and retrofit at SFO. Bloomberg (2013-06-14). Retrieved on 2013-08-16. United is also the North American launch customer for the 787-9 and 787-10, stretched versions of the base 787-8 model.

Cabin

United claims to be the only mainline legacy carrier to offer in-flight entertainment on all mainline aircraft. Audio programming is provided by Zune. Despite the loss of this partnership, United's television entertainment continues to include several prime time NBC programs. On newer Airbus A320s and Boeing 737-900's, as well as select Boeing 777's not equipped with BusinessFirst, United offers wireless entertainment streaming to personal devices via wifi, featuring a selection of movies, shows and more.

United Global First

United Global First is offered on all Boeing 747-400s, as well as all three class configured Boeing 767-300ERs and Boeing 777-200s. The United Global First Suite is 

United BusinessFirst

United BusinessFirst is offered on all Boeing 747, Boeing 767, Boeing 777 and Boeing 787 Dreamliners, as well as select transatlantic-configured Boeing 757-200s. BusinessFirst passengers check in at separate counters and can use priority security screening where available. In-flight service includes pre-departure beverages, table linens and multi course meals designed by United's Congress of Chefs on international flights. Passengers are also given priority with boarding and baggage handling and access to the United Club and other airline lounges. The longest domestic routes (such as flights between East Coast and Hawaii) utilize BusinessFirst equipped aircraft, however these flights are sold as United First but do not allow for complimentary premier upgrades.
Depending on the aircraft model, BusinessFirst seats have differently configured seating arrangements. Narrowbody aircraft, including transatlantic and United p.s. Boeing 757-200s have the seats arranged four-across, all facing-forward. On two-class Boeing 767-300 and Boeing 767-400ER aircraft, the seats are all forward facing in a 2-1-2 across configuration. On Boeing 787s, the seats are configured 2-2-2 with the outside seats angled away from the aisles. On the 747s, as well as all 767s and 777s equipped with United GlobalFirst, BusinessFirst is configured with rows of seats that alternate between forward facing seats and backward facing seats. In this configuration, middle seats face backwards in rows with forward-facing seats on the outside of the aisles, and vice-versa.
Other domestic routes, especially hub-to-hub service and certain non "United p.s." transcontinental flights regularly see internationally configured aircraft with BusinessFirst (and sometimes GlobalFirst) for operational reasons. While the physical seats and entertainment are the same as on international flights, the service, catering and other amenities are the same as in domestic first class. Unlike routes marketed as "BusinessFirst" and United p.s., these flights are eligible for complimentary premier upgrades it also replaced the old Continental Airlines BusinessFirst.

United p.s.

United p.s. (short for "Premium Service") is a sub-brand for transcontinental flights between New York JFK and Los Angeles or San Francisco. Initially launched in 2004, these flights utilize specially configured 757-200 aircraft, with 180-degrees-flat BusinessFirst seats, Economy Plus, and Economy seats. The premium cabin also features international style catering, while all seats have access to inflight wi-fi, on demand entertainment, and power outlets.  BusinessFirst passengers also have access to the United Club located at JFK, Los Angeles, and San Francisco.
United p.s. routes are not eligible for complimentary Premier upgrades, although MileagePlus members can upgrade using Regional Premier Upgrade e-certificates, Global Premier Upgrade e-certificates, or miles.

United First and United Business (short haul)

United First is offered on all domestically configured United aircraft. When such aircraft are used on international services, the premium cabin is branded as United Business. The cabin features a seat similar to the old international United Business seat, but without the personal reading lamps, entertainment units, or legrests. The seats have a 

United Economy

United Economy is available on all aircraft in United's fleet. Seats have a pitch of 31"(30" on newer A320 series planes due to the new slimline seats and 32" on 787's) and a recline of 3-5"(aircraft dependent). All United Economy seats on Boeing 767 and Boeing 777 aircraft feature an adjustable headrest and a personal television at the back of each seat. United Economy's in-flight entertainment system on Boeing 767 aircraft features nine channels of entertainment on loop on a  On flights with meals, the main meal consists of a salad/appetizer, a choice of hot entrées and dessert. On longer flights, United also offers a light pre-arrival meal.

=United Economy Plus=

Economy Plus is available on all aircraft in the domestic and international fleet. Economy Plus seats are located in the front of the economy cabin and have up to 2" more recline and 5 inches of additional pitch(6 inches on long haul 757's and select 737-800's) totaling 5-7" of recline(aircraft dependent) and 36" of pitch(35" on newer A320 series planes and 37" on 787's due to the economy pitch on those planes). Economy Plus is available for free to all MileagePlus Elite members. 1K, Platinum and Gold members may select an Economy Plus seat when booking. Silver members can select an Economy Plus seat at check-in.

Frequent flyer services

MileagePlus

MileagePlus is the frequent flyer program for United Airlines, Copa Airlines and Copa Airlines Colombia.
From its inception until June 29, 2011, United's frequent flier program was known as Mileage Plus. Following United's merger with Continental Airlines, United retained Mileage Plus as the frequent flier program of the new United and, subsequently, renamed the program MileagePlus.

United Club

The United Club is the airline lounge associated with United Airlines and United Express carriers. The United Club replaced the former United Red Carpet Club and Continental Airlines Presidents Club prior to the merger with Continental.

Subscriptions

Among United's subscriptions that passengers pay an annual fee for:

Incidents and accidents



Footnotes



Bibliography




