[[Olivia Benson]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional characters introduced in 1999, Fictional New York City Police Department detectives, Fictional offspring of rape, Law & Order: Special Victims Unit characters

Olivia Benson is a fictional character on the NBC police procedural drama Law & Order: Special Victims Unit, portrayed by Mariska Hargitay. Benson is a police officer with the Manhattan SVU at the 16th Precinct of the New York Police Department. 
During the first twelve seasons of the series Benson is partnered with Detective Elliot Stabler. After Stabler resigns from the NYPD, Nick Amaro becomes her partner as Benson the unit's senior detective. Following the retirement of John Munch, Benson takes and passes the exam to become a Sergeant, and shortly thereafter assumes command of the unit after its captain, Donald Cragen, also retires.

Characterization

Series creator Dick Wolf named his two lead detectives after his son, Elliot, and his daughter, Olivia.
In the episode "Paranoia", Benson described how, despite the difficulty she faced in dealing with a 2-year-old female rape victim on her second case, Karen Smythe, who trained her, praised her for displaying a talent in dealing with victims. some Spanish and French and is able to read the Miranda warnings in at least two other languages.
Benson was born on December 13, 1967. She has a younger half brother named Simon Marsden (Michael Weston). Simon, whom she found by illegally running her DNA through the system, was thought to be a rapist. However, his name was cleared in the season eight episode "Florida", where it was revealed that he was framed by Captain Julia Millfield (Kim Delaney).
In the season twelve episode "Trophy", Benson's life is further complicated when she is named the legal guardian of a young boy named Calvin Arliss (Charlie Tahan). Calvin's mother, Vivian (Maria Bello) abandons Calvin and flees when Benson's investigation uncovers that Vivian (also a child of rape) may have killed her mother's rapist. Vivian names Benson as Calvin's legal guardian. Calvin lives with her for a while, causing her both delight and stress when Calvin gets into fights at school. In "Rescue", she finds Vivian and her lover Sara have relapsed back into drug use. Sara confesses to murdering Vivian's father and is then shot dead. At the end of the episode, Vivian revokes Benson's parental rights and sends Calvin to live with his grandparents. Both Calvin and Benson are devastated by the separation. In season 13 she is seen with Calvin and his grandparents during or right before Halloween.
In the season thirteen episode "Child's Welfare", brother Simon reveals to Benson that she has a niece and step-nephew named Olivia and Ty, and that he is getting married to a woman named Tracy. When the children are later taken by the city due to Simon's criminal background, Benson calls Defense Attorney Beyard Ellis (Andre Braugher), with whom she has become good friends, to help Simon and Tracy get the children back. When a judge denies the Marsdens their children back, Simon later kidnaps them. Ellis deals to have Simon serve a 60-day sentence, knocking his charge down from kidnapping to a misdemeanor, custodial interference. One of the conditions of the reduced charges is he must give up his custody petition and agree to only visit his daughter in a supervised setting for the next three years. Simon is reluctant but Benson tells him it's better than his daughter visiting him in jail.
In the fifteenth season episode "Wonderland Story", Captain Cragen asks Benson to take the Sergeant's exam. Four episodes later, in "Rapist Anonymous", it is revealed (during a dinner party held in her honor) that she passed the test (in the top 1% of her class) and is now a Sergeant. At the start of the following episode, "Amaro's One-Eighty", Capt. Cragen announces at another dinner party that Sergeant Benson has been approved to remain at SVU (it was feared she would be reassigned); at the end of the episode, Cragen reveals his impending retirement from the NYPD, making Benson SVU's acting commanding officer. 

Relationships

Hargitay has characterized Benson and Stabler's relationship as "very complicated". Her assessment is that: 
 Baer agrees that a romantic relationship between the two is unlikely, though commented: "You never can say never".
Hargitay has stated that her favorite SVU scene occurs in the season seven episode "Fault", when Benson is faced with the possibility of losing Stabler: "Lou Diamond Phillips played a child killer has a gun to Elliot's head. I'm negotiating him to drop the gun. It was a painful, high-stakes scene. Elliot and I have to admit what we mean to each other... He is everything that character Olivia has. So this was where we really got that to pay off." In an episode where Stabler goes undercover, Benson tries to talk him into coming back, but they are interrupted by Stabler's targets. She undresses and pretends to be a prostitute. 
In the show's first season, Benson has a sexual relationship with one of her SVU colleagues, Detective Brian Cassidy (Dean Winters). In the episode "Closure" Benson refers to it as a drunken one night stand. It is implied that the relationship continued based on comments in the episode "Disrobed". Cassidy leaves the precinct at the end of that episode. In the season five episode "Lowdown" it was revealed Benson had a relationship with a murder victim who turned out to be homosexual and also HIV positive. Medical Examiner Melinda Warner immediately tests Benson and the results come back negative. In the season nine episode "Closet", the SVU squad are surprised to find out that Benson has been in a relationship with journalist Kurt Moss (Bill Pullman) for several months. It comes out only because Internal Affairs are investigating Benson and Stabler in a case in which the department accidentally outed a professional football player. By the end of the episode, she breaks up with Moss.
While Benson has only been portrayed in relationships with men, she has, according to lesbian entertainment website AfterEllen.
In the middle of the thirteenth season, Benson enters into a relationship with a new prosecutor to the district attorney's office, Executive ADA David Haden (Harry Connick, Jr.) Hargitay has said that Connick, who is a friend of hers, improved the show. "This is a home run on so many levels," she said. "The show is very fortunate to have Harry's extraordinary talent, and I'm lucky because I get to work with my friend. I think Olivia couldn't have asked for a better companion to take her through a new stage in her life and career." Haden and Benson begin their relationship at the end of the episode, "Official Story". In the episode "Hunting Ground", she decides to take it slow with Haden, claiming she needs time to see if their relationship will last. That night, they end up sleeping together in her apartment. This makes her late for a case, which is frowned upon in the NYPD. In the episode "Justice Denied", Benson and Haden end their relationship due to a conflict of interest.
In the Season 14 premiere, Benson shares a kiss with Cassidy after she tells him she is not the same person from 13 years before, when they had a brief sexual relationship. Later that season, in the episode "Undercover Blue", it is revealed that Cassidy and Benson had been seeing each other for quite some time. Their relationship hits a rough patch in the episode when Cassidy is accused of rape, which results in their relationship becoming public. The charges against Cassidy are later dropped when the SVU detectives discover that he was being set up. In Season 15, Benson stays with Cassidy as she recovers from her imprisonment by a dangerous serial rapist. A few months after she returns to work, they get a new apartment together. 

Sexual assault storylines

In the season nine episode "Undercover", Benson poses as an inmate in a women's prison to investigate an alleged rape by a corrections officer. While there, the corrections officer in question, Captain Lowell Harris, attacks her and attempts to force her to perform oral sex on him. She is rescued by SVU colleague Fin Tutuola (Ice-T), who gets there just in time to stop the rape. Later, Benson helps convict the rapist by questioning his earlier victim about distinguishing features on his penis, prompting the victim to recall a mole on it, which Benson later explains to Warner that she had also seen. When Warner asks Benson if she had been raped, she replies, "It was the closest I've ever come." 
In season ten, Benson is seen struggling with now being a victim of sexual assault herself. She is attending group therapy, something she has not shared with anyone but Tutuola. In the episode "PTSD," while investigating the rape of a Marine, she is pushed against a wall while trying to break up a fight between a suspected rapist and another Marine. She subsequently breaks up the fight by holding her gun to the back of the suspect's head. Later, while in questioning, the other Marine tells Tutuola that, "She Benson has PTSD, I would recognize that glassy-eyed look anywhere." At the end of the episode, the original suspect is cleared, and Benson apologizes to him, admitting that she was a victim of sexual assault.
In the season eleven episode "Perverted," Benson becomes the prime suspect in the sexual mutilation and murder of a biker gang member. As more evidence is found linking her to the crime, an Internal Affairs detective insinuates that she may have committed it while suffering from a flashback to the assault. The other detectives eventually discover that Benson has been framed by a man she sent to prison years earlier.
At the end of the season 14 finale "Her Negotiation", Benson is kidnapped by serial rapist/murderer William Lewis (Pablo Schreiber). During the season 15 premiere "Surrender Benson", Lewis makes her watch while he rapes and tortures the mother of his attorney/girlfriend and kills a police officer who attempted to pull him over for running a red light. He then beats, tortures, and holds her hostage for four days. Just as he is about to rape her, she breaks free, handcuffs him, and holds him at gunpoint. When he taunts her, she loses control and beats him within an inch of his life with an iron rod. She is rescued by her fellow detectives moments later, and Cragen puts her on mandatory leave so she can recover. "Madman brutalizes Olivia Benson as 'Law & Order: Special Victims Unit' returns." New York Daily News. September 25, 2013 She returns to work in the following episode, "Imprisoned Lives", which takes place two months later, but is still haunted by the experience. She begins seeing a therapist (Bill Irwin) to cope with the trauma. It is later revealed that Lewis survived and is in prison awaiting trial.
In "Psycho/Therapist", Lewis fires his attorney and chooses to represent himself. He calls Benson as a witness and accuses her of assaulting him because he rejected her sexual advances. She vehemently denies it, and lies under oath that she had acted in self-defense. Lewis is found guilty of kidnapping and assaulting a police officer, but the jury voices doubts about Benson's story and acquits him of rape. The episode closes with Benson weeping on the courthouse stairs and, four months later, Lewis being wheeled away on a stretcher after claiming to have had a seizure.
In "Beast's Obsession", Lewis uses the distraction caused by his (self-induced) seizure to escape from prison. He then rapes a teenaged girl, kidnaps her sister and threatens to kill her unless Benson tells the truth about her testimony. Benson holds a press conference and admits that she lied on the witness stand. When Lewis does not release the girl, Benson tracks him down and surrenders to him. With his hostage watching, Lewis at first attempts to rape Benson, but changes his mind when she refuses to show him fear; instead, he forces her to play Russian roulette with him. As a police squad closes in, Lewis taunts her one last time before committing suicide right in front of her.

Character development

Hargitay has deemed the storyline which saw Benson find her paternal family "probably the biggest thing that's ever happened to Olivia". She feels her character is a role model for teenage girls, revealing:


Reception

Hargitay has won a number of awards for her role as Benson: 'Individual Achievement for Best Female Lead' and 'Outstanding Female Lead' Gracie Awards in 2004 and 2009 respectively, an Emmy for 'Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series' in 2006, a Prism Award for 'Performance in a Drama Series Episode' in 2006, and a Golden Globe for 'Best Performance by an Actress in a Television Series' in 2005. Of her Emmy win, Hargitay commented: "It makes me only want to be better. Now I'm an Emmy winner. I have to step it up."
The San Francisco Chronicles John Carman has called Hargitay "the show's weakest performer" when the series originally premiered in 1999. In 2006, however, fellow San Francisco Chronicle writer Jean Gonick, deemed Benson a suitable role model for teenage girls, calling her "courageous and strong, and unspeakably gorgeous", and writing that "Olivia Benson is our own special hero. She battles evil, avenges her mother, faces her demons but refuses to date them."
A poll on the Hallmark Channel voted her second-greatest detective in the Law & Order franchise, only being beaten by Law & Order: Criminal Intent

Appearances on other shows

Benson appears on three episodes of Law & Order and one episode of Law & Order: Trial by Jury.






