[[Superman's Pal Jimmy Olsen]]

CATEGORIES: DC Comics titles, Superman titles, 1954 comic debuts, Superhero comics, Humor comics

Superman's Pal, Jimmy Olsen is an American comic book series published by DC Comics from September-October 1954 until March 1974, spanning a total of 163 issues. Featuring the adventures of Superman supporting character Jimmy Olsen, it contains stories often of humorous nature.   

Publication history

The 1952 television series Adventures of Superman co-starred actor Jack Larson, who appeared regularly as Jimmy Olsen.  Largely because of the popularity of Larson and his portrayal of the character, National Comics Publications (DC Comics) decided to create a regular title featuring Jimmy as the leading character.
Many of the issues include Jimmy undergoing a transformation of some form.  Some of these include:
Lucy Lane was introduced in issue #36 (April 1959) She was also the anonymous "Miss X" whom Jimmy kissed in issue #44 to break the spell that turned him into a werewolf. 
When Jack Kirby began working at DC in 1970, he insisted on this title since it was the lowest selling in the publishing line and without assigned talent at the time so he wouldn't cost someone their job. "Afterword." Jack Kirby's Fourth World Omnibus: Volume 1, New York: DC Comics, 2007. 141: "Since no ongoing creative team had been slated to Superman's Pal, Jimmy Olsen, "King of Comics" Jack Kirby made the title his DC launch point, and the writer/artist's indelible energy and ideas permeated every panel and word balloon of the comic." During his run, Kirby introduced many memorable characters, notably the Fourth World's New Gods, Darkseid, Project Cadmus and Transilvane. Kirby left the series with issue #148 (April 1972). 
Lucy Lane was believed to have died in Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane #120 (March 1972)
In 1958, a second title was introduced, Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane, which revolves around another supporting character in a similar fashion. Both titles ended in 1974 by merging into Superman Family. The new series would continue the numbering from Superman's Pal Jimmy Olsen. 159 "DC's 100-page Super Spectaculars were proving popular, so DC said goodbye to Supergirl, Superman's Pal Jimmy Olsen, Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane, and housed the characters together in Superman Family.  Continuing the numbering from where Superman's Pal Jimmy Olsen ended, the series featured classic reprints with new tales in the lead spot." 
A Superman's Pal Jimmy Olsen Special one-shot was published in December 2008, following on from the "Atlas" storyline, and leading into Superman: New Krypton.

Proposed TV series

In 1959, the producers of the action/adventure series Adventures of Superman were hit by a snag as to how revive the now-canceled series after series star George Reeves had died that summer from a gunshot wound. Jack Larson, who played Jimmy in the series, was approached with the idea of continuing the franchise as a spin-off for two new seasons of 26 episodes each to begin airing in 1960. Titled Superman's Pal Jimmy Olsen, it would focus on a more serious angle of Olsen's rising career as a reporter and journalist with Larson reprising his role. In place of Reeves, stock footage of Superman flying and a look-alike stunt double to play the Man of Steel. Disgusted at the thought of the producers trying to cash in and make money over the death of Reeves, Larson rejected the proposal, and the project went unmade.

Collected editions








