[[Jason Ricci]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, Living people, American blues singers, American blues harmonica players, LGBT musicians from the United States

Jason Ricci (February 3, 1974)Nagy, Levy . "Jason Ricci" . Levynagy Weblog . June 7, 2009 is an American harmonica player and singer.

Biography

Raised in Portland, Maine, Jason Ricci is the son of the controversial businessman/politician/activist Joe Ricci, founder of Elan School. Ricci started playing music in punk bands at the age of 14. Scripps News, November 28, 2007 After discovering a love of the harmonica and Blues music, he turned his attention in that direction.  In 1995, Ricci moved from Portland to Memphis, TN, where shortly thereafter he placed first in the Sonny Boy Blues Society contest at 21 years of age. Later that same year Ricci recorded his first album, Jason Ricci.
In Memphis, Ricci began playing with David Malone Kimbrough, son of blues great Junior Kimbrough, and soon was a part of the bands of both Kimbroughs and was sitting in with R. L. Burnside. "Out Gay Bluesman is opening Ears and Minds" . Scripps News, November 28, 2007 This also marked a dark period for Ricci, as drug addiction led to a one-year stint in jail.
In 1999, Ricci won the Mars National Harmonica Contest, and began playing with Keith Brown, later recording with him as well. In 2000, he received a  two-page write up in Blues Access magazine by Adam Gussow (harmonica player for Satan and Adam) saying:
After 15 months with Big Al and the Heavyweights, and a brief period of living in Raleigh, NC, Ricci started his own band, Jason Ricci & New Blood, in 2002. This band features Shawn Starski, who, in June 2008, was named by Guitar Player Magazine as one of the "Top Ten Hottest New Guitarists."   In 2005, Ricci was honored with the Muddy Waters Most Promising New Blues Artist award. 
In 2007
By January 2011, Ricci had relocated to New Orleans, and assembled a new band, Approved By Snakes, with guitarist John Lisi.
Ricci received "Best Harmonica Player" at the May 6, 2010 Blues Music Awards.

Controversy

Ricci is one of  the only openly gay male performers touring on the blues circuit today. This has been a professional obstacle as well as an opportunity for Ricci to challenge both gay stereotypes and traditional Blues expectations:  
  "The [gay] community doesn't like drum sets and guitars and actual live music. They're used to lip-synching, and dudes in dresses, and Madonna, and Cher, and techno beats. Those are the things that kept me from coming out earlier. I felt like I had nothing in common with the gay community, and I still don't feel like I have a lot in common with the community. I'm hoping that changes, but the majority of their icons are press-friendly little Mickey Mouse-doll figureheads that you're more likely to see on a show redecorating somebody's house than onstage at a blues festival... And when I did that, I wanted to sing about that. I wanted to write songs about what my life was like, and I wanted to use terminology that was modern."<ref name="ReferenceB">Long, Autumn . "Jason Ricci Gets His Rocks Off" . Blues Revue Magazine . February/March 2008</ref> 
 Though Ricci does not generally wear his sexuality on his sleeve on stage, his openness with being gay has occasionally been a difficult issue in the traditionally conservative Blues world, as he's been "disinvited" from a number of venues and events. Get Real Denver . December 20, 2007 
"Done With The Devil" signaled a new direction in Ricci's musical inspiration, as his study of the occult strongly influenced the writing on the album.W.. "Jason Ricci Bringing His Blues Harmonica Magic to K.C.". Camp KC  April 30, 2009 Ricci has become a student of Thelema and the writings of Aleister Crowley, and Ricci has gone so far as to call him "a great holy man."

Discography

Note: This discography does not include appearances by Jason Ricci or other members of New Blood on other artist's albums, or various   compilations.






