[[World War I reparations]]

CATEGORIES: Aftermath of World War I in Germany, Reparations, Treaty of Versailles

World War I reparations were the payments and transfers of property and equipment that Germany was forced to make under the Treaty of Versailles following its defeat during World War I. Article 231 of the Treaty (the 'war guilt' clause) declared Germany and its allies responsible for all 'loss and damage' suffered by the Allies during the war and provided the basis for reparations.
In 1921, the total sum due was decided by an Inter-Allied Reparations Commission and was set at 132 billion gold marks. However, the actual amount of reparations that Germany was obliged to pay out was not the 132 billion marks cited in 1921 but rather the 50 billion marks stipulated in Schedules A (12 billion marks) and B (38 billion marks). The historian Sally Marks stated the 112 billion marks in "C bonds" were entirely chimerical—a device to fool the public into thinking Germany would pay much more. The actual total payout from 1920 to 1931 (when payments were suspended indefinitely) was 20 billion German gold marks, worth about 5 billion US dollars or one billion British pounds. Of this amount, 12.5 billion was cash that came mostly from loans from New York bankers. The rest was goods like coal and chemicals, or from assets like railway equipment. The total amount of reparations was fixed in 1921 on the basis of the German capacity to pay, not on the basis of Allied claims. The highly publicized rhetoric of 1919 about paying for all the damages and all the veterans' benefits was irrelevant to the total, but it did affect how the recipients spent their share. Austria, Hungary, and Turkey were also supposed to pay some reparations but they were so impoverished that they in fact paid very little.  Germany was the only country rich enough to pay anything; it owed reparations chiefly to France, Britain, Italy and Belgium; the US received $100 million.
Payments were suspended for one year in June 1931 as proposed by U.S. president Herbert Hoover in the "Hoover Moratorium", and ended at the Lausanne Conference of July 1932. About one-eighth of the initial reparations had been paid. Following the Second World War, the London Conference (1953) required Germany to resume payment on the money borrowed to pay for reparations. The final installment of this repayment was made on 3 October 2010.

Background

In 1914, the First World War broke out. For the next four years fighting raged across Europe, the Middle East, Africa, and Asia. 9 On 8 January 1918, United States President Woodrow Wilson issued a statement that became known as the Fourteen Points. In part, this speech called for Germany to withdraw from the territory it had occupied and the formation of a League of Nations. 429Fourteen Points Speech During the autumn of 1918, the Central Powers began to collapse. 182–95 In particular, the German military was decisively defeated on the Western Front, while on the Home Front the navy mutinied prompting uprisings in Germany, which became known as the German Revolution. 71Tucker, p. 638Schmitt, p. 101 The German Government attempted to obtain a peace settlement based on the Fourteen Points, and maintained it was on this basis that they surrendered. Following negotiations, the Allied Powers and Germany signed an armistice, which came into effect on 11 November while German forces were still positioned in France and Belgium. 102Weinberg, p. 8Boyer, p. 526 In late 1918, Allied troops entered Germany and began the occupation of the Rhineland. 18
France was the location of most of the war's major battles and the French countryside was heavily scarred in the fighting. Furthermore, in 1918 during the German retreat, German troops devastated France's most industrialized region in the northeast. Extensive looting took place as German forces removed whatever material they could use and destroyed the rest. Hundreds of mines were destroyed along with railroads, bridges, and entire villages. Prime Minister of France Georges Clemenceau was determined, for these reasons, that any just peace required Germany to pay reparations for the damage they had caused. In addition, Clemenceau viewed reparations as a way of weakening Germany to ensure that they could not again threaten France. 41–3 and 58MacMillan, p. 202 Reparations would also go towards the reconstruction costs in other countries, such as Belgium, also directly affected by the war. 14 British Prime Minister David Lloyd George opposed harsh reparations, arguing instead for a smaller sum less crippling to the German economy so that Germany could remain a viable economic power and British trading partner. He furthermore argued that reparations should include war pensions for disabled veterans and allowances to be paid to war widows, which would, consequentially, reserve a larger share of the reparations for the British Empire. 44Brezina, p. 21Yearwood, p. 127 Wilson opposed these positions, and was adamant that there be no indemnity imposed upon Germany. 272
The Paris Peace Conference opened on 18 January 1919, aiming to establish a lasting peace between the Allied and Central Powers. 37 Demanding compensation from the defeated party was a common feature of peace treaties. 22 However, the financial terms of treaties signed, during the peace conference, were labelled reparations to distinguish them from punitive settlements, usually known as indemnities, as they were intended for reconstruction and the compensation of families who had been bereaved by the war. The opening article of the reparation section of the Treaty of Versailles, Article 231, served as a legal basis for the following articles, which obliged Germany to pay compensation,Marks (1978), p. 231 and limited German responsibility only to civilian damages. The same article, with the signatory's name changed, was also included in the treaties signed by Germany's allies. 231–2

German reaction

In February 1919, Foreign Minister Count Ulrich von Brockdorff-Rantzau informed the Weimar National Assembly that Germany would have to pay reparations for the devastation caused by the war, but would not pay for actual war costs. 133–5 Following the drafting of the Treaty of Versailles, on 7 May the German and Allied delegations met and the treaty was handed off to be translated and for a response to be issued. At this meeting Brockdorff-Rantzau stated that "We know the intensity of the hatred which meets us, and we have heard the victors' passionate demand that as the vanquished we shall be made to pay, and as the guilty we shall be punished". However, he proceeded to deny that Germany was solely responsible for the war. 135–6 Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles was not correctly translated. Instead of stating "... Germany accepts responsibility of Germany and her allies causing all the loss and damage ...", the German Government's edition reads "Germany admits it, that Germany and her allies, as authors of the war, are responsible for all losses and damages ...". 399–400 This resulted in a prevailing belief of humiliation among Germans as the article was seen as an injustice, and of Germany having signed "away her honor". 290Binkley, p. 400 Despite the public outrage, German government officials were aware "that Germany's position on this matter was not nearly so favorable as the imperial government had led the German public to believe during the war."Boemeke, pp. 537–8 Politicians seeking international sympathy, however, would continue to use the article for its propaganda value, convincing many who had not read the treaties that the article implied full war guilt. German revisionist historians who subsequently attempted to ignore the validity of the clause found a ready audience amongst 'revisionist' writers in France, Britain, and the USA. 21 The objective of both the politicians and historians was to prove that Germany was not solely guilty for causing the war, if that guilt could be disproven then the legal requirement to pay reparations would disappear. 15

Evolution of reparations

Initial demands

The Treaty of Versailles stated that a Reparation Commission would be established in 1921. This commission would consider the resources available to Germany, their capacity to pay, provide the German Government with an opportunity to be heard on the subject, and decide on the final reparation figure that Germany would be required to pay. In the interim, Germany was required to pay an equivalent of  gold marks ($5 billion) in gold, commodities, ships, securities or other forms. The money would also be used to pay Allied occupation costs and buy food and raw materials for Germany. 156Treaty of Versailles, articles 232-5 Article 121 of the Treaty of Neuilly acknowledged that "the resources of Bulgaria are not sufficient to enable her to make complete reparation". Therefore, the treaty required Bulgaria to pay a total sum equivalent of 2.250 billion Gold francs in reparations.Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye, articles 178-9Treaty of Trianon, article 162-3Treaty of Sèvres, article 231-6 In addition, Bulgaria was required to hand over thousands of livestock, to Greece, Romania, and the Serb-Croat-Slovene State "in restitution for animals taken away by Bulgaria during the war". This would not be credited towards the reparation figure. These shipments would not be credited agaisnt Bulgaria's reparation sum. They would, however, be credited for such acts.Treaty of Versailles, Annex IV-VTreaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye, Annex IV-VTreaty of Trianon, Annex V
In January 1921, growing impatient, the Allied Powers established the reparation sum at 226 billion gold marks. The Germans countered with an offer of 30 billion. 410 On 24 April 1921, the German Government wrote to the American Government expressing "her readiness to acknowledge for reparation purposes a total liability of 50 billion gold marks", but was also prepared "to pay the equivalent of this sum in annuities adapted to her economic capacity totalling 200 billion gold marks."FRUS, p. 46 In addition, the German Government stated "to accelerate the redemption of the balance" and "to combat misery and hatred created by the war", Germany was willing to provide the resources needed and "to undertake herself the rebuilding of townships, villages, and hamlets". 47

London Schedule of Payments

The London Schedule of Payments, of 5 May 1921, established "the full liability of all the Central Powers combined, not just Germany alone," at  gold marks. This sum was a compromise, promoted by Belgium (against higher figures demanded by the French and Italians and the lower figure the British supported), that "represented an assessment of the lowest amount that public opinion ... would tolerate."Marks (1978), p. 236
This figure was divided into three series of bonds. "A" and "B" Bonds, together, had a nominal value of ), smaller than what Germany had previously offered to pay. "C" Bonds, containing the remainder of the reparation figure, "were deliberately designed to be chimerical." They were "a political bargaining chip" that served the domestic policies of France and the United Kingdom. 113 The figure was completely unreal, with the primary function of misleading public opinion "into believing that the 132-billion-mark figure was being maintained." Furthermore, "Allied experts knew that Germany could not pay 132 billion marks and that the other Central Powers could pay little. Thus the A and B Bonds, which were genuine, represented the actual Allied assessment of German capacity to pay." Taking into account what had already been paid, between 1919 and 1921, Germany's immediate obligation was therefore 41 billion gold marks. 414
To pay towards this sum, Germany could pay in kind or via cash payments. Commodities, paid in kind, included coal, timber, chemical dyes, pharmaceuticals, livestock, agricultural machines, construction material, and factory machinery. The gold value of these would be deducted from what Germany was required to pay. In addition, helping to restore the university library of Louvain (destroyed by the Germans on 25 August 1914) was also credited towards the sum, as were some of the territorial changes imposed upon Germany by the treaty. 223–234Kramer, p. 10 The payment schedule required  annually, plus 26 per cent of the value of German exports. The German Government was to issue bonds at five per cent interest and set up a sinking fund of one per cent to support the payment of reparations.

End of reparations for Austria, Bulgaria, Hungary, and Turkey

Between the signing of the Treaty of Neuilly-sur-Seine and April 1922, Bulgaria paid 173 million gold francs in reparations. 18 In 1923, the Bulgarian reparation sum was revised downwards to 550 million gold francs, "plus a lump sum payment of 25 million francs for occupation costs". 234-5 Towards this figure, Bulgaria paid 41 million gold francs between 1925 and 1929. In 1932, the Bulgarian reparation obligation was abandoned following the Lausanne Conference. 84
Austria was "so impoverished" following the war, coupled with the collapse of the Bank of Vienna, resulted in no reparations being paid "beyond credits for transferred property". 59 Due to the collapse of the Hungarian economy, no reparations were paid other than coal deliveries. 60 Turkish reparations had been "sharply limited in view of the magnitude of Turkish territorial losses". However, the Treaty of Sèvres was never ratified. When the Treaty of Lausanne was signed, in 1923, Turkish reparations were "eliminated altogether." 

German defaults

From the initiation of reparations, German coal deliveries were below the level agreed. In an attempt to rectify this situation, the Spa Conference was held in July 1920. At this conference it was decided that Germany would be paid five marks per coal ton delivered, to facilitate coal shipments and help feed the miners. Despite this, Germany continued to default on her obligations. 235-6 By late 1922, the German defaults on payments had grown so serious and regular that a crisis engulfed the Reparations Commission. French and Belgian delegates urged the seizure of the Ruhr as a way of encouraging the Germans to make more effort to pay, while the British supported postponing payments to facilitate the financial reconstruction of Germany. 239-40 On 26 December 1922, Germany defaulted on timber deliveries. The timber quota was based upon a German proposal and the default was massive. The Allies were unanimous that the default was in bad faith. In January 1923, the German Government defaulted on coal deliveries for the 34th time in three years despite quota reductions following the loss of the Upper Silesian coal fields (containing 11 per cent of German coal resources), which had been transferred to Poland. 241Hehn, p. 66
On 9 January 1923, the Reparation Commission declared the Germans in default of their coal deliveries and voted to occupy the Ruhr to enforce Germany's reparation commitments. The British were the lone dissenting voice to both measures. On 11 January, French and Belgian soldiers - supported by engineers, including an Italian contingent - entered the region initiating the Occupation of the Ruhr. 243Bell, pp. 24–5 
The French Premier Raymond Poincaré was deeply reluctant to order the occupation, and had only taken this step after the British had rejected his proposals for more moderate sanctions against Germany. 244 By December 1922, Poincaré was faced with Anglo-American-German hostility and saw coal for French steel production draining away. 26 Exasperated with the British failure to act, he wrote to the French ambassador in London:
 Judging others by themselves, the English, who are blinded by their loyalty, have always thought that the Germans did not abide by their pledges inscribed in the Versailles Treaty because they had not frankly agreed to them. ... We, on the contrary, believe that if Germany, far from making the slightest effort to carry out the treaty of peace, has always tried to escape her obligations, it is because until now she has not been convinced of her defeat. ... We are also certain that Germany, as a nation, resigns herself to keep her pledged word only under the impact of necessity. 140 
The occupation proved profitable, with the occupying powers receiving 900 million gold marks. However, the real issue behind the occupation was not German defaults on coal and timber deliveries, but forcing Germany "to acknowledge her defeat in World War I and to accept the Versailles Treaty."Marks (1978), p. 245 Poincaré recognized that if Germany could get away with defying Versailles in regards to the reparations, then a precedent would be created, and inevitably the Germans would proceed to dismantle the rest of the Versailles treaty. 244-5

Dawes Plan

Although the French succeeded in their objective during the Ruhr occupation, the Germans had wrecked their economy by funding passive resistance and brought about Hyperinflation. Under Anglo-American pressure, along with the simultaneous decline in the value of the franc, the French were increasingly isolated and their diplomatic position weakened. 246 In October, a committee (consisting of American, Belgian, British, French, German and Italian experts) chaired by Director of the US Bureau of the Budget Charles G. Dawes was formed to consider "from a purely technical standpoint" how to balance the German budget, stabilize the economy and set an achievable level of reparations. 37–8
In April 1924, the Dawes Plan was accepted and replaced the London schedule of payment. While the "C" Bonds were omitted from the framework of the plan, they were not formally rescinded. As part of the plan, French troops were to withdraw from the Ruhr, a bank independent of the German Government was to be established, with a ruling body at least  marks was to be raised (Fifty per cent coming from the United States, 25 per cent from Britain, and the rest from other European nations) to back the German currency and to aid in the payment of reparations. 82 and 114

Young Plan

Under the Dawes Plan, Germany always met her obligations. However, they considered the plan a temporary measure and expected a revised plan at a future date. In late 1927, the Agent-General for Reparations "called for a more permanent scheme" for payments, and in 1928 the Germans followed suit. 249 German Foreign Minister Gustav Stresemann called for a final reparation plan to be established alongside an early withdrawal of Allied troops from the Rhineland. The French, aware of their weakening political and financial position, acquiesced. On 16 September 1928, a joint Entente-German statement was issued acknowledging the need for a new reparation plan. 249-50
In February 1929, a new committee was formed to re–examine reparations. Chaired by the American banker Owen D. Young, the committee presented its findings in January 1930. The "Young Plan" was accepted and later ratified by the German Government on 12 March 1930. The plan established a final reparation figure at 112 billion gold marks (26.35 billion dollars), with a new payment schedule that would see reparations completed by 1988 (the first time that a final date had been set). In addition, foreign oversight of German finances was to end with the withdrawal of the Reparations Agency, which would be replaced by the Bank for International Settlements. The bank was established to provide cooperation among German banks as well as to receive and disburse reparation payments. A further loan of 300 million dollars was to be raised, and given to Germany. 70Bell, p. 38Marks (1978), pp. 250-1Young, p. 171
As a result of the plan, German payments were half of what had been required under the Dawes Plan. 251-2 The implementation of the Young Plan required the Anglo-French withdrawal from the Rhineland within months. 25 Despite the progress, there was increasing German hostility to the plan. In December 1929, 5.8 million voters registered their opposition to the plan during a plebiscite, which resulted in Adolf Hitler gaining "significant national attention and valuable right-wing financing."Marks (1978), p. 251

End of German reparations

In March 1930, the German Government collapsed and was replaced by a new coalition led by Chancellor Heinrich Brüning. In June, Allied troops withdrew from near Mainz - the last occupation zone in the Rhineland - and Brüning's Government broached the subject of demanding further refinement to reparations, only to be shot down by the British ambassador to France William Tyrrell. 171-2 During 1931, a financial crisis began in Germany. In May, Creditanstalt, the largest bank in Austria, collapsed sparking a banking crisis in both Germany and Austria. In response, Brüning announced that Germany was suspending reparation payments. This resulted in a massive withdrawal of domestic and foreign funds from German banks. By mid-July, all German banks had closed. 174 French policy, to this point, had been to provide Germany with financial support to help Brüning's Government stabilize the country. Brüning, now under considerable political pressure from the far-right and President Paul von Hindenburg, was unable to make any concessions or reverse policy. As a result, Brüning was unable to borrow money from foreign or domestic sources. Further attempts to enlist British support to end reparations failed, as the British highlighted it was a joint issue with both France and the United States. In early July, Brüning announced "his intention to seek the outright revision of the Young Plan". 56-8 In light of the crisis and with the prospect of Germany being unable to repay its debts, United States President Herbert Hoover intervened. In June, Hoover publically proposed a one year moratorium to reparation and war debts. By July, the "Hoover Moratorium" had been accepted. 155
The moratorium was met with widespread support from both Germany and the United Kingdom. The French, initially hesitant, eventually agreed to support the American proposal. 200 However, on 13 July, the German Darmstädter Bank collapsed leading to further bankruptcies and a rise in unemployment further exacerbating the financial crisis within Germany. 160 With the Great Depression now exerting its influence, the Bank for International Settlements reported that the Young Plan was unrealistic in light of the economic crisis and urged the world governments to reach a new settlement on the various debts they owed each other. During January 1932, Brüning stated that he would now seek the complete cancellation of reparations. His position was supported by the British and Italians, and opposed by the French. 137
Due to the political differences between each country on the subject, along with impending elections in both France and Germany, a conference could not be established until June. This delay brought about the downfall of Brüning's Government. On 16 June, the Lausanne Conference opened. However, discussions were complicated by the ongoing World Disarmament Conference. At the latter conference, the Americans informed the British and French that they would not be allowed to default on their war debts. In turn, they recommended that war debts be tied into German reparation payments, which the Germans objected too. On 9 July, an agreement was reached and signed. The Lausanne Conference annulled the Young Plan and required Germany to pay a final single installment of 3 billion marks (to save France from political humiliation) thus ending Germany's obligation to pay reparations. 137-8Mommsen, p. 454Joshi, p. 78

Amount paid by Germany

The precise figure Germany paid is a matter of dispute. 140 The German Government estimated that they had paid the equivalent of 67.8 billion gold marks in reparations. The German figure included, other than gold or goods in kind, the scuttling of the interned German fleet at Scapa Flow, state property lost in lands ceded to other countries, and the loss of colonial territories. 19 The Reparation Commission and the Bank for International Settlements state, that in total,  gold marks. 424 Ferguson further estimates that this sum amounted to only 2.4 per cent of the total German national income between 1919 and 1932. Historian Stephen Schuker places the figure at an average of 2 per cent of national income between 1919 and 1931, in cash and kind, making a total transfer equal to 5.3 per cent of the national income for the period. 43
Gerhard Weinberg argues that reparations were paid, towns were rebuilt, orchards replanted, mines reopened and pensions paid. However, the burden of repairs was shifted away from the German economy and onto the damaged economies of the war's victors. 16

Loan payments

To help make reparations payments, Germany took out various loans during the 1920s. In 1933, following the cancellation of reparations, the new German Chancellor, Adolf Hitler, cancelled all payments. In June 1953, an agreement was reached with West Germany in regards to this existing debt. West Germany agreed to make payments against the loans that had been defaulted on, but deferred some of the debt until West and East Germany were unified. In 1995, following reunification, Germany commenced making the final payments towards the loans that had been defaulted on in the 1920s. On 3 October 2010, a final installment of $94 million was made settling German loan debts in regards to reparations.

Summary

Analysis

Impact on the German economy

=Overall=

During the period of reparations, Germany received between 27 and 38 billion marks in loans. 417Henig, p. 62 By 1931, German foreign debt stood at 21.514 billion marks, with the main sources of aid being the United States, Britain, the Netherlands, and Switzerland. 7 In additional to post-war loans, Detlev Peukert highlights that during the war Germany did not raise taxes or create new ones to pay for war-time expenses. Rather, loans were taken out placing Germany in an economically precarious position as more money entered circulation destroying the link between paper money and the gold reserve that had been maintained before the war. With defeat, Germany was not in a position to impose reparations and pay off their, now, colossal war debts. 62
Peukert therefore argues that the financial problems that arose in the early 1920s were not the fault of reparations, but the legacy of German government and economic decisions during the war. Niall Ferguson partially supports this analysis. He comments had reparations not been imposed, Germany would still had significant problems caused by the need to pay war debts combined with the demands of voters for more social services. 420-21 Ferguson further argues that these problems were aggravated by a trade deficit and a weak exchange rate for the mark, during 1920. Afterwards, as the value of the mark rose, inflation became an issue. None of these, he contends, were the result of reparations. 413 Ferguson highlights that even without reparations, total public spending in Germany between 1920 and 1923 comprised 33 per cent of German net national product. A.J.P. Taylor comments that "Germany was a net gainer by the financial transactions of the nineteen-twenties: she borrowed far more from private American investors ... than she paid in reparations." P.M.H. Bell comments that the creation of a multi-national committee, which would eventually result in the Dawes Plan, was done to consider how the German budget could be balanced, the currency stabilized, and fixing the German economy to ease reparation payments. 37 Max Winkler comments that from 1924 onward German officials were "virtually flooded with loan offers by foreigners." Overall, he argues, the German economy performed reasonably well until the foreign investments funding the economy, and the loans funding reparations payments (which had ", were suddenly withdrawn with the Stock Market Crash of 1929. This collapse was magnified by the volume of loans provided to German companies by US lenders. Even the reduced payments of the Dawes plan were primarily financed through a large volume of international loans. 86–7 
While Germany initially had a trade deficit, British policy during the early 1920s was to reintegrate Germany into European trade as soon as possible. Likewise, France attempted to secure trade deals with Germany. 24 During the mid to late 1920s, trade between France and Germany grew rapidly. French imports of German goods "increased by 60 per cent" highlighting how "closely linked" French industrial growth was to "Germany production" and the increase in "Franco-German co-operation."Bell, p. 38-9 
Max Hantke and Mark Spoerer provide a different perspective on the effect of reparations on the German economy. They note that focusing on the reparation and inflation issue ignores "the fact that the restriction of the German military to 115,000 men relieved the German central budget considerably." The duo comment that their findings show "that even under quite rigorous assumptions the net economic burden of the Treaty of Versailles was much less heavy than has been hitherto thought, in particular if we confine our perspective to the Reich's budget. 851 They note that "though politically a humiliation" the limitation on the military "was beneficial in fiscal terms" and that their economic models show that "the restriction of the size of the army was clearly beneficial for the Reich budget."Hantke, p. 860 Additionally, their economic scenarios highlight that while "the Treaty of Versailles" was "overall clearly a burden on the German economy" it "also offered a substantial peace dividend for Weimar's non-revanchist budget politicians." They conclude that "The fact that politicians did not make sufficient use of this imposed gift supports the hypothesis that the Weimar Republic suffered from home-made political failure."Hantke, p. 861

=Hyperinflation=

Erik Goldstein wrote that in 1921 the payment of reparations caused a crisis and that the occupation of the Ruhr had a disastrous effect on the German economy, resulting in the German Government printing more money as the currency collapsed. Hyperinflation began and printing presses worked overtime to print Reichsbank notes, by November 1923 one US dollar was worth  Ferguson comments that the policy of the Economics Minister Robert Schmidt led Germany to avoid economic collapse from 1919–1920, but that reparations accounted for most of the Reich deficit in 1921 and 1922 and (along with Barry Eichengreen) that reparations were the cause of the hyperinflation. 409–10 
However, the argument that it was reparations that caused the inflation and collapse of the mark is countered by several historians. Gerhard Weinberg comments that Germans simply refused to pay by doing so destroyed their own currency. Anthony Lentin concurs. He argues that inflation was "a consequence of the war rather than of the peace" and the hyperinflation was a result of the "German government's reckless issue of paper money" during the Allied occupation of the Ruhr. 26 Sally Marks notes that the Germans claimed that reparations destroyed the Mark while British and French experts believed that the Mark was being sabotaged, to avoid budgetary and currency reform and to evade reparations. Marks argues that historians who claim reparations caused hyperinflation have overlooked "that the inflation long predated reparations" and have also overlooked how "inflation mushroomed" from the summer of 1921 to the end of 1922 "when Germany was actually paying very little in reparations" and have failed to explain why during "the period of least inflation coincided with the period of largest reparation payments ... or why Germans claimed after 1930 that reparations were causing deflation" concluding "there is no doubt that British and French suspicions late in 1922 were sound."Marks (1978), p. 239 Marks argues the "astronomic inflation which ensued was a result of German policy", whereby the government paid for passive resistance in the Ruhr "from an empty exchequer" and paid off its domestic and war debts with worthless marks. Bell agrees. He comments "inflation had little direct connection with reparation payments themselves, but a great deal to do with the way the German government chose to subsidize industry and to pay the costs of passive resistance to the occupation the Ruhr by extravagant use of the printing press." Bell concludes that hyperinflation was not an inevitable consequence of the Treaty of Versailles, but was among the actual results. 25

Reparations

=Contemporary=

John Maynard Keynes "set the fashion for critics of the economic aspects of the treaty" and "made probably the severest and most sweeping indictment of its economic provisions". 161 Keynes was temporarily attached to the British Treasury during the war and was their official representative at the peace conference. He later resigned "when it became evident that hope could no longer be entertained of substantial modifications in the draft Terms of Peace" due to the "policy of the Conference towards the economic problems of Europe". In 1919, he wrote The Economic Consequences of the Peace based on his objections. 146 and called the treaty a "Carthaginian peace" that would economically effect all of Europe. 86-7 Keynes argued that the treaty's reparation figures "generally exceed Germany's capacity" to pay. 215 He asserted that 10 billion dollars was the "safe maximum figure", but even then he did "not believe that could pay as much". 200 The Reparation Commission, he believed, was a tool that could "be employed to destroy Germany's commercial and economic organization as well as to exact payment". 79 Rather, in Keynes' opinion, the reparation figure should have been fixed "well within Germany's capacity to pay" so to "make possible the renewal of hope and enterprise within her territory" and to "avoid the perpetual friction and opportunity of improper pressure arising out of the Treaty clauses". 265 Furthermore, Keynes identified reparations as the "main excursion into the economic field" by the Treaty of Versailles, but notes that the treaty included "no provisions for the economic rehabilitation of Europe, – nothing to make the defeated Central Empires into good neighbors, nothing to stabilize the new States of Europe, nothing to reclaim Russia; nor ... promote in any way a compact of economic solidarity amongst the Allies themselves."Keynes, p. 226 Coal provides an example of these destabilizing effects within Germany and beyond. Keynes claimed that the "surrender of the coal will destroy German industry" although conceding that without coal shipments, as reparations, the French and Italian industry – damaged directly via the war or indirectly due to damage to coal mines – would be effected. He notes that this is "not yet the whole problem". The knock on effects would also impact Central and Northern Europe, as well neutral states such as Switzerland and Sweden who made up for their own coal deficiencies by trading with Germany. Likewise, Keynes argued Austria would now be consigned to "industrial ruin" as "nearly all the coalfields of the former Empire lie outside of what is now German-Austria". 94-5 
Historian Claude Campbell notes that the "apparent majority did not regard the treaty as perfect". Rather, as Bernard Baruch comments in The Making of the Reparation and Economic Sections of the Treaty, most believed it to be the best agreement obtainable under the circumstances. Campbell notes that it was a minority who attacked the treaty, but these attacks "centered upon its economic provisions". 160 James T. Shotwell, writing in What Germany Forgot, claimed "the only 'unendurable servitudes' in the treaty were in the sections on Reparation and the Polish settlement and raised the question as to what part of Germany's grievance against the peace lay in the substance of its exactions and what part in the manner of their imposition." Sir Andrew McFayden, who also represented the British Treasury at the peace conference and later worked with the Reparation Commission, published his work Don't Do it Again. McFayden's position "falls somewhere between the views of Keynes and Shotwell". His attack on reparations "was as harsh as Keynes" but conceded the "fault did not lie primarily in the provisions of the treaty but in their execution" and also believed "that he Polish settlement was the only readjustment ... which was decidedly unwise."Campbell, pp. 161-2 Albrecht-Carrié highlights that prior to the German surrender Woodrow Wilson dispatched a note to the German Government on 5 November 1918, the terms of which were accepted by the German Government. The note stated that the allies "under-stand that compensation will be made by Germany for all damage done to the civilian population of the Allies and their property by the aggression of Germany by land, by sea, and from the air." Regardless of which, Albrecht-Carrié concedes that the reparation section of the treaty proved "to be a dismal failure."Albrecht-Carrié (1940), p. 16 Campbell comments "although there was much in the peace that was 'petty, unjust, and humiliating', there was little aside from reparation clauses and certain territorial concessions, which had much real bearing upon Germany's economic future."Campbell, p. 162 Summarizing the view of economists throughout the 1920s, she notes that the territorial changes to Germany were "not necessarily ... economically unsound", but the removal of the Saar and territory to Poland thus "depriving Germany of her resources in excess of the amount necessary to fulfill the legitimate economic demands of the victors ... was indefensible". Furthermore, the treaty failed to "include ... provisions looking to the restoration of Germany to her former position as the chief economic and financial stabilizing influence in central Europe" and that this was economically shortsighted and was a failing of the treaty from an "economic standpoint". 163
Étienne Mantoux, a French economist, was the harshest critic of Keynes during the period. In his a posthumously published book, The Carthaginian Peace, or the Economic Consequences of Mr. Keynes, Mantoux asserted that Keynes "had been wrong on various counts, especially with respect to his predictions about Germany's coal, iron and steel production ... and its level of national saving."Cord, p. 41 Keynes had argued that the overall European output of iron would decrease, however Mantoux highlights the opposite occurred. By 1929, European iron output had increased by ten per cent from that of 1913. In regards to Germany, Keynes believed that this overall European trend would also effect German iron and steel production. Mantoux demonstrates that this prediction was also incorrect. By 1927, German steel output had increased by 30 per cent and iron output increased by 38 per cent from 1913. Keynes predicted that German coal extraction would also decrease and contended Germany would not be able to immediately export coal following the war. Mantoux also attacks these arguments. By 1920, German was exporting 15 million tons of coal a year and reached 35 million tons by 1926. By 1929, German coal mining had risen by 30 per cent, on the 1913 figures, due to increased labor efficiency methods that had been employed. In regards to national savings, Keynes stated 2 billion marks would only be possible following the treaty. Mantoux highlights that the 1925 German national savings figure was estimated at 6.4 billion marks raising to 7.6 billion marks by 1927. 162-163 Mantoux calculated that Germany took out between 35-8 billion marks in loans during the 1920-31 period, while only paying out 21 billion in reparations. This, he argues, allowed Germany to re-equip, expand, and modernize her industry. Highlighting the rearmament under Hitler, Mantoux suggested Germany "had been in a stronger position to pay reparations than Keynes had made out". He further argues that Germany could have paid all of the reparations had they wanted to, and that the problem was not the Germans were unable to pay, but rather that they were unwilling to pay. 70 
In 1954, then United States Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles - one of the authors of Article 231 - commented that "Efforts to bankrupt and humiliate a nation merely incite a people of vigor and of courage to break the bonds imposed upon them. ... Prohibitions thus incite the very acts that are prohibited."Immerman, p. 10

=Modern=

Geoff Harcourt, commenting on the debate between John Maynard Keynes and Étienne Mantoux's work, states that Keynes' had a "very considerable" impact on the pubic and "more than three-quarters of a century after its first appearance, continues to exercise a powerful influence on our understanding of some of the key turning points in the twentieth-century". He notes that Keynes' arguments, that reparations would lead to German economic collapse, have been adopted "by historians of almost all political persuasions" and have colored the way historians and the public "see the unfolding events in Germany and the decades between Versailles and the outbreak of the Second World War." In regards to Mantoux's work, he notes that it "is not simply a critique of Keynes", but "a stimulus to question the received wisdom's interpretation of the unfolding events in Germany". Despite Mantoux highlighting the errors "in great detail", Harcourt notes that Mantoux's work "has not led us to revise our general judgment of Keynes" yet "it does make us question the soundness of theoretical and empirical aspects" of his arguments. 21 A. J. P. Taylor comments that in "1919 many people believed that the payment of reparations would reduce Germany to a state of Asiatic poverty." He notes that Keynes "held this view, as did all Germans; and probably many Frenchmen". However, these "apprehensions of Keynes and the Germans were grotesquely exaggerated". 44 Taylor "shrewdly concludes that Étienne Mantoux had the better of his controversy with John Maynard Keynes". 42 Stephen Schuker contends that Keynes' "tendentious but influential" book was "ably refuted" by Mantoux. 7 Richard J. Evans comments "the economic history of the 1920s and early 1930s seemed to confirm" the arguments of Keynes, yet "as we now know" Keynes reparation arguments were wrong. Evans contends the economic problems that arose were a result of the inflation of 1923, which lay with the German government rather than reparations. Robert Cord comments that until the release of Mantoux's work, "nobody seemed capable of mounting a serious challenge to his economic arguments." Despite Mantoux mounting a "convincing broadside" against Keynes' work, his "attack came far too late to do any real damage to Keynes's reputation". Ruth Henig notes that while Mantoux did not rival Keynes' "in terms of immediate impact or huge sales" his "arguments have been supported and reinforced in more recent historical writing" resulting in the scholarly consensus now resting on the position that Germany was capable of paying what had been asked for. 63
Despite this, the "traditional interpretation of the treaty's impact on Germany" was that it "plunged the nation into an economic free fall". 95 This view was shared by the German people, who believed the treaty was robbing Germany of its wealth. German banker Max Warburg went as far as to characterize the terms of the treaty as "pillage on a global scale". 401 Niall Ferguson highlights that the German view was incorrect and "not many historians would today agree with Warburg". However, several historians do echo the earlier German views. Norman Davies comments that the treaty forced Germany to "pay astronomic reparations"Davies, p. 133 while Tim McNeese states "France and Britain had placed war damages on Germany to the tune of billions of gold marks, which the defeated Germans could not begin to pay in earnest."McNeese, p. 19 In an analysis of the impact of reparations on Germany, Ferguson comments that they were "less of a burden than Keynes and others claimed" and that the "potential burden on national income of the annuity vary from 5 percent to 10 percent." However, he cautions against underestimating the initial German effort to pay. Prior to the implementation of the Dawes Plan, Germany transferred between eight and 13 billion gold marks, which amounted to "between 4 and 7 percent of total national income". Ferguson calculates that "the annuity demanded in 1921 put an intolerable strain on the state's finances" and total expenditure - between 1920 and 1923 - amounted to "at least 50 percent of Reich revenue, 20 percent of total Reich spending and 10 percent of total public spending."Boemeke, p. 425 Thus, Ferguson argues, reparations "undermined confidence in the Reich's creditworthiness" and "were therefore excessive - as the German government claimed."Boemeke, p. 426 Hantke and Spoerer comment that "reparation payments were indeed a severe economic burden for Germany". They note that "the German economy was deprived of between one and 2.2 billion Reichsmark (RM) annually, which amounted in the late 1920s to nearly 2.5 per cent of Germany's GDP."Hantke, p. 849 Gerald Feldman argues that "there can be no question that the entire London schedule could be viewed as a way of reducing the reparations bill without the Allied publics being fully informed of what was going on. This was recognized by at least some German politicians, one of whom optimistically argued that 'the entente will only demand the 50 billion marks, not the rest. They have only called for the rest for domestic political reasons.'"Feldman, p. 339 However, he notes that the prospect that the 'C' bonds would be evoked hung over the German Government like a "Damocles Sword". 430 In addition to Feldman and Ferguson's opposition, Peter Kruger, Barry Eichengreen, and Steven Webb all concur that the "the initial German effort to pay reparations" was substantial and "produced an immense strain" on the German economy. 445-6 
Several historians take the middle ground between condemning reparations and supporting the argument that they were not a complete burden upon Germany. Detlev Peukert states that "Reparations did not, in fact, bleed the German economy" as had been feared, however the "psychological effects of reparations were extremely serious, as was the strain that the vicious circle of credits and reparations placed the international financial system."Peukert, p . 197 P.M.H. Bell comments that while reparations were unwelcome in Germany and did provide a "strain on the German balance of payments", they could be paid and were also "compatible with a general recovery in European commerce and industry." Robert Boyce called reparations "a heavy burden on Germany, both as a financial charge ... and as a charge on Germany's balance of payments". However, he notes while "Germany claimed it could not afford to pay reparations" this was far from the truth. He states "in fact Germany had made little effort to pay reparations. It refused to levy the necessary taxes, and far from accumulating the foreign exchange required for their payment by collecting some of the overseas earnings of German exporters, it allowed them to leave their earnings abroad."Martel (2010), p. 183 William R. Keylor echoes these thoughts. He comments "an increase in taxation and reduction in consumption in the Weimar Republic would have yielded the requisite export surplus to generate the foreign exchange needed to service the reparation debt."Boemeke, p. 502 However, Charles Feinstein contends that these kind of arguments overlook that there would have been extreme reluctance from the Germans "to accept even a modest increase in taxation to meet what was universally regarded as an unjustified and oppressive imposition by hostile adversaries." While Feinstein concedes that "even if the economic aspects ... were not as crippling as had been assumed in the 1920s, the exaction of reparations was still of deep political and psychological significance for Germany. 32
Sally Marks comments "There are those ... who claim reparations were unpayable. In financial terms, that is untrue.......Marks (2013), pp. 632-659 Marks argues that Germany could have easily paid the 50 billion marks in reparations, but instead chose to repeatedly default on payments as part of a political strategy of undermining Versailles. 255 Marks highlights that in 1921 Germany met her requirements in full because custom posts were occupied by Allied troops. Afterwards, once the Allies relinquished control of the customs posts Germany made no further payments in cash until 1924 following the implementation of the Dawes Plan. 238 In regards to the terms of the treaty, Marks comments that while Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles "established an unlimited theoretical liability", Article 232 limited German responsibility to pay only for civilian damages. When the 1921 conference in London was called, to determine how much Germany should pay, the Allies calculated on the basis of what Germany could pay, not on their needs. 232 In this way, Marks argues, the Germans largely escaped paying for the war, and instead shifted the costs onto American investors. 254 Marks states that the delay until 1921, to establish a final total, "was actually in Germany's interest" as the figures discussed at the peace conference were "astronomic" and she highlights the British contingent for particular comment. "The British experts, Lords Sumner and Cunliffe, were so unrealistic that they were nicknamed 'the heavenly twins'." Marks also comments "much ink has been wasted on the fact that civilian damages were stretched to cover war widows' pensions and allowances for military dependents." As reparations were based on what Germany could pay, Marks highlights the inclusion of such items did not affect German liability but merely altered distribution of reparations: the "inclusion of pensions and allowances increased the British share of the pie but did not enlarge the pie." Bernadotte Schmitt comments had "pensions and separation allowances ... not been included, reparations would probably never have become the bogey that poisoned the post-war world for so many years."Schmitt, p. 107 Taylor comments that "no doubt the impoverishment of Germany was caused by war, not by reparations. Not doubt the Germans could have paid reparations, if they had regarded them as an obligation of honour, honestly incurred." However, he concedes that "reparations ... kept the passions of war alive." Peter Liberman notes that while the Germans believed they could not meet such demands of them, the "French believed that Germany could pay and only lacked the requisite will" to do so. Liberman highlights that this is "a position that has gained support from recent historical research." In regards to Germany's capacity to pay, he focuses on coal. He notes that German coal consumption, per capita, was higher than France's despite coal shipments being consistently short. Furthermore, he comments "the reparations demanded at Versailles were not far out of proportion to German economic potential" and highlights that in terms of national income it was similar to what the Germans demanded of France following the Franco-Prussian War. Rather than a weakened Germany, he states the opposite was true. 67
Keylor comments that the literature on reparations has "long suffered from gross misrepresentation, exaggeration, and outright falsification" and that it "should "finally succumb to the archive-based discoveries of scholars". Diane Kunz, summarizing the historiography on the subject, comments that historians have refuted the myth that reparations caused an "intolerable burden" on Germany. 524 While Marks notes that a "substantial degree of scholarly consensus now suggests that paying ... was within Germany's financial capacity". 357 Ruth Henig comments "most historians of the Paris peace conference now take the view that, in economic terms, the treaty was not unduly harsh on Germany and that, while obligations and damages were inevitably much stressed in the debates at Paris to satisfy electors reading the daily newspapers, the intention was quietly to give Germany substantial help towards paying her bills, and to meet many of the German objections by amendments to the way the reparations schedule was in practice carried out."Henig, p. 65



Notes




