[[Jack Johnson (ice hockey)]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 births, American ice hockey defencemen, Carolina Hurricanes draft picks, Columbus Blue Jackets players, Ice hockey people from Michigan, Ice hockey players at the 2010 Winter Olympics, Living people, Los Angeles Kings players, Medalists at the 2010 Winter Olympics, Michigan Wolverines men's ice hockey players, National Hockey League first round draft picks, Olympic ice hockey players of the United States, Olympic medalists in ice hockey, Olympic silver medalists for the United States, People from Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA Hockey National Team Development Program players

John Joseph Louis "Jack" Johnson III (born January 13, 1987) is an American professional ice hockey defenseman and an alternate captain of the Columbus Blue Jackets of the National Hockey League (NHL). He has previously played for the Los Angeles Kings. Johnson is known as a capable two-way defensemen, combining physical prowess and offensive capabilities in his style of play.thehockeynews.php?4956
Following two years with the USA Hockey National Team Development Program, Johnson was selected 3rd overall by the Carolina Hurricanes in the 2005 NHL Entry Draft. After a year at the University of Michigan, Johnson's rights were traded to the Los Angeles Kings. Johnson would play another year at Michigan before signing his first professional contract with the Kings. In February 2012, he was traded to the Columbus Blue Jackets after five seasons in Los Angeles. Johnson has represented the United States on the international stage multiple times, most notably playing for Team USA at the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver.

Playing career

Amateur career

Jack Johnson attended Shattuck-Saint Mary's Boarding School in Minnesota. As a sophomore during the 2002–03 hockey season, Johnson scored 15 goals and 27 assists as he helped the school's Midget Major AAA team win the U.S. National Championship along with current NHL player Sidney Crosby.
Johnson was drafted by the Carolina Hurricanes in the first round, third overall, in the 2005 NHL Entry Draft from the Team USA under-18 national team, but did not immediately jump to the NHL, instead playing for the University of Michigan in the Central Collegiate Hockey Association. In his freshman season, Johnson set school records for points (32) and penalty minutes (149) by a freshman defenseman. After his freshman season, however, with the Hurricanes needing a defenseman and Johnson having committed to another collegiate season (the Hurricanes had tried to sign him after his freshman season ended),
After his rights were traded, Johnson played one more season for the Wolverines, setting the school record for the most goals (16) by a sophomore defenseman in a single season and was named the CCHA Offensive Defenseman of the Year.

Professional career

=Los Angeles Kings=

After Michigan lost in the West Regional Semifinals of the 2007 NCAA Tournament, rather than return to Michigan and finish the semester, Johnson jumped to the NHL and signed his entry-level contract with the Kings in March 2007, making his NHL debut on March 29 against the Vancouver Canucks. Johnson would play five games on the season, recording eighteen penalty minutes and no points. Johnson recorded his first NHL point on October 10, 2007; assisting a Kyle Calder goal in a loss to the Dallas Stars. His first goal came on October 19, 2007 against goalie Roberto Luongo of the Vancouver Canucks. Johnson scored 3 goals and 8 assists that season.
Early in the 2008-09 season, Johnson suffered a shoulder injury and missed 41 games after needing surgery.
During the 2009-10 season, Johnson would greatly improve his game, scoring eight goals and 28 assists, 2nd only to Drew Doughty in defensive scoring on the Kings. His play earned him a selection to the Team USA at the 2010 Olympics along with Kings team captain Dustin Brown, winning silver.
On January 8, 2011, Johnson signed a seven-year extension with the Kings, at the time, Johnson led all Kings defensemen in points scored with 4 goals and 24 assists. The contract carries a $4.3 million cap hit. He would end the 2010-2011 NHL season with a career high 42 points, ranking 6th among all Kings skaters. His 2011-12 season with the Kings would be a tough one for Johnson however, as he failed to score at his level the season before with only 24 points in 61 games by February 12, 2012.

=Columbus Blue Jackets=

thumb|right|Johnson playing for the Columbus Blue Jackets in 2013. On February 23, 2012, Johnson was traded by the Kings to the Columbus Blue Jackets along with a conditional first round draft pick in exchange for Jeff Carter.
With the  2013 NHL lockout halting play to start the year, Johnson spent the lockout training so he would be in the top shape once the game returned. In the shortened 2012-13 NHL season, Johnson was one of the Blue Jackets alternate captains, and was considered the de facto leader of the team as it almost qualified to the playoffs.dispatch.html
He scored one of the goals in the season closer against the Nashville Predators, and broke the Blue Jackets record for most ice time in regulation nearing 35 minutes in a game against the Red Wings, which was also the individual record that season. 
Johnson is considered a front-runner to become Columbus' first full-fledged captain since Rick Nash.[ref]
[/ref]
Johnson struggled during the first half of the 2013-14 NHL season, with only 11 points in 43 games by January, despite being considered by many to be a lock for the team.go.
The Blue Jackets would face the Pittsburgh Penguins in the first round of the playoffs, but fell in 6 games. Johnson led all Blue Jackets players in playoff scoring, with 3 goals and 7 points in the 6 game series, including 2 assists in a narrow 4-3 loss on home ice that knocked the Blue Jackets out of the playoffs.nhl.htm?id=8471677&season=20132014&view=gamelog

International career


Jack Johnson was first selected to the United States junior team at the 2004 IIHF World Championship. Despite failing to medal in the 2006 World Junior Championships he was selected to the All-Star Team of the Tournament.
He was named to his first Olympic team on January 1, 2010. Johnson would march on behalf of the United States Olympic team in the opening ceremony in Vancouver on February 12, 2010, being the first American-born NHL player to march in the Olympic opening ceremony. In 6 games with Team USA, Johnson collected 1 assist and helped claim a silver medal. In the following 2010 IIHF World Championship he was selected and named as Captain of Team USA.

Career statistics

Regular season and playoffs

International statistics

Awards and honours

Transactions






