[[Yeng Guiao]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Philippine Basketball League executives, Filipino basketball coaches, Filipino basketball players, Kapampangan people, People from Pampanga, Philippine Basketball Association coaches, Philippine Basketball Association broadcasters, Sports commentators, National team coaches, 1959 births, Lakas–CMD (1991) politicians, Kabalikat ng Malayang Pilipino politicians, Lakas–CMD politicians

Joseller "Yeng" Guiao is a Filipino professional basketball head coach, politician, commentator and sports commisioner. He is currently coaching  the Rain or Shine Elasto Painters in the Philippine Basketball Association, and was also the head coach of the Philippine National Basketball Team. Guiao won four PBA titles since starting his head coaching job for Swift in the early 1990s. He is a former Philippine Basketball League commissioner from 1997-2000.  He was also a He is also the Vice Governor of the Province of Pampanga from 2004 to 2013, serving 3 different Governors, Mark Lapid, Ed Panlillo and Lilia Pineda. He is now representing 1st District of Pampanga.

Early life

Guiao is the son of former Pampanga Governor, the late Bren Z. Guiao. He was an alumnus of La Salle Green Hills and studied at the University of the Philippines, Diliman, where he was a member of the senior men's varsity basketball team. He entered the coaching ranks in the 1980s.

First Coaching Stint

Prior to his PBA coaching career, Guiao was the head coach of the Swift franchise in the Philippine Amateur Basketball League with Alvin Patrimonio as one of its top stars. The RFM franchise entered the PBA in 1990, as Pop Cola, joining market rival Pepsi. Guiao was the team's first head coach and led the renamed Diet Sarsi to its first finals appearance, losing to the Purefoods Tender Juicy Hotdogs in the 1991 All-Filipino Finals.
In the 1992 Reinforced Conference, he led Swift to their first championship with a 4-0 sweep of 7-Up in the championship. It was also Guiao's first championship in the PBA. He would also led the Mighty Meaties squad to two finals appearances in 1993 and 1994, losing to San Miguel and Alaska.
In 1995, Guiao and then-Pepsi mentor Derrick Pumaren were involved in rare coach for coach trade. While Pumaren led the rechristened Sunkist Orange Juicers to two championships that year, Guiao had two forgettable seasons with Pepsi and then-renamed as Mobiline before leaving his coaching position in 1996.

Philippine Basketball League Commissioner

In 1997, Guiao became the new commissioner of the Philippine Basketball League, replacing Charlie Favis. His first move was to put the league's game from the Rizal Memorial Coliseum to the newly built Makati Coliseum. He also helped the league gained marginal success from 1997–1999, with teams such as the Tanduay Rhum Masters winning titles and Blu Detergent signing-up Asi Taulava.
In 1999, he put the PBL coverage for one-season on Vintage Sports, the same network covering PBA games back then. The year saw significant exposure for the league while Welcoat Paints established themselves as the league's new dynasty.

Commentator

Around the time he was the PBL commissioner, he also joined Vintage Sports as their regular color commentator from 1997 to 1999. From 1998 to 1999, Guiao formed a popular tandem with Chino Trinidad, mostly delivering humor to the broadcasting booth. Trinidad and Guiao called Barangay Ginebra's upset of the Mobiline Phone Pals in 1999 All-Filipino Cup quarterfinals for Vintage Sports.
Guiao would leave the commentary booth, as well as the Commissioner post in 2000 to join Red Bull's move to the pro ranks. Coincidentally, the PBL board chose Trinidad as its successor.

Red Bull head coach

In 2000, Guiao made his PBA coaching return for the Batang Red Bull Energizers. Despite poor performances in the All-Filipino and Commissioner's Cup, he coached the Thunder to a third-place finish in the 2000 Governors Cup.
In 2001, he would lead Red Bull to its first PBA title by defeating San Miguel 4-2 in the Commissioner's Cup finals with Antonio Lang as import. The series was marred by physical play between both teams and also Guiao's famous "San Miguel has never beat us with a complete lineup" line, during the series. It was a reference to the PBA suspending Kerby Raymundo and Junthy Valenzuela in Games 3 and 4, respectively as the Beermen won both games.
Guiao would later repeat the same feat in 2002 Commissioner's Cup, leading the Red Bull Thunder to a seven-game series victory over Talk 'N Text to defend its championship won a year ago.
Red Bull had a two-season title drought, despite several respectable finishes during those seasons. But in the 2005-06 PBA season, he coached the Bulls to the 2005-06 Fiesta Conference Championship, defeating Purefoods in six games and a runner-up finish in the 2006 Philippine Cup, losing to the same Purefoods team, 4-2.
In the 2006-07 Philippine Cup, Guiao led the Bulls to its ninth semifinals appearance in franchise history but lost to San Miguel in seven games. The series saw physical confrontation between teams, even Guiao was ejected in Game 6 for elbowing Dondon Hontiveros and getting involved in a verbal exchange with SMB assistant Pido Jarencio.
The Barakos, with a depleted line-up, snatched a slot in semi-finals after it swept the powerhouse team Magnolia Beverage Masters 2-0 in best of three quarter finals of the 2007-2008 Philippine Cup.
In 2008, Guiao resigned as Barako Bull head coach.

Burger King/Air21 head coach

In 2009, he was signed by the Burger King Whoppers as the new head coach of the team. When the sale of the franchise failed, Lito Alvarez. 

Rain or Shine head coach

After his contract expired on December 31, 2010, he signed with the Rain or Shine Elasto Painters to become their head coach. As the coach of the Elasto Painters, he helped the team first by making them appear in the Semi-Finals for the first time in Franchise history in the 2010-2011 Governor's Cup. 
2011-2012 Season
The 2011-2012 Philippine Cup Elasto Painters with prize Rookie Paul Lee and the resurgence of Jeff Chan and Gabe Norwood showed their improvement by making it to the Semi-Finals once again and were one game away from its first PBA Finals appearance before falling to the Powerade Tigers in 7 games. After a forgetful Commissioner's Cup, Yeng and the Elasto Painters bounced back in the Governor's Cup and topped the Elimination round. The team went on to face the San Mig Coffee Mixers (then known as the B-Meg Llamados), with Paul Lee out of the series Yeng and the Elasto Painter found ways to beat the Llamados, the Elasto Painters went up 3-1 before the Llamados won 2 straight games to force Game 7. The Elasto Painters won Game 7 and also won their first PBA Title.
2012-13 Season
Yeng once again led the Rain or Shine Elasto Painters to its 2nd straight (2nd overall) finals appearance once again at the expense of the San Mig Coffee Mixers.
2013-14 Season
Yeng again led the Rain or Shine Elasto Painters to the finals,despite he was notorious for being impatient,hot-headed and draconic coaching,but lost to San Mig Super Coffee Mixers due to disappointment and penalized for his actions during the season.

National team coach

On September 25, 2008, he was named the head coach of the Philippine national basketball team and tasked with selecting, forming, and training the national squad, with the ultimate goal of competing in the 2010 World Basketball Championship (FIBA World Championship) in Istanbul, Turkey. Guiao was the successor of Chot Reyes, the current head coach of the Talk 'N Text Tropang Texters. Guiao became the sixth coach to head a PBA-backed national squad after Robert Jaworski, Sr. (1990), Norman Black (1994), Tim Cone (1998), Jong Uichico (2002), and Reyes, who had a 9th-place finish in 2007 FIBA-Asia Men's Basketball Championship in Tokushima, Japan.inquirer.tv, PBA names Yeng Guiao as national team coach After a failed bid, he was then succeeded by Rajko Toroman as the national coach.

Political career

In 2001, Guiao became a board member in the province of Pampanga, after serving in numerous local positions in his home town. Guiao had plans to have Pampanga host several sports for the 2005 Southeast Asian Games but was later scrapped. In 2004, he won the Vice Governor position of the province in the local elections which he currently serves.
Guiao, the son of former Pampanga Governor Bren Z. Guiao, had been critical about the leadership of former Pampanga Governor Mark Lapid, who was his former ally, so he switched sides and aligned himself to Lilia Pineda, wife of the alleged gambling lord Bong Pineda. In 2005, he asked Philippine President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo to investigate Gov. Lapid and his father Senator Lito Lapid of plunder charges.
He ran for re-election as Vice Governor and won as a running mate of Senior Provincial Board Member Baby Pineda, the wife of alleged-Jueteng lord Bong Pineda, under the KAMPI banner (KAMPI is the mother party of Arroyo).
He will run for congressman of the First District of Pampanga in 2013. Francis Nepomuceno.

Criticisms and controversies

Guiao's coaching style is criticized by most basketball fans for its physical style of play. Most of them believed that he asks his players to resort to dirty tactics. This was further intensified when Purefoods' Eugene Tejada suffered a critical injury on May 14, 2006, after the team faced Guiao's team. 
In November 2006, Guiao was involved in a verbal exchange with Talk 'N Text team manager Frankie Lim after an incident between Red Bull's Carlo Sharma and Asi Taulava. Lim was complaining about Guiao's reaction after the incident and both were ejected. Guiao received a one-game suspension for the incident.
During Game 6 of the 2006–07 PBA Philippine Cup semifinals against San Miguel, Guiao was ejected in the second quarter after two technical fouls. The first was when he purposely elbowed Dondon Hontiveros after the latter hit a three-pointer from the corner. This led to a shouting incident between him and Beermen assistant Pido Jarencio, resulting in Guiao's second technical.
With little experience in international play, Guiao refused Smart Gilas coach Rajko Toroman's offer to scout for the Powerade Team Pilipinas for the 2009 FIBA Asia qualifying tournament, saying he will rely on his assistant coaches Nadurata and Abadilla who both have no experience in international tournaments. The Powerade Team Pilipinas finished an embarrassing 8th place in the tournament.
He was also criticized by respected grand slam coach Tommy Manotoc for not pulling out Wynne Arboleda from the game against Smart Gilas on 16 October 2009, saying that "any responsible coach would have taken out a player who clearly wanted to hurt his opponent" after Arboleda "sent a welcome-to-the-PBA clothesline to the side of the head of a driving JV Casio."   Arboleda was eventually suspended for the rest of the PBA season after assaulting Smart Gilas fan Alain Katigbac at courtside.
Some also criticized Guiao if he could control his time both as Pampanga's Vice Governor and as Burger Kings' head coach.








