[[Dominican University (Illinois)]]

CATEGORIES: Council of Independent Colleges, Dominican universities and colleges in the United States, Educational institutions established in 1901, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, Roman Catholic universities and colleges in Illinois, Roman Catholic universities and colleges in the United States, Universities and colleges in Cook County, Illinois, Universities and colleges in Illinois, River Forest, Illinois

Dominican University (DU)  is a coeducational, comprehensive, Catholic institution of higher education and research in River Forest, Illinois.  Affiliated with the Sinsinawa Dominican Sisters, it offers bachelor's and master's degrees and certificate programs as well as a PhD in library and information science. Dominican offers more than 50 majors in the Rosary College of Arts and Sciences and 20 programs in five graduate academic divisions offering graduate programs in library and information science, business, the School of Education, and social work.  Dominican also has a School of Professional and Continuing Studies. Dominican is well known for its offerings of undergraduate programs in the arts and sciences as well as several graduate programs in practice-oriented disciplines such as business and education.dom.

History and mission

The school began as St. Clara College in 1848, chartered by Fr. Samuel Charles Mazzuchelli, O.P. in Sinsinawa, Wisconsin. It became a college in 1901 and moved to River Forest, Illinois, taking the name Rosary College in 1922 while under the leadership of Mother Samuel Coughlin of the Sinsinawa Dominican Sisters.  The present name of Dominican University was adopted in 1997 as part of a strategic plan by president Donna Carroll to reflect the school's Dominican heritage and its status as a more comprehensive university.dom.edu/about/Mission-History/ Accessed 2007-11-20
The university operates under the following mission statement:  "As a Sinsinawa Dominican-sponsored institution, Dominican University prepares students to pursue truth, to give compassionate service and to participate in the creation of a more just and humane world."

Academics

Dominican University offers more than 40 undergraduate majors, and several pre-professional programs. There is a twelve to one student faculty ratio at this University. Dominican's graduate school is divided into five academic divisions: the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS), the Brennan School of Business, the School of Education, the Graduate School of Social Work, and the School of Professional Continuing Studies.
Dominican University's Graduate School of Library and Information Science offers the Master of Library and Information Science (MLIS) and the Doctor of Philosophy in Library and Information Science (PhD).
The GSLIS publishes a semi-annual, peer-reviewed online journal called World Libraries,www.org a publication dedicated to "librarians and libraries in regions without associations or agencies to encourage scholarly communication and professional development."  The publication of World Libraries is coordinated by students studying internet publishing.
Administered by the GSLIS, the Butler Children's Literature Center is one of the nation's premier centers for the study of children's and young adult literature in the services of literacy, learning and a lifelong love of reading. As an examination center for children's and young adult literature, it serves as a best practices professional collection to support integration of children's and young adult literature in classrooms, libraries, childcare centers, and homes.

Campus

Dominican University is located on a  wooded campus in suburban River Forest and just ten miles (16 km) from downtown Chicago. The Rebecca Crown Library has 300,000 materials in various formats and a fully equipped learning resource center. Other campus features include a language learning center, a computer technology center, an art gallery, a chapel, a student center, the Lund Auditorium, the Eloise Martin Recital Hall and the Stepan Bookstore.ican.edu/abitaboutdu/parentFAQ. More than 30% of all undergraduates live on campus. Most incoming first-year students live in double rooms in Murray or Coughlin halls.ican.edu/pdfs/2008-2009_Housing_Application. Accessed 2008-03-28

Parmer Hall

In 2007, Dominican University began a new building designed to incorporate the university's gothic identity. This $38 million facility is used for science and education classes. This building follows the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design criteria to minimize environmental impact. This building joins Murray Hall, a residence hall, and a 550-car parking pavilion among recent campus additions.

Student life

Dominican has multiple campus organizations that students join after being admitted to the University. They range from cultural groups, to department clubs, honor societies, and special interest groups.dom.edu/studentlife/activities Accessed 2013-09-17

Athletics

Dominican University teams participate as a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division III since 2000 (previously NAIA). Nicknamed the "Stars," Dominican is a member of the Northern Athletics Collegiate Conference (NACC) (formerly the Northern Athletics Conference ("NAC")). From the mid 1990s until spring 2005, Dominican was a member of the Northern Illinois-Iowa Conference; and a member of the Lake Michigan Conference until the spring of 2006. Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, golf, soccer, tennis, and volleyball; while women's sports include basketball, cross country, soccer, softball, tennis, and volleyball.

=Men's soccer=

Dominican University's Men's Soccer team is annually ranked amongst the best in the nation. Since 2002, the Stars Men's Soccer has made 11 consecutive NCAA national tournament appearances, and have posted a 16–11 NCAA Tournament record (.593). The Stars have advanced to the Sweet Sixteen four times in program history (2003, 2006, 2009, 2012), to the Elite Eight three times (2003, 2006, 2009), and to the NCAA national semifinal game in 2009 where the Stars fell 1-0 to the eventual national runner-up, Calvin College. Since the NAC (now the NACC) began in 2006, the Stars have won all seven Men's Soccer regular season and tournament titles, and boast a conference unbeaten streak of 104 matches, and a conference tournament winning streak of 32 games.
With the 2012-13 academic year being his 19th at the helm, Head Men's Soccer Coach Erick Baumann boasts a career .801 winning percentage with a 311-69-22 overall record, ranking him in the top 15 amongst all NCAA men's soccer winningest coaches all-time, and fourth all-time among NCAA Division III men's soccer coaches. Additionally, Baumann's 311 career coaching victories rank him 20th in NCAA Division III men's soccer all-time while he is the only coach in the top 20 with fewer than 22 years as a coach at a Division III institution. In 1999, Baumann was featured in Sports Illustrated as the NAIA Region VII Coach of the Year as he led the team to the university's first-ever regional championship in men's soccer and the program's first appearance in the NAIA National Tournament.
Under Baumann's leadership, Dominican's Men's Soccer team has produced eight All-American athletes. The most recent to garner the award under Baumann was Lio Tovar and Michael Kapusta, first and second team selections respectively in 2010.  In 2009, Mario Napiorkowski earned a spot on the 2009 second team. In 2007, Matt Kochanowski was a third team selection. In 2004 and 2005 respectively Erik Elizondo and David Niederholtmeyer were first-team selections. In 1997 Oscar Alvarez was named to the second team in 1997. In 1999, Carlos Carrillo and Oscar Alvarez were third team selections.
Regional rivalries have developed with other notable Division III programs such as University of Chicago, Wheaton College (IL), Loras College, North Park University, and Washington University (St. Louis, MO).

Notable students and faculty








