[[Missak Manouchian]]

CATEGORIES: 1906 births, 1944 deaths, Armenian communists, Armenian poets, Executed activists, Armenian people executed by firearm, French Armenians, Ottoman Armenians, French Communist Resistants, French Resistance members, Members of the French CGT, People from Adıyaman, Resistance members killed by Nazi Germany, Syrian emigrants to France, Armenian Genocide survivors, French people executed by firearm, People executed by Germany by firearm, Armenian people executed by Nazi Germany, French people executed by Nazi Germany, Deaths by firearm in France

Missak Manouchian (also spelled Manoushian, , 1 September 1906 – 21 February 1944) was a French-Armenian poet, a militant communist in the MOI (Main-d'œuvre immigrée or Immigrant Workforce Movement), and military commissioner of the FTP-MOI (Partisan irregulars of the MOI) in the Paris region. He was 37 years old when executed by the Nazis for his Résistance work.
Although Manouchian became well known for his leadership in the French Resistance, he was, above all, an intellectual and a talented poet.

Early life and education

Missak Manouchian was born on 1 September 1906 at Adıyaman of Vilayet of Mamuret-ul-Aziz in the Ottoman Empire into an Armenian peasant family. Manouchian's father died during the Armenian Genocide of 1915, and his mother died soon afterward.
Missak and his brother, Karabet, now orphaned, joined the stream of Armenian refugees heading south into the French protectorate of Syria. The brothers were accepted at an orphanage, where they learned the French language, and acquired carpentry and other manual skills. They remained until they were able to secure passage to Marseilles, where they landed in 1925, when Manouchian was 19.

Work and politics

Eventually, the brothers moved to Paris, where Missak took a job as a lathe operator at a Citroën plant and joined the General Confederation of Labour (in French: Confédération Générale du Travail or CGT). This national association of trade unions was the first of the five major French confederations.
His brother Karabet Manouchian died in 1927 of unknown causes. In the early 1930s, when the world-wide economic crisis of the Great Depression set in, Missak Manouchian lost his job. Disaffected with capitalism, he began earning a meager living by posing as a model for sculptors. 
In 1934, Manouchian joined the Communist Party. The following year, he was elected secretary of the Relief Committee for Armenia (HOC), an organization associated with the MOI (Immigrant Workforce Movement). At a meeting of the HOC in 1935, he met Mélinée Assadourian, who became his companion and, later, his wife.

Literary career

Manouchian wrote poetry and, with his Armenian friend who used the pseudonym of Séma (Kégham Atmadjian), founded two literary magazines, Tchank (Effort) and Mechagouyt (Culture).Séma (Kégham Atmadjian -1910-1940) They published articles on French literature and Armenian culture. The two young men translated the poetry of Baudelaire, Verlaine, and Rimbaud into Armenian, making many of these works available in Armenian for the first time. Both Manouchian and Séma enrolled at the Sorbonne to audit courses in literature, philosophy, economics, and history. In 1935, Manouchian assumed responsibility for the Armenian-language weekly newspaper, Zangou, named for an Armenian river.

The Resistance

When the Second World War broke out in September 1939, Manouchian as a foreigner was evacuated from Paris. He found work in the Rouen area, again as a lathe-operator.  After the defeat of June 1940, he returned to Paris to find that his militant activities had become illegal. (French authorities had banned the Communist Party as early as September 1939.) On 22 June 1941, when the invasion of the Soviet Union by the Nazis began, Manouchian was arrested by the occupying Germans in an anti-Communist round-up in Paris. Interned in a prison camp at Compiègne, by the efforts of his wife he was released after a few weeks without being charged.Missak Manouchian - Ein armenischer Partisan
Manouchian became the political chief of the Armenian section of the underground MOI, but little is known about his activities until 1943. In February of that year, Manouchian transferred to the FTP-MOI, a group of gunmen and saboteurs attached to the MOI in Paris. On 17 March 1943, Manouchian at age 36 participated in his first armed action, in Levallois-Perret. 
Joseph Epstein, head of a group of FTP-MOI, became the head of all of the partisan guerrilla fighters in the Paris region. Manouchian assumed command of three detachments, totaling about 50 fighters. The Manouchian group is credited with the assassination on 28 September 1943, of General Julius Ritter, the assistant in France to Fritz Sauckel, responsible for the mobilization and deportation of labor under the German STO (the Obligatory Work Service) in Nazi-occupied Europe. (The attack was made by the partisans Marcel Rayman, Léo Kneller, and Celestino Alfonso.) The Manouchian groups carried out almost thirty successful attacks on German interests from August to November 1943.San Diego Jewish Film Festival preview: 'Army of Crime'
In March and July 1943, the Special Brigade No. 2 of General Intelligence made two sweeps,  looking for resistance activists. (The Special Brigades were a collaborationist French police force specializing in tracking down "internal enemies": members of the French Resistance, dissidents, escaped prisoners, Jews, and those evading the STO.) The Special Brigades undertook a large operation based on tailing suspected activists, an effort which eventually led to the complete dismantling of the FTP-MOI of Paris in mid-November.  They arrested a total of 68 persons, including Manouchian and Epstein. On the morning of 16 November 1943, Manouchian was arrested in his headquarters at Évry-Petit Bourg. His companion, Mélinée, managed to escape the police.(in Russian) Армянский боец французского Сопротивления
Manouchian and the others were tortured to gain information, and eventually handed over to the Germans' Geheime Feldpolizei (GFP). The 23 were given a 1944 show trial for propaganda purposes before execution. Manouchian and 21 of his comrades were shot at Fort Mont-Valérien near Paris on 21 February 1944. Only Olga Bancic, the twenty-third member of Manouchian's inner circle, was executed elsewhere; she was beheaded in the prison at Stuttgart on 10 May 1944."Last letters of The Manouchian Group, May 1944. Olga Bancic", in Philippe Ganier Raymond, L'Affiche Rouge, Paris: Fayard, 1975; (translated by Mitch Abidor and published on Marxists Internet Archive)
The executed members of the group were:

The last letter

Manouchian's last letter to his wife has been preserved. Melinée Manouchian eluded Nazi capture and survived the war. 
The original document, "the last letter by Manouchian," is held by the Library of Congress in Washington D.C.

The red poster

In the wake of the executions, the Germans printed 15,000 propaganda posters on red background paper. The red posters (Affiche Rouge) became famous.  They bore photos of ten of the dead, each within its own black medallion. The center photo of Manouchian had the following inscription: "Armenian gang leader, 56 bombings, 150 dead, 600 wounded."  The poster was intended to portray the members of MOI (and the Resistance in general) as criminal, murderous foreigners who were a danger to law-abiding, cooperative citizens.  But people marked the red posters with "Morts pour la France!" (they died for France). Pasted on walls all over Paris, the posters became emblems of martyrdom by freedom fighters, and contributed to popular support for the Resistance.

Legacy and honors





Further reading




