[[Kandukondain Kandukondain]]

CATEGORIES: 2000 films, Indian films, Tamil-language films, Films set in Chennai, Films based on works by Jane Austen, Tamil-language films dubbed in Telugu, Romantic musical films, Filmfare Best Tamil Movie Award winners, Tamil films of 2000

Kandukondain Kandukondain (
The plot features two young sisters with differing views on love who find themselves with three suitors. The elder sister attracts the attention of an aspiring film director, while a wounded commando falls for her younger, hopelessly romantic sister but hesitates because he is much older than she. Meanwhile, the younger sister meets and falls for an upcoming businessman with a passion for Tamil poetry. However, problems lap up from different directions, resulting in emotional turmoil for both sisters. Whom the sisters marry forms the crux of the story.
The film opened to Indian audiences, after several delays, on 4 May 2000 gaining generally positive reviews. Kandukondain Kandukondain was dubbed and released in Telugu as Priyuraalu Pilichindi, and the producers released subtitled versions worldwide. Shankar Mahadevan won the National Film Award for Best Male Playback Singer for the song "Enna solla pogirai" in the movie.oneindia.html

Synopsis

Kandukondain Kandukondain opens with army commando Major Bala (Mammootty) fighting in a war and losing his left leg in a grenade explosion. After the opening credits, Sowmya (Tabu) and Meenakshi "Meenu" (Aishwarya Rai) are shown as the adult daughters of Pathma (Srividya) living in a Chettiar mansion in Karaikudi, Tamil Nadu with their maternal grandfather Chandrasekhar (Unnikrishan Nambooripad), maidservant Chellatha (S. N. Lakshmi) and younger sister Kamala (Shamili). Sowmya is a school principal while Meenu is passionate about classic Tamil poetry, music and dance. Major Bala, one of the rich men in their village falls in love with Meenu, but Meenu falls in love with Srikanth (Abbas). Manohar (Ajith Kumar) is a director who comes to Meenu's house for a film shoot. Sowmya and Manohar fall for each other but an issue crops up between the two and whether Manohar manages to win her back forms the rest of their part of the story.
Chandrasekhar, on his deathbed, tries to say something about the will which was written by him and kept in a box, a long time ago. No one understands him. After his death, their lawyer breaks open the box and found out that he had bequeathed all his property to his younger son Swaminathan (Nizhagal Ravi), remembering the fact that his elder daughter Pathma had eloped and married without his knowledge. Unable to bear Swaminathan's wife's arrogant behaviour upon inheriting the mansion, Sowmya and her family move to Chennai.
In Chennai, Sowmya finds a respectable job in a software company while Meenu becomes a playback singer with the help of Major Bala. Meanwhile, Srikanth's finance company goes bankrupt and he has to pay back his investors. A minister offers to bail out Srikanth and his company if Srikanth marries his daughter. Srikanth agrees and when Meenu finds this out by chance, she is shocked and overwhelmed at Srikanth's hypocrisy. She falls into an open manhole and gets rescued by Bala. Realising Bala's true love for her, Meenu falls in love with him.
Manohar's first movie project is in disarray and he is thrown out. He plans his own movie, a path-breaking action one with Nandhini Varma (Pooja Batra) as the heroine. Nandhini falls for Manohar's charm although not with any serious intentions. Rumours of an affair spread which hurt Sowmya deeply. The movie becomes a big commercial success. When he visits Sowmya's house in Chennai, he finds out that Sowmya is going to California. Tearful exchanges of resentment are exchanged between them as Manohar tries to convince Sowmya after some tearful drama. The movie ends with Manohar marrying Sowmya and Bala marrying Meenakshi.

Cast

Production

Development

Rajiv Menon was signed by Kalaipuli S. Dhanu to direct a film under his production in the winter of 1998. The film was initially launched as a multilingual project in Tamil, Telugu, Hindi and Malayalam, though it only released in Tamil with a subsequent dubbed version in Telugu titled Priyuraalu Pilichindi. After most of the production was complete in November 1999, Menon wanted a rough copy of the film to be previewed by the village audience first, to ensure that they could relate to the subject. After showing parts of the film, they eventually held a group discussion before thanking the volunteers with gifts, while receiving positive feedback.
The audio release function of the film was held, with Kamal Haasan in attendance. The film was initially scheduled for release in the Diwali season of 1999, before delays postponed the makers to announce that the film would release on 1 January 2000, becoming the first film of the millennium. However, the film finally released in May 2000.

Casting

Mammootty was signed to play the lead role of the former army general. Soundarya was offered Aishwarya Rai's role. She had to turn it down because of schedule issues. Aishwarya Rai was signed on to the project, making her third appearance in Tamil films after Iruvar and Jeans. Srividya was signed on to play Tabu and Rai's mother, while Shamili of Anjali fame played their sister. Nizhagal Ravi and Anita Ratnam were also a part of the family, with Malayalam actor, Unnikrishnan Nambooripad, making his debut as the bed-ridden grandfather. Prominent actors Raghuvaran and Manivannan were selected for supporting roles in the film, while Hindi actors Dino Morea and Pooja Batra appeared in small character roles. Senthil is credited with a guest appearance in the film, while technicians Gangai Amaren, A. R. Rahman and Rajiv Menon all play one-scene cameos.
Rajiv Menon and Dhanu retained several of the technical team from his previous venture, with only Sujatha added to write the dialogues. Menon cited that he often thought of the dialogues in his native language Malayalam before telling writer Sujatha to translate them into Tamil. Furthermore a cinematographer himself, Menon opted not to be so in the project and appointed Ravi K. Chandran to control the camera. Music by the film was composed by Rahman, while lyrics were written by Vairamuthu. Suresh Urs edited the film, while Vikram Dharma directed stunts, Nagu directed arts and Rekha Prakash, Brindha and Raju Sundaram choreographed the songs.

Filming

Scenes with Mammootty's army general character were shot from February to April 1999, close to the outbreak of the Kargil War. During the shoot in the Chettiar mansion in Karaikudi, Menon cited that the unit bonded with Aishwarya Rai and Tabu becoming good friends, Ajith Kumar learning off Mammootty and the whole unit joining over dinner. In May 1999, the crew along with Aishwarya Rai and Abbas went to Scotland to film the title song on a lake in Dornie with the backdrop of a castle, the Eilean Donan. In the "Konjum Mainakale" song, professional Kathakali artists were used; the video for "Yengay Yenedhu Kavidhai" was shot in the backdrop of Chennai monsoonal rains. The production team planned a four-day shoot trip to Egypt to film a song with the backdrop of the pyramids, however, the stay turned into a week-long schedule. The team of director, Ajith, Tabu, choreographer Raju Sundaram and cinematographer Ravi K. Chandran daily traveled three hours from Cairo and shot in the heat, with one day of shoot being cancelled after Tabu fainted. The film was delayed for six months due to the success of  Aishwarya Rai's Taal and Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam, which prompted the revival of other projects she had signed up to at the period. Furthermore, Menon's insistence that A. R. Rahman reworked some of the music to provide a better fusion of classical and contemporary music, also postponed progress. The film subsequently ended filming six months behind the schedule devised by Menon, but he cited that everything had fallen in place as planned.
During post-production, the film ran into problems with dubbing by Mammooty initially showing hesitance for dubbing for his character, before eventually giving in to the producer's demands. Actor Vikram dubbed for Abbas's character while actress Revathi dubbed for Tabu's character.

Reception and box office

The film sold 8 million tickets worldwide. Indian Express stated "A progressive film encouraging female independence, yet staying a warm family tale in essence, Kandukondain Kandukondain is the kind of film every intelligent movie-goer ought not to miss. Almost every supporting character pitches in an impressive performance, thus making Kandukondain Kandukondain a wonderful watch". The film successfully completed 150 days.;
Its audio rights were sold for record 

Awards

Soundtrack

A. R. Rahman composed the original score and the songs with lyrics by Vairamuthu. The album rights were bought by Sa Re Ga Ma for a then-record sum of 
The soundtrack features eight songs, including a poem by Bharathiyar, tuned by Rahman. The song "Kanamoochi" is based on Carnatic raga ragamalika, "Kandukondain Kandukondain" is based on Nalinakanthi raga, "Smayiyai" is based on jazz music, and "Enna Solla Pogirai" is a folksy and romantic number.
Rahman got great appreciation from critics and listeners alike. Upon release, the album became very popular with all songs becoming chart busting ones. Especially, "Enna Solla Pogirai" became a rage among youth and is still popular. The soundtrack is listed among one of Rahman's finest soundtracks. Critically, the soundtrack received extremely positive reception. Many opined that if there was no Alaipayuthey that year, this soundtrack could have won all the possible music awards. Eventually, it lost many awards to Alaipayuthey in music category.
"Enna Solla Pogirai" earned Shankar Mahadevan the National Film Award for Best Male Playback Singer.






