[[Khor Fakkan]]

CATEGORIES: Archaeological sites in the United Arab Emirates, Transport in the United Arab Emirates, Ports and harbours of the United Arab Emirates, Port cities in the Arabian Peninsula, Former Portuguese colonies, Populated places in Sharjah, Khor Fakkan

Khor Fakkan (or Khawr Fakkan) ( is set on the picturesque bay of Khor Fakkan, which means "Creek of Two Jaws". Khor Fakkan belongs to the emirate of Sharjah but is geographically surrounded by the emirate of Fujairah. It is the site of Khor Fakkan Container Terminal, the only natural deep-sea port in the region and one of the major container ports in the Emirates.

History

Khor Fakkan has a long history of human settlement. There is evidence of the postholes from the wooden uprights of the traditional barasti huts known as arish, such as at Tell Abraq which dates from the 3rd to 1st millienium BC. Excavations by a team from the Sharjah Archaeological Museum have identified 34 graves and a settlement belonging to the early-mid 2nd millennium BC. These are clustered on rock outcrops overlooking the harbour.
Around 1500, Duarte Barbosa described it as a village "around which are gardens and farms in plenty".s log also mentions fig trees, melons, watermelons and myrrh.  It notes several wells with "good and fresh water" used for irrigation.
One reason suggested for the ruinous state of the forts is an invasion  in 1623 of the Persian navy under the control of Omani Sheikh Muhammad Suhari.  Suhari, facing a Portuguese counter-attack, withdrew to the Portuguese forts, including that of Khor Fakkan.  When the Persians were expelled, the Portuguese commander Rui Freire urged the people of Khor Fakkan to remain loyal to the Portuguese crown and established a Portuguese customs office as well.
In 1737, long after the Portuguese had been expelled from Arabia, the Persians again invaded Khor Fakkan, with some 5,000 men and 1,580 horses, with the help of the Dutch, during their intervention in the Omani civil war. In 1765 Khor Fakkan belonged to a sheikh of the Al Qasimi, Sharjah's ruling family, according to the German traveler Carsten Niebuhr. There is a map by the French cartographer Rigobert Bonne dating to about 1770 that shows the Arabian Peninsula and the Persian Gulf and shows Khor Fakkan.
From 1903 to 1952 Khor Fakkan was part of the cleaved emirate of Sharjah Kalba. German submarine U-533 sunk about From 1965 to 1969, the enclave formed a separate post area and gave out stamps bearing the inscription Sharjah & Dependencies / Khor Fakkan. 
The modern Khor Fakkan Container Terminal was inaugurated in 1979, and is the only natural deep-sea port in the region, and one of the top ports in the Emirates for containers.

Geography and climate

Khor Fakkan lies on the east coast of the UAE, between the Arabian Sea and the Shumayliyah Mountains, rising to  at Jebel al Hilqah. The bay of Khor Fakkan is north-east facing and is protected from prevailing winds by a jetty serving terminal for container ships. Tourism, despite the total ban on the sale and consumption of alcohol by the emirate of Sharjah, is well developed thanks to white sand beaches and coral reefs that attract many divers. Khor Fakkan Beach lies to the north of the centre of the town.
From November to April Khorfakkan is sunny and warm during the day; the evenings are cool and humidity low. Daytime temperatures range from 18°C to 30°C. One may expect rain and tropical storms between January and March. The climate warms from May to September with the high temperature at noon in July and August reaching 55°C. The nights too are warm, with the temperature reaching 42°C, with high humidity.

Landmarks

Khor Fakkan has one 4 star holiday beach resort, the Oceanic Hotel. The fish, fruit and vegetable souq is located at the southern end of the corniche and near the main highway. Al Wurrayah Falls is reachable by four-wheel-drive around 4.5 km north of the Oceanic hotel. One site of interest is the Rifaisa Dam, in the mountains of Khor Fakkan. This is believed to have been built over a village, and when the water is very still, the tops of the old houses are still visible. The town is served by Khor Fakkan Hospital.

Notable people






