[[Brian Friedman]]

CATEGORIES: 1977 births, American choreographers, American Jews, LGBT entertainers from the United States, LGBT Jews, Living people, People from Highland Park, Illinois, So You Think You Can Dance choreographers, The X Factor (TV series) judges, The X Factor (UK TV series)

Brian L. Friedman, (born May 28, 1977) is an American dancer and choreographer, and has created the choreography for many popular music artists - such as Britney Spears, Cher,  Beyoncé Knowles and Mariah Carey - as well as for music videos, concert tours and television and film productions. He was the creative director of The X Factor UK, The X Factor USA and currently on America's Got Talent.

Early life

Friedman was born in Highland Park, Illinois, United States. He is Jewish.. He began dancing at the age of 11 in his hometown of Scottsdale, Arizona, and appeared in various dance shows including Newsies, and Kids Incorporated. By the age of 16, he was responsible for his own dance studio. Friedman trained under Joe Tremaine, Kenny Ortega, Vince Patterson, and Twyla Tharp. As a young dancer, Friedman worked with such artists as Michael Jackson, Paula Abdul, Celine Dion, Melissa Etheridge, Salt N Pepa, and Patti LaBelle. He has been credited for providing choreography for films such as Charlie's Angels and Charlie's Angels: Full Throttle, among others.
Friedman also appeared in a singing group, "Blessed With Soul", along with Brittany Murphy, but left to pursue a career in dance. Friedman also co-owned a dance studio with his mother, Judi Friedman, called The Dance Source, which closed in 2000 so he could focus full-time on choreography.

Career

Choreography

Friedman has choreographed and directed many music videos and performances, such as Aphex Twin "Windowlicker", Britney Spears "Toxic", "Me Against the Music", "Boys" "I'm a Slave 4 U" and her "The Dream Within a Dream Tour" and Onyx Hotel Tour Tours. His other work includes "My Love Is Like... Friedman has also choreographed for various television shows including Will & Grace, The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, Late Show with David Letterman and the Billboard Music Awards. 
Friedman released an interactive instructional dance DVD called "FREESTYLE", teaching audiences the dance steps he himself used in his productions. He also is creative director of a dance work shop called The Pulse, where he tours around the world mentoring students.
In 2011 He re-joined long-time friend Britney Spears to choreograph the music video and performances for her #1 Single "Hold It Against Me" as well as serve as the choreographer and tour director for her upcoming 2011 tour. Although in April he pulled out due to scheduling conflicts.

Television

Friedman appeared as a judge and choreographer on the show So You Think You Can Dance?. After two seasons, Friedman was offered a contract by Simon Cowell to appear on his show, Grease Is the Word alongside Sinitta, David Ian and David Gest. The show lasted only one series. In 2007, Friedman became a judge and the replacement for Louis Walsh on the UK series of The X Factor alongside Cowell, Sharon Osbourne and fellow new judge Dannii Minogue, as part of a revamp to the show in series 4. However, Friedman proved too critical and was swiftly replaced for the Manchester auditions by Walsh. Subsequently, Cowell created a brand new on-camera position for Friedman as Creative Director. As creative director he was able to work with the contestants of the show as well as the judges, Sharon Osbourne, Simon Cowell, Dannii Minogue, Louis Walsh and later Cheryl Cole, who replaced Osbourne. 
Friedman's contract ended with the UK show in 2010, and he was re-contracted to work on the American version of the show,  The X Factor USA, alongside the contestants and the judges; Simon Cowell, Nicole Scherzinger, L.A. Reid, Paula Abdul and formerly Cheryl Cole. Brian finished his judging duties on MTV's Top Pop Group and directed, choreographed and danced on Dancing with the Stars, before acting as producer and creative director for America's Got Talent and as creative director for The X Factor USA. In 2012, Friedman returned to work on The X Factor UK for the ninth series alongside the judges Gary Barlow, Tulisa Contostavlos, Nicole Scherzinger and Louis Walsh for the first three weeks of the live shows. After this, Friedman flew back to Los Angeles to work with the acts permanently on the live shows of the second season of the American version alongside Simon Cowell, L.A. Reid, and new judges Demi Lovato and Britney Spears.
Friedman did not return as creative director for the third season of The X Factor and was replaced by Jamie King.
Friedman also choreographed the stage performance for Irish pop duo Jedward for the Eurovision Song Contest 2011 semi-final.
Friedman has his own clothing and shoe line with Frontline in association with Capezio called "BeFree Clothing Inc." He resides in Los Angeles and London.

Awards

Friedman has been nominated for 4 MTV Video Music Awards, 2 Music Video Production Awards and 5 American Choreography Awards.






