[[Vexatious litigation]]

CATEGORIES: Civil procedure, Abuse, Abuse of the legal system

Vexatious litigation is legal action which is brought, regardless of its merits, solely to harass or subdue an adversary. It may take the form of a primary frivolous lawsuit or may be the repetitive, burdensome, and unwarranted filing of meritless motions in a matter which is otherwise a meritorious cause of action. Filing vexatious litigation is considered an abuse of the judicial process and may result in sanctions against the offender.
A single action, even a frivolous one, is usually not enough to raise a litigant to the level of being declared vexatious. Repeated and severe instances by a single lawyer or firm can result in eventual disbarment.
Some jurisdictions have a list of vexatious litigants: people who have repeatedly abused the legal system. Because lawyers could be disbarred for participating in the abuse, vexatious litigants are often unable to retain legal counsel, and such litigants therefore represent themselves in court. Those on the list are usually either forbidden from any further legal action or are required to obtain prior permission from a senior judge before taking any legal action. The process by which a person is added to the list varies among jurisdictions. In liberal democratic jurisdictions, declaring someone a vexatious litigant is considered to be a serious measure and rarely occurs, as judges and officials are reluctant to curtail a person's access to the courts.
These legal actions are occurring in some countries of the former British empire, where the Common Law System still remains: Australia, Canada, Ireland,  New Zealand, UK and US, which are specified below. The Civil (Codified/Continental) Law does not provide this kind of gate to limit equal access of citizens to the justice system.

History of legislation against vexatious litigation

The concept of vexatious litigation entered into law in 1896 with the Vexatious Actions Act, enacted in England and soon extended to Scotland and Ireland. This was a response primarily to the actions of Alexander Chaffers, a lawyer who filed numerous actions against leading members of Victorian society. When costs were awarded against him he failed to pay.5 No. 1 January 2009, pp.11- 27. ALEXANDER CHAFFERS AND THE GENESIS OF THE 
VEXATIOUS ACTIONS ACT 1896. The Cambridge Law Journal, 63, pp 656­684 
[/ref]
The first law outside Britain was passed in Australia in 1927, the Supreme Court Act, 1927. This too was prompted by the behaviour of an individual, Rupert Millane. The first Vexatious Litigant law in the United States was enacted in California in 1963. By 2007 five US states states had passed similar legislation: California, Florida, Hawaii, Ohio, and Texas.

Laws by country

Australia

=High Court=

Only three people have ever been declared vexatious litigants in the High Court of Australia, the first in 1976. Then, in 1992, Justice John Toohey ran out of patience with Alan Skyring and Patrick Cusack's repeated attempts to obtain a re-hearing on their argument that the Commonwealth did not have the power to issue paper money.

=New South Wales=

In New South Wales, seventeen people are on the New South Wales Supreme Court's vexatious litigants register.lawlink.gov.nsf/pages/SCO_vexlitstable#10 They include Drago Jambrecina, who took a building society to court 44 times, Dominic Wy Kanak of the Waverley Council, who launched 40 proceedings against an Olympic beach volleyball stadium at Bondi, Pranay Bhatttacharya and  Con Tsekouras.

=Queensland=

In Queensland, the process for having someone declared a vexatious litigant is governed by the Vexatious Proceedings Act 2005, which supplanted an earlier Act.

=South Australia=

In South Australia, vexatious litigation laws were enacted in the mid-1930s with the Supreme Court Act 1935-1936, following similar laws enacted in Victoria. (2009). "Litigious Paranoia: Confronting And Controlling Abusive Litigation In The United States, The United Kingdom, And Australia". International Review of Business Research Papers. 5:11. p22. Retrieved 5 January 2013. In 2010 the Rann government acted to strengthen the ability of the courts to act against vexatious litigants by "increasing the range of courts and tribunals that can declare people as vexatious". (6 November 2010). "Government targets serial litigants clogging up the courts". The Advertiser, Adelaide, South Australia. Retrieved 5 January 2013. Prior to that date, few people had been banned from bringing litigation to South Australian courts – by 2005, only two people were listed as having been declared as vexatious litigants, the first in 1997 and the second declared during that year. (19 July 2005). "Legal History in the Making as Woman Faces Courts Ban: Litigant has her day in court – maybe for the last time." The Advertiser, Adelaide, South Australia. p10. (12 November 2005). "Serial litigant barred". The Advertiser, Adelaide, South Australia. p25. Subsequently, at least two other South Australians have been found to be vexatious litigants.

==Notable SA Vexatious Litigants==

Ranjit Rana was declared to be a vexatious litigant by the Federal Magistrates Court on 20 July 2012Rana v Deakin University 2012 FMCA 575 noting that Mr Rana had litigated 77 decisions of various Courts being unsuccessful in each and every one.
Mr. Kazimir Kowalski was declared to be a vexatious litigant against Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd by Bleby J of the Supreme Court of South Australia on 19 April 2005.KOWALSKI v MITSUBISHI MOTORS AUSTRALIA LTD 2005 SASC 433 Those 2005 orders didn't apply to State court litigation against parties that were not related to Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd, or the Federal Court. Mr. Kowalski continued to litigate in the Federal Court without restraint until 2010 when Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd and the Registrar of the Federal Court of Australia applied for orders stopping him again. He was declared to be a vexatious litigant by Stone J of the Federal Court of Australia on 7 April 2011.Kowalski v Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd 2011 FCAFC 159
During 2010 Mr. Kowalski also started lodging complaints against legal practitioners in the Legal Practitioners Conduct Board.  This number of complaints against legal practitioners grew to more than 30 and included Robyn Layton QC, Frances Nelson QC, Ralph Bönig, Terry Forrest, Tim Bourne, Russell John Cole, Andrew Sim and Jay Weatherill.  During 2011 the complaints against legal practitioners escalated to private Criminal prosecutions against Tim Bourne,Kowalski v Bourne 2012 SASC 6 Russell Cole and OthersKowalski v Cole & Ors 2012 SASC 20 and then an attempt at Jay Weatherill.  On 7 October 2011 Dr A.J. Cannon DCM ordered that the Criminal information proposed to be laid by Mr Kowalski against Jay Weatherill not be accepted at any South Australian registry.
During 2011 the Attorney-General of South Australia started a Supreme Court action against Mr. Kowalski to have him declared to be a vexatious litigant.Attorney-General of SA v Kowalski (NO 1) 2011 SASC 231Attorney-General of SA v Kowalski (NO 2) 2012 SASC 99Attorney-General of SA v Kowalski (NO 3)2012 SASC 100Attorney-General of SA v Kowalski (NO 4)2012 SASC 101Attorney-General of SA v Kowalski (NO 5) 2012 SASC 169Attorney-General of SA v Kowalski (NO 6) 2012 SASC 198
Also Andrew Garrett and Strathalbyn woman Henriette PiepkornThe Advertiser November 06, 2010 and Stephen Glenn Heinrich. SCCIV-02-822 2003 SASC 436

=Victoria=



=Western Australia=

Legislation has existed since 1930, but is under review as of limited use.2.11

United Kingdom

=England and Wales=

Courts in England and Wales have the means of escalating the sanctions against a litigant who makes applications to the court that are "totally without merit":Civil Procedure Rules, Practice Direction to Pt.3 3CPD.2.1
Further applications totally without merit can lead to withdrawal of the right of appeal. Harassment of the court and court officials can lead to a penal prohibition notice, prohibiting the litigant from contacting or approaching the court without permission.
HM Courts Service maintains a list of vexatious litigants.

=Scotland=

Under the Vexatious Actions (Scotland) Act 1898 the Lord Advocate can apply for an order to prevent any person accused of vexatious litigation from raising any and all legal proceedings "unless he obtains the leave of a judge sitting in the Outer House on the Bills in the Court of Session, having satisfied the judge that such legal proceeding is not vexatious." As of December 2012 there are eight names on this list.gov.uk/the-courts/court-of-session/coming-to-court-of-session/about-the-offices-of-the-court-of-session/general-department/vexatious-litigants

Canada

Under the Constitution Act, 1867, section 92(14), each province is vested with the power to enact and apply laws relating to the administration of justice within its own territory.
In Canada, Section 40 of the Federal Court ActFederal Courts Act and in Ontario Section 140 of the Courts of Justice Act,Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43 restrict the ability to introduce or continue proceedings for those who have instituted vexatious proceedings or conducted proceedings in a vexatious manner.

=Quebec=

In Quebec, the Code of Civil Procedure is the principal legislation that sets rules related to civil procedure.
Under section 46 of the Code of Civil Procedure,L.R.Q., ch. C-25, s. 46 all judicial courts and judges in Quebec are vested with "... Furthermore, they may:
 
 "…at any time and in all matters, whether in first instance or in appeal, issue orders to safeguard the rights of the parties, for such time and on such conditions as they may determine. As well, they may, in the matters brought before them, even on their own initiative, issue injunctions or reprimands, suppress writings or declare them libellous, and make such orders as are appropriate to deal with cases for which no specific remedy is provided by law."Code of civil procedure, L.R.Q., ch. C-25, s. 46

Section 46 vests a very broad power on judicial courts and judges to ensure that the administration of justice is conducted according to decorum and according to the remedial nature of justice. As the courts's decisions have shown it, the authority to declare a litigant as vexatious is directly tributary to the power conferred by section 46.
Cases illustrating the application of section 46 are numerous. Among them, there are: Nguiagain v. Commission de la fonction publique,1996 R.J.Q. 3009 in which the judge rejected the plaintiff's motion for a mandamus to enjoin his union to revise the grievance that he had filed on the grounds that the motion was groundless and abusive; De Niverville c. Descôteaux,1997 R.J.Q. 1049 where an injunction was rendered declaring the respondent, disbarred lawyer Descôteaux, as a vexatious litigant due to the multiple unfounded and frivolous actions that he had sought against the plaintiff De Niverville; and in Fabrikant v. Corbin,J.E. 2000-1347 a motion to declare the plaintiff Valery Fabrikant as a vexatious litigant was granted to the defendant, Dr. Corbin. In all of the above cited cases, a litigant was only declared vexatious following a proceeding instated by the opposite party.
Moreover, section 46's scope is limited to judicial courts and judges. Administrative tribunals are legislative creations and they can only exist and function within the limits that are imposed by law. Administrative tribunals in Quebec cannot declare a person a vexatious litigant.
As per section 90 of the Rules of Practice of the Superior Court of Québec in Civil Matters,L.R.Q., ch. C-25, r. 8 such litigants are now indexed in a registry kept by the Chief Justice in the judiciary district of Montreal. Lawyer and author Claude Duchesnay has reported in May 2003 that a document on the Quebec attorney general's intranet contains the name of 58 persons who must obtain permission prior to instating proceedings before the courts. VII et VIII

Ireland

In Ireland, a court may, of its own motion or on application, order that no proceedings, either of a certain type or at all, may be issued by a certain person without leave of that court or some other court, for a specified time, or indefinitely. Such an order is referred to in legal circles as an Isaac Wunder order after Isaac Wunder who made several claims against the Hospitals Trust claiming sweepstakes prizes, but the claims were found to be groundless and the case deemed frivolous or vexatious. He was prohibited from taking further High Court proceedings in the action without leave of the court.jsijournal.%201/1%5B1%5D_Moore_Isaac%20Wunder%20Orders.pdf

New Zealand

In New Zealand a person may be declared a vexatious litigant by a High Court Judge on the application of the Attorney-General. A vexatious litigant must then apply to a High Court Judge for leave to commence any action. A decision by the High Court whether or not to grant leave cannot be appealed.
David Stanley Heenan, an adjudicated bankrupt of Queenstown, was declared a vexatious litigant in August 2009 and unsuccessfully appealled to the Court of Appeal.stuff.co.stuff.co.
James Reid of Woodville became the "eighth person in 50 years" to be declared a vexatious litigant, mainly for litigation against the Tararua District Council and the New Zealand Fire Service Commission.stuff.co.nz/national/6880351/Attempt-to-shut-down-vexatious-litigant

United States

=California=

Under California lawCalifornia Code of Civil Procedure, § 391(b) a vexatious litigant is someone who does any of the following, most of which require that the litigant be proceeding pro se, i.e., representing himself:
Appeals of an existing action do not count as "final determinations". Appeals and writs that are related to a current action do not count as "final determinations" or additional determinations, because until all avenues of appeal have been exhausted the determinations cannot be construed as "final". Painewebber, Inc. (1994), 29 Cal.4th 982 A judgment is final for all purposes when all avenues for direct review have been exhausted. v. Superior Court, (1989) 212 Cal.3d 860, 864, 261 Cal. 116. Interlocutory decisions before a judgment cannot be considered "final determinations". U.S. Bank Nat. Ass'n, (2005), 129 Cal.4th 1494, 29 Cal.3d 578 Docket lists show nothing about qualifying merit of interim motions (Id.)
To meet the unspecified criteria for "repeated" motions or litigations, the number must be much more than two, and the rule based on case law seems to be around 12. "While there is no bright line rule as to what constitutes "repeatedly," most cases affirming the vexatious litigant designation involve situations where litigants have filed dozens of motions either during the pendency of an action or relating to the same judgment." Bravo v. Ismaj, (2002) 99 Cal.4th 211, 120 Cal.2d 879)
Repeated motions must be "so devoid of merit and be so frivolous that they can be described as a flagrant abuse of the system, have no reasonable probability of success, lack reasonable or probable cause or excuse, and are clearly meant to abuse the processes of the courts and to harass the adverse party than other litigants."Morton v. Wagner, (2007) 156 Cal.4th 963, 67 Cal.3d 818. Evidence that a litigant is a frequent plaintiff or defendant alone is insufficient to support a vexatious litigant designation. Edwards,  (1982) 127 Cal.3d at 847, 179 Cal. 830. The moving party, in addition to demonstrating that the plaintiff is vexatious, must make an affirmative showing based on evidence that the case has little chance of prevailing on the merits. If the plaintiff is so determined, a bond may be required, and if the bond requirement is not met within a specified time period, a judgment of dismissal is ordered. A finding of vexatiousness is not an appealable order, but a dismissal for failure to post a bond requirement based on a judgment of vexatiousness is appealable.
Habeas petitions do not count towards vexatious litigant determination.App.4th 1004, 64 Cal.2d 679. Vexatiousness in Probate Actions are governed by a different standard (Cal. Prob. Code §1611).

Notable vexatious litigants





Notes


