[[Minnesota High School Speech]]

CATEGORIES: Student debating societies, Public speaking

Minnesota High School Speech refers to the competitive forensics system in the state of Minnesota.  These activities are currently coordinated and organized by the Minnesota State High School League, otherwise known as the MSHSL.
There are thirteen categories of Minnesota High School Speech, many of which differ greatly from their National Forensics League counterparts.  Minnesota High School Speech and Minnesota High School Debate, while both organized by the Minnesota State High School League, are independent activities with different tournament schedules, seasons, awards, and procedures.
Minnesota High School Speech, as organized by the MSHSL, is composed of thirteen highly varied categories both interpretive and public address style.

Categories

The thirteen categories offered are Creative Expression, Discussion, Duo Interpretation, Extemporaneous Reading, Extemporaneous Speaking, Great Speeches, Humorous Interpretation, Informative Speaking, Original Oratory, Serious Interpretation of Drama, Serious Interpretation of Poetry, Serious Interpretation of Prose, and Storytelling.
In Creative Expression, the speaker presents an original, creative piece.  They are judged on writing as well as delivery.
In Discussion, students are given up to an hour to discuss in a small group, and come to a cooperative agreement or compromise on a given prompt.
In Duo Interpretation, a pair of speakers present a piece together.  Body contact is not allowed and speakers are only allowed eye contact with each other during the introduction and transitions.
In Extemporaneous Reading, the speaker draws three "cuttings" (a portion of a story) from a selection of around twenty short stories. The speaker chooses one of the three to read, and is given thirty minutes to practice it and memorize and introduction.
In Extemporaneous Speaking, the speaker draws three national or international current event questions, and is given thirty minutes to prepare a seven minute speech on the drawn topic of their choice.
In Great Speeches, the speaker presents on a historically great speech, including an analysis and sections of the original speech.
In Humorous Interpretation, the speaker presents a humorous selection from a play, prose, or poem.
In Informative Speaking, the speaker presents an original, unbiased speech on the topic of their choice with the purpose to inform.  They are also permitted to use posters or other visual aids to enhance their presentation.
In Original Oratory, the speaker presents an original speech with the purpose of persuading the audience.
In Serious Interpretation of Drama, the speaker presents a serious monologue, or selection from a play.
In Serious Interpretation of Poetry, the speaker presents a serious poem, selection of poems, or portion of a poem.
In Serious Interpretation of Prose, the speaker presents a serious selection from a novel or short story.
In Storytelling, the speaker draws three from a selection of fifteen folk tales, and presents their interpretation of it.

Competition

The Minnesota State High School League organizes only three divisions of competitive speech tournaments; all other invitationals and tournaments are organized by schools and teams themselves and are without central coordination.

Independent Competition

Independently organized tournaments, for the most part, adhere to Minnesota State High School League-sanctioned rules, although many schools now host tournaments specifically ruled by those set by the National Forensics League, whose rules and categories differ wildly in many areas.
Invitational speech meets usually follow a certain form, with three preliminary rounds.  The top six, seven, or eight will advance to a final round, which is judged by three judges.  If a final round is judged, the final round scores are usually the only scores counted when determining final placement.

MSHSL Competition

The MSHSL currently divides all Speech teams into two classes:
Some sections, either A or AA, chose to run a subsection meet.  Others chose to run what is called a "Supersection" which is described below.
The MSHSL currently coordinates three levels of competition:

Rule change at State Competition

For many years, if a student had qualified to speak at the State level but was unable to attend, an alternate was used from their section.  The rules have been changed to state that" A. Substitution:
If a qualified contestant is unable to participate in the  State Contest, no alternate contestants will be placed into competition."


Ranking

In each round, students typically compete against 5-8 other speakers.  The judge will rank each speaker in the round (Note: at invitationals, no ranking lower than a 5 is awarded; 6th, 7th, etc. will receive a rank of 5).  The judge will also give each speaker a rate or percentage (typically no lower than 85).  When scores for placements are being tabulated, the students are first placed by the total of their ranks.  The students with the lowest sum of their ranks place highest.  If a tie occurs, it is, if possible, first broken by Judge's Preference.  If the tied speakers faced each other head to head in a round, the student that ranked higher in the round places highest.  If a tie cannot be broken by Judge's Preference (i.e. the speakers never faced each other in a round, or they faced each other more than once with judges disagreeing on their ranks relative to each other), it is then broken by rate.  The student with the highest sum of their rates places highest.  If the students have equal rates, a tie is then broken using Reciprocals.  The speakers' ranks are reciprocated (i.e. 1=1, 2=.5, 3=.33, etc.) and the reciprocals are added.  The student with the highest sum of these reciprocals places highest.  This places more weight on higher rankings.  If a tie is still unable to be broken, the winner will be decided in a coin toss.




