[[Everett Community College]]

CATEGORIES: Everett Community College, Education in Everett, Washington, Educational institutions established in 1941, Roller derby venues in the United States, Two-year colleges in the United States, Universities and colleges accredited by the Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities, Universities and colleges in Snohomish County, Washington, Universities and colleges in Washington (state)

Everett Community College (EvCC) is a community college located in Everett, Washington, in the Seattle metropolitan area. EvCC educates almost 20,000 students every year at seven learning centers throughout Snohomish County, Washington with most students and faculty at the main campus (2000 Tower Street, Everett, Washington 98201).

History

EvCC was founded in 1941, with the college's first students taking classes at a converted elementary school. The college's main campus moved to its present site in 1958.everettcc.edu/visitors/overview?LinkIdentifier=id&ItemID=2242

Campus

Everett Community College's north Everett campus is located at 2000 Tower St. in Everett on 46 acres near the Legion Memorial Park Golf Course. The campus includes 14 classroom and lab buildings named after the peaks of the Cascade and Olympic mountain ranges. 
In early 1999, the college built a state-of-the-art Instructional Technology Center, Shuksan Hall, named after a local mountain. Whitehorse Hall, one of the newest buildings on campus, opened January 2007. The  The building is part of a 10-year expansion plan that includes the new $40 million undergraduate education center, Gray Wolf Hall, which opened Spring 2009.
Everett Community College's new $19.5 million Student Fitness Center off of Tower Street, near its main campus, opened in January 2011. The  building replaced the college's 1958 gym.
In addition to the college's main campus in north Everett, EvCC offers classes at its East County Campus in Monroe, Aviation Maintenance Technical School at Paine Field, Corporate & Continuing Education Center in south Everett, School of Cosmetology in Marysville, and at several other locations in north and east Snohomish County.

Organization and administration

EvCC is one of 34 community and technical colleges governed by the Washington State Board of Community and Technical Colleges. The college is administered by a five-member board of trustees

Academic profile

In 2011-12 the college had 19,666 students. EvCC students range in age from 12 to 85 with the largest number of students between 18–21 years of age. One-fourth of EvCC's students are students of color. During the past five years, student enrollment has increased 15 percent. 
Students come to EvCC to affordably start their four-year degrees, earn certificates, train for new jobs, experience hands-on training in professional and technical programs, learn English, develop basic skills, finish high school, train for a promotion, or to learn just for fun.
The college offers associate's degrees In addition to traditional classroom courses, EvCC offers courses that can be taken online through the CANVAS learning platform.
The University Center of North Puget Sound offers more than 25 bachelor's and master's degree programs at EvCC's north Everett campus and supports a dozen online degree programs from colleges and universities,

Student life

Sport

Everett Community College offers 11 intercollegiate sports to both its male and female students and faculty. These include baseball, softball, basketball, soccer, cross country, and volleyball. All teams use the same school colors of Red and White, with their mascot being the Trojans.

Notable people

Aaron Cunningham has played baseball for several major-league teams.






