[[Bullet for My Valentine]]

CATEGORIES: Welsh heavy metal musical groups, Welsh metalcore musical groups, Musical groups established in 1998, Musical quartets, Jive Records artists, Kerrang! Awards winners, People from Bridgend, RCA Records artists, 1998 establishments in Wales

Bullet for My Valentine are a Welsh heavy metal band from Bridgend, formed in 1998. The band is composed of Matthew Tuck (lead vocals, rhythm guitar), Michael Paget (lead guitar, backing vocals), Jason James (bass guitar, backing vocals), and Michael Thomas (drums). They were formed under the name Jeff Killed John and started their music career by covering songs by Metallica and Nirvana. Jeff Killed John recorded six songs which were not released; two of these tracks were reworked later in their career as Bullet for My Valentine. Financial difficulties dictated the name change, which was followed by a change in music direction. In 2002, the band secured a five-album deal with Sony BMG. The band has stated that their music is influenced by classic metal acts such as Metallica, Iron Maiden, and Slayer. The band is part of the Cardiff music scene.
Bullet for My Valentine's debut album, The Poison, was released on 3 October 2005 in the United Kingdom and on 14 February 2006 in the United States to coincide with Valentine's Day, in a nod to the band's name. The album entered the Billboard 200 in the US at number 128. It was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America. The band made appearances at the Download Festival and Kerrang! XXV, and undertook a US tour with Rob Zombie. Bullet for My Valentine's second studio album, Scream Aim Fire, was released on 29 January 2008 and debuted at number four on the Billboard 200. The band's third album, Fever, was released on 26 April 2010 and debuted at number three on the Billboard 200. On February 8, 2013, the band released their fourth studio album, Temper Temper,Pre-Order "Temper Temper" | The Official Bullet For My Valentine Website which peaked at number 13 on the US Billboard 200. The band has sold over one million albums in the United States and over 3,000,000 albums worldwideRock Titans Bullet For My Valentine to Release New Track 'Temper'. Rockmusicreport. Retrieved on 2013-02-13. and are the most-successful act in the Kerrang! Awards category of "Best British Band" with three wins.

History

Jeff Killed John and record deal (1998—2005)

Jeff Killed John was the forerunner band to Bullet for My Valentine and was formed in 1998 by Matthew Tuck, Michael "Padge" Paget, Nick Crandle, and Michael "Moose" Thomas while studying music at Bridgend College. They started playing Nirvana and Metallica cover songs. In 1999, the band released their first ever EP, Better Off Alone. They released another two-track EP in 2002, You/Play with Me, which was produced by Greg Haver. The EP was financed through the Pynci scheme for new Welsh musicians and the release garnered radio airplay on BBC Radio 1's broadcast at Newport's T.J.'s. Jeff Killed John's music followed the nu metal trend set by bands such as Korn and Limp Bizkit. Shortly after, the band released another two-track EP titled Eye Spy. In 2003, their second EP was released titled Don't Walk Away. This was a promotional cd and was shipped to different record companies, as well as being given out locally in Bridgend. Unfortunately they were not successful, probably due to their playing of "nu metal" genre type music, which was becoming less popular. Thus making Jeff Killed John, one of the millions affected by the nu metal genre. Bassist Crandle left the band on the eve of entering the recording sessions for the bands self-titled EP and was replaced by Jason James. The band then changed their name to Bullet for My Valentine and reworked their musical strategy; they decided to play heavy metal songs with "harmony guitars and big angelic choruses" according to frontman Tuck. Late 2003, they released their final EP before record labels actually began to notice their potential. This happened due to the sudden change in their strategy and sound which, the band claims came "directly out of their heads."
Roadrunner Records showed interest in Bullet for My Valentine and offered the band a deal. The offer was ultimately turned down, and the band signed a five-album record deal with Sony BMG and a UK licensing deal with Visible Noise. According to Tuck, they chose Sony because, "We thought that a lot more doors would be open to us."

The Poison  (2005—2007)

Bullet for My Valentine's debut album, The Poison, was released on 3 October 2005 in the UK and on Valentine's Day, 2006 in the US. It entered the Billboard 200 at number 128,

Scream Aim Fire (2007—2008)

The bands second studio album, Scream Aim Fire, was recorded at Sonic Ranch Studios and was produced by Colin Richardson. Three songs were released as singles: "Scream Aim Fire", "Hearts Burst into Fire", and "Waking the Demon".
In support of the new album, the band toured North America and Australia in the spring of 2008 for the Taste of Chaos tour alongside Atreyu, Blessthefall, and Avenged Sevenfold. Bullet for My Valentine cut short the Canada portion of the tour and flew back home to support the daughter of James who was in hospital. In December 2008, Scream Aim Fire was re-released with four bonus tracks that were recorded during the album's studio sessions, but with re-recorded vocal-lines.

Fever (2009—2011)

Matt Tuck spoke to Daniel Marez of Metal Hammer in March 2009 about the band's progress on writing and recording their third album. Tuck stated that there were four or five songs that were finished and that "usually we write and record 14 tracks that I then have to write vocal lines for, but this time I'm trying to write the vocals as I write the music".
During the summer of 2009, Bullet for My Valentine toured across the United States as part of the Mayhem Festival,

Temper Temper (2012—2013)

On 28 January 2011, Michael Paget stated that the group had already drawn proportions for the next studio album and will sound a lot like Fever. He followed-along with stating that the band plans to have the songs for it written within 2011 and will begin recording the album by the end of the year. A couple tracks left from the Fever sessions might be redone, re-arranged and re-recorded for the new record. The band played at Uproar Festival 2011, after which they began writing material for a fourth studio album.
On 7 October, RCA Music Group announced it was disbanding Jive Records along with Arista Records and J Records.  With the shutdown, the band (and all other artists previously signed to these three labels) will release their future material (including their next studio album) on the RCA Records brand. On 1 May 2012, it was revealed that the project will be called AxeWound and will feature Liam Cormier, Mike Kingswood, Joe Copcutt and Jason Bowld.
In May 2012, it was announced that Bullet for My Valentine would be playing at the South African music festival Oppikoppi, as well as a once-off gig in Cape Town alongside Seether and Enter Shikari. They were slated to play in the country for the Coke Zero Fest of 2009, but pulled out at the last minute to record Fever. Times LIVE (2012-05-29). Retrieved on 2013-02-13. It was confirmed on 6 August that the final recording session of the band's fourth studio record was complete, and that the album would be out sometime in late 2012.Soundwave Festival 2013 second lineup. Fasterlouder.au. Retrieved on 2013-02-13. Oztix.au (2012-08-18). Retrieved on 2013-02-13.
Bullet for My Valentine released the track "Temper Temper" on 25 November in the UK and 30 October worldwide across all digital providers. The song was debuted live by the band on Monday 22 October at BBC Radio 1's Rock Week where they performed at Maida Vale studios. Facebook. Retrieved on 2013-02-13. It was announced the day prior to the performance that the band's fourth studio album would also be named Temper Temper. Twitter. Retrieved on 2013-02-13. The release date was confirmed to be the 12 February 2013. 
The band began touring in support of Temper Temper on February 10, 2013 and finished the tour on November 3, 2013.Altsounds.com - Tour dates The tenth show of the tour, held at Birmingham's O2 Academy, was filmed by music video website Moshcam.

Fifth studio album (2014—present)

In an interview, Matt Tuck said that Bullet for My Valentine were going to start work on a new album before the Rule Britannia Tour which took place between 1st December 2013 till the 6th December 2013 in which the band played arenas in Britain supported by Young Guns and Asking Alexandria. In the interview Matt also said that they would be working with Terry Date who has worked with bands such as Pantera. He also said the band would bring back the thrash metal elements from The Poison and Scream Aim Fire.
On November 13, 2013, Bullet for My Valentine revealed though their Facebook page they were working on a new song. A short snippet of the song, titled "Raising Hell", was released on Matt Tuck's Vine profile on November 15, 2013. The song was first played on November 18, 2013 via BBC Radio 1's Rock Show. It was made available for streaming on November 20, 2013. Soundcloud.YouTube - "Raising Hell"
On January 6, 2014, Matt announced on Twitter that the band were entering the studio to record a fifth album.

Musical style and influences

Bullet for My Valentine are primarily deemed as a contemporary metal band. With detailed statements, their music has been described by critics as heavy metal
Kirk Miller of Decibel Magazine praised the band for the effort in  synchronised song structures.
The band has cited being influenced by bands such as Metallica, Annihilator, Pantera, Machine Head, Sepultura, AC/DC, Iron Maiden, Guns N' Roses, Led Zeppelin, Deep Purple, and Black Sabbath.artistdirect.com/entertainment-news/article/interview-matt-tuck-of-bullet-for-my-valentine-and-lzzy-hale-of-halestorm/10490831 
According to Thomas, these are the bands that inspire Bullet for My Valentine's "catchy vocals, aggressive riffs, and melodies,". Matt Tuck has stated in an interview, his songwriting is highly influenced by Bruce Springsteen, Bob Seger, and Bob Dylan. He goes on to say that "these bands just are proper old school songwriters"

Band members

Discography

Tours

Awards and achievements






