[[Fuqua School of Business]]

CATEGORIES: Business schools in North Carolina, Duke University, Educational institutions established in 1969, 1969 establishments in North Carolina

The Fuqua School of Business (pronounced ), Master of Management Studies (in partnership with the Seoul National University), joint degree programs (including joint degrees in medicine, law, environmental management, forestry, public policy, and nursing), and a Ph.D. program.  Additionally, Duke Executive Education offers non-degree business education and professional development programs.

History

Formed in 1969, the Graduate School of Business Administration enrolled its first class of 20 students in 1970.
J.B. Fuqua was raised by his grandparents on a tobacco farm in Prince Edward County, Virginia.  Fuqua began his relationship with Duke University when he borrowed books by mail from the Duke library. J.B. Fuqua's cumulative giving to Duke was nearly $40 million at the time of his death on April 5, 2006.fuqua.edu/about/leadership/jb_fuqua/
In September 2008, Fuqua launched an expansion initiative to establish campuses in St. Petersburg, Russia; Dubai, United Arab Emirates; Shanghai/Kunshan, China; New Delhi, India; and London, England.
In 2014, Fuqua starts a one-year Master of Management Studies program that splits time between Fuqua's main campus in Durham, NC, and a new study location in Kunshan, China.

Admissions

Admission to the Daytime MBA program is competitive. For the Class of 2014, 27% of 3,161 applicants were accepted to fill a class of 432; the average GMAT score was 697.businessweek.html Fuqua reports an 80% GMAT range of 640-740, with 40% international and 33% female students.fuqua.edu/daytime-mba/student-life/class-statistics/

Academics

The school's faculty is organized into ten disciplines, including Accounting, Decision Sciences, Economics, Finance, Management, Health Sector Management, Management Communication, Marketing, Operations Management, and Strategy. The daytime MBA program offers concentrations in Decision Sciences, Energy and Environment, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, Finance, Financial Analysis, Leadership and Ethics, Management, Marketing, Operations Management, Social Entrepreneurship, and Strategy. The faculty was ranked No.1 in the US by BusinessWeek (Intellectual Capital) in 2010 and 2012.businessweek.html
While working at Duke University, former Professor Robert E. Whaley developed the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index (ticker symbol: VIX), a measure of the implied market volatility.ssrn.cfm?abstract_id=1296743

Joint Degrees

The Duke MBA offers several joint degree programs in conjunction with other highly respected graduate and professional programs at Duke. These programs allow students to earn two degrees in less time than if they pursued the two separately.
Joint degrees offered with Duke University School of Medicine, Duke University School of Law, Nicholas School of the Environment and Earth Sciences, Nicholas School of the Environment and Earth Sciences, Terry Sanford Institute of Public Policy, and the Duke University School of Nursing.:

Research Centers

Research centers at The Fuqua School of Business further specific academic interests of the business school. Such research centers include:

Honor Code

Some research shows that students studying business describe themselves as being academically dishonest more often than students pursuing other types of degrees.typepad.pdf To address such concerns, the school instituted an extensive honor code.businessweek.htm At the end of the 2006–2007 academic year, Fuqua initiated a disciplinary action that was taken against 34 of the school's first-year MBA students — almost 10% of the school's 2008 class — for cheating on an open-book, take-home final exam.clearadmit.businessweek.htm The Fuqua Judicial Board ruled in late April 2007 that 9 students should be expelled and 15 students receive a one-year suspension and a failing grade in the course. Nine others received a failing grade in the course and one student received a failing grade on an exam. All convictions and penalties were upheld by the school's appeals committee.com/article/convicted-fuqua-case-cry-out

Careers

The 2011 Forbes full-time MBA rankings indicated that Fuqua graduates achieved the 12th highest average salary following graduation for the class of 2010.
The 2013 Financial Times ranking indicated that of the MBAs graduating in 2009, Fuqua graduates achieved the 14th highest salary in the United States, and the 20th highest salary worldwide, three years after graduation.ft.com/businessschoolrankings/global-mba-ranking-2013
For the graduating, full-time MBA Class of 2012, the top three hiring companies include: Deloitte (30 hires), McKinsey & Co. (18 hires), and The Boston Consulting Group (12 hires).fuqua.edu/documents/mba_recruiting/DukeMBAEmploymentReport11-12

Rankings

Daytime MBA

The daytime MBA program at The Fuqua School of Business was ranked:
The daytime MBA program at The Fuqua School of Business also has the following rankings based on each respective category:

Corporate Education

Duke Corporate Education, a carve-out of the Executive Education program at The Fuqua School of Business, was ranked:

Executive MBA

The Executive MBA program at The Fuqua School of Business was ranked:

Notable alumni








