[[Homalin]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places in Sagaing Region, Homalin Township, Township capitals of Burma

Homalin or Hommalinn () is a small town in northwestern Burma and capital of the Homalin Township in Hkamti District of the Sagaing Region. The town lies on the Chindwin River and is served by Homalin Airport.
The Tamanthi Wildlife Reserve extends into the Homalin Township. Gold has been found in the river sand of Uyu River and extraction has been undertaken jointly with the Russians. The town also has a drug (heroin) manufacturing unit maintained by an Infantry Battalion of the Myanmar Army.

History

The 1908 Imperial Gazetteer of India recorded that the steamers of the Irrawaddy Flotilla Company plied weekly between Pakokku and Homalin. Government of Myanmar also plied its launches on this route.
On August 6, 1988, an earthquake with an epicentre near Homalin killed 3 people, damaging infrastructure.
Myanmar had the distinction of accounting for 60% of world's heroin supply, in 1997, with the production of about 2500 tonnes of opium. Particularly in North Burma, the Army has been maintaining the drug refineries.

Geography

Homalin, a small town, lies close to the Indian border, at the head end of a bend in the Chindwin River, after an island. It has the backdrop of large forested mountains, which rise to a height of 
The Uyu River, a major tributary of the Chindwin River flows close to Homalin. The sand in this river carries gold particles and also, some times, small nuggets. Local villagers pan this river sand to extract gold dust with the hope of finding small nuggets.

Climate

Homalin has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification Cwa) bordering on a tropical savanna climate (Köppen climate classification Aw). Temperatures are very warm throughout the year, although the winter months (December-February) are milder. There is a winter dry season (November-April) and a summer wet season (May-October).
 
 

Demographics

The town has a population of roughly 1500 people. The Naga and Kuki ethnic group reside in Homalin, Naga Traditional New Year is celebrated by the nagas and the kuki celebrate Chavang Kut every year.

Transportation system

The main artery road in the region is the Thabeikkyin-Phaungbyin-Homalin-Hkamti Road, which is 
Country boats, locally known as landwins, also ply in the waters of the Chindwin River to Homalin. Both Irrawaddy and its major tributary the Chindwin River have Inland Water Transport facilities, which are being improved further.
The Homalin Airport (HOX) in the centre of the Homalin town has flights operating to Yangon and Mandalay and is on the popular tourist circuit. It is located at an elevation of  length.

Economy

The climatic conditions in Homalin have been found suitable to grow Rubber plantations. The conditions have been well exploited by establishing viable rubber cultivation practices by introducing high-yield strains like the PRIM 600, PB-260, BPM-24, GT-1 and PBIG. This has resulted in expansion of rubber plantation areas in the township, which has created ample employment opportunities to the local people and thus improved their economic conditions and living standards. Pineapple plants are also intercropped within the rubber plantations to make the economic yield from the land even more viable. Since Rubber has a world wide demand, local people have been urged to expand area under cultivate rubber cultivation as also as tea as a commercial venture.
A TV retransmission station has been set up in Homalin, as part of establishing such stations at 41 townships of the Sagaing, Mandalay and Magway Divisions.
The exploration of gold from the Uyu River in Homalin got a boost when the Geological Survey and Mineral Exploration Department of Myanmar and the Victorious Glory International of Russia signed a deal for exploration of "gold and associated minerals".

Hydropower development

As a part of the overall economic development of the Chindwin region in its upper reaches, several hydropower projects have been planned on the Chindwin River, which includes the Homalin Hydropower Project with a capacity of 150 MW. This project also envisages benefits of irrigation.
The Tamanthi Dam which is component part of the Tamanthi Hydroelectric Project (installed capacity 1200 MW) on the Chindwin River, which was under planning and investigations since 2004, is to be implemented with assistance from the Government of India,  following a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) signed on September 16, 2008 between the National Hydroelectric Power Corporation (NHPC) of India and the Government of Burma,  as a joint venture project. The submergence under this project which is now under implementation, has serious issues of displacements of 380 families from Leivomjang and Tazong villages that would come under submergence between Tamanthi and Homalin in Sagaing Division.




