[[Pitchford]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Shropshire, Civil parishes in Shropshire

Pitchford is a small village in the English county of Shropshire. It is located between Cantlop and Acton Burnell and stands on an affluent of the River Severn. Pitchford takes its name from a bituminous spring/pitch in the village,
It is also the name for the civil parish.

History

Employment

In the Census of 1831 a detailed categorisation of employment was recorded, showing that Agricultural Labourers made up the largest sector (over 50%) of employment of Males aged 20 and over in 9 occupational categories. The second largest category consisted of those employed in the Retail and Handicrafts industry.

Population

Census data during the years 1880– 1960 shows that Pitchford's population decreased while the total population of England and Wales increased conversely.

Social Class

Social class was also noted in the 1831 census, showing the majority (over 55%) of the Pitchford population was made up of those described as "Labourers and Servants". The second largest social class was recorded as "muddling sorts".

Pitchford Estate

Pitchford Hall is Grade I listed building and the estate is first referred to in historical records in the Domesday Book (1081–86) as follows:
"Edric, and Leofric and Wulfric held it as thress manors; they were free. 3 hides which pay tax. Land for 5 ploughs. In lordship 3; 3 slaves; 3 ploughmen; 1 village; 3 smallholders, a smith and rider with 2 ploughs. Woodland for fattening 100 pigs. Value before 1066, 8s later 16s; now 40s."
Records suggest a medieval manor house existed somewhere on the site from at least 1284 to 1431.
The 40-room mansion as it exists today however is said to have been built between 1560 and 1570 for Adam Ottley, a wool merchant from Shrewsbury.
Princess Victoria – better known as the queen of the same name – visited the hall in 1832, and wrote in her diary the hall was "A curious looking but very comfortable house. It is striped black and white, and in the shape of a cottage". George VI (The Duke of York at the time) and Queen Elizabeth (The Queen Mother) also stayed in the hall during 1935. In 1940, during the Second World War, Pitchford Hall was also one of the three houses selected for the King and Queen as a safe refuge.  The hall, unlike some similar properties in Britain has remained in private ownership for many generations. The hall was sold in 1993 however, ending a 500- year family link to the estate. The Pitchford Hall and estate are now separately owned.

Church of St Michael and All Angels

The Church of St Michael and All Angels was founded and built by Ralph de Pitchford in 1220 AD. The Pitchford Estate website describes the church as a "Norman Church with interesting contents". The most notable of which is a solid oak carving (one of only 3 in the country) of a crusader called Sir John De Pitchford.






