[[Kiran Bedi]]

CATEGORIES: 1949 births, Living people, Indian police officers, Indian police chiefs, People from Amritsar, People from Chandigarh, Indian civil servants, Ramon Magsaysay Award winners, Indian civil rights activists, Female police officers, University of Delhi alumni, Panjab University alumni, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi alumni, Anti-corruption activists‎, Indian social activists

Kiran Bedi is an Indian social activist and a retired Indian Police Service (IPS) officer. Bedi joined the police service in 1972 and became the first woman officer in the IPS.
She has also founded two NGOs in India: the Navjyoti Delhi Police Foundation for welfare and preventative policing in 1988Official website Navjyoti. Navjyoti.in (8 October 2011). Retrieved on 16 October 2011. which was later renamed as the Navjyoti India Foundation in 2007, and the India Vision Foundation for prison reformation, drug abuse prevention and child welfare in 1994. Indiavisionfoundation. Retrieved on 16 October 2011. Bedi was awarded Ramon Magsaysay award in 1994 for Government service.

Early life and education

Kiran Bedi was born in Amritsar, Punjab, India. She was awarded a BA degree by the Government College for Women, Amritsar in 1968. She then earned a Master's degree in Political Science from Punjab University, Chandigarh, graduating at the top of her class in 1970. She later obtained Bachelor of Laws in 1988 from Faculty of Law, University of Delhi. In 1993, she obtained a Ph.D. in Social Sciences from the Department of Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology DelhiA Kiran Bedi:Tough Lady In All Male Bastion Kiran Bedi at living. where the topic of her thesis was 'Drug Abuse and Domestic Violence'.

Career

She began her career as a Lecturer in Political Science (1970–72) at Khalsa College for Women, Amritsar. In July 1972, she joined the Indian Police Service, becoming the first woman to do so. Bedi joined the police service "because of her urge to be outstanding". Kiranbedi. Retrieved on 16 October 2011.
She served in a number of tough assignments ranging from New Delhi traffic postings, Deputy Inspector General of Police in Mizoram, Advisor to the Lieutenant Governor of Chandigarh, Director General of Narcotics Control Bureau, to a United Nations delegation, where she became the Civilian Police Advisor in United Nations peacekeeping operations. For her work in the UN, she was awarded a UN medal. She is popularly referred to as Crane Bedi for towing the Prime Minister Indira Gandhi's car for a parking violation, during the PM's tour of United States at that time.
Kiran Bedi influenced several decisions of the Indian Police Service, particularly in the areas of narcotics control, Traffic management, and VIP security. During her stint as the Inspector General of Prisons, in Tihar Jail (Delhi) (1993–1995), she instituted a number of reforms in the management of the prison, and initiated a number of measures such as detoxification programs, Art of Living Foundation Prison Courses,Prison SMART Program | Stress management | Rehabilitation Training. The Art of Living (10 October 2011). Retrieved on 16 October 2011. yoga, vipassana meditation, Murat redressing of complaints by prisoners and literacy programs. Reuters , 4 Mar 2010 Her initiatives for the practice of Vipassana meditation were documented in the film Doing time, Doing Vipassana. For this she won the 1994 Ramon Magsaysay Award, and the 'Jawaharlal Nehru Fellowship', to write about her work at Tihar Jail.
She was last appointed as Director General of India's Bureau of Police Research and Development.
In May 2005, she was awarded an honorary degree of Doctor of Law in recognition of her "humanitarian approach to prison reforms and policing".
On 27 November 2007, she expressed her wish to voluntarily retire from the police force to undertake new challenges in life. On 25 December 2007, the Government of India agreed to relieve Bedi of her duties as Director General of the Bureau of Police Research and Development.

Social initiatives

Kiran Bedi along with 15 other police officers set up Navjyoti India Foundation (NIF) in 1987, NIF started with a de-addiction and rehabilitation initiative for the drug addicts and now the organization has expanded to other social issue like illiteracy and women empowerment. In 1994 Bedi setup India Vision Foundation which works in field of police reforms, prison reforms, women empowerment and rural and community development.
Her efforts have won national and international recognition, and her organizations were awarded the "Serge Soitiroff Memorial Award" for drug abuse prevention by the United Nations.

India Against Corruption

In early December 2010, Bedi and others formed India Against Corruption (or "Bhrashtachar ke Virudh Janyudh") as a way of receiving public support and input on the group's alternate Lokpal Bill,
Bedi did not join the Aam Aadmi Party, which evolved from a section of the India Against Corruption. Before the Indian general election, 2014, she declared support for Narendra Modi as the prime ministerial candidate.Kiran Bedi: Expressed support for Narendra Modi as an 'independent citizen'

Honours and awards

Controversies

In July 1993, Kiran Bedi, the then Inspector-General of Prisons of Tihar Jail was pulled up by the Supreme Court of India for ignoring the apex court directives for providing medical attention to a foreign under-trial prisoner by initiating contempt proceedings against her. In 1988 Wadhwa Commission criticised Bedi for her role in lathi-charge on lawyers protesting against a colleague's arrest outside Bedi's office.
Bedi was criticised for being a hardliner in the negotiations with government over Lokpal bill.
Kiran Bedi was alleged to have charged her hosts full fare for air tickets despite her paying discounted fare. She was also alleged to have charged her hosts business class fare while flying economy class and presenting false invoices.
In 1992 Kiran Bedi's daughter was given admission for MBBS course in Delhi's Hardinge College under a quota for student's from North-East. Kiran Bedi was posted in Mizoram at that time. Bedi stated that it was within the rules and Central Government employees were entitled to such schemes.
In November 2011, the Delhi Police, under directions of the additional chief metropolitan magistrate, registered an FIR against Bedi for allegedly misappropriating funds meant for her NGOs. Indian Express (27 November 2011). Retrieved on 13 March 2012. and subsequently filed closure for the case.

In films and literature

A non fiction feature film on Kiran Bedi's life, Yes Madam, Sir, has been produced by Australian film maker, Megan Doneman. This film is being screened in film festivals around the world. Its commentator is an Academy Award winner, Helen Mirren. Kiran Bedi was present during its screenings in Toronto, Dubai and Adelaide, and to address the Q&A sessions at the end of each show.
The documentary has made a clean sweep of the award categories---"Best Documentary" with a cash award of $100,000, the biggest prize for a documentary in any film festival in the US and the Social Justice Award with $2500 at Santa Barbara International Film Festival. Yes Madam, Sir got a unanimous vote from the jury.
In 2006, Norwegian Mpower Film & Media and film maker Oystein Rakkenes released another documentary on Bedi and her prison revolution in Tihar Central Jail, In Gandhi's footsteps. The film was awarded Best Documentary at the Indo-American Film Festival in Atlanta, in November 2006.
Kiran Bedi features in the upcoming inspirational film Carve Your Destiny. The film is directed by Anubhav Srivastava.
Kiran Bedi also became host in 2009–10 on the TV show Aap Ki Kachehri Kiran Ke Saath on Star Plus.
The Kannada-language feature film Kannadada Kiran Bedi, starring Malashri as a fictionalized interpretation of Kiran Bedi, was released in 2009.
Biographies of Bedi:

Bibliography








