[[Political status of Western Sahara]]

CATEGORIES: Politics of Morocco, Politics of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, Government of Western Sahara, Diplomatic recognition, Western Sahara conflict

Western Sahara, formerly the Spanish colony of Spanish Sahara, is a disputed territory claimed by both the Kingdom of Morocco and the Polisario Front. It is listed by the United Nations (UN), as a non-decolonized territory and is thus included in the United Nations List of Non-Self-Governing Territories.
Since the Madrid Accords of 1975, a part of Western Sahara has been administered by Morocco as the Southern Provinces. Another section, the Liberated Territories, is administered by the Polisario Front as the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR). Mauritania administers temporally the western half of the Ras Nouadhibou Peninsula. A UN-monitored cease-fire has been in effect since September 1991.
In order to resolve the sovereignty issue, the UN has attempted to hold a referendum through the mission United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), and is holding direct talks between the Kingdom of Morocco and the Polisario Front. The UN recognizes neither MoroccanUnited Nations Security Council: Report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western Sahara (S/2006/249) paragraph 37, p. 10 nor SADR sovereignty over Western Sahara.

Positions of the main parties

Kingdom of Morocco

The official position of the Kingdom of Morocco since 1963 is that all of Western Sahara is an integral part of the kingdom. The Moroccan government refers to Western Sahara only as the "Sahara", "Moroccan Sahara", "Saharan provinces", or the "Southern Provinces".
According to the Moroccan government, in 1958 the Moroccan Army of Liberation fought Spanish colonizers and almost liberated what was then Spanish Sahara. by a number of former Polisario founders and leaders. The Polisario Front is considered by Morocco to be a Moroccan separatist movement, referring to the Moroccan origins of most of its founding members, and its self-proclaimed SADR to be a puppet state used by Algeria to fight a proxy war against Morocco.

Polisario Front / Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic

The Polisario Front is described by itself and its supporters as a national liberation movement that opposes Moroccan control of Western Sahara, whilst it is considered by Morocco and supporters of Morocco's claims over the Western Sahara to be a separatist organisation. It began as a movement of students who felt torn between the divergent Spanish and Moroccan influences on the country. The original goal of the Polisario, which was to end Spanish colonialism in the region, was achieved, but their neighbours, Morocco and Mauritania, seized sovereignty of the region, which the Polisario felt belonged to it. The Polisario engaged in guerrilla warfare with the Moroccan and Mauritanian forces. It evacuated the Sahrawi population to the Tindouf refugee camps due to Royal Moroccan Air Force bombing of the refugee camps on Sahrawi land with napalm and white phosphorus.Tomás Bárbulo, La historia prohibida del Sáhara Español, Destino, Imago mundi, Volume 21, 2002, Pages 284-285
The Polisario Front has called for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara to be decided through a referendum. Although the SADR is not recognised as a state by the UN, the Polisario is considered a direct participant in the conflict and as the legitimate representative of the Sahrawi people, recognized by the United Nations since 1979.
The Polisario Front argues that Morocco's position is due to economical interests (fishing, phosphate mining, and the potential for oil reserves) and political reasons (stability of the king's position and the governing elite in Morocco, deployment of most of the Moroccan Army in Western Sahara instead of in Morocco). The Polisario Front proclaimed the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic in Bir Lehlou (Western Sahara), on 27 February 1976.

Mauritania

Claims on Western Sahara had proliferated since the 1960s, fuelled by Mauritanian President Moktar Ould Daddah. Before Mauritania signed the Madrid Accords and after the withdrawal of the last Spanish forces, in late 1975, the Mauritanian Army invaded the southern part of Western Sahara, while the Moroccan Army did the same in the north. In April 1976, Mauritania and Morocco partitioned the country into three parts, Mauritania getting the southern one, which was named Tiris al-Gharbiyya. Mauritania waged four years of war against Polisario guerrillas, conducting raids on Nouakchott, attacks on the Zouerate mine train and a coup d'état that deposed Ould Daddah. Mauritania finally withdrew in the summer of 1979, after signing the Argel Accord with the Polisario Front, recognizing the right of self-determination for the Sahrawi people, and renouncing any claims on Western Sahara. The Moroccan Army immediately took control of the former Mauritanian territory. Mauritania recognized the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic on 27 February 1984.

Algeria

Algeria has supported the independence of Western Sahara diplomatically since 1975 because of its own national liberation war. In 1976, Algeria got involved directly in the conflict, but after a military confrontation at Amgala against the Moroccan Army, Algeria's role became indirect, through political and military support for the Polisario Front. Morocco argues that the Algerian position is due to the 1963 Sand War, in which the two countries clashed. Algeria recognized the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic on 6 March 1976.

United Nations

Western Sahara was first placed, by Moroccan demand, the UN has argued for negotiations between Morocco and the Polisario Front to resolve the deadlock, culminating in the Manhasset negotiations.
Although Morocco claims that no recognition is required, Moroccan sovereignty over the territory is supported by the Arab League and by some other states as a policy of deliberate ambiguity.

Positions of other states

The following lists contain the following states and entities:
Some states are on both lists; for example, when a state is supportive of the "right of self-determination", including the option of autonomy under Morocco sovereignty. Some states have changed their opinion frequently or have given separate announcements of support for both Morocco and the Polisario Front/SADR (Paraguay, Belgium, Benin, Botswana, Burundi, Chile, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Malawi, Peru, Russia, Sierra Leone, Swaziland).
Some of the states announcing support of the "right of self-determination" currently recognize the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic. Not all of the states that have terminated diplomatic relations with or withdrawn recognition of the SADR have announced their support for the Moroccan claims.
Some states have not announced any position as of 2014.

States supporting Sahrawi claims on Western Sahara

Apart from the states that fully recognize the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic as the sovereign state of Western Sahara, some other states, although not recognizing the SADR for various reasons, have expressed explicit support for the right of self-determination of the Sahrawi people, which is the principal position of the Polisario Front, although such states may or may not recognise the Sahrawi claim to self-determination. Some states that do not recognize the Sahrawi Republic (neither as a state, nor as a government-in-exile

States supporting Moroccan claims on Western Sahara

No state recognizes the sovereignty of Morocco over Western Sahara, although many states have expressed support for Moroccan claims, or endorsed the Moroccan autonomy initiative for the territory. Several states have withdrawn their recognition of the SADR or canceled their relations with the SADR (close to 30 countries). Many of these states (mostly African countries and Caribbean or Pacific island-states) have done this as a result of Moroccan political pressures or exchanges and/or offers of economic assistance and investment.
However, some international organizations, such as the Arab League and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, have recognized the sovereignty of Morocco over what it calls its Southern Provinces.
Some UN member states have expressed explicit support of Morocco's territorial integrity in reference to Western Sahara as Moroccan provinces, while others have endorsed or complemented the Moroccan proposal of autonomy for the territory as being credible and serious.map. Morocco's old allies, France and the United States, have provided the kingdom with economic, diplomatic, and military aid, throughout the conflict. Saudi Arabia provided much economic aid as well. 176.
Morocco and the PRC maintain close relations, that have been improving steadily in the past decades. China has shown strong support for Morocco's territorial integrity, China.
France enjoys close relations with Morocco. It is the kingdom's leading trade partner and the leading source of public development aid and private investments. The country claims neutrality on the Western Sahara issue, despite its military involvement in the Western Sahara War on the side of Morocco and Mauritania (see Operation Lamantin). In 2009Security Council under pressure over human rights in Western Sahara Pravda, 27 April 2010Francia impide que la ONU vigile los derechos humanos en el Sáhara El País, 1 May 2009  and 2010,Opposition of France to monitoring of human rights in Western Sahara "disgrace for Europe" (Austrian parliamentarian). SPS, 23 April 2010Polisario Front denounces blocking by France of human rights monitoring in Western Sahara. SPS, 29 April 2010 France used the threat of its veto power to block the establishment of Human Rights monitoring by the MINURSO in Western Sahara. France has been a major backer of the Moroccan autonomy plan and in the EU negotiated the concession of the advanced status to Morocco.map.ma/eng/sections/world/morocco_witnesses_po/view MAP, 12 August 2009
Former President Bill Clinton set a precedent on the conflict over Western Sahara which his successor, George W. Bush, followed. Both Presidents Clinton and Bush sided with Morocco and maintained the position that "Genuine autonomy under Moroccan sovereignty is the only feasible solution."House of Representatives letter to President Barack Obama. Accessed 21 February 2010.
The Obama administration disassociated itself from Moroccan autonomy in 2009, however, reversing the Bush-backed support of the Moroccan plan, and returning to a pre-Bush position, wherein the option of an independent Western Sahara is on the table again.
In April 2009, 229 members of the U.S. House of Representatives, a clear majority and more than 50 more than the number who signed the letter included Democratic Majority Leader Steny Hoyer and Republican Minority Leader John Boehner. In addition to acknowledging that Western Sahara has become a recruiting post for radical Islamists, the letter affirmed that the conflict is "the single greatest obstacle impending the security and cooperation necessary to combat" terrorism in the Maghreb. Retrieved 21 February 2010. The letter referenced UN Security Council Resolution 1813 (2008), and encouraged President Obama to follow the policy set by President Clinton and followed by President Bush. The congressmen expressed concerns about Western Sahara's viability. They referenced a UN fact-finding mission to Western Sahara which confirmed the State Department's view that the Polisario proposal, which ultimately stands for independence, would lead to a non-viable state. In closing, the letter stated, "We remain convinced that the U.S. position, favoring autonomy for Western Sahara under Moroccan sovereignty is the only feasible solution. We urge you to both sustain this longstanding policy, and to make clear, in both words and actions, that the United States will work to ensure that the UN process continues to support this framework as the only realistic compromise that can bring this unfortunate and longstanding conflict to an end."
Commenting on a 2004 free trade agreement with Morocco, US Trade Representative Robert Zoellick stated in a letter to Congressman Joe Pitts in response to his questioning, "the United States and many other countries do not recognize Moroccan sovereignty over Western Sahara and have consistently urged the parties to work with the United Nations to resolve the conflict by peaceful means. The Free Trade Agreement will not include Western Sahara."Letter from the trade office to Congressman Joe Pitts
In April 2013, the United States proposed that MINURSO monitored human rights (as all the other UN mission since 1991) in Western Sahara and the Sahrawi refugee camps in south-western Algeria, a move that Morocco  strongly opposed, cancelling the annual African Lion military exercises with US Army troops. Also in mid-April, United States Ambassador to Morocco Samuel L. Kaplan declared during a conference in Casablanca that the Moroccan autonomy plan "can't be the only basis in these negotiations", referring to the UN sponsored talks between the Polisario Front and Morocco. Kaplan Algerian Press Service, 16 April 2013

States which have not announced any position

The following states and entities have not announced any position:

Positions of international organizations

The SADR is also a member of the Asian-African Strategic Partnership, formed at the 2005 Asian-African Conference, over Moroccan objections to SADR participation.
In 2006, the SADR participated in a conference of the Permanent Conference of Political Parties of the Latin American and the Caribbean.
In 2010, the SADR ambassador to Nicaragua participated in the opening conference of the Central American Parliament
In 22 February 1982, the SADR secured membership in the Organisation of African Unity.
The African Union (formerly the OAU) has given the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic full recognition, and accepted it as a member state (which has led Morocco to leave the union.). Mohamed Abdelaziz, president of the SADR, has been vicepresident of the OUA in 1985, and of the AU in 2002.
The European Union supports the right of self-determination of the Sahrawi people (the MINURSO UN-sponsored referendum),Algeria, EU have same position on Western Sahara issue, says Algerian FM but does not recognize the Polisario Front.THE EU'S APPROACH TOWARDS WESTERN SAHARA In addition, members of the EFTA trade bloc have made statements excluding the Western Sahara from the Moroccan-EFTA free trade agreement.wsrw.php?parse_news=single&cat=105&art=1410
Since 1966, the United Nations request for the celebration of a referendum for enabling the "indigenous population" to exercise freely their right to self-determination. 22/29 -Question of Ifni and Spanish Sahara- 21st Gneral assembly UN, 20-12-1966 Since 1979, the United Nations has recognized the Polisario Front as the representative of the people of Western Sahara, and considered Morocco as an occupying force. 34/37 -Question of Western Sahara- 34th General assembly UN, 21-11-1979
Former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan stressed, in his last report on Western Sahara, to the Security Council:
| url = 
| accessdate =15 July 2006 }} 





Bibliography



Tables of states recognizing the SADR


