[[Deadworld]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 comic debuts, Caliber Comics titles, Image Comics titles

Deadworld is an ongoing American comic book published by Desperado Publishing in association with IDW Publishing.
The series follows survivors in a post-apocalyptic scenario brought on by zombie attacks.  Led by King Zombie, Deadworld brings forth a different slant than just humans slaughtering zombies.

Publication history

Originally published by Arrow Comics, Deadworld was written and created by Stuart Kerr and Ralph Griffith in 1987,
Arrow Comics ceased production of all titles, but sold the rights of the title to Locke who transferred the rights to Gary Reed's Caliber Comics. By the twelfth issue of the title, Reed took over as the primary writer. The first volume of Deadworld ended in 1992 after twenty-six issues. One year later, a second volume began. The second volume ended after fifteen issues.
After a lull in its printing, the series returned to print in 2005 through Image Comics, with Gary Reed and Locke working on the series.  By issue number 3, Dalibor Talajic took over illustration duties and completed the story arc of Requiem to the World.  Following that, Image released Deadworld: Frozen Over with guest writer Michael Raicht and artist Federico Dallocchio. Deadworld: Bits and Pieces collected the short stories and scenes from various issues and was released through Transfuzion Publishing.  Desperado released Deadworld Chronicles which featured all new short illustrated tales of Deadworld.  Deadworld: Slaughterhouse was released in 2010 with artwork from Sami Makkonen in a hardcover edition only.   IDW released volumes one and two of  Deadworld Classics which collects the long out-of-print first original 16 issues illustrated by Vince Locke. Gary Reed joined up with Gary Francis for original graphic novel,  Deadworld: The Last Siesta,  illustrated by Mark Bloodworth and released through IDW (ISBN 1613770448).
In 2012, Gary Reed teamed up again with Sami Makkonen to bring Deadworld into full color for the first time.  The five issue series, "War of the Dead" was released by IDW as a weekly comic series during the month of August and then collected in October (ISBN 978-1613775080).  It received a number of award nominations including the Shel Dorf for Best mini-series for Best Mini-Series 
In October, 2012, Reed released a special graphic novel sized book called "Voices from the Deadworld".  This was a series of single page tales from those who lived and died in Deadworld with each text page accompanied by an original illustration from over 40 various artists.
Also in 2012, Reed licensed Deadworld to PopFunk for t-shirts (ISBN 978-1600108587).
The most recent series was Deadworld: Restoration, the full color follow up mini-series to War of the Dead, also from IDW which debuted in December, 2013 with the final issue shipping in April 2014.

Issues

Ongoing series

The ongoing series are:
Deadworld vol. 1
Deadworld vol. 2

Limited series

From Caliber:
From Image
From Desperado
From IDW

One shots

One shots include:

Contributors

vol. 1

vol. 2

2005 to present

Collected editions

The series has been collected into a number of trade paperbacks:

Deadworld CD-ROM collection library

Eagle One Media  collected and released the first 46 issues of the original Deadworld comic book series along with two mini-series onto CD-ROM. Each page from the issues are scanned and viewable on one's PC in protected (non-extractable) PDF format.

Film

In June, 2009, it was announced that Deadworld was to be turned into a film. Dark Hero Studios partners David Hayter and Benedict Carver have teamed up with Bill Mechanic to turn the comicbook into a zombie feature franchise. In 2013, Gary Reed announced that the option had expired and he did not renew it.






