[[Shau Kei Wan Government Secondary School]]

CATEGORIES: Secondary schools in Hong Kong, Government schools in Hong Kong, Shau Kei Wan

Shau Kei Wan Government Secondary School (SGSS, 筲箕灣官立中學) is a co-educational grammar school operated by the Hong Kong Government in Hong Kong. Located in Shau Kei Wan, the school was founded in 1961 and its medium of instruction is English.

History

Introduction

Shau Kei Wan Government Secondary School was founded in 1961. As the school was still under construction, it operated in the shared premises of Clementi Middle School in Fortress Hill Road. It moved to its present premises at 42 Chai Wan Road, Shau Kei Wan in the autumn of 1964 and was officially opened on 19 November 1964.  It was the first government secondary school opened on Hong Kong Island after the Second World War, and was the first government secondary school not named after a member of the British Royal Family or a philanthropist.  And it's the only one Band One Co-Ed government secondary school in the island.
There are four houses, Dragon, Lion, Phoenix and Unicorn.
It's well equipped with laboratories for science subjects, Home Economics, Geography, Music and Woodwork classes.  That Woodwork Workshop was renamed in 1976 as the Workshop for a new subject, Design and Technology, which was cancelled many years later as the secondary industry in H.K. became a part of the history.
There're a school hall, a library, gardens, badminton courts, a basketball court and a football field in the campus.
A repeated wrong answered question in Yahoo Answer is why it's called Shau Kei Wan Government Secondary School, but not Chai Wan Government Secondary School.  The right answer is that, the boundary of the two areas is Tai Tam Road junctions of Chai Wan Road in tradition.  Similarly, there is a part of Castle Peak Road, and Tai Po Road, in Shamshuipo, it's Shamshuipo indeed, not Castle Peak and Tai Po in that particular area.

School Song

Here again we gather together, under the banner of Shaukeiwan. Vow to ourselves, in the spirit of the Dolphins, to love TRUTH, to seek KNOWLEDGE and to brave danger, For the good of our fellow beings .
Arts and Science we explore *Soprano
Arts and Science we explore, we explore . * Alto
Arts and Science we explore, Arts and Science explore, *Bass
Honour and Conduct we treasure more, to one another we pledge to be loyal we pledge to  be loyal, we pledge to be true, with fervour and friendship we enrich our soil .
Houses four we all stand together, Dragon, Lion, Phoenix and Unicorn, To one family we all belong . When and Where, when and where SGSS appears, appears, we'll uphold its name loud and clear ! We'll uphold its name loud and clear . We'll uphold its name loud and clear !

1960s

In 1961, SGSS established on borrowed premises of Clementi Middle School with only 6 classrooms. The school officially opened by the Governor of Hong Kong, Sir David Trench in 1964.
The first batch of students sat for Hong Kong Certificate of Education Examination (HKCEE) in 1966. In the same year, Form 6 Arts and Science classes were introduced. Furthermore, The first Annual Speech Day, Annual Swimming Gala and Annual Athletics Meet were held subsequently in 1967.
In 1968, the first batch of students sat for Hong Kong Advanced Level Examination (HKALE). Boy Scouts and Girl Guides were set up. A new subject, Economics and Public Affairs, was introduced. In 1969, the first Parents' Night was held.

1970s

The Integrated Science Pilot Scheme were introduced in 1973. It was an educational reform, simple experiments were provided to junior forms students, it was a new leap at that time.  The HKCEE results under this scheme were bracketed with (A) for Alternative Syllabus.  These syllabi replaced the original ones years later.  This pioneer scheme is adopted in school in the whole society, it's regarded as a successful move towards modern development to local education.
As a transitional measure to house extra students following the introduction of the 9-year compulsory education in 1976, roughly 80 Band 2 students were admitted into 3-year special classes in each subsequent school year.  There were Band 1 and Band 2 classes from 1976 to 1983.  Later it turned back again to a Band 1 school.
The school library expanded with recruitment of a teacher librarian in 1978. SSPA was introduced in the same year mentioned. Moreover, special classes for maladjusted children were implemented. JSEA was introduced in 1979.
The structure of the teaching staff in those year was, a Principal I, a Chief Educational Officer who headed the school, with roughly ten Senior Education Officers, including two Senior Masters/Mistresses, who're called Vice Principals now, and one other for each leading subjects.  There were EOs, AEOs for senior classes, an SAM, Senior Assistant Master who led non-graduated Assistant Masters and Certified Masters for junior forms and side subjects, such as Woodwork, Design and Technology, Home Economics, Music and Physical Education.  Mr Chan Woon Pun was that SAM.  University Graduates in other non-government schools are called General Masters, or GMs in short.  The post of the principal of the adjacent government school is a Principal II (an SEO) as it's a Band Two school.
Following several educational reforms in the middle of '90s, a new rank, Principal Assistant Master, was introduced into the school.
Another change was that, as the government cut cost in hiring well paid SEOs, there're now only two SEOs working as Vice Principals in the school, with far more EOs, AEOs, replacing most AMs and CMs.  Now, nearly all teachers in the school are university graduates, except those for side subjects.  That's a reality we can hardly change.  Teachers around 40 will find more difficult to get promoted.
In those years, there was a subject called Economics and Public Affairs, which was a good subject to study the roles and limitations of running a government.  It's no longer exist.  Students have to study Sociology in Higher Education for that.
The first lady seated as the Principal was the late beloved Mrs A.M. Lee, a half-bleed of Scotland and France, who spoke fluent Mandarin and Cantonese.

1980s

The Extracurricular Activities Co-ordination Committee was set up in 1982. Human Biology, Economics and Moral education were introduced in the same year.
In 1983, special classes were totally phased out. There are 29 classes in the school and streaming in Form 4 was started.
In 1984, Computer Studies was introduced. In 1985, Civic Education was introduced. In the same year, the school was visited by the Governor of Hong Kong, Sir Edward Youde.
The school celebrated its silver jubilee in 1986. The opening ceremony of open day and Treeplanting Ceremony was officiated by Michael Leung, Director of Education. The 25th Anniversary School Magazine was published. Sex education was introduced in the same year.
Putonghua lessons for S.1 and S.2 students were introduced. Moreover, the Reading Award Scheme organised by Library Committee was introduced too.

1990s

The Students' Association was formed in 1990. Shau Kei Wan Government Secondary School had his 30th Anniversary in 1991. The 30th Anniversary School Magazine was published. The Cake-Cutting Ceremony on Speech Day was officiated by John Winfield, Deputy Director of Education.
In 1992, a School Management Initiative was being implemented. Health Education was introduced.
The School Advisory Council was formed in 1993. The school mission statement and goals were formulated in the same year. The Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) was formed. Environmental Education was introduced and the Chinese Instrumental Group was set up.
In 1995, SGSS celebrated its 35th Anniversary. W. K. Lam, Director of Education, was invited to visit SGSS. The Cake-Cutting Ceremony at Speech Day was officiated by Professor Rosie Young, HKU. Furthermore, in 1996, the Ribbon-Cutting Ceremony of Open Day was officiated by Mr S. T. Kwan, Assistant Director of Education, and the 35th Anniversary School Magazine was published.
In 1997, the SGSS Alumni Association was formed.
In 1999, the Central Broadcasting System was set up. The Hall Lighting and Sound System was improved to a higher standard. The School Intranet was set up. In the same year, the Information Technology Room was opened and began to operate.

2000s

SGSS celebrated its 40th Anniversary in 2000. Air-conditioning was installed in the hall. Moreover, a new subject, Mathematics & Statistics, was introduced.
SGSS celebrated its 45th Anniversary in 2005. A music concert was organised on 7 July 2006 in City Hall to celebrate this special occasion.
SGSS celebrated its 50th Anniversary in 2011.

School Facilities

The school has a total of 31 classrooms (5 in the new annex), 3 prefabricated rooms, an Information Technology Room, a Multi-Media Learning Centre, 4 laboratories (for Physics, Chemistry, Biology and Integrated Science) and 6 special rooms (for Art & Design, Design & Technology, Music, Home Economics, Geography and Computer Studies). In addition, the school has a library, a school hall, 2 staff rooms (1 in the new annex), a general office, a garden, a courtyard, a basketball court and a football pitch. In the new annex, there is a Conference Room, a Computer-Assisted Learning Room, a Language Room, a Student Activity Centre, an English Room, a Careers Library, a Social Worker's Room and a Music Practice and Activities Room.

Alumni Association

The SGSS Alumni Association was formed in 1997 by a group of F.6 and F.7 students. In 2002, a Council was added to the structure of the Association in order to play the role of an advisor, as well as a monitor.  Mrs Fanny Cheung and Mr Chow Wing Sum chair that association.

Notable alumni

Achievements




