[[Sasha Pieterse]]

CATEGORIES: 1996 births, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from Los Angeles, California, Actresses from Nevada, Afrikaner people, American child actresses, American child models, American female models, American film actresses, American television actresses, Living people, People from Johannesburg, People from the Las Vegas Valley, South African emigrants to the United States

Sasha Pieterse (born February 17, 1996) is an American actress and singer. She is known for her role as Alison DiLaurentis on ABC Family's series Pretty Little Liars.

Early life

Sasha Pieterse was born in Johannesburg, South Africa on February 17, 1996. Immigrating to the United States when she was three years old, she was raised in Las Vegas before moving to Los Angeles.
In 2004, she appeared in Stargate SG-1.  Pieterse has done numerous television commercials including long-running national spots for "Nesquick" and "Firestone Tires." She was featured on a billboard for "Supercuts" that appeared throughout the country then she sang and modeled in the Macy's Passport Fashion Show, performing throughout California.

Career

Acting

At 6 years old, Pieterse got her start in television, co-starring in 2002 as Buffy on the Warner Bros. comedy series Family Affair. She started to rise to fame as an actress when she played in House portraying a young girl named Andie with terminal cancer. Her performance in House M.D was later considered for a daytime Emmy in 2005.
In 2006, Pieterse appeared in Good Luck Chuck as a young goth girl named Anisha who, after having her sexual advances rejected by Chuck, places a curse on him so that every single woman he sleeps with will break up with him and marry the next man who asks her out.
In 2009, Pieterse was cast as a series regular on Pretty Little Liars as Alison DiLaurentis, the former "queen bee" of her high school clique and the most popular and beautiful girl in her school before her disappearance, a role she still plays today.
Other roles Pieterse has had include a 2009 appearance in Without a Trace as Daphne Stevens in the episode "Wanted" and a recurring role as Amanda Strazzulla, an abandoned daughter, in Heroes. In 2011, she appeared as Amy Loubalu in the Disney Channel Original Movie Geek Charming and also as a teenage girl in the movie X-Men: First Class. More recently, Pieterse has appeared in the film G.B.F. with one of the lead roles of Fawcett Brooks and in an episode of Hawaii Five-0 as a terrorist pupil named Dawn Hatfield.

Music

Pieterse describes her music as "country with southern rock". Pieterse was signed to record label Dan Franklin Music. 
Her third single "I Can't Fix You" was released on July 12, 2013.

Filmography

Awards and nominations






