[[M1117 Armored Security Vehicle]]

CATEGORIES: Textron, Internal security vehicles, Armored personnel carriers of the United States, Armoured fighting vehicles of the post–Cold War period, Armored fighting vehicles of the United States

The M1117 Guardian Armored Security Vehicle, or ASV, is an internal security vehicle manufactured by Textron Marine & Land Systems for use by the U.S. Army's Military Police Corps. Its armament consists of an Mk 19 grenade launcher and M2HB Browning machine gun, mounted in a turret similar to that used on the U.S. Marine Corps' Amphibious Assault Vehicle; and a M240H Medium Machine Gun mounted outside the gunner's hatch. The vehicle was very popular with American military police and convoy security units in Iraq. It is a more heavily protected and heavily armed alternative to the armored Humvee which was not originally designed to be a protected fighting vehicle.

History

By the 1980s, American military doctrine emphasized two distinct types of equipment. Tanks and infantry fighting vehicles were for frontline combat, and unarmored utility vehicles for transport behind the lines. Freedberg Jr. National Journal March 26, 2007 In 1993, the military had to fight through Mogadishu in unarmored Humvees, leading to the development of uparmored models. Many generals doubted the benefits, but the Military Police Corps, tasked with patrolling the "safe" rear area behind the battle line insisted that the Army fund a slow but steady production of the bullet resistant M1114.
In 1999, the United States Army began buying a limited number of M1117s (originally the ASV-150) for the Military Police Corps. This purpose-built ASV was derived from Cadillac Gage's previous Commando family of AFV which was used in Vietnam for base security. The ASV 150 is a much improved version the earlier Cadillac Gage 100/150, with improved armor protection and better maneuverability due to the use of Timoney's independent suspension system.
The ASV uses an advanced modular expandable armor package from IBD, consisting of ceramic composite applique on the exterior and spall liner on the interior. At $800,000 each, the M1117 was significantly more expensive than the $140,000 price for an M1114. They were field tested by MP units in Kosovo mostly by members of the 709th MP Battalion. The program was canceled in 2002 because of budget priorities. The United States Army believed that existing vehicles could be used without an "unacceptable level of risk." When the Iraq War began in 2003, there were 49 ASVs in service, with almost all of them being assigned to MP Units. The first MP unit to officially use them in a combat zone was the 527th MP Company and other elements of the 720th MP Battalion. However, the onset of events in Iraq has given new life to the ASV program as HMMWVs have proven vulnerable to attacks and a large source of casualties. Uparmored HMMWVs were not designed to be armored cars like the M1117, which are designed to withstand hits from small arms, mines and rockets in frontline combat units. Soldiers who used them, and some members of Congress visiting Iraq have favored them over other mine protected vehicles. As of mid-2007, 1,729 vehicles were delivered or under contract with many being dispersed not just to MPs but numerous other military units to include the Iraqi National Police.
In response to urgent United States Army requirements in the mid-2000s, production has increased from one ASV every three weeks to the complete 56 vehicles per month. The plant that produces the vehicles is located in New Orleans and was heavily damaged by Hurricane Katrina. The manufacturing facilities have since been rebuilt and expanded to five buildings and personnel have more than doubled. The vehicle is a 21st-century version of the V-100 Cadillac Gage Commando which was used by the U.S. Army Military Police during the Vietnam War,Doyle, p. 2 whose duties often consisted of providing armed escort for wheeled convoys. The USAF in South Vietnam utilized an open hatched (turret-less) Commando for base security missions. 2, 40
A variant was to be evaluated by the U.S. Marine Corps as part of the Mine Resistant Ambush Protected (MRAP) vehicle program. As of May 18, 2007, After their vehicle submission failed ballistics testing at Aberdeen Proving Grounds, Textron received word that they would not receive further orders as part of the MRAP program. They will be delivered with the latest fragmentation protection kits. The total number of ASVs produced and remaining to be delivered to the U.S. Army is 2,058 vehicles.S. Army M1117 Armored Security Vehicles.

Design

At about 15 tons, the M1117 is lighter than the 20 ton Stryker ICV or 25 ton M2 Bradley armored vehicle. It can reach a speed of 20 miles per hour in 7 seconds."M117 Armored Security Vehicle Data Sheet." Textron Marine and Land Systems, 17 May 2011. Web. Retrieved 1 Aug 2012. It is only  for a Bradley. Buttoned up, the crew has 360° visibility. In size and capability, it fits between the Humvee and the $1.42 million Stryker. The crew compartment is fully air-conditioned.

Survivability

The Guardian's armor is designed to defeat small arms fire, mines and Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs). The armor is angled presenting no vertical surfaces, deflecting many rocket-propelled grenade (RPG) hits. If an RPG does hit the vehicle directly, it can still function, although crew survivability varies depending on the location at which the RPG hits.
ASVs in Iraq and Afghanistan have withstood several IED attacks, some vehicles multiple times. One ASV returned  Since the incidents, Textron has started adding 15 additional bolts to the vehicle turret.

Mobility

The typical mission profile of an ASV involves 50% travel primary roads, 30% travel on secondary roads, and 20% cross-country travel. It uses a model MD3560 Allison Transmission. Front and rear independent suspension provides smooth highway speeds of up to  ground clearance.
Six ASVs can enplane on a C-17, fully loaded and ready to roll off. Also, the CH-53E Super Stallion is able to carry a single one of these ASVs.

Variants

The following variants are known to be in production/service:Armoured Security Vehicle (ASV) in demand in Iraq.

Export variants

Bulgaria uses a variant of the M1117 APC fitted with a NSVT heavy machine gun instead of the M2. Not all vehicles have been converted this way.
The Iraqi Armored Personnel Carrier ASV variant is configured for transport.

Operators

Future operators








