[[War]]

CATEGORIES: Dispute resolution, Ethics, Violence, War, Human rights abuses

War is an organized and often prolonged conflict that is carried out by states or non-state actors. It is generally characterised by extreme violence, social disruption and economic destruction. War should be understood as an actual, intentional and widespread armed conflict between political communities, and therefore is defined as a form of political violence or intervention. The set of techniques used by a group to carry out war is known as warfare. An absence of war is usually called peace.
While some scholars see warfare as an inescapable and integral aspect of human nature, others argue that it is only inevitable under certain socio-cultural or ecological circumstances. For some the practice of war is not linked to any single type of political organization or society. Rather, as discussed by John Keegan in his A History of Warfare, war is a universal phenomenon whose form and scope is defined by the society that wages it. Another argument suggests that since there are human societies in which warfare does not exist, humans may not be naturally disposed for warfare, which emerges under particular circumstances.
The deadliest war in history, in terms of the cumulative number of deaths since its start, is the Second World War, with 60–85 million deaths. Proportionally speaking, the most destructive war in modern history is the War of the Triple Alliance, which took the lives of over 60% of Paraguay's population, according to Steven Pinker. In 2003, Richard Smalley identified war as the sixth (of ten) biggest problems facing humanity for the next fifty years."Top Ten Problems of Humanity for Next 50 Years", Professor R. E. Smalley, Energy & NanoTechnology Conference, Rice University, May 3, 2003.

Etymology

The English word war derives from the late Old English (c.1050) words wyrre and werre; the Old French werre; the Frankish werra; and the Proto-Germanic werso. The denotation of war derives from the Old Saxon werran, Old High German werran, and the German verwirren: "to confuse", "to perplex", and "to bring into confusion".
The scholarly study of war is sometimes called polemology (), from the Greek polemos, meaning "war", and -logy, meaning "the study of".

Types

War, to become known as one, must entail some degree of confrontation using weapons and other military technology and equipment by armed forces employing military tactics and operational art within the broad military strategy subject to military logistics. War Studies by military theorists throughout military history have sought to identify the philosophy of war, and to reduce it to a military science.
Modern military science considers several factors before a national defence policy is created to allow a war to commence: the environment in the area(s) of combat operations, the posture national forces will adopt on the commencement of a war, and the type of warfare troops will be engaged in.

Behaviour and conduct

The behaviour of troops in warfare varies considerably, both individually and as units or armies. In some circumstances, troops may engage in genocide, war rape and ethnic cleansing. Commonly, however, the conduct of troops may be limited to posturing and sham attacks, leading to highly rule-bound and often largely symbolic combat in which casualties are much reduced from that which would be expected if soldiers were genuinely violent towards the enemy. Situations of deliberate dampening of hostilities occurred in World War I by some accounts, e.g., a volley of gunfire being exchanged after a misplaced mortar hit the British line, after which a German soldier shouted an apology to British forces, effectively stopping a hostile exchange of gunfire. 1984. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books. Other examples of non-aggression, also from World War I, are detailed in "Good-Bye to All That." These include spontaneous ceasefires to rebuild defences and retrieve casualties, alongside behaviour such as refusing to shoot at enemy during ablutions and the taking of great risks (described as 1 in 20) to retrieve enemy wounded from the battlefield. The most notable spontaneous ceasefire of World War I was the Christmas truce.
The psychological separation between combatants, and the destructive power of modern weaponry, may act to override this effect and facilitate participation by combatants in the mass slaughter of combatants or civilians, such as in the bombing of Dresden in World War II.

History

Before the dawn of civilization,
In War Before Civilization, Lawrence H. Keeley, a professor at the University of Illinois, says that approximately 90–95% of known societies throughout history engaged in at least occasional warfare,
Keeley explained several styles of primitive combat such as, small raids, large raids, and massacres. All of these forms of warfare were perpetrated by primitive societies, a finding that has been supported by more recent research looking at violence in the past., Ryan P. Harrod, and Ventura R. Pérez, eds. 2012. The Bioarchaeology of Violence. Gainesville: University Press of Florida.  The Dogrib tribe eventually destroyed the Yellowknife tribe by killing 4 men, 13 women, and 17 children which accounted for 20 percent of the population. This was a devastating blow from which the Yellowknife tribe never recovered. Keeley further explains how small raids are not organized due to the lack of leadership and any formal training. This causes raids to be short and quick with relatively low numerical casualties but may significantly damage a percentage of a population. The deficit of resources also can account for a lack of fortifications and defensive structures in primitive prestate societies. The protection provided by defensive structures could not justify the valuable resources used and labor implemented to build it.
William Rubinstein wrote that "Pre-literate societies, even those organised in a relatively advanced way, were renowned for their studied cruelty ... 'archaeology yields evidence of prehistoric massacres more severe than any recounted in ethnography after the coming of the Europeans'. At Crow Creek, South Dakota, as noted, archaeologists found a mass grave of 'more than 500 men, women, and children who had been slaughtered, scalped, and mutilated during an attack on their village a century and a half before Columbus's arrival (ca. AD 1325)' ".
It is problematic however to suggest that people in past societies are any more violent than people today. Martin and colleagues in their recent book have pulled together some of the foremost researchers studying violence in the past to show that though there may be events like massacres in the past, like today the use and manifestation of warfare varies greatly both within and between societies.
thumb|According to the U.S. Bureau of the Census (1894), the Indian Wars of the 19th century cost the lives of about 19,000 whites and 30,000 Indians. American Indian Holocaust and Survival: A Population History since 1492. University of Oklahoma Press. .World War One – A New Kind of War | Part II, From 14 – 18 Understanding the Great War, by Stéphane Audoin-Rouzeau, Annette Becker During the 20th century, war resulted in a dramatic intensification of the pace of social changes, and was a crucial catalyst for the emergence of the Left as a force to be reckoned with.: "War in this century became an essential precondition for the emergence of a numerically powerful Left, moving it from the margins to the very center of European politics during 1917–18 and of all world affairs after 1941".
Recent rapid increases in the technologies of war, and therefore in its destructiveness (see mutual assured destruction), have caused widespread public concern, and have in all probability forestalled, and may altogether prevent the outbreak of a nuclear World War III. At the end of each of the last two World Wars, concerted and popular efforts were made to come to a greater understanding of the underlying dynamics of war and to thereby hopefully reduce or even eliminate it all together. These efforts materialized in the forms of the League of Nations, and its successor, the United Nations.
Shortly after World War II, as a token of support for this concept, most nations joined the United Nations. During this same post-war period, with the aim of further delegitimizing war as an acceptable and logical extension of foreign policy, most national governments also renamed their Ministries or Departments of War as their Ministries or Departments of Defense, for example, the former US Department of War was renamed as the US Department of Defense.
In 1947, in view of the rapidly increasingly destructive consequences of modern warfare, and with a particular concern for the consequences and costs of the newly developed atom bomb, Albert Einstein famously stated, "I know not with what weapons World War III will be fought, but World War IV will be fought with sticks and stones."[ref]
 Nuclear Age Peace Foundation paper
[/ref]
Still since the close of World War II, limited non-nuclear conflicts continue, and surprisingly enough, 
The Human Security Report 2005 documented a significant decline in the number and severity of armed conflicts since the end of the Cold War in the early 1990s. However, the evidence examined in the 2008 edition of the Center for International Development and Conflict Management's "Peace and Conflict" study indicated that the overall decline in conflicts had stalled. Wilkenfield and T. Gurr Peace and Conflict 2008, Paradigm Publishers, 2007

Throughout history

=Nine largest (by death toll)=

Three of the ten most costly wars, in terms of loss of life, have been waged in the last century. These are of course the two World Wars, then followed by the Second Sino-Japanese War (which is sometimes considered part of World War II, or overlapping with that war). Most of the others involved China or neighboring peoples. The death toll of World War II, being 60 million plus, surpasses all other war-death-tolls. This may be due to significant recent advances in weapons technologies, as well as recent increases in the overall human population.
[ref]McFarlane, Alan: The Savage Wars of Peace: England, Japan and the Malthusian Trap, Blackwell 2003, ISBN 0-631-18117-2,
ISBN 978-0-631-18117-0 – cited by White[/ref]

Historic famous battles

 
 
File:Greek-Persian duel.jpg|Greek hoplite and Persian warrior depicted fighting, on an ancient kylix, 5th century BC
File:MS Ghent - Battle of Tewkesbury.jpg|The Battle of Tewkesbury (1471) during the Wars of the Roses in England
File:Schwäbischer Bund Luzerner Schilling.jpg|A cattle raid during the Swabian War (Luzerner Schilling)
File:Battle of Ravenna (1512).JPG|The Battle of Ravenna, in which France defeated the Spaniards on Easter Sunday in 1512
File:Bad-war.jpg|Swiss and Landsknecht pikemen fight at "push of pike" during the Italian Wars
File:Battle of Orsha (1514-09-08).jpg|Russo-Polish war, Battle of Orsha in 1514
File:Battle of Lepanto 1571.jpg|The Spanish naval victory of the Battle of Lepanto, 1571, the last battle to be fought primarily between galleys
File:Schlacht am Weißen Berg C-K 063.jpg|Battle of White Mountain, 1620, an early battle in the Thirty Years' War
File:Van Soest, Four Days Battle.jpg|The Four Days' Battle, 1–4 June 1666, during the Second Anglo-Dutch War
File:Marten's Poltava.jpg|The Battle of Poltava (1709), a decisive battle between Russian and Swedish troops
File:Charge of the French Cuirassiers at Waterloo.jpg|Depicting French Cuirassiers charging onto the British squares during the Battle of Waterloo
File:Inkermann.jpg|The 20th Foot at the Battle of Inkerman, Crimean War, 1854
File:Battle of Fort Fisher.jpg|American Civil War, Union captures Fort Fisher, 1865
File:Bundesarchiv Bild 183-W0506-316, Russland, Kampf um Stalingrad, Siegesflagge.

Effects

