[[Kiki Sanford]]

CATEGORIES: American academics, American physiologists, American radio personalities, American science writers, Science bloggers, Science journalists, Women biologists, University of California, Davis alumni, 1974 births, Living people

Kirsten "Kiki" Sanford (born August 1, 1974) is an American science communicator. After working at the University of California, Davis as a research scientist in neurophysiology,Science Resume at The Bird's Brain she left research work to pursue a career in science communication. Her work has included multiple audio and video programs, including the This Week in Science radio program and Dr. Kiki's Science Hour.This Week in Science - The Weekly Science Talk Radio Show and Podcast

Biography

Sanford was born in Santa Rosa, California and raised near Stockton, California. 

Science communication

Sanford, known as "Dr. Kiki," produces and appears in a number of science education programs. Sanford says of her work, "My shtick is Dr. Kiki reaches out to people who don't necessarily like science to get them to see it as something enjoyable. My goal is to get people who maybe flunked chemistry or didn't do well on their science fair project to say, 'This is really interesting.'"
Sanford is the host of the This Week in Science radio show/podcast, which she founded in 1999. This Week in Science is a weekly program formerly streamed live from the This Week in Tech Network (TWiT), and then rebroadcast from U.C. Davis' KDVS, 90.3 FM. Although TWiT no longer carries This Week in Science (as well as all third-party shows,) Sanford states that she is considering continuing the program on her own.
Starting in late 2007, Sanford expanded her work, starring in On Network's successful series Food Science. The program explores the science of cooking as well as at-home experiments involving food.
On April 30, 2009, Dr. Kiki's Science Hour kicked off on TWiT.tv. The show, recorded live on TWiT, became a podcast with episode 24. Past guests included scientists, skeptics, and science communicators such as astronomer Phil Plait and neurologist Steven Novella.
Sanford has produced and hosted various segments for The Science Channel's science program Brink.

Awards

In 2005, Sanford was awarded the American Association for the Advancement of Science Mass Media Science & Engineering Fellowship AAAS Mass Media Science & Engineering Fellows Program from the American Association for the Advancement of Science in recognition for her work with her radio show This Week in Science. Through this fellowship she worked as a television news producer at WNBC News in New York City, working with noted health and science reporter Dr. Max Gomez.






