[[SPIE]]

CATEGORIES: International non-profit organizations, 1955 establishments in California, Scientific societies, Engineering societies, Optics institutions

SPIE is a not-for-profit international professional society for optics and photonics technology, founded in 1955. It organizes technical conferences, trade exhibitions, and continuing education programs for researchers and developers in the light-based fields of physics, including, but not limited to: optics, photonics, and imaging engineering. SPIE is most known for Photonics West, held in San Francisco.
The society publishes peer-reviewed scientific journals, conference proceedings, monographs, tutorial texts, field guides, and reference volumes in print and online. In 2012, the society provided $3.3 million in support of optics education and outreach programs around the world.

Former names

On July 1, 1955 SPIE was founded as the Society of Photographic Instrumentation Engineers in California to specialize in the application of photographic instrumentation. In 1964 the Society formally changed its name to the Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers. In 1977 SPIE moved its headquarters to Bellingham, Washington, and in 1981, to reflect a changing membership, the Society began doing business as (DBA) SPIE—The International Society for Optical Engineering. In 2007, the Society ended its DBA, and is referred to simply as SPIE.

Mission

The mission of SPIE is to serve scientists and engineers in industry, academia, and government working in a wide variety of fields that utilize some aspect of optics and photonics, the science and application of light. More specifically, optics is a branch of physics that examines the behavior and properties of light and the interaction of light with matter. 
Photonics is the science and technology of generating, controlling, and detecting photons, which are particles of light. Individuals involved with the society conduct research and apply new techniques to the design and development of technologies such as semiconductor manufacturing, robotics, medical imaging, next-generation displays, battlefield technologies, entertainment, biometric security, image processing, communications, astronomy, and much more. SPIE has Members from around the world, including North and South America, Europe, Africa, and Asia, with central offices in North America and Europe.

Conferences and exhibitions

SPIE Conferences and Exhibitions connect optical science and the optics industry. The society is affiliated with over 140 meetings and events each year.

Publications

The society's first publication, SPIE Newsletter,  was launched in 1957. In 1959, the society published its first book, SPIE Photographic Instrumentation Catalog. The newsletter morphed into the Society's first journal, now known as Optical Engineering, SPIE's flagship monthly journal. Throughout the years, SPIE has created many publications including journals, magazines, newspapers, websites, and books.
SPIE currently publishes:

Scientific journals

Digital Library

The SPIE Digital Library publishes online technical papers from SPIE Journals and Conference Proceedings from 1962 to the present, as well as eBooks published by SPIE Press. There are over 400,000 articles with more than 18,000 new research papers added annually.

SPIE Professional

SPIE Professional is a quarterly magazine that covers optics industry insights, technology overviews, career trends, and provides informational articles for optics and photonics professionals.

SPIE Newsroom

The SPIE Newsroom includes industry news and technical articles organized by topic:
The type of content includes:  technical articles related to optics and photonics news, SPIE. RSS Feeds are available on different topics.

SPIE Open Access

SPIE started a new Open Access program January of 2013 to promote knowledge transfer, education, and awareness of technology and industry developments in optics in photonics. All new articles published in SPIE journals for which authors pay voluntary page charges are freely accessible to anyone.

Services

SPIE Career Center

The SPIE Career Center is a recruitment resource for companies and
professionals in the optics and photonics community. Candidates can post their CV/resume online, search the job board, and access additional resources for career advancement. Employers and recruiters can post their jobs online and conduct targeted resume searches.

Courses

SPIE provides educational coursework in various formats including courses at conferences, CD-ROMs, DVDs and videos, and in-company training courses

Membership

The society's membership includes over 17,000 professionals, students, and organizations. Membership provides conference, course and publication rate reductions, online journal, and a print subscription to SPIE Professional, as well as voting rights, Student Chapter formation, and access to fellow promotion, senior member promotion and positions of governance in SPIE. 
Those "distinguished through outstanding contributions in the relevant technologies"Fellows nomination criteria   are eligible for election as SPIE Fellows.  Since the society began in 1955, more than 900 members have been elected as Fellows. In 2012, 75 individuals were elected, and in 2013 there were 69 elevated to the rank of SPIE Fellow.org/x32.xml

Awards

The society issues several awards:








