[[Phil Valentine]]

CATEGORIES: 1959 births, Living people, Conservative talk radio, Radio personalities from Nashville, Tennessee

Philip Carr "Phil" Valentine (born circa 1959) is an American conservative talk radio show host in Nashville, Tennessee. He broadcasts daily on flagship station WWTN, a Cumulus Media station, from 3:00 p.m. until 7:00 p.m. Central Time

Personal life

Valentine is the son of former six-term Democratic U.S. Representative Tim Valentine of North Carolina, but is nonetheless a self-described conservative. His mother is the late Betsy Valentine who was killed in an auto accident one month shy of Valentine's 22nd birthday.  He grew up in Nashville, North Carolina "I saw the movie poster for One Million Years B.C. 1966 film when I was 7. I was never the same."  and graduated from Northern Nash High School. After attending East Carolina University, he decided on a career in radio. ECU did not offer a broadcast major so Valentine left the university and enrolled in Carolina School of Broadcasting in Charlotte, North Carolina.

Books

Valentine is the author of three books, The Conservative's Handbook, Right from the Heart: The ABC's of Reality in America,

Film and television

In August 2009 Valentine launched production of his documentary, An Inconsistent Truth, a rebuttal to Al Gore's movie. The movie held its world premiere on January 26, 2012, and officially opened on January 27, 2012. For the first two weeks after the film's release, Truth was the top-grossing movie per screen in the country. At the time, it was playing at a single movie theater and earned a total of $36,439 for those two weeks. 
Valentine's other movie credits include a supporting role in the 1998 movie A Letter From Death Row, written and co-directed by Bret Michaels of the rock group Poison. He was also the voice of a radio talk show host in a 2003 episode of ABC-TV's Threat Matrix television drama. Valentine has made numerous appearances on Fox News Channel and MSNBC.The Phil Valentine Show official website

Awards and honors

Valentine has received numerous AIR Awards (Achievement in Radio) in Philadelphia and Nashville and the Gold World Medal for Best Talk Show Host from the New York Festivals International Radio Awards.  
Valentine is consistently listed in the Talkers Magazine "Heavy Hundred" as one of the 100 most influential talk show hosts in America and is listed by Talkers as one of the 100 most influential talk show hosts of all time. For 2013, he is ranked #39 on the Heavy Hundred list.






