[[UEFA]]

CATEGORIES: UEFA, Association football governing bodies in Europe, Sports governing bodies in Europe, Supraorganizations, Organizations established in 1954, International sports bodies based in Switzerland

The Union of European Football Associations ( also referred to by its acronym UEFA 
()) is the administrative body for association football in Europe and, partially, Asia. It is one of six continental confederations of world football's governing body FIFA. UEFA consists of fifty-four national association members.
UEFA represents the national football associations of Europe, runs nation and club competitions including the UEFA European Championship, UEFA Champions League, UEFA Europa League, and UEFA Super Cup, and controls the prize money, regulations, and media rights to those competitions.
UEFA was founded on 15 June 1954 in Basel, Switzerland after consultation between the Italian, French, and Belgian associations. Initially, the European football union consisted of 25 members which number doubled by the early 1990s. UEFA membership coincides for the most part with recognition as a sovereign country in Europe, although there some exceptions. Some micro states, (e.g. the Vatican City) are not members. Some UEFA members are not sovereign states, but form part of a larger recognised sovereign state in the context of international law.  Examples include England and Scotland, (part of the United Kingdom) or the Faroe Islands, (part of Denmark) however in the context of these countries government functions concerning sport tend to be carried at the territorial level coterminous with the UEFA member entity. Some UEFA members are transcontinental states, (e.g. Turkey and Russia). Several Asian countries were also admitted to the European football association, particularly Israel and Kazakhstan, which had been members of the Asian football association. Additionally some UEFA member associations allow teams from outside their association's main territory to take part in their "domestic" competition. Monaco, for example, takes part in the French League (though a separate sovereign entity); Welsh clubs Cardiff City and Swansea City participate in the English League; Berwick Rangers, situated in England, play in the Scottish Professional Football League and Derry City, situated in Northern Ireland, play in the Republic of IIreland-based League of Ireland .
Until 1959 the main headquarters were located in Paris, and later in Bern. Since 1995, UEFA headquarters transferred to Nyon, Switzerland. Henri Delaunay was the first general secretary and Ebbe Schwartz the first president. The current president is Michel Platini.

Members

Notes

Former members

Competitions

UEFA runs official international competitions in Europe and some countries of Northern, Southwestern and Central regions of Asia for national teams and professional clubs, known as UEFA competitions, some of them regarded between the world's most prestigious tournaments.

International

The main competition for men's national teams is the UEFA European Football Championship, started in 1958, with the first finals in 1960, and known as the European Nations Cup until 1964. It is also called UEFA or the EURO. UEFA also runs national competitions at Under-21, Under-19 and Under-17 levels. For women's national teams, UEFA operates the UEFA Women's Championship for senior national sides as well as Women's Under-19 and Women's Under-17 Championships.
UEFA also organized the UEFA-CAF Meridian Cup with CAF for youth teams. In an effort to boost youth soccer.
UEFA launched the UEFA Regions' Cup, for semi-professional teams representing their local region, in 1999.
In futsal there is the UEFA Futsal Championship and UEFA Futsal Under-21 Championship.
Italian, German, Spanish and French men's national teams are the sole to have won the European football championship in all categories.

Club

The top-ranked UEFA competition is the UEFA Champions League, which started in the 1992/93 season and gathers the top 1–4 teams of each country's league (the number of teams depend on that country's ranking and can be upgraded or downgraded); this competition was re-structured from a previous one that only gathered the top team of each country (held from 1955–92 and known as the European Champion Clubs' Cup or simply the European Cup).
A second, lower-ranked competition is the UEFA Europa League. This competition, for national knockout cup winners and high-placed league teams, was launched by UEFA in 1971 as a successor of both the former UEFA Cup and the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup (also begun in 1955).  A third competition, the Cup Winners' Cup, which had started in 1960, was absorbed into the UEFA Cup in 1999.
In women's football UEFA also conducts the UEFA Women's Champions League for club teams. The competition was first held in 2001, and known as the UEFA Women's Cup until 2009.
The UEFA Super Cup pits the winners of the Champions League against the winners of the UEFA Europa League (previously the winners of the Cup Winners' Cup), and came into being in 1973.
The UEFA Intertoto Cup was a summer competition, previously operated by several Central European football associations, which was relaunched and recognized as official UEFA club competition by UEFA in 1995. The last Intertoto Cup took place in 2008.
The Intercontinental Cup was jointly organised with CONMEBOL between the Champions League and the Copa Libertadores winners.
Only four teams a feat that is no longer possible for any team that did not win the Cup Winners' Cup. There are currently nine teams throughout Europe that have won two of the three trophies; all but one have won the Cup Winners Cup, four require a win in the Champions League and five require a UEFA Europa League win.
Juventus of Italy was the first team in Europe—remaining the only one to date (2013)—to win all UEFA's official championships and cups
UEFA's premier futsal competition is the UEFA Futsal Cup, a tournament started in 2001 which replaced the former Futsal European Clubs Championship. This event, despite enjoying a long and well-established tradition in the European futsal community, dating back to 1984, was never recognized as official by UEFA.

Sponsors

The following are the sponsors of UEFA (named "UEFA Partners"):

League revenues

Annual revenue comparison. All figures in Euros.
Source is the Deloitte 2013 annual report, which uses 2011–12 figures.[ref]Deloitte, Annual Review of
Football Finance – Highlights, June 2013, 



Competitions

Resolutions

Major non-UEFA competitions

Financial Fair Play

See also

World Cup Participation and results






