[[Tekno (toy manufacturer)]]

CATEGORIES: Model manufacturers, Toy cars and trucks, Toy brands, Die-cast toys

Tekno is a toy maker from Copenhagen, Denmark, that began manufacturing construction toys in 1928 and model autos immediately after World War II, selling 1 million a year during its peak (Dickson 2006; Tekno Dansk 1953). While started as a toy company, the focus later shifted to adult collectibles and promotional truck models as the firm was moved to Holland.
The company is not to be confused with Tekno, the "robotic" dog and pony.

History

The only Scandinavian company to become an accomplished diecast metal toy producer, Tekno was similar to Schuco Modell, Marklin, or Gama Toys, being one of the oldest toy and model producing firms of Europe. The founder was A. Siegumfeldt, a plumber from Copenhagen, who began producing diecast vehicles in 1945, thus becoming a main competitor to Dinky (Rixon 2005, p. 34).
Brochures show that the company regally celebrated its 25th anniversary in 1953. By this time a wide variety of trucks, tractors and cars were being produced along with toy miniature pots, pans and other kitchenware (Tekno Dansk 1953). Wooden houses, cranes, trucks and other toys, sometimes in association with the Swedish company Brio, were also produced in the 1950s.

Diecasters involved

From the late 1940s through about 1967, many Tekno models were made by H. Langes Legetøj (Langes Toys), a diecaster in Copenhagen with which Tekno had contracts (Rixon 2005, p. 35). This was a similar situation to that of English toymaker Morestone which enlisted the help of diecaster Modern Products.
In the case of Tekno, parts were cast in the neighborhood of Nyrnbergadde then sent west about four miles to Kirkebjerg. Later, production was also done in Glostrup about three miles west of Kirkebjerg. This area of Copenhagen apparently also gave its name to Kirk Toys. Langes Toys were later bought by Kirk toys which replaced the Tekno name with Kirk on some vehicle bases.

Details and promotionals

Tekno was known for favoring Swedish auto maker Volvo, making coupes, sedan, and wagons. Some of these models were used by Volvo as promotional models. Tekno had a reputation for accuracy and realism - its Volvo models and many others like its Oldsmobile Toronado and Jaguar X-KE had superb proportions and detail (Sinclair 1979, p. 391). Tekno trucks were also known for detail, such as the Ford D-800 tilt-cab decorated for Tuborg Beer which featured thirty-two removable beer cases (Sinclair 1979, p. 391). Still, in the early 1960s, the company favored the unrealistic, flashy practice of using jeweled headlights, similar to Dinky, Corgi, or Mebetoys (Gardiner and O'Neill 1996, p. 18). 
More than any other diecast maker, Tekno was known for its variety of liveries and their variations, which could seem nearly endless. For example, veteran collector Cecil Gibson wrote as early as 1970 how Tekno in the 1960s made its Volkswagen Transporter panel truck and Ford Taunus vans in many liveries, often for Scandinavian products such as Amstel Beer, the Politiken newspaper, or the more well known Scania (Gibson 1970, pages 28–29). Tekno's Scania and Volvo trucks were also offered with a variety of advertising on their flanks. In fact, Tekno may have been the earliest diecast company to focus on promotional products, perhaps even earlier than Winross Models' diecast trucks out of Rochester, New York - known in the United States for having many promotional variations.
Tekno boxes were normally rather dull, usually being red with illustrations of the cars on the sides. Earlier boxes showed illustrations of cars in various street scenes. Some of the colors could be brighter, however, as with the chartreuse color used on boxes introducing "Fingertip Styring" (sic)(Gardiner and O'Neill 1996, p. 37). Oddly, a 'cut-off' hand appeared apparently out of  the sky to touch and guide the car along. Through the 1960s, boxes became more simple as cars were portrayed with apertures closed - and then open on the opposite side (Rixon 2005, p. 35). The red box flaps showed the car in a yellow or white band across the center of the flap, or boxes were red on one side and blue on the other (Gardiner and O'Neill 1996 pp 36-37). Later, and like the rest of the industry, plastic window boxes with white and red trim became commonplace - obviously putting some talented graphic artists out of work (Ilich 1995-2000).

Copies and comparisons

Normally producing in 1:43 scale, Tekno's principal rivals were Corgi and Dinky - formidable competition. Models produced often mimicked their offerings, like the Commer estate or the later Oldsmobile Toronado, both models made by Corgi. Still, Tekno always had a personality all its own, offering unique vehicles (particularly those Swedish Saabs and Volvos). One example was the 1970 Volvo 144 police sedan or the Saab 99. Another was the Corvair Monza concept vehicle, produced in several colors - later reproduced by Auto Pilen of Spain. Some Tekno original tooling for 1960s Tekno models was also sold to Dalia of Spain, like several Volvo, Ford, and Lincoln models.
In contrast with most other diecast car producers, Tekno did not give in to the temptation of low friction, flashy wheels on their vehicles. Though the company remained loyal to its roots in producing more realistic models, this was not good for sales. Gradually, the variety of cars and other vehicles gave way to marketing only diecast trucks - often still for promotional purposes. At least this strategy helped the company survive, though more in the mode of German Conrad or NZG.
Some earlier models suffered occasionally from zinc pest and warping or bending chassis (perhaps from moldings that were unreinforced), but, overall, Tekno vehicles were of high quality finish.

Later history

Some Tekno cars were marketed in the United States by Kayeff, Inc. of Arcadia, California in blister packages. Unlike Lonestar Toys sold in the U.S. by Physio-Chem, which did not advertise the Lonestar name on packaging, the Kayeff cars proudly displayed the Tekno logo on the blister and stated boldly "It's from Denmark!" with the Danish flag and crown prominently shown (Hobby Talk 2008). The cars were more likely to be colored in more "spectra-flame"-type colors, perhaps in an attempt to compete with Mattel's Hot Wheels. A few years ago, one of these was reported to have sold for $800.00.
MPC also marketed some Tekno trucks and cars as MPC. These were castings made by Kirk (Hobby Talk 2008). They were advertised as "Strip 'n Steer Metal Precision Trucks" as they could be taken apart and re-assembled.
Sometime in the late 1960s, Tekno models were also offered through a special mail order ad by Road and Track magazine (Hobby Talk 2008).

Tekno Holland

Sinclair says Tekno ceased making toys in 1972 (Sinclair 1979, p. 391). In 1974, Tekno tooling was sold to a Dutch firm called Vanmin, BV. Thus Tekno, now with the name "Tekno Toys" continues as a firm in the Netherlands. It is still in business, mainly making truck models with a variety of promotional liveries (Hobby Talk 2008). In 1989, due to the promotional and adult collector focus of Teknos offerings, the word "Toys" was dropped from the name (Tekno website).








