[[Lindsay Fox]]

CATEGORIES: Australian businesspeople, Businesspeople from Melbourne, Truck drivers, 1937 births, Living people, St Kilda Football Club administrators, St Kilda Football Club players, Caulfield Football Club players, Moorabbin Football Club players, Companions of the Order of Australia, People educated at Melbourne High School (Victoria), Australian rules footballers from Victoria (Australia), Golden Point Football Club players, Delegates to the 1998 Australian Constitutional Convention, Australian billionaires

Lindsay Edward Fox AC (born 19 April 1937) is an Australian businessman.  As of 2009, he was the 10th richest person in Australia, with a net worth of around ). He is best known as the founder and chairman of his family-owned trucking and logistics company, Linfox. Trucking magnate Lindsay Fox, AC, plugs into the power of dreams. The Age. 26 January 2008.

Early life

Lindsay Fox was brought up in Prahran, a suburb of Melbourne. He was educated at Melbourne High School, but was asked to leave during Year 10, at age 16, due to his lack of academic interest. He started working as a truck driver and was able to use this as a springboard to found Linfox.  He has since visited Melbourne High School on numerous formal occasions. An indicator of his tremendous work ethic and raw business savvy can be seen on a profile of Fox televised on the ABC. He has been married for 50 years, with 6 children.
Following the suicide of his son Michael in 1991, Fox advised the Federal and Victorian governments on youth suicide and is on the board of the National Advisory Council on Suicide Prevention."Youth Suicide Prevention Bulletin". Australian Institute of Family Studies. October 2000.  In 1992 he was named "Victorian Father of the Year". In an interview with George Negus in August 2004, Fox spoke of the loss of his son: "Well, life is about being up and being down and being able to get up again. And in my walks of life, I guess I thought I was invincible till one of my sons committed suicide. And at that point of time, I knew I wasn't invincible ... I'd give up everything if we could get Michael back. He's got a special place in each and every one of the hearts of our family and he'll always be there and he'll never grow old."

Political positions

When asked by George Negus how he describes himself politically, Fox replied: "I guess, Labor think I'm Liberal, Liberal think I'm Labor, the Catholics think I'm Protestant, the Protestants think I'm Catholic. The local rabbi delivers me matse. So I guess, bottom line, I'm an Australian".
Fox went on to say: "I, traditionally, probably, was brought up in a working-class family where the old man would turn in his grave if he'd thought I'd have voted Liberal. But I must admit, from probably 25 up to the last election, I would have voted Liberal and supported Liberal quite strongly. But I was completely disillusioned by the lack of statesmanship with our Prime Minister with the Ansett debacle. He had an opportunity to be a statesman. Instead he took on a political role and as a result of that, the demise of Ansett came about".

Football career

For many of his earlier years Lindsay Fox played Australian rules football with moderate success, and he continues his involvement with the sport.
Recruited from the St Kilda Football Club's thirds side (which he captained), Fox was sent to Golden Point Football Club in the Ballarat Football League before he returned to make his Victorian Football League debut in 1960. Fox did not think much of his footballing abilities, but as a ruckman he went on to play 20 games (for 3 goals) between 1959 and 1961. Following his stint in the VFL, he went to the VFA, playing firstly for Moorabbin, where he won a premiership, and then for Brighton-Caulfield, where he moved after Moorabbin's expulsion from the Association. 
He later returned in an administrative role, becoming the president of the Saints in 1979.

Business interests

Fox started his Linfox company in 1956 with one truck. "Australia and New Zealand's 40 Richest". Forbes. 12 February 2007.
He also took ownership of Melbourne's Luna Park in late 2005.  In 2006, he made an unsuccessful bid for the development of the neighboring 'Triangle Site' on St Kilda's foreshore. The property was subsequently destroyed by fire. "Luna Park fan Fox follows his heart". The Age. 23 June 2005. "Lindsay Fox in resort brawl". Herald Sun. 25 November 2006."Phillip Island may never be the same". The Age. 27 August 2006.
He has been involved with a number of high profile disputes with the Government relating to his property development activities. In the late 1990s he attempted to claim the public beach area in front of his holiday home as a private helipad for his helicopter and to build a high security compound for himself and his family.  This development was rejected by the Victorian Planning Minister.ABC News Online
Fox has been in dispute with the local council of his Toorak mansion by attempting to have the heritage listing that applies to all homes in the street removed from his property.The Age: Fox family home gutted in fire

Awards and recognition




