[[Watsessing Avenue (NJT station)]]

CATEGORIES: Bloomfield, New Jersey, New Jersey Transit stations, Railway stations opened in 1912, Transportation in Essex County, New Jersey, Stations along Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad lines, Buildings and structures in Essex County, New Jersey

Watsessing Avenue (also known as Watsessing) is a New Jersey Transit station in Bloomfield, New Jersey, along the Montclair-Boonton Line. It is located beneath the Bloomfield Police Benevolent Association meeting hall (which formerly served as the station building) near the corner of Watsessing Avenue and Orange Street in Bloomfield. It is one of two stations on the line where the boarding platform is below ground level (the Glen Ridge Station, two stops away from it, is the other). The Watsessing station and the Kingsland station in Lyndhurst on the Main Line shared similar designs (both station platforms are located below street level) and were built about the same time.
The current Glen Ridge, Bloomfield and Watsessing stations along the Montclair branch were all built in 1912 during a grade separation program by the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad. During New Jersey Transit's running of the line, two stations between Watsessing and Newark Broad Street were closed due to low ridership—the Roseville Avenue station in Newark, at the junction with the Morristown Line on September 16, 1984, The word "Watsessing" is a Native American term that translates to "mouth of the creek".
The station has been on the New Jersey State Historic Preservation Office listings since March 25, 1998, the last of the four stations from East Orange to Glen Ridge to receive the listing. On September 14, 2005, the entire Montclair Branch was added to the same listings, although Ampere, Bloomfield and Glen Ridge stations have been on the listings since March 17, 1984.

Station layout and services

Watsessing Avenue station is located on the corner of Watsessing Avenue and Orange Street at Westinghouse Plaza in Bloomfield and is just blocks from the East Orange city line. The former depot is currently used by the Bloomfield Police Benevolent Association. There are two below-street-level platforms at the Watsessing station. Ticket vending machines are available at street level on Watsessing Avenue and a $5 surcharge applies if riders buy them on the train; the Montclair-Boonton Line added vending machines to the remaining stations that did not have them in 2011.
The Watsessing Avenue station is not handicap accessible, and people have to use the Newark Broad Street Station or Bay Street Station for handicap accessibility.
The station sees service on the Montclair-Boonton Line on a common basis, with twenty-three of thirty inbound trains serving the station, the first starting from Montclair State University Station at Little Falls at 5:38 am. The last inbound train to service the station stops at Watsessing Avenue at 9:30 pm. The first outbound train that serves Watsessing Avenue departs from Hoboken Terminal at 6:54 am. The last outbound train on weekdays to serve the station is which serves the station at 1:05 am the next morning. On weekends, service via trains stops at Watsessing Avenue (one of five stops made by Montclair-Boonton trains to Bay Street. The first inbound train stops at Watsessing Avenue station at 7:12 am while the bi-hourly service ends at 12:12 am the next morning. The station's outbound service to Bay Street begins at Hoboken Terminal at 6:08 am, stopping at Watsessing Avenue 22 minutes later. The last train begins at Hoboken at 1:17 am the next morning, arriving at Watsessing Avenue at 1:47 am. One-way tickets from New York cost $6.25, reduced is $2.75, while a monthly pass is $169.00. From Hoboken, the costs are reduced to $4.75 one way, reduced costing only $2.25 and $133.00 for a monthly pass. From Newark Broad Street Station, its $2.25 for a one-way ticket, $1.00 reduced and $55.00 for a monthly pass. Only one local New Jersey Transit bus runs by Watsessing Avenue station, the 94, which also serves Bloomfield station.

History

Delaware, Lackawanna and Western ownership (1856–1976)

The history of a station at Watsessing Avenue in the Watsessing district of Bloomfield dates back to the Newark and Bloomfield Railroad, established in 1856.  The station, a houseless station off of Dodd Street, was deemed first as Doddtown by a railroad conductor. This name soon gave way to Watsessing, and in 1865, the line was bought by the Morris and Essex Railroad, running through trains. The Morris and Essex Railroad was soon bought out by the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad, and a new station was built, deemed Watsessing.
In 1911, as the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad continued the project of eliminating at-grade crossings between streets and railroads, the Montclair Branch was the next to receive the structural change. Bloomfield criticized the Lackawanna railroad for making a disgrace of the community. The railroad proposed using $700,000 (1911 USD) of funds to construct a brand new station at Watsessing Avenue along with a new downtown Bloomfield Station. The cost of elevating and depressing the railroad came up to about $20,000 (1911 USD) for the Lackawanna. This contract by the railroad and township was approved after negotiations dating back to 1908. The negotiations included a park to be built between both stations on both sides of the railroad. The park land cost the township $50,000 to buy for the construction, and it was to be turned over to the Essex County Park Commission.
Construction was completed on a 
The station served as the third station on the Montclair Branch, which was first electrified by technology created by Thomas Alva Edison in 1930. The overhead catenary wires were installed, making the line the first electrically run line on the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western alignment. Although the now Erie-Lackawanna Railway continued to run the Montclair Branch, it reduced service, reducing the once two-rail alignment to one lone track, and removed most of the tracks at Lackawanna Terminal in Montclair. On April 1, 1976, the station was transferred to the Consolidated Rail Corporation (Conrail) as the Erie-Lackawanna Railway was dissolved into the Conrail program.

New Jersey Transit and historical status (1979 – present)

In 1979, New Jersey Transit was formed to run bus and train service in place of Conrail and the New Jersey Department of Transportation. In 1983, New Jersey Transit took over rail service from Conrail, and just one year later, the line became a temporary diesel rail line when the overhead catenary wires had to be adjusted for conversion to higher electrical voltage. The station itself was still the third on the Montclair Branch, but the line now ran into a new station at Bay Street in Montclair. On March 17, 1984 all stations on the Montclair Branch but the Roseville Avenue station in Newark, Bay Street and Watsessing Avenue were added to the State Register of Historic Places. The same would occur on June 22, 1984 at the national level with Ampere,  Glen Ridge and Bloomfield Stations being added to the National Register of Historic Places. On September 16, 1984, Roseville Avenue station was closed, and just over six years later, on April 7, 1991, Ampere station in East Orange was closed. Since then, Watsessing Avenue has been the first station New Jersey Transit has served on the Montclair Branch, although East Orange has proposed reopening the station at Ampere as part of a redevelopment plan for the Ampere district.
On March 25, 1998, the station at Watsessing Avenue was given the State Historical Preservation Organization honor that Ampere, Glen Ridge and Bloomfield stations received just fourteen years prior. The station continued to receive service through the opening of Montclair Connection on September 30, 2002, which ended service as the Montclair Branch and began as the Montclair-Boonton Line, still the first station on the line after Newark Broad Street Station. On September 10, 2007, New Jersey Transit announced the canopies of the old station, then 95 years old, were to be restored and repaired. The service contracted a $1.7 million project to Watertrol Incorporated of Cranford. At that time, the station served an average of 200 people daily.








