[[Sardinian language]]

CATEGORIES: Sardinian language, Languages of Sardinia

Sardinian () is a Romance language spoken on most of the island of Sardinia (Italy). It is the most conservative of the Romance languages in terms of phonology and is noted for a Paleosardinian substratum.
Since 1997, the languages of Sardinia have been protected and recognised by regional and national laws. Several written standards, including the Limba Sarda Comuna (Common Sardinian Language), have been created in an attempt to unify the two main variants of the language.sardegnacultura.it/linguasarda/limbasardacomuna/ 

History

The history of the island of Sardinia, relatively isolated from the European continent up into modern times, led to the development of a distinct Romance language, which even now preserves traces of the indigenous pre-Roman language of the island. The language is of Latin origin like all Romance languages yet the following substratal influences are possible:
Adstratal influences include:

Origins

The early origins of the Sardinian language (sometimes called Paleo-Sardinian) are still obscure, due mostly to the lack of documents, as Sardinian appeared as a written form only in the Middle Ages. There are substantial differences between the many theories about the development of Sardinian.
Many studies have attempted to discover the origin of some obscure roots that today could legitimately be defined as indigenous, pre-Romance roots. First of all, the root of sard, present in many toponyms and distinctive of the ethnic group, is supposed to have come from the Sherden, one of the so-called Peoples of the Sea.
Massimo Pittau claimed in 1984 to have found in the Etruscan language the etymology of many other Latin words, after comparison with the Nuragic language. Pittau also suggests, as a historical point, that the Tirrenii landed in Sardinia, whereas the Etruscans landed in modern-day Tuscany. Massimo Pittau's views however are not representative of most Etruscologists.
It has been said that Paleosardinian should be expected to have notable similarities with  Iberic languages and the Siculian language: the suffix -'ara, for example, in proparoxytones (Bertoldi and Terracini proposed it indicated plural forms). The same would happen (according to Terracini) for suffixes in - and in -/asài/ were thought to show Anatolic influence (Bertoldi). The suffix -/aiko/, widely used in Iberia, and perhaps of Celtic origins, as well as the ethnical suffix in -/itanos/ and -/etanos/ (as in the Sardinian Sulcitanos) have been noted as other Paleosardinian elements (viz Terracini, Ribezzo, Wagner, Hubschmid, Faust, et al.).
Linguists like Blasco Ferrer (2009, 2010) or Morvan (2009) have recently attempted to revive the theory of a Basque connection by linking modern surface forms such as Sardinian ospile "fresh natural cover for cattle" and Basque ozpil "id.", Sardinian arrotzeri "vagabond" and Basque arrotz "stranger", Sardinian arru "stone, stony" and Basque arri "stone", Gallurese (South Corsican and North Sardinian) zerru "pig" and Basque zerri "id.". Of interest, and in support to this theory, genetic data on the distribution of HLA antigens have suggested a common origin for Basque and Sardinian people. - HLA antigens in a sample of the Spanish population: common features among Spaniards, Basques, and Sardinians. - Hum Genet. 1981;58(3):344-8.

Roman period

The Roman domination, beginning in 238 BC,  brought Latin to Sardinia, but this language was not able to completely supplant the Pre-Roman Sardinian language. Some obscure roots remained unaltered, and in many cases it was Latin that was made to accept the local roots, such as nur (in nuraghe, as well as Nùgoro and many other toponyms). Roman culture, on the other hand, became largely dominant; Barbagia derives its name from the Greek word Ό βάρβαρος-ου, which means "stuttering", due to the fact that its people could not speak Latin well. Cicero, who called Sardinian rebels latrones matrucati ("thieves with rough sheep-wool cloaks") to emphasise Roman superiority, helped to spread this conception.
Modern Sardinian, as it is known today, was the first language to split off from the others that were still developing from Latin, possibly as early as the first century BC.

Other influences

During this time period, there was a reciprocal influence between Corsica and a limited area of northern Sardinia. On the southern side, though, the evidence favors contacts with Semitic and (later) Byzantine languages. In the 1st century AD, some relevant groups of Hebrews were deported to Sardinia, bringing various influences; the Christianization of the island would probably have brought Hebrews to convert to a sort of independent cult of Sant'Antioco (perhaps a way to preserve some aspects of their ethnicity under a Christian form), still present in Gavoi. This contact with Hebrews, followed by another deportation of Christians, presumedly lasted for a couple of centuries, and makes it likely that by the 3rd century AD, Vulgar Latin began to dominate the island.
This eventual Latin cultural domination thus makes Sardinian a Romance language, or more precisely an archaic neo-Latin language, whose main characteristics are archaic phonetic and morphosyntactic phenomena.
After this domination, Sardinia passed under the control of the Eastern Roman Empire, and more influences are derived from this culture. The Greek language that was the main reference of Byzantines did not, however, enter into the structure of Sardinian (still a Romance language) except for in some ritual or formal formulas that are expressed in Latin using Greek structure. Much evidence for this can be found in the condaghes, the first written documents in Sardinian.
Some toponyms show Greek influence as well, such as Jerzu, commonly presumed to derive from the Greek khérsos (untilled), together with the personal names Mikhaleis, Konstantine, and Basilis.

Giudicati (Judicados) period

Sardinian had once been the official and national language of the Giudicati, Byzantine districts that became independent due to the Arab expansion in the Mediterranean, which obstructed all the connections between the island and Byzantium. Sardinian obviously had a greater number of archaisms and Latinisms than the current language does, not to mention the usage of word letters reflecting the origin of the copyists (the majority of whom were Catalan, Genoese and Tuscan) which are now fallen into disuse. Dante Alighieri stated in De Vulgari Eloquentia (1303-1305) that would expel Sardinians from his work, claiming that they were not Italics and, furthermore, had never developed any Vulgar language of their own in his opinion, preferring to imitate Latin instead (after all, they say "domus nova" and "dominus meus"). I, XI, 7
The literature in this period is mostly made up by legal documents; here is a list of some of them having been considered worth mentioning, even though it should be noted, before going any further, that it is far from exhaustive: it may seem to you that literature is virtually nonexistent, while there has always been an abundance of poems, for instance (the same is valid for all the other periods which follow this one).
The first document in which some elements of the language make their appearance, dates back to 1063: it is an act of donation to the abbey of Montecassino signed by Barisone I of Torres."Archivio Cassinense Perg. Caps. XI, n. 11 " e "TOLA P., Codice Diplomatico della Sardegna, I, Sassari, 1984, p. 153"
The first document ever written in Sardinian is the Carta Volgare (1070/1080) in old Campidanese.
The "Logudorese Privilege", dating back to 1080, is still being kept in the archives of Pisa:
The "Donation of Torchitorio", dating back to 1089 and being written in old Campidanese, had been written in San Saturnino church (part of Cagliari diocese) and had been kept in the archives of Marseille:
Another act between the bishop of Civita Bernardo and Benedetto, in charge of the Opera del Duomo located in Pisa, written in Old Logudorese (1173):
The second Marsellaise Chart, written in old Campidanese (1190-1206):
Sassari's Republic medieval statutes, written in old Logudorese (1316):
Finally, the Carta de Logu of the Kingdom of Arborea (1355-1376):Here is the complete text, in case you may want to consult it.

Catalan period

The enfeoffment of Sardinia by Pope Boniface VIII in 1297, without his realizing the presence of independent states within it, led to the founding of the Kingdom of Sardinia, to the end of the independence of the island and to a long period of war, which ended only with the decisive Catalan victory at Sanluri in 1409 and the renunciation of the rights of succession signed by William III of Narbonne; since then, any anti-Catalan uprising, such as the rebellion which occurred in Alghero in 1353 and that in Macomer in 1478, had been systematically neutralized. During this period, Aragonese government carried out an assimilation policy that's been almost total in the cities, since both the small bourgeoisie (all of which was of Catalan ancestry) and the clergy choose Catalan as their primary language, thus relegating Sardinian to a secondary position. It is reported by the lawyer Sigismondo Arquer (author of the Sardiniae brevis historia et descriptio) that, while Catalan was a language spoken in the cities, Sardinian would still prevail in the rural areas: that is, most of the Kingdom.
In spite of Sardinian still being the most widely spoken language, little is given to know about it due to the scarcity of written documentation: all we have, however, may well explain the contaminated linguistic forms produced by Catalan, which are still visible even today.
Antòni Canu (1400-1476) - Sa Vitta et sa Morte, et Passione de sanctu Gavinu, Brothu et Ianuariu (15th century, publication dated back to 1557):
Rimas Spirituales, a work by Hieronimu Araolla, had been determined to "glorify and enrich Sardinian, our language" (magnificare et arrichire sa limba nostra sarda) just in the same way as Spanish, French and Italian poets had already done for their own languages (see la Deffense et illustration de la langue françoyse, il Dialogo delle lingue):Incipit to "Lettera al Maestro" in "La Sardegna e la Corsica", Ines Loi Corvetto, Torino, UTET Libreria, 1993: Semper happisi desiggiu, Illustrissimu Segnore, de magnificare, & arrichire sa limba nostra Sarda; dessa matessi manera qui sa naturale insoro tottu sas naciones dessu mundu hant magnificadu & arrichidu; comente est de vider per isos curiosos de cuddas. the question of the Sardinian language situation had been posed for the first time ever, and many other authors after him would analyze it in a number of ways.
Antonio Lo Frasso, a poet who had born in Alghero (that's a city he would later remember dearly...L'Alguer castillo fuerte bien murado / con frutales por tierra muy divinos / y por la mar coral fino eltremado / es ciudad de mas de mil vezinos...) but spent all life in Barcelona, is likely to be considered the first intellectual we have testimony of to write lyric poems in Sardinian:Los diez libros de fortuna d'Amor (1573)

Spanish period

In 1624, with the reorganization of the monarchy led by the Count-Duke of Olivares, Sardinia finally exits from the Aragonese sphere of influence of and fully enters into the Spanish one. Spanish, unlike Catalan which was adopted to a certain extent by all the bourgeoise, would be perceived as somewhat of an elitist language. Sardinian has been known as the spontaneous linguistic code of Sardinian people, and because of that respected and even learnt by Spanish colonists. 3, a cura di Giorgia Ingrassia e Eduardo Blasco Ferrer The sociolinguistic situation of the language consists of a proficiency, both active and passive, of Catalan and Spanish in the cities, with the latter replacing the first, and a proficiency of Sardinian in all of the villages, as reported by many people such as the Spanish ambassador Martin Carillo (author of the ironic remark about Sardinians: pocos, locos y mal unidos), the anonymous work of Llibre dels feyts d'armes de Catalunya («parlen la llengua catalana molt polidament, axì com fos a Catalunya»), and Baldassarre Pinyes, dean of the Jesuit college located in Sassari, who had been writing in Rome: «per ciò che concerne la lingua sarda, sappia vostra paternità che essa non è parlata in questa città, né in Alghero, né a Cagliari: la parlano solo nelle ville». As for written documentation of Sardinian, we mostly have notary deeds, which are heavily affected by Spanish and Italian contamination forms, and religious works, such as Sa Dottrina et Declarassione pius abundante e Sa Breve Suma de sa Doctrina in duas maneras.
Here is an act, dating back to 1620 and still kept in the archives of Bosa:
In the meanwhile, the priest Ioan Matheu Garipa, writing his work "Legendariu de Santas Virgines, et Martires de Iesu Christu" highlights the nobility of Sardinian, by claiming it is the closest living language to classical Latin:

Piedmontese and Kingdom of Italy

The outcome of the war of Spanish succession  resulted in the island becoming property of Austria, whose sovereignty was later confirmed by the treaties of Utrecht and Rastatt (1713-1714). However, the situation was not supposed to last long; in 1717, a Spanish fleet reoccupied Cagliari and in the following year Sardinia was again ceded to Victor Amadeus II of Savoy in exchange for Sicily.
During the Savoyard period, a number of essays written by intellectuals, such as philologist Matteo MadauMatteo Madau - Ichnussa and professor and senator Giovanni Spano explicitly posed the Sardinian language question, attempting to find a unified orthography by choosing the Logudorese variety, just like Florentine would later become the basis for what became the official language of Italy;... E proprio sulla falsariga di quanto era stato teorizzato ed anche attuato a favore della nazione italiana, che nell'Ottocento stava per portare a termine il processo di unificazione linguistica, elevando il dialetto fiorentino e toscano al ruolo di "lingua nazionale", chiamandolo "italiano illustre", anche in Sardegna l'auspicata "lingua nazionale sarda" fu denominata "sardo illustre". Massimo Pittau, Grammatica del sardo illustre, Nuoro, pp. 11-12 however, the Piedmontese government chose to impose Italian by law in the island on July 1760,S'italanu in Sardìnnia, Amos Cardia, IskraLa "limba" proibita nella Sardegna del '700 (da "Ritorneremo", una storia tramandata oralmente) - MeiloguNotizie. In spite of such assimilation policies, the anthem of the Piedmontese Kingdom of Sardinia was the Hymnu Sardu (or Cunservet Deus su Re), the lyrics of which are in Sardinian; it was partially substituted by the Savoy's March when all of the Italian peninsula was unified.
During the general mobilization in preparation for entering World War I the Italian Army raised the Sassari Infantry Brigade on 1 March 1915, at Tempio Pausania and Sinnai. Unlike all other Italian infantry brigades, the Sassari one was recruited locally on Sardinia; even most officers hailed from the island. It is actually the sole Italian unit to have a hymn in a regional language: Dimonios, written by Captain Luciano Sechi. This name comes from the attribute Rote Teufel (German for Red Devils, and Dimonios stands for English Devils) given to Sardinian soldiers by Austro-Hungarian enemies during World War I, because of their white and red flashes and their worth in war.
During the Fascist period, especially the Autarchy campaign, regional languages were banned. The restrictions went so far that even personal names and surnames were made to sound more "Italian-sounding".E.g. Lussu became Lusso, Pilu changed to Pilo and so on. A wide range of Sardinian surnames had been affected by this policy. During this period, the Sardinian Hymn of the Piedmontese Kingdom was the sole chance to speak in a regional language in Italy without risking prison, because, as a fundamental part of the Royal Family's tradition, it could not be forbidden. Catholic priests practiced a strict obstructionism against mutos, a form of improvised sung poetry where two or more poets are assigned a surprise theme and have to develop it on the spur of the moment in rhymed quatrains.

Current situation

In the last decade, the Sardinian language has been legally recognized (with Albanian, Catalan, German, Greek, Slovene, Croatian, French, Franco-Provençal, Friulian,  Ladin, and Occitan) by the Law 482-1999, despite its academic and legal recognition as a different language. Some people still regard the language as a mere Italian dialectCosa, lis dolet? - Novas de s'Isportellu linguìsticu sovra-comunale de Planàrgia e Montiferru otzidentale (sometimes even at institutional level,I giudici della Cassazione: "Il sardo non è una vera lingua, è solamente un dialetto". aMpI: "gravissimo attacco alla lingua del popolo sardo" - Il Minuto Notizie Mediterranee in spite of the laws which already exist), as was the custom for all minority and regional languages throughout Italy (even though the majority of scholars abroadConferenza di Francesco Casula sulla Lingua sarda: sfatare i più diffusi pregiudizi sulla lingua sarda stated it should have been considered to be an autonomous group pertaining to the Romantic branch), mainly for either ideological reasons or remnant of old customs still persisting. In either case, Sardinian is still bearing a stigma because of that.La lingua sarda oggi: bilinguismo, problemi di identità culturale e realtà scolastica, Maurizio Virdis (Università di Cagliari)Sa limba sarda - Giovanna Tonzanu
Despite the cultural and political campaigns launched in order to put Sardinian on an equal footing with Italian, and any emotive value linked to Sardinian identity, the sociolinguistic situation in Sardinia due to several reasons, mainly political and socioeconomic (the gradual depopulation of the island's interior and rural exodus towards more urbanized and industrialized areas,This phenomenon which is occurring in Sardinia nowadays may be similar to what happened in Ireland long time before: we are referring to the so-called vicious circle of Irish Gaeltacht (Cfr. Edwards 1985). the language eradication policy such as the forced use of Italian presented as a prerequisite to get jobs and as one of the keys to social advancement, the immigration of people coming from the Italian peninsula over the time, the barriers to communication between the dialectal varieties, the heated debate over the official standardizationLa standardizzazione del sardo, oppure: quante lingue standard per il sardo? E quali? (Institut für Linguistik/Romanistik) etc.) has resulted in a constant regression, though it is not homogeneous throughout the island;D'une île l'autre: de la Corse en Sardaigne - Jean-Pierre Cavaillé
A bill of Monti's government would have further lowered the level of protection of the language,MIUR e limba sarda – ULS Alta Baronia which is already quite low,Sardaigne implementing a distinction between the languages protected by international agreements (German, Slovenian, French and Ladin) and those related to communities that do not have a foreign state behind them. This project, which never came into existenceCarta delle lingue: una ratifica presunta e una bufala probabile - Giuseppe Corongiu (Italy hasn't ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages yetLa mancata ratifica della Carta rivela le "scorrettezze" del Belpaese L'Europa e il sardo: cartellino giallo per l'Italia - Unione SardaL'Ue richiama l'Italia: non ha ancora firmato la Carta di tutela - Messaggero Veneto), has nonetheless caused some reaction from some parts of the intellectual and political world of the island.BolognesiLingua sarda: CISL, tutelare la specialità dell'isolaRichiesta di estensione massima dei benefici previsti massimi dalla Carta Europea delle Lingue a sardo e friulanoUniversità contro spending review «Viene discriminato il sardo» – Sassari NotizieIl consiglio regionale si sveglia sulla tutela della lingua sarda«Salviamo sardo e algherese in Parlamento», Alguer.Do you speak... su Sardu? - Irene Bosu , Focus SardegnaCagliari, promosso a pieni voti il tredicenne che ha dato l'esame in sardo - SardiniapostEleonora d'Arborea in sardo? La prof. "continentale" dice no - SardiniapostSassari, studente dell'Alberghiero si diploma parlando in sardo - ULS Alta Baronìa (La Nuova Sardegna)Esame di maturità per la limba: Buddusò, la tesina di Elio Altana scritta in italiano ma discussa in logudorese - La Nuova Sardegna Whether all the measures to save the language will succeed remains to be seen.

Phonology

All dialects of Sardinian feature archaic phonetic features when compared to other Romance languages. The degree of archaism varies, with Nuorese (central northeast part of the island) considered the most conservative, though in some cases it has innovated.  Evidence from medieval documents indicates that the medieval language spoken over the entirety of Sardinia and Corsica was similar to modern Nuorese; all of the remaining areas are thought to have innovated as the result of heavy external influence from centuries of colonization by Italian and Spanish speakers.
The examples listed below are from the northwestern Logudorese dialect:
Sardinian also features numerous phonetic innovations, including the following:
While the latter two features were acquired during the Spanish domination, the others reveal deeper relations between ancient Sardinia and the Iberian world. Note that retroflex d, l and r are found not only in southern Italy and Tuscany but also in Asturias. They were probably involved in the palatalization process of the Latin clusters -ll-, pl-, cl- (-ll- > Cast. and Cat. -ll- ).
Sardinian has the following phonemes (according to Blasco Ferrer):

Vowels

The five vowels  (without length differentiation).

Consonants

The following three series of plosives or corresponding approximants:
In Cagliari and neighbouring dialects the soft  : digitus > didu = diru 'finger'.

Fricatives

Affricates

and:

Nasals

Liquids

Some permutations of l and r can be observed, in that in most dialects preconsonant l (e.g. lt, lc, etc.) becomes r : L. "altum" > artu, marralzu = marrarzu 'rock'.
In palatal context, Latin l changed into  of Italian: achizare (It. accigliare), *volia > bòlla = bòlza = bòza 'wish' (It. vòglia), folia > fogia = folla = foza 'leaf' (It. foglia), filia > filla = fidza = fiza 'daughter' (It. figlia).

Morphology

The main distinctive features of Sardinian are :

Dialects

Sardinia has historically had a small population separated across several isolated cantons. Over time the island's language has formed into two literary and social groups, the northern (named su logudoresu) and the southern (named su campidanesu). The two differ mostly in phonetics, which does not hamper intelligibility among the speakers. There are some other differences between the two, and many dialectal differences within each. These models have created a small but very interesting body of literature.
Sardinian can be divided into the two following macro-dialect groups:

Pre-Latin Sardinian words

Other pre-Latin Sardinian words are presented here:

Notes






