[[Spearmint]]

CATEGORIES: Mentha, Herbs, Essential oils, Invasive plant species, Flora of Lebanon, Plants described in 1753

Spearmint or spear mint (Mentha spicata) is a species of mint native to much of Europe and southwest Asia, though its exact natural range is uncertain due to extensive early cultivation.

Description

It is a herbaceous, rhizomatous, perennial plant growing 30–100 cm tall, with variably hairless to hairy stems and foliage, and a wide-spreading fleshy underground rhizome. The leaves are 5–9 cm long and 1.5–3 cm broad, with a serrated margin. The stem is square-shaped, a trademark of the mint family of herbs. Spearmint produces flowers in slender spikes, each flower pink or white, 2.5–3 mm long, and broad., ed. (1992). New RHS Dictionary of Gardening. Macmillan ISBN 0-333-47494-5.
Hybrids involving spearmint include Mentha × piperita (peppermint; hybrid with Mentha aquatica), Mentha × gracilis (ginger mint, syn. M. cardiaca; hybrid with Mentha arvensis), and Mentha × villosa (large apple mint, hybrid with Mentha suaveolens).
The name 'spear' mint derives from the pointed leaf tips. (1568). Herbal. Cited in the Oxford English Dictionary.

Distribution and habitat

It grows in wet soils. & Grey-Wilson, C. (1989). Flora of Britain and Northern Europe. ISBN 0-340-40170-2

Cultivation and uses

Spearmint grows well in nearly all temperate climates. Gardeners often grow it in pots or planters due to its invasive, spreading rhizomes. The plant prefers partial shade, but can flourish in full sun to mostly shade. Spearmint is best suited to loamy soils with abundant organic material. 
Spearmint leaves can be used fresh, dried, or frozen.  They can also be preserved in salt, sugar, sugar syrup, alcohol, or oil. The leaves lose their aromatic appeal after the plant flowers. It can be dried by cutting just before, or right (at peak) as the flowers open, about one-half to three-quarters the way down the stalk (leaving smaller shoots room to grow).  Some dispute exists as to what drying method works best; some prefer different materials (such as plastic or cloth) and different lighting conditions (such as darkness or sunlight).
Spearmint is often cultivated for its aromatic and carminative oil, referred to as oil of spearmint. The most abundant compound in spearmint oil is  R-(–)-carvone, which gives spearmint its distinctive smell. Spearmint oil also contains significant amounts of limonene, dihydrocarvone, and 1,8-cineol. Unlike peppermint oil, oil of spearmint contains minimal amounts of menthol and menthone.com/mint-essential-oil/, Chemical composition of essential oils from several species of mint (Mentha). It is used as a flavoring for toothpaste and confectionery, and is sometimes added to shampoos and soaps.

Tea

The cultivar Mentha spicata 'Nana', the nana mint of Morocco, possesses a clear, pungent, but mild aroma, and is an essential ingredient of Touareg tea.
Spearmint is an ingredient in several mixed drinks, such as the mojito and mint julep. Sweet tea, iced and flavored with spearmint, is a summer tradition in the Southern United States.  In herbalism, spearmint is steeped as tea for the treatment of stomach ache.

Health effects

Spearmint tea may be used as a treatment for hirsutism in women. Its antiandrogenic properties reduce the level of free testosterone in the blood, while leaving total testosterone and DHEA unaffected.
Spearmint has been studied for antifungal activity; its essential oil was found to have some antifungal activity, although less than oregano.  Due both to its antioxidant activity and its common use to season lamb in Indian cuisine, it has been studied as an additive to radiation-processed lamb meat, and was found effective in delaying oxidation of fats and reducing formation of harmful substances, which can be detected using thiobarbituric acid as a reagent.



Gallery

Image:mentha spicata 02.jpg|Plant in flower
Image:Flowers of the spearmint.JPG|flowers
Image:Mentha_viridis_-_Köhler–s_Medizinal-Pflanzen-096.jpg|1887 illustration
File:PudinaMalaysia.JPG|Grown in Malaysia


