[[Eddie Constantine]]

CATEGORIES: 1917 births, 1993 deaths, American male singers, American emigrants to France, American expatriates in Germany, American people of Russian descent, Deaths from myocardial infarction, American people of French descent, French expatriates in Germany, French male film actors, French people of American descent, French people of Russian descent, Naturalized citizens of France, Male actors from Paris, Male actors from Los Angeles, California, French people of Polish descent, American people of Polish descent, American male film actors, French male singers, 20th-century French male actors, 20th-century American male actors, Singers from Los Angeles, California, Musicians from Paris

Eddie Constantine (born Edward Constantinowsky; October 29, 1917 – February 25, 1993) was an American French actor and singer who spent his career working in Europe.
He became well known for a series of French B movies in which he played secret agent Lemmy Caution and is now best remembered for his role in Jean-Luc Godard's philosophical science fiction film Alphaville (1965).
Constantine also appeared in films by Rainer Werner Fassbinder (as himself in Beware of a Holy Whore 1971), Lars von Trier, and Mika Kaurismäki. He continued reprising the role of Lemmy Caution well into his 70s; his final appearance as the character was in Jean-Luc Godard's Allemagne 90 neuf zéro (1991).

Biography

Edward Constantinowsky was born in Los Angeles to immigrant parents, a Russian father and Polish mother. In pursuit of a singing career, he went to Vienna for voice training, but when he returned to America his career didn't take off and he started taking work as a film extra.[ref]

In the 1950s Constantine was a star in France due to his role as the hard-boiled detective/secret agent Lemmy Caution (from Peter Cheyney's novels) in a series of French B-pictures, including La môme vert-de-gris (1953), Cet homme est dangereux (1953), Ça va barder (1953), Je suis un sentimental (1955), Lemmy pour les dames (1961) and  À toi de faire... mignonne (1963).
Constantine eventually became a French citizen and enjoyed great popularity in several European countries, including France and Germany. When not playing Lemmy Caution, Constantine's character would still typically be a suave-talking, seductive, smooth guy, although he often played this for laughs. He turned his accent and perceived American cockiness to advantage in such roles, and later described his film persona as having been "James Bond before James Bond".com
One of his most notable roles was in Jean-Luc Godard's Alphaville, une étrange aventure de Lemmy Caution (1965), in which he reprised (to a more radical end) the role of Lemmy Caution, in a departure from the style of his other films. His box-office appeal in France waned in the mid-1960s. Having remarried with a German television producer, he eventually relocated to Germany, where he worked as a character actor, appearing in German TV dramas as well as film. Constantine later claimed he had never taken his acting career seriously, as he considered himself to be a singer by trade, and had been an actor strictly for the money. He nevertheless worked with directors such as Godard and Rainer Werner Fassbinder, and his last notable film appearance was in Lars Von Trier's Europa in 1991. He had taken up the part of Lemmy for the last time in the same year, in Godard's experimental film Allemagne 90 neuf zéro.

Personal life

Constantine was married three times, to Helinka Musilova (divorced), with whom he had three children, Dorothea Gibson (1977–78, divorced), and the film producer Maya Faber-Jansen (1979–93, Constantine's death), with whom he had one child. His son, born in 1957 and named after Constantine's famous role, is Lemmy Constantine (entry on French Wikipedia), who is also a singer and actor.

Filmography

Death

Eddie Constantine died of a heart attack on February 25, 1993, aged 75.






