[[Malaviya National Institute of Technology Jaipur]]

CATEGORIES: Engineering colleges in Rajasthan, Education in Jaipur, National Institutes of Technology, Deemed Universities in Rajasthan, Educational institutions established in 1963, Universities and colleges in Jaipur, 1963 establishments in India

Malaviya National Institute of Technology Jaipur, shortened to MNIT, is a public engineering college located in Jaipur, Rajasthan, India. It is one of 30 National Institutes of Technology and an Institute of National Importance. It was established in 1963. The institute is fully funded by MHRD, the government of India, New Delhi. The institute's director is I. K. Bhat and the chairman of the board of Governors is Dr. K. K. Aggarwal.

History

The institute is a Centre of Excellence established by the MHRD, government of India. The institute formerly known as Malaviya Regional Engineering College(MREC) was established in 1962, as a joint venture of the government of India and government of Rajasthan.
In 1963, the college started functioning from its temporary campus at Pilani and admitted 30 students each in Electrical Engineering and Mechanical Engineering. The college moved to the present campus to Jaipur in 1965. The college was inspired by the educationist Pt. Madan Mohan Malaviya and thus named as Malaviya Regional Engineering College. Prof. V.G. Garde, the  educationist and visionary, was the first principal.
It offered five-year Bachelor of Engineering programmes in Civil, Electrical, Mechanical and Metallurgical Engineering. The duration of the B.E. Degree Course was changed to four years from 1983.
The institute was upgraded to a National Institute of Technology and was declared a deemed university on 26 June 2002 and since then the institute started offering Bachelor of Technology (BTech) degree instead of Bachelor of Engineering degree. On 15 August 2007 MNIT and all other NITs were declared Institutes of National Importance by the government of India under the National Institutes of Technology Act, 2007. The institute is now under The Ministry of Human Resource and Development, New Delhi. It has been selected to participate in the Technical Education Quality Improvement Program of the government of India and the World Bank.

Academics

The institute offers eight four-year undergraduate courses of study leading to the Bachelor of Technology degree and a five-year undergraduate course leading to the Bachelor of Architecture degree, with a total of over 3000 students. Postgraduate degrees award Master of Technology (MTech), Master of Science (MSc.), Master of Business Administration (M.B.A) or Master of Urban Planning. There are also doctoral programs with over 300 students. There are over 150 faculty members engaged in teaching and research.
Admission to the institute is through the All India Engineering Entrance Examination (AIEEE).

Departments, centres and schools

Campus

The campus extends over  of lush greenery. It provides staff clubs, dispensary, banks, post office, community center, school, staff residences, gymnasium, playing fields, guest houses, and canteen. 
The campus is in four sectors: 
The instructional buildings include departments, the library, and administrative block. These are at walking distance from the students hostels and staff colony. There is a branch of the ICICI BANK  formerly known as Bank of Rajasthan on the premises and a Post Office. Other banks such as SBI, PNB etc. are within walking distance from the campus. A dispensary is supervised by a team of Medical Officers and two Compounders. The institute has a part-time homeopathic doctor and Ayurvedic doctor on the campus. Canteen buildings, one near the instructional zone and another near the hostels, provide food to the students and the staff. There is an Amul parlor.
There are two guest houses in the campus to cater the needs of guests and students.
There are facilities for sports and games and for co-curricular activities.

Extracurricular activities

MNIT annually organizes Neuron its national level technical festival. Neuron is one of the biggest technical festival in India, with 10,000 students attending from all over country.
Annually MNIT conducts the MNIT Sports Tournament. Students from all across the country, from NITs and IITs participate in the event. MNIT is part of the Inter-NIT sports federation.
MNIT hosts Blitzschlag, a national level techno-cultural festival, which began as an intra-college technical symposium cum cultural festival organised by the Mechanical Engineering Society, MNIT, in 2005. It attracts participation from all corners of the country.
The institute has a sports department with a faculty strength of five coaches and five support staff. The college has international size basketball courts (two), football ground(one), tennis court(two, with flood lights), badminton and table tennis courts (separate in every hostel, open 24 hours). There is an indoor badminton court in the sports department and a gymnasium. There are three standard volleyball courts.
National level events include Neuron, Blitzschlag, Electronica, Moments, MST, Schrifftum, Taal and Zodiac.

Blitzschlag

Blitzschlag is the annual techno-management fest of MNIT Jaipur. It is a three-day long event held towards the end of January every year and attracts a crowd of 25,000 students from more than 200 colleges all over the country.
The word Blitzschlag has German origins; it stands for Thunder and Lightning. Aimed at inspiring innovation, technical interest among students and awareness among the public, the event has played host to lectures, seminars, workshops, competitions, exhibitions, and quizzes.
The event is organised by the students under the guidance of their teachers.

Controversies

In September 2010 the institute was facing a 30% staff shortage. Allegations were made that this affected academics, which the administration denied. Work pressure and denied promotion MNIT staffer Mahendra Singh Chaudhary (35) hangs self.








