[[Jethro Sumner]]

CATEGORIES: 1733 births, 1785 deaths, Continental Army generals, Continental Army officers from North Carolina, Militia generals in the American Revolution, People of Virginia in the French and Indian War, British America army officers

Jethro Exum Sumner (March 18, 1785) was a North Carolina landowner and businessman, and an officer in the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War.  Born in Virginia, Sumner's military service began in the French and Indian War as a member of the state's Provincial forces. After the conclusion of that conflict, he moved to Bute County, North Carolina, where he acquired a substantial area of land and operated a tavern.  He served as Sheriff of Bute County, but with the coming of the American Revolution, he became a strident Patriot, and was elected to North Carolina's Provincial Congress.
Sumner was named the commanding officer of the 3rd North Carolina Regiment of the North Carolina Line, a formation of the Continental Army, in 1776, and served in both the Southern theater and Philadelphia campaign.  He was one of five brigadier generals from North Carolina in the Continental Army, in which capacity he served between 1779 and 1783.  He served with distinction in the battles of Stono Ferry and Eutaw Springs, but recurring bouts of poor health often forced him to play an administrative role, or to convalesce in North Carolina. Following a drastic reduction in the number of North Carolinians serving with the Continental Army, Sumner became a general in the state's militia but resigned in protest after the North Carolina Board of War awarded overall command of the militia to William Smallwood, a Continental Army general from Maryland.  After the end of the war in 1783, Sumner helped to establish the North Carolina Chapter of the Society of the Cincinnati, and became its first president.  He died in 1785 with extensive landholdings and 35 slaves.

Early life

Sumner was born in Nansemond County, Virginia, in 1733 to Jethro and Margaret Sullivan Sumner.  His family had originally settled in Nansemond County in 1691.
Sumner owned substantial property inherited through his wife's family in Bute County,

American Revolutionary War

In 1775, the North Carolina Provincial Congress passed legislation to raise militia forces throughout the state,

Southern theater, 1776

On April 4, 1776, after the American Revolutionary war had been raging in Massachusetts for nearly a year, the Provincial Congress at Halifax chose Sumner to be colonel, and thus commanding officer, of the 3rd North Carolina Regiment.

Philadelphia campaign and Valley Forge

In early 1777, Sumner resumed command of the 3rd North Carolina regiment, and marched the unit north to serve under George Washington in the Philadelphia campaign.
After the death at Germantown of General Francis Nash, the regiments of his North Carolina brigade were left without a commanding general.  Generals Alexander McDougall of New York and Lachlan McIntosh of Georgia were appointed in succession to temporary command of the North Carolinians while in winter quarters.  Many North Carolina officers believed the state was due the appointment of two additional brigadier generals based on the number of soldiers it provided to the Continental Army.

Promotion and campaigning in the Carolinas

Although North Carolina believed it was owed additional general officer positions, conflicts between members of the North Carolina General Assembly over who was to be considered for the positions, and Thomas Burke, one of North Carolina's leading delegates to the Continental Congress, apparently lacked interest in any of the suggested candidates stalled the appointment of officers to assume those positions.  To complicate matters further, Alexander Martin, once a leading candidate for generalship, resigned after charges of cowardice were leveled against him, and was no longer seen as an appropriate candidate.
On June 20, 1779, Sumner led a Continental Army brigade at the Battle of Stono Ferry, assaulting the British right flank and routing the Hessian von Trümbach Regiment.

Militia command

Between the Siege of Charleston in May 1780 and the Battle of Camden in August that year, the North Carolina Line (a loose organizational structure that encompassed all of North Carolina's Continental Army units) was virtually annihilated, suffering substantial casualties and the loss of many men as prisoners of war.
In late 1780, the North Carolina Board of War removed Caswell from command of North Carolina's militia, and the General Assembly awarded command of the militia to Continental Army Brigadier General William Smallwood of Maryland, citing the Assembly's lack of confidence in their own state's military commanders.  Sumner was further offended when command of the dwindling number of North Carolina Continentals in the southern theater was given to Smallwood as well.

Return to the Continental Army

Sumner next served under General Nathanael Greene, who arrived in the southern theater in December 1780 and directed Sumner to recruit further Continental soldiers from North Carolina.
Following his success at Eutaw Springs, Sumner was made commanding officer of Continental Army forces in North Carolina by Greene in 1781.  Greene primarily wanted him to regain control of the military situation in the state, as then-Governor and former Continental Congress delegate Thomas Burke had been captured by David Fanning in a stunning daylight raid on Hillsborough, North Carolina on September 12, 1781.

Post-war activities, death, and legacy

Following the war's end in 1783, Sumner returned to Bute County, which had been renamed Warren County after Joseph Warren, the hero of the Battle of Bunker Hill.  It appears that Sumner's wife died at some point between 1781 and 1785.
Sumner died in Warren County between March 15 and March 19, 1785 at the age of 52.  At his death, he owned approximately 20,000 acres of land in North Carolina and Tennessee (much of which in the latter was part of the Continental Army land warrant he received), as well as 35 slaves.



Bibliography




