[[Ike's Wee Wee]]

CATEGORIES: 1998 television episodes, Jewish comedy and humor, Jewish-related television episodes, South Park (season 2) episodes

"Ike's Wee Wee" is the fourth episode of the second season of the animated television series South Park, and the 16th episode of the series overall. It first aired on Comedy Central in the United States on May 20, 1998. In the episode, school counselor Mr. Mackey is fired, and turns to drugs. Meanwhile, the boys misconstrue what circumcision entails, and try to save Kyle's younger brother Ike from his upcoming bris.
The episode was written and directed by series co-creator Trey Parker. "Ike's Wee Wee" satirizes certain attitudes towards drug users, and explores whether family can only mean those who are related by blood. This episode introduced Ike's backstory as an adopted Canadian child. "Ike's Wee Wee" received positive responses from fans, as well as critics who especially praised the episode for its touching moments. A line often repeated by Mr. Mackey in this episode, "drugs are bad, m'kay?", has entered popular culture, and has been referenced in various songs, articles, and court documents.

Plot

Mr. Mackey, the school counselor, is giving a drug and alcohol prevention lecture for the class, emphasizing that smoking, drinking, marijuana, and LSD "are bad." He passes a sample of marijuana around the class so that the children can learn its smell, but it is never passed back up to the front. We later see that Mr. Garrison stole it. But as a result, Mackey is fired, and is later kicked out of his house by his landlord, leaving him homeless. A desperate Mackey gives in to trying marijuana one night in an alley, and later, LSD. Soon enough, Mr. Mackey becomes a drug-addled hippie, and meets a hippie woman, with whom he decides to get married. While on honeymoon in India, Mr. Mackey is captured by the A Team, Mr. Garrison and Principal Victoria and is taken into rehab. Mr. Mackey emerges clean from rehab and is given his job back. 
Meanwhile, Kyle invites Stan, Cartman and Kenny to his younger brother Ike's bris. When they learn more about what a bris is, and misconstrue it as a party where they are going to "chop off his penis", Kyle is shocked and tries to find a way to hide his brother from his parents and the circumcision process. Kyle puts Ike on a train to Nebraska and makes an Ike-style doll out of meat bones in an attempt to not arouse his parents' suspicions. This backfires when the doll is eaten by a dog, and both the dog and doll are run over by a fuel tanker which then explodes in front of the Broflovskis' house, which leads to them to think that Ike is dead. It is at the funeral that Kyle finds out that Ike is not his biological brother, but was adopted from Canada. Upon discovering this, Kyle decides that Ike is not his "real brother" and he no longer cares about him. His parents are shocked by what has happened, and Ike is retrieved from Nebraska. During the funeral, Kenny falls into an open grave and the gravestone falls on him.
The day of the bris arrives, and Kyle is grounded. When the mohel arrives to perform the bris, Ike flees to Kyle's room in terror. Seeing Ike in distress and some old pictures prompts a change of heart in Kyle, and he defends his brother fiercely before it is explained to him what a circumcision actually is, at which point Stan and Cartman decide they want to be circumcised too. They then watch the process, and Kyle is relieved to see Ike unharmed. The episode ends with Mr. Mackey attempting to explain drugs to the children again, and the boys arguing about whose bris should be the next.

Production

"Ike's Wee Wee" was written and directed by series co-creator Trey Parker. The scene where Mr. Mackey loses the marijuana cigarette in class was inspired by a real event from Parker's life, where a counselor came into his class in seventh grade, and passed around a lit piece of marijuana, which then disappeared. At the beginning and end of the episode, there are scenes where the kids imitate Mr. Mackey's voice to him, while he is oblivious to the fact that he is being made fun of. Parker and his classmates used to do the same thing to their counselor in junior high school who was the basis for Mr. Mackey's character. Chef's sentence would later return in the season four episode "The Tooth Fairy Tats 2000".
The episode introduced Ike's backstory as a Canadian child adopted by the Broflovskis. Ever since the recurring characters Terrance and Phillip were established to be Canadians in the season one finale "Cartman's Mom Is a Dirty Slut", and the subsequent season two premiere "Terrance and Phillip in Not Without My Anus",News post dated April 28, 2001. In:  Ike's backstory would play an important role in the movie South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut, which involves a fictional American–Canadian war, as well as in future episodes of the series, such as the season seven episode "It's Christmas in Canada", in which Ike's biological parents take him away from the Broflovskis, and bring him back to Canada.
"Ike's Wee Wee" features regular voice acting from series creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone for most characters, Mary Kay Bergman (credited as Shannen Cassidy) for female characters, and Isaac Hayes for Chef. Additional dialogue was provided by South Park audio engineer Bruce Howell, while Ike's lines were uttered by Howell's then-5-year-old son Jesse.

Themes

"Ike's Wee Wee" raises the question of who really can be considered one's family. At first, Kyle's implicit idea is that family consists of "those for whom we care that are related by blood". Based on this viewing of family, he no longer feels the need to help Ike when he learns that they are not related by blood. As the story progresses, Kyle questions his initial beliefs, and forms the episode's central moral by saying that "Family isn't about whose blood you have. It's about who you
care about." Thus, Kyle's reformed view of family not only includes his adopted brother, but his friends as well. Kyle's questioning of his own morals has been likened to engaging in the dialectical Socratic method of inquiry.
The other plot in "Ike's Wee Wee" satirizes certain drug subcultures, as well as drug use, and societal attitudes towards drug users. The way the episode portrays Mr. Mackey's lack of real knowledge about drug use and addiction has been described as an example of South Park satirizing left-wing politics, when "they lead to the sort of hypocrisy inconsistent with a proper open society."

Cultural references

Part of the episode revolves around the practice of religious male circumcision in Judaism, and the related ceremony called the brit milah or bris, and the boys' misunderstanding of the tradition (to which they refer as "circumstition"). The boys believe that circumcision entails the cutting off of one's penis, which they refer to by the childish colloquial term "wee wee", except for Cartman, who insists on calling it "fireman". Cannabis is also referred to by various names, including weed, grass, pot, and marijuana, in which Mr. Mackey constantly pronounces the letter j as  (as in jam), which makes Kyle mispronounce the drug as "marry-Jew wanna".
Drug use is often portrayed in conjunction with the hippie subculture, through hippie characters such as the two teenagers that give LSD to Mackey, and the woman that he befriends and eventually marries.
While walking home, Mr. Mackey drunkenly sings the 1983 Pat Benatar song "Love Is a Battlefield". During Ike's supposed funeral, a bagpipe player starts playing the Hebrew folk song "Hava Nagila". At the funerals, the priest uses the phrase "Ashes to ashes, dust to dust", from the Anglican burial service. When the townspeople start to harass Mackey, one of them shouts "Now we see what you and Homer Simpson have in common... Dope!" This references the famous catchphrase from The Simpsons, "D'oh!", which sounds similar to the word dope, meaning illicit drugs. At Kyle's house, Kyle's parents offers the boys a dish called "GaHekgafuga", which is not a real dish. The A-Team is a 1980s action adventure TV series. Mackey is taken to rehabilitation to the Betty Ford Clinic, which is based on a real-life hospital.
A common plot device is referenced, where a shoulder angel (represents conscience) and a shoulder devil (representing temptation) appear near a character. This concept is spoofed in the episode, as both the devil and the angel suggest to Mackey that he should drink the beer. When Stan tells Kyle what he thinks a bris means, a dolly zoom is used, which is an unsettling filmmaking effect often used to show that a character is undergoing a major realization. The hallucinogenic effects of certain drugs are portrayed by different means. When inhaling cannabis, the alley that Mr. Mackey is in suddenly turns very colorful. After taking LSD, Mr. Mackey's head inflates like a giant balloon, and then literally detaches from his body, and floats away. 
In the scene when the boys are talking to Chef, he leaves without answering the boys' sexual question, angrily saying, "Dammit, children, why do I always have to be the one to explain all this stuff to you. Ask your parents for once!" This is in reference to Chef's tendency to give advice to the boys. While the children are trying to think of what is the most important thing for a man, Cartman says "Ham?", to which Stan angrily replies, "No, not ham, you fat fuck!". This exchange was used verbatim between the same characters in The Spirit of Christmas, the 1995 short film that was the precursor to South Park.

Broadcast, reception, and impact

Two episodes preceded "Ike's Wee Wee" in the second season of the show.

"Ike's Wee Wee" was met with favorable reviews. Critics especially praised the episode for its touching moments, in contrast with the off-color humor often employed in the series. In his review of the episode in the Chicago Tribune, Allan Johnson praised the episode, especially in comparison with the first two episodes of the season, and wrote that "'Ike's Wee Wee' ranks with some of the better episodes of 'South Park.'" Upon the series reaching its 100th episode in 2003, the same writer also listed "Ike's Wee Wee" as one of the "top 10 episodes that have made 
Mr. Mackey's line "drugs are bad, m'kay?" has entered popular culture. The Eminem song "The Kids" – which is featured on the B-side of the single "The Way I Am" and the clean version of The Marshall Mathers LP – is thematically about drug use, and makes numerous references to South Park and impressions of the show's characters,

Home release

"Ike's Wee Wee" was released on VHS in April 1999, along with the episode "Chickenlover", on a video titled South Park: Volume 8.






