[[Tim Walz]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, Living people, American Lutherans, Members of the United States House of Representatives from Minnesota, Minnesota Democrats, People from Mankato, Minnesota, United States Army soldiers, People from Cuming County, Nebraska

Timothy James "Tim" Walz (born April 6, 1964), serving since 2007. He is a member of the Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party (DFL).
The district comprises the state's southern end, running along the entire border with Iowa. It includes Rochester, Austin, Winona and Mankato.

Early life, education and career

Walz was born in West Point, Nebraska, the son of Darlene R. and James F. "Jim" Walz. His ancestry includes German, Irish, and Swedish.genealogy.ancestry.htm Walz, the son of a public school administrator and community activist, was raised in Chadron, Nebraska, a rural community in the northwestern portion of the state.
Walz graduated from Butte High School in a class of 25 students, and went on to earn a Bachelor of Science degree in social science education from Chadron State College.  Walz's first teaching experience was at the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in South Dakota.  Walz then accepted a teaching position with WorldTeach, teaching in the People's Republic of China.
Walz enlisted in the National Guard in 1981, and over the course of his 24-year career rose to the rank of command sergeant major.  In 1989, he earned the title of Nebraska Citizen-Soldier of the Year.  After a deployment to Italy with his Guard unit as part of Operation Enduring Freedom, Walz retired from the National Guard and resumed teaching as a geography teacher and football coach at Mankato West Senior High School.
He and his wife Gwen ran Educational Travel Adventures, accompanying high school juniors and seniors on summer educational trips to China.  Walz has two children — one daughter and one son.
He currently resides in Mankato, Minnesota.

U.S. House of Representatives

Political Campaigns

Walz decided to run for Congress in 2006. Walz had no opponent in the race for the DFL nomination for the seat in the September 12, 2006 primary election. He beat incumbent Republican Gil Gutknecht in the general election on November 7, and took office on January 3, 2007.  After the election, a Walz profile described him as having caught Gutknecht "off guard" and as having "resolved never to get caught like that himself...."
He was reelected in 2008 with 62 percent of the vote, becoming only the second non-Republican to win a second full term in the district.  He won a third term in 2010, defeating State Representative Randy Demmer with 50 percent of the vote.

Tenure

Upon his swearing in, Walz became the highest-ranking retired enlisted soldier ever to serve in Congress, as well as only the fourth Democrat/DFLer to represent the 1st District.  The others were Thomas Wilson (1887–89), William Harries (1891–93), and Tim Penny 1983-1995 (DFL).
Walz serves on the House Agriculture Committee,
Representing a district that has traditionally voted Republican, but has recently become a swing district due to changing demographics, Walz has cast votes ranging from moderate to liberal.
Walz received a 100% rating from Planned Parenthood in 2012, from the ACLU in 2011, from the American Immigration Lawyers Association in 2009-10, from the AFL-CIO in 2010, from the Teamsters in 2009-10, and from NOW in 2007.  In recent years he has received one-digit ratings from the National Taxpayers' Union, Citizens against Government Waste, Americans for Tax Reform, and Freedom Works.  The US Chamber of Commerce gave him a 25% rating in 2010.

=Veterans Issues=

Having served 24 years in the National Guard, Walz is the highest ranking enlisted soldier to serve in Congress.  As a freshman in Congress he was given a rare third committee membership when he was assigned to the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs.

=2008 financial crisis=

During 2008, Walz repeatedly spoke out against using taxpayer money to bail out financial institutions; in late September he voted against the $700 billion TARP bill, which purchased troubled assets from these institutions.
In December 2008 he used the same reasoning when he voted against the bill that offered $14 billion in government loans to bail out the country's large automobile manufacturers.

=Jobs/Economy=

Despite his "No" votes on bailout bills which loaned taxpayer money to the large banks and auto manufacturers, Walz did vote with his Democratic colleagues to support the 2009 American Recovery & Reinvestment Act (aka Stimulus bill). As a member of the House Transportation Committee, Walz saw the stimulus bill as an opportunity to work "with his congressional colleagues to make job creation through investment in public infrastructure like roads, bridges and clean energy the cornerstone of the economic recovery plan."
Walz has also put emphasis on the farm economy by urging assistance for hog and dairy farmers who struggled with lower prices for their commodities in 2008 and 2009.

=Education=

Walz was a public school teacher for 20 years.  He is a strong supporter of Public Schools and opposes using merit pay for teachers in low-income schools as punishment.

=Women's Issues=

When asked in 2006 Walz responded that he supported all kinds of legal abortions, including cases of incest or rape.  Planned Parenthood, a national organization supporting the reproductive rights of women and women's health initiatives, gave Walz a 100% rating on their issues, including contraceptive, women's health education and family planning. Walz voted against House Amendments 509 & 510.

=LGBT Issues=

Walz is a strong supporter of equal rights for all, including women and the LGBT community. In early 2009, Walz voted for the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act, ensuring women receive equal pay for equal work. When asked, Walz confirmed his support for federal anti-discrimination laws on the basis of sexual orientation.  In a 2009 speech in Washington DC, Walz called for an end to the "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" policy, saying that sexual discrimination has no place in the military and that sexual orientation of individuals does not affect the "professionalism" of units.

Committee assignments

Caucus memberships

Co-Chair National Guard and Reserve Component Caucus

Election campaigns

2012

2010

2008

2006








