[[Malini Fonseka]]

CATEGORIES: 1947 births, Living people, Sri Lankan actor–politicians, Sri Lankan film actors, Sinhalese people, Members of the 14th Parliament of Sri Lanka, Sri Lankan politicians

Malani Senehelatha Fonseka (Sinhala:මාලනි සෙනෙහෙලතා ෆොන්සෙකා) (born April 30, 1947 in Kelaniya) is an award-winning Sri Lankan film actress, also known as the "Queen of Sinhalese cinema". She first earned recognition, when she won the 'Best Actress Award' at the 1969 National State Drama Festival This was followed by Sarasaviya Best Actress Awards for Hingana Kolla in  1980, Aradhana in 1982 and Yasa Isuru in 1983. In 2010 she has been named by CNN as one of Asia's 25 greatest film actors of all time.CNNGo - Asia's 25 greatest actors of all time

Biography

Early life

Born as the third child to the Gilbert and Seelwathie Fonseka at Peliyagoda, Kelaniya. After Malini was born, her family moved to Jambugasmulle, Nugegoda. In 1952 she started her education at St. Johns College Nugegoda until the 5th grade. After moving of the family to Wedamulle, Kelaniya she was enrolled at Gurukula Maha Vidyalaya, Kelaniya until completing her education.

Personal life

On June 12, 1986, she married Lucky Dias, a veteran Cinema and teledrama actor and producer.

Political life

On April, 2010, she got a Membership for Sri Lanka Parliament with National List of United People's Freedom Alliance.

Career

Fonseka started her acting career with stage dramas. In 1963, she made her entry to stage dramas with "Noratha Ratha". In 1968, Fonseka won the best stage drama actress national award for her performance in Akal Wessa. She has since played the lead role in 14 stage dramas. She entered the cinema industry through one of her brothers, Ananda Fonseka, who was both a film director and producer but was introduced to the cinema itself by Tissa Liyansuriya and Joe Abeywickrama.
She made her debut with Tissa Liyansuriya's Punchi Baba (The little Baby) in 1968. These films were followed by Abudasse kale, Dahasak Sithuwili and Adarawanthayo in the same year. With the critical success she gained with these, she was offered the lead role by several movie directors of the time. Fonseka has acted in over 140 movies since then, some of which were international movies.
Some of her successful films include Nidhanaya by Lester James Peiris,  Siripala Saha Ranmenika by Amaranath Jayathilake,  Eya Den Loku Lamayek and Bambaru Ewith by Dharmasena Pathiraja. She achieved a significant milestone in her artistic career with Sasara Chetana in 1984, where she became both its director and producer. She has directed two other films so far: Ahinsa in 1987 and Sthree in 1991.
She paired up with popular Tamil actor, Sivaji Ganeshan in Pilot Premnath in 1978.
Later on, she also worked in the television industry. Fonseka has won praise for her performance in  Manalada Puthe Kiri Dunne, Pitagamkarayo, Kemmura, and Ambu Daruwo teledramas. She won the Sumathi Best Tele Actress Awards for her roles in Pitagamkarayo and Kemmura.
She has also made her mark as a teledrama director, with successful creations such as Sanasili Suwanda. She even had the honor of being the first female teledrama director in the history of Sri Lanka teledrama history, when she, both directed and acted in her first teledrama Nirupamala.Malani on Television
Her latest film is Uppalawanna directed by Prof. Sunil Ariyaratne.
Malini's career enhanced with Gamini Fonseka and both who had a long journey in history of the silver screen. Malini stated at Gamini's funeral in 2004, "His performance had appeal across the board and I had the good fortune of being associated with Gamini. The cinema of that era is slowly fading away and the passing away of Gamini is another step towards that direction".

Awards

Fonseka was the first Sri Lankan actress to reach international heights, winning a  special Jury award at the Moscow International Film Festival in 1975. This was to be the first of her many international awards.
Apart from the many Sarasaviya Awards she has won, she has also earned other honours like the Presidential Awards, OCIC Awards and also international recognition.
Her most recent awards include the "Best Actress Award" for the teledrama "Kemmura" at the Sumathi Tele Awards Ceremony, 2000 and Wishva Prasadhini Award as appreciation of her service to the cinema industry from the President in 1996.
Malini Fonseka felicitation ceremony titled Maliniye held at the BMICH on April 30, 2003 with the participation of President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga for her four decades of contribution to the Cinema of Sri Lanka in more than 150 films.
Sri Lankans living in U.S.A. gathered in large numbers at Los Angeles to honor legendary actress Malini in January 2008. Also a special dinner hosted by the Consular General of Sri Lanka Jaliya Wickramasuriya and Mrs. Wickramasuriya and the Consulate staff. A special ceremony organized for her to present an Appreciative Plaque by the Consulate General of Los Angeles Jaliya Wickramasuriya with the participation of representative groups of the community, Associations, renowned artists and actors and well wishers and fans of actress Malini Fonseka.
Sarasaviya Awards won by Fonseka:

Filmography


|-
|-
|-







