[[Tyler Cowen]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, Living people, American academics, American bloggers, American economists, American food writers, American libertarians, American political writers, American social sciences writers, George Mason University alumni, George Mason University faculty, Harvard University alumni, Libertarian economists, Libertarian theorists, The New York Times columnists, 20th-century American writers, 21st-century American writers, 20th-century economists, 21st-century economists

Tyler Cowen (

Education and personal life

Cowen was born in Bergen CountyNew Jersey State Champions 1946 – Present New Jersey State Chess Federation, Official Site Cowen graduated from George Mason University with a bachelor of science degree in economics in 1983 and received his PhD in economics from Harvard University in 1987 with thesis titled Essays in the theory of welfare economics. At Harvard, he was mentored by game theorist Thomas Schelling, the 2005 recipient of the Nobel Prize in Economics. He is married to Natasha Cowen, a lawyer.

Writings

Culture

The Los Angeles Times has described Cowen as "a man who can talk about Haitian voodoo flags, Iranian cinema, Hong Kong cuisine, Abstract Expressionism, Zairian music and Mexican folk art with seemingly equal facility". He has written books on fame (What Price Fame?), art (In Praise of Commercial Culture), and cultural trade (Creative Destruction: How Globalization is Changing the World's Cultures). In Markets and Cultural Voices, he relays how globalization is changing the world of three Mexican amate painters. Cowen argues that free markets change culture for the better, allowing them to evolve into something more people want. Other books include Public Goods and Market Failures, The Theory of Market Failure, Explorations in the New Monetary Economics, Risk and Business Cycles, Economic Welfare, and New Theories of Market Failure.

Recent books

Cowen followed the controversial success of his 2011 work, The Great Stagnation with An Economist Gets Lunch: New Rules for Everyday Foodies "taking on food with equally provocative ideas."
The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All The Low-Hanging Fruit of Modern History, Got Sick, and Will (Eventually) Feel Better is a short, 15,000-word take on the United States' recent economic trajectory and was released only in electronic format in January 2011. Create Your Own Economy: The Path to Prosperity in a Disordered World was released in July 2009 (and rereleased in 2010 with the new title The Age of the Infovore: Succeeding in the Information Economy) and received favorable reviews from critics including Matthew Yglesias and Tim Harford.
In 2013 he published Average is Over on the future of modern economies.

New York Times columns

Cowen's New York Times columns cover a wide range of issues, including the 2008 financial crisis, "Too Few Regulations? No, Just Ineffective Ones".

Dining guide

His dining guide for the D.C. area, "Tyler Cowen's Ethnic Dining Guide", was reprinted in the Food section of the Washington Post.

Political philosophy

Cowen has written papers in political philosophy and ethics: for example, he co-wrote a paper with the philosopher Derek Parfit, arguing against the social discount rate.'Against the social discount rate', Derek Parfit and Tyler Cowen, in Peter Laslett & James S. Fishkin (eds.) Justice between age groups and generations, Yale University Press: New Haven, 1992, pp. 144–161. A recent paper has argued that the epistemic problem fails to refute consequentialist forms of argument.Klein, Daniel B. "Mere Libertarianism: Blending Hayek and Rothbard". Reason Papers. Vol. 27: Fall 2004. In a 2007 article entitled "The Paradox of Libertarianism," Cowen argued that libertarians "should embrace a world with growing wealth, growing positive liberty, and yes, growing government. We don't have to favor the growth in government per se, but we do need to recognize that sometimes it is a package deal". His argument was subsequently criticized by Bryan Caplan,
In 2012, David Brooks called Cowen one of the most influential bloggers on the right, writing that he is among those who "start from broadly libertarian premises but do not apply them in a doctrinaire way."

Attack

On March 26, 2014, Cowen was attacked in his classroom by Jonathan Pendelton, who tried to arrest the professor and then pepper sprayed him. Pendelton was held by a student who was also an off-duty police officer, and arrested shortly after by police. Cowen and his students reportedly suffered no lasting injuries. No motives for the attack were established in the early reports. Ironically, news reports indicated that the class topic for that day had been vigilantism.

Publications

Books

isbn=978-0-5259-5373-9|pages=304}} (Wikipedia page)

Select journal articles

Select articles






