[[Javier Garrido]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, Living people, People from Irun, Basque footballers, Spanish footballers, Spain youth international footballers, Spain under-21 international footballers, Spanish expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in England, Expatriate footballers in Italy, Association football fullbacks, Real Sociedad footballers, Manchester City F.C. players, S.S. Lazio players, Norwich City F.C. players, La Liga footballers, Premier League players, Serie A footballers, Spanish expatriate sportspeople in Italy, Spanish expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom

Javier Garrido Behobide (born 15 March 1985) is a Spanish footballer who plays for Norwich City. He is a left back characterized by his constant overlapping runs.

Club career

Real Sociedad

Born in Irun, Basque Country, Garrido signed for Real Sociedad when he was a child and continued his training at the lower levels of the club. Between 2002 and 2004, he was part of the players of Real Sociedad B, where he played 50 games for this team in the Second Division B. 
He made his debut with the first team of Real Sociedad in a Copa del Rey match on 8 October 2003 with a 2–1 win against Real Oviedo. Garrido's professional career began in 2004 when he became a part of the first team in the 2004–05 season to replace Agustín Aranzábal, who had left the club in the summer transfer window for Real Zaragoza. He made his league debut against Levante UD on 29 August 2004. In his three seasons with Real Sociedad in La Liga, he played 86 games and scored 1 goal and being the most used left-back for Sociedad in those three seasons. Despite starting the season with Real Sociedad, he left due to his team's economical problems following their relegation in 2006–07.

Manchester City

On 2 August 2007, Garrido signed for Manchester City for £1.5m (€2.2 million), on a four-year contract. He made his debut on 11 August against West Ham United. Garrido played a part in the most successful Premiership start in the club's history with four victories and four clean sheets from the opening six games. But he was replaced by Michael Ball just before Christmas. His team eventually ended in the ninth place in the league and qualified for the UEFA Cup through fairplay.
Garrido scored his first goal for City direct from a free kick against Liverpool in their 3–2 loss on 5 October 2008. His second season with City was more disappointing than the first, as he only made 13 league appearances, 14 less than the previous season. The following summer he took part in the Vodacom Challenge appearing in a game against Kaizer Chiefs and as an unused substitute against Celtic. During his third season in England, Garrido found it increasingly hard to find a place in the first team squad. In the Manchester derby, in which United won 4–3, Garrido, as an unused substitute in the match, was struck on the head by a coin as he headed down the tunnel at half-time. After the match, Garrido told Daily Mail, making accusation to United, for causing trouble and described the club's action as 'climate of hostility'. 
After leaving Manchester City, Garrido says he has no feud with Mancini - who sold him in 2010 - and say Mancini was grateful to him when he gave him a chance to play in the first team.

Lazio

On 30 July 2010, he joined Lazio from Manchester City - just days after Aleksandar Kolarov joined City from Lazio - on a four-year deal, with the fee of 2.2 million euros (1.5 million pounds). After four months joining Lazio, Garrido had to wait until make his debut on 14 November 2010, coming on as a substitute, in a 2-0 win over Napoli. 
On 25 November 2010, when he made his scored his first goal, in the fourth round of Coppa Italia match, in a 3–0 win against AlbinoLeffe. Shortly making his debut, Garrido soon suffered an Achilles tendon problems. On 6 March 2011, he made his return, coming on as a substitute in a late minute, as Lazio beat Palermo 2–0. Under manager Edoardo Reja, Garrido find it diffiuclt to make it to the first team, due to injuries and would be often used in first team ins and out in his first season.
The next season, Garrido was barely used for the club in the first half of the season, due to muscular problems, at first, and then Strain in mid-March. Garrido made his first appearance, making his first start, of the season, as Lazio lose 3–2 against Genoa on 5 February 2012.

Norwich City

On 16 August 2012, Garrido joined Norwich City on a season long loan from Lazio, 
Garrido made his debut on 25 August 2012 in a 1–1 draw against QPR. Since then, Garrido managed to beat Marc Tierney for the left back position and established himself in the first team. In a match against Manchester United on 17 November, Garrido assisted Anthony Pilkington, crossing the ball to him for a header, giving Norwich City a 1–0 win.

International career

Garrido played for Spain U-19 where he won the 2004 edition of UEFA European Under-19 Football Championship.
He also earned four caps for Spain U-21.

Statistics

Honours






