[[Ivalice]]

CATEGORIES: Fantasy worlds, Fictional regions, Fictional populated places, Final Fantasy locations


Though described often as a world, this was only physically true of Ivalice in Final Fantasy Tactics Advance, in which Ivalice was created parallel to the real world. The 'true' Ivalice, as witnessed in the remaining games, describes two distinct locations; a geographical region,Ivalice (Sage Knowledge 29 of 78), Clan Primer Bestiary  and a smaller kingdom, both of which belong to a larger, unnamed world. Generally, however, the term Ivalice is also used to refer to the conceptual setting, rather as one might say "the world of medieval Europe" and the Middle Ages Mediterranean.

Concept and creation

Ivalice was created by Yasumi Matsuno as a fictional world with its own identity; a medieval-like world where magic and machine exist together. The usual elements of Final Fantasy, such as Chocobos, crystals and magic spells, blend into the setting. This setting first appeared in Final Fantasy Tactics, a game produced mostly by the team that made Ogre Battle and Tactics Ogre, and was Matsuno's first project with Square following his departure from Quest in 1995.
Following Matsuno's departure from Square Enix during development on Final Fantasy XII, Square Enix has continued to feature Ivalice in other games.
In 2011, Matsuno stated that he never originally intended for Vagrant Story to take place in Ivalice.

Appearances

Video games

Final Fantasy Tactics (1997), a tactical role-playing game developed and published by Square for the Sony PlayStation video game console, marked the first appearance of Ivalice. The game combined thematic elements of the Final Fantasy video game series with a game engine and battle system unlike those previously seen in the franchise. Final Fantasy Tactics is set in a fictional medieval-inspired kingdom called Ivalice and created by Yasumi Matsuno. The game's story follows Ramza Beoulve, a highborn cadet who finds himself thrust into the middle of an intricate military conflict known as The Lion War, where two opposing noble factions are coveting the throne of the kingdom. As the story progresses, Ramza and his allies discover a sinister plot behind the war.
In an interview with Akito Inoue, an assistant professor at the International University of Japan, Inoue mentions that Final Fantasy Tactics was made because of how casual gamers are usually put off by games with branching storylines found in other Matsuno's titles such as Tactics Ogre.
Vagrant Story (2000) is an action role-playing game featuring no shops and no player interaction with other characters; instead, the game focuses on weapon creation and modification, as well as elements of puzzle-solving and strategy. The game takes place in the fictional kingdom of Valendia and the ruined city of Leá Monde. The story centers on Ashley Riot, an elite agent known as a Riskbreaker, who must travel to Leá Monde to investigate the link between a cult leader and a senior Valendian Parliament member, Duke Bardorba. In the prologue, Ashley is blamed for murdering the duke, and the game discloses the events that happen one week before the murder.
Final Fantasy Tactics Advance is a tactical role-playing game developed and published by Square for the Nintendo Game Boy Advance. The game shares several traits with Final Fantasy Tactics, although it is not a direct sequel. The game's story centers on four children; Marche, Mewt, Ritz, and Doned, who live in a small town named St. Ivalice. The children are transported to a realm of the same name as their town, "Ivalice", after discovering an ancient magical book. The story then focuses on the exploits of Marche as he attempts to return to the real world while facing opposition from those around him.
Development on the game began when Square announced its publishing agreement with Nintendo, and it was later confirmed by the producer Matsuno. The development team of Tactics Advance, Square's Product Development Division 4, was constructed from employees of Quest Corporation, and work began in February 2002.
Final Fantasy XII (2006) is a role-playing video game developed and published by Square Enix for the PlayStation 2 platform. It is the twelfth title in the mainline Final Fantasy series. The game introduced several innovations to the offline titles in the mainline series: an open world, a seamless battle system, a controllable camera, a customizable "gambit" system which lets the player automatically control the actions of characters; and a "license" system which determines which abilities and equipment are used by characters.
The game takes place in the fictional land of Ivalice, where the empires of Archadia and Rozarria are waging an endless war. Dalmasca, a small kingdom, is caught between the warring nations. When Dalmasca is annexed by Archadia, its princess, Ashe, creates a resistance movement. During the struggle, she meets Vaan, a young adventurer who dreams of commanding an airship. They are quickly joined by a band of allies; together, they rally against the tyranny of the Archadian Empire.
On December 13, 2006, a Square Enix representative informed Tokyo reporters that the already announced Final Fantasy XII: Revenant Wings would be joined by other games in a new subseries known as the Ivalice Alliance. Retrieved January 10, 2007. Final Fantasy Tactics: The War of the Lions is a PlayStation Portable and iOS port of the original Final Fantasy Tactics game. Final Fantasy Tactics A2: Grimoire of the Rift is a Nintendo DS sequel to Final Fantasy Tactics Advance,Ivalice Alliance Famitsu.co.jp. Retrieved January 10, 2007. albeit set in the actual Ivalice world and not an artificial illusory world, unlike its predecessor.
Executive producer Akitoshi Kawazu explained that the aim of the Ivalice Alliance is to "spread the word about the world of Ivalice", and to bring more players into the franchise, with new titles not restricted to the standard role-playing game genre but also tactical games and games similar to Vagrant Story.
Crystal Defenders is a series of turn-based strategy video games developed by MSF/Winds and published by Square Enix. It comprises several iterations released for mobile phones and through online video game delivery services. The games are set in the fictional world of Ivalice and features job classes, monsters and summoned creatures from the tactical role-playing game Final Fantasy Tactics A2: Grimoire of the Rift.
Fortress is the code name of a cancelled action role-playing video game that was in development by Grin. Director Ulf Andersson devised the concept for Fortress and pre-production began in the second half of 2008.
During development, Square Enix did not pay Grin over several months, and disapproved of the game's Nordic art style.
Final Fantasy Tactics S is a tactical role-playing game with social features and multiplayer battles. It was released in Japan on the Mobage social gaming network in May 2013.

Other media

In Japan, Final Fantasy Tactics Advance's story was expanded and broadcast in Japanese radio stations. The radio drama entitled Final Fantasy Tactics Advance Radio Edition was broadcast in four radio stations within Japan from early January 2003 to late March 2003.
Final Fantasy XII was adapted into a manga by Gin Amou. Square Enix published the series in a total of five tankōbon volumes from December 22, 2006 to August 22, 2009.

Setting

Geography

=Kingdom of Ivalice=

The events of Final Fantasy Tactics are set in the kingdom of Ivalice, which borders Ordalia in the east and the insular nation of Romanda in the north-west, from which it is separated by the Larner Channel. The kingdom forms a peninsula and is composed of seven provinces which were individual kingdoms before their unification: Gallione, Lionel, Lesalia, Fovoham, Limberry, Zeltennia and Mullonde.
The insular province of Mullonde is home to the Glabados Church and is ruled separately from the royal government.
Prior to the events of Final Fantasy Tactics, the Fara church dominated the kingdom of Ivalice.

=Leá Monde=

Vagrant Story is set in the ruins of the city of Leá Monde. The kingdom of Valendia is also heavily mentioned, and a few of its locations are featured in the prologue and the ending sequence. In contrast to the other Ivalice games, magic is rare, being suppressed by religious doctrine. Other races are never mentioned, so one can assume that all other races aside from Humes have become extinct by this time.
Vagrant Story centers around the "Dark", a formless, invisible entity. In places where the Dark runs strongest, those who died will have their corpses controlled by the dark, becoming the undead. It invades the body like a plague, an unseen visitor. Yet those it taints become...  Throughout the story, many individuals crave the powers of the Dark, which centers around the abandoned city of Leá Monde. Another mythological aspect of Vagrant Story is the Kiltia, an ancient cult which built itself upon the Dark and ancient sorcery, and of which the Müllenkamp sect is stemmed from. It can be seen that most rituals and summoning performed in the game involved ancient Kildean magic.
In Vagrant Story, the Iocus priesthood of the kingdom of Valendia is shown to use the Kildean rood as a symbol, although they follow the teachings of a saint named Iocus instead of the original Kildean teachings of the Kiltia religion of Leá Monde. This hypocrisy is revealed over the course of the story, though it goes unresolved.

=St. Ivalice=

In Final Fantasy Tactics Advance, the protagonist lives in a land called St. Ivalice. Following the characters' discovery of the book called the Gran Grimoire, St. Ivalice was transformed into a "mirror" of the "real" kingdom of Ivalice. This is apparently explained as Mewt replied that Final Fantasy was his favorite game; with the Races and elements such as Ivalice, one would assume St. Ivalice was based on Final Fantasy XII. The sequel to the game, Final Fantasy Tactics A2: Grimoire of the Rift, also takes place in both St. Ivalice and the Ivalice of Final Fantasy XII.

=Galtean Peninsula=

In Final Fantasy XII, Ivalice covers three continents, Ordalia, Valendia and Kerwon. The demography consists of the known races: Humes, Bangaa, Viera, Seeq and Moogles, and other  minority races. Civilization is advanced in this world where the use of a magical stone called magicite is extensive in everyday life, airships are a prominent transportation and multi-story buildings cover the cityscape. Ivalice in Final Fantasy XII is designed based on a mixture of cultures. According to the game developers, these designs are inspired from a mixture of medieval Mediterranean countries, The cityscape is also conceived by Matsuno as being dirty and weather-worn, mirroring the conditions of a medieval landscape. The natural landscape also mirrors Earth's geographical features, including large expanse of deserts and snowy mountains.
In Final Fantasy XII, the continents in Ivalice are presently home to three nations: Rozarria, Archadia and Dalmasca. There was once the Kingdom of Nabradia and the Republic of Landis in Valendia, now either destroyed or assimilated into the Archadian Empire. Strategically located between the rival neighboring empires of Archadia and Rozarria, Dalmasca's position as a neutral buffer region between the two countries is eliminated when it is invaded by Archadia at the onset of the game. With the fall of Landis and Nabradia and its reduction to an occupied territory under Archadian rule, Dalmasca is set to play a central role in the still-heated dispute between its neighbors, which is escalating once more.
The events of Final Fantasy XII are focused on the area around the Galtean Peninsula, itself located in the larger Ivalice region.Memoirs of Marquis Halim Ondore IV 
These various micro-climates are influenced by the magical phenomenon known as Mist, an unstable substance with the ability to cause great variation over small areas.Mist (Sage Knowledge 09 of 78) 
Mist is responsible for the existence of 'magicite', stones that contain magical powers due to the presence of Mist in their crystalline structure. Magicite is divided into three types; spellstones that are used in spell casting, skystones that are installed into a component known as 'glossair rings' that give flight to the vehicles, whether small-sized bikes or large airships, and memstones that function much like recording devices. The quality of magicite depends on the quantity of Mist and not on the size or shape of the stone. The ubiquitousness of magic and magicite, as well as its cost-efficiency, led to it replacing electricity and its various sources as the dominant usable energy in Ivalice.
Nethicite, another type of magicite, works by absorbing Mist, thus nullifying the effects of magic and storing vast amounts of power. Nethicite can be described as either deifacted or manufacted (literally, god-made or man-made). During the course of the game, it is discovered that deifacted nethicite is nethicite created by the Occuria, and that the ultimate source of known pieces of deifacted nethicite is the Sun-Cryst they created. In tower on distant shore it dreams. The mother of all Nethicite, the source of its unending power.  Deifacted nethicite contains a large amount of magic and is known to influence the history of Ivalice.
In Final Fantasy XII, the Light of Kiltia, a polytheistic religion, is the dominant church in Ivalice, having influence in the political affairs of the region around the Galtean Peninsula. 

=Purvama Lemurés=

Some of the locations in the Ivalice of Final Fantasy XII returned in its sequel, Final Fantasy XII: Revenant Wings, along with a new area called Lemurés. A legendary Purvama (Floating Continent) raised into the skies by the god Feolthanos long ago, this land is ruled by three "Sacred Crystals" called Auraliths, which erected a barrier to shield the Purvama from the rest of the world. In Revenant Wings, the "Legend of the Floating Land" has become an ambition for Sky Pirates who seek the island for Auracite, pieces of Auralith able to allow one to summon entities called Yarhi. The ruins of Lemurés are where the Aegyl reside.
In the backstory of Final Fantasy XII: Revenant Wings, Feolthanos established a personality cult over Lemurés, labeling himself to his people as a god. Though Lemurés still had a sense of peace and paradise, in spite of Yarhi attacks, it was a false paradise due to the Aurcite draining the Aegyl of their anima as part of Feolthanos' plan to destroy Ivalice as revenge against the Occurians.

=Jylland=

Taking place only a few years after Final Fantasy XII: Revenant Wings, Final Fantasy Tactics A2: Grimoire of the Rift introduces a new region of Ivalice called Jylland. The region of Jylland is made up of the western half of the Ordalia Continent and the eastern half of the Loar Continent, with Jagd Zellea to the north of the two continents. There are five regions spread out across these two continents, which consist of smaller territories inside of them, twenty being the number of territories throughout Jylland, which contain a varying number of areas (battlefields) in each of them (eighty-six areas in all of Jylland).  The towns in Jylland include Camoa, Grazston, Moorabella, Fluorgis, and Goug.  Goug in particular, is a town of Moogles.  Another race similar to the Aegyl also was introduced along with this game.  Called Gria, these winged females are small, but pack a mean punch, specializing in three new classes and one old one.  Geomancer, Ravager, and Raptor, along with the before-human exclusive class Hunter were given to the Gria, and only the geomancer class uses magic.

Timeline

The timeline of Ivalice as presented in the games was left quite vague, and formerly other official sources had said little on the matter. A few sources have made their own conclusion on the timeline of Ivalice. The official timeline, however, was eventually given in the Final Fantasy XII Ultimania Omega, and placed the events of Final Fantasy XII before those of Final Fantasy Tactics.
There is no direct mention of Ivalice in Vagrant Story. However, several references are made; the Kingdom of Valendia, the setting for Vagrant Story, shares its name with a continent of Ivalice appearing in Final Fantasy XII. The Kiltia religion, featured in Final Fantasy XII, was the religion of the ghost town Leá Monde, in which the story takes place. Additionally, a quotation from Arazlam J. Durai, a famous historian of Ivalice who lived 400 years after the War of the Lions (and narrator of the Zodiac Brave Story told in Final Fantasy Tactics), is used at the beginning of the game,
Some confusion still persists, particularly due to the facts surrounding Saint Ajora, who was executed 1200 years prior to the events of Final Fantasy Tactics,Born around twelve centuries ago in Bervenia of Lesalia.  Raised in Milodos.  Spoke of the arrival of a kingdom of a higher source, as feelings of anitpathy grew from Father Fara.  Executed as a traitor by the Holy Empire of Yudora.  Soon after, the capital of the Church of Fara became submerged under the sea by an extraordinary natural phenomenon.  Those disciples of Ajora believed this was his miracle.  As these stories spread, the Glabados Church became what it is today. 
Final Fantasy Tactics A2: Grimoire of the Rift has been confirmed by the developers to take place after Final Fantasy XII, and both Final Fantasy Tactics Advance and A2 to take place "near" in time to Final Fantasy XII.

Races

The populations seen in Final Fantasy Tactics and Vagrant Story are essentially human. The other intelligent races who appear are hostile or monster-like, such as Goblins or Ogres. Friendly intelligent races appear in later games set in Ivalice, where the human race is called Humes. Monsters and the like are thought not to exist by the general populace in Vagrant Story, with the monsters in the isolated Leá Monde all stemming from the Dark. The races are sorted by appearance and then according to the alphabetical order.
Ivalice as featured in Final Fantasy Tactics Advance is populated by four main intelligent races in addition to Humes; all of them also reappearing in Final Fantasy XII.
Final Fantasy XII introduces several other races to Ivalice, with varying importance in the plot of the game.
Final Fantasy XII: Revenant Wings introduces two other races:
Lastly, Final Fantasy Tactics A2: Grimoire of the Rift features two other races:

Mythos

Within Final Fantasy Tactics, legends revolve around the Zodiac Brave Story, which deals with twelve knights who used the power of Zodiac Stones—magical stones engraved with symbols of the twelve Zodiac constellations—to fight against a demon summoned by an ambitious king to control Ivalice. This myth was twisted by the Glabados Church, as explained in the game's backstory, by including St. Ajora as the leader of the Zodiac Braves.
The "Lucavi" are demons linked to the twelve Zodiac Stones who seek to gain control of Ivalice by resurrecting their defeated leader, the High Seraph, Ultima. Any person who holds a Zodiac Stone may make a contract with the Lucavian demon associated with it, and in doing so, become one with that demon. During the events of the game, the Lucavi manipulate the Glabados Church into controlling the War of the Lions to ensure enough bloodshed for Ultima's resurrection... It just needs more... You didn't hear? It just needs more blood... Lots of blood is needed for the Angel's resurrection. Much bloodshed since Ajora's death, but I guess it wasn't enough... I guess I'll have to go on another rampage...!! Heh, heh, heh.... Don't worry... I'll 'sacrifice' you first. In the new translation of the PSP version of Final Fantasy Tactics, the Zodiac Stones are also referred to as Auracite—the same stone used to summon the Yarhi and Scions (the Lucavi) in Final Fantasy XII: Revenant Wings.
Final Fantasy XII also introduces the "Occuria", immortal beings who have no visible faces, only a pair of glowing yellow eyes seen under their floating shell-like armor, surrounded by an aquamarine aura. The Occuria can become selectively invisible, and are also capable of possession, shape-shifting and image projection. Referred to by some as gods, but unknown to the main religions in Ivalice, the Occuria race played a central role in the history of Ivalice, controlling all major events, such as the rise of the Dynast-King Raithwall. He took the sword and cut the Cryst.  In Final Fantasy XII: Revenant Wings, the Occuria were revealed to have played a part in the sealing of the Purvama Lemurés long ago, which by the present time became a land of legend that many Sky Pirates sought for its Auracite.
Revenant Wings also introduced beings known as the "Yarhi". Also known as "Espers" to those on Ivalice, they are powerful entities created from anima, spiritual energy. Through certain elements, such as Auracite or Mist, the Yarhi can assume physical form until they are defeated in battle. They are summoned by the wielders of Auracite and obey their every command. Fourteen such Yarhi appeared in Final Fantasy XII; the first thirteen being the Lucavi from Final Fantasy Tactics which are referred as the "Scions of darkness", magical beings created by Occuria with great strength and intelligence. Led by Ultima, they eventually rebelled for various reasons and engaged themselves in a war dubbed the Thousand Year War against the gods; but they were eventually defeated. Consequently, the gods bound their existence with the Glyph of the Beast, trapping them within the Mist. Any who controls the Glyph in turn controls the Scion, allowing them to operate as summoned creatures. The Fourteenth is the legendary swordsman Gilgamesh, who collects the swords of those he defeats in battle. While most fight, few like Cu Sith and the Sahaguin Namingway offer aid in other ways. Also, the viera job "Summoner" can call and use the powers of mythological gods like Kirin, Shiva, and many others.

Reception

Final Fantasy Tactics sold 824,671 copies in Japan in the first half of 1997.
Editorials from the gaming website RPGamer. One editorial noted that it was a controversial move by the developers, as if the church institution "in fact worships a demon, and is evil from its god on down".
The Ivalice of Final Fantasy XII is considered a Japanese take on the Star Wars galaxy by a GameSpot reviewer (in turn, Star Wars was considered an American take on Japanese jidaigeki samurai films, specifically Akira Kurosawa's The Hidden Fortress). 
Eurogamer praised the "beautiful architecture and interaction of the various races" in Final Fantasy XII and noted that there was a "melancholy feeling" to "wandering the barren wastes" of Ivalice.








