[[Flowserve]]

CATEGORIES: Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Companies based in Irving, Texas, Companies established in 1997, Manufacturing companies, Pump manufacturers

The Flowserve Corporation is an American multinational corporation and one of the largest suppliers of industrial and environmental machinery such as pumps, valves, end face mechanical seals, automation, and services to the power, oil, gas, chemical and other industries. Flowserve sells products and offers aftermarket services to engineering and construction firms, original equipment manufacturers, distributors and end users. The Flowserve brand named originated in 1997 with a merger of BW/IP and Durco International.
On August 21, 2007, Flowserve Corporation was recognized by CIO magazine as one of the 2007 CIO 100 Award Honorees.2007 Winner Profile Flowserve Corporation, CIO Magazine, 21 August 2007. ()

History

Flowserve heritage dates back to the 1790 founding of Simpson & Thompson by Thomas Simpson, later to become Worthington Simpson Pumps, one of the companies that became part of BW/IP. The company was created in 1997 with the merger of two fluid motion and control companies – BW/IP and Durco International.
Acquisitions include HydroTechnik Olomouc in 2006,Flowserve.com Calder Ag in 2009Flowserve.Flowserve. Also in March 2013 it acquired one plant from L&T Valves.

Products

Flowserve comprises over 48 fluid motion and control products.  They are in alphabetical order: ACEC Centrifugal, Accord, Aldrich, Anchor Darling, Argus, Atomac, Automax, BW Seals, Byron Jackson, Cameron, Calder, DuraClear, Durametallic, Durco, Edward, Five Star Seals, Flowserve, Gestra, IDP, Interseal, Jeumont-Schneider, Kammer, Limitorque, Logix, McCANNA/MARPAC, NAF, NAVAL, Noble Alloy, Norbro, Nordstrom, PMV, Pac-Seal, Pacific, Pacific Wietz, Pleuger, Polyvalve, Schmidt Armaturen, Scienco, Serck Audco, Sier-Bath Rotary, TKL, United Centrifugal, Valtek, Valtek EMA, Vogt, Western Land Roller, Wilson-Snyder, Worcester Controls, Worthington.

Acquisitions

Flowserve has grown through mergers and acquisitions.

Industries served

Corporate governance

In July 2005, Flowserve underwent a leadership change.  The board of directors announced Lewis M. Kling, COO at the time, as the new president, CEO, and a member of the board of directors.  On May 30, 2007 Kling's employment agreement was extended until February 28, 2010. Kling announced his retirement at the end of the upon agreement in February 2010. Kling was elected vice chairman of the board effective October 1, 2009. Mark Blinn succeeded Kling  as CEO. Previously Mark Blinn served as CFO from 2004 to October 1, 2009 when he officially took over as CEO and vice chairman of the board.com
Current members of the board of directors of Flowserve are: Mark A. Blinn, Kevin E. Sheehan, Christopher A. Bartlett (DBA), Gayla J. Delly, Roger L. Fix, John R.  Friedery, Joseph E. Harlan, Diane C. Harris, Michael F. Johnston, Lewis M. Kling, Rick J. Mills, Charles M. Rampacek, James O. Rollans and William C. Rusnack.

Educational services

Flowserve has five training centers for students around the world to attend.  They are in Irving, TX, Kalamazoo, MI, Houston, TX, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, and Desio, Italy.  The learning resource center (LRC) in Irving is  with classrooms, static labs, and power labs with complete pumping systems.
The LRC in Italy is the most recent, opening on April 20, 2010.Flowserve Opens New State-of-the-Art Learning Resource Center in Desio, Italy

Environmental efforts

To support the Hurricane Katrina disaster relief, Flowserve donated $50,000 and matched up to $50,000 in employee donations to the Red Cross according to a CNN article.

Restatements

On Feb 3, 2004, Flowserve announced restatement of its financial statements for aggregate estimated pretax adjustments for 2003. The restatement was approximately $11 million.
On Oct 26, 2004, Flowserve determined to restate its previously announced financial results for the second quarter of 2004, including certain post-closing adjustments and recently identified out-of-period expenses. The restatement had no impact on net cash balance.
On Feb 7, 2005, Flowserve confirmed that it would restate its 2000 through first quarter 2004 financial statements, resulting from an ongoing comprehensive review of the company's accounts. The restatement reduced net income for the periods restated.






