[[Aaron Livesy]]

CATEGORIES: Emmerdale characters, Fictional gay males, Fictional mechanics, Fictional characters introduced in 2003

Aaron Livesy is a fictional character from the British ITV soap opera Emmerdale, played by Danny Miller, who took over the role from Danny Webb in 2008. He made his first on-screen appearance on 24 December 2003. Aaron is the son of Chastity Dingle and Gordon Livesy. His storylines have included being involved with the criminal McFarlane family, making a pass at his best friend, Adam Barton, coming to terms with his homosexuality, and his relationship with Jackson Walsh. In November 2011, Miller announced that he would be leaving Emmerdale. He made his final appearance on 5 April 2012. Two years later, it was announced Miller had agreed to reprise his role and Aaron will return later in the year.
Storylines== 

2003–06

When Aaron was young, his parents, Gordon Livesy (Gordon Fletcher) and Chas Dingle (Lucy Pargeter), separated and Chas left her son to live with his father and Gordon's second wife, Sandra (Janet Bamford). Aaron visits his mother in Emmerdale, where he tells her that he resents her for not raising him and explains that he feels that she abandoned him. The two begin to bond, before Aaron returns home to his father. Aaron returns to visit Chas, but she reprimands him after she catches him talking to other people about her behind her back. Louise Appleton (Emily Symons) witnesses Chas slapping Aaron and tells Gordon when he arrives to collect his son. Gordon tells Chas that her relationship with her son is over and that Aaron will not visit her again. Despite this, Aaron returns to Emmerdale several months later, staying longer than expected as he came into contact with a person who had German measles and Sandra was pregnant. Aaron returns home to his father and his stepmother, after telling Chas that while she was in the Army, her partner Carl King (Tom Lister) had a one night stand with her cousin, Del Dingle (Hayley Tamaddon).

2008–12

Aaron returns to the village two years later when arrested by Ross Kirk (Samuel Anderson) for possession of drugs. He is cautioned and meets his mother. Aaron later runs away and Gordon reveals that he threw Aaron out for hitting Sandra. Chas's family learn that Aaron is a drug courier for the McFarlanes and they bring him to Emmerdale, after Gordon refuses to take him back. Aaron clashes with Victoria Sugden (Isabel Hodgins), but they eventually become friends and Aaron helps rescue her when she falls into a frozen lake. After Aaron convinces his cousin, Belle Dingle (Eden Taylor-Draper), to take the day off school and is caught stealing, her mother Lisa (Jane Cox) throws him out. So he and Chas move into Smithy Cottage with Paddy Kirk (Dominic Brunt), until he catches Aaron selling drugs. Aaron gets a job at the garage.
Aaron begins dating Victoria and loses his virginity to her but they break up when he discovers her relationship with her foster-brother, Daz Eden. Aaron then dates Holly Barton (Sophie Powles) and make friends with her brother, Adam (Adam Thomas). When Aaron ignites a bale of hay at the Bartons' farm, Holly's father, John (James Thornton), hits him and locks him in a stable. Aaron reports John to the police but drops the charges. Aaron discovers that Chas has resumed her relationship with Carl and he tells her that he wants nothing more to do with her. After Aaron and Adam are involved in a run-off-road collision, Aaron tries to kiss Adam. Aaron is embarrassed and tells Adam that he misunderstood the situation. Aaron sleeps with Holly and Adam tells his family that he thinks Aaron is gay. Adam tells Aaron that he is fine with him being gay, but he does not want his sister to be used. Aaron denies it but Holly ends their relationship.

Aaron visits a gay bar and meets Jackson Walsh (Marc Silcock). He leaves his phone behind and Jackson returns it. Aaron returns to the bar to meet Jackson. When Paddy discovers that Aaron visited a gay bar, he asks Aaron if he is gay and Aaron attacks him. Aaron apologises and admits that he is gay but rejects his sexuality. Jackson comes to the village and he and Aaron talk. They go to kiss, but are interrupted. After a night out at the bar, Jackson and Aaron kiss. Jackson comes to The Woolpack and when he touches Aaron's arm, Aaron punches him. Aaron is charged with ABH and told he will stand trial. Aaron tries to kill himself by inhaling car fumes, but his uncle, Cain Dingle (Jeff Hordley), and Adam drag him outside. During his court case, Aaron admits that he is gay. Aaron gets community service. He meets Wayne Dobson (Gary Hanks), who taunts him about his sexuality. Jackson witnesses Aaron being threatened by Wayne and protects him. After talking things through, Aaron and Jackson begin a relationship.
Aaron sells a clocked car to Mickey Hall (Lee Oakes). Aaron uses his dog, Clyde, to try to intimidate Mickey, but Mickey sets his own dog on Clyde, seriously injuring him, so Clyde has to be put down. Jackson and Aaron argue and Jackson tells Aaron that he loves him. Aaron believe things are becoming too serious for him and the pair do not talk for days. Aaron and Jackson invite Paddy and Marlon Dingle (Mark Charnock) on a night out. Jackson is hurt when Aaron does not admit he loves him too and after realising that Aaron will not change his violent tendencies, Jackson drives off. Aaron tries to ring him and later finds Jackson has crashed his van onto a railway and has been hit by a train. Jackson is permanently paralysed from the shoulders down and Aaron tells him that he will not walk again as Jackson's mother, Hazel (Pauline Quirke), cannot do it.
Jackson blames Aaron for the crash and they break up. Aaron then refuses to see Jackson, even when Hazel asks him to. Aaron and Jackson get back together and Aaron helps Jackson and Hazel move into Dale Head. Jackson's mood starts to deteriorate and he pushes Aaron away. Aaron meets Flynn Buchanan (Ryan Prescott) and he feels like he is cheating on Jackson. Aaron tells Flynn about Jackson and that he cannot forget about him. Aaron then tells Jackson that he loves him. Aaron watches Jackson's video diary and is shocked to hear Jackson admit that he wants to die, he tells Hazel and they try to work out how to help Jackson. Aaron confesses to Jackson that both he and Hazel have watched his video diary. Aaron and Hazel then become determined to show Jackson that he has a life worth living. Jackson is admitted to hospital with a chest infection and it strengthens his resolve to end his life. Jackson, Aaron and Hazel go to Whitby and Aaron books Jackson on a tandem skydive. Aaron thinks Jackson has changed his mind about dying, but he has not. Aaron is shocked to learn that Jackson has managed to convince Hazel to help him end his life. Jackson later promises Aaron that nothing is going to happen until Aaron is ready. Jackson breaks up with Aaron to make the process easier and Aaron agrees to help Jackson end his life. Jackson tells his mother and Aaron how grateful he is for their support and when Hazel cannot give Jackson the pills, Aaron takes the cup and gives it to Jackson. Jackson then dies and Aaron runs through the village. He then tells Adam that Jackson is dead and what he did.
The police investigate Jackson's death and arrest Aaron for murder. Aaron is forced to miss the funeral as he is due in court. He is released on bail and he goes to Jackson's grave to say goodbye. At his trial, Aaron is found not guilty of murder. However, Aaron blames himself for Jackson's death and he starts lashing out at people. Aaron breaks into Carl's house with the intention of getting arrested, but Carl does not press charges. Aaron moves into The Woolpack with Chas and begins self harming. During a drive, Aaron starts speeding and crashes the car. Chas suffers minor injuries. When Sean Spencer (Luke Roskell) steals money from the garage, Aaron chases him and collapses. He recovers and Chas tries to get him to open up to her about his problems. She later catches Aaron self harming and he starts attending counselling sessions. He also takes a break from the village for a while.
Aaron meets Ed Roberts (Lloyd Everitt) when he brings a minibus to the garage to be fixed. However, when Aaron becomes involved in an argument with Adam, Ed leaves. He later returns with his rugby team mates and Aaron fixes the minibus, but Ed drives off without paying the bill. Ed later returns to pay Aaron and when he brings his car to the garage for Aaron to look, he gives him his phone number. Aaron arranges to go for a drink with Ed, but he cancels to help Adam fix a roof. Ed turns up with two of his teammates to help out. Ed initially mistakes Aaron and Adam's friendship for something more, but Aaron corrects him and they kiss. They go on their first date to Bar West, but Ed leaves early when he finds out about Jackson. Aaron becomes angry with Ed and deletes his phone number. Ed comes to visit Aaron and he apologises. Aaron reveals his scars from self harming to Ed and they spend the night together. Ed tells Aaron that he has been signed for a French rugby club and is leaving for France in four weeks. He asks Aaron to come with him, but he turns him down. Aaron spots a fire in the garage and helps Adam save Cain, who had become trapped. Aaron then learns Adam deliberately started the fire and not wanting his friend to be sent to prison, Aaron tells the police that he was responsible for the fire. He is released on bail, but on the day of his court hearing, Aaron goes to France with Ed.

Character development

Casting

Jake Roche auditioned for the role of Aaron, however, it was actor Danny Webb who was eventually cast. Miller admitted in an interview with Sue Crawford of The People that he would have quit acting for good if he had not landed the role.

Characterisation

Violent, angry and always in trouble, the character quickly established himself as the 'baddest' of bad boys. Describing Aaron, Lucy Pargeter (Chas Dingle) said "Aaron's an absolute pain in the arse for Chas. Danny Miller, who plays him, is brilliant. He gives so much and he's only young".

Sexuality

A high profile storyline for the character was when he began to question his sexual orientation. As the storyline progressed, Aaron was seen struggling to come to terms with his sexuality, before admitting the truth to his friend and guardian Paddy Kirk (Dominic Brunt).
Emmerdale producer Gavin Blyth explained the gay plotline to Miller saying, "There are hundreds of thousands of teenage lads out there who are struggling with it as we speak - they're sexually confused". He also added "Aaron keeps it in so much because he's worried about what people think of him". He said "You'd never think yourself to be in the position that these two are in. Knowing myself and knowing Adam and his long-term girlfriend, he's the last person you'd expect in that position."

Departure

On 18 November 2011, Miller announced he would be leaving Emmerdale in 2012. The actor said "They keep chopping and changing it - I think because they want to make it quite impactful and dramatic. I hope it's not leaving in the back of a cab, but there's great storyliners and a great team there."
In February 2012, Susan Hill of the Daily Star reported Aaron would exit the village in "heartbreaking scenes" after turning down the chance to leave with his new man, Ed Roberts (Lloyd Everitt). Aaron made his last screen appearance on 5 April 2012.
In honour of his departure, the cast and crew made a parody video for the song "Written in the Stars" by Tinie Tempah.

Return

On 4 April 2014, Daniel Kilkelly from Digital Spy reported that Miller would be returning to Emmerdale. Kilkelly said that while producers had yet to officially announce the news, a show insider had confirmed Miller's return. Aaron will make his on-screen return later in the year.

Reception

For his portrayal of Aaron, Miller was nominated for the "Best Newcomer Award" at the Inside Soap Awards in 2009.
A writer for Holy Soap said Aaron's most memorable moment was "His realisation about his sexuality and the emotional scenes where he told Paddy the truth."








