[[Transnational organized crime]]

CATEGORIES: Transnational organized crime, Crime by type, Organized crime by country, Organized crime, Sociocultural globalization, Globalization issues

Transnational organized crime (TOC or transnational crime) is organized crime coordinated across national borders, involving groups or networks of individuals working in more than one country to plan and execute illegal business ventures.ncjrs.aspx?ID=184773 In order to achieve their goals, these criminal groups utilize systematic violence and corruption. The most commonly seen transnational organized crimes are money laundering; human smuggling; cyber crime; and trafficking of humans, drugs, weapons, endangered species, body parts, or nuclear material.

Effects

Transnational organized crime is widely opposed on the basis of a number of negative effects. It can undermine democracy, disrupt free markets, drain national assets, and inhibit the development of stable societies. In doing so, it has been argued, national and international criminal groups threaten the security of all nations. These transnational crime networks often victimize on governments that are unstable or not powerful enough to prevent them, conducting illegal activities that provide them with immeasurable profits. Transnational organized crimes result in interrupting peace and stability of nations worldwide, often using bribery, violence or terror to meet their needs.

Enforcement

United Nations

Transnational Organized Crime is one of "The Ten Threats" warned by the High Level Threat Panel of the United Nations.
The UN has taken a stand against this threat with the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime which has been adopted to fight against transnational organized crime, with the recognition of UN Member States that this is a serious and growing problem that can only be solved through close international cooperation, since November 2000. The Ad Hoc Committee established by the United Nations General Assembly is to deal with this problem by taking a series of measures against transnational organized crime. These include the creation of domestic criminal offences to combat the problem, and the adoption of new, sweeping frameworks for mutual legal assistance, extradition, law-enforcement cooperation and technical assistance and training.

United States

The White House in the United States published a strategy to combat transnational organized crime in 2011 
First of all, by having multijurisdictional task forces which combine investigative resources from several agencies, its strength and sophistication of a task force's capabilities will be stronger than any other single agency.whitehouse.
To illustrate further, Operation Trifecta, a 19-month transnational investigation led by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, involved 9 Federal agencies and 67 State and local law enforcement agencies from 8 States. In 2003, it led to the arrests of some 240 individuals charged with transnational drug trafficking. 
Secondly, transnational organized crimes often occur on local streets. State and local agencies should put effort in trying to discover patterns or characteristics of transnational crimes. If there are any incidents of offenders in overseas contacts, association of foreign nationals, false documents, and trafficking of large amount of money.
Last but not least, both state and local law enforcement agencies should be aware of how advanced the means of communications are in the 21st century to facilitate transnational organized crimes. It is essential that these agencies become more familiar with the devices that are involved in transnational crimes as illicit communications. Criminals can communicate across international boundaries very fast, thus law enforcement agencies ought to keep alert and improve their ability to share intelligence without having any limits.treasury.aspx
Law enforcement agencies such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation are employed by nation-states to counteract international organized crime. Serious international crime, such as crimes against humanity, may be investigated by the International Criminal Court, but it does not have the power to take suspects into custody, instead relying on the support of law enforcement and military force in relevant countries.
According to Louise I. Shelley, Director of the Terrorism, Transnational Crime and Corruption (TraCCC) Center at George Mason University,
It is said that policing objectives in the United States must extend beyond national borders to seek out and target this type of crime. Only through international collaboration and information exchange can the United States develop effective protocol and policies for countering these crimes and mount a serious opposition

Russia

"Transnational criminal rings are becoming more and more powerful and universal, and their mobility is growing. The means and resources of any state are not enough to seriously harm them." 
—Yuriy A. Voronin, Professor of Criminal Law, Urals State Law Academy, Ekaterinburg,  Russia 

Interpol

Although the organization Interpol exists to coordinate intelligence efforts between national law enforcement agencies, it is not an international police force, and indeed no such international law enforcement body with universal jurisdiction exists. 






