[[Royal Barge Procession]]

CATEGORIES: Thai monarchy, Thai culture, Royal barges of Thailand, Ceremonies in Thailand

Thailand's Royal Barge Procession (; RTGS: Krabuan Phayuhayattra Chonlamak) is a ceremony of both religious and royal significance which has been taking place for nearly 700 years.  The exquisitely crafted Royal Barges are a blend of craftsmanship and traditional Thai art.  The Royal Barge Procession takes place rarely, typically coinciding with only the most significant cultural and religious events.  During the reign of King Bhumibol Adulyadej, spanning over 60 years, the Procession has only occurred 16 times.
The Royal Barge Procession, in the present, consists of 52 barges: 51 historical Barges, and the Royal Barge, the Narai Song Suban, which King Rama IX built in 1994. It is the only Barge built during King Bhumibol's reign. These barges are manned by 2,082 oarsmen.  The Procession proceeds down the Chao Phraya River, from the Wasukri Royal Landing Place in Khet Dusit, Bangkok, passes the Temple of the Emerald Buddha, the Grand Palace, Wat Po (, Temple of the Dawn).

History

Thailand's Royal Barge Procession most likely began during the Ayutthaya period in the 14th century.  Western visitors witnessed and wrote about the "immense procession with 200 boats" upon their arrival in Thailand in the 18th century.  During the processions, the oarsmen were kept in rhythm by the beating of drums, with accompanying music.  This traditional boat song was written by Prince Dhamma Dibes of the late Ayutthaya period.  
In 1767, Burma invaded Thailand, and amid the destruction, hundreds of the barges were burned and destroyed.   General Taksin rallied the Thais and established the new capital at Thonburi.  During his short 15 year reign, Taksin ordered the reconstruction of the barge fleet, and used a fleet of 115 barges to carry a revered figure of Buddha to his new capital.  
Chao Phaya Chakri succeeded King Taksin, and moved the capital to the eastern side of the river to what is now known as Bangkok. Chao Phaya Chakri, founder of the Chakri Dynasty, ruled as King Buddha Yodfah (Rama I) and began the Royal Kathin Ceremony Procession. The Kathin Ceremony is a presentation of Kathin robes and earns merit by honouring and supporting the Buddhist Monks.  
Soon after his accession to the throne in 1782, King Rama I ordered construction of the Royal Barge Si Suphannahong.  The Si Suphannahong was the principle Royal Barge for more than a century.  In 1911 King Rama VI launched its successor, also named Suphannahong.
The Prince of Nakhon Sawan, during the reign of Rama V, regulated the formations, which became the standard "Major" and "Minor" formations used today.  
Processions took place occasionally until the absolute monarchy ended in 1932. They were not resumed until the celebration of the 25th century of the Buddhist Era in 1957. In 1959, Bhumibol Adulyadej revived the Royal Barge Procession to present the Royal Kathin.

Modern Processions

Occurrences

In the reign of the present king, Bhumibol Adulyadej, 16 royal barge processions have been conducted:

=Major Sailings=

|url= 
|title= 
The Crown Prince to Travel by Royal Barge to Wat Arun for the Royal Kathin Ceremony 
|author=  Government Public Relations
|authorlink= 
|date= 26 October 2012
|format= |work=  Inside Thailand
|publisher= Foreign Office, The Government Public Relations Department, Office of the Prime Minister
|accessdate=  November 11, 2012
|archiveurl= 
|archivedate= 2012-11-11
|quote=   His Royal Highness Crown Prince Maha Vajiralongkorn will represent His Majesty the King in traveling by royal barge to Wat Arun, or the Temple of Dawn, for the Royal Kathin Ceremony.
}}[/ref]

=Additional sailings (Royal Kathin)=

Organization

The Royal Barge Procession is conducted in one of two formations, the Major and the Minor.  The Major formation, also known as the Major Battle Formation (Petch Phuang Major Battle Formation) dates from the time of King Narai.  This formation is used for the more significant events, such as The Royal Kathin Ceremony, the movement of the sacred image of Buddha, or important occasions of state.  The Petch Phuang Formation is arranged into five columns, with the Royal Barges in the center, and two rows of war barges on each side.  In the Minor formation, there are three columns, the Royal Barges in the middle, and a single row on each side.

Major Barge Procession

Arranged in five rows. 

Minor Barge Procession

The Barges

The Royal Barges

The Royal Barge Suphannahong ("the Golden Swan" or the "Phoenix") was built in 1911 during the reign of Rama VI with a bow resembling a mythical swan, or hong, adorned with gold lacquer and glass jewels, with a crystalline ball and tassle dangling from her mouth. This 46-meter craft was carved from a single trunk of teakwood, and was launched 13 November 1911.  There is a golden pavilion on board to house the king and his immediate royal family. 
The World Ship Trust, in 1992, named the Royal Barge Suphannahong a Maritime World Heritage.worldshiptrust.html Award Number 8, June 4th, 1992
The original Royal Barge Anantanakkharat ("Ananta, the King of Serpents") was built during the reign of Rama III (King Nangklao). It was used as the primary Royal Barge of Rama IV (King Mongkut). The current Anantanakkharat was built during the Reign of Rama VI (King Vajiravudh), and launched on 14 April 1914. The bow is carved into the 7-headed Nakkharat, the mystical snake-like creature, in gold lacquer and glass jewels.
The Royal Barge Anekkachatphuchong ("the Variety of Serpents") is the oldest of the four Royal Barges, being the actual barge built in the late 19th century during the reign of Rama V (King Chulalongkorn). While no mythical figure is readily visible on the bow, numerous small ornamental Naga figures are carved into the bow.
The Royal Barge Narai Song Suban Ratchakan Thi Kao or The Royal Barge Narai Song Suban HM King Rama IX ("God Narayana on his carrier, Garuda") is the only barge built during the reign of Bhumibol Adulyadej, who laid the keel in 1994. It was built  under commission by the Royal Thai Navy and the Thai Department of Fine Arts and was launched 6 May 1996 to coincide with the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of Bhumibol Adulyadej's accession to the throne.
The names of the four Royal Barges are composed in a consistent rhyme: "Suphannahong", "Narai Song Suban", "Anantanakkharat" and "Anekkachatphuchong".

The Other Barges

=Escort barges=

Image:Asura Paksi bow. hier
Image:Krut Tret Traichak bow.
Image:Sukrip Khrong Mueang bow.
Image:Ekachai Lao Thong bow.

Escort barges consist of five different classes of barges, totalling 12 barges. The bow is decorated with either a painting or a figurehead of a mythical creature.
Ekachai Class Barges are the two barges with a gold painting of a horned creature that is half-nāga half-dragon, Ekachai Hern How and Ekachai Lao Thong. They might be used to tow Suphannahongse in case of a strong current.  Unlike other escort barges, Ekachai class barges are not equipped with cannon. The two barges can be distinguished by the slightly different pattern.
Krut Class Barges are the two barges with garuda figureheads with nagas caught on their wings and feet. The garuda on Krut Hern Het is red while the one on Krut Tret Traichak is pink. 
Krabi Class Barges consist of four barges with Vanara figureheads, Pali Rang Thawip, Sukrip Khrong Mueang, Krabi Ran Ron Rap, and Krabi Prap Mueang Man. The bow of Pali Rang Thawip depicts Vali, the elder brother of Sugriva on Sukrip Khrong Mueang, rulers of the Kishkindha Kingdom. Both have crowns on their heads with the body color green and red respectively.  Krabi Ran Ron Rap and Krabi Prap Mueang Man feature uncrowned warriors of Vanara Nilaphat (black body) and Hanuman (white body), respectively. 
Asura Class Barges consists of two barges with half-bird, half-ogre figureheads. The bow on Asura Vayuphak has an indigo body in a purple coat, while Asura Paksi has a green body in a purple (front) and green (back) coat. 
Suea Class Barges are the barges with the painting of a tiger, Suea Thayan Chon and Suea Kamron Sin. The names of the barges are clearly written on the bow. 

=Lesser escort barges=

The largest number of barges in the fleet is the Lesser Escorts and Attendants such as Ruea Dang, Ruea Saeng, Police barges and Drum barges. They have no figurehead and no cannon.

Preservation

The present fleet of barges was restored during the reign of King Bhumibol Adulyadej, as some had suffered damage in bombing raids on Bangkok during World War II. The dock that stored them, located in the Bangkok Noi district, became the National Museum of Royal Barge. Only eight important barges, including all four Royal Barges, are displayed in the museum due to limits of space. The remainder are kept at Wasukri Pier, next to the National Library of Thailand. All are stored out of the water to prevent deterioration. They return to Chao Phaya River only for a Royal Barge Procession.



Notes and references




