[[Renée Richards]]

CATEGORIES: 1934 births, American female tennis players, American LGBT military personnel, American physicians, Horace Mann School alumni, Jewish American sportspeople, Jewish tennis players, American autobiographers, LGBT Jews, LGBT sportspeople from the United States, Living people, Sportspeople from New York City, Tennis people from New York, Transgender and transsexual sportspeople, Transgender and transsexual military personnel, United States Navy officers, University of Rochester alumni, Yale Bulldogs tennis players, LGBT tennis players, LGBT people from New York

Renée Richards (born August 19, 1934) is an American ophthalmologist, author and former professional tennis player. In 1975, Richards underwent sex reassignment surgery. She was denied entry into the 1976 US Open by the United States Tennis Association, citing an unprecedented women-born-women policy. She disputed the ban, and the New York Supreme Court ruled in her favor in 1977. This was a landmark decision in favor of transsexual rights."Renée Richards Documentary Debuts at Tribeca Film Festival". April 22, 2011. Through her fight to play tennis as a women, she challenged gender roles and became a role model and spokesperson for the transgender community 

Early life

Richards was born Richard Raskind on August 19, 1934 in New York City, and was raised, as she put it, as "a nice Jewish boy". She attended Horace Mann School and excelled as the wide receiver for the football team, the pitcher for the baseball team, and on the tennis and swim teams. Her baseball skills even got her scouted by the New York Yankees, but she decided to focus on tennis. After high school she attended Yale University where she was captain of the Men's Tennis team. She was considered by some to be one of the best college tennis players in the country. After graduating from Yale she then went to the University of Rochester Medical Center where she specialized in ophthalmology. She graduated from Rochester in 1959 and then served a 2-year internship at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York. After her internship she served two years of residency at the Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat Hospital in New York. She played competitive tennis for a while and during the time in which she was moonlighting she was ranked sixth out of the top twenty males over thirty-five. After her internship and residency she joined the United States Navy to continue her medical training and played tennis for the Navy during her time there. While playing for the navy she won both the singles and doubles at the All Navy Championship. During this time she was ranked as high as 4th in the region. She had a very lethal and recognizable left hand serve that followed her everywhere and latter led to the discovery of Renée.

Transitioning sex

Beginning sometime during college Raskind began cross-dressing, which at the time was considered to be a perversion and transsexualism was classified as a form of insanity. Raskind named the female alter ego Renée, which is French for reborn. Raskind's struggle with sexuality created sexual confusion, depression, and suicidal tendencies. Raskind began seeing Dr. Charles Ihlenfeld who specialized in endocrinology, transsexualism, and sexual reassignment. Upon seeing Dr. Ihlenfeld Raskind began getting hormone injections with the long-term hope for a life change. In the mid-1960s Raskind traveled in Europe dressed as a woman, intending to go to North Africa to see Georges Burou, a famous gynecological surgeon at Clinique Parc in Casablanca, Morocco, regarding sex reassignment surgery; however, Raskind ultimately decided against it and returned to New York.  There, Raskind married a woman, Barbara, whom she divorced after five years of marriage and together they had one son. After hormone treatment, extensive psychological counseling, and sex reassignment surgery, Renée finally became a reality. After surgery, Renée went to Newport Beach, California and started working as an ophthalmologist with another doctor.

Court case

Richards applied to play in the  US Open and was denied the right to play in 1976. The United States Tennis Association (USTA), the Women's Tennis Association (WTA), and the United States Open Committee (USOC) required all women competitors take a gender verification test called the  Barr body test that tested their chromosomes.. Women, media and sport: challenging gender values. Thousand Oaks u.a.: Sage, 1994 Richards refused to take the test, and so was bared from USTA tournaments. She wasn't allowed to play in the US Open, Wimbledon, or the Italian Open in the summer of 1976. She then decided to sue the USTA claiming she was being discriminated against and that she had the right to play and her case went all the way to the New York Supreme Court. Judge Alfred M. Ascione heard her case. Her case was focused around discrimination based on gender, which violated the New York Human Rights Law. Richards felt that participating in the tournament would constitute "an acceptance of her right to be a women.". Some of the USTA members felt that everyone would start undergoing sex changes to try and be successful in women's tennis. Sports Illustrated called Renee Richards an "extraordinary spectacle: and characterized reactions to her as "varying from astonishment to suspicion, sympathy, resentment, and more often than not, utter confusion. The USOC stated, "there is competitive advantage for a male who has undergone a sex change surgery as a result of physical training and development as a male (Richards V. USTA, 1977 p.269)." Richards finally agreed to take the test and her results were ambiguous, but she refused to take it again and therefore was bared from play. Judge Ascione ruled that the USTA intentionally discriminated against Richards and on August 16, 1977 the court granted Richards an injunction against the USTA and the USOC which allowed her to play in the 1977 US Open. The court ruled: "This person is now a female" and that requiring Richards to pass the  Barr body test was "grossly unfair, discriminatory and inequitable, and a violation of her rights (Richards V. USTA, 1977 p.272)." This ruling allowed her to play in the 1977 Women's US Open where she lost to Virginia Wade in the first round, but made it to the finals in doubles.

Tennis career after transitioning

After moving to California, Richards played in regional competitions for her local club, The John Wayne Tennis Club, under the name Renée Clark.  In the summer of 1976 she enter the Lahoya Tennis Tournament Championships where she crushed the competition and her unique and lethal left hand serve was recognized.  Her long time friend Gene Scott then invited her to play in his professional tennis tournament the Tennis Week Open in South Orange, New Jersey. The USTA and the WTA then withdrew their sanction and organized another tournament and 25 of the 32 participants withdrew from the tournament.    This was just the beginning of the issues Richards would encounter in trying to play professional women's tennis that eventually lead to her suing the USTA and winning. Richards played professionally from 1977 to 1981 when she retired at age 47.    She was ranked as high as 20th overall (in February 1979), and her highest ranking at the end of a year was 22nd (in 1977). Her first professional event as a female was the 1977 US Open. Her greatest successes on court were reaching the doubles final at her first U.S. Open in 1977, with Betty Ann Stuart — the pair lost a close match to Martina Navratilova and Betty Stöve — and winning the 35-and-over women's singles. Richards was twice a semifinalist in mixed doubles (with Ilie Năstase) at the U.S. Open. In 1979, she defeated Nancy Richey for the 35 and over singles title at the U.S. Open. Richards posted wins over Hana Mandlíková, Sylvia Hanika, Virginia Ruzici, and Pam Shriver. She later coached Navratilova to two Wimbledon wins and was inducted into the USTA Eastern Tennis Hall of Fame in 2000.

Retirement

After 4 years of playing tennis, she decided to return to her medical practice, which she moved to Park Avenue in New York. She then became the surgeon director of ophthalmology and head of the eye-muscle clinic at the Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat Hospital. In addition she served on the editorial board of the Journal of Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus. Renée no lives in a small town north of New York City with her companion Arleen Larzelere. Renée still goes and watches the sport she enjoyed all her life, tennis, at the US Open.

Movies and books

In 1983, Richards published an autobiography, Second Serve. "Second Serve: the Renée Richards Story". New York City, New York, USA: Stein and Day, March 1983,  ISBN 0812828976 In 2007, Richards published a second autobiography, No Way Renée: The Second Half of My Notorious Life, in which she describes regret over the type of fame that came with her transsexuality—she said in 2007 that she did not regret undergoing the sex reassignment process in itself. Transsexual pioneer Renee Richards regrets fame. Reuters. Retrieved February 21, 2011. Richards's first autobiography served as the basis for the film Second Serve. Cole. Women, sport, and culture. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, 1994. The film was one of the anchor films of the 2011 Tribeca Film Festival and the documentary premiered on ESPN on October 4, 2011.

Family

Richard grew up in an all-American home in Forest Hills Queens in New York City.. Sports justice: the law & the business of sports. Boston, Mass.: Northeastern University Press, 2010. Film. Directed by Eric Drath. New York: ESPN Films, 2011. Richards' father, David Raskind, was an orthopedic surgeon, and her mother was one of the first female psychiatrists in the United States in addition to being a professor at Columbia University. Because of her parent's career choices, it was expected that she would go to medical school as well. Her sister, Josephine, was a tomboy when they were young and was never very accepting of the choices that Renée made for herself and still continues to refer to Renée as "he" and "my brother". Richard was married to a model, Barbra Mole, and they were married in June 1970 and were divorced in 1975. Richards' son, Nicholas Raskind, was born in 1972 and has never really forgiven Renée for leaving when he was a child. Nicholas has developed addiction problems and has struggled to hold down a job, and Renée feels as though it is her fault.

Grand Slam singles tournament timeline

Men's singles

(As Richard Raskind)

Women's singles

(As Renée Richards)
A = did not participate in the tournament.
SR = the ratio of the number of singles tournaments won to the number of those tournaments played.
Note: The Australian Open was held twice in 1977, in January and December.

Grand Slam doubles tournament timeline

A = did not participate in the tournament.
SR = the ratio of the number of singles tournaments won to the number of those tournaments played.
Note: The Australian Open was held twice in 1977, in January and December.

Grand Slam mixed doubles tournament timeline








