[[Christian Boussus]]

CATEGORIES: 1908 births, 2003 deaths, Australian Championships (tennis) champions, French male tennis players, People from Hyères, IBM employees, Grand Slam (tennis) champions in mixed doubles

Christian Boussus (5 March 1908 – August 2003) was a left-handed French tennis player who found success in the 1920s and 1930s.

Tennis career

He started playing amateur tennis in the late 1920s by entering one of his first tournaments at the age of 17 in the 1926 edition of The French Covered Courts tournament in doubles, which he won by teaming up with French veteran René Lacoste.
He was defeated in the finals of the 1931 French Open by Jean Borotra. In 1932, he and Marcel Bernard were defeated in the doubles finals of the French Open by Henri Cochet and Jacques Brugnon. He played twice the Australian Championships, in 1928 and 1935, and won the mixed doubles that year, his only Grand Slam title. He competed in the French Open nineteen times between 1927 and 1953, which is the third most appearances in history right after Fabrice Santoro (20) and Francois Jauffret (20). He also won twice the German championships in Hamburg and the British Hard Court Championships on one occasion. He was ranked number one French tennis player four times in a row in the consecutive years of 1934, 1935, 1936 and 1937.
Boussus was ranked World No. 9 in 1930 and 1935 by A. Wallis Myers of The Daily Telegraph, and the European No. 6 in 1931 (the latter by "Züricher Sport" newspaper)."Moody, Perry Rated Tops By British Expert", Reading Eagle, 17 October 1935.

Playing style

At the peak of his career in 1932 his play was observed by Great Britain's then active Davis Cup player Nigel Sharpe who described him as the greatest French left-hander in the following manner: "He relies upon an all-round game with volleying as his forte. There is nothing of hurricane speed in his game. He takes the ball on the rise and hist his forehand with an easy swing and without much topspin. He gets good pace in this stroke and usually relies upon it as the forerunner of a volleying campaign... This stroke, of course, has its limitations, as it is distinctly difficult to make good passing shots against an agile volleyer. This wing is Boussus' chief weakness... (he) is able to make his volley down the line with great speed.. He further analysed his service game and found it be most unorthodox. Boussus completely omitted to swing his racquet behind his head while serving making his serves rather ineffective. Although this style was useful in overhead smashes when accuracy is more important than the speed. With this type of serve he also put a great spin to the ball and kept it relatively low. Later in his career he adapted to baseline play and utilized a series of dropshots in his games.

Personal life

In his student ages he studied advertising. His 1930 season was interrupted because he had to fulfill his military service. While playing amateur tennis he worked as a tire salesman in the mean time. Later he was appointed the Director of Communications for IBM France. Apart from his tennis playing style he is known as the first man to wear shorts instead of pants on court. He was in a civil partnership with French parfume designer Germaine Cellier with whom he lived together for 30 years until she died in 1976. He died at the age of 95, the last surviving Musketeer. He had a brother Roland, also amateur tennis player, with whom he won the doubles title of the Le Touquet Spa Championships in 1937, while also winning the singles and mixed contest as well.

Grand Slam finals

Singles

Doubles

Mixed doubles






