[[V]]

CATEGORIES: ISO basic Latin letters

V (named vee "V", Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd edition (1989); Merriam-Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged (1993); "vee", op. cit.) is the twenty-second letter in the ISO basic Latin alphabet.

Letter

The letter V comes from the Semitic letter Waw, as do the modern letters F, U, W, and Y. See F for details.
In Greek, the letter upsilon 'Υ' was adapted from waw to represent, at first, the vowel , the front rounded vowel spelled 'ü' in German.
In Latin, a stemless variant shape of the upsilon was borrowed in early times as V—either directly from the Western Greek alphabet or from the Etruscan alphabet as an intermediary—to represent the same .
In Roman numerals, the letter 'V' is used to represent the number 5. It was used because it resembled the convention of counting by notches carved in wood, with every fifth notch double-cut to form a 'V'.
During the Late Middle Ages, two forms of 'v' developed, which were both used for its ancestor 
In the International Phonetic Alphabet,  represents the voiced labiodental fricative. See Help:IPA.
Like J, K, Q, X, and Z, V is not used very frequently in English. It is the 6th least common letter in the English language, with a frequency of about 1.03% in words. It appears frequently in the Spanish (where its pronunciation is the same as B) and French languages.
This letter, like Q and X, is not used in the Polish alphabet.  instead, following the convention of German.
In English, V is unusual in that it has not traditionally been doubled to indicate a short vowel, the way for example P is doubled to indicate the difference between 'super' and 'supper'. However, that is changing with newly coined words, such as 'divvy up' and 'skivvies'.
V is the only letter that cannot be used to form an English two-letter word in the Australian version of the game of Scrabble.

Other names

In Japanese, V is often called "bui" (ブイ). This name is an approximation of the English name which substitutes the voiced bilabial plosive for the voiced labiodental fricative (which does not exist in native Japanese phonology) and differentiates it from "bī" (ビー), the Japanese name of the letter B. The sound can be written with the relatively recently developed katakana character 「ヴ」 (vu)Not an entirely new character, 「ヴ」 is simply the character for u (ウ) with the addition of a dakuten, the same mark used to change the sound of other kana. The dakuten is, for example, used to transform ka (カ) to ga (ガ), hi (ヒ) to bi (ビ) and ta (タ) to da (ダ).  due partly to inertia, and to some extent due to the more native Japanese sound).

Pronunciation

In most languages which use a Latin alphabet, .
In Native American languages of North America (mainly Iroquoian),  represents a nasalized central vowel, /ə̃/.
In Chinese pinyin, , which most keyboards lack. Romanised Chinese is a popular method to enter Chinese text phonetically.
In Irish, the letter , etc.
In the 19th  century, .

Related letters and other similar characters

Computing codes

Other representations








