[[The Byrds (box set)]]

CATEGORIES: Albums produced by Bob Johnston, Albums produced by Terry Melcher, Albums produced by Gary Usher, The Byrds compilation albums, 1990 compilation albums, Columbia Records compilation albums, English-language compilation albums, Albums produced by Roger McGuinn, Albums produced by Gene Parsons, Albums produced by Skip Battin, Albums produced by Clarence White, Albums produced by Don DeVito

The Byrds is a four-CD box set by the American rock band The Byrds that was released on October 19, 1990 by Columbia/Legacy.  The box set also includes six songs performed by a reunited line-up of The Byrds, featuring original members Roger McGuinn, David Crosby, and Chris Hillman.  Of these six songs, two were recorded live at the Roy Orbison Tribute Concert on February 24, 1990 and four are new studio recordings dating from August 1990.  The two other original members of The Byrds, Gene Clark and Michael Clarke, who were both still living in 1990, did not participate in the reunion.
At the time of its release, The Byrds was the first box set by a defunct rock act to be issued by Columbia Records.  The compilation includes a number of rare and previously unreleased songs, many of which were later included as bonus tracks on the remastered editions of the band's individual albums.  In the years since Sweetheart of the Rodeo was issued, these "lost" Parsons' vocals had become near-legendary among fans of the band and their inclusion on The Byrds provided a major selling point for the box set.  
The Byrds' lead guitarist Roger McGuinn served as "musical consultant" during preparation of the set and also had a hand in deciding the final track listing.  While The Byrds does provide a detailed overview of the band's music, there has been some criticism concerning the absence of songs written by Gene Clark, who was the band's principal songwriter in its early years.  In particular, the exclusion of popular and highly regarded Clark-penned songs such as "Set You Free This Time" and "Here Without You" was interpreted by many fans as an attempt on McGuinn's part to downplay Clark's importance in the group.  The additional failure of McGuinn to mention Clark in the box set's booklet, while at the same time praising Crosby and Hillman, served to reinforce the notion that Clark was being intentionally slighted.    
Upon release, the box set reached #151 on the Billboard Top Pop Albums chart in the U.S., during a chart stay of four weeks, but failed to reach the UK Albums Chart.
The Byrds is currently out of print but a newly revised box set, titled There Is a Season, was released on September 26, 2006 by Columbia/Legacy.  While this second box set is meant to replace The Byrds, each set contains tracks that the other does not.

Track listing

NOTES:  

Disc one

Disc two

Disc three

Disc four

20 Essential Tracks from the Boxed Set: 1965-1990 track listing




