[[Jason Shackell]]

CATEGORIES: 1983 births, Living people, People from Stevenage, English footballers, Association football defenders, Norwich City F.C. players, Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players, Doncaster Rovers F.C. players, Barnsley F.C. players, Derby County F.C. players, Burnley F.C. players, Premier League players, The Football League players, Norwich City F.C. captains

Jason Philip Shackell (born 27 September 1983) is an English footballer who plays as a defender for Championship club Burnley.

Career

Norwich City

Shackell is a product of the youth academy at Norwich City of which he joined in 2000. He made his senior debut for on 5 April 2003 in a 2–1 defeat at Derby County, when he played at left-back following an injury to Adam Drury. Although Shackell's preferred – and best – position is central defender, his first few appearances were at left-back when Drury was either injured or suspended.
He added further experience the following season as Norwich won the First Division championship. He did not feature in the club's opening months in the Premier League but returned to the team in February 2005 in a home game against Manchester City. Although Norwich lost 3–2, he acquitted himself well and kept his place in the centre of defence for the remainder of the season, but could not prevent relegation.
The scene was set for Shackell to continue his progress in the 2005–06 season. However, a pre-season illness and a subsequent run of injuries caused him to miss four months of the campaign. However, the season brought him his first goal for Norwich on 17 October 2006 against Birmingham City, proving to be the winning goal. He scored two further goals that season, against Preston North End and Luton Town, but the club were unable to challenge for an immediate return to the top division.
After undergoing another ankle operation during Summer 2006, he returned to be a virtual ever-present in the next season. With the arrival of Peter Grant as manager during the season, Shackell was appointed captain at the start of the 2007–08 season. In October 2007, he signed a new contract that was due to have kept him at Carrow Road until 2010. However, his season took a downturn in December, when new manager Glenn Roeder relieved him of the captaincy.
Shackell lost his place in the Norwich side at the start of the new season after several new defensive signings arrived. On 1 September 2008, he left for fellow Championship side Wolverhampton Wanderers, signing a four-year deal for an undisclosed fee believed to be around £1 million.

Wolverhampton Wanderers

However, he was unable to stake a regular place in the Molineux side, and fell down the pecking order. He returned to his former club Norwich on 10 February 2009, for the remainder of the 2008–09 season. The season proved unique for Shackell as he was relegated from the Championship, but having played 12 games earlier in the season for Wolves before his loan to Norwich, had done enough to earn a winners' medal when Wolves won the Championship on 25 April. 
Out of favour at Wolves, he spent the 2009–10 season on loan at Championship side Doncaster Rovers.

Barnsley

On 12 May 2010 he left Molineux, when he signed for Barnsley for an undisclosed fee. He served as club captain, replacing Stephen Foster. Shackell's first goal for the club came in the 2–0 victory over Middlesbrough at Oakwell on 28 August 2010. Shackell headed home to give Barnsley a 1–0 lead in the 28th minute.
After a set of impressive performances during the 2010–11 season (where he won the Player of The Year award all interested in the player.
Derby County had two bids for the player rejected, the second bid estimated to be in the region of £700,000.

Derby County

Shackell was confirmed as a Derby County player on 21 June 2011, signing a three-year contract.
Shackell scored on his league debut for Derby County in a 2–1 win over Birmingham City on the opening day of the 2011–12 season, heading the equaliser from a Ben Davies freekick.

Burnley

On 5 July 2012, Shackell signed for fellow Championship side Burnley for an undisclosed fee, on a four-year contract.
Later that month it was announced that he would become Burnley captain.

Career statistics

Honours






