[[Uppington]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Shropshire

Uppington is a village in the English county of Shropshire. It lies in the civil parish of Wroxeter and Uppington. It is situated 7.5 miles East from Shrewsbury and 4 miles South-East from Wellington. It is located within the Diocese of Lichfield, within the Rural Deanery of Wrockwardine. Uppington covers a total area of around 706 acres, much of this being open fields, used for arable and pastoral farming, as well as a small amount of local woodland.

The Village

The village of Uppington consists of various residential houses, Uppington Village Hall, Avenue Farm, Raby Farm, Raby Estates, Raby Sawmill and Uppington House. The village is fairly isolated and is only connected via four small tracks connecting it to other villages, the Northern track out of the village leads to Roman Road/B5061 and the A5. Surrounding Uppington are the small villages of Charlton, Aston, Rushton, Donnington, Uckington, Norton and Wroxeter. These small villages lay in between the two large towns of Shrewsbury and Telford. The far West of Uppington holds Uppington Village Hall, Uppington Holy Trinity Church, Uppington House and the Raby Estates. To the far East of the village is the Raby Sawmill, part of the Raby Estate of Shropshire.
The first mention of Uppington was in the Domesday Book. Uppington had 5 villagers, 4 smallholders and 6 ploughmen.co. Uppington was described as having a population of 95, consisting of 15 houses.visionofbritain.uk/place/place_page.melocki.uk/salop/Uppington. The Parish of Wroxeter and Uppington was formed when there was little difference between church and state. The community at the time was centred around the parish church. The parish manages local amenities, such as the operation of street lighting.british-towns.asp?GetL3=7376 In the Parish of Wroxeter and Uppington the village of Wroxeter is the largest village in the area. Wroxeter has been built around the Roman remains of Viroconium Cornoviorum,a former Roman city.british-towns.asp?GetL3=7376 It has been proposed in the past that Uppington should have Conservation Area Status.2shrop.

Businesses

Avenue Farm offers a 4 star Bed & Breakfast for passers-by and those wishing to stay in a truly rural setting in the heart of Shropshire.tripadvisor.co.html
Grange Farm have previously offered Bed & Breakfast yet have now ceased to offer them, this is likely to be due to competition from Avenue Farm.seatongrange.co.uk/
Raby Estate is a private rural estate which has locally supplied a mix of hard and softwoods which are sustainably grown and FSC certified. These are produced locally for Raby Sawmill.rabysawmill.co.php
Raby Sawmill works in association with Raby Estate. Raby sawmill was opened 30 years ago to offer locals sustainably sourced wood to aid construction, building schemes and restoration projects to restore old timber framed housing. The saw mill is completely open to the public at certain hours as is the Raby Estate.rabysawmill.co.php

Wroxeter & Uppington Cricket Club

Wroxeter & Uppington Cricket Club was formed in 1906 by local members of the parish and the surrounding area. The first 12 years of the clubs existence it was based on Donnington. The club moved to its present ground after the end of the First World War. The present pavilion used opened in 1971, around the time of completion of the club's changing facilities. The cricket club is located between the large Shropshire towns of Shrewsbury and Telford, situated in the Parish of Wroxeter and Uppington, North-West of Uppington. In 2001 the cricket club joined the new pyramid scheme and entered the Birmingham Cricket League where they were largely successful. However in 2005 Wroxeter & Uppington returned to the Shropshire County Cricket League Division Two. The cricket team won the Shropshire cricket league knockout in 2009 and 2010. Following this in 2011 they won the Shropshire cricket league division one title. The current 2nd XI is now in the Shropshire County Cricket Premier Reserve Division One after their 4 league wins and promotions in the last 5 years. The Wroxeter & Uppington Cricket Club have merged with the Wroxeter Mercenaries.wroxetercricketclub.co.uk/

Uppington Holy Trinity Church

Uppington Holy Trinity Church was built around the Norman Period. The original architect was George Sidebotham.achurchnearyou.P. Pritchard of Darlington. All financed by the Fourth Duke of Cleveland.britishlistedbuildings.co. The Patron of Uppington Holy Trinity is the Deanery of Wrockwardine Patronage Board.achurchnearyou.

Transport

Bus services coming into Uppington consist of the A21 bus leading to Harlescott in North Shrewsbury. The nearest railway station is located to the North-East in Wellington.






