[[Kelly Duda]]

CATEGORIES: American film directors, Living people

Kelly Duda is an American filmmaker and activist from Arkansas. Duda spent seven years making Factor 8: The Arkansas Prison Blood Scandal.
Variety magazine described Duda as "a pit bull with a bureaucratic bone" who "follows subjects fearlessly and ventures into hostile environs (and) comes away, most of the time, with the information he wants to get." Variety described Factor 8 as "hard-headed journalism" stating, "one of the things that hits the viewer in 'Factor 8' is that Ken Starr spent more than $40 million trying to pin something on then-President Bill Clinton, and missed what Duda found via sheer leg work."
The American Film Institute remarked, "Kelly Duda's dedication to the truth is an inspiration—this expose wears his heart on its sleeve, refusing to let the victims die in vain."
Duda was also part of the team for Fuji Television that produced The Hepatitis C Epidemic: A 15-Year Government Cover-up. The program won a George Foster Peabody Award in 2003 and was reportedly watched by more than 12 million viewers in Japan.
Evidence and documents unearthed by Duda were used to help 5,500 "forgotten" Canadian victims of tainted blood receive a $1 billion compensation package from the Canadian federal government in 2006.
On July 11, 2007, Duda testified (as the only American) at the Lord Archer Inquiry on Contaminated Blood in the Parliament of the United Kingdom overseen by Peter Archer, Baron Archer of Sandwell.
In 2009, the two-year old inquiry's conclusion condemned the UK government for its lack of self-sufficiency, citing the use of high-risk prisoners' blood from the U.S. as one of the factors.
Further evidence of Duda's helped lead to four successful class-action lawsuits for tainted blood victims in Japan, which led to government compensation for 1,000 victims, and an apology from Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda, who on January 11, 2008, said: "We must frankly admit the state's responsibility for causing huge harm to the victims and for failing to prevent the harm from spreading. I express my apologies from my heart."
In addition, Duda was the "go-to" contact in Arkansas for Robert Greenwald's controversial documentary Wal-Mart: The High Cost of Low Price, and has contributed to The ACLU Freedom Files.
On September 20, 2007, Kelly Duda traveled to Jena, Louisiana with students from the University of Central Arkansas to participate in the Jena 6 march for justice, along with Martin Luther King III and thousands of others.
Kelly Duda was co-founder, along with Lanette Grate, of the short-lived West Memphis Three Innocence Project, a 501(c)(3) organization, which was soon renamed to the West Memphis Three Injustice Project after being issue a cease and desist order for unauthorized and illegal use of the Innocence Project's name.
Kelly Duda was a judge at the Little Rock Film Festival and Hot Springs Documentary Film Festival.
In 2012, Kelly accompanied actor and civil rights activist George Takei on a pilgrimage to the Rohwer War Relocation Center site and cemetery, marking the 70th anniversary of Executive Order 9066 signed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Takei and his family were Japanese Americans interned at Rohwer during World War II.






