[[Stockholm University]]

CATEGORIES: Stockholm University, Educational institutions established in 1878, Universities in Sweden, Buildings and structures in Stockholm

Stockholm University () is the state university of Stockholm, Sweden.  Stockholm University has two scientific fields: the natural sciences and the humanities/social sciences. It has over 66,000 students at four different faculties: law, humanities, the mathematical and natural sciences making it one of the largest universities in Scandinavia. The institution is also frequently regarded as one of the top 200 universities in the world. Stockholm University's primary mission is to provide education and high quality research for the betterment of the Swedish community.Högskolelagen 1 kap §2 (1992:1434)(Swedish)

History

The initiative for the formation of Stockholm University was taken by Stockholm City Council. The process was completed after a decision in December 1865 regarding the establishment of a fund and a committee to "establish a higher education institution in the capital". Stockholm 1969, sid. 52 The nine members of the Committee were respected and prominent citizens whose work have helped the evolution of science and society. Givare och donatorer under högskolans uppbyggnadsskede. Uppsats, pedagogiska institutionen, Stockholms universitet (årtal?)
The next important step was taken in October 1869, when the Stockholm University College Association was established.Svensk Uppslagsbok: Stockholms högskola, Baltiska förlaget A.-B., Lund: 1929 The association's mission was to establish a university in Stockholm and would "not be dissolved until college came into being and its future could be secured." The memorandum of the Stockholm University College were adopted in May 1877, and in the autumn semester of the following year, actual operations began.
In 1878, the university college Stockholms högskola started its operations with a series of lectures on natural sciences, open to curious citizens (a tradition still upheld by yearly publicly open lectures).  Notable in the university's early history is the appointment of Sofia Kovalevskaya to hold a chair in mathematics department in 1889, making her the third female professor in Europe. In 1904 the college became an official degree granting institution.
In 1960, the college was granted university status, becoming Sweden's fourth state university. The university premises were situated in central Stockholm at Observatorielunden but as enrollment increased resulting in lack of space, this required university campus to be shifted to bigger facility, due to this after 1970 most of the university operations are pursued at the main campus at Frescati north of the city center.

Organisation

Stockholm University is a state agency and is governed by the decisions coming from the government and parliament. The University has the right, within the limits the government provides, to decide on many issues such as their internal organization, educational, admission of students and other administrative functions of the university.

Bodies within the university organization

Departments, institutes and centers

Education and research at Stockholm University is carried out within the natural sciences and the humanities/social sciences. Within these fields, there are four faculties with 70 departments, institutes and centers within the humanities, law, natural sciences and social sciences. Research and training also takes place at a number of centers and institutes with a separate governing board, but that organisationally belong to a department. For a full list of all departments, institutes and centers, go to 

Courses and Programmes

At Stockholm University, there are 200 Bachelor's programmes and 1,900 courses to choose from.su.se/english/study/courses/bachelor-s-programmes

Research

The university researchers engage in governmental investigations, participates in the media, leaving comments on proposed legislation and is included in several Nobel committees and international expert bodies. For a full list of Stockholm University's leading research areas, go to 

Field stations

Askö Laboratory
Stockholm University Marine Research center (SMF) provides "Askö Laboratory". Research on ecosystems, ecology and the impact of human interference is carried out here. The field station was built in 1961 by Professor Lars Silén, Prefect of the Department of Zoology, and is now established as a renowned marine research center.Facts Askölaboratoriet
Tarfala
Tarfala research station belongs to the Department of Physical Geography and Quaternary Geology at Stockholm University. The station is located 1135 meters above sea in Tarfaladalen, on the east side of Kebnekaise in arctic / alpine surroundings. Here, glaciological, hydrological, meteorological and climatological research is conducted. The station has the capacity to accommodate groups up to 25 people and the staff consists of 2-5 people.Tarfala Research station
Tovetorp
Tovetorp Zoological Research Station belongs to the Department of Zoology at Stockholm University, and is located about 95 km southwest of Stockholm. It conducts research and training activities in ecology and ethology. Every year Tovetorp is visited of up to 600 students who live and study between 2–10 days on the station. On the research side, over 20 people work today with different research projects. The number of employees are currently 6 people.Tovetorp research station: startpage (in swedish)

Student unions

Prior to 2008, Stockholm University had only one student union called Stockholm University Student Union (Stockholm universitets studentkår, SUS). However as of 2008 the computer and system science students and the teacher students have their own, independent, student unions called DISK and "The Teacher's College's Student Union" (Lärarhögskolans studentkår). The law students also have their own student union, as do journalism students (Studentkåren vid JMK).
The future of the Teacher's College's Student Union is however not entirely safe, as Stockholm University's Student Union has declared it will begin talks with the Teacher's College's Student Union on transferring its members to it, as it already has a teacher's division. In contrast to common belief, DISK is not an abbreviation.Disk - Organisation

Famous people connected with Stockholm University

Four Scientists at Stockholm University have been awarded with the Nobel Prize:
Notable alumni

Rankings

In the Academic Ranking of World Universities 2013, Stockholm University was placed as the 82nd overall best university worldwide.
Whereas, in the 2013 QS World University Rankings, Stockholm University was ranked 170th overall in the world. Its subject rankings were: 81st in Arts & Humanities, 168th in Life Sciences & Biomedicine, 69th in Natural Sciences, and 65th in Social Sciences.

The Campus

The main part of Stockholm University is in the area Frescati, ranging from Bergius Botanical Garden in the north to Sveaplan in the south. It is located in the world's first national urban park and the area is characterized by nature, architecture and modern art. Within Frescati, the areas Albano (Stockholm), Bergius Botanical Garden, Frescati Backe, Frescati Hage, Kräftriket, Lilla Frescati and Sveaplan are located. Identification of many of these areas have a history dating back to the late 1700s. After Gustav III's trip to Italy in 1783-84, several places at Brunnsviken were named after Italian models. Stockholm University has also, for example the Department of computer and systems sciences, located in Kista.Facts regarding the campus

Public transportation to Stockholm University

There are many ways to get to Stockholm University, the main campus Frescati is located near the underground railway station Universitetet metro station, on the red line of the Stockholm Metro. The commuter train line Roslagsbanan also stop close to the main campus, at Universitetet railway station. SL buses 40, 70, 540, 608 and 670 can also be used to get to the campus.
The Computer Science campus, Kista, also is close to an underground station called Kista. It is also located close to the pendeltåg station Helenelund, only 1-2 stops (depending on bus line) from the bus station Torsnäsgatan located next to the campus area.
The Teacher Students campus is located next to the underground station Thorildsplan.








