[[William Alston]]

CATEGORIES: 1921 births, 2009 deaths, 20th-century philosophers, 21st-century philosophers, American Episcopalians, American metaphysics writers, American philosophers, Analytic philosophers, Christian philosophers, Epistemologists, Epistemology of religion, Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Metaphysicians, Philosophers of language, Philosophers of religion, Rutgers University faculty, Syracuse University faculty, University of Chicago alumni, University of Michigan faculty, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign faculty

William Payne Alston (November 29, 1921 – September 13, 2009) was an American philosopher. He made influential contributions to the philosophy of language, epistemology and Christian philosophy. He earned his PhD from the University of Chicago and taught at the University of Michigan, Rutgers University, University of Illinois, and Syracuse University.

Early life and education

Alston was born to Eunice Schoolfield and William Alston on November 29, 1921 in Shreveport, Louisiana. He graduated from high school when he was 15 and went on to Centenary College of Louisiana, graduating in 1942 with a Bachelor of Music in piano. During World War II, he played clarinet and bass drum in a military band in California. During this time, he became interested in philosophy, sparked by W. Somerset Maugham's book The Razor's Edge. After this, he engrossed himself in works by well-known philosophers such as Jacques Maritain, Mortimer J. Adler, Francis Bacon, Plato, René Descartes, and John Locke. While he was there, he learned more about philosophy from Richard McKeon and Charles Hartshorne, and he received his PhD in 1951.

Career

From 1949 until 1971, Alston was a professor at the University of Michigan, and he became professor of philosophy in 1961. He then taught at Rutgers University for five years, followed by the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign from 1976 to 1980 and then Syracuse University from 1980 to 1992.
His views on foundationalism, internalism versus externalism, speech acts, and the epistemic value of mystical experience, among many other topics, have been very influential. Like most American philosophers, Alston is counted among the analytic philosophers.
Together with Alvin Plantinga, Nicholas Wolterstorff, and Robert Adams, Alston helped to found the journal Faith and Philosophy.

Death

Alston died in a nursing home in Jamesville, New York on September 13, 2009, at the age of 87.

Bibliography





Further reading


