[[Heather Mason]]

CATEGORIES: Child characters in video games, Female characters in video games, Fictional American people of European descent in video games, Konami protagonists, Orphan characters in video games, Silent Hill characters, Video game characters based on real people, Video game characters who have mental powers, Video game characters introduced in 2003, Video game characters in film

Heather Mason is the main protagonist and player character in Silent Hill 3, a 2003 survival horror video game by Konami's Team Silent. As the reincarnation of Alessa Gillespie and Cheryl Mason from the first Silent Hill game, Heather is instrumental in the game's main antagonist Claudia Wolf's efforts to bring about the rebirth of "God". She is also the main character in the film adaptation, Silent Hill: Revelation 3D, where her real name is Sharon Da Silva. Her alternative self,  Cheryl Heather Mason, is also the true protagonist of Silent Hill: Shattered Memories.

Appearances

Heather is the protagonist of the video game Silent Hill 3 and the film Silent Hill: Revelation 3D. In the video game Silent Hill: Shattered Memories, "Heather" is a middle name of the main character Cheryl, who was also born in 1983.
Heather is also a downloadable content character in the video game Silent Hill: Book of Memories. In addition, she makes cameo appearances in some of the endings in Book of Memories and in the video game Silent Hill: Downpour, as well as in an unrelated Konami game Dance Dance Revolution Extreme.

Character design

Heather was modeled after French actresses Charlotte Gainsbourg and Vanessa Paradis in several rough sketches. The sketches portrayed her as an "innocent" type of character. The development team realized that she seemed too "nice" and Heather was inspired by Sophie Marceau and Gainsbourg to give her an attitude. At this point, Heather was a clash of masculinity and femininity. The character designer Shingo Yuri imagined Heather as wearing jeans, but the female team members of Team Silent thought that Heather should show her legs to look more feminine and convinced Yuri. Heather's hair was initially more natural and less elaborate, but the female team members thought that curly hair would be more suitable for a young girl. Heather was given shorter hair for the convenience of video games: it would have taken more processing power of the PlayStation 2 to animate longer realistic hair and the game designers used the processing power towards increasing monster numbers instead. Heather's original design was later used with Elle Holloway, a character in Silent Hill: Homecoming.
The character's name and model were inspired by her original voice actress, Heather Morris.  The creators originally named Heather "Helen", but after talking with Morris they realized that name was old-fashioned and changed it. Konami, 2003. Pg 66-67, "Silent Hill 3 Character Commentary".

Reception

In Silent Hill: The Terror Engine, Bernard Perron wrote that Heather's "temper" and "sharp tongue" served to distinguish her from the female protagonists of the survival-horror games Rule of Rose (2006), Clock Tower 3 (2002), and Fatal Frame (2001), whom he described as being characterized as "more frail or innocent".




