[[Victoria Bitter]]

CATEGORIES: Fosters Group, Australian beer brands, Culture in Victoria (Australia), 1854 establishments in Australia, Companies established in 1854

Victoria Bitter is a lager produced by Carlton & United Breweries, a subsidiary of Foster's Group in Melbourne, Victoria. It was first brewed by renowned Melbourne brewers Thomas C. Moore and Henry F. Baxter in the early 1900s. It is one of the highest selling beers in Australia.

History

The origins of Victoria Bitter date back to Victoria Brewery founder Thomas C. Moore, who developed the recipe in the early 1900s. The beer began to gain wide popularity in the mid 1960s with an innovative television advertising campaign featuring a very similar recording of the theme from the film The Magnificent Seven, images of working-class Australians at work and play, and a voice-over by notable Australian actor John Meillon. The campaign was used until quite recently. Paul Hester, late drummer of Crowded House, once appeared in a VB advert.
Like most Australian Lagers, VB is made using a wortstream brewing process, and uses a portion of cane sugar to thin out the body of the beer.
Currently one third of the packaged beer sales in Australia are of VB. It used to be available in the Northern Territory in a 1 litre tinnie nicknamed a 'Killer can' (Kilo can). As with all packaged beer sold in Australia it was for many years only available in 750 ml or 26 2/3 fl oz (1/6 imperial gallon) bottles, until the introduction of "stubbies" and smaller cans.
On the 6th of July, 2011, VB released the product packaged in limited edition, 1958 heritage cans. The packaging had the original artwork of the 1958 VB product, but also included a standard ring pull on each can, something which was lacking on the original can. The alcohol strength remained at the standard 4.6%, as with normal packaged VB cans.VB launches limited edition 1958 heritage can - Campaign Brief, 06 July 2011
On the 3rd of September, 2012, CUB announced VB would be going back to its original recipe of 4.9% and its original packaging. CUB had received many complaints since it was changed to 4.6% in 2009, and the beer had lost a large amount of market share. The updated VBs began rolling out in late October 2012.Aussie beer favourite victoria bitter back to full strength

Sales and availability

According to ACNielsen in 2009 Victoria Bitter was claimed to be Australia's only billion dollar retail beer brand, selling the equivalent of one slab every second. At one time VB sold twice as much as any other full strength beer and was the only Australian beer brand that is in the top 3 sellers in every state.
In April 2011 VB held 13.7 per cent volume share and XXXX Gold had 11.7 per cent. Just one year on and in April 2012 VB had dropped to 12.3 per cent, while XXXX Gold took the lead with 12.4 per cent.
In addition to being sold in Australia, Victoria Bitter is also available in New Zealand, Bali, Indonesia, the UK, and, to a limited extent, other countries abroad. When the joint venture Angkor Brewing Co. was established in Cambodia in 1992, VB was briefly brewed in Sihanoukville, and later imported; it held a significant share of the premium beer market until 1994.

Brand

Despite its name, Victoria Bitter is a standard commercial lager rather than a bitter. Since late 2012, Victoria Bitter has been sold at a strength of 4.9% ABV after an interim period of producing the same product at an ABV of 4.6% (equal to virtually every other major Australian lager).com.9% and 4.6% available in 375ml quantities in either bottles or cans.

VB Gold

In 2007, Fosters launched a new, midstrength version of VB called VB Midstrength Lager with an alcohol volume of 3.5%, in order to capitalise on the growing market for midstrength beers, currently dominated by XXXX Gold. VB Midstrength changed its name to VB Gold in 2009 and sells over 1m cases every year and is growing strongly following its launch in late 2007.
TV builder Scott Cam, a self-confessed VB fan, is the appointed VB Mid Ambassador.The best cold beer is… VB MIDSTRENGTH - Fosters Group website
On 24 July 2007, The Australian reported that within three months of Fosters launching VB Midstrength, market share for the full strength VB and mid VB had increased.
During the 2008 Rugby League World Cup, VB Gold was advertised on TV by Australian Rugby League legends Wally Lewis and Gorden Tallis.

VB RAW

In September 2009 VB released VB RAW to compete in the low carb market. The alcohol volume is 4.5%.  VB Raw was discontinued in late 2010 due to poor sales.

Marketing and promotion

The early slogan from the 60s "For a hard earned thirst, you need a big cold beer, and the best cold beer is Vic, Victoria Bitter" was replaced by "VB – The Drinking Beer" as part of a marketing strategy to reposition VB up-market.
In 2005, VB had started a promotion where David Boon became the face of Victoria Bitter (VB) beer for its 2005/06 summer advertising campaign, called Boonanza. Part of the promotion was the sale of a talking David Boon figurine with purchases of cartons of beer, which would make comments when prompted by Channel Nine commentary.
In late 2006, the Boonanza promotion returned as Boonanza II for the 2006-07 Ashes series. The promotion now included former England cricket captain Ian Botham as a talking figure, who would interact alongside an updated David Boon figure.
For the 2007-08 Australian cricket series, Shane Warne took over as VB spokesperson from David Boon.A real doll for Shane Warne - The Herald Sun, 4 Oct 2007
VB has invested heavily in sponsorships of Australian rugby league. It is currently the official beer of the NRL,Sponsors - National Rugby League the naming rights sponsor for NRL Friday Night Football and the main sponsor of the Australian national rugby league team, the Kangaroos.
Victoria Bitter was also the main sponsor of the Australian Tri-Series for five years between 2001-02 to 2005-06. During this time the series was renamed The VB Series.
Victoria Bitter currently.
The previous advertising campaign was called the Stubby Symphony, where 100 members of the Melbourne and Victorian orchestras play the theme from The Magnificent Seven only using VB beer bottles. The campaign was created by George Patterson Y&R in Melbourne.
VB launched a new advertising campaign in Australia in July 2009 to coincide with the SBS television broadcast of the 2009 The Ashes cricket series. They will drop the famous tag "For a hard earned thirst.." for "VB – The Drinking Beer".com.au, 8 July 2009Droga5's new VB TVC unveiled - B&T Today, 8 July 2009
In an interview, Ex-The Distillers singer/guitarist, Brody Dalle said that Victoria Bitter was all her and her bandmates drank during their time in Australia.
VB is mentioned in I Was Only Nineteen, the #1 single by Redgum from the 1983 album Caught in the Act.








