[[Cajun cuisine]]

CATEGORIES: Cajun cuisine, American cuisine

Cajun cuisine () is the style of cooking named for the French-speaking Acadian or "Cajun" immigrants deported by the British from Acadia in Canada to the Acadiana region of Louisiana, USA. It is what could be called a rustic cuisine; locally available ingredients predominate and preparation is simple. An authentic Cajun meal is usually a three-pot affair, with one pot dedicated to the main dish, one dedicated to steamed rice, special made sausages, or some seafood dish, and the third containing whatever vegetable is plentiful or available. Ground cayenne and fresh black pepper are used often.
The aromatic vegetables bell pepper (poivron), onion and celery are called by some chefs the holy trinity of Cajun and Louisiana Creole cuisines. Roughly diced and combined in cooking, the method is similar to the use of the mire poix in traditional French cuisine which blends roughly diced onion, celery and carrot. Characteristic aromatics for the Cajun version may also include parsley, bay leaf, green onions and dried cayenne pepper.

History

17th - 18th Centuries: From Canada to Southern Louisiana

The roots of Cajun cuisine are in the Acadian people: French immigrants who settled in eastern Canada in the 17th and 18th centuries.Meat was uncommon in the diet due to their low social status. However, because of the prevalence of fish, shellfish, and various sources of meat in Acadia, Acadians expanded their diet to incorporate these items.Bienvenu
Around 1755, Acadians were forced out of their settlements by the British, and as a result, they migrated in 1755 in what was called the Grand Derangement, eventually settling in Southern Louisiana. There were a series of "starving years" during the 18th century during which fish and game became important food sources. This extensive use of natural resources caused the supply to quickly run out, and so, eggs became a key source of protein.

Late 19th - Early 20th Centuries

In the late 19th to early 20th centuries, a meal of slow-cooked meat, corn bread, and seasonal vegetables was a common dish. Overall, the meals were quite simplistic.
It was in this same time period, particularly the early 20th century, that freshwater fish began to hold a more prominent position in Cajun cuisine. Modern inventions such as refrigeration and better infrastructure, along with higher income in the Cajun household, led to a greater consumption of freshwater fish. Seafood also became popular in the mid to late 20th century, as more Cajun men became introduced to seafood through their work on oil rigs. Crawfish also became popular around this time.

Mid to Late 20th Century: The Commercialization of Cajun Cuisine

It was during the mid to late 20th century that there began to be a distinction between classic Cajun cuisine and modern, or commercialized, Cajun cuisine. Restaurants of this time fried much of the seafood they prepared, and because frying was a such a messy process, fried seafood was usually limited to restaurants. The most common home-cooked Cajun dish was beef, rice, and gravy.
This "new Cajun" style of cooking was further perpetuated with Paul Prudhomme's modern Cajun creations. This lead to a number of industrialized companies creating "Cajun" products, that were more closely based on Prudhomme's modernized Cajun than true Cajun cuisine.

Cajun Cuisine Today

Today, most restaurants serve dishes that consist of a blend of Cajun and Creole styles, which Paul Prudhomme dubbed "Louisiana cooking". In home-cooking, these individual styles are still kept separate. Chef Paul Prudhomme's Louisiana Kitchen. New York: William Morrow and Company, Inc., 1984 However, there are fewer and fewer people cooking the classic Cajun dishes that would have been eaten by the original Acadian settlers of Louisiana. Like the rest of America, more and more Cajun households are "two-income families" and so there is simply less time to prepare the slow-cooked meals that define classic Cajun cuisine. Today, Cajun fusion is becoming more prevalent. Modern chefs, many of which do not have Cajun roots, are re-defining Cajun cuisine by taking Cajun elements and mixing them with a variety of other styles, including but not limited to Italian, Asian, and Mexican.

Cooking methods

Deep-frying of turkeys or oven-roasted turduckens entered southern Louisiana cuisine more recently. Also, blackening of fish or chicken and barbecuing of shrimp in the shell are excluded because they were not prepared in traditional Cajun cuisine.

Ingredients

The following is a partial list of ingredients used in Cajun cuisine and some of the staple ingredients of the Acadian food culture.

Grains

Fruits and vegetables

Meat and seafood

Cajun folkways include many ways of preserving meat, some of which are waning due to the availability of refrigeration and mass-produced meat at the grocer. Smoking of meats remains a fairly common practice, but once-common preparations such as turkey or duck confit (preserved in poultry fat, with spices) are now seen even by Acadians as quaint rarities.
Game (and hunting) are still uniformly popular in Acadiana.
The recent increase of catfish farming in the Mississippi Delta has brought about an increase in its usage in Cajun cuisine in the place of the more traditional wild-caught trout (the saltwater species) and red fish.
 
 Seafood
Also included in the seafood mix are some so-called trash fish that would not sell at market because of their high bone to meat ratio or required complicated cooking methods. These were brought home by fishermen to feed the family. Examples are garfish, black drum also called gaspergou or just "goo", croaker, and bream.
Poultry
 
 Pork
Beef and dairy 
Though parts of Acadiana are well suited to cattle or dairy farming, beef is not often used in a pre-processed or uniquely Cajun form. It is usually prepared fairly simply as chops, stews, or steaks, taking a cue from Texas to the west. Ground beef is used as is traditional throughout the southern US, although seasoned differently.
Dairy farming is not as prevalent as in the past, but there are still some farms in the business. There are no unique dairy items prepared in Cajun cuisine. Traditional southern US and New Orleans influenced desserts are common.
Other Game Meats


Seasonings

Individual
Blended
Cooking bases

Cajun dishes

Three popular local dishes in Acadiana are noted in the Hank Williams'  song Jambalaya, namely "Jambalaya and-a crawfish pie and filé gumbo."

Primary favorites

Boudin, sometimes spelled "boudain", is a type of sausage made from pork, pork liver, rice, garlic, green onions and other spices. It is widely available by the link or pound from butcher shops. Boudin is usually made daily as it does not keep well for very long, even when frozen. Boudin is typically stuffed in a natural casing and has a softer consistency than other, better-known sausage varieties. It is usually served with side dishes such as rice dressing, maque choux or bread. Boudin balls are commonly served in southern Louisiana restaurants and are made by taking the boudin out of the case and frying it in spherical form.
Gumbo - High on the list of favorites of Cajun cooking are the soups called gumbos. Contrary to non-Cajun or Continental beliefs, gumbo does not mean simply "everything in the pot."  Gumbo exemplifies the influence of African and Native American food cultures on Cajun cuisine. The name originally meant okra, a word brought to the region from western Africa. Okra which can be one of the principal ingredients in gumbo recipes is used as a thickening agent and for its distinct vegetable flavor.
A filé gumbo is thickened with dried sassafras leaves after the stew has finished cooking, a practice borrowed from the Choctaw Indians. The backbone of a gumbo is roux of which there are two variations: acadian, a golden brown roux, and creole, a dark roux, which is made of flour, toasted until well-browned, and fat or oil. The classic gumbo is made with chicken and the Cajun sausage called andouille, pronounced {ahn-doo-wee}, but the ingredients vary according to what is available.
Jambalaya - Another classic Cajun dish is jambalaya. The only certain thing that can be said about a jambalaya is that it contains rice, some sort of meat (such as chicken or beef) and/or seafood (such as shrimp or crawfish) and almost anything else. Usually, however, one will find green peppers, onions, celery, tomatoes and hot chili peppers. Anything else is optional.
Rice and gravy - Rice and gravy dishes are a staple of Cajun cuisine

Food as an event

=Crawfish boil=

The crawfish boil is a celebratory event where Cajuns boil crawfish, potatoes, onions and corn in large pots over propane cookers. Lemons and small muslin bags containing a mixture of bay leaves, mustard seeds, cayenne pepper and other spices, commonly known as "crab boil" or "crawfish boil" are added to the water for seasoning. The results are then dumped onto large, newspaper-draped tables and in some areas covered in spice blends, such as REX, Zatarain's, Louisiana Fish Fry or Tony Chachere's. Also, Cocktail sauce, mayonnaise and hot sauce are sometimes used. The seafood is scooped onto large trays or plates and eaten by hand. During times when crawfish are not abundant, shrimp and crabs are prepared and served in the same manner.
Attendees are encouraged to "suck the head" of a crawfish by separating the abdomen of the crustacean and sucking out the abdominal fat/juices.
Often, newcomers to the crawfish boil or those unfamiliar with the traditions are jokingly warned "not to eat the dead ones". This comes from the common belief that when live crawfish are boiled, their tails curl beneath themselves, but when dead crawfish are boiled, their tails are straight and limp.
Seafood boils with crabs and shrimp are also popular.

=Family Boucherie=

The traditional Cajun outdoor food event hosted by a farmer in the rural areas of Acadiana.  Family and friends of the farmer gather to socialize, play games, dance, drink, and have a copious meal consisting of hog and other dishes.111.  Men have the task of slaughtering a hog, cutting it into useable parts, and cooking the main pork dishes while women have the task of making boudin.110.

=Cochon de Lait=

Similar to a family boucherie, the cochon de lait is a food event that revolves around pork but does not need to be hosted by a farmer.  Traditionally, a suckling pig was purchased for the event, but in modern cochon de lait's, adult pigs are used.111  Unlike the family boucherie, a hog is not butchered by the hosts and there are generally not as many guests or activities.112.  The host and male guests have the task of roasting the pig (see pig roast) while female guests bring side dishes.

=Rural Mardi Gras=

The traditional Cajun Mardi Gras (see Courir de Mardi Gras) is a Mardi Gras celebration in rural Acadiana.  The tradition originated in the 18th century and was brought to Louisiana by the Acadians but was abandoned in the early 20th century because of unwelcome violence associated with the event.  In the early 1950s the tradition was revived in Mamou in Evangeline Parish.
The event revolves around male maskers on horseback who ride into the countryside to collect food ingredients for the party later on.  They entertain householders with Cajun music, dancing, and festive antics in return for the ingredients.  The preferred ingredient is a live chicken—in which the householder throws the chicken to allow the maskers to chase it down (symbolizing a hunt) but other ingredients include rice, sausage, vegetables, or frozen chicken.  Unlike other Cajun events, men take no part in cooking the main course for the party and women prepare the chicken and ingredients for the gumbo.113.
Once the festivities begin, the Cajun community members eat and dance to Cajun music until midnight—the beginning of Lent.

Other dishes and sides

List of Cajun or Cajun-influenced chefs



Notes




