[[Winner in You]]

CATEGORIES: Patti LaBelle albums, 1986 albums, Albums produced by Ashford & Simpson, Albums produced by Burt Bacharach, MCA Records albums

Winner in You is the eighth studio album by American R&B singer Patti LaBelle, released April 28, 1986, on MCA Records. Recording sessions took place during 1985–1986. Production was handled by several record producers, including Burt Bacharach, Carole Bayer Sager, and Nickolas Ashford, among others.
The album peaked at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart, as well as producing the US number-one hit single "On My Own". It was LaBelle's only album to chart outside of the United States, charting in the Netherlands, New Zealand, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. Upon its release, Winner in You received moderate reviews from music critics. The album has been certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).

Release and promotion

Singles

The first single to be released off of Winner in You was "On My Own", featuring Michael McDonald. It peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot 100
The second single to be released was "Oh, People". It peaked at number twenty-nine on the Billboard Hot 100 and number seven on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs. It was the second single to chart internationally, peaking at thirty-one on the Dutch Singles Chart, and number thirty-six on the New Zealand Singles Chart. The third single to be released was "Kiss Away the Pain". It was not as successful as the two prior singles, only reaching number thirteen on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs. The final single to be released was "Something Special (Is Gonna Happen Tonight)", and it performed as well as "Kiss Away the Pain", reaching number thirteen on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Singles.

Winner in You Tour

From 1986 to 1987, LaBelle toured Europe to promote her album.

Reception

Commercial performance

The album peaked at number one on the US Billboard 200. Winner in You attained respectable international charting. In the Netherlands, it entered at number twenty-eight on the Mega Album Top 100. In New Zealand, it entered at number ten on the Top 40 Albums. In Sweden, it entered at number seventeen on the Albums Top 60. In the United Kingdom, it entered at number thirty-four and peaked at number 30 on the UK Albums Chart.

Critical response

Winner in You received average reviews from critics. Ron Wynn on Allmusic gave the album three out of five stars. Wynn claims this is the album that made LaBelle's solo career. He enjoys the songs "Oh, People" and "Kiss Away the Pain", which he believed needed to chart higher on the Billboard Top 40. Robert Christgau gave the album a B, praising the duet with Michael McDonald as well as LaBelle's singing abilities. Christgau also compliments her and her family's songwriting abilities. He believes this is how LaBelle became a multi-platinum solo artist.  Christgau did not like the earlier part of the album, claiming she "doesn't start out with such surefire goods". Overall, he says the "beats and tunes kick in till you could care less what organ she's singing through." Kim Farber of Billboard gave the album a mixed review, claiming it to be inconsistent. He believes album was not a "hands-down winner so many anticipated," saying how none of the fast tracks have a "jump." Ferber, although, praises her singing ability and says that is the only thing that saved the album. He said the ballads were well-written, and enjoyed "On My Own", saying the song is "something real" and likes the song "Oh, People" even more.

Track listing

Personnel and ProductionProduction, Personnel and Studio Information at discogs

Recording Studios

Charts and certifications

Chart positions

Certifications

Chart precession and succession







