[[Turnbull & Asser]]

CATEGORIES: Clothing brands of the United Kingdom, Clothing companies based in London, Companies established in 1885, Clothing retailers of the United Kingdom, High fashion brands, Luxury brands, British Royal Warrant holders, Shops in London, Suit makers, 1885 establishments in England

Turnbull & Asser is a gentleman's bespoke shirtmaker and clothier established in 1885.  In addition to its flagship store on Jermyn Street in London, England, it also has one United States location in New York City. 
The firm has dressed figures such as Prince Charles, Sir Winston Churchill, Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush, John Kerry, Charlie Chaplin, and Picasso. Although extremely traditional outfitters, the company is known for its particularly vivid colours in shirts, knitwear, socks, and ties, with the vast majority of items largely handmade in Britain.

History

Turnbull & Asser was founded in 1885 by Reginald Turnbull, a hosier, and Ernest Asser, a salesman. Together, they opened a hosiery under the name "John Arthur Turnbull" in St. James's in the West End of London. As the neighborhood was the site of numerous gentlemen's clubs and high-end haberdashers, Turnbull's business flourished. The name was changed to "Turnbull & Asser" in 1895.
In 1903, after continued success, Turnbull & Asser moved to its present location at the corner of Jermyn Street and Bury Street.  In 1915, during World War I, Turnbull & Asser developed a raincoat which doubled as a sleeping bag for the British Military. It is known as the Oilsilk Combination Coverall & Ground Sheet. During the 1920s, as dress became less formal, men's dress shirts became more noticeable articles of clothing. Turnbull & Asser responded by focusing its business more on shirtmaking, for which it is most known today.
Between the 1920s and the 1970s, Turnbull & Asser grew its London business from a haberdashery to a clothier, expanding into sportswear, clothing (both bespoke and off-the peg), and off-the-peg shirts. As its symbol, it used a hunting horn with a "Q" above, which it called the Quorn, a name it shares with one of the oldest hunts in England. Many of Turnbull & Asser's articles were called by this name, such as the popular "Quorn scarf". During the 1960s, Turnbull & Asser even had been known for catering to the Swinging London set, with vibrant colors and "modern" designs. In 1962, Turnbull & Asser began to outfit the cinematic James Bond as first portrayed by Sean Connery, whose dress shirts had turnback cuffs fastened with buttons as opposed to cufflinks, referred to as  Portofino, or cocktail cuffs, or James Bond cuffs.
In the 1970s and 1980s, however, Turnbull & Asser began reviving some of the more traditional aspects of its business. The company found that Americans increasingly were buying its wares, so it began offering trunk shows at the Grand Hyatt in New York City. Beginning in 1974, Turnbull & Asser sold ready-to-wear shirts in the United States through department stores Bonwit Teller and Neiman Marcus. For a brief period beginning in 1979, Turnbull & Asser even operated a small store in Toronto opened by Tony Carlisle and Kenneth Williams.
Prince Charles, the Prince of Wales, had bought shirts from Turnbull & Asser since his youth. In 1981, after his marriage to Princess Diana, the Queen bestowed upon him the right to grant royal warrants in his own name. The first warrant he signed was to Turnbull & Asser for shirts which was won for the company by then director Antony Carlisle. He also wears Turnbull & Asser suits, made by the former Chester Barrie factory in Crewe, Cheshire.

Today

Ali Fayed, younger brother of Mohamed Al-Fayed, former owner of Harrods, bought Turnbull & Asser in 1986. He renovated the Jermyn Street store, installing computerised cash registers and updating the interior. He also closed the Toronto location. In 1993, after Thomas Mason, a Nelson, Lancashire mill from which Turnbull & Asser bought its cotton 
However, unlike the majority of other "Jermyn Street" labelled competitors, Turnbull & Asser still make their shirts in the UK, from their long-established Gloucester factory.
Noticing a continuing influx of Americans to the Jermyn Street location, in 1997 Fayed opened a location on 57th Street in New York City.
In 2003, Fayed opened an additional store on Brighton Way in Beverly Hills. This store closed in 2013.
In 2007, Turnbull & Asser created an online store on their British website.  The U.S.-based website does not currently cater for online orders.
In 2008, Turnbull and Asser opened a new store in Old Broad Street, London
In 2010, Turnbull and Asser started selling Custom Shirts through their on-line store.
In 2013, Turnbull & Asser launched their new website.
Turnbull and Asser can now also be followed on social media sites such as Twitter, having created a Twitter account (@turnbull_asser) in 2011.

Cultural references






