[[Toonami Jetstream]]

CATEGORIES: Cartoon Network, Internet television channels, Internet properties established in 2006, Internet properties disestablished in 2009, Toonami

Toonami Jetstream was an ad-supported online broadband service and a remake of Toonami's previous video streaming service Toonami Reactor provided by Cartoon Network and Viz Media.
It hosted various Toonami hits and had music videos, game reviews, and a comment box. It premiered July 17, 2006. Toonami Jetstream was only available in the United States. A computer with Windows 2000 SP4+, Windows XP, Windows Vista or Mac OS X, Microsoft Internet Explorer 5.5 (or higher) or Mozilla Firefox 1.5 (or higher), Adobe Flash 9, and a broadband connection were required.
After Toonami was cancelled on September 20, 2008, it was unknown if Toonami Jetstream would still be active, or would merge with Cartoon Network Video. On January 30, 2009, however, Toonami Jetstream suddenly got taken offline. As a result, Pokémon moved to Cartoon Network Video, while other anime series like Zatch Bell! and Hikaru no Go are on Viz Media's website and One Piece is available on FUNimation's official One Piece website.

Shows

Former series (premieres)

Former series (reruns)

Series dropped from Toonami Jetstream

These shows have been taken off the schedule prematurely, possibly due to dubbing of the shows.
These shows have been taken off the schedule prematurely, for reasons unknown:

Finished/Inactive series

Movies

Specials

Availability of each series

Toonami Jetstream had five shows that originally could not be found anywhere else in their dubbed format. These shows were The Prince of Tennis, Eyeshield 21, MÄR, MegaMan Star Force, and Kiba. The fourth premiered on Toonami as an edited TV movie on August 25, 2007, and due to the online popularity of the The Prince of Tennis and MAR, they were added to the Toonami line-up on December 23, 2006, but Toonami Jetstream continued to show the world premiere English-language episodes, save for one MÄR episode that premiered on Toonami. However, as of June 2007, The Prince of Tennis and MÄR have been removed from the Toonami schedule, though a DVD release for them has begun. MegaMan Star Force has not been seen on Toonami since its edited TV movie.
Premiere episodes of Naruto are currently being aired on TV, and previous episodes are available on DVD. The episodes on Toonami Jetstream were repeats.
Dragon Ball Z, Samurai Jack, Star Wars: Clone Wars, Dragon Ball, Pokémon Chronicles, Megas XLR and Bobobo-bo Bo-bobo have already been aired completely on Cartoon Network. While Samurai Jack has only aired a small portion of its episodes on Toonami, it has been completely aired on Cartoon Network and all four seasons of the show are available on DVD. All of Megas XLR has aired on Toonami, except for one episode which was skipped due to an error and later shown on Miguzi. Star Wars: Clone Wars and Dragon Ball Z have completely aired on Toonami and are also available on DVD. Dragon Ball has also finished airing on Toonami and is available on DVD and is also currently airing reruns on CoLours TV. Pokémon Chronicles has finished airing on Toonami (except for one episode which aired on the normal Cartoon Network schedule), and Toonami Jetstream merely showed reruns starting from the first episode. Bobobo-bo Bo-bobo finished airing and 2 DVDs are available containing the first 8 episodes.
Hikaru no Go is currently on ImaginAsian TV and is also available on DVD. It is unknown if it will surpass its ImaginAsian TV run or its DVD releases on Toonami Jetstream.
Pokémon has aired five seasons The first one was "The Johto Journeys" episodes previously aired on Kids' WB! (first run), Cartoon Network (reruns), and Toonami Jetstream (Reruns) are also available on DVD, but it actually started at the Orange League episode "The Pokémon Water War". They also aired "Johto League Champions" episodes that aired on Kids' WB! and are on DVD, but only a select few aired on Cartoon Network during the Pokémon master marathon. They are currently airing "Master Quest" episodes that aired on Kids' WB! (first run), on Cartoon Network's now-defunct Miguzi block (reruns), and are on DVD, as well as "Battle Frontier" episodes that aired on Cartoon Network's regular schedule (first run) with the first 14 having been rerun on Toonami. "Original Series" episodes aired previously on Kids' WB! (first run, though some aired in syndication first), Cartoon Network (reruns), and currently on Jetstream (also reruns).
One Piece aired reruns from Toonami, with the first 58 episodes having been aired on 4Kids TV prior to their Toonami premieres. It did not return to the site.
Zatch Bell! originally aired on Toonami for 77 episodes, and is in the midst of a DVD release, however, it seemingly vanished from television after episode 77. Later, the show was added to Toonami Jetstream, and more recently, premiere English language episodes are being shown.
IGPX has already finished airing on Cartoon Network, with most of its run being on Toonami, and is in the midst of a DVD release.
There has been no word on the fate of MegaMan NT Warrior (which had aired on Kids' WB! for most of its run), but it is presumably being skipped in favor of Star Force. Rumors are being spread that episodes of the Rockman EXE. Stream series will begin premiering on Jetstream.
Transformers: Animated is currently airing episodes on TV, though not on Toonami, leaving Toonami Jetstream to air reruns. It has aired all of its current episodes of Toonami Jetstream, and was re-airing them. New episodes are now being aired on television.
Blue Dragon aired Saturday mornings on Cartoon Network's regular schedule for the first 14 episodes. Toonami Jetstream used to air reruns, then it aired the world premiere English language episodes as of July 21, 2009.
Storm Hawks aired its complete first season on Cartoon Network, some on Toonami. However, season two has yet to come to the U.S., giving Jetstream the chance to air it, which it has not yet done.
One of the movies to air on Jetstream is Naruto The Movie: Ninja Clash in the Land of Snow.
The second movie to air on Jetstream is Naruto the Movie 2: Legend of the Stone of Gelel
As of June 30, 2008, Bobobo-bo Bo-bobo, Dragon Ball, Dragon Ball Z, and One Piece are seemingly no longer available on the site despite not being finished or due to dubbing issues.

RSS feed

Toonami Jetstream was offering two ways to check for updates. The first is a RSS feed on their website. Alternatively, a downloadable program called the Toonami Jetstream Desktop Receiver collected and displayed updates automatically, allowing easy access to new additions. After Toonami Jetstream became defunct, Cartoon Network Video made a desktop receiver of its own.

Promotions with the Toonami Block

The Toonami website began advertising the service on July 3, 2006. The first television promo was during Cartoon Planet on July 9, 2006. The first Toonami promo was on July 15, 2006, during a special Naruto marathon.




