[[Mike Sheron]]

CATEGORIES: 1972 births, Living people, English footballers, England under-21 international footballers, Association football forwards, Manchester City F.C. players, Bury F.C. players, Norwich City F.C. players, Stoke City F.C. players, Queens Park Rangers F.C. players, Barnsley F.C. players, Blackpool F.C. players, Macclesfield Town F.C. players, Shrewsbury Town F.C. players, Warrington Town F.C. players, Premier League players, The Football League players, Sportspeople from Liverpool, Bury F.C. non-playing staff

Michael Nigel "Mike" Sheron (born 11 January 1972) is an English former footballer, born in Liverpool, who made nearly 500 appearances in the Premier League and the Football League playing as a striker for Manchester City, Bury, Norwich City, Stoke City, Queens Park Rangers, Barnsley, Blackpool, Macclesfield Town and Shrewsbury Town.

Career

Sheron started his career with Manchester City, whom he joined as a schoolboy. His first league appearance came in March 1991 on loan at Bury, for whom he played five times. His Manchester City debut came in the 1991–92 season in a match against Everton. Sheron a total of 29 appearances over the course of the season, scoring seven times. The majority of Sheron's Manchester City appearances were in a striking partnership with Niall Quinn, particularly in the 1992–93 season when Sheron scored 14 goals. Following the arrival of Paul Walsh and Uwe Rosler in March 1994, Sheron's first team opportunities become limited, and in August 1994 he joined Norwich City for a fee of £1,000,000.
His success at Stoke prompted Queens Park Rangers to pay £2.75 million for his services. After 18 months at QPR, the club were facing financial difficulties, and as one of the highest wage earners, Sheron was sold to Barnsley for £1.5 million. Sheron spent four years at Barnsley, making more appearances for them than for any of his other clubs.
Towards the end of his playing career Sheron had short spells at several lower division clubs, playing for Blackpool, Macclesfield and Shrewsbury.
After leaving Shrewsbury, Sheron signed for Warrington Town of the Northern Premier League who he briefly played for before hanging up his boots to join the club's coaching staff.

Career statistics

 
 

Honours

Individual






