[[Mike Henry (voice actor)]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, American stand-up comedians, American television producers, American male writers, American male singers, American male voice actors, American comedians, Living people, American male film actors, American male television actors, People from Richmond, Virginia, Washington and Lee University alumni, Family Guy

Michael "Mike" Henry (born March 25, 1964) is an American actor, producer, screenwriter, singer, and comedian. He is best known for his work on Family Guy, where he is a writer, producer, and voice actor. He provides the voices for many characters including Cleveland Brown, Herbert, Bruce, and Consuela. Starting with the show's fifth season, Henry had received billing as a main cast member. In 2009, Henry, Richard Appel, and Seth MacFarlane created a spin-off of Family Guy called The Cleveland Show to focus on Cleveland and his new family.

Early life and education

Henry and his younger brother Patrick were born to artist parents and raised in Richmond, Virginia. Henry's parents divorced when he was 8 years old and he was primarily raised by his mother. He attended Collegiate School in Richmond where he liked to imitate pitcher Walter Johnson during varsity baseball game warm-ups. He later attended Washington and Lee University. While his brother was attending the Rhode Island School of Design, Henry acted in his short films and met Seth MacFarlane.

Career

Family Guy

Henry met MacFarlane at the Rhode Island School of Design and kept in touch with him after they graduated. A few years later, MacFarlane contacted him about being part of a show called Family Guy; he agreed and came on as both a writer and voice actor. During the show's first four seasons, he was credited as a guest star, but beginning with season five's "Prick Up Your Ears" he has been credited as a main cast member.
After 2 episodes of the second season, Family Guy was taken off the network's permanent schedule and shown irregularly thereafter. The show returned in March 2000 to finish airing the second season which contained 21 episodes, all the cast came back for the series return. The third season contained 21 episodes and began airing from July 11, 2001 to February 14, 2002. During its second and third-season runs, Fox publicly announced that the show had been cancelled at the end of the second season in 2002. Once again Henry and the rest of the cast came back for their voice works.

The Cleveland Show

In 2009, a spin-off series called The Cleveland Show premiered on Fox. The project was created by Seth MacFarlane, Henry and American Dad! show runner Rich Appel. The show was renewed for a third and fourth season on 9 May 2011.

Personal life

Henry and his wife Sara have a daughter named Josie (born November 2007). From a previous marriage, he also has a son named Jack (born c. 2004).

Filmography



Notes




