[[The Wachowskis]]

CATEGORIES: 1960s births, Living people, American comics writers, American film directors, American people of Polish descent, Articles about multiple people, English-language film directors, People from Chicago, Illinois, Prometheus Award winners, Science fiction film directors, Sibling duos, Sibling filmmakers, Writers from Chicago, Illinois

Lana Wachowski (born Laurence "Larry" Wachowski; June 21, 1965) and Andrew Paul "Andy" Wachowski (born December 29, 1967), known together professionally as the Wachowskis and formerly as the Wachowski Brothers, are American film directors, screenwriters and producers.
They made their directing debut in 1996 with Bound, and reached fame with their second film The Matrix (1999), for which they won the Saturn Award for Best Director. They wrote and directed its two sequels The Matrix Reloaded and The Matrix Revolutions (both in 2003), and were heavily involved in the writing and production of other works in the franchise.
Following the commercial success of the Matrix series, they wrote and produced the 2006 film V for Vendetta (an adaptation of the comic of the same name by Alan Moore), and in 2008 released the film Speed Racer, which was a live action adaptation of the Japanese anime series, Speed Racer. Their most recent film, Cloud Atlas, based on the novel of the same name by David Mitchell and co-written and co-directed by Tom Tykwer, was released on October 26, 2012. Their next film Jupiter Ascending, and the television series Sense8, which they created, are both scheduled for a release in 2014.

Early life

Lana Wachowski was born Laurence Wachowski (known as "Larry") in Chicago in 1965. Andy Wachowski was born two years later in 1967. Their mother, Lynne ( They have two sisters, Julie and Laura;WINM :: Keanu Reeves Articles & Interviews Archive :: Wacky Wachowskis. Whoaisnotme. Julie was credited as assistant coordinator in the Wachowskis' film Bound,Bound – Cast, Crew, Director and Awards. The New York Times. Retrieved July 9, 2013. and is a novelist and screenwriter.J. Wachowski Is Speaker At Chattanooga Writers Guild Meeting On May 14 – 05/02/2013. Chattanoogan.
Lana and Andy attended Kellogg Elementary School in Chicago's Beverly area, and graduated from Whitney Young High School, known for its performing arts and science curriculum, in 1983 and 1986, respectively. Former students recall them playing Dungeons & Dragons and working in the school's theater and TV program. Andy then attended Emerson College in Boston, while Lana went to Bard College in New York. Both dropped out before graduating and ran a carpentry business in Chicago while creating comic books.
Influences on the pair included Akira Kurosawa, Mamoru Oshii, and Stanley Kubrick,The Wachowskis Finally Revealed in an Excellent New Yorker Profile. FirstShowing. among others.

Career

Early work

Prior to working in the film industry, the Wachowskis wrote comic books for Marvel Comics' Razorline imprint, namely Ectokid (created by horror novelist Clive Barker) in 1993 as well as writing for Epic Comics' Clive Barker's Hellraiser and Clive Barker's Nightbreed comic series.
In the mid-1990s they branched out into film writing, creating the script for Assassins in 1994. Warner Brothers bought the script and included two more pictures in contract.

Matrix franchise

Their next film, The Matrix was completed in 1999. It proved to be a success, and spawned two sequels, The Matrix Reloaded and The Matrix Revolutions, both released in 2003.

Owned companies

During The Matrix Reloaded, The Matrix Revolutions, Animatrix and Enter the Matrix production, the Wachowskis created EON Entertainment (not to be confused with Eon Productions), their production company to coordinate and direct all involved partners. creativeplanetnetwork. Retrieved July 9, 2013. It is also where the films were edited together, after the various FX vendors sent their finished work. New York Times (June 3, 2003). EON's internal VFX team, ESC, did a number of visual effect shots for the two Matrix sequels and coordinated the other vendors. ESC was shut down in summer 2004. AWN (August 18, 2004). Anarchos Productions (credited in Cloud Atlas as Anarchos PicturesTom Hanks To Star in Tykwer and Wachowskis' Cloud Atlas, Selling at Cannes | Thompson on Hollywood. Blogs.com. Retrieved July 9, 2013.) is their production company that has been billed for all their films starting with V for Vendetta,Synopsis. warnerbros.co.uk. Retrieved July 9, 2013. but EON is still being mentioned at the production credits of their latest film, Cloud Atlas. The New York Times. Retrieved July 9, 2013.
Kinowerks is their postproduction and effects studio, based in Ravenswood, Chicago. (March 14, 2012) The Wachowskis want to produce big movie here – but… | Chicago film, commercials, advertising, video, production, post, tech news from. ReelChicago. It has been acclaimed for its green-friendly design. (July 25, 2011) Wachowskis' Kinowerks the best of green technology | Chicago film, commercials, advertising, video, production, post, tech news from. ReelChicago. Roger Ebert was invited to watch a restored print of The Godfather in the Kinowerks facilities and met the Wachowskis,Ebert, Roger. (July 1, 2013) The Wachowskis: From "2001"to "The Godfather" to "The Matrix" :: rogerebert. Chicago Sun-Times. but he was oblivious to the fact the studio belonged to them. The Chicago Tribune's Christopher Pirelli has interviewed the Wachowskis in the facility but was instructed to keep its exact location a secret, as the filmmakers want to avoid having fans showing up at the front door. Chicago Tribune. (October 24, 2012).
Prior to working in the film industry, the Wachowskis wrote comic books for Marvel Comics' Razorline imprint, namely  Ectokid (created by horror novelist Clive Barker) in 1993 as well as writing for Epic Comics' Clive Barker's Hellraiser and Clive Barker's Nightbreed comic series.
In 2003, they created Burlyman Entertainment and have released comic books based on The Matrix as well as two original bi-monthly series:

Later work

In 2006 the Wachowskis wrote and produced V for Vendetta, an adaptation of Alan Moore's comic book of the same name. The film, directed by Wachowski collaborator James McTeigue, was well received.

Future films

In 2008 the Wachowskis were producing for Madhouse an animated film based on their comic book company's Shaolin Cowboy,C2E2 Announces Ten Top Artist Appearances Chicago Comic & Entertainment Expo press release."Circle of Confusion hires Emery". April 28, 2009. Variety. titled Shaolin Cowboy in The Tomb of Doom. Bleedingcool. The feature is co-directed by the comic book's creator Geof Darrow and Seiji Mizushima, a Japanese director. When the American financiers backed out, the film was left half-finished and in need of $3 million. Darrow does not believe that the required amount of money to finish it will be found. Comic Book Resources (July 26, 2012).
Warner Bros. has expressed interest in Hood, a modern adaptation of the Robin Hood legend, which the Wachowskis wrote and plan to direct. They also wrote an Iraq war-set gay romance conspiracy thriller titled CN-9 (or Cobalt Neural 9); however, the project failed to find financing. However the siblings are still keen to make it, even if it has to be made in a different form than film.
Jupiter Ascending, an original science fiction screenplay by the Wachowskis, is set to be made into a film by Warner Bros. Pictures. The film will be directed and produced by the Wachowskis.
The siblings are also shopping around a concept for a TV series dubbed Sense8 that they have developed with Ninja Assassin collaborator J. Michael Straczynski. In their pursuit of the concept the Wachowskis have penned three spec scripts which are said to resemble their unique storytelling style seen in The Matrix films, and they plan to direct at least a few episodes of the series, should it be made. Producer Marc Rosen of Georgeville Television (GTTV), describes the project as "an idea so big in size and scale that it doesn't make sense to try it as a pilot. The only way to let the filmmakers realize their vision on something like this is to do multiple episodes." On March 27, 2013 it was announced ten episodes will be made to be streamed on Netflix late 2014. (March 27, 2013) Netflix signs up The Matrix, Babylon 5 creators to develop a new sci-fi series: Sense8. Engadget. The series which belongs to the genre of science fiction is described as "a gripping global tale of minds linked and souls hunted" which was conceived by the showrunners "after a late night conversation about the ways technology simultaneously unites and divides us".

Style

The siblings admit to a love for telling multipart stories. "Because we grew up on comic books and the Tolkien trilogy, one of the things we're interested in is bringing serial fiction to cinema," Lana has said. Andy puts his desire to shake up viewers a bit more bluntly: "We think movies are fairly boring and predictable. We want to screw with audiences' expectations." In terms of themes that run through their body of work, Lana has cited "the inexplicable nature of the universe being in constant dialogue with our own consciousness and our consciousness actually affecting the inexplicable nature of the universe.", "interconnectivity and about truth beneath the surface"McGrath, Charles (October 9, 2012) Bending Time, Bending Minds. The New York Times. and "the paradox of choice and choicelesness". YouTube (February 18, 2013). The Wachowskis cited the art of comic book artist Geof Darrow as an influence on the look of The Matrix. Also, they stated that Ghost in the Shell, Ninja Scroll, and Akira as anime that inspired them. "in anime, one thing that they do that we tried to bring to our film was a juxtaposition of time and space in action beats."
The Wachowskis cited Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey as one of their main inspirations for Cloud Atlas. (October 25, 2012) 'Cloud Atlas' Movie Review: The Wachowskis Struggle in the Stratosphere. Time. They first saw the film when they were seven and ten respectively.

Gaming

Lana and Andy are self-proclaimed gamers. As teens they spent their weekends in the attic playing Dungeons & Dragons. They liken the process of the playing parties imagining the same virtual space to the process of filmmaking. Along with some of their friends they wrote a 350-page role-playing game of their own, called High Adventure. The rights to it are available for publishing. The Hollywood Reporter. (October 17, 2012).
On the video game front, they had been exchanging letters with Hideo Kojima and finally met him during a Famitsu interview in late 1999. GameSpot. Metal Gear Solid was the first video game they played after finishing work on The Matrix. Candidates for an adaptation of the first Matrix movie to video game form included Kojima, Bungie and Shiny Entertainment whose Messiah PC game impressed them. MatrixFans.Interview with Gabe Rountree (Animation Director) from Enter the Matrix. MatrixFans. Shiny's David Perry who ultimately had his company develop and collaborate with them on the Enter the Matrix and The Matrix: Path of Neo video games was impressed with their familiarity with the medium which was a big plus during development. Uk.com. Retrieved July 9, 2013. The Wachowskis owned both a PlayStation 2 and Xbox video game console and played several games such as Splinter Cell and Halo 2 and in the case of the latter they finished it even before Perry did. (July 12, 2005) Enter The Bank Balance Interview. Eurogamer. Reportedly during a Halo deathmatch they destroyed their Xbox.
Asked about their feelings turning the tightly controlled Matrix saga to the unpredictable form of an MMORPG with The Matrix Online the duo appeared enthusiastic about the nature and possibilities of video games:

Personal life

Andy has been married to Alisa Blasingame since 1991. Lana, while still identifying as Larry, married Thea Bloom in 1993; they divorced in 2002. She subsequently began dating Karin Winslow, a dominatrix known as Ilsa Strix; they married in 2009.
Raised by a "hardcore atheist" father and an "ex-Catholic turned Shamanist" mother, the duo once described their religious beliefs as non-denominational. Lana is a vegetarian. YouTube. Retrieved July 9, 2013.

Lana's gender transition

Rumors that Lana Wachowski, then still identifying as Larry, was transitioning from male to female spread in the early 2000s, though neither sibling spoke directly on the subject at the time. Though the Wachowskis remained silent, sources close to them denied the rumors. In a 2007 interview Joel Silver, the producer of numerous Wachowski films, stated that the rumors concerning the gender reassignment surgery were "all untrue", further explaining, "they just don't do interviews, so people make things up." Similar statements were made to Fox News by crew members working on the Speed Racer film, with one employee pointing out, "on the call sheets, it still says Larry."No Sex Change for 'Matrix' Director Larry Wachowski. Fox News Channel.
According to Rovi, Lana completed her transition after Speed Racer's release in 2008.
In October 2012 Lana received the Human Rights Campaign's Visibility Award.

Works

Films

Additionally classifying themselves as "lifelong rabid Bulls fans" they created a revamped introductory animation for Chicago Bulls to open the 2006–2007 regular season.

Television

Video games

Comic books

The Wachowskis also wrote an introduction to the 2005 published Vol. 2: Tag

Awards and nominations






