[[Stotfold]]

CATEGORIES: Towns in Bedfordshire, Civil parishes in Bedfordshire

Stotfold is a small town and civil parish in the English county of Bedfordshire.
In the 19th century, Stotfold was regarded as a wealthy place. The saying was that to live in Stotfold, one has to have £100 and a pig. The town is divided by a long road,  High Street, which separates the north side from the south. There are two parks and a recreational ground, plus a Multi-Use Games Area (MUGA) and a football pitch.
Stotfold is thought to have gained its name from the northern drovers breaking their journey south at this point on the A1 Great North Road and penning their horses (stots) in enclosures (folds) before continuing their journeys southwards.
The River Ivel runs through the town. Stotfold covers  and the population, according to the 2001 census, is  6,190.Office for National Statistics: Census 2001: Parish Headcounts: Mid Bedfordshire Retrieved 31 October 2010
The church of St Mary's dates back to Norman times.

Landmarks

Stotfold Watermill

Stotfold Watermill stands on the River Ivel and is one of four mills in Stotfold that were recorded in the Domesday Book."Bedfordshire and Domesday", Bedfordshire Historical Record Society, Quarto Memoir, 1922 vol. 1, by G. Herbert Fowler, p.72  It is the only working mill left in Stotfold and is a grade II listed watermill.

New estates

Building work continues to expand the town, with new areas such as Mill View and Fairfield Park.
Fairfield Park is on the site of the old Fairfield Hospital, covering a very large area, south of Stotfold and to the east of Arlesey. The old hospital has been converted into luxury apartments, with hundreds of new homes being built in the grounds of the former mental health institute. Fairfield Park was formally split from Stotfold on 1 April 2013, when it became a separate civil parish.
Construction has also begun on 850 new homes in the 'Land South of Stotfold' development. This was originally expected to be completed by 2013, with the inclusion of a new lower school, industrial area and shop, but is now expected to have a later completion date due to the current recession. 
In late 2008, the then Mid Bedfordshire District Council came under fire from the public and the government for rejecting complaints from the community about a gypsy site being erected in Stotfold. As of early 2011, it had not been decided where the gypsy site was to be built.

Sport and leisure

Stotfold  has a Non-League football club Stotfold F.C., which plays at Roker Park.

Famous residents

Olympic and world champion track cyclist, Victoria Pendleton, was brought up in Stotfold.  In 2007, the cycle track between Arlesey and Stotfold was renamed in her honour. There is also a golden post box in her honour. Bedfordshire County Council Press Release
Craig Vye, most recently seen in Hollyoaks playing Ethan Scott. Also seen in Aquila, London's Burning, Doctors and Skins.  
Nicky Hunt, Commonwealth Games Gold winner / Olympic hopeful (Archery)






