[[Woody Allen]]

CATEGORIES: 1935 births, Woody Allen, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors, Male actors from New York City, American atheists, Dixieland clarinetists, American male film actors, American film directors, American film producers, American jazz clarinetists, American people of Austrian-Jewish descent, American people of Russian-Jewish descent, American screenwriters, American short story writers, American stand-up comedians, Ashkenazi Jews, Best Director Academy Award winners, Best Director BAFTA Award winners, Best Original Screenplay Academy Award winners, César Award winners, David di Donatello winners, English-language film directors, Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Film directors from New York City, Independent Spirit Award winners, Jewish American male actors, Jewish American musicians, Jewish American writers, Jewish atheists, Jewish comedians, Jewish comedy and humor, Jewish dramatists and playwrights, Jews and Judaism in New York City, Living people, O. Henry Award winners, People from Brooklyn, People from the Bronx, Writers Guild of America Award winners, Cecil B. DeMille Award Golden Globe winners



Woody Allen (born Allan Stewart Konigsberg, December 1, 1935) is an actor, director, screenwriter, comedian, musician and playwright whose career spans more than 50 years.
He worked as a comedy writer in the 1950s, writing jokes and scripts for television and publishing several books of short humor pieces. In the early 1960s, Allen began performing as a stand-up comic, emphasizing monologues rather than traditional jokes. As a comic, he developed the persona of an insecure, intellectual, fretful nebbish, which he maintains is quite different from his real-life personality. "Woody Allen: Blending Real Life With Fiction". Fresh Air. Retrieved April 7, 2012. In 2004, Comedy CentralComedy Central's 100 Greatest Stand-Ups of all Time. Everything2 (April 18, 2004). Retrieved May 4, 2012. ranked Allen in fourth place on a list of the 100 greatest stand-up comics, while a UK survey ranked Allen as the third greatest comedian.
By the mid-1960s Allen was writing and directing films, first specializing in slapstick comedies before moving into dramatic material influenced by European art cinema during the 1970s. He is often identified as part of the New Hollywood wave of filmmakers of the mid-1960s to late '70s.
Allen has been nominated 24 times and won four Academy Awards: three for Best Original Screenplay and one for Best Director (Annie Hall). He has more screenwriting Academy Award nominations than any other writer. He has won nine British Academy of Film and Television Arts Awards. Allen performs regularly as a jazz clarinetist at small venues in Manhattan. In 2011, PBS televised the film biography, Woody Allen: A Documentary, on the American Masters TV series.

Early life

Allen was born Allan Stewart Konigsberg in the Bronx and raised in Brooklyn, New York, the son of Nettie (born Cherrie; November 8, 1906 – January 27, 2002), a bookkeeper at her family's delicatessen, and Martin Konigsberg (December 25, 1900 – January 13, 2001), a jewelry engraver and waiter.
His childhood was not particularly happy: his parents did not get along, and he had a rocky relationship with his stern, temperamental mother.
He impressed students with his extraordinary talent at card and magic tricks.
To raise money he wrote jokes (or "gags") for agent David O. Alber, who sold them to newspaper columnists. According to Allen, his first published joke read: "Woody Allen says he ate at a restaurant that had O.P.S. prices – over people's salaries."
He began to call himself Woody Allen. At the age of 17, he legally changed his name to Heywood Allen. He was then earning more than both parents combined.
After high school, he attended New York University, studying communication and film. He later briefly attended City College of New York and soon flunked out.

Career

Writer and comedian

He was hired as a full-time writer for humorist Herb Shriner, initially earning $25 a week. At 19, he began writing scripts for The Ed Sullivan Show, The Tonight Show, specials for Sid Caesar post-Caesar's Hour (1954–1957), and other television shows.
In 1961, he began working as a comedian, debuting in a Greenwich Village club, the Duplex. He released three LP albums of live nightclub recordings: the self-titled Woody Allen (Colpix 518; 1964), Volume 2 (Colpix 488, 1965), and The Third Woody Allen Album (Capitol 2986; 1968) recorded at a fund-raiser for Eugene McCarthy's presidential run. The material from these albums was edited and abridged into the 2-LP compilation albums Standup Comic and Nightclub Years 1964–1968 (also on CD), including his "The Moose" routine, co-written with Mickey Rose. Allen brought innovation to the comedy monologue genre and his stand-up comedy is considered influential.
Allen wrote for the popular Candid Camera television show, and appeared in some episodes.
Allen started writing short stories and cartoon captions for magazines such as The New Yorker; he was inspired by the tradition of four prominent New Yorker humorists, S. J. Perelman, George S. Kaufman, Robert Benchley and Max Shulman, whose material he modernized. 7 quote: . Retrieved December 1, 2010. (October 24, 2004) "I Appreciate George S. Kaufman", The New York Times. Time. July 3, 1972. pp. 5–6 quote: "I never had a teacher who made the least impression on me, if you ask me who are my heroes, the answer is simple and truthful: George S. Kaufman and the Marx Brothers."Michiko Kakutani (1995) "Woody Allen". This interview is part I of the series The Art of Humor, published by Paris Review 37(136):200 (Fall, 1995). 
Allen is an accomplished author, having published four collections of his short pieces and plays.

Playwright

He became a successful Broadway playwright and wrote Don't Drink the Water in 1966. The play starred Lou Jacobi, Kay Medford, Anita Gillette and Allen's future movie co-star Tony Roberts. A film adaptation of the play, directed by Howard Morris, was released in 1969, starring Jackie Gleason. Because he was not particularly happy with the 1969 film version of his play, in 1994, Allen directed and starred in a second version for television, with Michael J. Fox and Mayim Bialik.
The next play Allen wrote for Broadway was Play It Again, Sam, in which he also starred. The play opened on February 12, 1969, and ran for 453 performances. It featured Diane Keaton and Tony Roberts. Allen, Keaton and Roberts would reprise their roles in the film version of the play, directed by Herbert Ross. For its March 21 issue, Life featured Allen on its cover. In 1981, his play The Floating Light Bulb premiered on Broadway and ran for 65 performances. While receiving mixed reviews, it was notable for giving an autobiographical insight into Allen's childhood, specifically his fascination with magic tricks. He has written several one-act plays, including 'Riverside Drive' and 'Old Saybrook' exploring well-known Allen themes.
On October 20, 2011, Allen's one-act play Honeymoon Motel opened as part of a larger piece entitled Relatively Speaking on Broadway, with two other one-acts by Ethan Coen and Elaine May.

Early films

His first movie was the Charles K. Feldman production What's New Pussycat? in 1965, for which he wrote the screenplay. He was disappointed with the final product, which inspired him to direct every film that he would later write. Allen's first directorial effort was What's Up, Tiger Lily? (1966, co-written with Mickey Rose), in which an existing Japanese spy movie – Kokusai himitsu keisatsu: Kagi no kagi (1965), "International Secret Police: Key of Keys" – was redubbed in English by Allen and friends with fresh new, comic dialogue. In 1967, Allen played Jimmy Bond in the 007 spoof Casino Royale.
Allen directed, starred in, and co-wrote (with Mickey Rose) Take the Money and Run in 1969, which received positive reviews. He later signed a deal with United Artists to produce several films. Those films eventually became Bananas (1971, co-written with Rose), Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex* (1972), Sleeper (1973), and Love and Death (1975). Sleeper was the first of four films where the screenplay was co-written by Allen and Marshall Brickman.
In 1972, Allen wrote and starred in the film version of Play It Again, Sam, directed by Herbert Ross and co-starring Diane Keaton. In 1976, he starred in The Front (directed by Martin Ritt), a humorous and poignant account of Hollywood blacklisting during the 1950s.
Then came two of Allen's most popular films. Annie Hall won four Academy Awards in 1977, including Best Picture, Best Actress in a Leading Role for Diane Keaton, Best Original Screenplay and Best Director for Woody Allen. Annie Hall set the standard for modern romantic comedy and ignited a fashion trend with the clothes worn by Diane Keaton in the film. While in production, the working title was "Anhedonia", a term that means the inability to feel pleasure and the plot revolved around a murder mystery. Allen re-cut the movie after production ended to focus on the romantic comedy between Allen's character, Alvy Singer, and Keaton's character, Annie Hall. The new version, retitled Annie Hall (named after Keaton, Hall being her original last name and Annie a nickname), deals with the inability to feel pleasure. The film is ranked at No. 35 on the American Film Institute "100 Best Movies" and at No. 4 on the AFI list of "100 Best Comedies."
Manhattan, released in 1979, is a black-and-white film often viewed as an homage to New York City. As in many Allen films, the protagonists are upper-middle class academics. The love-hate opinion of cerebral persons found in Manhattan is characteristic of many of Allen's movies, including Crimes and Misdemeanors and Annie Hall. Manhattan focuses on the complicated relationship between middle-aged Isaac Davis (Allen) and a 17-year-old Tracy (Mariel Hemingway).
Between Annie Hall and Manhattan, Allen wrote and directed the dark drama Interiors (1978), in the style of the late Swedish director Ingmar Bergman, one of Allen's chief influences. Interiors represented a departure from Allen's "early, funny" comedies (a line from 1980's Stardust Memories).

1980s

Allen's 1980s films, even the comedies, have somber and philosophical undertones, with their influences being the works of European directors, specifically Ingmar Bergman and Federico Fellini. Stardust Memories was based on 8½, which it parodies, and Wild Strawberries. A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy was adapted from Smiles of a Summer Night. In Hannah and Her Sisters, part of the film's structure and background is borrowed from Fanny and Alexander. Amarcord inspired Radio Days. September resembles Autumn Sonata. Allen uses many elements from Wild Strawberries. In Crimes and Misdemeanors, Allen references a scene from Wild Strawberries.
A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy was the first of 13 movies Allen made starring Mia Farrow, who stepped into Diane Keaton's role when Keaton was shooting Reds.
Stardust Memories features Sandy Bates, a successful filmmaker played by Allen, who expresses resentment and scorn for his fans. Overcome by the recent death of a friend from illness, the character states, "I don't want to make funny movies any more" and a running gag has various people (including visiting space aliens) telling Bates that they appreciate his films, "especially the early, funny ones."
Allen combined tragic and comic elements in such films as Hannah and Her Sisters and Crimes and Misdemeanors, in which he tells two stories that connect at the end. He produced a vividly idiosyncratic tragi-comical parody of documentary, Zelig.
He made three films about show business: Broadway Danny Rose, in which he plays a New York show business agent, The Purple Rose of Cairo, a movie that shows the importance of the cinema during the Depression through the character of the naive Cecilia, and Radio Days, a film about his childhood in Brooklyn and the importance of the radio. The Purple Rose of Cairo was named by Time as one of the 100 best films of all time and Allen described it as one of his three best films, along with Stardust Memories and Match Point. (Allen defines them as "best" not in terms of quality but because they came closest to his vision.)
In 1989, Allen teamed with directors Francis Ford Coppola and Martin Scorsese to make New York Stories, an anthology film about New Yorkers. Allen's short, Oedipus Wrecks, is about a neurotic lawyer and his critical mother. His short pleased critics, but New York Stories bombed at the box office.

1990s

His 1992 film Shadows and Fog is a black-and-white homage to the German expressionists and features the music of Kurt Weill. Allen then made his critically acclaimed drama Husbands and Wives (1992), which received two Oscar nominations: Best Supporting Actress for Judy Davis and Best Original Screenplay for Allen. His film Manhattan Murder Mystery (1993) combined suspense with dark comedy and marked the return of Diane Keaton, Alan Alda and Anjelica Huston.
He returned to lighter movies like Bullets Over Broadway (1994), which earned an Academy Award nomination for Best Director, followed by a musical, Everyone Says I Love You (1996). The singing and dancing scenes in Everyone Says I Love You are similar to musicals starring Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers. The comedy Mighty Aphrodite (1995), in which Greek drama plays a large role, won an Academy Award for Mira Sorvino. Allen's 1999 jazz-based comedy-drama Sweet and Lowdown was nominated for two Academy Awards for Sean Penn (Best Actor) and Samantha Morton (Best Supporting Actress). In contrast to these lighter movies, Allen veered into darker satire towards the end of the decade with Deconstructing Harry (1997) and Celebrity (1998).
Allen made one sitcom "appearance" to date (2009) via telephone on the show Just Shoot Me! in a 1997 episode, "My Dinner with Woody" which paid tribute to several of his films. Allen provided the lead voice in the 1998 animated film Antz, which featured many actors he had worked with and Allen's character was similar to his earlier neurotic roles.

2000s

Small Time Crooks (2000) is similar to the 1942 film Larceny, Inc. (from a play by S.J. Perelman).  Small Time Crooks was Allen's first film with the DreamWorks studio and represented a change in direction: Allen began giving more interviews and made an attempt to return to his slapstick roots. The film was a relative financial success, grossing over $17 million domestically but Allen's next four films foundered at the box office, including Allen's most costly film, The Curse of the Jade Scorpion (with a budget of $26 million). Hollywood Ending, Anything Else, and Melinda and Melinda were given "rotten" ratings from film-review website Rotten Tomatoes and each earned less than $4 million domestically. Woody gave his godson Quincy Rose a small part in Melinda and Melinda.
Allen was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2001.
Match Point (2005) was one of Allen's most successful films of the decade, garnering positive reviews.
Allen returned to London to film Scoop, which also starred Johansson, Hugh Jackman, Ian McShane, Kevin McNally and Allen himself. The film was released on July 28, 2006, and received mixed reviews. He filmed Cassandra's Dream in London. Cassandra's Dream was released in November 2007, and stars Colin Farrell, Ewan McGregor and Tom Wilkinson.
After finishing his third London film, Allen headed to Spain. He reached an agreement to film Vicky Cristina Barcelona in Avilés, Barcelona and Oviedo, where shooting started on July 9, 2007. The movie stars Scarlett Johansson, Javier Bardem, Rebecca Hall and Penélope Cruz. Speaking of his experience there, Allen said: "I'm delighted at being able to work with Mediapro and make a film in Spain, a country which has become so special to me." Vicky Cristina Barcelona was well received, winning Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy at the Golden Globe awards. Penélope Cruz received the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her role in the film.
Allen has said that he "survives" on the European market. Audiences there tend to be more receptive to his films, particularly in Spain, France and Italy – countries where he has a large audience (joked about in Hollywood Ending). "In the United States things have changed a lot, and it's hard to make good small films now," Allen said in a 2004 interview. "The avaricious studios couldn't care less about good films – if they get a good film they're twice as happy but money-making films are their goal. They only want these $100 million pictures that make $500 million."
In April 2008, he began filming a story focused more towards older audiences starring Larry David, Patricia Clarkson Released in 2009, Whatever Works,
described as a dark comedy, follows the story of a botched suicide attempt turned messy love triangle. Whatever Works was written by Allen in the 1970s and the character played by Larry David was written for Zero Mostel, who died the year Annie Hall came out.

2010s

You Will Meet a Tall Dark Stranger, filmed in London, stars Antonio Banderas, Josh Brolin, Anthony Hopkins, Anupam Kher, Freida Pinto and Naomi Watts. Filming started in July 2009. It was released theatrically in the US on September 23, 2010, following a Cannes debut in May 2010, and a screening at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 12, 2010. Allen announced that his next film would be titled Midnight in Paris, starring Adrien Brody, Owen Wilson, Marion Cotillard, Rachel McAdams, Kathy Bates, Michael Sheen, Gad Elmaleh and Carla Bruni, the First Lady of France at the time of production. The film followed a young engaged couple in Paris who see their lives transformed. It debuted at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival on May 12, 2011. Allen said he wanted to "show the city emotionally," during the press conference. "I just wanted it to be the way I saw Paris – Paris through my eyes," he added.
Allen's most recent release, Blue Jasmine, debuted in July 2013. Retrieved August 8, 2013. The film is set in San Francisco and New York, and stars Alec Baldwin, Cate Blanchett, Louis C.K., Andrew Dice Clay, Sally Hawkins, and Peter Sarsgaard. and starring Emma Stone and Colin Firth.imdb.com/title/tt2870756/?ref_=sr_1

Future projects

For many years, Allen wanted to make a film about the origins of jazz in New Orleans. The film, tentatively titled American Blues, would follow the vastly different careers of Louis Armstrong and Sidney Bechet. Allen stated that the film would cost between $80 and $100 million and is therefore unlikely to be made. Conversations with Woody Allen. Alfred A. Knopf. 2007. pp. 315–316 ISBN 1-4000-3149-4.
It was announced in February 2012 that Allen would adapt Bullets Over Broadway into a Broadway musical scheduled to open in 2013.

Theatre

While best known for his films, Allen has enjoyed a successful career in theater, starting as early as 1960, when he wrote sketches for the revue From A to Z. His first great success was Don't Drink the Water, which opened in 1968, and ran for 598 performances for almost two years on Broadway. His success continued with Play It Again, Sam, which opened in 1969, starring Allen and Diane Keaton. The show played for 453 performances and was nominated for three Tony Awards, although none of the nominations were for Allen's writing or acting.
In the 1970s, Allen wrote a number of one-act plays, most notably God and Death, which were published in his 1975 collection Without Feathers.
In 1981, Allen's play The Floating Light Bulb opened on Broadway. The play was a critical success and a commercial flop. Despite two Tony Award nominations, a Tony win for the acting of Brian Backer (who won the 1981 Theater World Award and a Drama Desk Award for his work), the play only ran for 62 performances.
After a long hiatus from the stage, Allen returned to the theater in 1995, with the one-act Central Park West, an installment in an evening of theater known as Death Defying Acts that was also made up of new work by David Mamet and Elaine May.
For the next few years, Allen had no direct involvement with the stage, yet notable productions of his work were staged. A production of God was staged at The Bank of Brazil Cultural Center in Rio de Janeiro,
In 2003, Allen finally returned to the stage with Writer's Block, an evening of two one-acts – Old Saybrook and Riverside Drive – that played Off-Broadway. The production marked the stage-directing debut for Allen.
Also that year, reports of Allen writing the book for a musical based on Bullets Over Broadway surfaced, but no show ever formulated. was directed by Allen and enjoyed an extended run Off-Broadway.
In June 2007, it was announced that Allen would make two more creative debuts in the theater, directing a work that he did not write and directing an opera – a re-interpretation of Puccini's Gianni Schicchi for the Los Angeles Opera
In October 2011, Woody Allen's one-act play called Honeymoon Motel premiered as one in a series of one act plays on Broadway titled Relatively Speaking.com. Retrieved January 4, 2012 Also contributing to the plays are Elaine May and Ethan Coen with John Turturro directing.

Music

thumb|Woody Allen with Jerry Zigmont and Simon Wettenhall performing at Vienne Jazz Festival, Vienne, France, September 20, 2003 Allen is a passionate fan of jazz, featured prominently in the soundtracks to his films. He began playing the clarinet as a child and took his stage name from clarinetist Woody Herman.
Woody Allen and his New Orleans Jazz Band have been playing each Monday evening at Manhattan's Carlyle Hotel for many years The documentary film Wild Man Blues (directed by Barbara Kopple) documents a 1996 European tour by Allen and his band, as well as his relationship with Previn. The band has released two CDs: The Bunk Project (1993) and the soundtrack of Wild Man Blues (1997).
Allen and his band played the Montreal International Jazz Festival on two consecutive nights in June 2008.

Significant works about Allen

Apart from Wild Man Blues, directed by Barbara Kopple, there are other documentaries featuring Woody Allen, including the 2002 cable-television documentary Woody Allen: a Life in Film, directed by Time film critic Richard Schickel, which interlaces interviews of Allen with clips of his films, and Meetin' WA, a short interview of Allen by French director Jean-Luc Godard. In 2011 the PBS series American Masters co-produced a comprehensive documentary about him, Woody Allen: a Documentary directed by Robert B. Weide.
Eric Lax authored the book Woody Allen: A Biography. From 1976 to 1984, Stuart Hample wrote and drew Inside Woody Allen, a comic strip based on Allen's film persona.

Personal life

Marriages and romantic relationships

Allen has had three wives: Harlene Rosen (1954–1959), Louise Lasser (1966–1970) and Soon-Yi Previn (1997–present). Though he had a 12-year romantic relationship with actress Mia Farrow, the two never married. Allen also had romantic relationships with Stacey Nelkin and Diane Keaton.

=Harlene Rosen=

At age 19, Allen married 16-year-old Harlene Rosen. The marriage lasted from 1954 to 1959. Time stated that the years were "nettling" and "unsettling."
Rosen, whom Allen referred to in his standup act as "the Dread Mrs. Allen", sued him for defamation due to comments at a TV appearance shortly after their divorce. Allen tells a different story on his mid-1960s standup album Standup Comic. In his act, Allen said that Rosen sued him because of a joke he made in an interview. Rosen had been sexually assaulted outside her apartment and according to Allen, the newspapers reported that she "had been violated".  In the interview, Allen said, "Knowing my ex-wife, it probably wasn't a moving violation." In an interview on The Dick Cavett Show, Allen brought up the incident again where he repeated his comments and stated that the sum for which he was sued was "$1 million."

=Louise Lasser=

Allen married Louise Lasser in 1966. They divorced in 1969, and Allen did not marry again until 1997. Lasser appeared in three Allen films after the divorce – Take the Money and Run, Bananas, and Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex* (*But Were Afraid to Ask)  and briefly appeared in Stardust Memories.

=Diane Keaton=

In 1970, Allen cast Diane Keaton in his Broadway show, Play It Again, Sam. During the run she and Allen became romantically involved and although they broke up after a year, she continued to star in a number of his films, including Sleeper as a futuristic poet and Love and Death as a composite character based on the novels of Tolstoy and Dostoevsky. Annie Hall was very important in Allen and Keaton's careers. It is said that the role was written for her, as Diane Keaton's given name is Diane Hall. She then starred in Interiors as a poet, followed by Manhattan. In 1987, she had a cameo as a nightclub singer in Radio Days and was chosen to replace Mia Farrow in the co-starring role for Manhattan Murder Mystery after Allen and Farrow began having troubles with their personal and working relationship while making this film. Keaton has not worked with Allen since Manhattan Murder Mystery. Since the end of their romantic relationship, Keaton and Allen remain close friends.Q&A: Diane Keaton. CBS News. February 18, 2004. Retrieved February 21, 2006.

=Stacey Nelkin=

The film Manhattan is said by the Los Angeles Times to be widely known to have been based on his romantic relationship with actress Stacey Nelkin. Her bit part in Annie Hall ended up on the cutting room floor, and their relationship, though never publicly acknowledged by Allen, reportedly began when she was 17, and a student at New York's Stuyvesant High School. Woody: Movies from Manhattan. New York: Overlook Press, 1996. pp. 111–112 ISBN 0-87951-692-5.  Woody Allen: A Biography. New York: Caroll & Graf., 1998. pp. 226, 248, 249, 250, 253, 273–4, 385, 416 ISBN 0-7867-0807-7. The Reluctant Film Art of Woody Allen. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2001. p. 61 ISBN 0-8131-9041-X.

=Mia Farrow=

Around 1980, Allen began a relationship with actress Mia Farrow, who had leading roles in most of his movies from 1982 to 1992. Farrow and Allen never married and kept separate homes.
Allen and Farrow separated in 1992, after Farrow discovered nude photographs that Allen had taken of Soon-Yi, Farrow's adopted daughter who was around 20 years old then.
In a 2005 Vanity Fair interview, 

=Soon-Yi Previn=

After ending his relationship with Mia Farrow in 1992, Allen continued his relationship with Soon-Yi Previn. Though Allen never married Mia FarrowCollins, Glenn (December 25, 1997). "Mixed Reviews Greet Woody Allen Marriage", New York Times. Retrieved January 23, 2010. and was not Previn's legal stepfather, the relationship between Allen and Previn has often been referred to as a stepfather involved romantically with his stepdaughterHornblow, Deborah. "Entertainment", Los Angeles Times, August 30, 2001. because she was adopted and legally Farrow's daughter and Allen's son's sister. In 1991, The New York Times opined on Allen's family life: "Few married couples seem more married. They are constantly in touch with each other, and not many fathers spend as much time with their children as Allen does."
In 1991, when the relationship began, Allen was 56 and Previn around 19. Asked whether their age difference was conducive to "a healthy, equal relationship", Allen said equality is not necessarily a requirement in a relationship and "The heart wants what it wants. There's no logic to those things. You meet someone and you fall in love, and that's that."Isaacson, Walter; Allen, Woody (August 31, 1992). "The heart wants what it wants". Time. The couple married in 1997. Retrieved July 24, 2013.

Children

Mia Farrow and Allen jointly adopted two children, Dylan Farrow (who changed her name to Eliza and later to Malone) and Moshe Farrow (known as Moses); they also had one biological child, Satchel Farrow (known as Ronan Seamus Farrow). Allen did not adopt any of Farrow's other children, including Soon-Yi Farrow Previn (adopted daughter of Farrow and André Previn, now known as Soon-Yi Previn).
Following their separation, Farrow won custody of their children. Allen was denied visitation rights with Malone and could see Ronan only under supervision. Moses, who was then 15, chose not to see Allen
Soon-Yi Previn and Allen have two adopted daughters,
After Allen and Farrow separated, a long public legal battle for the custody of their three children began. Prior to the proceedings, Dylan Farrow's doctor reported concerns that Allen had sexually molested his adopted daughter, who was then seven years old. The police-appointed medical team concluded that Dylan "was not molested", citing contradictory statements by Dylan. The judge eventually found that the sex abuse charges were inconclusive. "Chronicle", The New York Times.
In February 2014, Dylan Farrow repeated the allegations in an open letter published by Nicholas Kristof, a friend of Mia Farrow, in his The New York Times blog, describing how Allen allegedly sexually abused her in the attic in their Connecticut summer home while she was playing with her brother's train set.
In a 2013 interview with Vanity Fair, Farrow stated that Ronan could "possibly" be the biological child of her first husband Frank Sinatra, with whom she claims to have "never really split up."

Psychoanalysis

Allen spent over 37 years undergoing psychoanalysis, and some of his films, such as Antz, jokingly include references to psychoanalysis. Moment Magazine says, "It drove his self-absorbed work." Allen biographer John Baxter, wrote, "Allen obviously found analysis stimulating, even exciting." Allen says his psychoanalysis ended around the time he began his relationship with Previn, although he is still claustrophobic and agoraphobic.
Allen has described himself as being a "militant Freudian atheist".

Theatre works

In addition to directing, writing, and acting in films, Allen has written and performed in a number of Broadway theater productions.

Filmography

Awards & nominations

Bibliography






