[[Silvio Berlusconi]]

CATEGORIES: 1936 births, 21st-century Italian criminals, A.C. Milan, Forza Italia politicians, Italian anti-communists, Italian billionaires, Italian businesspeople, Italian football chairmen and investors, Italian fraudsters, Italian mass media owners, Italian politicians convicted of crimes, Italian publishers (people), Living people, Members of Propaganda Due, Members of the Italian Chamber of Deputies, Newspaper publishers (people), People convicted of fraud, People expelled from public office, People from Milan, Presidents of the European Council, Prime Ministers of Italy, Recipients of the Al-Fateh Medal (Libya), Recipients of the Order of the Three Stars, 2nd Class, Recipients of the Star of Romania Order, Silvio Berlusconi, The People of Freedom politicians, University of Milan alumni, Recipients of the Order of Abdulaziz al Saud

Silvio Berlusconi ( who served three times as Prime Minister of Italy, from 1994 to 1995, 2001 to 2006 and 2008 to 2011.C. Milan since 1986. He is nicknamed Il Cavaliere (The Knight) for his Order of Merit for Labour, although he voluntarily resigned from this order in March 2013. Digilander.it. Retrieved on 2013-08-04.
In 2014, Forbes magazine ranked him as the 141st richest man in the world with a net worth of US$9.0 billion.
Berlusconi was Prime Minister for nine years in total, making him the longest-serving post-war Prime Minister of Italy, and the third longest-serving since the Unification of Italy, after Benito Mussolini and Giovanni Giolitti. He was the leader of the centre-right party Forza Italia from 1994 to 2009, and its successor party The People of Freedom from 2009 to 2013. Since November 2013, he is acting as the current leader of a revived Forza Italia.
After serving nearly 19 years as member of the Chamber of Deputies, Italy's lower house, after the 2013 general election he became a member of the Senate.
On 1 August 2013, he was convicted of tax-fraud by the final appeal instance, Court of Cassation, and sentenced to four years imprisonment (of which three years are automatically pardoned) along with a public office ban for two years. As his age exceeds 70 years, he will be exempted from direct imprisonment, and instead serve his sentence by doing unpaid social community work. Because of being sentenced to a gross imprisonment for more than two years, a new Italian anticorruption law made the Italian Senate expel and bar him from serving any legislative office for six years. Berlusconi has pledged to stay leader of Forza Italia throughout the period where he serves his imprisonment sentence and public office ban.

Family background and personal life

Berlusconi was born in Milan in 1936, where he was raised in a middle-class family.  Silvio was the first of three children; he had a sister, Maria Francesca Antonietta Berlusconi (1943–2009), and has a brother, Paolo Berlusconi (born 1949).
After completing his secondary school education at a Salesian college, he studied law at the Università Statale in Milan, graduating (with honours) in 1961 with a thesis on the legal aspects of advertising. Berlusconi was not required to serve the standard one-year stint in the Italian army which was compulsory at the time.[ref]
