[[Andrea Doria-class battleship]]

CATEGORIES: Battleship classes, Andrea Doria-class battleships, World War I battleships of Italy, World War II battleships of Italy, 1910s ships

The Andrea Doria'' class''', which Italians usually call the Caio Duilio class', was a pair of dreadnought battleships built for the Royal Italian Navy (Regia Marina) during the early 1910s. The two ships—Andrea Doria and Caio Duilio—were completed during World War I. The Andrea Doria class was an incremental improvement over the preceding  guns.
The two ships spent World War I based in southern Italy to keep the Austro-Hungarian Navy bottled up in the Adriatic, but neither vessel saw any combat during the war. After the war, they cruised the Mediterranean and participated in several international incidents including the Corfu incident in 1923. Both ships were withdrawn from service in 1933 and began a lengthy reconstruction in 1937. The modifications included removing their center main battery turret and boring out the rest of the guns to , strengthening their armor protection, installing new boilers and steam turbines, and lengthening their hulls. The reconstruction work lasted until 1940, by which time Italy was already engaged in World War II.
The two ships were moored in Taranto on the night of 11–12 November 1940 when the British launched a carrier strike on the fleet there. In the resulting Battle of Taranto, Caio Duilio was hit by a torpedo and forced to beach to avoid sinking. Andrea Doria was undamaged in the raid—repairs for Caio Duilio lasted until May 1941. Both ships escorted convoys to North Africa in late 1941, including Operation M42, where Andrea Doria saw action at the inconclusive First Battle of Sirte on 17 December. Fuel shortages curtailed further activity in 1942 and 1943, and both ships were interned at Malta following Italy's surrender in September 1943. Italy was permitted to retain both battleships after the war, and they alternated as fleet flagship until the early 1950s, when they were removed from active service. Both ships were scrapped after 1956.

Design

The Andrea Doria-class ships were designed by Vice Admiral (Generale del Genio navale) Guiseppe Valsecchi and were ordered in response to French plans to build the  guns of the older ships. 278

General characteristics

The ships of the Andrea Doria class were  at deep load. 260 They were provided with a complete double bottom and their hulls were subdivided by 23 longitudinal and transverse bulkheads. The ships had two rudders, both on the centerline. They had a crew of 31 officers and 969 enlisted men. 270, 272

Propulsion

The ships were fitted with three Parsons steam turbine sets, arranged in three engine rooms. The center engine room housed one set of turbines that drove the two inner propeller shafts. It was flanked by compartments on either side, each housing one turbine set which powered the outer shafts. Steam for the turbines was provided by 20 Yarrow boilers, 8 of which burned oil and 12 of which burned both oil and coal. Designed to reach a maximum speed of . 272–73, 278

Armament

As built, the ships' main armament comprised thirteen 46-caliber 305-millimeter guns,Preston, p. 179 designed by Armstrong Whitworth and Vickers,Friedman, p. 234 in five gun turrets. The turrets were all on the centerline, with a twin-gun turret superfiring over a triple-gun turret in fore and aft pairs, and a third triple turret amidships, designated 'A', 'B', 'Q', 'X', and 'Y' from front to rear. The turrets had an elevation capability of −5 to +20 degrees and the ships could carry 88 rounds for each gun. Sources disagree regarding these guns' performance, but naval historian Giorgio Giorgerini claims that they fired 
The secondary armament on the first two ships consisted of sixteen 45-caliber  torpedo tubes, one on each broadside and the third in the stern. 268, 277–78

Armor

The Andrea Doria-class ships had a complete waterline armor belt that had a maximum thickness of  thick, also in two layers. Fore and aft transverse bulkheads connected the armored belt to the decks. 271
The frontal armor of the gun turrets was  thick.

Modifications and reconstruction

During World War I, a pair of 50-caliber 76-millimeter guns on high-angle mounts were fitted as anti-aircraft (AA) guns, one gun at the bow and the other on top of 'X' turret. In 1925 the number of 50-caliber 76-millimeter guns was reduced to 13, all mounted on the turret tops, and six new 40-caliber 76-millimeter guns were installed abreast the aft funnel. In addition two license-built 2-pounder AA guns were also fitted. In 1926 the rangefinders were upgraded and a fixed aircraft catapult was mounted on the port side of the forecastle for a Macchi M.18 seaplane. 164
By the early 1930s, Regia Marina had begun design work on the new  for Duilio at deep load. The ships' crews increased to 70 officers and 1,450 enlisted men.
Two of the propeller shafts were removed and the existing turbines were replaced by two sets of Belluzzo geared steam turbines rated at .
The center turret and the torpedo tubes were removed and all of the existing secondary armament and AA guns were replaced by a dozen  thick armor. Atop the conning tower there was a fire-control director fitted with three large rangefinders.
The deck armor was increased during reconstruction to a total of  thick. The existing underwater protection was replaced by the Pugliese system that consisted of a large cylinder surrounded by fuel oil or water that was intended to absorb the blast of a torpedo warhead. 158

Ships

Service history

Both battleships were completed after Italy entered World War I on the side of the Triple Entente, though neither one saw action, since Italy's principle naval opponent, the Austro-Hungarian Navy, largely remained in port for the duration of the war. Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel, the Italian naval chief of staff, believed that Austro-Hungarian submarines and minelayers could operate too effectively in the narrow waters of the Adriatic. 150 The threat from these underwater weapons to his capital ships was too serious for him to use the fleet in an active way. 150 Instead, Revel decided to implement a blockade at the relatively safer southern end of the Adriatic with the battle fleet, while smaller vessels, such as the MAS torpedo boats, conducted raids on Austro-Hungarian ships and installations. Meanwhile, Revel's battleships would be preserved to confront the Austro-Hungarian battle fleet in the event that it sought a decisive engagement. 141–142
Andrea Doria and Caio Duilio both cruised in the eastern Mediterranean after the war, and both were involved in postwar disputes over control of various cities. Caio Duilio was sent to provide a show of force during a dispute over control of İzmir in April 1919 and Andrea Doria assisted in the suppression of Gabriele D'Annunzio in Fiume in November 1920. Caio Duilio cruised the Black Sea after the İzmir incident until she was replaced in 1920 by the battleship Giulio Cesare. Andrea Doria and Caio Duilio were present during the Corfu incident in 1923 as part of the naval demonstration protesting the murder of General Enrico Tellini and four other Italians. In January 1925, Andrea Doria visited Lisbon, Portugal, to represent Italy during the celebration marking the 400th anniversary of the death of explorer Vasco da Gama. The two ships performed the normal routine of peacetime cruises and goodwill visits throughout the 1920s and into the early-1930s, when both battleships were placed in reserve. 165–167
Both Andrea Doria and Caio Duilio went into drydock in the late 1930s for extensive modernizations; this work lasted until October and April 1940, respectively. By that time, Italy had entered World War II. The two ships joined the 5th Division based at Taranto. Caio Duilio participated in a patrol intended to catch the British battleship , attacked the ships moored in the harbor. Andrea Doria was undamaged in the raid, but Caio Duilio was hit by a torpedo on her starboard side. She was grounded to prevent her from sinking in the harbor and temporary repairs were effected to allow her to travel to Genoa for permanent repairs, which began in January 1941. 166–168Rohwer, p. 47 In February, she was attacked by the British Force H; several warships attempted to shell Caio Duilio while she was in dock, but they scored no hits. 64 Repair work lasted until May 1941, when she rejoined the fleet at Taranto. 166
In the meantime, Andrea Doria participated in several operations intended to catch British convoys in the Mediterranean, including the Operation Excess convoys in January 1941. By the end of the year, both battleships were tasked with escorting convoys from Italy to North Africa to support the Italian and German forces fighting there. These convoys included Operation M41 on 13 December and Operation M42 on 17–19 December. During the latter, Andrea Doria engaged British cruisers and destroyers in the First Battle of Sirte on the first day of the operation. Neither the Italians nor the British pressed their attacks and the battle ended inconclusively. Caio Duilio was assigned to distant support for the operation, and was too far away to actively participate in the battle. Convoy escort work continued into early 1942, but thereafter the fleet began to suffer from a severe shortage of fuel, which kept the ships in port for the next two years.
Both ships were interned at Malta following Italy's surrender on 3 September 1943. They remained there until 1944, when the Allies allowed them to return to Italian ports; Andrea Doria went to Syracuse, Sicily and Caio Duilio returned to Taranto before joining her sister at Syracuse. Italy was allowed to retain the two ships after the end of the war, and they alternated in the role of fleet flagship until 1953, when they were both removed from service. Andrea Doria continued on as a gunnery training ship, but Caio Duilio was simply placed in reserve. Both battleships were stricken from the naval register in September 1956 and were subsequently broken up for scrap. 167–168Gardiner & Chesneau, p. 284

Notes

Footnotes



|year=2004|location=Annapolis, Maryland|publisher=Naval Institute Press|isbn=1-84415-047-X}}

Further reference




