[[Yōtōden]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 anime OVAs, 1989 anime films, 1989 manga, Action anime and manga, Adventure anime and manga, Central Park Media, Drama anime and manga, Fantasy anime and manga, J.C.Staff, Japanese fantasy novels, Japanese mythology in anime and manga, Ninja anime and manga, Ninja films, Samurai anime and manga, Sengoku period in fiction, Supernatural anime and manga

 is a Japanese historical fantasy novel by Takeshi Narumi. In 1987 the novel was adapted into a 3-episode original video animation by J.C. In 1989, Yotoden was re-edited into the feature film titled Wrath of the Ninja for English-speaking regions. A manga version was created as well.

Plot

The story takes place during Japan's great civil war Sengoku period, beginning in the summer of 1581 and ending two years later. In the anime, the historical warlord Oda Nobunaga is really an evil demon killing everyone who stands in his way. An ancient prophecy says three mystical Demon Blades from three different ninja clans can end Nobunaga's unholy campaign. The story follows Kasumi no Ayanosuke, a young kunoichi (female ninja) who has escaped her village's annihilation, in her heroic efforts to reunite these three sacred weapons use them to kill Nobunaga.

Characters

Protagonists

Antagonists

Other characters

OVA version

The series was released in three episodes from 1987 to 1988 in Japan only on VHS and videodisc formats;Media release dates 

Film version

The compilation movie version of Yōtōden was cut together by MTV Japan and released cinematically, premiering at Ikebukuro Theater on May 27, 1989,Theatrical release info 

Manga version

Yōtōden manga was published after the anime and ran for a year (September 1989 - September 1990) in the Japanese magazine Newtype, later also published in a book form in 1991 and in Kadokawa Newtype 100% Comics in 1992.

Other

Other media and items for the series included two soundtracks released on CD by Victor Musical Industries, Inc. in 1987-1988,Soundtrack 1 info  two artbooks, a line of collectible phone cards, and a large number of minor merchandise such as calendars, posters, postcards, etc.

Reception

The OVA series achieved an enormous success in Japan upon its initial release, including being voted by the readers of Gakken's animation magazine AnimeV as the best OVA in both 1987 and 1988. Ayame was also voted the best female character, and Sakon won the first place for two constructive years in the category best supporting character.General info 

Sources






