[[Rosenstolz]]

CATEGORIES: Echo winners, German musical duos, German musical groups, German pop music groups, Musical groups established in 1991, Musical groups from Berlin

Rosenstolz () was a German pop duo from Berlin that was active between 1991 and 2012 and had chart hits in Germany, Austria and Switzerland. The duo consisted of singer AnNa R. and musician Peter Plate, who also occasionally provided vocals. Rosenstolz achieved major chart success after the nineties, with five studio albums going to No. 1 in the German albums chart. The duo's biggest selling album, Das große Leben (2006), sold over one million copies. Although Rosenstolz split up to pursue separate music careers, the duo left open the possibility of a future reunion.

History

1991: Formation

Shortly after moving to Berlin-Friedrichshain in December 1990, Plate met native Berliner AnNa R. They were put in contact with each other by the landlord of Plate's flat, who knew that singer AnNa R. was looking for a pianist and that keyboard player Plate needed a singer. The duo first met in AnNa R.'s flat and went on to Plate's flat the same evening, where they recorded a song together. Lieb mich, wenn du kannst, nimm mich, nimm mich ganz (3rd ed., July 1998) (in German). Munich, Germany: dtv. ISBN 3-423-20058-8.
The duo began to meet regularly to work on new songs despite their different music tastes – AnNa R. had a preference for singing chanson, while Plate's interests lay in making English-language pop music. After about 4 months, they had enough material to produce their first cassette and were eager to give their first concert. They needed a name for their band and considered many possibilities, one of the early favourites being A & P. Eventually, they somehow came up with Rosenstolz, which immediately appealed to them.
The first Rosenstolz concert took place on 4 October 1991 in Berlin at the Galerie Bellevue, where most of the people present were friends of the duo.

1992–1995: Soubrette werd' ich nie, Nur einmal noch and Mittwoch is' er fällig

Rosenstolz continued to perform live following the initial concerts and was soon discovered by record producer Tom Müller, who had previously worked with German singer Nina Hagen.
Eventually, Rosenstolz was giving around 10 concerts per month, mostly in the eastern states of Germany. By 1993, the band was able to hold its first proper concert, which took place at the WABE culture centre in Berlin and had 600 fans attending.
Rosenstolz also recorded two further studio albums: Nur einmal noch (1994) and Mittwoch is' er fällig (1995)."ROSENSTOLZ - NUR EINMAL NOCH - CD - musicline. PhonoNet GmbH. Retrieved 5 January 2014."ROSENSTOLZ - MITTWOCH IS'ER FÄLLIG - CD - musicline. PhonoNet GmbH. Retrieved 5 January 2014. By then, the band had left Pool owing to a disagreement and had moved to small record label Traumton Records.

1996–1999: Objekt der Begierde, Die Schlampen sind Müde and Zucker

By the mid-nineties, major record labels were starting to show an interest in Rosenstolz. After considering various offers, the duo decided to switch to Polydor, where they were able to retain their artistic independence. The move to a major label meant that the costs of producing Rosenstolz's albums were no longer borne by Müller, but instead by the record label. In addition, the duo now had more resources available to them, such as the use of a 20-piece string ensemble for the production of the song "Der Moment". The song was part of Rosenstolz's next studio album, Objekt der Begierde, which was released in 1996 and coincided with a tour that took place between May and December, with a break for the summer. During the tour, Rosenstolz saw increased audience numbers in the western states of Germany and performed in front of over 4000 people in the final concert in Berlin. "ROSENSTOLZ - OBJEKT DER BEGIERDE - CD - musicline. PhonoNet GmbH. Retrieved 5 January 2014.
In 1997, Rosenstolz was invited by the Goethe-Institut to perform at a concert in Novosibirsk, Russia. The audience of about 10,000 people was the band's largest so far. "Rosenstolz: Bonjour Tristesse" (in German). DerWesten. 24 September 2008. In the same year, Rosenstolz entered the German charts for the first time with Die Schlampen sind müde, the band's fifth studio album. Despite the lack of airplay, the album remained in the charts for several weeks, peaking at No. 31."Rosenstolz Magazin - 20 Jahre Rosenstolz" (in German). Official Rosenstolz website. Retrieved 10 November 2013."Rosenstolz | Longplay-Chartverfolgung" (in German). musicline.de. Media Control Charts. PhonoNet GmbH. Retrieved 5 January 2014.
Rosenstolz gained more exposure in 1998 by participating in the televised qualifying competition to find Germany's next representative for the Eurovision Song Contest. Although Rosenstolz did not win and came second, the band's song "Herzensschöner" was the first Rosenstolz song to enter the German singles chart, peaking at No. 34."Die Teilnehmer am Vorentscheid 1998" (in German). Official German Eurovision website. Retrieved 10 November 2013."Rosenstolz | Single-Chartverfolgung" (in German). musicline.de. Media Control Charts. PhonoNet GmbH. Retrieved 5 January 2014.
In 1999, Rosenstolz's sixth studio album, Zucker, was released. It charted more highly than the band's previous album, entering the charts at No. 2."Rosenstolz | Chartverfolgung | Zucker (Longplay)" (in German). musicline.de. Media Control Charts. PhonoNet GmbH. Retrieved 5 January 2014. Rosenstolz toured the same year and released the band's first live album, Zuckerschlampen:live, which also charted highly, entering the charts at No. 5."Rosenstolz | Chartverfolgung | Zuckerschlampen: Live (Longplay)" (in German). musicline.de. Media Control Charts. PhonoNet GmbH. Retrieved 5 January 2014.
Also in 1999, Rosenstolz released the song "Ja, ich will" in support of the introduction of same-sex marriage. At the time, Germany had not yet legalized registered partnerships for same-sex couples. The song was a collaboration with German comedienne Hella von Sinnen, who sang a duet with Plate in the song."Rosenstolz mit Bundesverdienstkreuz ausgezeichnet" (in German). queer.de. 1 September 2011.

2000–2004: Kassengift, Macht Liebe and Herz

The start of the new millennium saw Rosenstolz topping the German albums chart for the first time. Kassengift, the band's seventh studio album, was released in September 2000 and went straight to No. 1."Rosenstolz | Chartverfolgung | Kassengift (Longplay)" (in German). musicline.de. Media Control Charts. PhonoNet GmbH. Retrieved 5 January 2014.  The band also received more airplay on music television channels through the music video for the single "Amo Vitam", which was from the new album and sung entirely in Latin. Rosenstolz also re-recorded two songs from Kassengift as collaborations with other artists: "Total Eclipse", which was recorded with Marc Almond, and "Die schwarze Witwe", which was recorded with Nina Hagen.""Wir hassen Schlager"" (in German). Rhein-Zeitung online. 8 October 2001.
Rosenstolz's next studio album, Macht Liebe, came out in 2002 and differed from earlier albums, with electropop elements to be found in songs such as "Sternraketen". ""Auf der Tour lassen wir es richtig krachen!"" (in German). laut.de. 3 September 2002. Macht Liebe reached No. 3 in the German albums chart,"Rosenstolz | Chartverfolgung | Macht Liebe (Longplay)" (in German). musicline.de. Media Control Charts. PhonoNet GmbH. Retrieved 5 January 2014. and the accompanying concert tour was a sell-out, including seven sold-out concerts in the Columbiahalle in Berlin. At the concerts, Rosenstolz performed "Laut", a protest song the band had written against the invasion of Iraq.
The summer of 2003 saw the release of Rosenstolz's second live album and first live DVD. Both were titled Live aus Berlin and were recorded during the Macht Liebe tour. Rosenstolz's first open-air concert tour also took place that summer, ending in Berlin in front of an audience of 17,000 people.
The release of Herz (2004), Rosenstolz's ninth studio album, marked a change in the band's direction: in an interview in 2008, Plate expressed his opinion that there were two phases of Rosenstolz, the first one ending with Macht Liebe and the second one starting with Herz. ""Wir wollen einfach Mut machen"" (in German). Berliner Morgenpost. 27 July 2008. Herz reached gold status after one week and then platinum status shortly afterwards; it also went to No. 1 in the German albums chart. The singles "Liebe ist alles", "Ich will mich verlieben" and "Willkommen" from the album were top 10 hits in the German singles chart, and a record number of people attended the concert tour following the album's release."Rosenstolz | Chartverfolgung | Herz (Longplay)" (in German). musicline.de. Media Control Charts. PhonoNet GmbH. Retrieved 16 February 2014. The song "Liebe ist alles" was later covered by Melanie C and Grégory Lemarchal. Their versions of the song are titled "Let There Be Love" (2011) and "Je Deviens Moi" (2005), respectively."Spice Girl Melanie C: "Frauen sind im Pop das Ultimative"" (in German). Hamburger Abendblatt. 14 September 2011."Peter Plate - Biografie" (in German). Universal Music Group website. 18 January 2013.

2005–2011: Das große Leben, Die Suche geht weiter and Wir sind am Leben

Rosenstolz's tenth studio album, Das große Leben, was released in March 2006. Consisting mostly of ballads, the album was the most successful in the band's history, staying at No. 1 in the German charts for four consecutive weeks and selling over one million copies. "Anders als geplant" (in German). Berliner Zeitung. 25 February 2006."Rosenstolz | Chartverfolgung | Das Grosse Leben (Longplay)" (in German). musicline.de. Media Control Charts. PhonoNet GmbH. Retrieved 5 January 2014."Gold-/Platin-Datenbank (Rosenstolz; 'Das grosse Leben')" (in German). Bundesverband Musikindustrie. It was also the band's first album to top the Austrian charts."Rosenstolz – Das grosse Leben" (in German). Austriancharts.at. Hung Medien. Retrieved 5 January 2014. All the singles from the album entered the German top 20: "Ich bin ich (Wir sind wir)", "Nichts von alledem (tut mir leid)", "Ich geh in Flammen auf", "Auch im Regen" and "Aus Liebe wollt ich alles wissen". The accompanying concert tour encompassed 36 concerts and concluded in Berlin with three sold-out open-air concerts at Kindl-Bühne Wuhlheide in Berlin.
In August 2008, Rosenstolz topped the German singles chart for the first time with "Gib mir Sonne". The song was from the band's eleventh studio album, Die Suche geht weiter, which was more reflective than earlier albums and written following the death of the mother of Ulf Leo Sommer (Plate's partner). The album itself went straight to No. 1 in the German charts and received platinum status."Rosenstolz | Chartverfolgung | Die Suche Geht Weiter (Longplay)" (in German). musicline.de. Media Control Charts. PhonoNet GmbH. Retrieved 5 January 2014."Gold-/Platin-Datenbank (Rosenstolz; 'Die Suche geht weiter')" (in German). Bundesverband Musikindustrie.  Two further singles from the album, "Wie weit ist vorbei" and "Blaue Flecken", reached the top 10 of the German singles chart. In November 2008, Rosenstolz began its 2008/2009 Bist du dabei tour, which ended prematurely in Hamburg in January 2009. It was later announced that Plate was suffering from burnout and that all future tour dates were cancelled."Peter Plate von Rosenstolz hat Burnout-Syndrom" (in German). Die Welt. 12 February 2009. "Burn-out ist Pop – Rosenstolz sind wieder da" (in German). Die Welt. 21 September 2011.
After a break of nearly three years, Rosenstolz returned to public attention in September 2011 with the release of the single "Wir sind am Leben" and a new studio album of the same name.Rüth, Steffen. "Rosenstolz ist wieder da - Interview" (in German). Main-Post. 20 September 2011. Wir sind am Leben was well received by fans, reaching No. 1 in the German albums chart."Rosenstolz | Chartverfolgung | Wir Sind Am Leben (Longplay)" (in German). musicline.de. Media Control Charts. PhonoNet GmbH. Retrieved 5 January 2014. 2011 was also Rosenstolz's 20th anniversary and to mark this occasion, German broadcaster ARD broadcast the one-hour documentary Rosenstolz – Wir sind Wir! – Die Erfolgsgeschichte eines Popduos by Marc Boettcher."Rosenstolz - Wir sind Wir!" (in German). www.de. 20 January 2012.

2012: Indefinite break

In February 2012, there were rumours in the media of Rosenstolz splitting up. These rumours were fuelled by cancellations of appearances on a television show and at the 2012 ECHO awards. However, the band's record label said the cancellations were due to illness."Rosenstolz – Ist wirklich alles aus?" (in German). BILD.de. 16 February 2012. "Ärger um Trennungsgerüchte" (in German). Berliner Zeitung. 18 February 2012.
At the end of 2012, AnNa R. and Plate posted a message on the official Rosenstolz website and on Facebook and Twitter to announce that they would be taking a break from Rosenstolz for an indefinite period of time. After many years together, the duo felt now was the best time to give each other some space and to go their separate ways."Ihr Lieben," (in German). Official Rosenstolz website. Retrieved 10 November 2013. In 2013, the duo announced their new music careers, with Plate becoming a solo artist"Nachricht von Peter" (in German). Official Rosenstolz website. Retrieved 10 November 2013. and AnNa R. becoming the lead singer of the newly formed band Gleis 8."AnNa R. von Gleis 8" (in German). Official Rosenstolz website. Retrieved 10 November 2013.

Music style

Virtually all of Rosenstolz's songs were sung in German. This was considered unusual at the start of the band's career in the early nineties, as other German pop acts were singing in English. "Zwischen Kitsch und Kult" (in German). FOCUS ONLINE. 26 April 2006. Rosenstolz had initially attempted to work with English-language songs, but the duo were not satisfied with the results and consequently turned to their mother tongue.
According to the duo, Rosenstolz was a pop group whose music embraced all genres, including classical, rock, chanson and R&B."Rosenstolz meldet sich zurück" (in German). schwäbische.de. 13 April 2006. Plate also stated that ballads were amongst Rosenstolz's strong points. "Eigentlich ist Liebe ein wirklich schönes Wort" (in German). Planet Interview. 8 January 2001. Owing to the difficulty in categorizing Rosenstolz, the media used the term Mondänpop to describe the band's music. The term was invented by one journalist who, upon seeing a photo of AnNa R. wearing a hat, commented that she looked mondän (chic).""Schlager sind einfach doof"" (in German). Berliner Zeitung. 17 May 1995.
Ernst Hofacker, editor of music magazine Musikexpress, commented in 2002 that Rosenstolz's music flowed between chanson, German songs from the twenties, schlager and modern pop music."Wie schaffen die das bloß?" (in German). Der Tagesspiegel. 24 November 2002. Other journalists were also of the opinion that Rosenstolz's music contained elements of pop and chanson and/or schlager. "Schlampenpop für hungrige Herzen" (in German). Berliner Zeitung. 1 June 1996. "Irgendwo dazwischen" (in German). Kölnische Rundschau. 25 September 2008. "Die uncoolste Band der Welt" (in German). Die Welt. 5 March 2006. However, comparisons between Rosenstolz's music and schlager were strongly disputed by the band, who expressed a dislike of the latter."Rosenstolz im Interview: "Wir führen ein Pop-Leben"" (in German). Der Tagesspiegel. 14 September 2000.""Ein schönes Wort: lyrisches Ich"" (in German). Der Tagesspiegel. 25 September 2008.
Common themes in Rosenstolz songs were those of an emotional nature,Ackermann, Birgit. "Lust, Liebe, Leben " (in German). Süddeutsche.de. 17 May 2010.  such as love, friendship and pain. "Briefkastentanten-Pop" (in German). Frankfurter Rundschau. 26 September 2008. "Das große Beben" (in German). Der Tagesspiegel. 17 June 2007. Rosenstolz also wrote songs of a sexual nature, but these were less evident in the band's later albums."Rosenstolz: "Herz"" (in German). derStandard.at. 4 October 2005. Rosenstolz also changed musically over the years: various journalists remarked that the band had a maturer and more serious sound in its later albumsMüller, Peter. "Rosenstolz und die Legende von Anna und Peter" (in German). Die Welt. 26 September 2008."Irgendwo dazwischen" (in German). Badische Zeitung. 14 January 2009. and that the band in its later years no longer exhibited the quirkiness"„Herz-Tour 2004" auf DVD: Rosenstolz live in Berlin" (in German). Rhein-Zeitung online. 25 November 2004. and over-the-top vocals from its early years.

Charity work

Rosenstolz was active in raising money for AIDS charities. At the band's concerts, donations were collected for Deutsche AIDS-Hilfe (German AIDS Aid) and the issue of AIDS was highlighted."Peter Plate | Ich" (in German). Official Peter Plate website. Retrieved 30 November 2013.
In 1993, Rosenstolz released the limited edition CD Sanfte Verführer and donated the proceeds to Deutsche AIDS-Hilfe. In March 2007, Rosenstolz released the charity single "Aus Liebe wollt ich alles wissen", with all proceeds going to the Deutsche AIDS-Stiftung (German AIDS Foundation)."Rosenstolz veröffentlichen Benefiz-Single zugunsten der Deutschen AIDS-Stiftung!" (in German). smago! 20 March 2007. Rosenstolz then held a benefit concert on 18 June 2007 in the Columbiahalle in Berlin, where the duo presented a cheque for 100,000 euros to the Governing Mayor of Berlin, Klaus Wowereit, who accepted it on behalf of the Deutsche AIDS-Stiftung. "Rosenstolz spielen 100 000 Euro für Aids-Stiftung ein" (in German). Die Welt. 20 June 2007.
Rosenstolz received two official awards in recognition of the band's efforts in the fight against AIDS. The first was the Sächsische Ehrenmedaille »Für herausragende Leistungen im Kampf gegen HIV und Aids« (Saxon medal of honour "for outstanding achievements in the fight against HIV and AIDS"), which was awarded on World AIDS Day 2009."Welt-Aids-Tag 2009, Staatsministerin Clauß verleiht Sächsische Ehrenmedaille »Für herausragende Leistungen im Kampf gegen HIV und Aids«" (in German). sachsen.de. 1 December 2009. The second was the Bundesverdienstkreuz (Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany), which was awarded on 31 August 2011."Bundesverdienstkreuz für Rosenstolz" (in German). Berliner Morgenpost. 1 September 2011.

Music awards

Various German music awards were awarded to Rosenstolz during the band's career. These included a Goldene Stimmgabel (six times), an ECHO award (five times) and a Comet award (two times).
In 2003, the band won three awards. These were an ECHO for best website by an artist,""Echo"-Preis für die Künstler-Webpage von Rosenstolz" (in German). Die Welt. 11 February 2003. a Comet for best national music video ("Es tut immer noch weh"),"Die Gewinner des VIVA-Medienpreises Comet 2003" (in German). Kölner Stadt-Anzeiger. 15 August 2003. and a Goldene Stimmgabel for best German pop duo."TV-Auftritt "Goldene Stimmgabel 2003"" (in German). Universal Music Group website. Retrieved 10 November 2013.
A few years later in 2007, Rosenstolz received six awards. The band won a Goldene Kamera for best national pop act,"Goldene Kamera für Rosenstolz" (in German). Hamburger Abendblatt. 22 November 2006. an ECHO for best national rock/pop group,"ROSENSTOLZ gewinnen Echo 2007 - Als Beste Gruppe Rock/Pop national vom Berliner Regierenden Bürgermeister ausgezeichnet" (in German). Familienklick. 26 March 2007. and two DIVA awards, one for best artist and the other for best album. In addition, the band was awarded the Fred-Jay-Preis for song writing"Pop-Duo Rosenstolz erhält Fred-Jay-Preis" (in German). schwäbische.de. 18 January 2007. and Plate received the Paul-Lincke-Ring in recognition of his contribution to music."Peter Plate erhält Paul-Lincke-Ring der Stadt Goslar" (in German). Journal Frankfurt. 5 June 2007.

Film, television and other media

Band members

Discography

Studio albums



Further reading




