[[European Train Control System]]

CATEGORIES: European Rail Traffic Management System, Train protection systems, Railway signalling block systems

The European Train Control System (ETCS) is a signalling, control and
train protection system designed to replace the many incompatible safety systems currently used by European railways, especially on high-speed lines.
ETCS requires standard trackside equipment and a standard controller within the train cab. In its final form, all lineside information is passed to the driver electronically, removing the need for lineside signals which, at high speed, could be almost impossible to see or assimilate.
The need for ETCS stems from EU Directive 96/48 about the interoperability of high-speed trains, followed by Directive 2001/16 extending the concept of interoperability to the conventional rail system. ETCS specifications have become part, or are referred to, the technical specification for interoperability for (railway) control-command systems, which is a piece of European legislation managed by the European Railway Agency. It is a legal requirement that all newly built, upgraded or renewed tracks and rolling stock within the European railway system should adopt ETCS, possibly keeping legacy systems for backward compatibility. Many trains and networks outside the EU also adopted ETCS, generally for high-speed rail projects.
ETCS is specified at four different levels - 

History

European railway networks grew as separate national networks with little more in common than standard gauge. Notable differences include different voltages, loading gauge, coupling systems, signalling and control systems. By the end of the 1980s there were 14 national standard train control systems in use across the EU, and the advent of high-speed trains showed that signalling based on lineside signals is insufficient.
Both factors led to efforts to reduce the time and cost of cross-border traffic. On 4 and 5 December 1989, a working group, including Transport Ministers, resolved a master plan for a trans-European high-speed rail network, which was the first time ETCS was suggested. The Commission communicated the decision to the European Council, which approved the plan in its resolution of 17 December 1990. This led to a resolution on 91/440/EEC as of 29 July 1991, which mandated the creation of a requirements list for interoperability in high-speed rail transport. The rail manufacturing industry and rail network operators had agreed on creation of interoperability standards in June 1991.| Until 1993 the organizational framework was created to start technical specifications that would be published as TSI standards (Technical Specifications for Interoperability). The mandate for TSI was resolved by 93/38/EEC. In 1995 a development plan first mentioned the creation of the European Rail Traffic Management System.
The specification was written in 1996 in response to EU Council Directive 96/48/EC99 of 23 July 1996 on interoperability of the trans-European high-speed rail system. First the European Railway Research Institute was instructed to formulate the specification and about the same time the ERTMS User Group was formed from six railway operators that took over the lead role in the specification. The standardisation went on for the next two years and it was felt to be slow for some industry partners – 1998 saw the formation of UNISIG (Union of Signalling Industry), including Alstom, Ansaldo, Bombardier, Invensys, Siemens and Thales which were to take over the finalisation of the standard. In July 1998 SRS5a (System Requirement Specification 5a) documents were published that formed the baseline for technical specifications. UNISIG provided for corrections and enhancements of the baseline specification leading to the "Class P" specification in April 1999.
The baseline specification has been tested by six railway companies since 1999 as part of the European Rail Traffic Management System The railway companies defined some extended requirements that were included to ETCS (e.g. RBC-Handover and track profile information) leading to the Class 1 Version 2.0.0 specification of ETCS that was published in April 2000. Further specification continued through a number of drafts until UNISIG published the SUBSET-026 defining the current implementation of ETCS signalling equipment – this Class 1 Version 2.2.2 was accepted by the European Commission in decision 2002/731/EEC as mandatory for high-speed rail and in decision 2004/50/EEC as mandatory for conventional rail. The SUBSET-026 is defined from eight chapters where chapter seven defines the ETCS language and chapter eight describes the balise telegram structure of ETCS Level 1. Later UNISIG published the corrections as SUBSET-108 also known as Class 1 Version 2.2.2 "+" that was accepted in decision 2006/679/EEC.
The earlier ETCS specification contained a lot of optional elements that limited interoperability. The Class 1 specifications were revised in the following year leading to Version 2.3.0 document series that was made mandatory by the European Commission in decision 2007/153/EEC on 9 March 2007. Annex A describes the technical specifications on interoperability for high-speed (HS) and conventional rail (CR) transport. Using Version 2.3.0 a number of railway operators started to deploy ETCS on a large scale, for example the Italian Sistema Controllo Marcia Treno is based on Level 1 balises. Further development concentrated on compatibility specification with the earlier "Class B" systems leading to specifications like EuroZUB that continued to use the national rail management on top of Eurobalises for a transitional period. Following the experience in railway operation the ERA (European Railway Agency) published a revised specification Class 1 Version 2.3.0 D ("debugged") that was accepted by the European Commission in July 2008.
The final ETCS is divided up into nine   different equipment and functional levels. The definition of the level depends on how the route is equipped and the way in which information is transmitted to the train. The movement authority ("permission to proceed") and the corresponding route information are transmitted to the train and displayed in the cab ("cab signalling"). A vehicle fitted with complete ERTMS/ETCS equipment (EuroCab) and functionality can operate on any ETCS route without any technical restrictions.
While some countries switched to ETCS, German and French railway operators had already introduced a modern type of train control system so they would gain no benefit. Instead ideas were introduced on new modes like "Limited Supervision" (known at least since 2004
The ERA work programme concentrates on the refinement of the test specification SRS 3.3.0 to be published in July 2013. In parallel the GSM-R specification will be extended into a GSM-R baseline 1 until the end of 2013. The German Deutsche Bahn has since announced equipping at least the TEN Corridors running on older tracks to be using either Level 1 Limited Supervision or Level 2 on high-speed sections. Current work continues on Level 3 definition with low-cost specifications (compare ERTMS Regional) and the integration of GPRS into the radio protocol to increase the signalling bandwidth as required in shunting stations.
The development of ETCS has matured to a point that cross-border traffic is possible and some countries have announced a date for the end of older systems. The first contract to run the full length of a cross-border railway with ETCS was signed by Germany and France in 2004 on the high-speed line from Paris to Frankfurt, including LGV Est. The connection opened in 2007 using ICE3MF, to be operational with ERTMS trains by 2016. The Netherlands, Germany, Switzerland and Italy have a commitment to open the full length of Corridor A from Rotterdam to Genoa for freight by the start of 2015. France will replace KVB on high-speed lines by 2017 with Level 2. Switzerland will switch from ZUB/Signum to Level 1 for conventional rail in 2018. Germany will start replacing all PZB and LZB systems in 2015, to be finished by 2027. Non-European countries are starting to deploy ERTMS/ETCS, including Algeria, China, India, Kazakhstan, Korea, Libya, Mexico, New Zealand and Saudi Arabia.ertms.aspx Australia will switch to ETCS on some dedicated lines starting in 2013.ertms.aspx
Denmark has decided to drop its older ATC (which will reach its end of life between 2015 and 2020) switching the whole railway network of 2100 km to ETCS. Rural areas will be covered by GSM-R using ETCS Level 3 while the S-Bane network in Copenhagen will use the Siemens TrainGuard system. Implementation will be between 2014 and 2018.

Levels of ETCS

Level 0

Level 0 is when an ETCS vehicle is used on a non-ETCS route. The trainborne equipment monitors the train for maximum speed of that type of train. The train driver observes the trackside signals. Since signals can have different meanings on different railways, this level restricts drivers to one railway. If the train has left a higher level ETCS, it might be limited in speed globally by the last balises encountered.

Level 1

ETCS Level 1 is a cab signalling system that can be superimposed on the existing signalling system, leaving the fixed signal system (national signalling and track-release system) in place. Eurobalise radio beacons pick up signal aspects from the trackside signals via signal adapters and telegram coders (Lineside Electronics Unit – LEU) and transmit them to the vehicle as a movement authority together with route data at fixed points. The on-board computer continuously monitors and calculates the maximum speed and the braking curve from this data. Because of the spot transmission of data, the train must travel over the Eurobalise beacon to obtain the next movement authority. With the installation of additional Eurobalises ("infill balises") or a EuroLoop between the distant signal and main signal, the new proceed aspect is transmitted continuously. The EuroLoop is an extension of the Eurobalise over a particular distance which basically allows data to be transmitted continuously to the vehicle over cables emitting electromagnetic waves. A radio version of the EuroLoop is also possible.
For example, in Denmark and Sweden, the meanings of single green and double green are contradictory. Since Level 1 knows the difference, drivers can drive beyond the national borders safely.

=Deployment=

Croatian Railways (HZ) are installing Level 1 on the Vinkovci–Tovarnik line.
In Hungary, the Budapest–Hegyeshalom and Zalacséb–Hódos lines are equipped with Level 1.
In Poland, Level 1 was installed in 2011 on the CMK high-speed line between Warsaw and Katowice-Kraków, allowing speeds to be raised from  The CMK line, which was built in the 1970s, was designed for a top speed of 250 km/h but was not operated above 160 km/h due to lack of cab signalling, now provided by Level 1.
In Slovakia, the system has been deployed as part of the Bratislava–Košice mainline modernisation program, currently between Bratislava (east of Bratislava-Rača station) and Nové Mesto nad Váhom, with the rest of the line to follow. The current implementation is limited to 160 km/h due to limited braking distances between the control segments.
In northeast China, Level 1 is deployed on the Beijing–Tianjin Intercity Rail line.
In Auckland, New Zealand, the first true ETCS Level 1 system in the Southern Hemispehere was commissioned on 29th April, 2014 for Kiwi Rail by Siemens Rail Automation, with further ETCS implementation in Adelaide, SA planned for mid - late 2014.

=Limited Supervision=

Limited Supervision mode allows the ETCS cab computer to disregard some information in comparison to the traditional Full Supervision mode. Formally this is possible for all ETCS levels but it is most commonly used with Level 1 – specifically the ETCS equipment is only used to control the safety restrictions while the communication of a Movement Authority is left to other systems. This allows older tracks to be rebuilt by adding ETCS L1LS equipment where Movement Authority is derived from the existing lineside equipment or radioed by GSM-R. Studies have shown that ETCS L1LS has the same capacity as plain Level 1 for half the cost which has led to railway operators pushing for the inclusion of Limited Supervision into the ETCS standard. However this had been delayed until the successor Version 3.0.0+ of ETCS which is planned to be available as a legal foundation not earlier than (the end of) 2012.
Limited Supervision mode was proposed by RFF/SNCF (France) based on a proposal by SBB (Switzerland). Several years later a steering group was announced in spring 2004. After the UIC workshop on 30 June 2004 it was agreed that UIC should produce a FRS document as the first step. The resulting proposal was distributed to the eight administrations that were identified: ÖBB (Austria), SNCB/NMBS (Belgium), BDK (Denmark), DB (Germany), RFI (Italy), CFR (Romania), Network Rail (UK) and SBB (Switzerland). After 2004 German Deutsche Bahn took over the responsibility for the change request.
In Switzerland the Ministry of Transport BAV announced in August 2011 that beginning with 2018 the Eurobalise-based EuroZUB/EuroSignum signalling will be switched to Level 1 Limited Supervision

Level 2

Level 2 is a digital radio-based signal and train protection system. Movement authority and other signal aspects are displayed in the cab for the driver. Apart from a few indicator panels it is therefore possible to dispense with trackside signalling. However, the track-release signalling   and hence the train integrity supervision still remain in place at the trackside. All trains automatically report their exact position and direction of travel to the Radio Block Centre (RBC) at regular intervals. Train movements are monitored continually by the radio block centre. The movement authority is transmitted to the vehicle continuously via GSM-R together with speed information and route data. The Eurobalises are used at this level as passive positioning beacons or "electronic milestones". Between two positioning beacons the train determines its position via sensors (axle transducers, accelerometer and radar). The positioning beacons are used in this case as reference points for correcting distance measurement errors. The on-board computer continuously monitors the transferred data and the maximum permissible speed.

=Deployment=

In July 2009 the European Commission announced that ETCS is mandatory for all EU funded projects that include new or upgraded signalling, and GSM-R is required when radio communications are upgraded. Level 2 installations in Switzerland, Italy, the Netherlands, Germany, France, Sweden, and Belgium are operational.UIC ERTMS Implementation Maps
In Denmark, plans were announced in December 2008 for the conversion of its entire national network to Level 2. This was necessitated by the near obsolete nature of parts of its network. The total cost of the project is estimated at €3.3bn, with conversion beginning in 2009 and projected for completion in 2021.
In Italy, Level 2 is used on the Rome–Naples high-speed line, opened in December 2005.
In Spain, Level 2 was commissioned on the Madrid-Barcelona high-speed rail line in October 2011, allowing the speed to be raised to 
In Sweden, the Bothnia Line in Sweden was inaugurated in August 2010 using Level 2.
In Hungary Level 2 under construction in the Kelenföld-Székesfehérvár line as a part of a full reconstruction, and planned to be ready before 2015.
In Turkey, Level 2 is installed on the Ankara–Konya high-speed line designed for 
In China, Level 2 is deployed on the 1,000 km Wuhan–Guangzhou High-Speed Railway.
In Wales, Level 2 began to be used by passenger trains on the Cambrian Line in October 2010; this is a trial before wider deployment across Great Britain.
In Libya, Ansaldo STS was awarded a contract in July 2009 to install Level 2.

Level 3

With Level 3, ETCS goes beyond the pure train protection functionality with the implementation of full radio-based train spacing. Fixed track-release signalling devices (GFM) are no longer required. As with Level 2, trains find their position themselves by means of positioning beacons and via sensors (axle transducers, accelerometer and radar) and must also be capable of determining train integrity on board to the very highest degree of reliability. By transmitting the positioning signal to the radio block centre it is always possible to determine which point on the route the train has safely cleared. The following train can already be granted another movement authority up to this point. The route is thus no longer cleared in fixed track sections. In this respect Level 3 departs from classic operation with fixed intervals: given sufficiently short positioning intervals, continuous line-clear authorisation is achieved and train headways come close to the principle of operation with absolute braking distance spacing ("moving block"). Level 3 is currently under development. Solutions for reliable train integrity supervision are highly complex and are hardly suitable for transfer to older models of freight rolling stock.

=ERTMS Regional=

A variant of Level 3 is ERTMS Regional, which has no moving blocks. It will have lower costs since track-release signalling devices are not used and be suitable for lines with low traffic. These usually have no automatic train protection system today.
As a pilot, the railway between Malung and Borlänge (West Dalarna Line) in Sweden is operating with ERTMS Regional, in full operation in February 2012. In November 2010 demonstration runs were started using ERTMS Regional, attended by foreign visitors, for example from Network Rail.

=GNSS-2=

Instead of using fix-data balises to detect the train location recognition there may also be "virtual balises" based on satellite navigation and Differential GPS as it was researched by the UIC (GADEROS/GEORAIL) and ESA (RUNE/INTEGRAIL).uic.fr/pages/gaderos. Experiences in the LOCOPROL project show that real balises are still required in railway stations. The successful usage of satellite navigation in the GLONASS-based Russian ABTC-M block control has triggered the creation of the ITARUS-ATC system that integrates Level 2 RBC elements – the manufacturers Ansaldo STS and VNIIAS aim for certification of the ETCS compatibility of this system.
Ansaldo STS has come to lead the UNISIG workgroup on GNSS integration into ERTMS. The proposed Shift²Rail project will integrate Galileo satellites as soon as they come operational in 2014/2015 to test the EGNOS services providing "virtual basiles" that meet SIL4 safety of life criteria.

Train-borne equipment EVC and STM

European trains will be fitted with an ERTMS on-board system composed of a computer (EVC) and its peripheries, as the ERTMS system is deployed on rail networks throughout Europe. At this moment only certain corridors have been fitted for ERTMS. Trains running on these lines must therefore be equipped to run on both ERTMS lines and classic lines, which still rely on national (Class B) systems. Such a dual system is called a Eurocab. A STM (Specific Transmission Module) is a key element within the Eurocab. The STM handles the national Class B Automatic Train Protection Systems like PZB, Memor, ATB.

Locomotive operation modes in ETCS

Full supervision

Partial supervision

Multiworking

Shunting

On/off modes

Failures

ETCS Test Laboratories

Three ETCS Test Laboratories work together to bring support to the industry.
More information can be found under the following addresss, 
To be a reference laboratory ERA is requesting the laboratories to be accredited ISO17025.

ETCS Corridors

Based on the proposal for thirty TEN-T Priority Axes and Projects during 2003, a cost/benefit analysis was performed by the International Union of Railways (UIC) which was presented in December 2003.
In 2005 the UIC combined the EC priority axes into the following ERTMS/ETCS Corridors that were subject to international development contracts: 
The Trans-European Transport Network Executive Agency (TEN-T EA) publishes ERTMS funding announcements showing the progress of trackside equipment and onboard equipment installation. 
Corridor A has two routes in Germany – the double track east of the Rhine (rechtsrheinisch) will be ready with ETCS in 2015 (Emmerich, Oberhausen, Duisburg, Düsseldorf, Köln-Kalk, Neuwied, Oberlahnstein, Wiesbaden, Darmstadt, Mannheim, Schwetzingen, Karlsruhe, Offenburg, Basel) while the upgrade of the double track west of the Rhine (linksrheinisch) will be postponed.
Corridor F will be developed in accordance with Poland as far as it offers ETCS transport: Frankfurt – Berlin – Magdeburg will be ready in 2012, Hanover to Magdeburg – Wittenberg – Görlitz in 2015. At the other end Aachen to Oberhausen will be ready in 2012, the missing section from Oberhausen to Hanover in 2020. The other two corridors are postponed and Germany chooses to support the equipment of locomotives with STMs to fulfill the requirement of ETCS transport on the corridors.

Logo

In October 2010 a logo was adopted for ERTMS, which oversees ETCS. The logo is an upright orange rectangle with rounded edges, the lower third shows the word "ertms" in lower case sans-serif typeface, the upper two thirds show a series of twelve wide beams converging to a point on the right side with only two of the beams coming from the bottom starting above the "e" and "s" of the word.ertms.aspx








