[[FK Pelister]]

CATEGORIES: Football clubs in the Republic of Macedonia, Football clubs in Yugoslavia, FK Pelister, Association football clubs established in 1945, 1945 establishments in the Socialist Republic of Macedonia

FK Pelister () is a football club based in the city of Bitola, Republic of Macedonia. They currently play in the Macedonian First League.

History

In the long and storied history, FK Pelister, was formed way back in 1924, first under the name Omladina, then Pelister, then SK Bitola. Under the name SK Bitola, they won the Skoplje Football Subassociation League back in 1927. Putting together some of its most talented players at the time were: Koko Džima, Miki Kacujani, Temelkovski, Hroni and Čomo. In 1945, the club was renamed back to Pelister and would go on to win the Bitola regional title in 1946. That same year it fuses with Rabotnik and captures another title in 1951. During that time, some of the most famous players to wear the clubs jersey were: Georgievski, Dimitrovski, T.
The team played primarily in the lower divisions of the former SFR Yugoslavia and were champions of the Macedonian Republic League four times, along with winning the Macedonian Republic Cup four times in 1959, 1962, 1985 and 1991. They earned promotion to the Federal Yugoslav Second League Eastern division (clubs from Serbia, Kosovo, Montenegro and Vojvodina competed in this league) for the first time in 1974, which was a big success for that generation. Some of the most famous players at the time were: Grbevski, Dukovski, Cvetkovski, Taškov, Bogoevski, Gočevski, Ristevski, Tristovski, Mickovski, Dimovski, Markovski, Upalevski and the manager Stavre Eftimovski. Soon after, they were relegated but made another comeback in 1982 with Mitko Butlevski as chairman and Ivan Čabrinović as manager. The biggest success came in  the 1990–91 Yugoslav Cup when they reached the 1/8 final, getting eliminated on away goals by the eventual champions Hajduk Split. Before the split of the former SFR Yugoslavia, Pelister played in the final season of the federal Yugoslav First League finishing in 15th place.
Following the formation of the First Macedonian Football League, Pelister had early success consistently finishing in the Top 5. Once again, they played in the UEFA Cup where they lost 0-1 on aggregate to APOEL. Another case of financial difficulties and poor results, once again relegated them back to second division for the 2011-12 season. This time, however, relying mostly on young players from Bitola and led by captain Dragan Dimitrovski, Pelister made an immediate return to the top division.
The club focuses heavily on youth players from the Bitola region with a strong talent development. Gjorgji Hristov, Dragan Kanatlarovski, Toni Micevski, Nikolče Noveski, Toni Savevski and Mitko Stojkovski are some of the famous Bitola natives to start their careers with the club. Therefore, Pelister is known as the nursery of young and talented players who have left and gone to have success on various clubs in Macedonia and abroad.

Colours and Crest

The club colours have traditionally been green and white. The crest is formed in a shape of a shield, at the top left corner it has always had the number 1945 inscribed, which is the year of the club's foundation. In the latest version it includes the Cyrillic letters FK, on the right side. Shape of a mountain forms in the backdrop (to honor the mountain peak Pelister) with the name of the club in the center and a classic leather football underneath it. Early versions of the crest included the colour black, but now the entire badge uses only two colours, green and white.

Honours

 Macedonian Republic League:
 Macedonian Second League:
 Macedonian Republic Cup:
 Macedonian Cup:

Recent seasons

Key

Top scorer shown in bold when he was also top scorer for the division.

Pelister in Europe



Results

UEFA club competition record

UEFA club coefficient ranking

As of 4 June 2013, Source: 

Club records in UEFA competitions

Current squad

As of 29 January 2014

Notable players

The following players included were either playing for their respective national teams or left good impression among the fans. Bold players represented their national team.
Note: For a complete list of former players, see :Category:FK Pelister players.

Club officials

As of 6 November 2013

Former managers

Supporters

Čkembari () which started organized support for Pelister at every match.

Rivalries






