[[Edward Howland Robinson Green]]

CATEGORIES: People from Massachusetts, American philatelists, 1868 births, 1936 deaths, Texas Republicans, Massachusetts Republicans


Edward Howland Robinson "Ned" Green (August 22, 1868 – June 8, 1936), also known as Colonel Green, was an American businessman, the only son of the notorious miser Hetty Green (the "Witch of Wall Street"). In the late 19th-century, he became a political ally in the Republican Party of William Madison McDonald, a prominent African-American politician. 
After his mother's death in 1916 and his inheritance of half her fortune, Green built a mansion in Round Hill, Massachusetts. He was noted for his stamp and coin collections.

Biography

Edward Green was the first of two children of Hetty and Edward Henry Green. His sister Harriet Sylvia Ann Howland Green Wilks, called Sylvia, was born in 1871. Their mother amassed a fortune through her business dealings and was known as a miser.
Ned broke his leg as a child, and Hetty first tried to have him admitted to a free clinic for the poor. Charles Slack, her biographer, said that she was recognized, and she agreed to pay for the medical services. She also sought other doctors for help for Ned, while trying home remedies. The boy's leg did not heal properly and, after years of unsuccessful treatment, had to be amputated. Ned had to use a cork prosthesis. He  grew to 6'4" (1.93 m) and 300 lb. (136 kg) as an adult. 
Green attended private schools, and then graduated from Fordham College. He later studied real estate law. 

Career

In 1893, Green was assigned by his mother to manage the Texas Midland Railroad, which she had acquired by foreclosure. He went to Terrell, Texas and turned the ailing enterprise into "a model railroad boasting the first electrically-lighted coaches in the State." This was only one of many business ventures in which Green succeeded.
Green was also active in state politics. In 1896, he began a long-lasting political partnership with William Madison McDonald, an African-American leader of the "Black and Tan" faction of the Republican Party from Fort Worth. In 1910, though a Republican, Green was made "a Colonel on the staff of a Democratic Governor of Texas".
In contrast to his mother, Green spent lavishly and partied. He surrounded himself with attractive young women, who were well paid for their services. As Hetty strongly opposed his marrying, he delayed until after her death in 1916 to wed his longtime companion Mabel E. Harlow, a prostitute. 
He and his sister Sylvia each inherited half of their mother's fortune of $150 million or more. In addition to the various other homes he already owned, after his mother's death, Green built a mansion in Massachusetts, Round Hill, and another on Star Island. The Round Hill mansion was designed by the Anglo-American architect Alfred C. Bossom and completed in 1921 at a cost of $1.5 million.
After his death in 1936, Green's widow and his sister fought over his estate, estimated at the time as $44,384,500. Green had persuaded Mabel to sign a prenuptial agreement, which limited her to a $1500 monthly stipend, but she challenged it in court. She eventually settled for $500,000.

Interests

Green is known to philatelists for forming one of the great collections of postage stamps of the early 20th century, exceeded in size and value only by that of King George V. In 1918, he purchased the sheet of Inverted Jenny stamps from the dealer Eugene Klein for $20,000. On Klein's advice, he broke the sheet up into blocks. He put one stamp in a locket he gave to his wife.  
To numismatists, Green is known for his extensive coin collection.
He brought one of the first automobiles into Texas, "a two-cylinder St. Louis Gas Car surrey, designed by George Norris - the correct name is Dorris", He eventually owned a large fleet of cars, many modified with special transmissions on account of his prosthetic leg.
In 1924, Green rescued the last American wooden whaling vessel of the 19th century, the bark Charles W. Morgan, and exhibited her, embedded in sand, at Round Hill.  Green was the grandson of Edward Mott Robinson, one of the ship's earlier owners.  The Marine Historical Association bought her in 1941, when she became a showpiece of Mystic Seaport Museum, Mystic, Connecticut.National Register of Historic Places, Inventory and Nomination



Further reading




