[[Guy McDonough]]

CATEGORIES: 1955 births, 1984 deaths, Deaths from pneumonia, Australian male singers, Australian guitarists, Australian Crawl members

Guy Gillis McDonough (1955–1984) was an Australian rock musician best known for rhythm guitar and singer-songwriter with the iconic McDonough's solo 1985 release, My Place, was produced by his brother, Bill McDonough.

Biography

Early years

McDonough's parents were William Morris McDonough and Juneva McDonough. Together with his elder brother Bill McDonough, he grew up in Mount Eliza on Mornington Peninsula south east of central Melbourne, Victoria. McDonough attended The Peninsula School and formed Spiff Rouch in 1976 with Bill McDonough (drums) and other locals James Reyne (vocals, guitars, keyboards), Brad Robinson (guitars, keyboards), Paul Williams (bass guitar), Robert Walker, Mark Hudson (guitars) and Simon Binks.
By early 1978 Spiff Rouch had separated into two groups: The Flatheads and Clutch Cargo. The Flatheads had Guy and Bill McDonough, and Walker, who were joined by Sean Higgins (synthesisers) and Nigel Spencer (bass guitars, synthesisers). Clutch Cargo was renamed Australian Crawl "Downhearted", with Higgins and Bill McDonough, for the Crawl's third single from debut 1980 album The Boys Light Up.

Australian Crawl

Guy McDonough joined Australian Crawl in October 1980, supplying rhythm guitar, vocals, and songwriting. The Crawl released their second album Sirocco in 1981, which became a #1 album on the National charts.
1982 saw the release of Sons of Beaches with McDonough again writing or co-writing five of its tracks. This album also reached #1 but the singles had less success. After its release, Bill McDonough left the Crawl. He was briefly replaced by Graham Bidstrup on drums for the 1983 EP release Semantics. This four-track EP contained no tracks written by McDonough but did feature the #1 Australian Singles Chart success "Reckless (Don't Be So)". The live album Phalanx released later that same year saw drummer John Watson replacing Bidstrup. The Crawl's biggest overseas break came when Duran Duran took the band as support on an international tour.

Death

In the early months of 1984 in an attempt to step away from the temptations that every rock star faces - Guy decide to detox in an attempt to break away from the drinking & drug taking culture associated with stardom. Guy booked into Rehab with family support but then decided to not finish his program & returned home to follow a naturopathic procedure provided by a qualified friend. Unfortunately this was an error of judgment as this treatment exacerbated his health situation rather than improve it, leading him to contract viral pneunomia and be admitted to hospital in Melbourne, thus also forcing Australian Crawl off the road. Guy was in Intensive Care for many weeks & improved to return home for a few day visits. But due to extreme physical deterioration from months in hospital & low immunity levels he contracted a secondary infection & was placed back in to Intensive Care. Despite intense medical intervention, on 26 June 1984, he died, at the age of 28.

Solo release/legacy

Prior to his death, Guy McDonough recorded a series of demos with his brother, Bill McDonough (drums), Sean Higgins (keyboards) and Nigel Spencer (bass) (all former bandmates in The Flatheads), Mick Hauser (saxophone) and Michael Bright (guitar). Compilers and producers of Lost & Found were Bill McDonough and Peter Blyton.

Discography

 for full list or for a quick link to albums and singles use infobox below. Studio albums with McDonough:




