[[Vicente Fox]]

CATEGORIES: Vicente Fox, 1942 births, Living people, Presidents of Mexico, Mexican presidential candidates (2000), Governors of Guanajuato, National Action Party (Mexico) politicians, Members of the Chamber of Deputies (Mexico), Political scandals in Mexico, Universidad Iberoamericana alumni, Mexican people of American descent, Mexican Roman Catholics, Mexican people of Basque descent, Mexican people of German descent, Drug policy reform activists, Honorary Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George, Recipients of the Order of the Liberator General San Martin, Grand Crosses of the Order of Vytautas the Great, Recipients of the Grand Star of the Decoration for Services to the Republic of Austria, Coca-Cola people

Vicente Fox Quesada (; born July 2, 1942) is a Mexican businessman who was President of Mexico from December 1, 2000 to November 30, 2006 under the National Action Party (PAN). He is also the Co-President of the Centrist Democrat International, an international organization of Christian democratic political parties.Who's Who at CDI-IDC
Fox was elected President of Mexico in the 2000 presidential election, a historically significant election that made him the first president elected from an opposition party since Francisco I. Madero in 1910 and the first one in 71 years to defeat, with 42 percent of the vote, the then-dominant Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI).
After serving as president of Mexico for six years, President Fox returned to his home state of Guanajuato, where he resides with his wife and family. Since leaving the presidency, Vicente Fox has been involved in public speaking and the construction of the Vicente Fox Center of Studies, Library and Museum.org.mx

Early years

Vicente Fox was born in Guanajuato on July 2, 1942, the second of nine children. His father was José Luis Fox Pont, a Mexican citizen, and his mother Mercedes Quesada Etxaide, was Basque from San Sebastian, Gipuzkoa, Spain. Fox's paternal grandfather was born Joseph Louis Fuchs in Cincinnati, Ohio, the son of German Catholic immigrants, Louis Fuchs and Catherina Elisabetha Flach, of Strasbourg, now in France. The "Fox" surname was changed from the German "Fuchs" during the 1870s.com. Cincinnati, Ohio Directory, 1890-91 on-line. Provo, UT, USA: MyFamily., 2000. Original data: Cincinnati, OH, USA: Williams & Co., 1890.
Fox spent his childhood and adolescence at the family ranch in San Francisco del Rincón in Guanajuato. He moved to Mexico City to attend the Universidad Iberoamericana and received a Bachelor's degree in business administration in 1964. He earned his diploma in top management skills from the Harvard Business School in the United States in 1974.
In 1964, Fox went to work for the Coca-Cola Company where he started as a route supervisor, and he drove a delivery truck. He quickly rose in the company to become the supervisor of Coca-Cola's operations in Mexico, and later in all of Latin America. As the President of Coca Cola Mexico, Fox presided over Coca-Cola when it became Mexico's top-selling soft drink, increasing Coca-Cola's sales by almost 50%.
Vicente Fox married a receptionist at Coca-Cola, Lilian de la Concha. They adopted four children, Ana Cristina, Vicente, Paulina, and Rodrigo. In 1990, after 20 years of marriage, Lilian filed for and was granted a divorce.
Vicente Fox married for the second time while in office as President. He married Marta María Sahagún Jiménez (until then his spokesperson) on July 2, 2001, the first anniversary of his presidential election and his 59th birthday. For both, this was their second marriage.
After retiring from Coca-Cola, Vicente Fox began to participate in various public activities in Guanajuato, where he created the "Patronato de la Casa Cuna Amigo Daniel", an orphanage. He was the president of the Patronato Loyola, a sponsor of the León campus of the Universidad Iberoamericana and of the Lux Institute.Biography of Vicente Fox

Early political career

With the support of Manuel Clouthier, Vicente Fox joined the Partido Acción Nacional on March 1, 1988. That same year he ran for and was elected to the federal Chamber of Deputies representing the Third Federal District in León, Guanajuato.

Governor of Guanajuato

After serving in the Chamber of Deputies, Fox sought the governorship in Guanajuato in 1991, but lost to Ramón Aguirre Velázquez of the PRI. Following the election, local discontent was so great that the state Congress appointed Carlos Medina Plascencia of the PAN as interim governor. Four years later, Fox ran again, winning by a vote of 2 to 1.
As governor, Fox promoted government efficiency and transparency. He was one of the first state governors of Mexico to give a clear, public and timely account of the finances of his state. (accessed January 20, 2010)
Fox pushed for the consolidation of small firms, promoted the sale overseas of goods manufactured in Guanajuato and created a unique system in which micro-credits with no overdue portfolio were granted. Under Fox, the state became the fifth most important Mexican state economy.

Campaign for President

On July 7, 1997 (three years before the presidential election of 2000), Vicente Fox decided to run for President of Mexico. In spite of opposition within his party, Fox secured his candidacy representing the Alliance for Change, a political coalition formed by the National Action Party and the Green Ecological Party of Mexico on November 14, 1999. 
During the course of his campaign a presidential debate was organized. There was a disagreement between the three main contenders, Fox, Francisco Labastida of the PRI and Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas of the PRD, and some of the arguments were broadcast on national television, notably the one on whether the debate should be held that same day or the following Friday.com For minutes, Fox kept repeating the word "Hoy" meaning "today," originating the famous phrase "hoy, hoy, hoy!" The other candidates decided to postpone the debate, but Fox used that day's airtime anyway. At first the action brought criticism to Fox, but it soon backfired against his opponents when Fox started using his new phrase to gain new supporters as he campaigned for a better future "today." 
During the presidential debate his main opponent, Francisco Labastida, claimed in a nationally televised debate that Vicente Fox had repeatedly called him a "sissy" and a "cross-dresser".irc-online.html Fox's campaign slogans were "¡Ya!" ("Right now!"), "Ya ganamos" ("We've already won") and "Vota Alianza por el Cambio" meaning "Vote for Alliance for Change."

=Amigos de Fox=

Amigos de Fox ("Friends of Fox") was a non-profit fund-raising group established by Denise Montaño that was instrumental in getting Vicente Fox elected President of Mexico. The phrase was also used as a campaign slogan referring to the millions of people supporting Fox in the 2000 presidential elections.com
In 2003, money-laundering charges were lodged against the fund-raising group, but were dropped shortly before the July 2003 mid-term elections.org

=Election results=

On July 2, 2000, (Fox's 58th birthday) he won the presidential election with 43% (15,989,636 votes) of the popular vote, followed by the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) candidate Francisco Labastida with 36% (13,579,718 votes), and Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas of the Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD) with 17% (6,256,780 votes). Vicente Fox declared victory that same night, a victory which was ratified by President Zedillo. After the final results were announced, President-elect Vicente Fox met with thousands of supporters at the Angel of Independence monument in Mexico City, to address his supporters and celebrate his victory. His opponents conceded the election later that night.
President-elect Vicente Fox received an enormous amount of media coverage, as well as many congratulating messages and phone calls from world leaders including then President of the United States, Bill Clinton.
Fox took office as president on December 1, 2000, marking the first time in Mexico's history that an incumbent government peacefully surrendered power to an elected member of the opposition.

Presidency

Public image

During his campaign for president, Vicente Fox became well known for his unique cowboy style and popular charisma. As speaker, Fox usually gathered big crowds in early years of his presidency.com News | Fox is it
At six foot five, President Fox easily stood out in most crowds, and is believed to be one of the tallest presidents in Mexican history. After his inauguration, President Fox usually only wore suits for formal occasions, opting to wear his signature boots and jeans throughout his many visits around Mexico.Google Image Search
When President Fox welcomed U.S. President George W. Bush to his ranch in Guanajuato, both presidents were wearing Fox's signature black cowboy boots, prompting the Wall Street Journal to call it "The Boot Summit".Google Image Search

=Controversial comments=

Post-presidential life

Public speaking and advocacy

After leaving office in December 2006, Fox has maintained himself in the public eye by speaking in countries such as Nigeria, Canada and the United States about topics such as the controversial 2006 election and the Iraq War. In Mexico, Fox's busy post-presidency has caused much criticism because traditionally former Presidents in Mexico are expected to stay out of the public/political spotlight. Nevertheless, Fox stated: 
In addition, President Fox has expressed interest in campaigning for PAN candidates in future Mexican elections, an action that would make him the first former president in many decades to do so. Given that President Fox is still well-liked and left office with approval ratings of 70%, many in Mexico are wondering if his support could result in candidates being elected.Info
Vicente Fox is a Member of the Global Leadership Foundation, a not-for-profit organization that offers, discreetly and confidentially, a range of experienced advisors to political leaders facing difficult situations.
In 2013, Fox discussed why the West has pursued a moral crusade against drugs at HowTheLightGetsIn festival in Hay-on-Wye. with Chris Bryant and John Ralston Saul. The three debated whether it is hypocritical to ban certain drugs while continuing to export others such as alcohol and tobacco. Should we follow the lead of Washington and Colorado states in the U.S. and allow the free trading of drugs?
Vicente Fox gave a video interview in July 2013 to High Times magazine, in which he discussed the failure of drug prohibition, and cited Portugal's decriminalization policies as "working splendid(ly)". He said he supports drug legalization despite not being a user himself, just as he said he also "fully respects" same-sex marriage although he does not personally agree with it.
In February 2014, Fox wrote an opinion piece that was published in the Globe And Mail newspaper of Toronto in which he stated: 
He also said that "we must be given the very freedom to decide our own behaviour and to act responsibly, as long as we do not detrimentally affect the rights of others." 

Autobiography

Fox's autobiography, entitled Revolution of Hope: The Life, Faith and Dreams of a Mexican President, was released in September 2007.Vicente Fox: Bush a "windshield cowboy" who's scared of horses | Corrente

Fox Center of Studies, Library and Museum

On January 12, 2007,AND Fox&siteelnorte Harán realidad a 'Foxilandia' by Grupo Reforma over a month after he left office, Vicente Fox announced the construction of a center of studies, library and museum that has been labeled by the U.S. press as Mexico's first presidential library.com > News > Mexico - Fox gets award for reform in Mexico a IP 'Foxilandia' by Grupo ReformaCallan sobre inversión en 'Foxilandia' by Grupo Reforma It is expected to be a genuine U.S.-style presidential library. It will be built in Fox's home state of Guanajuato, in his home town of San Francisco del Rincón. 
While museums are abundant throughout the country, there is nothing comparable to a presidential library where personal documents, records, and gifts amassed by the country's leader are opened to the public. Fox's library will be modeled after the Bill Clinton Library in Little Rock, Arkansas,Fox looks to cement his place in history | The San Diego Union-Tribune which, according to the former president, will allow Mexicans to enjoy, for the first time in Mexico's history, the liberty to review the documents, images and records that made up his six years as president.org.html
According to the official website, the construction of the Center is in progress and advancing. Final completion of the library was expected by late 2007.
There was news in the media on Centro Fox joining hands with UST Global to transform Mexico.  "UST Global is partnering Centro Fox in order to help accomplish nothing less than the transformation of my country into a world-class technology economy," said Vicente Fox in a release. "Together, we will establish Mexico at the forefront of the information technology revolution in the region," a release quoted him as further saying.

Centrist Democratic International

On September 20, 2007, Fox was elected Co-President of the Centrist Democratic International (along with the re-elected Pier Ferdinando Casini) at its leaders' meeting in Rome. The CDI is the international organization of political parties that counts Fox's party, the National Action Party, as a member.Portail d'informations Ce site est en vente!

Statue controversy

In October 2007, an announcement was made in the municipality of Boca del Río, Veracruz, that a 3-meter (10 ft) statue of Vicente Fox was to be erected to honor the former president. This aroused much criticism from the opposition Party of the Democratic Revolution and Mexican media "towards Boca del Río's mayor", "who is affiliated with the National Action Party, of which Fox is also a member."
The statue was put in place amidst protests on the dawn of October 13, 2007. The inauguration was to have been held on October 14, 2007. Some hours after the installation, a crowd of about 100 people brought the statue down with a rope, damaging it. The statue was put back in place for the inauguration, then taken away for repairs.La Prensa Latina » Blog Archive » Derriban estatua de Vicente Fox
PAN members accused Veracruz's governor, Fidel Herrera Beltrán, of "ordering the attack on the statue", while Fox called him intolerant. Some sources in the media considered that the installation of the statue was inappropriate, since former President Fox was facing allegations relating to an illicit enrichment scandal.
Many of the protesters were members of the center-left Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI),

Honours



Sources

Schmidt, Samuel. 2000. Mexico encadenado. El legado de Zedillo y los retos de Fox. Mexico D.F.: Colibri

Notes




