[[Chris Stewart (baseball)]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, Living people, Chicago White Sox players, Texas Rangers players, New York Yankees players, San Diego Padres players, San Francisco Giants players, Pittsburgh Pirates players, Baseball players from California, Major League Baseball catchers, Bristol White Sox players, Winston-Salem Warthogs players, Birmingham Barons players, Charlotte Knights players, Oklahoma RedHawks players, Scranton/Wilkes-Barre Yankees players, Portland Beavers players, Fresno Grizzlies players, Riverside City Tigers baseball players, Bradenton Marauders players, Indianapolis Indians players

Christopher David "Chris" Stewart (born on February 19, 1982) is an American professional baseball catcher for the Pittsburgh Pirates of Major League Baseball (MLB). Stewart has also played in the majors for the Chicago White Sox, Texas Rangers, New York Yankees, San Diego Padres and San Francisco Giants. Before turning professional, Stewart attended Riverside Community College.

Professional career

Chicago White Sox

The Chicago White Sox selected Stewart in the 12 Stewart began his professional career in 2002 with the Chicago White Sox rookie-level affiliate, the Bristol White Sox of the Appalachian League. With Bristol, Stewart batted .278 with 25 runs, 44 hits, nine doubles, one home run and 12 runs batted in (RBIs). On defense that season, Stewart committed eight errors in 377 total chances. During the 2003 season, Stewart was assigned to the Winston-Salem Warthogs of the Class-A Advanced Carolina League.
In 2004, Stewart split his time, first playing Triple-A ball with the Charlotte Knights of the International League and then Double-A baseball with the Birmingham Barons of the Southern League. Stewart stayed with the Barons for the 2005 minor league baseball season. In 2006, Stewart was promoted back up to Triple-A with the Charlotte Knights and put on the White Sox's 40-man roster and made his Major League debut on September 6, 2006.
Stewart appeared in 4 games for the White Sox before making his first start on September 27, 2006. In his 8 major league at bats, Stewart had no hits and two strikeouts. 

Texas Rangers

Stewart was traded to the Texas Rangers on January 12, 2007, for minor league pitcher John Lujan.Texas Rangers acquire catcher Chris Stewart from White Sox
After showing solid defensive skills in spring training, Stewart beat out veteran Miguel Ojeda for the Rangers backup catcher job, and started the season on the major league roster. On June 9, 2007, the Rangers optioned Stewart to Triple-A after acquiring Adam Melhuse in a trade. Stewart went to 2008 spring training with the Rangers before being released on March 27, 2008.

New York Yankees

On April 3, 2008, Stewart signed a minor league contract with the New York Yankees and was assigned to their Triple-A affiliate, the Scranton/Wilkes-Barre Yankees. He was sent down after only appearing in one game on April 30, after Chad Moeller cleared waivers and re-joined the team. Stewart was designated for assignment on June 30 to make room on the roster for Brett Gardner and later outrighted to the minors.

Second stint with White Sox

Stewart became a free agent after the season and re-signed with the Chicago White Sox. 

Secont stint with Yankees

On March 22, 2009, Stewart returned to the Yankees by being traded for a player to be named later (PTBNL).Yanks acquire Stewart from White Sox

San Diego Padres

Stewart signed a minor league contract with the San Diego Padres on December 22, 2009. Stewart was called up to join the Padres on September 1, 2010. He was designated for assignment by the Padres on October 6,

San Francisco Giants

Stewart signed with the San Francisco Giants for the 2011 season. They called him up to the majors on May 26 after Buster Posey was placed on the 15-day disabled list with a fractured bone in his lower left leg. On August 9, 2011, he hit his first big-league home run against the Pittsburgh Pirates' James McDonald.

Third stint with Yankees

The New York Yankees traded for Stewart on April 4, 2012, in exchange for reliever George Kontos.
Before the start of the 2013 season, Yankees' manager Joe Girardi estimated Stewart would play in 60 games; he played in over 100.

Pittsburgh Pirates

On December 2, 2013, the Yankees traded Stewart to the Pittsburgh Pirates for cash or a player to be named later.

Player profile

Stewart has a reputation as an excellent defensive catcher. He contributes to the team with his ability to frame pitches, which saves his team runs.

Personal life

Stewart and his wife, Lindsey, have two children; a son, Sebastian Carter, and a daughter, Brooklyn Jean.






