[[San Cristóbal de La Laguna]]

CATEGORIES: World Heritage Sites in Spain, Populated places established in the 1490s, Tourism in Spain, San Cristóbal de La Laguna, Municipalities in Tenerife

San Cristóbal de La Laguna (commonly known as La Laguna) is a city and municipality in the northern part of the island of Tenerife in the Province of Santa Cruz de Tenerife, on the Canary Islands, (Spain). The city is the third-most populous city of the archipelago and the second-most populous city of the island. La Laguna's historical center was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1999. In 2003 the municipality started an ambitious Urban Plan to renew this area, that was carried out by the firm AUC S.L. (Arquitectura Urbanismo y Cooperación). The city was the ancient capital of the Canary Islands.arquitectuba.ar/diccionario-arquitectura-construccion/san-cristobal-de-la-laguna/ La Laguna lies right alongside the city of Santa Cruz de Tenerife, thus the two cities and municipalities form a single large urban center, linked by tram.tenerife2.html
The city is home to the University of La Laguna which is home to 30,000 students; these are not included in the population figures for the city. La Laguna is considered to be the cultural capital of the Canary Islands. Also there is in the habit of being calling the "City of the Anticipated ones", for having been the first university city of the archipelago.
Its economy is business-oriented while agriculture dominates the northeastern portion of the city. The urban area dominates the central and the southern parts. Tourism covers the northern coast. The main industry includes some manufacturing. The industrial area is made up of the main subdivisions of Majuelos, Las Torres de Taco, Las Mantecas and Las Chumberas. In this city one finds the legendary house of the spectre of Catalina Lercaro, as well as the incorrupt body of sister Sor María de Jesús, and the Christ of La Laguna (Cristo de La Laguna). Another emblematic building of the city is the Cathedral of La Laguna, which is the catholic cathedral of Tenerife and his diocese (Diocese of Tenerife).
In 2010 after a survey, La Laguna was listed as the city with the best reputation in the Canary Islands and the third provincial capital city of Spain with the best reputation, behind Gijon and Marbella.Estadísticas de Merco Ciudad

Etymology

At first the place where the town was called "Aguere" by the aboriginal Guanches (the name is still used in the literature). Later he founded the city as "Villa de San Cristóbal de La Gran Laguna" (in memory of a pond or lake that was in place). Later he established the San Cristóbal de La Laguna, and today is known simply as "La Laguna" (the lake).

Coat of arms

The coat of arms was granted by Queen Juana of Castile on 23 March 1510, as arms of the island of Tenerife. The town of La Laguna, being the capital of the island during the first times after the Conquest, adopted this emblem as its own. It features an island with a volcano spitting fire, on waves, between a castle and a lion, and above the Archangel Saint Michael, holding a spear in one hand and a shield in the other. In the border, the inscription Michael Arcangele Veni in Adjutorium Populo Dei Thenerife Me Fecit. These elements symbolize the incorporation of the island of Tenerife to the Crown of Castile and its evangelization under the patronage of Saint Michael.

Subdivisions

Climate

Owing to its northerly aspect that captures moisture from the prevailing northeasterly winds, San Cristóbal de La Laguna has a Mediterranean climate (Köppen Csb) that contrasts with the arid climate of other cities on the Canary Islands, with three to five times more rainfall than on the southern slopes, around ten percent less sunshine, and about ten percent higher humidity throughout the year.

History

The Battle of Aguere was fought here in 1494. The city was founded between 1496 and 1497 by Alonso Fernández de Lugo and was the capital of the island after the conclusion of the conquest of the islands. The coastal area was later raided by pirates. The University of La Laguna was founded in 1701.
A declining population and economy in the 18th century resulted in the transfer of the capital to Santa Cruz de Tenerife in 1723. Santa Cruz has since been the capital of the island of Tenerife.
The Tenerife North Airport at Los Rodeos was opened in the 1930s and is today expanding with low cost airlines using it.
It was declared a World Heritage Site on December 2, 1999. Several streets of historical significance have been closed off due to automobile traffic. La Laguna has often been called the "Florence of the Canary Islands", this is due to the large number of churches and convents that has, besides its old town and its historic buildings.

Main sights

Folklores

La Laguna is home to some of the best folklore in the Canary Islands, and the most famous folklorists are Los Sabandeños. La Laguna has created 59 folklore groups in and around La Laguna.

Holiday of the Cristo de La Laguna

It is celebrated every 14 September in honor of a much venerated image of Christ in the Canary Islands,Cristo de La Laguna the Cristo de La Laguna. For this event go to town People came from all over the archipelago.

Holy Week

Holy Week in the city of San Cristóbal de la Laguna is the largest of the Canary Islands.

Sisters cities

People







 

