[[Anna Olson]]

CATEGORIES: American emigrants to Canada, Canadian television chefs, Canadian people of Slovak descent, Pastry chefs, People from Atlanta, Georgia, People from Toronto, Queen's University alumni, 1968 births, Living people, Johnson & Wales University alumni

Anna Olson is a professionally trained pastry chef. She currently resides in Welland in the Niagara region of Ontario, Canada. She is the host of Bake with Anna Olson on Food Network Canada. She was previously the host of Food Network Canada's Fresh with Anna Olson,Food Network Canada Blog - "On Set of Fresh with Anna Olson" dated September 14, 2007 Sugar and Kitchen Equipped.

Biography

Olson was born Anna Tomcik in Atlanta, Georgia. Her parents, Donna and Andy Tomcik
Olson's writings include The Inn on the Twenty Cookbook, co-authored by her husband and published in 2000. Olson also published a cookbook called Sugar in 2004.  It was a companion to her TV show by the same name which can be found on Food Network Canada. Olson co-authored another book with her husband which was released in October 2005. The book is called Anna & Michael Olson Cook at Home: Recipes for Everyday and Every Occasion. This is a menu-driven book which highlights how Olson and her husband cook at home.  It also includes tips and tricks for entertaining and weeknight dining. Olson is writing another book with recipes derived from "Sugar", called Another Cup of Sugar slated for release in late 2006.  Olson also writes for publications such as Vines and LCBO Food and Drink.
Anna Olson opened Olson Food at Port in Port Dalhousie, a historic lakeside community in St. Catharines, Ontario.  She sold the Port Dalhousie shop in April 2009, to their long-time friend and pastry chef Andrea Poirier and her sister Leesa Leshkewich.niagaragreenbelt.php/site-map/431-olson-foods-at-ravine.html
In July 2008, the Olsons opened their second location, Olson Foods at Ravine, in partnership with Ravine Vineyards in St. David's, Ontario.  It was announced in a press release on Feb 1, 2010,that they are no longer involved with the location at The Ravine Winery and the partnership is ended.chow.com/topics/684599#5371505
Olson supports a local program called the Niagara Women's Enterprise Centre.  The centre provides training in the hospitality sector to women who might not have that opportunity, with her end-of-the-day product given to a local YWCA women's shelter or Out of the Cold Program.

Endorsements

Starbucks Coffee

Olson has been featured for the past few years in various promotions for Starbucks Coffee Canada. This started in the winter of 2004, when her Mocha Bites recipe was featured on a recipe card available in Starbucks retail stores.
In spring of 2005, Starbucks Coffee featured Olson in television advertisements aired nationally to promote their sweepstakes that was held in-conjunction with Food Network Canada and to introduce Anna's Brown Sugar Pound Cake being sold in retail stores. This also included in-store advertising of her cake with special pastry toppers and take-home recipe cards.
In winter 2005, her Chai Decadence Chocolate Bundt Cake was one of the featured holiday pastries sold in stores (once again promoted with in-store recipe cards). Olson was also featured in the Christmas television advertisement for Starbucks Coffee Canada.
Olson was recently seen promoting Starbucks in the spring of 2006 in television advertisements for Starbucks Coffee's annual Brewing Sale 2006.

Splenda

Starting in late 2005, Olson has appeared in television advertisements for Splenda and has provided recipes on their official Canadian website.

KitchenAid

Olson has appeared in television advertisements for KitchenAid appliances.

Pillsbury

Olson did commercials for Pillsbury Christmas cookies during the 2006 Christmas season.

Bulk Barn

Olson's "Chef's Selections" appears in Bulk Barn's flyers and website.bulkbarn.html?p=whatshappening_annaolson

Home Hardware

Olson did television commercials and flyer ads in 2010 for Home Hardware, advertising kitchen products and appliances. She also has a recipe section on the Home Hardware website 

Filmography

Bibliography






