[[Volapük]]

CATEGORIES: Constructed languages, International auxiliary languages, Volapük

Volapük ( in Volapük) is a constructed language, created in 1879–1880 by Johann Martin Schleyer, a Roman Catholic priest in Baden, Germany. Schleyer felt that God had told him in a dream to create an international language. Volapük conventions took place in 1884 (Friedrichshafen), 1887 (Munich) and 1889 (Paris). The first two conventions used German, and the last conference used only Volapük. In 1889, there were an estimated 283 clubs, 25 periodicals in or about Volapük, and 316 textbooks in 25 languages;Handbook of Volapük, Charles E. Sprague (1888) at that time the language claimed nearly a million adherents.A History of the English Language, 5th ed. Albert C. Baugh and Thomas Cable. Ch. I English Present and Future; Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River (2002) Volapük was largely displaced in the late 19th and early 20th centuries by Esperanto and Ido. Bodmer and L. Hogben (eds.) Ch. XI Pioneers of Language Planning; Allen & Unwin Ltd, London (1944)

Orthography and pronunciation

The alphabet is as follows:Sprague (1888)
|style="vertical-align:top;"|
|style="vertical-align:top;"|
|style="vertical-align:top;"|
|}
That is, the vowel letters ä, ö, ü have the pronunciations they do in German.  C is pronounced like English j, and j like English sh.   after voiced consonants, for example bs, ds, gs, ls, as it is in English. R was not found in the original proposal. 
Note: ä, ö, and ü do not have alternative forms such as the ae, oe, and ue of German.
There are no diphthongs; each vowel letter is pronounced separately.

Special consonantal letters

The author Alfred A. Post mentions in his Comprehensive Volapük Grammar some additional letters created by Schleyer:

Syllabic stress

Polysyllabic words are always stressed on the final vowel; for example, neai "never" is pronounced .  (However, the question clitic "-li" does not affect the stress of the word it attaches to.)  Where there is secondary stress, as is found in the compounding of several roots together, it is found on the final syllable between the roots.

Letter r

The letter r was avoided in Schleyer's original Volapük, on the principle that it would be difficult for Chinese speakers to pronounce, and in the adoption of foreign roots r was generally changed to l. For example, English rose becomes lol. However, other uncommon phonemes, such as ö  in his 1929 revision of the language. Modern Volapük has minimal l–r pairs such as rel "religion" versus lel "iron".

Vocabulary

Schleyer adapted the vocabulary mostly from English, with a smattering of German and French.  Some words  remain readily recognizable for a speaker of one of the source languages, but many others are modified beyond easy recognition."For example, while it is true that words like vol and pük don't really look like world and speak, but the whole language is not like that.  Scores of words are very obvious as what they mean – if, fasilik, gudik/badik, smalik, jerik (pronounced sherík – expensive), bank, bäk (back), deadik". – "What the L!", AUXLANG list posting by Thomas Alexander, 15 November 2005. For instance, vol and pük are derived from the English words world and speak. Although unimportant linguistically, and regardless of the simplicity and consistency of the stress rule, these deformations were greatly mocked by the language's detractors. It seems to have been Schleyer's intention, however, to alter its loan words in such a way that they would be hard to recognise, thus losing their ties to the languages (and, by extension, nations) they came from. Conversely, Esperanto and Interlingua are commonly criticized as being much easier to learn for Europeans than for those with non-European native languages.

Grammar

The grammar is based on that of typical European languages, but with an agglutinative character: grammatical inflections are indicated by stringing together separate affixes for each element of meaning. 

Nouns

Nouns inflect for case and number, but not for gender. 
The following is the declension of the Volapük word vol "world":
As in German, the Volapük noun has four cases: nominative, genitive, dative and accusative. In compound words, the first part of the compound is usually separated from the second by the genitive termination -a, e.g., Vola-pük, "of-world language".  However, the other case endings (-e dative, -i accusative) are sometimes used, or the roots may be agglutinated in the nominative, with no separating vowel.

Adjectives and adverbs

Adjectives, formed by the suffix -ik, normally follow the noun they qualify.  They do not agree with the noun in number and case in that position, but do if they precede the noun, are separated from it by intervening words, or stand alone.  Adverbs are formed by suffixing -o, either to the root or to the adjectival -ik (gudik "good", gudiko "well"); they normally follow the verb or adjective they modify.

Pronouns

The pronouns begin with o-. In the singular, they are ob "I", ol "thou", om "he/it", of "she", os (impersonal),Os is used for cases where the pronoun has no obvious antecedent, such as "I swear it", and perhaps with impersonal verbs.  Om is used for abstract things such as lit "light". on "one", ok "oneself". They are pluralized with -s: obs "we", oms "they". The possessive may be formed with either the genitive -a or with adjectival -ik: oba or obik "my". Prepositions, conjunctions and interjections are also formed from noun roots by appending appropriate suffixes.

Verbs

The verb carries a fine degree of detail, with morphemes marking tense, aspect, voice, person, number and (in the third person) the subject's gender. However, many of these categories are optional, and a verb can stand in an unmarked state. A Volapük verb can be conjugated in 1,584 ways (including infinitives and reflexives). 
For the simple present, the pronouns are suffixed to the verb stem: 
etc. The present passive takes the prefix pa-: 
The three tenses in the indicative, and the three perfect aspects, each take a characteristic vowel prefix:
The present-tense prefix is omitted in the active voice, so:
These are seen as being more distant from the present tense the further the vowel is from  in vowel space, and they can be used with temporal words to indicate distance in the past or future. For example, from del 'day', 
The passive voice is formed with p-, and here the a is required for the present tense: 
The infinitive is formed with the suffix -ön.  It can be combined with tense/aspect prefixes:
Yes–no questions are indicated with the particle li:
The hyphen indicates that the syllable li does not take stress. It occurs before the verb to avoid a sequence of three consonants or a double el:  li-pälogol?  li-binoms?
Participles, both active and passive, are formed in -öl:
Binob penöl is literally 'I am writing', though penob is also used.  For "I write" as habitual action, the habitual aspect is used.  This is formed by adding -i- after the tense prefix, and here again the present-tense a- is required. The forms are thus active ai-, äi-, ei-, ii-, oi-, ui-, passive pai-, päi-, pei-, pii-, poi-, pui-.  All are pronounced as two syllables. 
With temporal words, 
The imperative -öd follows the person suffix:
Optative -ös is used for courteous requests, and jussive -öz an emphatic command. 
Conditionals are formed with -la for the protasis (if-clause) and -öv for the apodosis (then-clause):
Note that the tense changes as well, so that in the first example the past tense is used even though the present tense is intended. Like the question particle, the -la is written with a hyphen to indicate that it is not stressed in speech. 
A potential mood is formed with -öx:
Reflexive forms are made from the active voice and the pronoun ok:
In the third person, the periphrastic form of vatükomok (he washes himself) must use the reflexive pronoun, vatükom oki, as vatükom omi would mean "he washes him (someone else)". 
The plural -s may precede or follow the reflexive, as the speaker chooses: 
Here there is a meaningful distinction between joining the pronoun to the verb, and inflecting it independently:
The gerundive arguments are active ö-, passive pö-.

History

