[[Cyan]]

CATEGORIES: Optical spectrum, Shades of cyan, Shades of blue, Shades of green

 

Cyan (Cyan definition on dictionary.merriam-webster.Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, 5th Edition, Oxford University Press, 2002. On the color wheels of the RGB (additive) and CMYK (subtractive) color models, it is located midway between blue and green, making it the complementary color of red.
Its name is derived from the Ancient Greek  or cyan-blueShorter Oxford English Dictionary, 5th edition. and its first recorded use of as a color name in English was in 1879.The Pigment Compendium: A Dictionary of Historical Pigments, Nicholas Eastaugh, Valentine Walsh, Tracey Chaplin, Ruth Siddall, 2004, Routledge, ISBN 9781136373855
The web color cyan is synonymous with aqua.  In most languages, 'cyan' is not a basic color term and it phenomenologically appears as a greenish vibrant hue of blue to most English speakers. Reasons for why cyan is not linguistically acknowledged as a basic color term can be found in the frequent lack of distinction between blue and green in many languages. Some varieties in the cyan color range are teal, turquoise, electric blue, aquamarine, and other colors described as blue-green.
In the CMYK color model, used in color printing, cyan is one of the primary colors, along with magenta, yellow, and black, which can be overlaid to produce all different colors. In the additive color system, or RGB color model, used to create all the colors on a computer or television display, cyan is made by mixing equal amounts of green and blue light. Since it is the complement of red, it can also be made by the removal of red from white light. Mixing red light and cyan light at the right intensity on a black screen will make white. Cyan light has a wavelength of between 490 and 520 nanometers, between the wavelengths of blue and green.com - Physics About.Com - Physics (Retrieved 6-18-2013)  

Gallery

File:RGB illumination.
File:RBG color wheel.
File:SubtractiveColor. In practice, since the inks are not perfect, some black ink is added.
File:Refill Ink Kit Color crop.
File:Komplementärfarben cyan auf rot. They have strong contrast and harmony, and if combined, they make either white, black or grey, depending upon the color system used.
File:Wham-a different corner. The water absorbs the color red from the sunlight, leaving a greenish-blue color.
Samarkand05. The color is widely used in architecture in Turkey and Central Asia.
File:Uranus2. seen from the Voyager 2 spacecraft. The cyan color comes from clouds of methane gas in the planet's atmosphere.
File:Wirbelsäulenoperation OKM.  Surgeons and nurses often wear gowns colored cyan, and operating rooms are often painted that color, because it is restful to the eyes, it is the complement of red and can help a doctor to see better, and it causes the least anxiety to patients.  "In the 20th century an influential doctor switched to green because he thought it would be easier on a surgeon's eyes..." (Livescience.

Cyan on the web and in printing

The web colors cyan and aqua

The web color cyan shown at right is a secondary color in the RGB color model, which uses combinations of red, green and blue light to create all the colors on computer and television displays.  In X11 colors, this color is called both cyan and aqua.  In the HTML color list, this same color is called aqua.
The web colors are more vivid than the cyan used in the CMYK color system, and the web colors cannot be accurately reproduced on a printed page. To reproduce the web color cyan in inks, it is necessary to add some white ink to the printer's cyan below, so when it is reproduced in printing, it is not a primary subtractive color. It is called aqua (a name in use since 1598) because it is a color commonly associated with water, such as the appearance of the water at a tropical beach.Maerz and Paul The Dictionary of Color 1930 (see under Aqua in Index, page 189)

Process cyan (pigment cyan) (printer's cyan)

Cyan is also one of the common inks used in four-color printing, along with magenta, yellow, and black; this set of colors is referred to as CMYK as in spectrum(s).
While both the additive secondary and the subtractive primary are called cyan, they can be substantially different from one another. Cyan printing ink can be more saturated or less saturated than the RGB secondary cyan, depending on what RGB color space and ink are considered.
Process cyan is not an RGB color, and there is no fixed conversion from CMYK primaries to RGB. Different formulations are used for printer's ink, so there can be variations in the printed color that is pure cyan ink. A typical formulation of process cyan is shown in the color box at right.

In science and nature

The color of water

Cyan and cyanide

Bacteria

Astronomy

Energy

Photography and film

Medicine

Why surgeons wear cyan gowns

In human culture

Architecture

Music






