[[Vim (text editor)]]

CATEGORIES: Unix text editors, DOS text editors, OS/2 text editors, Windows text editors, Mac OS text editors, OS X text editors, OpenVMS text editors, BeOS text editors, Free text editors, Termcap, Free software programmed in C, Cross-platform free software, Linux text editors, Free file comparison tools, Vi, Text editors that use GTK+

Vim (;Vim documentation: intro: "Vim is pronounced as one word, like Jim, not vi-ai-em.  It's written with a capital, since it's a name, again like Jim." a contraction of Vi IMproved) is a text editor written by Bram Moolenaar and first released publicly in 1991. Based on the vi editor common to Unix-like systems, Vim is designed for use both from a command line interface and as a standalone application in a graphical user interface. Vim is free and open source software and is released under a license that includes some charityware clauses, encouraging users who enjoy the software to consider donating to children in Uganda.
Although Vim was originally released for the Amiga, Vim has since been developed to be cross-platform, supporting many other platforms.  In 2006, it was voted the most popular editor amongst Linux Journal readers.

History

Bram Moolenaar began working on Vim for the Amiga computer in 1988.  Moolenaar first publicly released Vim (v1.14) in 1991.net/vimstory.pdf Vim was based on an earlier editor, Stevie, for the Atari ST,
The name "Vim" is an acronym for "Vi IMproved"  A later comment states that the reason for changing the name was that Vim's feature set surpassed that of vi.

Interface

Like vi, Vim's interface is not based on menus or icons but on commands given in a text user interface; its GUI mode, gVim, adds menus and toolbars for commonly used commands but the full functionality is still expressed through its command line mode.
Vim has a built-in tutorial for beginners (accessible through the "vimtutor" command). There is also the Vim Users' Manual that details Vim's features. This manual can be read from within Vim, or found online.net
Vim also has a built-in help facility (using the :help command) that allows users to query and navigate through commands and features.

Customization

Part of Vim's power is that it can be extensively customized. The basic interface can be controlled by the many options available, and the user can define personalized key mappings—often called macros—or abbreviations to automate sequences of keystrokes, or even call internal or user defined functions.
There are many plugins available that will extend or add new functionality to Vim.  These complex scripts are usually written in Vim's internal scripting language vimscript.3), Perl, Python, Racket (formerly PLT Scheme), Ruby, and Tcl.
There are projects bundling together complex scripts and customizations and aimed at turning Vim into a tool for a specific task or adding a major flavour to its behaviour. Examples include Cream, which makes Vim behave like a click-and-type editor, or VimOutliner, which provides a comfortable outliner for users of Unix-like systems.

Features and improvements over vi

Vim has a vi compatibility mode but when not in this mode Vim has many enhancements over vi.3)
Some of Vim's enhancements include completion, comparison and merging of files (known as vimdiff), a comprehensive integrated help system, extended regular expressions, scripting languages (both native and through alternative scripting interpreters such as Perl, Python, Ruby, Tcl, etc.) including support for plugins, a graphical user interface (known as gvim), limited integrated development environment-like features, mouse interaction (both with and without the GUI), folding, editing of compressed or archived files in gzip, bzip2, zip, and tar format and files over network protocols such as SSH, FTP, and HTTP, session state preservation, spell checking, split (horizontal and vertical) and tabbed windows, unicode and other multi-language support, syntax highlighting, trans-session command, search, and cursor position histories, multiple level and branching undo/redo history which can persist across editing sessions, and visual mode.

Availability

Whereas vi was originally available only on Unix operating systems, Vim has been ported to many operating systems including AmigaOS (the initial target platform), Atari MiNT, BeOS, DOS, Microsoft Windows 95/98/Me/NT/2000/XP/Server 2003/Vista/Server 2008/7/8, IBM OS/2 and OS/390, MorphOS, OpenVMS, QNX, RISC OS, Unix, Linux, BSD, and Mac OS.":help sys-file-list" 
Independent ports of Vim are available both for Android

Release history








