[[Kathryn Janeway]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional characters introduced in 1995, Fictional characters from Indiana, Fictional women soldiers and warriors, Star Trek (film franchise) characters, Star Trek: Voyager characters, Starfleet officers, Starfleet captains, Starfleet admirals

Kathryn Janeway, played by Kate Mulgrew, is a fictional character in the Star Trek franchise. As the captain of the Starfleet starship USS Voyager, she was the lead character on the television series Star Trek: Voyager, and later a Starfleet admiral, as seen in the 2002 feature film Star Trek: Nemesis.  Although other female captains had appeared in previous Star Trek episodes and other media, she is the only one to serve as the central character of a Star Trek TV series.

Casting

The character was originally called Elizabeth Janeway, after the noted writer of the same name. However, after Geneviève Bujold was cast, she requested the character to be renamed "Nicole Janeway".  Bujold, whose experience was mainly in feature films, was unprepared for the schedule demanded by the television series, and was unwilling to do news interviews, and dropped out on the second day of filming for the pilot episode "Caretaker".

Fictional character biography

Janeway's hometown is Bloomington, Indiana on Earth.  She was born on May 20.
Captain Janeway took command of the Intrepid-class USS Voyager in 2371. Their first mission was to locate and capture a Maquis vessel last seen in the area of space known as the Badlands. While there, the Maquis ship and Voyager were transported against their will into the Delta Quadrant, 70,000 light-years away, by a massive displacement wave.  The Maquis ship is destroyed while fighting the Kazon-Ogla, and although Voyager survives, there are numerous casualties. In order to protect the Ocampa, who live on a planet Voyager visits, Janeway destroys the Caretaker Array, the space station that transported the two ships to the Delta Quadrant, which provides energy to the Ocampa's planet, despite the fact that the Array may be the two ships' only chance to return home. In doing this, Janeway strands her ship and crew seven decades' travel from home.
Her first major task is integrating the surviving Maquis and Voyager crews. Chakotay, captain of the Maquis ship, succeeds the deceased Lieutenant Commander Cavit as her first officer. Janeway also grants convicted criminal, former Starfleet officer, and accomplished pilot Tom Paris a field commission, and makes him Voyagers helmsman.
Janeway's other interactions with her crew include helping the ex-Borg Seven of Nine reclaim her individuality and humanity and advocating for the Doctor's status as a sentient being.
During the course of the TV series, Voyager has contact with the Q Continuum on three occasions, and repeated contact with the Borg. With the intervention of a future/alternate version of herself, Janeway leads her crew in using one of the Borg's transwarp conduits to return her ship to Federation space after having traveled through the Delta Quadrant for seven years.

Later appearances

During a cameo appearance in the film Star Trek: Nemesis, now-Admiral Janeway instructs Captain Jean-Luc Picard to travel to Romulus at the invitation of the film's antagonist.
Admiral Janeway also appeared in the Borg Invasion 4-D ride at the Star Trek: The Experience venue in Las Vegas, which closed in 2008. In the ride, Janeway leads Voyager to the rescue of ride participants who are ostensibly trapped first on a space station and later on a shuttlecraft that come under attack by a Borg Cube commanded by the Borg Queen. At the ride's end, Janeway tells the participants, "Congratulations. You've defeated the Borg with one thing the Queen can never assimilate: the human spirit. As long as we have that, resistance will never be futile."
Although Paramount considers only the onscreen, live-action Trek episodes and movies to be official canon, Janeway has nonetheless continued as a major character in the Star Trek novels that depict the events in the lives of the Voyager characters after the end of that series. In Peter David's 2007 Star Trek: The Next Generation novel, Before Dishonor,Star Trek: The Next Generation: Before Dishonor at Amazon. Seven of Nine, with the aid of Ambassador Spock and the Enterprise-E crew, manages to communicate with Janeway's consciousness, buried deep within the Queen's mind. During a brief moment of contact, Janeway helps them destroy the Borg cube, with all hands on board. Although Seven manages to escape, Janeway is killed. Her memorial service sees a vast turnout, and a tall gleaming pillar with a light burning atop it is constructed in tribute to her.  The Q female appears to Janeway's spirit, and tells her that Q and the Q Continuum had taken an interest in her. Telling her that she has a destiny, Lady Q takes Janeway by the hand, and disappears with her into realms unknown. Writer Peter David explained the book was conceived by Pocket Books editorial as one in which Janeway would die, and that he was brought in to write it in order to give her a heroic send-off. "Star Trek: New Frontier from IDW". peterdavid. Quote: "The book was conceived by Pocket Books editorial as one in which Janeway would die, and then I was brought in to write it because they felt I could give her a heroic send-off. But if I hadn't written it, someone else would have, and Janeway would still be gone." In the 2012 Star Trek: Voyager novel The Eternal Tide by Kirsten Beyer, Janeway returns to life with the help of young Q, who needs her assistance, and by the book's end resumes her admiralship in Starfleet.
In Cryptic Studios online role-playing game, Star Trek Online, Janeway is briefly mentioned in the background, exploring the Hobus system after the supernova that was the catalyst for the events of the 2009 Star Trek movie."Mission: Ground Zero" mission text, Star Trek Online








