[[Gregg Zaun]]

CATEGORIES: Major League Baseball catchers, Baltimore Orioles players, Florida Marlins players, Texas Rangers players, Kansas City Royals players, Houston Astros players, Colorado Rockies players, Toronto Blue Jays players, Tampa Bay Rays players, Milwaukee Brewers players, Toronto Blue Jays broadcasters, Bluefield Orioles players, Wausau Timbers players, Kane County Cougars players, Frederick Keys players, Bowie Baysox players, Rochester Red Wings players, Omaha Golden Spikes players, Gulf Coast Royals players, Syracuse SkyChiefs players, New Hampshire Fisher Cats players, Dunedin Blue Jays players, Syracuse Chiefs players, Baseball players from California, Sportspeople from Baltimore, Maryland, Sportspeople from Glendale, California, 1971 births, Living people

Gregory Owen "Gregg" Zaun (; born April 14, 1971) is a former professional baseball catcher. He played sixteen seasons in Major League Baseball, from 1995 until 2010, for nine different teams.

Biography

Early life

Zaun, the nephew of former MLB catcher Rick Dempsey, was a high school teammate of Mark Loretta. Zaun and Loretta attended Saint Francis High School in La Cañada, California and graduated in 1989.

Professional career

Drafted by the Baltimore Orioles in the 17th round of the 1989 Major League Baseball Draft, Zaun reached the majors with the Orioles in June 1995. Used primarily as a back-up early in his career, he was traded to the Florida Marlins in 1996. After winning a World Series with the Marlins in 1997, he moved to the Texas Rangers prior to the 1999 season. He has also played with the Kansas City Royals, Houston Astros, and Colorado Rockies. He signed as a free agent with the Blue Jays prior to the 2004 season. In 2004, the Blue Jays were the first team to make Zaun, at 33, a starting catcher. Valuable in the line-up as a switch-hitter, he set a career high in 2005 with 133 games.

=2006–2011=

Prior to the 2006 season, the Blue Jays signed Bengie Molina as the everyday catcher, making Zaun the backup. Zaun started 2006 on the disabled list, with Jason Phillips serving as Molina's backup during the first week of the year. Zaun hit a game-winning two-run homer off the Tampa Bay Devil Rays' Jason Childers in his return on April 8. Molina's struggles against right-handed pitchers caused John Gibbons to platoon the two, with Molina generally starting against left-handed pitchers and Zaun playing against righties. On September 13, 2006, he hit home runs from both sides of the plate in the same game. He was only the 4th Blue Jay in history to do this.
Because the Toronto Blue Jays actively pursued Rod Barajas of the Texas Rangers as the club's new starting catcher during the 2006 offseason, it was assumed that Zaun would be exploring free agency as signing Barajas would mean Zaun would be maintained as a backup. Meanwhile, negotiations between Zaun and the club deteriorated, as Zaun claimed that the Jays offered "slightly better than back-up money for playing every day".com - Page Not Found The signing came after Zaun was rumored to have been courted by the Boston Red Sox and New York Yankees, both in backup roles.
Arguably his most famous play with the Jays was hitting a walk-off grand slam in the bottom of the 13th inning off of Tampa Bay Rays closer Troy Percival, on September 6, 2008 with two outs in the inning, wiping out the Rays, 7–4.  Zaun hit only the second walk-off grand slam in Jays history but it was the first that occurred in extra innings, and even more spectacular was that his team was losing at the time, due to an RBI single by Dioner Navarro to put the Rays up, 4–3, before the slam at the top of the 13th.
On January 22, 2009, Zaun signed a one-year deal with the Baltimore Orioles.Orioles sign Gregg Zaun
Zaun was claimed off waivers by the Tampa Bay Rays GM Andrew Friedman in exchange for Rhyne Hughes on August 7, 2009. On August 16 Zaun hit a pinch hit grand slam home run against his old team the Blue Jays in the 8th inning off Brandon League on a 3–2 fastball. On November 12, 2009 Zaun was granted Free Agency. On December 4, 2009, Zaun signed a one-year contract with the Milwaukee Brewers for $1.9 million. After suffering a severe injury, Zaun's 2010 season—and, as it turned out, his MLB career, ended on May 20. After the season, Milwaukee declined his contract option, and he became a free agent on November 2.
His at-bat music is "Limelight" by Rush.
In January, Zaun signed a minor league deal with the San Diego Padres, with an invitation to spring training.signonsandiego.Veteran catcher Zaun opts for retirement

Mitchell Report

In 2009, Zaun was included in the Mitchell Report following a 20 month investigation into the use of performance enhancing drugs by former Senator George Mitchell. In the report, Kirk Radomski claimed he sold Deca-Durabolin and Winstrol to Zaun in 2001, after a referral from Jason Grimsley. Radomski produced a check from Zaun for $500. Mitchell also explained that former Montreal Expos bullpen catcher Luis Perez claimed to have supplied Zaun with steroids in 2002. Zaun declined to be interviewed for the report. 179–81

Broadcasting career

Zaun started his broadcasting career after the Blue Jays closed out their 2006 season. Throughout the playoffs, Zaun would offer his thoughts on how the teams and players were doing, and how he thought they could improve. He worked alongside Jamie Campbell on Rogers Sportsnet. He has continued to work on Sportsnet's post-season broadcast through 2013.
After his retirement, on March 14, 2011 Zaun signed a two-year contract with Rogers Sportsnet to become their studio MLB analyst. As part of his duties he blogs on his website 'zauntourage.
On May 10–11, 2011 Zaun filled in as the color commentator on the NESN broadcast of a Red Sox series against the Blue Jays when the normal broadcaster, Jerry Remy was ill.






