[[North Ridgeville High School]]

CATEGORIES: High schools in Lorain County, Ohio, Public high schools in Ohio

North Ridgeville High School is a public high school located within the North Ridgeville City School District. North Ridgeville High is located at 34600 Bainbridge Road in North Ridgeville, Ohio, 8 miles west of Cleveland, Ohio The high schools former address of 7000 Pitts Blvd. was changed after the new addition was added onto the high school in 1998. The addition created what is known as the media center, and language hallways. Included in the addition was the creation of a new main entrance, and circle for student drop off and pick up. Thus changing the way the school faced from Pitts Blvd. to Bainbridge Rd. North Ridgeville High School was named the Ohio Lottery School of the Year for 2009-2010. The school colors are navy blue and gold.  The mascot is the Ranger.  The school is a member of the West Shore Conference.  North Ridgeville's traditional archrival is Midview.

Building History

The present high school building was constructed in 1967, with three later additions. A comprehensive high school, North Ridgeville houses grades 9, 10, 11, and 12, with an enrollment of approximately 1200 students.

Faculty

The faculty consists of 80 faculty members. Over 56% have a Masters Degree or graduate work beyond a Masters Degree.

Guidance Counseling & Student Services

Three full-time counselors work with students. In addition students receive services from a nurse, psychologist, and a speech pathologist. Other services offered to the students are: ESL and GRADS.

Parental Involvement

The Ranger Parent Club is an organization open to all parents of NRHS students. This group encourages and promotes parental involvement and open communication between the home and school. Some of its activities include publishing a newsletter, providing chaperones for school activities, coat check at dances and sponsoring of the After-Prom activities.
The Academic Recognition Committee is a group of parents and faculty members dedicated to promoting academic achievement at all ability levels. Some of its activities include sending letters to commend academic accomplishments, the ARC showcase, the Academic Awards Banquet, "Hall of Fame", and providing scholarships to selected Seniors.

Curriculum

Approximately 125 courses are offered in the areas of Art, Business, English, Family and Consumer Science, Foreign Language, Health/Physical Education, Industrial Technology, Math, Music, Science, Social Studies, Special Education, and Vocational. Honors credit is granted in most accelerated courses. Also available to students are Accelerated Pre-Calculus, in which students completing the course will receive LCCC credit, Accelerated US History, Biology Seminar, and Spanish Four will receive Kenyon College credit. Advanced Placement Art History, Government, AP Senior English, and US History are also offered. North Ridgeville High School has units for Disability Handicapped students and are actively involved in Inclusion. North Ridgeville High School also offers six vocational programs including Career Based Intervention 9, 10, and Marketing Education 11 & 12.
Juniors and Seniors may elect to attend the Lorain County Joint Vocational School that offers over thirty vocational programs. These students are bused to LCJVS for their vocational and academic course work. Juniors and Seniors that meet the requirements can enroll in area colleges as a post-secondary option student. The high school's choral and instrumental programs receive consistently high ratings in state and local competitions.

Extracurricular Activities

North Ridgeville High School has eighteen varsity sports involving approximately 150+ students per season. In addition, most sports have a junior varsity and freshmen team.
The school also sponsors many clubs and activities that encourage student involvement, leadership training, and community service.

Requirements for Graduation

Graduation requirements for the class of 2014 are four credits of English, Mathematics, and Social Studies; three credits of Science; one-half credit of technology and one credit of Business, Fine Arts, Foreign Language, or technology; one-half credit of Health; one-half credit of Physical Education; and six credits of electives for a total of 23 credits. Students are also required to pass the 10th grade Ohio Graduation Test in the areas of math, reading, writing, science, and citizenship before graduating. The Class of 2010 had 35 students receive an Honors Diploma and 38 students receive the Award of Merit from the State Department of Education. This award will commend outstanding seniors who excel in the areas of academic performance, school attendance, community service, and citizenship.

Scholarship

North Ridgeville graduates rank high in National Merit Scholarship competition and in State and National testing in Math, Reading, Science, Social Studies and Writing. The community of North Ridgeville offers approximately 35 local scholarships to graduating seniors each year.

School Songs

North Ridgeville's current fight song is Michigan's "The Victors", but prior to that, their song was "Blue and Gold".  The latter song is still heard prior to home football games.

Notes and references




