[[Hugo Almeida]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 births, Living people, Portuguese footballers, Association football forwards, Primeira Liga players, Segunda Divisão players, F.C. Porto B players, F.C. Porto players, U.D. Leiria players, Boavista F.C. players, Bundesliga players, SV Werder Bremen players, Süper Lig players, Beşiktaş J.K. footballers, Portugal youth international footballers, Portugal under-21 international footballers, Portugal international footballers, UEFA Euro 2008 players, 2010 FIFA World Cup players, UEFA Euro 2012 players, Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics, Olympic footballers of Portugal, Portuguese expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in Germany, Expatriate footballers in Turkey, Portuguese expatriates in Turkey

Hugo Miguel Pereira de Almeida (born 23 May 1984) is a Portuguese professional footballer who plays for Beşiktaş J.K. in the Süper Lig, as a centre forward.
After failing to establish himself at F.C. Porto, being loaned several times during his contract, he made a name for himself in Germany with Werder Bremen, where he would remain for four seasons, reaching one UEFA Cup final and scoring more than 50 official goals. 
Making his debut for the Portuguese national team in 2004, aged 20, Almeida appeared at the 2010 World Cup and two European Championships.

Club career

Portugal

Born in Figueira da Foz, Almeida started playing football for hometown club Associação Naval 1º de Maio, before being signed by F.C. Porto. He made his first division debut in a 2–0 home win over S.L. Benfica on 21 September 2003, playing three minutes; however, unable to settle at first, he had loan spells with União de Leiria (with which he had already played in the previous season, also on loan) and Boavista FC.
Almeida returned to Porto for the 2005–06 campaign, having a relatively important role in a side that was crowned national champions. During that season's UEFA Champions League he scored a spectacular goal from a 35-metre free-kick against Inter Milan at the San Siro, albeit in a 1–2 loss.

Werder Bremen

Almeida served another loan stint in the 2006–07 season, with a solid first year at the Bundesliga's SV Werder Bremen, 
With the departure of Miroslav Klose, who signed for FC Bayern Munich, He would finish the season with 16 goals in all competitions – 11 in the league, as his club finished second behind Bayern – only surpassed in the team by Diego's 17.
In 2008–09, another solid season: Almeida scored nine goals in the league, adding four in just five matches for the eventual cup winners – his first Bremen honour – namely a hat-trick against amateurs Eintracht Nordhorn, in a 9–3 away success.
Alternating starts with appearances from the bench, Almeida once again scored in double digits in the 2009–10 season, netting seven goals in the domestic league for a total of 11, as Bremen finished third and qualified to the Champions League play-off round, with the player assisting Peruvian Claudio Pizarro in the third goal of the clash against U.C. Sampdoria (3–1 home win in the first leg, eventual 3–2 aggregate win).
Almeida started the 2010–11 campaign netting six times in the first ten league games. On 28 November 2010 he took his total to nine, after scoring three in a home win against FC St. Pauli (3–0) – in the dying minutes of the fixture, he was sent off after elbowing an opponent.

Beşiktaş

On Christmas Eve 2010, after scoring 11 goals in 21 official games for Bremen during the season, Almeida joined Beşiktaş J.K. in the Süper Lig, after agreeing to a three-and-a-half-year contract for €2 million. On 11 May 2011, he converted his penalty in the shootout as the Istanbul team won the Turkish Cup against İstanbul Büyükşehir Belediyespor (4–3, 2–2 after extra time).

International career

Almeida played at every level in international competitions, from the under-15 to the main Portuguese national team. He made his full debut in a friendly match against England on 18 February 2004, in a 1–1 tie,
Almeida was called for Portugal's final three UEFA Euro 2008 qualifiers, starting against Azerbaijan and scoring his first international goal. He also netted in the follow-up, a 1–0 win over Armenia, and these goals eventually proved vital, as the nation clinched a tournament spot.
In Carlos Queiroz's second stint as national side coach, Almeida scored in a 4–0 away win against Malta on 6 September 2008, in the 2010 FIFA World Cup qualifying campaign. His importance diminished in late 2009, after the naturalization of Sporting Clube de Portugal's Liédson.
Almeida was picked for the finals in South Africa. After the first match, a 0–0 against Côte d'Ivoire, he replaced Liédson in the starting XI for the following match, but both players found the net in the 7–0 routing of North Korea on 21 June 2010, in Cape Town.
Almeida was selected by new manager Paulo Bento for his Euro 2012 squad, initially as third-choice after Hélder Postiga and Nélson Oliveira. After the former injured himself in the first half of the quarterfinals against Czech Republic, he replaced him,

Honours

Club statistics








