[[The Story of Saiunkoku]]

CATEGORIES: 2005 manga, Chinese mythology in anime and manga, Drama anime and manga, Fantasy anime and manga, Geneon Universal Entertainment, Kadokawa Shoten manga, Light novels, NHK shows, Shōjo manga, TVB, Viz Media manga

 is a series of Japanese light novels written by Sai Yukino and illustrated by Kairi Yura.  As of July 2011, the eighteenth and final volume was released, concluding the series. Four side story anthologies have also been released, collecting stories originally published in The Beans magazine.
A manga version, also illustrated by Kairi Yura, is serialized in Beans Ace, which is published by Kadokawa Shoten. However when Beans Ace ended, the manga was moved to Monthly Asuka. Currently, nine tankōbon volumes have been released. The series has been licensed by Viz Media for an English release in North America as part of their Shojo Beat imprint.
The anime adaptation series, produced by Madhouse Studios, is directed by Jun Shishido, and broadcast on the Japanese television network NHK on Saturday mornings.  The second season, titled  began airing on April 7, 2007 and consists of another 39 episodes, ending its run on March 8, 2008.アニメイトTV Web - ニュース速報 - 彩雲国物語、新シリーズ放送決定 Accessed 11/20/06.

Plot

Story

Saiunkoku is a world of eight provinces or houses, each named after a different color.
Set in the fictional empire of Saiunkoku, the story centers on Shurei Hong (Kou), a descendant of a noble family that has fallen on hard times. Her father works as a librarian in the Imperial palace, a post which offers prestige and respect, but little compensation. Shurei teaches in the temple school and works odd jobs to make ends meet, but her dream is to pass the imperial examinations and take a post in government, a path forbidden to women.
The new Emperor, Ryuuki Shi, has gained for a reputation for being uninterested in courtly matters and for flaunting his love for men. So the Emperor's Grand Adviser makes a startling offer for her to join the imperial household for six months as the young Emperor's consort and teach the Emperor to be a responsible ruler. She easily accepts the invitation. The mysterious Seiran, a young man who was adopted by her father, goes with her as Ryuuki's bodyguard. Entering the imperial palace revives Shuurei's dream of being a court official and if she succeeds, she will receive a reward of 500 gold coins.
The story details the hardships of creating change, especially as a woman, Shurei's growing relationship with the Emperor and other members of the court, the intrigues of imperial politics, and her commitment to better herself and her country.

Setting

According to legend, Saiunkoku was once infested by demons who threw the country into turmoil. A brave young warrior named  gathered together the Eight Enlightened Sages of Color and drove away the demons.
Sō Gen then forged the nation of Saiunkoku and became its first emperor. After Sō Gen's death, the eight sages disappeared, but according to legend they still exist among the people. A beautiful shrine was built for the Eight Colored Sages and still stands within the Imperial City.
Saiunkoku had always been divided into eight provinces named after colors of the rainbow. Six hundred years ago, the Emperor commanded each ruling clan to change its name to match its province. Commoners were forbidden to use the same family names as nobles.

Media

Light novels

Written by Sai Yukino and illustrated by Kairi Yura, the light novel series The Story of Saiunkoku has been serialized in The Beans since 2003. The individual chapters are collected and published in full novel volumes by Kadokawa Shoten with the first volume released in Japan on October 31, 2003. As of April 2010, 16 volumes have been released for the series.

Side stories

Sai Yukino has written a series of short side stories for The Story of Saiunkoku which are published in collected volumes by Kadokawa Shoten. The first volume was released in April 2005; as of May 2009, four volumes have been released.

Manga

Written and illustrated by Kairi Yura, a manga adaptation of The Story of Saiunkoku began serialization in Beans Ace in 2005 where it continues to run. However on October 9, 2009, the magazine has ended its publication and the series continued in Monthly Asuka

Anime

Produced by Madhouse Studios and directed by Jun Shishido, the anime adaptation of The Story of Saiunkoku premiered in Japan on NHK on April 8, 2006. The first season ran for 39 episodes until its conclusion on February 24, 2007. The second season, referred to as Saiunkoku Monogatari 2nd Series, premiered on April 7, 2007 and ran for another 39 episodes until its conclusion on March 8, 2008.
In May 2007, Geneon Entertainment announced it had acquired the license to releases the anime in North America with English language options.
The series uses three pieces of theme music.  by Teruya Miho is used for the second season.

Soundtracks

Three CD soundtracks have been released by Geneon Entertainment for The Story of Saiunkoku, using music from the anime adaptation. 

Drama CDs

Three drama CD series have been created around The Story of Saiunkoku. The first series,  
The second series, 
The final three volume series, 

Other

A web-based radio program for the series aired in Japan. Hosted by Tomokazu Seki and Hikaru Midorikawa, the program included mini-stories and special guests discussion the series. The program was released across two CDs in Japan by Geneon Entertainment. The first was released on May 25, 2007 with the first seven broadcasts and a bonus track.
On August 28, 2007, an art book for The Story of Saiunkoku was released in Japan. 

Notes







