[[Talbot Green]]

CATEGORIES: Towns in Rhondda Cynon Taf, M4 corridor

Talbot Green (Tonysguboriau or Tanysguboriau in Welsh) is a town just north of the M4 motorway, in the County Borough of Rhondda Cynon Taf, Wales in the United Kingdom. The town is part of Llantrisant Community Council.

Geography

Talbot Green is located at the mouth of the short and mountainous Ely Valley, between Mynydd Garthmaelwg (Llantrisant forest) and Y Graig (Llantrisant). The River Ely runs through along the town boundary before continuing to Pontyclun, running alongside the Warehouses of Capper and Co ltd, who run a portion of the SPAR UK retail chain. The town is bordered by the hill town of Llantrisant to the east, the Village of Pontyclun to the South and Llanharan a few miles to the West.

Transport

The area has good links to the rest of Wales with the A4119 linking it in the south to the M4 Motorway, and to the north to the South Wales Valleys. The Talbot Green by-pass opened in 1991 to relieve traffic in the town through disabling access to or from Pontyclun via Cowbridge Road, and provided a shorter route for the A473 Bridgend to Pontypridd Road. In September 2010, a £90m by-pass linking Talbot Green to Pontypridd was opened. The by-pass is notable for its three dormouse bridges, built to protect the endangered animals.
thumb|left|Sign showing the transport links in the areaA single track railway runs north from Pontyclun railway station (which is the towns nearest railway station), turning west at Talbot Green to run roughly parallel to the Afon Clun, alongside the north of the A473, and originally ran to the Cwm Coking Works at Tynant, Beddau. All the original railway infrastructure remains intact between Talbot Green and Pontyclun, including the track, signals and bridges. The track is still embedded in the road where it crosses the A473, the warning lights remain at the roadside and the roadsigns warn drivers to stop if they see warning lights flash at the level crossing. A recent consultative study (Sewta Rail Strategy Study—January 2006) has considered the possibility of reopening the Pontyclun to Beddau branch line, as a passenger line rather than just for freight. This would require new stations at Talbot Green, Llantrisant, Gwaun Meisgyn and Beddau (Tynant).

Retail parks

Talbot Green has two large retail parks, Glamorgan Vale retail park and Talbot Green shopping park.

Glamorgan Vale retail park

Glamorgan Vale retail park was opened circa 1996 and an extra unit was built in 2004. It is located on the A473 Talbot Green bypass. It has the total of 11 shopping units and 1 fast food restaurant.

Talbot Green shopping park

Talbot Green shopping park was opened circa 1996 initially with 3 units, then later to 14 shopping units and 1 fast food restaurant in 2004/05 and expanded further again after one unit was divided into two in 2012 thus having a total of 15 shopping units. It is expected to expand once again after recent proposals to convert one of the former shopping units into a food quarter containing 5 food and drink outlets  Construction is expected to start and be completed sometime in 2014, thus dropping the shopping units back down to 14 and the food outlets up to 6. Some units are located alongside the A4119 Talbot Green to Ynysmaerdy Dual Carriageway which are the older units and the other units are located on the former Tesco site and Newpark shopping precinct (which had independently run businesses) after the former relocated in 2003 to the former site of the Homeworld Department store, which closed in 1999 and was demolished the following year and left derelict for several years. 
There is also a Tesco Extra store, that was once the largest in Wales, after the store was expanded in 2005, but overtaken by the store in Culverhouse Cross, and later Fforestfach.

Facilities

The town also has a golf club, and industrial estates including Coedcae Lane and Lanelay Industrial Estate.
The Department Store Leekes is also situated in Talbot Green at Cowbridge Road, near Pontyclun.
The town also has a development of Offices, Hotel, Pub and a private Health facility which is located in Magden Park on the Ely Meadows alongside the A4119 Talbot Green to Ynysmeardy dual carriageway near the Royal Glamorgan Hospital. It also has the Avionics department of British Airways and is also the headquarters of the Welsh Blood Service.
Talbot Green's most significant building is Lanelay Hall, until recently the headquarters of the South Wales Fire and Rescue Service, who moved just over two miles away, to the former Buy As You View head office at Forest View Business Park, Ynysmaerdy, Llantrisant, in February 2009.

Future Developments

Improvements to the road network, in particular the A4119 linking the Rhondda Valleys to the M4, through Tonyrefail and Talbot Green, brought development pressure to the area around Llantrisant. Extensive housing development has taken place recently in the towns along the A473, the main Pontypridd to Bridgend road—linking Llantwit Fardre to Llantrisant, Talbot Green, Llanharan and Pencoed—the road that runs parallel to the Afon Clun from Rhiwsaeson to Pontyclun.

New Town centre scheme

On June 2011, it was announced there are proposals to make Talbot Green a "new town centre" by building a new supermarket, 40 shops, a multi screen cinema, cafes, restaurants, bars and a hotel. There will also be offices for local businesses, a range of civic and community facilities, apartments and houses. They are to be located on the former sites of Staedtler and Purolite and the surrounding brownfield land. The new scheme will include a new Leekes store to replace the existing one on the same site. The scheme is expected to create up to 1,900 jobs in the area.






