[[No Me Queda Más]]

CATEGORIES: 1994 singles, Billboard Hot Latin Songs number-one singles, Billboard Hot Latin Songs number-one singles of the year, Billboard Regional Mexican Songs number-one singles, Rhythm and blues ballads, Selena songs, Spanish-language songs, Soul ballads, Songs written by Ricky Vela, Song recordings produced by Bebu Silvetti, José Feliciano songs, Tito Nieves songs, Song recordings produced by A.B. Quintanilla

}}
"No Me Queda Más" () is a song recorded by American Tejano pop recording artist Selena from her fifth studio album Amor Prohibido (1994). It was released by EMI Latin on 10 November 1994, as the album's third single. "No Me Queda Más" was composed by lead keyboardist of Selena y Los Dinos, Ricky Vela; who had fallen in love with Selena's sister and drummer of the group, Suzette Quintanilla. Selena's brother and producer of her music, A.B. Quintanilla III produced "No Me Queda Más" alongside Argentine arranger and composer Bebu Silvetti.
"No Me Queda Más" is a Spanish-language down-tempo ballad with influences of flamenco and ranchera music. The central theme and lyrical content of the song conveys the story of a bewildered fiancée whose ex-lover has left her for another women and keeps an illusion that he will one day go back with her; while her ex-lover denies even loving her, she wishes him happiness. "No Me Queda Más" peaked at number one on the US Hot Latin Tracks for seven non-consecutive weeks and the Latin Regional Mexican Airplay charts, giving Selena her third consecutive number one single from Amor Prohibido. "No Me Queda Más" became the number-one song on the Billboard Top Latin Songs Year-End Chart for 1995. It also peaked at number 13 on the Latin Pop Airplay chart. 
"No Me Queda Más" was praised by contemporary music critics, who highly praised Selena's emotive vocalization she used to record the song. "No Me Queda Más" was nominated for "Song of the Year" at the 1994 Broadcast Music Latin Awards.  With "No Me Queda Más" and thirteen other of Selena's top-ten singles in the Hot Latin Tracks chart she was named "top Latin artist of the '90s" and "Best selling Latin artist of the decade" by Billboard. "Amor Prohibido" and "No Me Queda Más", became the most successful singles of 1994 and 1995, according to Billboard. There has been a number of covers by various artists ranging from Mexican to Dominican American musicians.
The song's accompanying music video was directed by Sean Roberts and features Selena in various locations in Texas, in some scenes Selena is reminiscing of her ex-lover while in others she is distraught and crying. The video was highly anticipated by EMI Latin to have been the "next big move" for Selena, as the label believed the video would be immensely popular in South American countries. It won "Video of the Year" at the 1995 Billboard Latin Music Awards and received favorable criticism from music critics.

Inspiration, writing and production

After Ricky Vela joined Selena y Los Dinos back in 1985 as the lead keyboardist, he quickly fell in love with Selena's sister and drummer Suzette Quintanilla.
"No Me Queda Más" was one of the last songs produced for Amor Prohibido (1994). Vela handled sequencing, while Quintanilla III and Argentine arranger and composer Bebu Silvetti produced the song. Recording sessions for "No Me Queda Más" took place at Selena's father and manager's recording studio Q-Productions in Corpus Christi, Texas. Brian "Red" Moore, a family friend, mixed the song. Band members Arturo Meza and Jesse "O'Jay" Martinez utilized percussion instruments such as congas for "No Me Queda Más", while Freddie Corea and Don Shelton used tambourines.
During an interview for Selena's collection 20 Years of Music, A.B. had told them about how he wanted Selena to record the song multiple times:
 
 "When we were recording for "No Me Queda Más" - I believe she had recorded it in four takes - and I wanted her to do it again, and she got mad at me. She told me that she wasn't going to sing it again. She said "I already had it! As a matter of fact, I've had it with you, and this studio, I'm ready to get out of here" - she kind of threw a fit - well she kind of didn't throw a fit. We wouldn't want to say a fit, but "you know I'm gonna go to the mall, and I'm gonna head out so, what you got there is what you got" - and now looking back at "No Me Queda Más", she really did a beautiful job when recording the track, she had so much passion. The song became a classic. That's what I can remember from one of the beautiful memories I have of the Amor Prohibido album.

Music, theme and lyrics

"No Me Queda Más" is a down-tempo
According to one of the writers of Encyclopedia of recorded sound, Volume 1 "No Me Queda Más" is a "torchy ballad",

Release and chart performance

Released on 10 November 1994 in the US, "No Me Queda Más" was the third single from Amor Prohibido. "No Me Queda Más" was the second single released from Amor Prohibido in international markets on EMI International. Two versions of the single were released in Mexico on the same day of its US release. A CD single, which featured the album version of "No Me Queda Más". A promotional single, was later released featuring two versions of "No Me Queda Más", the album version and the "new version". A 12" single was released in South American countries the same day.
The track debuted on the US Hot Latin Tracks chart on 12 November, 1994, at number 40, and peaked at number one for seven non-consecutive weeks,

Critical reception

Jorge Velasquez wrote in his book Meditaciones Para Lograr Su Primer Millon that "No Me Queda Más" is a "bonafide hit".

Recognition and accolades

With "No Me Queda Más" and thirteen other of Selena's top-ten singles in the Hot Latin Tracks chart, the singer was named "top Latin artist of the '90s" and "Best selling Latin artist of the decade" by Billboard.[ref]

"No Me Queda Más" was nominated for "Song of the Year" at the 1994 Broadcast Latin Music Awards

Music video

Background and production

The music video for "No Me Queda Más" was filmed from  11–18 June 1994, with Summit Productions, Inc with Sean Roberts serving as the director. During an interview, Selena was asked why she choose to do a music video for "No me queda más". Her response was that EMI Latin decided to choose the song, because they felt that the song would be the "big next move" in Mexico, Central and South America. She also confessed that the company wanted to showcase the video internationally for publicity. The filming for the music video was done at the San Antonio Amtrak station, during the grand staircase scene with Selena wearing a white dress (originally worn at the 36th Grammy Awards in 1994), while being surrounded with an orchestra. On the same day, filming was being done during the intro of the music video at Casa Rio restaurant at the San Antonio River Walk. Production of the music video was postponed and stalled for a week because of Selena's upcoming fashion show, tour in Mexico and the opening of her second boutique, Selena Etc. The "love," horse riding and marriage scenes were filmed at Breckenridge Park in San Antonio, Texas.Luis Munoz
During production, Selena's dress had to be re-sized due to gaining weight. She gave her response while cameras were still filming:
The location of the Amtrak train station for the music video was later adopted in the 1997 film about Selena's life, during the fashion show scene with Jennifer Lopez who took the role as "Selena".

Synopsis

The video opens with Selena sitting down at an outside-restaurant, accompanied by a live Mariachi band performance. She is then introduced by a waiter who offers her a glass of water. The waiter then comes back to her with her ordered entrée, the woman then eats peacefully while enjoying the live entertainment. As she enjoys her dinner the waiter returns to give her a note that her fiancée had left for her. The woman was waiting for her fiancée to arrive and to accompanied her but was running late as she thought since she was looking down at her watch frequently. In the note, her fiancée tells her that he can no longer see her and nor does he want to be with her, officially ending the engagement. He tells her that he is in love with another woman and they are going to get married. Heartbroken, Selena takes a sip of water before exiting the restaurant, crying.
The song then plays slowly as Selena is seen in the dark, behind a busy high-way, pealing off a white rose, indicating "he loves me ... he loves me not ...", while crying. While doing so, a collage of memorable pictures and videos of Selena and her now ex-fiancée are seen throughout the video. Now the video shines on Selena wearing her white dress that she had picked out for her wedding day, singing on a staircase with an orchestra playing their instruments, below the staircase. Selena is then seen at the wedding of her ex-fiancée, she tries to enter the outside-wedding near the beach, but she is pulled away by her emotions and instead cries running. She then crouch down to the floor and cries. After this, Selena's ex-fiancée and his newly fiancée acknowledge their marriage and share a kiss. After the wedding, the final video of Selena and her ex-fiancée is played, where he had given a kiss to Selena on her hands. The video then ends with him hugging his now wife, and Selena crying, looking down.

Reception

The music video was welcomed with positive reception from music critics. Raúl Manuel Rodríguez of El Dictamen believed that the "No Me Queda Más" music video was one of the best Selena music videos. He also stated that "it really captures the audiences attention, and thirst for what's going to come next." Victoria Díaz of Grupo Reforma highly praised Selena's "refreshing and exotic" clothing styles and noted that they were originally from her boutiques. Antonio Morales of Gringo Gazette, believed the video was "exquisite" and that it had almost made him cry: "I felt bad for Selena, I wanted to go inside the video and just hug her. I feel in love with the video. Selena had touch many hearts with Me Queda Más", something you don't see a lot in other Hispanic videos, nowadays." Javier Lopez, of TV Notas commented that "No Me Queda Más" is one of his favorite music videos and believed the video was "beautiful" and noted that the dress Selena worn was from the same dress she had worn at the Grammy Awards in 1994. The video was named 12 on his "Top 100 Spanish-language music videos of all time".

Cover versions

Kat DeLuna sung the song during a children's singing competition and won first place.

Track listings and formats

Credits and personnel

Charts and Awards

Weekly charts

Year-end charts

Awards and nominations






