[[Cayuga Lake]]

CATEGORIES: Finger Lakes, Anti-nuclear movement in the United States, Geography of Tompkins County, New York, Visitor attractions in Tompkins County, New York, Geography of Cayuga County, New York, Geography of Seneca County, New York, Visitor attractions in Cayuga County, New York, Visitor attractions in Seneca County, New York

Cayuga Lake ( at its deepest point.

Location

The city of Ithaca, New York, site of Ithaca College and Cornell University, is located at the southern end of Cayuga Lake.
Villages and settlements along the east shore of Cayuga Lake include Myers, King Ferry, Aurora, Levanna, Union Springs, and Cayuga.  Settlements along the west shore of the lake include Sheldrake, Poplar Beach, and Canoga.
The lake has one small island near Union Springs, Frontenac Island.  It is one of only two islands in the Finger Lakes.

Geographical characteristics

Cayuga Lake is located at  above sea level. Its depth, steep east and west sides with shallow north and south ends is typical of the Finger Lakes, as they were carved by glaciers during the last ice age.
The water level is regulated by the Mud Lock at the north end of the lake. It is connected to Lake Ontario by the Erie Canal and Seneca Lake by the Seneca River. The lake is drawn down as winter approaches, to minimize ice damage and to maximize its capacity to store heavy spring runoff.
The north end is dominated by shallow mudflats.  An important stopover for migratory birds, the mudflats and marsh are the location of the Montezuma National Wildlife Refuge.
The southern end is also shallow and often freezes during the winter.

Human impact

The fish population is managed and substantial sport fishing is practiced, including smelt, lake trout and smallmouth bass fishing.
Cayuga Lake is very popular among recreational boaters.  A large state marina and boat launch is located at the southern end of the lake in Ithaca (Allan H. Treman State Marine Park, the largest inland marina in New York).  There are two yacht clubs on the western shore: Ithaca Yacht Club a few miles north of Ithaca, and Red Jacket Yacht Club just south of Canoga. There are several other marinas and boat launches scattered along the lake shore.
Cayuga Lake is the source of drinking water for several communities, including Lansing near the southern end of the lake along the east side, which draws water through the Bolton Point Municipal Water system. There are also several lake source cooling systems that are in operation on the lake, whereby cooler water is pumped from the depths of the lake, warmed, and circulated in a closed system back to the surface. One of these systems, which is operated by Cornell University and began operation in 2000, was controversial during the planning and building states for potential negative environmental impact.  All the environmental impact reports and scientific studies have shown that the Cornell lake source cooling system has not yet had and will not likely have any measurably significant environmental impact. Furthermore, Cornell's system pumps significantly less warm water back into the lake than others further north which have been operating for decades, including the coal-fired power plant on the eastern shore.
The AES Cayuga electrical generating station operates in the Town of Lansing, on the east shore of Cayuga Lake. This coal-fired plant uses Cayuga Lake as a cooling source.  In the late 1960s, citizens successfully opposed the construction of an 830-MW nuclear power plant on the shore of Cayuga Lake."The Role of Experts in a Nuclear Siting Controversy"Chain Reaction pp. 262-264. Anti-nuclear Movements: A World Survey of Opposition to Nuclear Energy, Longman, pp. 126-127. Global Fission: The Battle Over Nuclear Power, Oxford University Press, p. 94.
Rod Serling named his production company Cayuga Productions during the years of his TV series, The Twilight Zone.  Serling and his family had a summer home at Cayuga Lake.rodserling.htm

Folklore

The lake is the subject of local folklore. Cornell's alma mater makes reference to its position "Far Above Cayuga's Waters", while that of Ithaca College references "Cayuga's shore".
A tradition at Wells College in Aurora holds that if the lake completely freezes over, classes are canceled (though for only one day).  According to Wells College records, this last happened in 1979.  However, other sources suggest that the only time the entire lake froze over solid end to end in the 20th century was in 1912.,New York Times February 19, 1912 CORNELL SKATERS DROWN page 1Anthony Ingraham, "Does Cayuga Lake Freeze Over?", February 13, 2013.
Cayuga Lake, like nearby Seneca Lake, is also the site of a phenomenon known as the Guns of the Seneca, mysterious cannon-like booms heard in the surrounding area. Many of these booms may be  attributable to bird-scarers, automated cannon-like devices used by farmers to scare birds away from the many vineyards, orchards and crops. There is however no proof of this.

Wine

Cayuga Lake is included in the American Viticultural Area with which it shares its name. Established in 1988,Code of Federal Regulations.  "§ 9.127 Cayuga Lake." Title 27: Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms; Part 9 — American Viticultural Areas; Subpart C — Approved American Viticultural Areas.  Retrieved Feb. 6, 2008. the AVA now boasts over a dozen wineries, four distilleries, a cidery, and a meadery.








