[[Williams College]]

CATEGORIES: Williams College, Universities and colleges in Massachusetts, Liberal arts colleges, New England Small College Athletic Conference, New England Association of Schools and Colleges, Council of Independent Colleges, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, Educational institutions established in the 1790s, 1793 establishments in the United States, Exeter College, Oxford, Universities and colleges in Berkshire County, Massachusetts, Members of the Annapolis Group, Association of Independent Colleges and Universities in Massachusetts members

Williams College is a private liberal arts college located in Williamstown, Massachusetts, United States. It was established in 1793 with funds from the estate of Ephraim Williams. Originally a men's college, Williams became co-educational in 1970. Fraternities were also phased out during this period, beginning in 1962. Williams forms part of the historic Little Three colleges, along with Wesleyan University and rival Amherst College.
There are three academic curricular divisions (humanities, sciences and social sciences), 24 departments, 33 majors, and two master's degree programs in art history and development economics. There are 334 voting faculty members, with a student-to-faculty ratio of 7:1. As of 2012, the school has an enrollment of 2,052 undergraduate students and 54 graduate students.
The academic year follows a 4–1–4 schedule of two four-course semesters plus a one-course "winter study" term in January.  A summer research schedule involves about 200 students on campus completing projects with professors.
Williams College currently occupies 1st place in U.S. News & World Report's 2014 ranking of the 266 liberal arts colleges in the United States. Colleges.rankingsandreviews. Retrieved on 2013-08-02. Forbes Magazine ranked Williams the 9th best college in the United States in its 2013 publication of America's Top Colleges.

History

Colonel Ephraim Williams was an officer in the Massachusetts militia and a member of a prominent landowning family. His will included a bequest to support and maintain a free school to be established in the town of West Hoosac, Massachusetts, provided that the town change its name to Williamstown. Williams was killed at the Battle of Lake George on September 8, 1755.[ref]
</ref>
After Shays' Rebellion, the Williamstown Free School opened with 15 students on October 26, 1791. The first president was Ebenezer Fitch. Not long after its founding, the trustees of the school petitioned the Massachusetts legislature to convert the free school to a tuition-based college. The legislature agreed and on June 22, 1793, Williams College was chartered.  It was the second college to be founded in Massachusetts.
At its founding, the college maintained a policy of racial segregation, refusing admission to black applicants. This policy was challenged by Lucy Terry Prince, who is credited as the first black American poet,
In 1806, a student prayer meeting gave rise to the American Foreign Mission Movement.  In August of that year, five students met in the maple grove of Sloan's Meadow to pray. A thunderstorm drove them to the shelter of a haystack, and the fervor of the ensuing meeting inspired them to take the Gospel abroad. The students went on to build the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, the first American organization to send missionaries overseas.  The Haystack Monument near Mission Park on the Williams Campus commemorates the historic "Haystack Prayer Meeting".
By 1815, Williams had only two buildings and 58 students and was in financial trouble, so the board voted to move the college to Amherst, Massachusetts.  In 1821, the president of the college, Zephaniah Swift Moore, who had accepted his position believing that the college would move east, decided to proceed with the move.  He took 15 students with him, and refounded the college under the name of Amherst College.  Some students and professors decided to stay behind at Williams and were allowed to keep the land, which was at the time relatively worthless.  According to legend, Moore also took portions of the Williams College library. Though plausible, the transfer of books is unsubstantiated. Moore died just two years later after founding Amherst, and was succeeded by Heman Humphrey, a trustee of Williams College.[ref]
