[[Ray Gricar]]

CATEGORIES: 1945 births, 2000s missing person cases, Case Western Reserve University School of Law alumni, Missing people, Missing person cases in the United States, State attorneys, District attorneys in Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania Republicans, People declared dead in absentia, People from Cleveland, Ohio, University of Dayton alumni

Ray Frank Gricar (; born October 9, 1945, missing April 15, 2005, declared legally dead July 25, 2011) was an American attorney who served as the district attorney of Centre County, Pennsylvania, from 1985 until 2005. On April 15, 2005, Gricar went missing under mysterious circumstances and has not been heard from since.
Born in Cleveland, Ohio, Gricar received his Juris Doctor degree from Case Western Reserve University School of Law and began his career as a prosecutor for Cuyahoga County. He moved to State College, Pennsylvania, around 1980 and after a brief stint as an assistant district attorney, Gricar was elected district attorney of Centre County in 1985. He was re-elected four times before announcing that he would not run for re-election in the 2005 campaign.
Gricar was reported missing to authorities after failing to return home from a road trip. His car was found in Lewisburg, Pennsylvania, with his cell phone inside, and his laptop computer was found in the adjacent Susquehanna River; other than that, very little trace of Gricar has been found. When he had been missing for over six years with no trace of his whereabouts, Centre County authorities declared Gricar legally dead on July 25, 2011.

Early life and career

Gricar was born in Cleveland, Ohio, and grew up in the city's Collinwood neighborhood.
Gricar moved to State College, Pennsylvania, around 1980, when his wife took a job at Pennsylvania State University ("Penn State"). He opted to become a stay-at-home dad to his young daughter following the move; however, when news spread that a prosecutor was living in the area, Centre County District Attorney David E. Grine offered Gricar an assistant position, which he accepted. In 1985, the incumbent district attorney, Robert Mix (Grine's successor), chose not to run for re-election, and Gricar ran for the open position. He won the election by a margin of 600 votes.
A part-time job when he was first elected, Gricar successfully campaigned to make the Centre County DA job a full-time one in 1996. 13 years later, in 2011, Sandusky was arrested and charged by the Pennsylvania Attorney General's office on multiple counts of child sexual abuse. In 2004, Gricar announced he would not run for re-election and would retire from both the DA job and as a practicing attorney in December 2005, shortly after his 60th birthday.

Personal life

Gricar met Barbara Gray during his undergraduate study at the University of Dayton. She moved to Cleveland with him after graduation and they married in 1969. They adopted a baby girl, Lara, in 1978. Ray and Barbara Gricar divorced in 1991; Ray married again in 1996, but divorced his second wife in 2001. In 2002 or 2003 Gricar moved in with his girlfriend, Patty Fornicola, an employee of the Centre County District Attorney's office.  He was living with Fornicola in her childhood home in Bellefonte at the time of his disappearance.
Ray Gricar's older brother, Roy, disappeared from his West Chester, Ohio, home in May 1996. His body was found a week later in the Great Miami River; authorities ruled his death a suicide.

Disappearance

At 11:30 a.m. (EDT) on April 15, 2005, Gricar called Fornicola to inform her that he was driving through the Brush Valley area northeast of Centre Hall. Fornicola reported Gricar missing 12 hours later when he failed to return home.
Gricar's car, a red MINI Cooper, was discovered the following day in an antique store parking lot in Lewisburg. His county-issued cell phone was inside, but his laptop computer, keys and wallet were missing, and there were no signs of foul play. Police and family members noted that the location where the vehicle was found—adjacent to two bridges over the Susquehanna River—bore some similarities to the location where the vehicle of Roy Gricar, Ray Gricar's older brother, was located before his body was found in the Great Miami River in Ohio in 1996.
Authorities searched the river and its banks in the days following the vehicle's discovery, but found no sign of Gricar. Pennsylvania authorities asked the FBI to analyze Gricar's bank accounts, credit card records and cell phone records, but found no clues as to where he may have been.
On July 30, 2005, fishermen discovered Gricar's county-issued laptop computer in the Susquehanna River beneath a bridge between Lewisburg and Milton.
[/ref]
Gricar's disappearance has been the subject of at least two television documentaries: an episode of Haunting Evidence first aired on Court TV in June 2006, and an episode of Disappeared first aired on Investigation Discovery in February 2011. Gricar's disappearance is featured on an episode of NBC's news magazine Dateline NBC on Dec. 16, 2011.
On June 30, 2011, Lara Gricar, Ray's daughter and trustee of his estate, petitioned Centre County for a court declaration of presumed death.
A day after Gricar was declared legally dead, a man resembling Gricar was arrested on a misdemeanor charge in Utah and refused to reveal his identity to police.  The "John Doe" was the same height and weight as Gricar and shared similar lips and some wrinkles with Gricar.  The man was eventually determined not to be Gricar.








