[[Arizona State Route 210]]

CATEGORIES: State highways in Arizona, Transportation in Pima County, Arizona

State Route 210 (SR 210), also known as the Barraza-Aviation Parkway, is a state highway located in Tucson, Arizona alongside the Union Pacific railroad. Most of it was opened around 1998.

Route description

Between its western terminus at Broadway Boulevard and Kino Parkway, SR 210 is a controlled-access expressway; further east, it is a limited-access highway with at-grade intersections and traffic lights until its eastern terminus at Golf Links Road (at the western edge of Davis-Monthan Air Force Base.
SR 210 currently does not intersect any other state or national routes, but may intersect Interstate 10 in the future.

History

The initial section of SR 210 has a very long history in Tucson.  Called the Barraza-Aviation Highway, all but the last few miles were completed in the 1990s.
The official history of the extension from the Downtown Links website history link states:
Four Citizen Advisory Committee (CAC) meetings and two public meetings were held between January 1 – June 30, 2008, where alignment options and issues were studied and commented upon. On June 23, 2008 the CAC voted to endorse the Curved 6th Street Alignment 3.d. to the Mayor and Council. And, on July 8, the Mayor and Council voted 6–0 to approve Alignment 3.d.Downtown Links History
What the statement on that page does not make clear is that the local neighborhoods and CAC initially approved another alignment, 3.c in December 2006, that ran along existing 6th St and 6th Ave routes after being shown several alignment options that did not include the ultimately approved Alignment 3.d.  After the CAC approval of alignment 3.c, the Southern Pacific railroad decided it wanted more room for a temporary track, known as a "shoofly", and the optional addition of a third set of rails.
The mayor and council approved the "thread the needle alignment" in 2007. That alignment received the Common Ground Award by the Metro Pima Alliance. It was rejected in January and replaced with a radically different plan.

Future

After the passage of the Regional Transportation Authority plan, a portion of the sales tax increase will pay for an extension of the parkway from Broadway Blvd to 6th St.  The plan is called Downtown Links. The road will go alongside the Union Pacific Railroad.  Also, the railroad crossing on 6th St, west of Stone will be improved, providing a new underpass below the railroad.  This will allow free-flowing traffic between I-10 and the new parkway.
The parkway will be four lanes wide.  Construction is scheduled to start in the second phase of the RTA plan in 2011.
ADOT is undergoing a study to connect SR 210 to I-10 at Valencia Road or Wilmot Road in South-East Tucson beginning as soon as 2014. The new roadway would be built to freeway standards from I-10 to the current terminus at Golf Links Road.azdot.pdf

Exit list






