[[RTI International]]

CATEGORIES: Multidisciplinary research institutes, Non-profit organizations based in North Carolina, Research institutes in the United States, Research Triangle, North Carolina, 1958 establishments in North Carolina

RTI International (formerly Research Triangle Institute) is a nonprofit organization, headquartered in the Research Triangle Park in North Carolina, that provides research and technical services. It was founded in 1958 by local businesses and the three North Carolina universities that form the Research Triangle region, with $500,000 in funding. RTI started with departments for research in isotopes, operational sciences and statistics. It restructured into four departments in 1971 and later created the Office for International Projects, now called the International Development Group. 
RTI later divided itself into eleven departments, including Health Research, Drug Discovery & Development, Education & Training Research, Survey Research, among others. RTI researchers work with the US Agency for International Development, which has come to account for 35 percent of RTI's revenue. RTI has also conducted research on HIV/AIDS, healthcare, education curriculum and environmental studies among others.

History

In 1954, Romeo Guest, a building contractor,
RTI started with three divisions: Isotope Development, Operational Sciences and Statistics Research. Its first contract was a $4,500 statistical study of morbidity data from Tennessee. and $85 million in 1988. 
In 1971, RTI's staff of 430 was reorganized into four research groups: social and economic systems, statistical sciences, environmental sciences and engineering, and chemistry and life sciences. It also created a division for education called the Center for Education Research and Evaluation. Four years later, RTI created the Office for International Programs to manage international projects. RTI provided financial assistance to help start the North Carolina School of Science and Mathematics, which was founded in 1980,
RTI started working with the US Agency for International Development (USAID) after the conflict between Iraq and the US began in 2003. USAID would become responsible for 35 percent of RTI's revenue by 2010. RTI worked with the US Agency for International Development in Iraq during which time the contractor, Unity Resources Group, hired to protect RTI staff shot and killed two Iraqi women on October 9, 2007.

Organization

RTI International is a not-for-profit research organization established by three local universities, but managed independently by a separate board and management team. RTI's structure consists of members of the corporation, the board of governors and corporate officers. The members of the corporation elect governors, who in turn create the organization's policies. Corporate officers are senior managers that report to the board for their area of responsibility. 
RTI has eleven service areas:

RTI also has a separate business called RTI Health Solutions, which supports biotech, diagnostic and medical device companies. As of 2012, the organization's largest division managed the social, statistical and environmental sciences services. More than half of RTI's staff have advanced degrees in one of 120 fields and work on approximately 1,200 projects at a time. RTI has partnerships with the Research Triangle Energy Consortium, the Triangle Global Health Consortium and other universities and research organizations. Many of RTI's staff hold faculty positions at the three universities that form the Research Triangle and participate in cooperative research projects. 
There are eight US offices and ten international locations in France, the United Kingdom, South America, Indian and Indonesia, among others, supporting operations in 75 countries.

Projects

thumb|right|Wall (right) and Wani (left) holding a piece of tree bark used to synthesize cancer intervention drugsRTI International's research has spanned areas like cancer, pollution, drug abuse and education.
Two RTI scientists, Monroe Wall and Mansukh Wani, synthesized an anti-cancer treatment, camptothecin, from a Chinese tree in 1966, and Taxol, from a Pacific yew tree in 1971.
RTI scientists helped identify toxic chemicals in the Love Canal in the 1970s. In 1978, RTI researched the possibility of improving solar cells for the US Department of Energy
An RTI survey in 1973, commissioned by the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, confirmed prior research that found no connection between drug use and violent crime, despite a long-held belief that heroin users were more prone to violence. 
In 1975, RTI provided recommendations to the Bureau of the Mint to halt production of expensive pennies and replace half-dollars with a new dollar coin. In 2001, RTI scientists created a new thinfilm superlattice material that uses the thermoelectric effect to cool microprocessors.[ref]
