[[Shawnee Mission West High School]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 1962, Public high schools in Kansas, Education in Overland Park, Kansas, Schools in Johnson County, Kansas, 1962 establishments in Kansas

Shawnee Mission West High School is a fully accredited public high school located in Overland Park, Kansas, USA, serving students in grades 9-12. Shawnee Mission West is one of several public high schools located within Shawnee Mission, KS. The official school colors are black and gold and the school mascot is the Viking. The average annual enrollment is approximately 2,000 students.
Shawnee Mission West was founded in 1962 in order to help educate the increasing number of students due to the emerging population of Shawnee Mission, KS.
Shawnee Mission West is a member of the Kansas State High School Activities Association and offers a variety of sports programs. Athletic teams compete in the 6A division and are known as the "Vikings". Extracurricular activities are also offered in the form of performing arts, school publications, and clubs.

History

Shawnee Mission West was established in 1962 due to the increasing numbers of students within the Shawnee Mission area, including Overland Park, Kansas. Prior to its creation, the Shawnee Mission School District included Shawnee Mission North High School (the original Shawnee Mission High School) and Shawnee Mission East High School.  Students from North and East were given the opportunity to transfer to the new high school if they lived within the boundaries of the new high school.

Academics

The former principal, Dr. Karl Krawitz, was named the NEA III District Educator of the Year for 2004-2005.

Student demographics

Shawnee Mission West has a student body population that is 11% African-American, which is the highest African-American population of any Johnson County high school.greatschools. Shawnee Mission West draws its student population from both Overland Park, Lenexa, and from a small portion of Shawnee.

Extracurricular activities

The Vikings compete in the Sunflower League and are classified as a 6A school, the largest classification in Kansas according to the Kansas State High School Activities Association. Throughout its history, Shawnee Mission West has won several state championships in various sports.

Athletics

SM West won state championships in 1972, 1985 and 2012 in football, in addition to runner-up finishes in 1977 and 2006.  On November 24, 2012 the Vikings won "the rematch" with the Hutchinson Salthawks 19-14 in Topeka, KS at Washburn University football field.

=Tennis=

In recent years, the girls tennis team has taken the region by storm. In 2006, the girls won the Sunflower League, which had been largely dominated by Shawnee Mission East for the past eight years.

=Other sports=

West has competed in four state title games for basketball, the most recent being in 2005, led by coach Mike Brinsko, but has never been able to come away with the title.

State championships

Forensics

SM West has twice (1986 and 2007) placed second at the National Forensic League tournament for policy debate.

Debate

SM West placed first in Kansas 6A 4-Speaker Debate in 2012. (KSHSAA sponsored - Coach Kenneth King)

School song

Music department

The Shawnee Mission West marching band has been invited to play in London for the New Years Parade every three years for the past fifteen years.  The Wind Ensemble was selected through audition to perform at the Kansas Music Educators Convention in February 2012. There were only three high school bands selected from across the state of Kansas for the prestigious honor. It has been 15 years since a band from Shawnee Mission West High School has been selected to perform at this event.  
At the end of the regular football season, the Shawnee Mission West marching band has a light show where the band straps glow-sticks and flashlights to themselves. This show is performed each year at the end of the last home football game of the regular season.
The Choral Department comprises four choirs: Bel Canto (Women's Select Choir), Chorale, Concert Choir (freshman) and the Madrigal Singers (a chamber choir of 24 to 30 students). Madrigals members are generally required to be enrolled in Chorale, with few exceptions. The Madrigal Singers, the school's premiere ensemble, was selected to represent West at Carnegie Hall in the 2006-07 school year and the Chorale was also in 2009-2010.

Notable alumni








