[[Los Angeles Jewish Community Center shooting]]

CATEGORIES: 20th-century attacks on synagogues and Jewish communal organizations, Terrorist incidents in the United States in 1999, Terrorist incidents in California, Jewish-American history in California, Jews and Judaism in Los Angeles, California, Los Angeles, California crime history, Deaths by firearm in California, Murder in California, 1999 in California, 1999 murders in the United States, Neo-fascist terrorism, Antisemitic attacks and incidents in the United States, Jewish Community Centers in the United States, Granada Hills, Los Angeles

The 1999 Los Angeles Jewish Community Center shooting occurred on August 10, 1999, at around 10:50 a.m. local time, when white supremacist Buford O. Furrow, Jr.  walked into the lobby of the North Valley Jewish Community Center in Granada Hills and opened fire with a semiautomatic weapon, firing 70 shots into the complex.  The gunfire wounded five people: three children, a teenage counselor, and an office worker.  Shortly thereafter, Furrow murdered a mail carrier, fled the state, and finally surrendered to authorities.

History

Months prior to the shooting, Buford O. Furrow had been treated for mental illness while in the custody of the state of Washington.New York Times, August 14, 1999 "Racist Shootings Test Limits Of Health System, and Laws"
He reportedly spent some time living with Debbie Mathews (the widow of Robert Jay Mathews) whom he met at the Aryan Nations headquarters in Idaho.adl.asp

Events

On August 7, Furrow bought a used red Chevrolet van in Tacoma, Washington, and loaded it with five rifles, two pistols, 6,000 rounds of ammunition and a flak jacket.  Furrow considered attacking three Jewish institutions: the Skirball Cultural Center, the American Jewish University and the Simon Wiesenthal Center's Museum of Tolerance, but security measures presented too much of a problem."The Kids Got In The Way: All the warning signs were there, but still Buford Furrow got his hands on guns and went on a rampage." Time. 154.8. August 23, 1999. p24."A Visitor from the Dark Side: The accused L.A. gunner drove into town on a high of delusion and self-destruction." Newsweek. 134.9. August 23, 1999. p32.
Furrow proceeded to drive from againWashington to the San Fernando Valley with the stated purpose of "killing Jews".  Three days later, Furrow  pulled off the freeway into the Granada Hills area of Los Angeles and made his way to the North Valley Jewish Community Center just before 11 a.m.  There were about 250 children playing outside"Suspect in L.A. Shootings Surrenders in Las Vegas -- He may be charged in second gun attack." The Seattle Times. August 11, 1999. pA1. when Furrow walked into the lobby carrying an Uzi-type submachine-gun."Separatist in fed court." United Press International. August 31, 1999.  He opened fire, spraying bullets from right to left, leaving smoke and more than 70 casings on the ground.  When he was done, a receptionist, a camp counselor and three little boys were wounded.
Furrow fled the scene in his van.  Twenty minutes later, he carjacked a woman's Toyota at gunpoint, left the van behind, and then dumped the Toyota at a Chatsworth motel.: "Manhunt; Police on suspect's trail after children are gunned down in school." Birmingham Evening Mail. August 11, 1999. p13.
The shootings ended with the death of USPS postal worker Joseph Santos Ileto (born March 19, 1960) in Chatsworth, a few miles away from the center. Ileto had just delivered mail to a home and was returning to his postal truck when Furrow asked Ileto to mail a letter for him.  As Ileto agreed, Furrow pulled out a Glock 9mm handgunWeinstein, Henry. "Slain Postman's Mother Can Sue Weapon Makers." Los Angeles Times 29 May 2004: B1. and shot Ileto nine times.  Later, Furrow would confess that he murdered Ileto because he thought Ileto was Latino or Asian (Ileto was Filipino American), and because Ileto was a federal employee. Retrieved August 3, 2006. 
Police found Furrow's abandoned van, where they discovered a cache of ammunition, rifle magazines, bulletproof vests, homemade explosives, a Ranger Handbook, and freeze-dried food.  Two books by Richard Kelly Hoskins, a Lynchburg, Virginia, leader of the Christian Identity movement were also found; a copy of the book War Cycles, Peace Cycles, and Vigilantes of Christendom: The Story of Phineas Priesthood, a book which according to the Anti-Defamation League justifies antisemitic and racist acts of violence. (August 13, 1999). "Close eye kept on U.S. hate groups: Monitors had large file on suspect." The Washington Times. p12.
Furrow fled 275-miles in an $800 taxi ride from Los Angeles, California to Las Vegas, Nevada, ending the manhunt by walking into an FBI office to confess, saying "You're looking for me, I killed the kids in Los Angeles."  Furrow also stated that he wanted his shooting to be "a wakeup call to America to kill Jews.""Shooting suspect gives up White supremacist held in L.A. attack." The Florida Times-Union. August 11, 1999. pA-1.

Victims

The injured included a 5-year-old boy, Benjamin Kadish, who was hit in the abdomen and leg, losing 50 percent of his blood; two 6-year-old boys, Joshua Stepakoff and James Zidell, a 16-year-old girl, Mindy Finkelstein, who was hit in her right thigh and shin; and 68-year-old receptionist Isabelle Shalometh, who was grazed on the arm and back.
Joseph Ileto died of multiple gunshot wounds to the chest and one to the back of the head.  He was found dead in a driveway. At Ileto's funeral, messages of condolence from numerous politicians were read by Congressman Brad Sherman.
Of the five people injured in the shooting at the Community Center, all eventually recovered.

Reaction

In 2004, on the fifth anniversary of the shootings, families of the victims and local officials called for stricter gun control and hate crime legislation.  Ismael Ileto, Joseph's brother, said: "We miss him very much ... and we cannot understand why someone would take the life of my brother. He was just doing his job when he was killed."   Ileto was honored by having a post office in Chino Hills, California named for him.AsianWeek: Main Feature: From News to History-Stories from the Pages of AsianWeek

Sentencing of Furrow

Initially, Furrow pleaded not guilty to a federal charge of murder in killing Ileto and state charges of attempted murder for shooting the five people in the Jewish center, although he reportedly confessed to the shootings in interviews with detectives.
Prosecutors in the case, who said Furrow admitted to his crimes stating they were motivated by racial hatred, promised to seek the death penalty if the case went to trial, which lead to a lengthy legal battle with Furrow's defense team. The case was further complicated by defense claims that Furrow suffered from serious psychiatric problems.
On January 24, 2001 Furrow pleaded guilty to all of the 16 felony counts against him (which include a  murder charge for the shooting of Ileto, six counts of civil rights violations and nine weapons charges). In exchange for pleading guilty, Furrow avoided a possible death sentence, but instead agreed to be sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole. According to the indictment, Furrow expressed no regrets for any of his crimes.
On March 26, 2001, at his sentencing hearing, Furrow was sentenced to two consecutive life terms, plus 110 additional years, without the possibility of parole and was ordered to pay $690,294.11 in restitution to victims' families and insurance companies. Judge Nora Manella excoriated Furrow during the proceeding, saying, "Your actions were a stark and brutal reminder that bigotry is alive, if not well."






