[[Bobby Singh]]

CATEGORIES: 1975 births, Living people, People from Richmond, British Columbia, Indo-Fijian people, Fijian emigrants to the United States, Sportspeople of Indian descent, Fijian emigrants to Canada, Canadian people of Indian descent, Canadian expatriate American football people in the United States, Grey Cup champions, Canadian football offensive linemen, Canadian players of American football, Players of Canadian football from British Columbia, American football offensive linemen, Portland State Vikings football players, Hawaii Rainbow Warriors football players, Undrafted National Football League players, St. Louis Rams players, Los Angeles Xtreme players, Calgary Stampeders players, BC Lions players, Winnipeg Blue Bombers players

Bobby Singh (born November 21, 1975) is a retired professional American and Canadian football guard. He last played for the BC Lions of the Canadian Football League. He was drafted by the Calgary Stampeders in the first round of the 1999 CFL Draft. Singh is the only player to have won an XFL Championship, a Super Bowl and a Grey Cup.
Singh has also played for the St. Louis Rams, Los Angeles Xtreme and Winnipeg Blue Bombers.

Early years

Singh was born in Fiji to parents Malkit and Mindy who are of Indian descent. The family moved to Richmond, British Columbia when Bobby was two years old. He attended Garden City Elementary School, Palmer Junior Secondary School, and Richmond Senior Secondary School. Throughout his school years, he was active in sports, including american football, basketball, and track and field.

College career

After graduating from high school, he earned a full football scholarship to the University of Hawaii. He played sparingly in 1995, but in 1996 started eleven games for the Warriors and was named an all-WAC Conference Academic. He transferred to Portland State University in 1997, where he was named first team All-Big Sky in his junior year, and All-American/All-Conference/Scholar Athlete of the Year in his senior year. He was a team captain for both his years at Portland State. He graduated with a degree in sociology.

Professional career

Singh was drafted in the first round, eighth overall by the Calgary Stampeders in the 1999 Canadian College Draft. He signed as a free agent with the St. Louis Rams, winning a Super Bowl ring in Super Bowl XXXIV while on the Rams' practice roster.  He underwent back surgery, was released after the season, and spent the 2000 season recovering. In 2001, he signed with the Los Angeles Xtreme of the XFL, playing in six regular season and two playoff games, and winning that league's first and only championship, the Million Dollar Game. He then signed with the San Diego Chargers, but was released at the end of training camp.
In 2002, he signed with the Calgary Stampeders of the Canadian Football League, becoming a starter by the fifth game of the season and playing in sixteen regular season games. After a strong season with Stampeders in 2003, he was named as a finalist for the CFL's Outstanding Canadian Award and CFL's Most Outstanding Offensive Lineman Award. Singh signed with the BC Lions in March 2004. During the 2004 season, he missed five games due to a triceps injury. He started all but two games of the 2005 season, including the Scotiabank West Championship (the CFL West Division final), which the Lions lost to the Edmonton Eskimos by the score of 28-23. He was released by Calgary just prior to the 2008 CFL season, and was signed by Winnipeg on Sept. 18, 2008. 
Singh has the unusual honor of having successfully completed the Triple Crown of professional outdoor football championships, having won the Super Bowl with the Rams, the Grey Cup with the Lions, and the championship of the highest outdoor professional league other than the NFL (in Singh's case, the Million Dollar Game) with the Xtreme.
He was released by the Bombers on May 15, 2009.
Singh re-signed with the BC Lions on June 25, 2009.

Outside football

Singh is involved in a variety of volunteer and community work in the Vancouver area, such as youth football programmes and the Richmond Boys and Girls Club. In November 2005, he was elected to the Richmond School Board, taking the seventh and final School Trustee position with 9152 votes. He also started a security company, Xtreme Security Ltd., during the 2005-2006 off-season.






