[[List of Pennsylvania State University residence halls]]

CATEGORIES: Pennsylvania State University campus, University and college dormitories in the United States

The following is a list of the residence halls within the Pennsylvania State University system.

University Park

In addition to the following residence halls, the University Park campus provides housing in Eastview Terrace, White Course Apartments, and Nittany Apartments.

Residence Commons

The residence commons are common areas for each of the residence hall areas.  Each one has a dining hall and a computer lab.  At one point in time, each had a radio station.  WEHR (East Halls Radio), which operated in Johnston Commons until 2005, was the last to survive.

Other resource areas

Houses a TV lounge, laundry facilities, Commons Desk, Residence Life/Housing Office for residents of Nittany Apartments and Suites.
Houses a TV lounge, Commons Desk, Residence Life/Housing Office for residents of White Course Apartments.
Houses a TV lounge, Front Desk, Residence Life/Housing Office for residents of Eastview Terrace.

East Halls

East Halls is the largest group of residence halls on campus, and is served by Findlay/Johnston Commons.  It is reserved primarily for first-year student housing, and most residents share a double room with a roommate. The area's special living options are First-Year Interest in Liberal Arts and Education and Tri-Service ROTC. All of the buildings in the East Halls residence area are named after former governors of Pennsylvania. The residence halls are:

North Halls

North Halls is the smallest residence hall complex at the University Park campus, consisting of four residence halls. They are known as the most comfortable on campus, with all rooms being carpeted and having their own bathroom. Nearly all rooms in North residence halls are suites for two or four students, however there are a few rooms for only a single resident.  The two and four person suites are made up of four rooms with two bedrooms with a shared living room separating them, and the bathroom connected to the shared living room.
Leete was the first hall converted to this format.  North Halls special living options are Arts and Architecture (A&A), Business and Society House (BASH), and EARTH House.North Halls

Pollock Halls

Pollock Halls is the third-largest residence hall complex on campus, consisting of co-ed and female only residence halls.  Most rooms are shared by two students.  Pollock Halls houses nine special livings options: Be House (Be-Engaged as of August 2013), Discover House, EASI (Engineering and Applied Sciences), Forensic Science Interest House, HEAL (Health Education and Awareness in Living), HAC (Helping Across the Community), ILH (International Languages), LIFE (Living in a Free Environment as of August 2013), and WISE (Women in Science and Engineering).  Pollock Halls also contains housing for eleven sororities.Pollock Halls

South Halls & South Proper

South Halls offers housing for Schreyer Honors College students in Atherton and Simmons, and in addition offers male, female and co-ed residence halls. Student dies in elevator shaft fallSouth Halls At one point both McElwain Hall and Simmons Hall both contained a dining complex, but as of May 2011 their dining areas were eliminated to increase residential room space.collegian.edu/archive/2008/05/02/commons_replaced_for_dorm_spac. On a Residence Life basis, McElwain has been moved to the Pollock Residential Life area.  

South Proper

These two buildings are connected to each other:
These two buildings are connected to each other:
These two buildings are connected to each other:
These two buildings are connected to each other:
*A Wet Core restroom concept eliminates the need to have "gender specific" restrooms in that there is a common sink space that everyone shares with every toilet/shower in a separate room behind a locked door.  The wet core concept eliminates the traditional restroom design and allows for more privacy for any student without having to worry about gender obstacles.

Nittany Apartments & Suites

Nittany Apartments and Suites provide the luxury of apartment and suite living while allowing students to still live on campus. Nittany Apartments houses same-sex students in either two-bedroom or four-bedroom apartments, complete with bathroom, living room, and kitchen. Nittany Suites—made up exclusively of Nittany Hall—houses single upperclass students in two-bedroom suites. Four people live in each suite. These living areas are available to upperclass students.Housing: Undergraduates: Nittany Apartments & Suites

Eastview Terrace

Eastview Terrace is a residence location specifically for sophomores, juniors, and seniors. It houses 806 undergraduates, providing a private bedroom and bath for each student. Additional charges do apply to Eastview Terrace rooms.

West Halls

West Halls offers male, female, and co-ed housing in single, regular double, small double, and triple rooms. West Halls also includes the oldest residence halls on campus that are still in use. Several special living options are offered in West Halls, including EMS (Earth and Mineral Sciences), IST Interest House, (LGBT) Ally House, and E-House (Engineering House).West Halls

White Course Apartments

This living area has previously only been available to full-time graduate students.  As of Fall 2008 the area is open to undergraduates. The area provides housing for single graduate students, as well as graduate students in relationships and with families. The area provides one-, two-, and three-bedroom apartments, as well as townhouses.Housing: Graduates: White Course Apartments

Commonwealth campuses

Altoona

Beaver

Berks

The village
The Woods

Erie, The Behrend College

Harrisburg

1000 

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

7000

8000

9000

Hazleton

Greater Allegheny

Mont Alto

Schuylkill






