[[Japanese eel]]

CATEGORIES: Anguillidae, Fish of China, Fish of Japan, Fish of Korea, Fish of the Philippines, Fish of Taiwan, Fish of Vietnam, Seafood red list

The Japanese eel, Anguilla  japonica, is a species of anguillid eel found in Japan, Korea, China, Taiwan, and VietnamVietnam Faunas, as well as the northern Philippines. Like all the eels of the genus Anguilla and the family Anguillidae, it is catadromous, meaning it spawns in the sea but lives parts of its life in  freshwater. The spawning area of this species is in the North Equatorial Current in the western North Pacific to the west of the Mariana Islands. The larvae are called leptocephali and are carried westward by the North Equatorial Current and then northward by the Kuroshio Current to East Asia where they live in rivers, lakes and estuaries.  The Japanese eel is an important food fish in East Asia where it is raised in aquaculture ponds in most countries in the region.   In Japan, where they are called unagi, it is an important part of the food culture, with many restaurants serving grilled eel, which is called kabayaki.  Eels also have uses in Chinese medicine.

Life history and habitat

The Japanese eel and other anguillid eels live in freshwater and estuaries where they feed and grow as yellow eels for a number of years before they begin to mature and become silver eels.  The silver eels then migrate out of freshwater into the ocean and start their long journey to their spawning area.  Adult Japanese eels migrate thousands of kilometers from freshwater rivers in East Asia to their spawning area without feeding. The adult eels of the Japanese eel appear to spawn in the upper few hundred meters of the ocean based on the recent catches of their spawning adults, eggs and newly hatched larvae.  The timing of catches of eggs and larvae and the ages of larger larvae have shown that Japanese eels only spawn during the few days just before the new moon period of each month of their spawning season.  
After being born in the ocean the leptocephali are carried westward by the North Equatorial Current and then northward by the Kuroshio Current to East Asia. In the open ocean, the larvae feed on marine snow, before they metamorphose into the glass eel stage.  The glass eels then enter the estuaries and headwaters of rivers and many travel upstream. In freshwater and estuaries the diet of yellow eels consists mainly of shrimp, other crustaceans, aquatic insects and small fishes. 
The Japanese eel population, along with anguillid eel populations worldwide, have declined drastically in recent years. This is presumably due to a combination of overfishing and habitat loss or changing water conditions in the ocean interfering with spawning and the transport of their leptocephali. In the case of the Japanese eel, spawning is likely affected by the north-south shifts of a salinity front created by an area of low salinity waters resulting from tropical rainfall. The front is thought to be detected by the adult spawning eels and to affect the latitudes at which they spawn. There appears to have been a northward shift in the front that occurred over the past 30 years, which could cause more larvae to be retained in eddies offshore in the region east of Taiwan, and southward shifts in the salinity front have been observed in recent years that could increase southward transport into the Mindanao Current that flows into the Celebes Sea.   These types of unfavorable larval transport are thought to reduce the recruitment success of the Japanese eels that reach river mouths as glass eels.

Commercial fisheries

Medical use

The Japanese freshwater eel is the only vertebrate known to produce a fluorescent protein. This protein is the basis of a new test to assess dangerous blood toxins that can trigger liver disease. Based on report "Sandle, Tim (2013): The glowing eel can help assess blood toxins"






