[[Lee Williamson]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, Living people, People from Derby, English footballers, Jamaican footballers, Association football midfielders, Mansfield Town F.C. players, Northampton Town F.C. players, Rotherham United F.C. players, Watford F.C. players, Preston North End F.C. players, Sheffield United F.C. players, Portsmouth F.C. players, Blackburn Rovers F.C. players, Premier League players, The Football League players

Lee Trevor Williamson (born 7 June 1982) is a professional footballer who plays as a Midfielder for Blackburn Rovers. Born in Derby he started his career at Mansfield Town before spending time at Northampton Town, Rotherham United, Watford, Preston North End, Sheffield United and Portsmouth before joining Blackburn. He has been called up for Jamaica but was an unused squad player.

Club career

Early career

Williamson started his career at Mansfield Town, making 165 appearances in his stay at Field Mill. He then moved to Northampton Town early in the 2004–05 season where he quickly established himself as an automatic choice in the first team where he scored two goals.
Williamson then joined Rotherham United in the summer of 2005, and once again established himself in first team.

Watford

He completed a move to Watford along with team mate Will Hoskins for a combined fee of £1.2 million on 5 January 2007. On 31 January 2007 he played his first Premier League match for Watford against Manchester United.
Williamson scored three times in his first season at Vicarage Road but was then loaned to Preston North End at the end of March until the end of the 2008–09 season.

Sheffield United

Williamson signed with Sheffield United for an undisclosed fee, believed to be around £500,000, during the 2009 close season.
He continued to be dogged by injuries during his first season with the Blades and eventually returned for a second operation on his back in the close season. This time, however, Williamson almost died after suffering complications during the operation. He was placed on a life support machine for two days after contracting an infection. Commenting at the time, then Blades Manager Kevin Blackwell said: "He was placed on life support. He's a very lucky lad to be alive."
On 26 July 2012, on Sheffield United's pre-season tour of Malta, manager, Danny Wilson confirmed Williamson would not sign a new deal with the club and had subsequently been told to stay away from training with the sqaud. Despite this Wilson refused to rule out Williamson signing a new deal.

Portsmouth

On 16 August 2012, Williamson signed a one-month deal with Portsmouth. In January 2013 he was released by Portsmouth along with 5 other players due to financial reasons.

Blackburn Rovers

Williamson signed for Championship side Blackburn Rovers on a 18-month deal on 8 February 2013. He made his debut away at Arsenal in the fifth round of the FA Cup, playing the whole match in gloves alongside Jason Lowe as his new team produced a surprise 1-0 win, courtesy of a late Colin Kazim-Richards goal. On 14 September 2013, Williamson was red-carded in the East Lancashire derby against  Burnley after fouling striker Danny Ings in a last man situation during injury time with the scores level at 1-1. This was well-received by the fans of Blackburn Rovers as an admirable and selfless piece of good play for the sake of the team, preventing the first local derby defeat for 35 years (11 attempts) Williamson was roundly applauded for 'taking one for the team' on his subsequent return to action and his meteoric rise to 'fans favourite' status has led to his nickname "Willo" now being chanted by the fans on a regular basis.

International career

On 23 May 2008, Williamson was included in a 28-man squad to play for Jamaica.

Career statistics

 
 






