[[Yellow]]

CATEGORIES: Optical spectrum, Rainbow, Shades of yellow, Web colors

Yellow  is the color of gold, butter and ripe lemons."of the color of gold, butter or ripe lemons",  Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language, The World Publishing Company, New York, 1964. In the spectrum of visible light, and in the traditional color wheel used by painters, yellow is found between green and orange.
Yellow is commonly associated with gold, wealth, sunshine, reason, happiness, optimism and pleasure, but also with envy, jealousy and betrayal. It plays an important part in Asian culture, particularly in China. 69–86.

Etymology and definitions

The word "yellow" comes from the Old English geolu, geolwe, meaning "yellow, yellowish", derived from the Proto-Germanic word gelwaz. It has the same Indo-European base, -ghel, as the word yell; -ghel means both bright and gleaming, and to cry out. Yellow is a color which cries out for attention.Webster's New World Dictionary of American English, Third College Edition, (1988)
The English term is related to other Germanic words for yellow, namely Scots (Scottish people) yella, East Frisian jeel, West Frisian giel, Dutch geel, German gelb, and Swedish gul.

Shades and varieties

See also Shades of yellow

File:Valencia market - lemons.
File:GoldNuggetUSGOV.jpg|A gold nugget
File:Hand-made butter.jpg|Fresh butter
File:Fried egg, sunny side up.jpg|A fried egg, sunny-side up
File:Chinese Buddhist Monks Ceremony Hangzhou.jpeg|Buddhist monks in Hangzhou, China
File:Cabs.
File:Zwei Bäume im Rapsfeld, blauer Himmel.
File:Saffron Crop.
File:Turmeric-powder.

In history and art

Prehistory and antiquity

Yellow, in the form of yellow ochre pigment made from clay, was one of the first colors used in prehistoric cave art. The cave of Lascaux has an image of a horse colored with yellow estimated to be 17,300 years old.
In Ancient Egypt, yellow was associated with gold, which was considered to be imperishable, eternal and indestructible. The skin and bones of the gods were believed to be made of gold. The Egyptians used yellow extensively in tomb paintings; they usually used either yellow ochre or the brilliant orpiment, though it was made of arsenic and was highly toxic. A small paintbox with orpiment pigment was found in the tomb of King Tutankhamun. Men were always shown with brown faces, women with yellow ochre or gold faces.webexhibits.html|Webexhibits -Pigments through the ages - antiquity
The ancient Romans used yellow in their paintings to represent gold and also in skin tones. It is found frequently in the murals of Pompeii.

File:Lascaux2. from Lascaux cave.
File:Tomb of Nakht.
File:Harfenspielerin Römisches Fresko.
File:Meister von San Vitale in Ravenna 003.
File:Flag of Palaeologus Dynasty.

The Middle Ages and Renaissance

During the Middle Ages and Renaissance, yellow became firmly established as the color of Judas Iscariot, the disciple who betrayed Christ, even though the Bible never describes his clothing. From this connection, yellow also took on associations with envy, jealousy and duplicity.
The tradition began in the Renaissance of marking non-Christian outsiders, such as Jews, with the color yellow. In 16th century Spain, those accused of heresy and who refused to renounce their views were compelled to come before the Spanish Inquisition dressed in a yellow cape. 82.

File:Thomas Becket Murder. (Circa 1200).
File:Giotto - Scrovegni - -31- - Kiss of Judas.
File:Johannes Vermeer - Het melkmeisje - Google Art Project. 1658)

The 18th and 19th centuries

The 18th and 19th century saw the discovery and manufacture of synthetic pigments and dyes, which quickly replaced the traditional yellows made from arsenic, cow urine, and other substances.
Circa 1776 Jean-Honoré Fragonard painted A Young Girl Reading. She is dressed in a bright saffron yellow dress. This painting is "considered by many critics to be among Fragonard's most appealing and masterly".
The 19th-century British painter J.M.W. Turner was one of the first in that century to use yellow to create moods and emotions, the way romantic composers were using music. His painting Rain, Steam, and Speed - the Great Central Railway was dominated by glowing yellow clouds.
Georges Seurat use the new synthetic colors in his experimental paintings composed of tiny points of primary colors. particularly in his famous Sunday Afternoon on the Isle de la Grand jatte (1884–86). He did not know that the new synthetic yellow pigment, zinc yellow or zinc chromate, which he used in the light green lawns, was highly unstable and would quickly turn brown. 220.
The painter Vincent van Gogh was a particular admirer of the color yellow, the color of sunshine. Writing to his sister from the south of France in 1888, he wrote, "Now we are having beautiful warm, windless weather that is very beneficial to me. The sun, a light that for lack of a better word I can only call yellow, bright sulfur yellow, pale lemon gold. How beautiful yellow is!" In Arles, Van Gogh painted sunflowers inside a small house he rented at 2 Place Lamartine, a house painted what Van Gogh called "buttery yellow." Van Gogh was one of the first artists to use commercially-manufactured paints, rather than paints he made himself. He used the traditional yellow ochre, but also chrome yellow, first made in 1809, and cadmium yellow, first made in 1820. 96–97.
At the end of the 19th century, in 1895, a new popular art form began to appear in New York newspapers; the color comic strip. It took advantage of a new color printing process, which used color separation and three different colors of ink; magenta, cyan, and yellow, plus black, to create all the colors on the page. One of the first characters in the new comic strips was a humorous boy of the New York streets named Mickey Dugen, more commonly known as the Yellow Kid, from the yellow nightshirt he wore. He gave his name (and color) to the whole genre of popular, sensational journalism, which became known as Yellow Journalism.

File:Fragonard, The Reader. Jean-Honoré Fragonard, ca. 1776, 32" x 25 1/2" National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.
File:Rain Steam and Speed the Great Western Railway. (1844). British painter J.M.W. Turner used yellow clouds to create a mood, the way romantic composers of the time used music.
File:Georges Seurat - Un dimanche après-midi à l'Île de la Grande Jatte. He did not know that the paint would quickly deteriorate and turn brown.
File:Vincent Van Gogh 0010.
File:YellowKid. He gave his name to type of sensational reporting called Yellow Journalism.

20th and 21st centuries

In the 20th century, yellow was revived as a symbol of exclusion, as it had been in the Middle Ages and Renaissance. Jews in Nazi Germany and German-occupied countries were required to sew yellow triangles with the star of David onto their clothing.
In the 20th century, modernist painters reduced painting to its simplest colors and geometric shapes. The Dutch modernist painter Piet Mondrian made a series of paintings which consisted of a pure white canvas with grid of vertical and horizontal black lines and rectangles of yellow, red, and blue.
Yellow was particularly valued in the 20th century because of its high visibility. It often replaced red as the color of fire trucks and other emergency vehicles, and was popular in neon signs, especially in Las Vegas and in China, where yellow was the most esteemed color.
The 21st century saw the use of unusual materials and technologies to create new ways of experiencing the color yellow. One example was The weather project, by Danish-Icelandic artist Olafur Eliasson, which was installed in the open space of the Turbine Hall of London's Tate Modern in 2003.
Eliasson used humidifiers to create a fine mist in the air via a mixture of sugar and water, as well as a semi-circular disc made up of hundreds of monochromatic lamps which radiated yellow light. The ceiling of the hall was covered with a huge mirror, in which visitors could see themselves as tiny black shadows against a mass of light. The art of Olafur Eliasson New Yorker.

File:Yellowstar.
File:Horse&rider. Las Vegas became a showcase of neon art and advertising.

In science

Light, optics and colorimetry

Yellow is the color the human eye sees when it looks at light within the wavelengths of 570 and 590 nanometers, the wavelength of light between green and orange.
In the language of optics, yellow is the evoked by light that stimulates both the L and M (long and medium wavelength) cone cells of the retina about equally, with no significant stimulation of the S (short-wavelength) cone cells. Light with a wavelength of 570–590 nm is yellow, as is light with a suitable mixture of red and green. Yellow's traditional RYB complementary color is purple, violet, or indigo, while its colorimetrically defined complementary color in both RGB and CMYK color spaces is blue.

=In color printing and on a computer screen=

In color printing, yellow is one of the three colors of ink, along with magenta and cyan, which can be overlaid in the right combination, along with black, to print any full color image. (See the CMYK color model).
The yellow on a color television or computer screen is created in a completely different way; by combining green and red light at the right level of intensity. (See RGB color model).
RGB yellow or X11 yellow is the most intense yellow in the 8-bit RGB color model; yellow is a secondary color in an additive RGB space.
The measured light spectrum from yellow pixels on a typical computer display is complex, and very unlike the reflectance spectrum of a yellow object such as a banana.
Process yellow (also known as pigment yellow, printer's yellow or canary yellow) is one of the three colors typically used as subtractive primary colors, along with magenta and cyan. The CMYK system for color printing is based on using four inks, one of which is a yellow color. This is in itself a standard color, and a fairly narrow range of yellow inks or pigments are used. Process yellow is based on a colorant that reflects the preponderance of red and green light, and absorbs most blue light, as in the reflectance spectra shown in the figure on the lower right.
Because of the characteristics of paint pigments and use of different color wheels, painters traditionally regard the complement of yellow as the color indigo or blue-violet.
Process yellow is not an RGB color, and there is no fixed conversion from CMYK primaries to RGB. Different formulations are used for printer's ink, so there can be variations in the printed color that is pure yellow ink.
The first recorded use of canary yellow as a color name in English was in 1789.

CMYK color swatches. When CMY "primaries" are combined at full strength, the resulting "secondary" mixtures are red, green, and blue
SubtractiveColor.
File:NIEdot367. Combining images in yellow, magenta and cyan creates a full-color picture. This is called the CMYK color model.	
File:RGB illumination.This is called the RGB color model.

=Complementary colors=

Traditionally, the complementary color of yellow is violet; the two colors are opposite each other on the color wheel long used by painters.
Hunt defines that "two colors are complementary when it is possible to reproduce the tristimulus values of a specified achromatic stimulus by an additive mixture of these two stimuli."
Newton's own color circle has yellow directly opposite the boundary between indigo and violet. These results, that the complement of yellow is a wavelength shorter than 450 nm, are derivable from the modern CIE 1931 system of colorimetry if it is assumed that the yellow is about 580 nm or shorter wavelength, and the specified white is the color of a blackbody radiator of temperature 2800 K or lower (that is, the white of an ordinary incandescent light bulb). More typically, with a daylight-colored or around 5000 to 6000 K white, the complement of yellow will be in the blue wavelength range, which is the standard modern answer for the complement of yellow.

File:PlanckianLocusWithYellowComplements. The green lines show several possible pairs of complementary colors with respect to different blackbody color temperature neutrals, illustrated by the "Planckian locus".

=Lasers=

Lasers emitting in the yellow part of the spectrum are less common and more expensive than most other colors.

Astronomy

Stars of spectral classes F and G, such as our sun Sol, have color temperatures that make them look "yellowish". The first astronomer to classify stars according to their color was F. G. W. Struve in 1827. One of his classifications was flavae, or yellow, and this roughly corresponded to stars in the modern spectral range F5 to K0. The Strömgren photometric system for stellar classification includes a 'y' or yellow filter that is centered at a wavelength of 550 nm and has a bandwidth of 20–30 nm.

Biology

=Why autumn leaves, daffodils, bananas and egg yolks are yellow=

Autumn leaves, yellow flowers, bananas, oranges and other yellow fruit all contain carotenoids, yellow and red organic pigments that are found in the chloroplasts and chromoplasts of plants and some other photosynthetic organisms like algae, some bacteria, and some fungi. They serve two key roles in plants and algae: they absorb light energy for use in photosynthesis, and they protect the green chlorophyll from photodamage.
In late summer, as daylight hours shorten and temperatures cool, the veins that carry fluids into and out of the leaf are gradually closed off. The water and mineral intake into the leaf is reduced, slowly at first, and then more rapidly. It is during this time that the chlorophyll begins to decrease.
As the chlorophyll diminishes, the yellow and red carotenoids become more and more visible, creating the classic autumn leaf color.
Carotenoids are common in many living things; they give the characteristic color to carrots, corn, daffodils, rutabagas, buttercups, and bananas. They are responsible for the red of cooked lobsters, the pink of flamingoes and salmon, and the yellow of canaries, and egg yolks.
Xanthophylls are the most common yellow pigments that form one of two major divisions of the carotenoid group. The name is from Greek xanthos (ξανθος, "yellow") + phyllon (φύλλον, "leaf"). Xanthophylls are most commonly found in the leaves of green plants, but they also find their way into animals through the food they eat. For example, the yellow color of chicken egg yolks, fat, and skin comes from the feed the chickens consume. Chicken farmers know this, and often add xanthophylls, usually lutein, to make the egg yolks more yellow.
Bananas are green when they are picked because of the chlorphyll their skin contains. Once picked, they begin to ripen; hormones in the bananas convert amino acids into ethylene gas, which stimulates the production of several enzymes. These enzymes start to change the color, texture and flavor of the banana. The green chlorphyll supply is stopped and the yellow color of the carotenoids replaces it; eventually, as the enzymes continue their work, the cell walls break down and the bananas turn brown.
Yellow is the most visible color, and is particularly attractive to birds and insects. It is believed that the vision of birds is particularly sensitive to certain colors, such as yellow. Yellow pan traps are used to capture insects, many of which are attracted to shades of yellow. Japanese Society of Applied Entomology and Zoology 3(1):37–48. E., M. L. Kok-Yokomi, and D. J. Voegtlin (1994) Effect of Trap Color on Species Composition of Alate Aphids (Homoptera: Aphididae) Caught over Watermelon Plants Florida Entomologist 77(1):146–153 PDF

File:Fall colors near the Eagle Lake trailhead.jpg|Autumn colors along the Eagle River near Anchorage, Alaska
File:Cornwall Daffodils.
File:Bananas.
File:Raw egg. The color comes from the xanthophyll carotenoids lutein and zeaxanthin

=Birds=

File:YellowbreastedChat23.jpg|Yellow-breasted Chat
File:Gulspurv.jpg|Yellowhammer
File:Dendroica-petechia-001.
File:Canary perched inside cage.

=Fish=

=Insects=

File:European wasp white bg.jpg|A yellow jacket or wasp
File:ComputerHotline - Danaus plexippus (by) (1).jpg|A monarch butterfly (Danaus plexippus)

=Trees=

=Flowers=

Yellow is the most common color of flowers; the color makes it the most visible to the insects who are needed to bring pollen to the flowers.

File:Mimosa Colombe d'Or Saint Paul de Vence.JPG|Acacia dealbata (Silver Wattle)
File:Aconitum lycoctonum DSCF1355.JPG|Aconitum lycoctonum (Northern Wolfsbane)
File:Mother and daughter edit.jpg| Anthemis tinctoria  (Golden Marguerite)
File:Anthyllis vulneraria, AlpenWundklee 1.JPG|Anthyllis vulneraria (Common kidneyvetch)
File:Arnica montana.JPG|Arnica montana (Leopard's bane)
File:Balsamorhiza sagittata.jpg| Balsamorhiza sagittata (Arrowleaf Balsamroot)
File:Brugmansia aurea 12.jpg|Brugmansia aurea (Angel's Trumpet)
File:Calendula officinalis L.JPG| Calendula officinalis (Pot Marigold)
File:Digitalis grandiflora-Kaernten-2008-Thomas Huntke.jpg|Digitalis grandiflora (Big-flowered Foxglove)
File:Yellow Coneflower Echinacea paradoxa Twisted Pair DoF 2000px.jpg| Echinacea paradoxa (Yellow Coneflower)
File:Eranthis_hyemalis.JPG|Eranthis hyemalis
File:Eschscholzia californica in Sedovo 001.jpg| Eschscholzia californica (California Poppy)
File:Forsythiax.JPG| Forsythia × intermedia (Border Forsythia)
File:Gagea close-up.jpg|Gagea lutea
File:Gazania rigens-1.jpg| Gazania rigens (Coastal Gazania)
File:Chrysanthemum coronarium May 2008.jpg| Glebionis coronaria (Crown Daisy)
File:Sunflower sky backdrop.jpg| Helianthus annuus (Sunflower)
File:Hibisc.jpg| Hibiscus syriacus cultivar (Common Hibiscus)
File:Hieracium murorum duet.jpg| Hieracium muorum (Wall Hawkweed)
File:Hypericum perforatum 007. John's Wort)
File:Iris pseudacorus iris des marais.jpg|Iris pseudacorus (Yellow Flag Iris)
File:Jacobaea aquatica.jpg| Jacobaea aquatica (Marsh Ragwort)
File:Echter Winterjasmin HD.JPG|Jasminum nudiflorum (Winter Jasmine)
File:Kerriaj1.jpg| Kerria japonica (Kerria)
File:Kleines Löwenmaul.JPG|Linaria vulgaris (Common Toadflax)
File:Narzisse.jpg| Narcissus (plant)  (Daffodil)
File:Opuntia humifusa flower.jpg| Opuntia humifusa (Eastern Prickly Pear)
File:Osteospermum dandenong (yellow).jpg| Osteospermum
File:Oxalis-pes-caprae0021c.jpg| Oxalis pes-caprae (Bermuda Buttercup)
File:Primula elatior 170405.jpg|Primula elatior (True oxlip)
File:Ranunculus repens LC0036.jpg| Ranunculus repens (Creeping Buttercup)
File:Rosa Gold Glow 2.jpg| Rose (Yellow roses)
File:Saxifraga aizoides.jpg|Saxifraga aizoides (Yellow Saxifrage)
File:Yellow French Marigold Flower.jpg|Tagetes erecta (Marigold)
File:Tanacetum vulgare 002.JPG|Tanacetum vulgare (Tansy)
File:Taraxacum officinalis DSC02042. Ruderalia (Dandelion)
File:Globeflower Trollius laxus Flower 2400px.jpg| Trollius laxus (Globeflower)
File:Vessertal trollblumen.jpg|Trollius europaeus (Globe-flower)
File:Leskenlehti, Luolala, Naantali, 24.4.2010.JPG| Tussilago farfara (Coltsfoot)
File:Viola tricoloryellow.jpg| Viola tricolor cultivar (Pansy)

=Other plants=

Minerals and chemistry

=Pigments=

=Dyes=

The color of saffron comes from crocin, a red variety of carotenoid natural pigment. The color of the dyed fabric varies from deep red to orange to yellow, depending upon the type of saffron and the process. Most saffron today comes from Iran, but it is also grown commercially in Spain, Italy and Kashmir in India, and as a boutique crop in New Zealand, the United Kingdom, France, Switzerland and other countries. In the United States, it has been cultivated by the Pennsylvania Dutch community since the early 18th century. Because of the high price of saffron, other similar dyes and spices are often sold under the name saffron; for instance, what is called Indian saffron is often really turmeric.

File:Orpiment mineral.
File:Indisch-Gelb.jpg|Indian yellow pigment
File:Lead chromate.
File:Saffran crocus sativus moist.
File:Curcuma longa (Haldi) W IMG 2440. it is also commonly used as a medicine and as a spice in Indian cooking.
File:Reseda luteola (Flowers).
File:Garcinia subelliptica (200703).
File:Yellow spectra Abney 1891.png|Reflectance spectra of yellow pigments, as a percentage of white (Abney 1891)
File:Titan yellow.svg|Structure of Titan yellow

=Food coloring=

The most common yellow food coloring in use today is called Tartrazine. It is a synthetic lemon yellow azo dye."Current EU approved additives and their E Numbers", Food Standards Agency website. Retrieved 15 December 2011. It is also known as E number E102, C.I. 19140, FD&C Yellow 5, Acid Yellow 23, Food Yellow 4, and Trisodium 1-(4-sulfonatophenyl)-4-(4-sulfonatophenylazo)-5-pyrazolone-3-carboxylate. It is the yellow most frequently used such processed food products as corn and potato chips, breakfast cereals such as corn flakes, candies, popcorn, mustard, jams and jellies, gelatin, soft drinks (notably Mountain Dew), energy and sports drinks, and pastries. It is also widely used in liquid and bar soap, shampoo, cosmetics and medicines. Sometimes it is mixed with blue dyes to color processed products green.
It is typically labelled on food packages as "color", "tartrazine", or "E102". In the United States, because of concerns about possible health problems related to intolerance to tartrazine, its presence must be declared on food and drug product labels.1705, 21 CFR 201.20
Another popular synthetic yellow coloring is Sunset Yellow FCF (also known as Orange Yellow S, FD&C Yellow 6 or C.I. 15985) It is manufactured from aromatic hydrocarbons from petroleum. When added to foods sold in Europe, it is denoted by E Number E110.
Sunset Yellow FCF is often used in orange sodas, marzipan, apricot jam, citrus marmalade, lemon curd, packaged soups, margarine, custard powders, packaged lemon gelatin desserts, energy drinks, cheese sauce mixes and many other foods, as well as over-the-counter medicines (especially children's medicines) and other products with artificial yellow, orange or red colors.
Because of public concerns about possible health hazards of synthetic food colorings, some companies are changing to natural food colorings from such plants as turmeric and annatto.

Symbolism and associations

In the west, yellow is not a well-loved color; in a 2000 survey, only six percent of respondents in Europe and America named it as their favorite color. compared with 45 percent for blue, 15 percent for green, 12 percent for red, and 10 percent for black. For seven percent of respondents, it was their least favorite color. 33. Yellow is the color of ambivalence and contradiction; the color associated with optimism and amusement; but also with betrayal, duplicity, and jealousy. But in China and other parts of Asia, yellow is a color of virtue and nobility.

In China

Yellow has strong historical and cultural associations in China, where it is the color of happiness, glory, and wisdom. In China, there are five directions of the compass; north, south, east, west, and the middle, each with a symbolic color. Yellow signifies the middle. China is called the Middle Kingdom; the palace of the Emperor was considered to be in the exact center of the world. 82.
The name of the legendary first Emperor of China, Huang Ti, meant literally "the Yellow Emperor." The last emperor of China, Puyi (1906–67), described in his memoirs how every object which surrounded him as a child was yellow. "It made me understand from my most tender age that I was of a unique essence, and it instilled in me the consciousness of my "celestial nature" which made me different from every other human." – originalCited in Eva Heller (2000), Psychologie de la couleur- effets et symboliques, p. 82.
The Chinese Emperor was literally considered the child of heaven, with both a political and religious role, both symbolized by yellow. Only members of the Imperial household were permitted to wear yellow. Distinguished visitors were honored with a yellow, not a red, carpet.
In Chinese symbolism, yellow, red and green are masculine colors, while black and white are considered feminine. In the traditional symbolism of the two opposites which complement each other, the yin and yang, the masculine yang is traditionally represented by yellow. Just as there are five elements, five directions and five colors in the Chinese world-view, there are also five seasons; summer, winter, fall, spring, and the end of summer, symbolized by yellow leaves.

File:Zhengde.
File:Portrait of the Qianlong Emperor in Court Dress.
File:Shanghainanjingroadpic1.jpg|Neon lights in modern Shanghai show a predominance of red and yellow

Light and reason

Yellow, as the color of sunlight, is commonly associated with warmth. Yellow combined with red symbolized heat and energy. A room painted yellow feels warmer than a room painted white, and a lamp with yellow light seems more natural than a lamp with white light.
As the color of light, yellow is also associated with knowledge and wisdom. In English and many other languages, "brilliant" and "bright" mean intelligent. In Islam, the yellow color of gold symbolizes wisdom. In medieval European symbolism, red symbolized passion, blue symbolized the spiritual, and yellow symbolized reason. In many European universities, yellow gowns and caps are worn by members of the faculty of physical and natural sciences, as yellow is the color of reason and research. 72–73.

Gold and blond

The word for 'gold' in Latin is aurum, which means yellow. In ancient Greece, the gods were depicted with yellow hair, and men commonly bleached their hair or spent hours in the sun to turn it yellow. However, in medieval Europe and later, the word yellow often had negative connotations; so yellow hair was more poetically called 'blond,' 'light', 'fair,' or especially 'golden.'Eva Heller (2000), Psychologie de la couleur - effets et symboliques, p. 73.

The color of visibility and caution

Yellow is the most visible color from a distance, so it is often used for objects that need to be seen, such as fire engines, road maintenance equipment, school buses and taxicabs. It is also often used for warning signs, since yellow traditionally signals caution, rather than danger. A yellow light on a traffic signal means slow down, but not stop; a yellow penalty card in a soccer match means warning, but not expulsion.

File:ICCE Illinois School Bus.
File:Gelber Briefkasten der Deutschen Post. Yellow was the color of the early postal service in the Habsburg Empire.
File:Crashtender BC.
File:Sea King HAR3 XZ585 at RIAT 2010 arp.
File:Martin Atkinson yellow card Carr Rosicky.C. and Birmingham City F.C. (2010)

The color of optimism and pleasure

Yellow is the color most associated with optimism and pleasure; it is a color designed to attract attention, and for amusement. Yellow dresses in fashion are rare, but always associated with gaiety and celebration.

File:L'impératrice Eugénie à la Marie-Antoinette, 1854, Franz Xaver Winterhalter.jpg|The Empress Eugenie dressed as Marie Antoinette, painted by Franz Winterhalter (1854)
File:Kuznetsova by Repin. (1901)
File:James Tissot - The Ball.jpg|The Ball by James Tissot (1880)

In other cultures

Music

Politics

Historic flags

File:Heiliges Römisches Reich - Reichssturmfahne vor 1433. The black, yellow and red colors reappeared first in 1848 and then in the 20th century in the German flag.
File:Flag of the Gran Colombia (1819-1820).
File:China Qing Dynasty Flag 1889.
File:Flag of South Vietnam. This was the flag of the capitalist southern part of Vietnam during the Vietnam War. It was replaced by the flag of North Vietnam after communist forces took Saigon on April 30, 1975.
File:Flag of East Germany. It differs from the West German flag by the presence of a communist symbol in the center, and it fell out of use when Germany was reunified after the fall of the Berlin Wall.

Selected national and international flags

Three of the five most populous countries in the world (China, India, and Brazil) have yellow or gold in their flag, representing about half of the world's population. While many flags use yellow, their symbolism varies widely, from civic virtue to golden treasure, golden fields, the desert, royalty, the keys to Heaven and the leadership of the Communist Party.

File:Flag of India. The yellow color is officially called India saffron, and represents courage and sacrifice.
File:Flag of Germany. Black, red and yellow were the colors of the Holy Roman Emperor, and, in 1919, of the German Weimar Republic. The modern German flag was adopted in 1949.
File:Flag of Ukraine.  Yellow on the bottom represents golden wheat and blue on the top represents the sky.
File:Flag of Belgium. The yellow comes from the yellow lion in the coat of arms of the Duchy of Brabant, founded in 1183–84.
File:Flag of Bhutan. The Bhutan flag features Druk, the thunder dragon of Bhutanese mythology. The yellow represents civic tradition, the red the Buddhist spiritual tradition.
File:Flag of the People's Republic of China. The four small gold stars represent the workers, peasants, urban middle class, and rural middle class. The large star represents the Chinese Communist Party.
File:Flag of Brazil. Yellow and green were colors of the Emperors of the House of Braganza who ruled Brazil from 1822 until 1889.
File:Flag of Brunei. In Southeast Asia yellow is the color of royalty. it is the color of the Sultan of Brunei, and also appears on the flag of Thailand and of Malaysia.
File:Flag of Colombia. The asymmetric design of the flag is based on the old Flag of Gran Colombia. The yellow color represents the golden treasure taken from Colombia over the centuries.
File:Flag of Spain. The yellow in the Spanish flag comes from the traditional Crown of Castille and the Crown of Aragon. The general design was adopted in 1785 for the Spanish Navy, to be visible from a great distance at sea.
File:Flag of Lithuania. Yellow represents the golden fields of Lithuania, green the countryside, and red the blood of Lithuanian martyrs.
File:Flag of Malaysia.) The yellow crescent represents Islam, the yellow star the unity of the fourteen states of Malaysia. The red and white stripes (like the stripes on the U.S. flag) are adopted from the flag of the British East India Company.
File:Flag of Mozambique. The colors are those of the Marxist Liberation Front of Mozambique, or FRELIMO, which rules the country. Yellow represents the country's mineral wealth.
File:Flag of Romania.) Blue, yellow and red were the colors of the Wallachian uprising of 1821, and the 1848 revolution which won independence for Romania. Yellow represents justice.
File:Flag of Sweden. The legend says that in 1157, during the First Swedish Crusade, the Swedish king Eric the Holy saw a golden cross appear in the blue sky.
File:Flag of Chad. The color yellow here represents the sun and the desert in the north of the country. This flag is identical to that of Romania, except that it uses a slightly darker indigo blue rather than cobalt blue.
File:Flag of Europe. The flag of the European Union was first created for the Council of Europe in 1953, then adopted by the European Union in 1985. The twelve yellow or gold stars do not represent any particular countries; twelve was chosen as a number which represented unity and harmony.
File:Flag of the Vatican City. The yellow color represents the golden key of the Kingdom of heaven, described in the Book of Matthew of the New Testament, and part of the Papal seal on the flag. 

Religion

According to Buddhist scriptures and commentaries, the robe dye is allowed to be obtained from six kinds of substances: roots and tubers, plants, bark, leaves, flowers and fruits. The robes should also be boiled in water a long time to get the correctly sober color. Saffron and ochre, usually made with dye from the curcuma longa plant or the heartwood of the jackfruit tree, are the most common colors. The so-called forest monks usually wear ochre robes and city monks saffron, though this is not an official rule.
The color of robes also varies somewhat among the different "vehicles", or schools of Buddhism, and by country, depending on their doctrines and the dyes available. The monks of the strict Vajrayana, or Tantric Buddhism, practiced in Tibet, wear the most colorful robes of saffron and red. The monks of Mahayana Buddhism, practiced mainly in Japan, China and Korea, wear lighter yellow or saffron, often with white or black. Monks of Hinayana Buddhism, practiced in Southeast Asia, usually wear ochre or saffron color. Monks of the forest tradition in Thailand and other parts of Southeast Asia wear robes of a brownish ochre, dyed from the wood of the jackfruit tree. 62.

File:Gesupietrochiave. The golden key is the symbol of the Pope.
File:Benedykt XVI (2010-10-17) 4. The Pope traditionally wears gold and white outside St. Peter's Basilica.
File:Rank celebration of Thai Buddhist monk 1.jpg|Buddhist monks at the promotion ceremony of a monk in Thailand
File:Buddhist monks of Tibet7.jpg|Buddhist monks in Tibet
File:Ueno monk.jpg|A Japanese Buddhist monk in downtown Tokyo
File:Sadou Kathmandu 04 04.

Metaphysics

Sports

File:Bradley Wiggins Tour 2012 EZF.

Transportation

Vexillology

Idioms and expressions





|last= Doran
|first= Sabine
|title= The Culture of Yellow, or, The Visual Politics of Late Modernity
|year=2013
|publisher=Bloomsbury
|isbn= 978-1441185877}}
|last= Ball
|first= Philip
|title= Bright Earth, Art and the Invention of Colour
|year=2001
|publisher=Hazan (French translation)
|isbn= 978-2-7541-0503-3}}
|last= Heller
|first= Eva
|title= Psychologie de la couleur - Effets et symboliques
|year=2009
|publisher=Pyramyd (French translation)
|isbn= 978-2-35017-156-2}}
|last= Keevak
|first= Michael
|title= Becoming Yellow: A Short History of Racial Thinking
|year=2011
|publisher=Princeton University Press
|isbn= 978-0-6911-4031-5}}
|last= Pastoureau
|first= Michel
|title= Le petit livre des couleurs
|year=2005
|publisher=Editions du Panama
|isbn= 978-2-7578-0310-3}}
|last= Gage
|first= John
|title= Colour and Culture - Practice and Meaning from Antiquity to Abstraction
|year=1993
|publisher=Thames and Hudson (Page numbers cited from French translation)
|isbn= 978-2-87811-295-5}}
|last= Varichon
|first= Anne
|title= Couleurs - pigments et teintures dans les mains des peuples
|year=2000
|publisher=Seuil
|isbn= 978-2-02084697-4}}
|last= Zuffi
|first= Stefano
|title= Color in Art
|year=2012
|publisher= Abrams
|isbn= 978-1-4197-0111-5}}
|last= Arvon
|first= Henri
|title= Le bouddhisme
|year=1951
|publisher=Presses Universitaires de France
|isbn= 978-2-13-055064-8}}

Notes


