[[Bidi Bidi Bom Bom]]

CATEGORIES: 1994 singles, Billboard Hot Latin Songs number-one singles, Colombian songs, Cumbia songs, Dance-pop songs, Dancehall songs, Mexican songs, Reggae songs, Bachata songs, Selena songs, Songs written by A.B. Quintanilla, Songs written by Pete Astudillo, Songs written by Selena, Spanish-language songs, Song recordings produced by Bebu Silvetti, Selena Gomez songs

"Bidi bidi bom bom" is a song by American Tejano pop singer Selena from her album Amor prohibido (1994). The album's second single, "Bidi bidi bom bom" was written by Selena and Pete Astudillo. It was produced by A.B. Quintanilla III – Selena's brother – and Bebu Silvetti. It was released on 13 August 1994 in the United States. It was picked up by Tejano, rhythmic contemporary and Contemporary Latin radio stations.
"Bidi bidi bom bom", regarded as Selena's signature song, was an unplanned song. After its first draft by Selena, the unfinished song was performed during her Entre a mi mundo Tour from 1992 to 1993. Selena wanted to see her fans' reaction before completing it. Despite the positive reaction of her fans, the song was not recorded at the time. It was modified to a roots reggae style to become accessible for Hispanics who were unfamiliar with her music. It won the award for "Most Performed Song of the Year" at the 1996 Broadcast Music Incorporated Latin Awards. At the 1994 Tejano Music Awards, "Bidi bidi bom bom" won "Song of the Year", while at the 2010 ceremony, it won "Best 1990s Song". "Bidi bidi bom bom" received mixed to positive review from contemporary music critics.
The song had extensive airplay in the United States, peaking at No. 1 on Billboard Hot Latin Tracks,  the second consecutive number-one single from Amor prohibido. Selena had promoted the song during three world concerts, including the Entre A Mi Mundo Tour (1992–93), Selena Live! Tour (1993–94), and the Amor Prohibido Tour (1994–95). The accompanying music video was released on 10 May 1994, on the major Spanish-language television channels and received positive reviews from music critics. "Bidi bidi bom bom" has been covered by many artists since its release.

Background and production

"Bidi bidi bom bom", one of the first songs composed for Selena's fifth studio album Amor prohibido (1994), is regarded as Selena's signature song. The song was produced by Selena's brother and music producer A.B. Quintanilla, her father and manager Abraham Quintanilla, Jr. and Bebu Silvetti; Brain "Red" Moore, a family friend, mixed the song. Selena recorded the song at Q-Productions, her father's recording studio, in Corpus Christi, Texas.
Due to the support of her previous album, Entre a mi mundo (1992), during the Entre a mi mundo Tour (1992–1993), Selena decided to sing a song which she had recently written. Initially, the song described a fish swimming freely in the ocean. Originally dubbed "Little Bidi Bubbles", then "Little Bubbles" and "Swim Swim Swim!", the song was a combination of roots reggae and cumbia music. It was used for sound checks at the band's rehearsals. Selena wanted to witness her fans' reactions to the song before completing it. Despite her fans' positive reactions, this version was not recorded following the tour. While gathering inspiration to release an exotic progressive album to help expand Selena's fan base, A.B. decided to complete "Little Bidi Bubbles". A.B. had wanted to finish the song as a Caribbean reggae song mixed with Colombian cumbia to attract fans from Latin America. Band members and Astudillo helped A.B. with writing the song, while Selena's widower Chris Perez helped gather Rock fusion and guitar solos into "Bidi bidi bom bom". 
Within a couple of weeks of the lyrics completion in early 1994, Selena began recording her fifth studio album. A.B. was nervous about the song because the mixed compositions had never been done before for a Tejano artist. EMI Records had a difficult time picking the lead single for the album. Selena and EMI wanted "Amor prohibido" as the first single, whereas A.B. wanted "Bidi bidi bom bom" first, and he unsuccessfully tried to convince his sister and EMI. Selena had done takes for "Bidi bidi bom bom" at Q-Productions. The song took less than three days to record. After Selena was murdered, by which time she was working on a crossover album, EMI Latin wanted to release the unfinished album, but they were short of songs. A.B. had remixed the song for Dreaming of You (1995).

Composition and lyric content

"Bidi bidi bom bom" is an uptempo roots reggae The song's lyrics describe a woman who is interested in a guy. Her heart would palpitate ("Bidi bidi bom bom") every time he walks near her. The feelings inside her begin to be a bit too much for her, and emotionally she cannot control it. Her knees and her heart begin to tremble, when she hears his voice. The song ends with the woman saying, "When I hear this song, my heart wants to sing like this". 95.

Critical reception

"Bidi bidi bom bom" was popular with children and young adolescents. Billboard's Ramiro Burr noted that, with French lyrics, it could have been popular in European night clubs. 
Antonio Morales of Gringo Gazette stated that "Bidi bidi bom bom" was one of his favorite songs, while he opined that "Selena was having fun with this track. You could really hear her excitement, enthusiasm and lovely voice in this gem."
Alexio Almeirão of Expresso believed that "Bidi bidi bom bom was one of Selena's best songs during her career, and one of her known songs internationally". Almeirão complained that " the song could have been way better if it had more of a cumbia sound – then reggae. Something similar to "Ya no" with a mixture of "No me queda más", would've topped the charts internationally". and was covered in various children compilation albums after Selena's death.

Music video

Background and development

The music video for "Bidi bidi bom bom" was filmed from  28–30 April 1994 and was directed by Cecilia Miniucchi.[ref]
   "EMI Latin's 1st Vid Venture Remembers Selena",
   ''Billboard'', 7 October 1995, p.93, webpage:
   [ BB93].
[/ref] The video was shot in Santa Monica, California at the Santa Monica Pier.
The music video opens up with fans throwing their hands up high in the sky, while Selena gently onto a pier, in slow-harmony "yeah". The video then transitions to Selena pumping gas into her Jeep Wrangler, watched by a handsome man nearby. Selena notices the guy looking at her, then she looks away smiling. Meanwhile, she begins to sing the song "Bidi Bidi Bom Bom". She then says in Spanish, "I don't know what's going to happen next." They then meet at a traffic light, in their adjacent vehicles. A street-seller approaches the guy to sell roses, and is successful, as he asks for one. The guy then gives the roses to Selena and asks her (by gesturing with a nod of his head) to follow him. Selena's car signal then transitions to the guy's direction, while she sings, "I can't control my heart, and it sings" (in Spanish). As she begins to follow the guy's car, he moves his rear-view mirror to see Selena. They later appear at a festival and enjoy games together. Music solos begin, as the guy wins a prize teddy bear and gives it as a gift to Selena. Videos of their relationship begin to play, now showing both enjoying various activities. At sunset, they leave the festival, laughing together. The video ends with a flashback scene to an alternate reality, where the street-seller is unsuccessful. The guy decides not to buy the roses, resulting in Selena and the guy leaving in opposite directions.

Reception

The music video was welcomed with positive reception from music critics. In 2002, a snippet was featured on CBS's The Early Show with Julie Chen, while she interviewed Selena's family about the upcoming release of Ones (2002). Fuegues editor, François Petit, said, "The music video for 'Bidi Bidi Bom Bom' was astonishing and greatly appreciated among French gays for its grooves and addicting lyrics, in nightclubs across Canada." It was positioned at number ten.

Track listing

Credits and personnel

All credits were taken from the albums liner notes.

Charts

Awards

Covers

"Bidi Bidi Bom Bom" has been recorded or performed live by many artists. During the Selena ¡VIVE! concert (2005), a tenth anniversary remembrance concert, Alejandra Guzmán sang the song live with backup dancers accompanying her.
Puerto Rican boy band, Tick Tock, covered the song, as well as creating a music video to promote the song in 2004.








