[[Sarah Burke]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, 2012 deaths, Canadian freeskiers, People from Barrie, People from Midland, Ontario, Skiing deaths, Sports deaths in Utah, Sportspeople from Ontario, Sportspeople from Vancouver, X-Games athletes, Superpipe skiers, Deaths from heart failure, Canadian female freestyle skiers, People from Squamish, British Columbia, Canadian Olympic Hall of Fame inductees, Canadian feminists

Sarah Jean Burke She was a four-time Winter X Games gold medallist, and won the world championship in the halfpipe in 2005. She successfully lobbied the International Olympic Committee (IOC) to have the event added to the Olympic program for the 2014 Winter Olympics. She was considered a medal favourite in the event. Burke died following a training accident in Utah.

Early life

Burke was born in Barrie, Ontario, to Jan Phelan and Gordon Burke, both artists.

Skiing career

As a teenage moguls skier, Burke would often sneak onto the Snowboard halfpipe at the end of the day.
Burke won first place in the 2001 US Freeskiing Open in the half-pipe event and finished second in slopestyle. She and Leskinen were the only women who competed against the men. In 2004, Burke lobbied ESPN to include a division for women skiers at its Winter X Games. In 2005, ESPN added women's freeskiing to the X-Games.
When half-pipe made its debut at the 2005 FIS Freestyle World Ski Championships, she emerged as the first world champion.
She won ESPN's 2001 Award for female skier of the year and was voted 2007's Best Female Action Sports Athlete at the ESPY awards. 
She regularly participated in skiing films, including Propaganda, in which she showcased her skills by sliding huge rainbow rails, spinning a huge 540 in the pipe and throwing back-flips.The Ski Channel - Sarah Burke Profile  
Burke was a known promoter of the superpipe skiing event, working to have it added to the Olympic program. She failed to have the event added in time for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver, but successfully lobbied the International Olympic Committee to have the event added for the 2014 Sochi Games.  Two years ahead of the games, she was considered a potential favourite for the gold medal in Sochi.

Personal life

Burke met freeskier Rory Bushfield when she was 14 at a ski camp in Whistler, British Columbia.

Accident and death

On January 10, 2012, Burke was seriously injured while training on the Park City Mountain Resort Eagle superpipe in Park City, Utah. This is the same superpipe where snowboarder Kevin Pearce was seriously injured in 2009. Onlookers reported that Burke had completed a trick fairly well yet fell onto her head, and the accident did not appear to be very severe. Her organs and tissues were donated as she requested before her death.
Because the event at which she fell was unsanctioned and hosted by Burke's sponsor Monster Energy, Burke was not covered under the insurance policy that applied to her when she competed for the Canada Freestyle Ski Association. The day after her death, Burke's agent established a website to raise $550,000 to help pay her estimated $200,000 hospital costs and establish "a foundation to honour Sarah's legacy and promote the ideals she valued and embodied". Sarah Burke's medical bills covered by donations: British Columbia CBC News January 20, 2012
On February 23, 2014, Sarah's ashes were spread in the mountains over Sochi, Russia during the 2014 Olympic Games. Her former coach, Trennon Paynter, spread them on the highest point at Rosa Khutor complex, and in the halfpipe.

Legacy

On June 12, 2012, the Canadian Olympic Committee announced that Burke was inducted into the 2012 Canadian Olympic Hall of Fame for her role in advocating for ski halfpipe's inclusion in the Olympic program.
In February 2014, Canada Post produced commemorative stamps honouring Burke, curler Sandra Schmirler and figure skater Barbara Ann Scott for being "pioneers of winter sports".
Burke was honoured on National Flag of Canada Day on February 15, 2014. The flag will be given to Burke's family as a tribute to her legacy.
In March 2014, the Government of Ontario announced that it would dedicate Highway 93 in memory of her and name it as the Sarah Burke Memorial Highway.sports.ca.com/top-stories/sarah-burke-highway-to-be-dedicated-in-skiers-name The route extends entirely within Simcoe County with its northern terminus near Barrie, Ontario, her birthplace.






