[[Tina Ellertson]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, Living people, African-American soccer players, American people of Ghanaian descent, American people of Nigerian descent, Association football defenders, People from Vancouver, Washington, Seattle Sounders Women players, Soccer players from Washington (state), United States women's international soccer players, Washington Huskies women's soccer players, Saint Louis Athletica players, African-American sportswomen, Atlanta Beat (WPS) players, MagicJack (WPS) players, United Soccer Leagues W-League players, American women's soccer players

Christina "Tina" Ellertson (born May 20, 1982), née Christina Jo Frimpong, is a former American professional soccer defender and former member of the United States women's national soccer team.

Early life

Ellertson was born and grew up in Vancouver, Washington. The daughter of a Nigerian mother and a Ghanaian father who emigrated to the U.S., she played soccer throughout her childhood.

University of Washington

Ellertson originally signed to attend Santa Clara University, but instead went to the University of Washington. The decision was hard since at age 18, she gave birth to her daughter, MacKenzie. She competed in soccer throughout college to become one of UW's most respected forwards. She was named Pacific-10 Conference co-player of the year in 2003 and player of the year in 2004.

Playing career

Club

On September 16, 2008, Ellertson was one of the three players drafted for Saint Louis Athletica in the WPS allocation of national team members, with the new league starting play in April 2009.  Ellertson was a consistently solid presence in the Athletica back line, logging 1748 minutes for the season, the most on the team.  She played as team captain whenever Lori Chalupny was not on the field, made the All-Star team, and was nominated for WPS's Defender of the Year award.
When Saint Louis folded in May 2010, Ellertson moved to Atlanta Beat alongside team mates Hope Solo and Eniola Aluko.
Ellertson has also played previously for the Seattle Sounders of the W-League.
In February 2013, she was chosen in the first round of the National Women's Soccer League's supplemental draft by Portland Thorns FC, despite having stated that she would not be playing in the league. Ellertson made five appearances for the Thorns, including an appearance as a substitute during the team's victory in the inaugural NWSL Championship match.
In February 2014, Ellertson announced that she was retiring from the Thorns to focus on coaching and her family. Equalizer Soccer, 2014-02-26.

International

After April Heinrichs's reign as coach, Ellertson tried out for the women's national soccer team, and earned her first cap against Ukraine on July 10, 2005. New coach Greg Ryan moved her to defender. She was named to the U.S. roster for the 2007 FIFA Women's World Cup and competed against Nigeria during group stage,

=International goal=

On December 13, 2008 at the Home Depot Center in Los Angeles, Ellertson scored her only international goal against China in her final USWNT game, and in her only start at forward; a 1–0 game winner.

Personal life

She is married to Brad Ellertson and they have two daughters, MacKenzie (born 2000) and Mya (born 2007). Prior to her marriage, she played under her maiden name, Frimpong.  Her twin sister, Crystal Frimpong, played soccer at the University of Florida.






