[[T. J. Oshie]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 births, Living people, American ice hockey centres, Ice hockey players at the 2014 Winter Olympics, Ice hockey people from Minnesota, Ice hockey people from Washington (state), National Hockey League first round draft picks, Native American sportspeople, Ojibwe people, Olympic ice hockey players of the United States, People from Everett, Washington, People from Mount Vernon, Washington, People from Roseau County, Minnesota, University of North Dakota men's ice hockey players, St. Louis Blues draft picks, St. Louis Blues players, Sioux Falls Stampede players

Timothy Leif "T. J." Oshie (born December 23, 1986) is an American professional ice hockey player, a right winger for the St. Louis Blues of the National Hockey League (NHL). He was selected by St. Louis in the first round of the 2005 NHL Entry Draft, the 24th overall pick. 

Early years

Born in Mount Vernon, Washington, Oshie was raised in Everett, north of Seattle, and was on ice at age five in the Seattle Junior Hockey Association, where he played for 10 years.seattlejrtotems. In 2002, Oshie moved to Warroad, Minnesota, where his parents were originally from, and lived with his father, Tim, and his fathers cousin. He attended Warroad High School, where he was a star player on the hockey team for three seasons, leading the club to two Minnesota State Class A titles in 2003 and 2005. He made the state's All-Tournament Team all three years. With 100 points (37 goals, 63 assists) in 31 games as a senior, he led all Minnesota high school players in scoring. He was subsequently named to 2005 Associated Press and Pioneer Press All-State First Team and was a Minnesota Mr. Hockey Finalist. At the completion of his senior season with the Warriors in 2004–05, he joined the Sioux Falls Stampede of the United States Hockey League (USHL) for 11 games. In the off-season, he was selected 24th overall by the St. Louis Blues in the 2005 NHL Entry Draft.

North Dakota Fighting Sioux

Following his draft, he played for the North Dakota Fighting Sioux of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association (WCHA) for three seasons. Scoring a team-leading 24 goals as a freshman, he added 21 assists for 45 points total. He also set a school record with nine game-winning goals in the season, which also led all NCAA players. He was named to the WCHA All-Rookie Team and the WCHA Final Five All-Tournament Team.
In his sophomore year, he improved to 52 points (17 goals and 35 assists), ranking second in team scoring. He earned Third Team All-WCHA and received the Fighting Sioux's Cliff "Fido" Purpur Award, given to the player who demonstrates hard work, determination, while generating excitement on the ice. Following North Dakota's WCHA playoff run, Oshie led all players with eight points (four goals and four assists) in the 2006 NCAA Tournament, earning NCAA West All-Tournament honors. He played his last season with North Dakota as a junior, recording 45 points in 42 games.

St. Louis Blues

On May 13, 2008, Oshie opted to forego his senior season with the University of North Dakota and signed with the St. Louis Blues.
Oshie broke his ankle in a fight with Sammy Pahlsson during a blowout loss against the Columbus Blue Jackets early in the 2010–11 season, missing three months due to the injury.
In 2011–12, Oshie had 19 goals and 35 assists for a career-high 54 points."T.J. Oshie". hockeydb. Retrieved February 19, 2014.

International play

Oshie played with the United States national team at the 2006 World Junior Championships in Vancouver. Following the Blues' elimination in the 2009 NHL playoffs, he received his first senior national team cap for the 2009 IIHF World Championship. Oshie also competed for the USA in the 2010 IIHF World Championship, scoring 4 goals and 2 assists in 6 games. In 2012, he was the last addition of the USA roster after the Blues were eliminated in the first round of the Stanley Cup playoffs.
On January 1, 2014, Oshie was named to the United States' roster for the 2014 Winter Olympics along with St. Louis teammates David Backes and Kevin Shattenkirk.

Personal life

Oshie has two siblings; a brother Taylor and a sister Tawni. At the University of North Dakota in Grand Forks, Oshie majored in general studies.
Oshie is a member of the Ojibwe people; his Ojibwe name "Keeway Gaaboo" means "Coming Home".blogspot.html His father is 5/8 Ojibwe Native American."The Hug Heard Around The World". Sports on Earth.

Career statistics

International

Awards and honors






