[[Holy Rosary Cathedral (Vancouver)]]

CATEGORIES: Churches in Vancouver, Roman Catholic cathedrals in Canada, Gothic Revival architecture in Vancouver, Roman Catholic churches in British Columbia

The Metropolitan Cathedral of Our Lady of the Holy Rosary, commonly known as Holy Rosary Cathedral, is a late 19th-century French Gothic revival church that serves as the cathedral of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Vancouver.  It is located in the downtown area of the city at the intersection of Richards and Dunsmuir streets.
The construction of the cathedral began in 1899 on the site of an earlier church by the same name.  It opened on the Feast of the Immaculate Conception on December 8, 1900, was blessed the day after and was consecrated in 1953.  The style has been described as resembling Chartres Cathedral.  The church was elevated to the status of cathedral in 1916.  It is listed on the Vancouver Heritage Register and is a legally protected building.

History

Original structure (1887–1899)

The parish was established in June 1885 and Father Patrick Fay, the chaplain to Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR) workers, was chosen as pastor.  He officiated the first mass of the parish on the feast of Our Lady of the Rosary in the same year.  Although masses were held in Blair's Hall and Keefer's Hall, it became apparent that a new and permanent church was necessary to cope with the growing number of parishioners.
In order to pick a site for the new church, legend has it that Father Fay went to the Coal Harbour waterfront, looked south towards the forested land (present-day Downtown Vancouver) and chose the area that contained the tallest tree.  Construction began in 1886 and the wooden church was completed in the following year.  Two years later, the church was enlarged and a bell tower was added.

Present-day cathedral

With the rapid growth of Vancouver at the time, plans were made for a greater expansion of the church.  Fay was transferred in 1892 and died shortly after.  Father Eumellin succeeded him in overseeing the plan for construction from 1893 to 1897.  In the following year, the new pastor of the church, Father James McGuckin, took over the project.  In order to fund the construction of the new church, the Missionary Oblates of Mary Immaculate (OMI), the religious order McGuckin belonged to, mortgaged their headquarters in FranceThirkell, p. 139 and, before his death, Fay worked as a CPR foreman for a construction crew.  Initially, parishioners and the OMI were skeptical of the project, resulting in it being labelled "McGuckin's folly".  Despite these doubts, the cornerstone of the new church was laid on July 16, 1899.  Thomas Ennor Julian and H.J. Williams were hired to be the architects
On October 7, 1952, the feast day of the cathedral's namesake, a gunman entered the church and fired a round from his rifle at the altar.  No one was hurt and he was arrested shortly after.  However, nothing serious arose from the incident.
Many significant events have taken place at the cathedral.  In 1936, it hosted an archdiocesan-level Eucharistic Congress, the first congress ever to be celebrated in Western Canada.
Over the years, several notable people had their funeral requiem mass said at the cathedral, including beloved local lifeguard and swim instructor Joe Fortes (1922),Thirkell, p. 87 Chief Dan George of the Tsleil-Waututh Nation (1981),

Architecture

Interior

The cathedral, built in a French Gothic style, is cruciform in the shape of the Latin cross.  The columns that support the nave are made from red Scagliola marble.  The cathedra is situated at the centre of the sanctuary, surrounded by an oak altar-piece and two towers of reredos.
The reordering of the sanctuary took place in the 1960s after the Second Vatican Council.  Refurbishing also took place before Pope John Paul II's visit to the cathedral in 1984.  The cathedral was completely re-roofed from 1995 to 1997 and repainted from 2004 to 2006.

Bells

When the cathedral was first built, seven bells (representing the sacraments) were cast at the Fonderie Paccard in Annecy-le-Vieux, Savoy, France and were blessed on October 21, 1900.  However, they were soon found to be out of tune and were sent back to Europe, this time to a foundry near Bristol.  This time, eight bells were made in order to complete an entire octave when rung.  They were reinstalled in the cathedral in 1906 and operate on change ringing.

Stained glass windows

There are currently 21 stained glass windows at the cathedral.  The most renowned ones are the five windows made by Canadian artist Guido Nincheri.  They depict Our Lady of the Holy Rosary, the Baptism of Our Lord, Jesus Healing the Sick, Jesus with the Children and the Assumption.  The window showing Our Lady of the Holy Rosary featured on Canada Post's annual Christmas stamp in 1997.

Modern day

The cathedral made news in 2007, with the Vancouver Police Department having to be called in on a weekly basis; cathedral staff claimed they were "under siege" by panhandlers who frequented the building and who were involved in at least one incident daily.
On March 23, 2008, First Nations protesters disrupted an Easter Sunday Mass at the cathedral by demonstrating on the steps outside.  They ordered the Church to "get off native land" and demanded that they disclose the burial locations of children who died in residential schools.



Notes



'''Footnotes
'''Bibliography




