[[Let's Go to Bed (No Angels song)]]

CATEGORIES: 2002 singles, No Angels songs

"Let's Go to Bed" is a song performed by German pop group No Angels. It was written by Mousse T. and frequent collaborator Errol Rennalls for the band's second studio album Now... Us! (2002), while production was handled by the former. Musically, the track is a mid-paced pop song that is set in retro style. It contains heavy elements of psychedelic soul and funk music, with its instrumentation led by a bass guitar. "Let's Go to Bed" contains lyrics that reference to a celebration of sexual lust and conquest, leading up to a desire to invite a love interest to come to bed.
The song was well received by contemporary music critics, who noted it the album's standout track and felt it was a breakaway from the Europop genre widely associated with the group; they also praised its production. On November 4, 2002, a beat-heavy remix of "Let's Go to Bed" was released as the album's third single in German-speaking Europe by Polydor. It became the No Angels's first single to miss the top ten on the German Singles Chart when it peaked at number twelve. In Austria, the song barely reached the top fifty, while in Switzerland, the funk track failed to chart on the Swiss Singles Chart. Altogether, it sold more than 100,000 copies Europe-wide but emerged as the band's lowest-selling single before their disbandment in 2003.
The single's accompanying music video was directed by Marcus Sternberg and filmed inside the New Trade Fair building in Leipzig in early October 2002. It features the girls in black dresses seductively dancing in front of architecture by Gerkan, Marg and Partners and Ian Ritchie Architects. Mousse T. makes a cameo appearance in the video.

Background

After a short break from public at the turn of the year 2001 the No Angels members reunited in February 2002 to begin working on their second album in Munich and Hamburg. Recorded at Peppermint Pavilion in Hanover, it was mixed by Mousse T. and Andreas "Spok" Bock. Vocals were arranged by Nik Hafemann, while the guitar was played by Fanfan La Tulipe.

Reception

"Let's Go to Bed" received generally favorable reviews from music critics, many of which called it the best song on Now... Us!. Joachim Gauger from Laut... Us!,
The song marked one of Mousse T. und Errol Rennalls's first collaborations with Universal Music Publishing (UMPG) and their Merge Music company.
In Austria, "Let's go to Bed" debuted at number 59 on November 17, 2002 and reached its peak position, number 46, in its third week on the chart. It would remain the No Angels's only song to do so before their disbandment in 2003.

Music video

The music video for "Let's Go to Bed" was directed and produced by Marcus Sternberg for Sternberg Filmproduktion and filmed at the New Trade Fair building in Leipzig, Germany in early October 2002. The final version of "Let's Go to Bed" was eventually premiered on October 19, 2002 on MTV Central's show Brand:Neu.
The plotless clip features the girls in black dresses performing inside the Trade fair glass hall and the adjoining conference center. The girls are also shown in different locations with individual shots as they dance in front of "artistic escalators, futuristic glass walls, a shape filling wentletrap, an oversized silhouette and a glass tube". Vanessa Petruo is seated on a wooden chair with male hands surrounding her head, while Nadja Benaissa is simply walking down the glass hallway. Sandy Mölling is dancing in front of window blinds; Lucy Diakovska performs a routine with two male dancers; and Jessica Wahls is writhing on a brass bedstead. Mousse T is seen in a cameo appearance near the end of the video.

Formats and tracklistings

Charts

Weekly charts






