[[Kayden Kross]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, 21st-century women writers, Actresses from Sacramento, California, American bloggers, American columnists, American female adult models, American female pornographic film actors, American people of Swedish descent, American short story writers, American women writers, California State University, Sacramento alumni, Living people, Penthouse Pets, Pornographic film actors from California, Women short story writers, Writers from Sacramento, California

Kayden Kross (born September 15, 1985) is an American pornographic actress and writer. Kross has won multiple awards for her adult film work.

Biography

Adult film career

Kross was born and raised in Sacramento, California. She grew up in the foothills between Sacramento and Placerville., State Hornet, StateHornet. Retrieved June 22, 2012. She was later contacted by an agent, whose business relationship provided Kross with the opportunity of modeling in adult magazines.
Kross was a senior at California State University, Sacramento when she signed an exclusive performing contract with Vivid Video in November 2006. Her movies with Vivid included Kayden's First Time, Hard Time, and Be Here Now. Unhappy with the company, she became a free agent one year later when she did not renew her contract. She signed an exclusive contract with Adam & Eve after one month of being a free agent.
She was named Penthouse Pet of the Month for September 2008.
Kross became exclusive to Digital Playground under a multi-year contract on January 1, 2010. Her first movie with the company, The Smiths, topped sales charts immediately and has continued to be a best seller. She was given the lead in their big budget feature, Body Heat, in her third month in contract. She won two Best Actress Awards for the role.
Kross hosted the 2010 AVN Awards show, along with porn actress Kirsten Price and comedian Dave Attell.
In January 2011, she was named by CNBC as one of the twelve most popular stars in porn. CNBC. CNBC noted her consecutive AVN nominations for Performer of the Year.
In 2012, she hosted the Xbiz awards for the second time, and appeared in the ceremony alongside Wicked Pictures/Wicked.

Appearances in other media

Kross has been featured regularly on G4 as a host, a reality TV guest star, and as a guest on Attack of the Show"Host of G4's AEE Special, Kayden Kross Pictures Photo Gallery". G4tv. and played a recurring role as Delilah in season two of Cinemax's Life on Top.
In 2011 she was cast as Tara in Gregory Hatanaka's drama The Obsession"The Obsession (2012)". IMDb.com
In 2011, Kross briefly co-hosted a regular videocast, Kayden's Review, for Triggla TVDigital Playground's Kayden Kross joins Triggla TV (July 26, 2011) alongside the comedian Dane Hanson. Starting from January 2013 Kross hosts the weekly call-in show Krossfire on Playboy Radio."Adult Who's Who: Kayden Kross", AVN Magazine, Vol. 29/No. 2, Issue 362, February 2013, p.32.
In 2013, Kross also appeared in the featurette "Chicks 'N Guns" on the Breaking Bad 5th season DVD as a stripper. The scene takes place during the season 5 episode "Gliding Over All."  She also made her mainstream debut in a starring role in the feature film Blue Dream.

Writing

Kross writes columns regularly for publications such as Complex magazine, XBIZ magazine, and a blog for xcritic.My Spot: Kayden Kross Loves Urth Caffe in L.A.. complex. AIPdaily. She has also contributed to Timothy McSweeney's Internet Tendency, and her short story "Plank" appeared in the 2012 short story collection Forty Stories: New Writing from Harper Perennial, an e-book. As of August 2012, she was writing an autobiographical book about the porn industry.

Adult industry activism

In 2008, she was among those testifying against a proposed tax in California on all producers and distributors of adult entertainment.

Personal life

In October 2008, Kross was charged with grand theft and violations of the California Civil Code, involving contracts for purchases of home equity mortgages, allegedly conning a disabled veteran and his family. She blamed her involvement in the situation on her naïvete and being scammed by the broker and mortgage lender. Business.com (July 6, 2009).
Kross gave birth to a baby girl on January 23, 2014.

Awards






