[[Warren Farrell]]

CATEGORIES: 1943 births, Living people, American civil rights activists, American feminist writers, American non-fiction writers, American political scientists, Critics of feminism, Fathers' rights activists, Gender studies academics, Male feminists, Montclair State University alumni, New York University alumni, University of California, Los Angeles alumni, Writers from New York City

Warren Thomas Farrell (born June 26, 1943) is an American educator, activist and author of seven books on men's and women's issues.
He came to prominence in the 1970s as one of the leading male thinkersSee 'Feminist Foundation' championing the cause of second wave feminism, and serving on the New York City Board of the National Organization for Women (NOW). However, when NOW took policy positions that Farrell regarded as anti-male and anti-father, he continued supporting the expansion of women's optionsMost recently, his 2005 Why Men Earn More focused on 25 ways women could earn higher pay, and the costs and benefits of doing so. while adding what he felt was missing about boys, men and fathers. He is now recognized as one of the most important figures in the modern men's movement.
His books cover ten fields: history, law, sociology and politics (The Myth of Male Power); couples' communication (Women Can't Hear What Men Don't Say, and Father and Child Reunion); economic and career issues (Why Men Earn More); child psychology and child custody (Father and Child Reunion); and teenage to adult psychology and socialization (Why Men Are The Way They Are and The Liberated Man). All of his books are related to men's and women studies; consistent to his books since the early 90's has been a call for a gender transition movement.Y.: Simon and Schuster, 1993);  Woman Can't Hear What Men Don't Say (N.Y.:Penguin/Putnam, 1999); Father and Child Reunion (N.Y.: Penguin/Putnam, 2001); Why Men Earn More: The Startling Truth Behind the Pay Gap - and What Women Can Do About It (N.Y.: AMACON, 2005); Warren Farrell and James Sterba, Does Feminism Discriminate Against Men (N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 2008)

Early life and education

Farrell was born in 1943, the eldest of the 3 children of an accountant.
Warren Farrell received a B.A. from Montclair State University in social sciences in 1965.  As a college student, Farrell was a national vice-president of the Student-National Education Association, leading President Lyndon B. Johnson to invite him to the White House Conference on Education."Warren Farrell at the White House Conference on Education," Bergen Record, (N.J.), July 27th, 1965, and Warren Farrell, "Commentary on the White House Conference on Education," Bergen Record, (N.J.), July 27, 1965
In 1966 he received an M.A. from UCLA in political science and in 1974 a Ph.D. in the same discipline from New York University. While completing his Ph.D. at NYU, he served as an assistant to the president of New York University.Y.:Random House, 1974), the Personal Introduction

University teaching

Farrell has taught university level courses in five disciplines (psychology; women's studies; sociology; political science; gender and parenting issues). These were at the School of Medicine at the University of California, San Diego; the California School of Professional Psychology; in the Department of Women's Studies at San Diego State; at Brooklyn College; Georgetown University; American University, and Rutgers.Y.:Putnam/Penguin, 2001), Biography

Feminist Foundation

When the second wave of the women's movement evolved in the late 1960s, Farrell's support of it led the National Organization for Women's New York City chapter to ask him to form a men's group. The response to that group led to his ultimately forming some 300 additional men and women's groups and becoming the only man to be elected three times to the Board of Directors of the National Organization for Women in N.Y.C. (1971–74).Y.: Random House, 1974), the Personal Introduction In 1974, Farrell left N.O.W. in N.Y.C. and his teaching at Rutgers when his wife became a White House Fellow and he moved with her to D.C. They subsequently divorced.
During his feminist period, Farrell wrote op-eds for the New York Times and appeared frequently on the Today show and Phil Donahue show, and was featured in People, Parade and the international media. This, and his women and men's groups, one of which had been joined by John Lennon, inspired The Liberated Man. The Liberated Man was written from a feminist perspective, introducing alternative family and work arrangements that could better accommodate working women and encourage care-giving men. The Liberated Man was the beginning of Farrell's development of parallels for men to the female experience: for example, to women's experience as "sex objects," Farrell labeled men's parallel experience as "success objects."The "success object" parallel is featured on the back cover of The Liberated Man (N.Y.: Bantam Books, 1975) in paperback.
As a speaker, Farrell was known for creating audience participation role-reversal experiences to get both sexes "to walk a mile in the other's moccasins." The most publicized were his "men's beauty contest" and "role-reversal date."Janet Cooke, Men Taking Turn in Beauty Contest Get Insights Into Woman's Role, Toledo Blade, November 19, 1979 In the men's beauty contest, all the men are invited to experience "the beauty contest of everyday life that no woman can escape." In the "role-reversal date" every woman was encouraged to "risk a few of the 150 risks of rejection men typically experience between eye contact and intercourse."Mimi Avins, "Men's Advocate in a Woman's World," Los Angeles Times, January 26, 2000.

Integrating men's issues into gender issues

In a 1997 interview, Farrell stated: 

Why Men Are The Way They Are

Farrell's books each contain personal introductions that reveal how the public consciousness and his personal growth led to the book. By the mid-1980s, Farrell was writing that both the role-reversal exercises and the women and men's groups allowed him to hear women's increasing anger toward men, and also learn about men's feelings of being misrepresented.Y.: McGraw-Hill, 1986), Personal Introduction. He wrote Why Men Are The Way They AreSee  to answer women's questions about men in a way he hoped rang true for the men.
He distinguished between both sexes' primary fantasies and primary needs, observing that "both sexes fell in love with members of the other sex who are the least capable of loving: women with men who are successful; men with women who are young and beautiful."Warren Farrell, Why Men Are the Way They Are, (N.Y.:McGraw-Hill, 1986), Chp. 5 Women feel disappointed because, "the qualities it takes to be successful at work are often in tension with the qualities it takes to be successful in love."  Men feel disappointed because, "a young and beautiful woman ('genetic celebrity') often learns more about receiving, not giving, while older and less-attractive women often learn more about giving and doing for others, which is more compatible with love."Warren Farrell, Why Men Are the Way They Are, (N.Y.: McGraw-Hill, 1986) Due partially to Oprah Winfrey's support, Why Men Are the Way They Are became his best-selling book.

The Myth of Male Power

By the early 1990s, Farrell was writing that he felt the misunderstandings about men had deepened and become dangerous to the survival of families and love.Y.: Simon and Schuster, 1993), Personal Introduction. See  He had spent five years re-examining everything he thought he knew about the sexes. The result was The Myth of Male Power.Y.: Simon and Schuster, 1993), Personal Introduction.
In The Myth of Male Power, Farrell offered his first in-depth outline of the thesis he would weave through his subsequent books: that for men and women to make an evolutionary shift from a focus on survival to a focus on a balance between survival and fulfillment, what was ultimately necessary was neither a women's movement nor a men's movement, but a "gender transition movement." He defined a gender transition movement as one that fosters a transition from the rigid roles of our past to more flexible roles for the future.
As the book's title implied, The Myth of Male Power challenged the belief that men had the power—in part by challenging the definition of power. Farrell defined power as "control over one's life." He wrote that, "In the past, neither sex had power; both sexes had roles: women's role was to raise children; men's role was to raise money."Warren Farrell, The Myth of Male Power, (N.Y.: Simon & Schuster, 1993), Chp. 2
Farrell documented how, cross-culturally, men's experience of powerlessness involved being socialized, even as boys, to become "the disposable sex."(The subtitle of The Myth of Male Power is Why Men Are the Disposable Sex.) For cross-cultural documentation, see Chapter 3. He argued that virtually every society that survived did so by training a cadre of its sons to be disposable—in war, and in work. The paradox of masculinity, he proposed, is that the very training for traditional masculinity that created a healthy society created unhealthy boys and men.Y.:Simon and Schuster, 1993), Chp. 2
The Myth of Male Power was ardently challenged by some academic feminists, whose critique is that men earn more money, and that money is power. Farrell concurs that men earn more money, and that money is one form of power. However, Farrell also adds that "men often feel obligated to earn money someone else spends while they die sooner--and feeling obligated is not power."This critique of Farrell is part of feminist James Sterba's critique of The Myth of Male Power and Why Men Earn More in Oxford University Press' book, Does Feminism Discriminate Against Men?, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), which is a debate of thirteen gender issues between James Sterba, representing feminist theory, and Warren Farrell, articulating gender transition theory. This perspective was to be more fully developed in Farrell's Why Men Earn More.
Farrell says heterosexual men are conditioned to believe that they can obtain love and affection from women only by earning money. This belief in turn leads to psychological problems for both sexes; according to Farrell, "men's weakness is their facade of strength; women's strength is their facade of weakness."Warren Farrell, The Myth of Male Power, (N.Y.: Simon & Schuster, 1993), Chapter 2 & 3.
Perhaps Farrell's most controversial contribution to gender politics is The Myth of Male Power's directly challenging the belief that patriarchal societies make rules to benefit men at the expense of women. Farrell argues that this oversimplification misses many realities—such as the facts that only American men, and not women are required to register for military conscription, or the fact that men constitute 93% of workplace deaths.Y.:Simon & Schuster, 1993), Chp. 3
Analyses such as these led The Myth of Male Power to become both his most-praised and most-controversial book. In the discipline of men's studies, it is considered to be a classic.com/2009/04/08/why-men-earn-more/; see also,  In the new academic journal, New Male Studies: An International Journal, in-depth interviews with Dr. Farrell focusing on The Myth of Male Power are the main features of two issues in 2012.com/OJS/index.Faludi, Susan. "Backlash: The Undeclared War Against American Women," Crown Publishers, NY: 1991. pp. 300-304.

Women Can't Hear What Men Don't Say and Father and Child Reunion

The increase in divorces in the 1980s and 1990s turned Farrell's writing toward two issues: the poverty of couples' communication;Warren Farrell, Women Can't Hear What Men Don't Say, (N.Y.: Penguin/Putnam, 2000), Personal Introduction and children's loss of their father in child custody cases.Y.: Tarcher/Putnam/Penguin, 2001), the Personal Introduction
In Women Can't Hear What Men Don't Say,Warren Farrell, Women Can't Hear What Men Don't Say, (N.Y.:Penguin/Putnam, 1999)See  Farrell asserts that couples often fail to use couples' communication outside of counseling if the person receiving criticism does not know how to make her or himself feel safe. Farrell develops a method called "Cinematic Immersion" to create that safety and overcome what he posits is humans' biological propensity to respond defensively to personal criticism.Y.:Penguin/Putnam, 1999) See also,  Institute: 
To address children's loss of their father in child custody cases, Farrell wrote Father and Child Reunion,Warren Farrell, Father and Child Reunion, (N.Y.: Tarcher/Putnam/Penguin, 2001). See:  a meta-analysis of research about what is the optimal family arrangement for children of divorce. Father and Child Reunion's findings include some 26 ways in which children of divorce do better when three conditions prevail: equally-shared parenting (or joint custody); close parental proximity; and no bad-mouthing.Y.: Tarcher/Putnam/Penguin, 2001). His research for Father and Child Reunion provided the basis for his frequently appearing in the first decade of the 21st Century as an expert witness in child custody cases on the balance between mothers' and fathers' rights needed to create the optimal family arrangement for children of divorce.

Why Men Earn More

By the start of the 21st century, Farrell felt he had re-examined every substantial adult male-female issue except the pay gap (i.e., that men as a group tend to earn more money than women as a group).Y.: AMACOM, 2005), Personal Introduction In Why Men Earn More: The Startling Truth Behind the Pay Gap—and What Women Can Do About It,Warren Farrell, Why Men Earn More: The Startling Truth Behind the Pay Gap--and What Women Can Do About It, (N.Y.: AMACOM, 2005) See:  he documents 25 differences in men and women's work-life choices which, he argues, account for most or all of the pay gap more accurately than did claims of widespread discrimination against women. Common to each of men's choices was earning more money, while each of women's choices prioritized having a more-balanced life. These 25 differences allowed Farrell to offer women 25 ways to higher pay—and accompany each with their possible trade-offs.Y.:AMACOM, 2005), Introduction, Chp. 1-6, and Conclusion, pp. 216-233. The trade-offs include working more hours and for more years; taking technical or more-hazardous jobs; relocating overseas or traveling overnight.Y.:AMACOM, 2005). Introduction; Chp. 1-6 This led to considerable praise for Why Men Earn More as a career book for women.S. News and World Report as one of five "Great Career Books." See Marty Nemko, "Five Great Career Books to read in 2006," January 4, 2006   Also, in the 2010 edition of What Color is Your Parachute?, (Berkeley: Ten Speed Press, 2010), p. 122, Bolles writes, "I would give this book to every female career-chooser or career-changer on the planet." ForeWord Magazine awarded Why Men Earn More its Silver Medal for 2005 Book of the Year Awards for Careers. 
Some of Farrell's findings in Why Men Earn More, included his analysis of census bureau data that never-married women without children earn 13% more than their male counterparts; or that the gender pay gap is largely about married men with children who earn more due to their assuming more workplace obligations. 
Themes woven throughout Why Men Earn More are the importance of assessing trade-offs; that "the road to high pay is a toll road;" the "Pay Paradox" (that "pay is about the power we forfeit to get the power of pay"); and, since men earn more, and women have more balanced lives, that men have more to learn from women than women do from men.Y.:AMACOM, 2005), Introduction, Chp. 1-6, and Conclusion, pp. 216-233.

Does Feminism Discriminate Against Men?

Farrell's most recent book, Does Feminism Discriminate Against Men? (ISBN 978-0195312836), published by Oxford University Press in 2008, is a debate book with feminist co-author James Sterba. Farrell felt gender studies in universities rarely incorporated the masculine gender except to demonize it. This book was Farrell's attempt to test whether a positive perspective about men would be allowed to be incorporated into universities' gender studies curriculum even if there were a feminist rebuttal.Y.: Oxford University Press, 2008) Preface and Introduction. Farrell and Sterba debated 13 topics, from children's and fathers' rights, to the "Boy Crisis."

Critical reception

Warren Farrell's books, published in sixteen languages,These include Chinese, German, Italian, Japanese, Norwegian, Swedish, Hebrew, Portuguese, Czech, Hungarian, Arabic, Dutch, Korean, and Taiwanese Mandarin tend to make both international news and be the subject of both praise and criticism from the political right and left, and from feminists and anti-feminists.
Early critiques in the New York Times Book Review by Larry McMurtry and John Leonard included disdain for Farrell's use of gender neutral language in The Liberated Man. 9, 1975 and Larry McMurtry, The New York Times, Book Review, January 5, 1975 More recently, conservative and antifeminist Phyllis Schlafly labels Farrell a "feminist apologist," though praises his research for Father and Child Reunion.C., 2006.
Praise of Warren Farrell include Kate Zernike of The Boston Globe ranking him as "the sage of the men's movement,"Zernike, Kate. "Feminism Has Created Progress, But Man, Oh, Man, Look What Else." Chicago Tribune 21 June 1997. Web. and the description of him as the "Gloria Steinem of men's liberation"Kleiman, Carol. "400 men try to beat 'chauvinist pig' rap." The Montreal Gazette 29 December 1977, p.27. Print. by Carol Kleiman of the Chicago Tribune. Esquire ranked Farrell, Thomas Aquinas, and John Stuart Mill as three of history's leading male feminists. "THIS ISSUE IS ABOUT WOMEN.
In 2012, a new international academic journal, New Male Studies, highlighted The Myth of Male Power by making it the lead feature in two of its first issues, positioning it as a classic to the field of men's studies.com/OJS/index.com/OJS/index.php/nms/article/view/44
Farrell's recent collaborations with Ken Wilber, have introduced his messages to more diverse and receptive audiences.  Farrell's claims on gender relations have attracted the interest of English academic Rory Ridley-Duff, who has integrated Farrell's perspectives into curriculum materials, academic papers and a bookRidley-Duff, R. J. (2005) "Interpersonal Dynamics: A Communitarian Perspective", paper to the 1st ENROAC-MCA Conference 7th-9th April, Antwerp This peer-reviewed conference paper is available from the Sheffield Hallam University Research Archive. J. (2010) Emotion, Seduction and Intimacy: Alternative Perspectives on Human Behaviour (Third Edition), Seattle: Libertary Editions ISBN 978-1-935961-00-0 and developed Attraction Theory to capture the gendering dynamics implicit in Farrell's work. J. (2008) "Gendering, Courtship and Pay Equity: Developing Attraction Theory to Understand Work-Life Balance and Entrepreneurial Behaviour", paper to the 31st ISBE Conference, 5th-7th November, Belfast This refereed paper is published in the ISBE conference proceedings (ISBN 978-1-900862-08-0) as well as the Sheffield Hallam University Research Archive.

Personal life

Farrell married Ursula, a mathematician and IBM executive, in the sixties.  After 10 years of marriage, in 1976 they separated and they subsequently divorced. He has two step-daughters.  They live in Mill Valley, California.com/pages.php?id=51

Other activities

During the California gubernatorial recall election, Farrell ran as a Democratic candidate,
Farrell's current foci are conducting communication workshops;See  in child custody cases; and researching a forthcoming book (working title Boys to Men), to be co-authored with John Gray.  In 2010-11, he keynoted, along with Deepak Chopra, a world conference on spirituality (the Integral Spiritual Experience), addressing the evolution of love. He  was then invited by the Center on World Spirituality to be one of their world leaders.centerforworldspirituality. Farrell is also now a semi-regular contributor to controversial web publication A Voice for Men and will be appearing at a worldwide conference on men's and boys' issues sponsored by that organization in June 2014.
In 2009, a call from the White House requesting Dr. Farrell to be an advisor to the White House Council on Women and Girls led to Dr. Farrell creating and chairing a commission to create a White House Council on Boys and Men.  The multi-partisan commission consists of thirty-five authors and practitioners (e.g., John Gray, Gov. Jennifer Granholm, Michael Gurian, Michael Thompson, Bill Pollack, Leonard Sax) of boys' and men's issues.  They have completed a study that defines five components to a "boys' crisis," which has been submitted as a proposal for President Obama to create a White House Council on Boys and Men.

Bibliography






