[[White trash]]

CATEGORIES: American phraseology, Ethnic and racial stereotypes, Ethnic and religious slurs, Social class subcultures, Social groups, Social stereotypes, White Americans, Ethnic and racial stereotypes in the United States

White trash is a derogatory American English term referring to poor white people, especially in the rural South of the US, suggesting lower social class and degraded standards. The term suggests outcasts from respectable society living on the fringes of the social order who are seen as dangerous because they may be criminal, unpredictable, and without respect for authority whether it be political, legal, or moral. 2 The term is usually a slur, but may also be used self-referentially by working class whites to jokingly describe their origins.

White trash vis-a-vis cracker, hillbilly, Okie, and redneck

In common usage "White trash" overlaps in meaning with cracker (regarding Georgia and Florida), hillbilly (regarding Appalachia), Okie (regarding Oklahoma origins), and redneck.  The main difference is that "redneck," "cracker", "Okie", and "hillbilly" emphasize that a person is poor and uneducated and comes from the backwoods with little awareness of the modern world, while "White trash" emphasizes the person's moral failings. 79, 102

History

The term White trash first came into common use in the 1830s as a pejorative used by house slaves against poor whites. In 1833 Fanny Kemble, an English actress visiting Georgia, noted in her journal: "The slaves themselves entertain the very highest contempt for white servants, whom they designate as 'poor white trash'". 81Wray suggests that the term may have originated in the Baltimore-Washington area during the 1830s when Irish and blacks were competing for the same jobs. Matt Wray, Not Quite White: White Trash and the Boundaries of Whiteness (2006) pp 42-44 
In 1854, Harriet Beecher Stowe wrote the chapter "Poor White Trash" in her book A Key to Uncle Tom's Cabin. Stowe tells the reader that slavery not only produces "degraded, miserable slaves", but also poor whites who are even more degraded and miserable. The plantation system forced those whites to struggle for subsistence. Beyond economic factors, Stowe traces this class to the shortage of schools and churches in their community, and says that both blacks and whites in the area look down on these "poor white trash".Wray (2006) pp 57-58
By 1855 the term had passed into common usage by upper class whites, and was common usage among all Southerners, regardless of race, throughout the rest of the 19th century.ncsu.PDF

White popular culture

Scholars in the late 19th and early 20th century explored the generations of families the authors considered disreputable, such as the The Jukes family and the The Kallikak Family (both were pseudonyms for real families).Nicole Hahn Rafter, White Trash: The Eugenic Family Studies, 1877-1919 (1988) 
Ernest Matthew Mickler's White Trash Cooking (1986) enjoyed an unanticipated rise to popularity. The cookbook, which is based on the cooking of rural white Southerners, features recipes with names such as Goldie's Yo Yo Pudding, Resurrection Cake, Vickies Stickies and Tutti's Fruited Porkettes. Edge, "White Trash Cooking, Twenty Years Later", Southern Quarterly 2007 44(2): 88-94; Smith (2004)Ernest Matthew Mickler's White Trash Cooking (new ed. 2011); excerpt and text search  As Inness (2006) notes, "white trash authors used humor to express what was happening to them in a society that wished to forget about the poor, especially those who were white." She points out that under the humor was a serious lesson about living in poverty. Inness, Secret ingredients: race, gender, and class at the dinner table (2006) p. 147
By the 1980s there appeared fiction written by Southern authors who themselves claimed redneck or white trash origins, such as Harry Crews, Dorothy Allison, Larry Brown, and Tim McLaurin. 68-90 in Project MUSE Autobiographies sometimes mention white trash origins. Gay rights activist  Amber L. Hollibaugh says, "I grew up a mixed-race, white-trash girl in a country that considered me dangerous, corrupt, fascinating, exotic. I responded to the challenge by becoming that alarming, hazardous, sexually disruptive woman."

Black popular culture

It is used among blacks as an attack against whites. Racism: essential readings (2001) p. 188Philip C. Kolin, Contemporary African American Women Playwrights (2007) p. 29  Use of "White trash" epithets has been extensively reported in the African American culture. Roediger, Take Black on white: Black writers on what it means to be white (1999) pp. 13, 123 Black authors have noted that blacks, when taunted by whites as "niggers," taunted back, calling them "white trash,"Philip C. Kolin, Contemporary African American Women Playwrights (2007) p. 29 and the black parents taught their children that poor whites were "white trash". Obiakor, Bridgie Alexis Ford, Creating Successful Learning Environments for African-American Learners With Exceptionalities (2002) p. 198  The epithet appears in black folklore. 966  In it, slaves (when out of earshot) would refer to harsh overseers as a "low down" man, "lower than poor white trash," "a brute, really."Claude H. Nolen, African American Southerners in Slavery, Civil War and Reconstruction (2005) p. 81

In literature





Citations

Bibliography




