[[Christina Aguilar]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 births, Living people, Thai pop singers, Thai people of French descent, Thai people of Spanish descent, Thai people of Filipino descent, Thai people of Vietnamese descent, Singers of Vietnamese descent

Christina Aguilar (Born October 31, 1966) is a Filipino-Thai descent and one of Thailand's biggest singers.

Biography

1966-1990: First Step

Christina Aguilar is the daughter of Spanish-Filipino musician Tony Aguilar and Margaret a French mother.  Christina was born in Bangkok, Thailand. Aguilar has two siblings, Anthony and Theresa.
"Tina", as her fans like to call her,www.com studied at the French institute. She then pursued Business management studies in France. She does not have Thai blood, but sometimes be mistaken as Thai because of her fair skin and ability to speak fluent Thai. In addition to Thai, Aguilar speaks French, English and some Spanish. Aguilar first became known for her singing abilities while in France. During the college's annual party, Aguilar was asked by her friends to perform on stage. She chose to sing "Sweet Memory."
Her father was one of her most important influence in music, and she and her family would often sing together.
Aguilar loves dogs and used to dream of becoming a veterinarian. In college, she wanted to be a successful businesswoman. But most of all she always wanted is to sing. As soon as she finished school, she was recruited by a French advertising agency. Tina worked as an assistance account executive. She gained much experience in communicating with people then she came back to Thailand and worked briefly with a travelling agency. The turning point in her career was when she met 'Rewat Bhuddhinan',then Chief producer for Grammy entertainment, who invited her to music industry.

1990-1994: Early Success and Career Development

Christina first appeared in the radios in 1990. The debut single with the same album title "Ninja" became a big hit soon among Thai listeners. The song has new fun sound with up-tempo beat, being different at that time, Christina brought Pop music to the mainstream since then. Following the release of some other pop dance singles, including one of her iconic songs "Plik Lock" and another hit "Prawatsart", and some ballads, including "Hua Jai Kor Ma" and "Plao Rok Na", the album was incredibly successful. Christina broke the record by being the first female artist who has a million-copy album.
Arwut Lab (Secret Weapons) was released in 1992. "Jing Mai Klua", the debut single, made her well known overseas. The video won MTV Asian Viewers Choice Award in Los Angeles, USA. It was the second music video of Thai artists to win this award after Thongchai McIntyre. Moreover, the album also went to Japan and received good reception. The album has several hit singles, including two all time hit ballads "Wela Mai Chuai Arai" and "Mai Yak Ja Cheua Lei". Similar to the first album, Arwut Lab (Secret Weapons) was also very successful and has sold close to million copies.

1994-1999: Became the Top

In 1994, Christina released her third album "Red Beat". With faster beat, modern and sexy appearance, it became her most successful album to date, containing two of her most successful singles, one is dance single "Mai Yag Rok" and another is love ballad single "Rak Thur Thee Sood". This album has been sold over three million copies, being one of the biggest-selling albums in Thai music history. This was the second time that Christina's album has been sold more than one million copies, proving her talent in music. Thais also know her as one of the very successful Thai music artists of all time due to this album.
A year later, she was one of five guests of Thai most successful artist, Thongchai McIntyre, in the album Khon Nok Gub Dok Mai (Feather and Flowers). She duet with Thongchai in Atsanee - Wasan' s "Rak Thur Samur". In the same year, with five popular Thai artists at that time, Jetrin Wattanasin, Patipan Pataweekarn, Tata Young, UHT and Myria Benedetti, she was included in the album 6-2-12. Both albums reached millions copies, adding up her popularity.
Golden Eye was released three years later. She came back with developed image, grew up and mature. Christina also co-wrote a song named Tai Pa Hom Oun for this album. The album created several hits such as "Ya Mong Trong Nan", "Fak Kwam Yin Dee", "Mai Tong Khob Jai", "Tai Pa Hom Oun" and a gay anthem "Pood Eek Thee".impaqmsn. The album was still popular although it was less successful than her previous albums. However, the record was broken again, this album reached million copies unsurprisingly. Christina is the first artist in Thailand who has three solo albums reaching one million copies

1999-Present: Beat Slowed Down

In 1999, Christina was back with a teenager image, younger and more colourful. Her 5th album, 5th Avenue, contains many beautiful songs, including one big hit single "Oon Jai". However, because of high competition in Thai music industry at that time, 5th Avenue became her least successful album since her debut. It has sold only half-million copies.
In the same year, Christina released her first English album. The album features Sarah Jane Fearnley (also known as Fearn), English singer who sang backup for Spice Girls and soundtracks of the movie Evita. This album consist of re-arranged songs of her in English. However, it was not as successful overseas as her second album.
Her sixth album "Dancing Queen" was released in 2001 with moderately reception. Dancing Queen represented her sexiness and highness like a queen of dance music. It was her first and only album that led with the ballad, "Kid Pid Kid Mai", a bit contrasting with the album concept. However, "Kid Pid Kid Mai" has topped several radio charts before the following two dance songs were released. The album was disturbed by pirate albums  that made the album be her smallest-selling album, having been sold only 0.3 million copies. In 2003, Christina released "Paradise" as her seventh album. The album was still not so popular as a result of missed promotion, according to her fans. It has been promoted only three singles - "Sawan Yoo Thee Jai", "Hong Derm" and "Yak Fung Kum Nun Talod Pai" - and has had very short time of promotion. However, the album has been sold 0.4 million copies.
In 2006, Christina released her new single "Koh Khoom Laew " in the radio in August, following by the new album "C. This album again lacked of promotion, only two music videos were broadcast: "An Everlasting Love" and "Wang Meed Dai Rue Yung".
In late of 2008, Christina has a special project album "Mai - Tina: Beauty on the Beat", collaborating with one of the most successful Thai female artists and her former rival(from a rumour news), Mai Charoenpura. Around March 2009,"BURN" first single from this special album released. On 6 June 2009 The Beauty on the Beat concert had performed. Finally this Album released on 26 November 2009.
In 2010, Christina performed with various artists (for example Tata Young, Mai Charoenpura, Marsha, Jetrin Wattanasin, Dan etc.) on Special Project "THIS IS IT THE CONCERT". Tribute to Michael Jackson, King of Pop who died on 25 June 2009.
Christina Aguilar had 20th year Anniversary in her career on 21 December 2010.
In 2011, Christina will have "20th Year Anniversary Concert" on 4 and 5 June 2011 At Royal Paragon Halls.

Discography

Studio Albums
Compilation, Remix and Covered Albums
Special Albums






