[[P. Vijayan]]

CATEGORIES: Indian police officers, Living people

P Vijayan IPS is the current Police Commissioner of Trivandrum. His earlier service postings include Police Commissioner of Thrissur City Police, Kochi City Police, Kozhikode and Police Superintendent of Malappuram District. He started his policing career as Assistant Police Superintendent at Kanhangad in Kasaragod District in October 2001.

Professional Achievements

Vijayan has led the teams that investigated the Kalamassery Bus Burning case, Sabarimala Thanthri case, the Chelembra Bank Robbery case, the email threat case against the Prime Minister of India and the first snake venom smuggling case in Kerala. He initiated the specially formed State Temple anti-Theft Squad, which detected more than 400 instances of robbery involving temples in Kerala and created the "Shadow Police" programme, with a primary focus on crime detection and prevention. P Vijayan helped set up an interface between retired and serving police officers and established a coordination panel involving police and office-bearers of the Manpower Exporters Association to curb the menace of Indian visa-related fraud. He established a 24/7 Police Call Centre for the Kozhikode residents in 2010. He also led a team of 200 officers and 10 company men from State Special Armed Police Battalion for a period of two months on security duty in the state of Uttar Pradesh during the Assembly Election 2007.

Punyam Poonkavanam

Sri Vijayan has also been actively involved in conceptualizing and implementing initiatives at Sabarimala, the world-renowned pilgrimage centre in Pathanamthitta District, Kerala. As Special Officer on Sabarimala duty, he initiated a novel clean-up programme of the holy Sannidhanam, by associating the police organization as well as other officials in this community service activity as a special offering to the Lord Ayyappa. Termed "Punnyam Poonkavanam", the project has now been officially recognized by the authorities as the most effective way of keeping the holy shrine and its premises free of man-made waste. The Kerala High Court has lauded the services of Sri Vijayan in this connection.

Youth Development Initiatives

P Vijayan played a role in expanding the focus of community policing in Kerala to include youth development as an essential factor to strengthen democracy. Since 2006, Sri Vijayan has actively promoted community-level police efforts to engage constructively with youth from all sections of society. Project Candlelight, a youth empowerment initiative in Kochi City, proved to be a significant intervention in the lives of several disadvantaged youth from a backward area of the city known as Udaya Colony.

Student Police Cadet project

As head of Kochi City Police, he was instrumental in convening a path-breaking youth engagement workshop named Janakeeyam involving over 300 high school students and senior police officials. The workshop proved to be the spark for the Student Police Cadet (SPC) project, a bold and far-sighted youth development initiative by Kerala Police  Launched in August 2010, the SPC project has been acknowledged as a model initiative for police organizations all across the country As State Nodal Officer of the SPC project, Sri Vijayan has the responsibility of nurturing and growing the various components of the SPC project, in which capacity he has been singularly effective.com/2010/11/10/man-making-is-our-mission-crime-free-society-our-ambition/

NANMA

Sri Vijayan is also the Patron of NANMA, a youth-focused and educationally oriented organization that seeks to mentor and develop youth from poorer sections of society into capable and successful youth. At present, NANMA Learning Centres have been established in seven locations across Kerala, and hundreds of high school students from economically backward families have benefited from their association with the organization.nanmafoundation.org

Our Responsibility to Children

"Our Responsibility to Children (ORC)" is another youth-focused initiative led by Sri Vijayan in his capacity as a police official concerned with reducing juvenile crime. Recognising that existing machinery of punishment have not proved to be very effective in correcting or preventing crime among youth, project ORC seeks to tackle the issue from a different perspective. The basic principles of this approach are: Retaining vulnerable and deviant youth within the mainstream of society rather than locking them away in institutions; Mentoring such youth through trained and motivated community members; and Re-engaging their energies and interests in self-development activities through a hand-holding approach recently, the Government of Kerala has instituted a scheme to implement the programme throughout the state.

Personal

Born in Puthurmadhom, Kozhikode, Sri Vijayan has a Master's degree in Economics from the Calicut University. Prior to joining the police force, Sri Vijayan had professional stints both as an educational researcher and lecturer. In April 2008, Sri Vijayan and his wife, Dr Beena IAS, parents of two children, were recipients of the Model Official Couple Award from South Indian Bank.indiaprwire.htm




