[[Haripad]]

CATEGORIES: Cities and towns in Alappuzha district

Haripad is a town in Alappuzha District, Kerala, India located between Alappuzha and Kollam on National Highway 47. Its coordinates are Latitude : 9°18′0″N and Longitude : 76°28′0″E.  It is bordered on the east by Pallippad, Veeyapuram and Karuvatta to the north, Kumarapuram and Mahadevikadu to the West, and on the south by Nangiarkulangara.
Haripad derived its name from either Aripad (Ari meaning Rice), or "Harigeethapuram".

History

During the period of European colonization, In the opinion of the Dutch Governor Gollanez the sea coast between Quilon and Purakkad which the Dutch called 'Martha" and which region was known as Karthikappally consisted of two regions or nation states, Karnoppally (present-day Karunagapally) and Karimpali.  More specifically, Haripad was located in Karimpali which was the area between Kayamkulam and Purakkad and was also known as Vettimana.
The capital of Vettimana was Karimpalil palace (near the present-day Haripad Railway Station), but at some point it was moved to Karthikappally. In 1742 Marthanda Varma defeated Karthikappally region and added it to Travancore State. During the period of the kingship, Haripad was a Town, the remaining town hall stands as proof.  Also during this period, Haripad was the administrative center of Karthikappally Taluk, and it was from Haripad that the major portion of rice for the state was produced.
In 1921 Haripad got municipal town status, however in 1941 it was downgraded to a non-municipal town. Finally, in 1954 it was changed into a Panchayat.

Geography

Haripad is a town in Alappuzha District of Kerala State in India.  Its coordinates are Latitude : 9°18′0″N and Longitude : 76°28′0″E, and lies at an elevation of 13 meters. It is bordered on the east by Pallippad, Karuvatta to the north, Kumarapuramand Mahadevikadu to the West, and on the south by Nangiarkulangara.1 Haripad is close to the Arabian Sea and connects Mavelikkara and Thrikkunnappuzha.
The nearest major railway station to Haripad is Alappuzha (Alleppey) which is at a distance of 32 kilometers. The nearest airport is at Kochi which is at a distance of 75 kilometers.
Being located in southwestern India, the summer months are characterized by high temperature and extremely high humidity. Monsoon brings rains between late April and July with the mildest weather being from November to March. Being near the coast areas has the additional characterization of heavy annual rainfall.

Arts and Culture

There are eighteen Hindu temples there and more than 30 more in the surrounding countryside. The two most famous are Subrahmanya Swamy temple and Mannarasala Temple.
Subrahmanya Swamy temple in Haripad is one of the oldest temples in Kerala. Dedicated to Subrahmanya Swamy, it is believed that the temple was established even before the advent of Kali Yuga.  The temple was consecrated on the Pushya star of Makara Masa. This day is celebrated as the founding day of the temple every year. It is believed that Lord Vishnu appreaded as a saint to consecrate the temple.  In 1096 of the Malayalam calendar, the temple caught fire, but the golden flag mast (erected 1067) and the Koothambalam were saved from the fire.  The current temple was built during the period of King Chithira Thirunal Balarama Varma, who reigned from 1930-1949 (Gregorian Calendar).
The Mannarasala Temple is a Nagaraja temple situated near Haripad. Like most snake temples, it is nestled in a forest glade, and has over 30,000 images of snakes along the paths and among the trees.  It is the largest such temple in Kerala. Women seeking fertility come to worship there, and upon the birth of their child, they come again to hold thanksgiving ceremonies, often bringing new snake images as offerings.
Another main feature of Haripad which attracts even the foreigners is the Payippad Jalolsavam, a three day water festival conducted on the nearby Payippad Lake. It is believed the idol of Lord Subrahmanya was brought from Kandalloor with escort of snake boats. Payippad Jalolsavam is conducted to renew this memory.

Government

Harippad is the headquarters of Karthikappally taluk, which includes 18 small villages:  Arattupuzha, Cheppad, Cheruthana, Chingoli, Haripad, Kandallor, Karthikappally, Karuvatta, Kayamkulam, Keerikkad, Krishnapuram, Kumarapuram, Muthukulam, Pallippad, Pathiyoor, Puthuppally, Thrikkunnapuzha, Veeyapuram.
The Haripad assembly constituency is part of Alappuzha (Lok Sabha constituency).

Famous people







