[[Sukumari]]

CATEGORIES: People from Kanyakumari district, 1940 births, 2013 deaths, People from Kerala, Indian actresses, Indian film actresses, Actors from Kerala, People from Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala State Film Award winners, Recipients of the Padma Shri, Actresses in Malayalam cinema, Filmfare Awards South winners, Best Supporting Actress National Film Award winners, Deaths from surgical complications, Recipients of the Kalaimamani Award

Sukumari (6 October 1940

Career

She was born in Nagercoil to Madhavan Nair and Sathyabhama Amma, she left them early in life to study dance with her aunt Saraswathi Amma in Chennai, alongside her first cousins the Travancore Sisters, Lalitha, Padmini and Ragini (their mothers were sisters). She learned dance with the sisters and mastered dance forms like Keralanadanam, Kathakali and Bharathanatyam.weblokam.htm She had played many notable mother roles. She has acted in films in Malayalam, Tamil, Kannada, Telugu and Hindi, and used her own voice in all languages without using dubbing artists.She has acted in television serials like Swapnam,Thulabharam,Sreeguruvaayoorappan,Malakhamar,Aakashadhoothu,Velankanni Mathavu and many serials of Sreekumaran Thampi etc.She is an accomplished dancer also.She has judged popular comedy reality show COMEDY FESTIVAL telecasting in Mazhavil Manorama Channel.

Personal life

Sukumari married director A. Bhimsingh in 1959. He died in 1978. The couple has a son, Suresh.Malayala Manoram Online Edition,27 March 2013

Death

On 26 March 2013, Sukumari died from a cardiac arrest at a hospital in Chennai where she was receiving treatments for burns she had sustained  while lighting a traditional lamp at her residence in February.

Response

Following her death, several South Indian personalities offered their condolences. Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Jayalalithaa, who has co-starred with Sukumari, said in a condolence message that Sukumari had left a unique imprint on South Indian cinema and theatre with her talents. Kerala's Chief Minister, Oommen Chandy called Sukumari a "phenomenon in Malayalam cinema." Actor and Minister for cinema K.B. Ganesh Kumar said actors in Malayalam film industry had lost "the loving presence of a mother in the sets." Leader of the Opposition V.S. Achuthanandan called Sukumari's death a "huge loss for Indian cinema." Kerala Pradesh Congress Committee president Ramesh Chennithala said Sukumari would be remembered for "the diversity of characters that she gave life to." Communist Party of India State secretary Pannian Ravindran said Sukumari was "an unforgettable acting genius." Union Minister of State for Food and Consumer Affairs K.V. Thomas described Sukumari as an actor who conquered the film scene with her unique acting style.

Awards

Partial filmography

2010s

2000s

1990s

1980s

1950-70s








