[[Steve Berry (footballer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, Living people, Sportspeople from Liverpool, English footballers, Association football midfielders, Portsmouth F.C. players, Aldershot F.C. players, Sunderland A.F.C. players, Newport County A.F.C. players, Swindon Town F.C. players, Northampton Town F.C. players, SV Darmstadt 98 players, Double Flower FA players, Stevenage F.C. players, British expatriates in Hong Kong, Kettering Town F.C. players, Rushden & Diamonds F.C. players, Bedford Town F.C. players, The Football League players, Hong Kong First Division League players, Football Conference players, 2. Bundesliga players, English football managers, Kettering Town F.C. managers, Expatriate footballers in Hong Kong

Stephen Andrew "Steve" Berry (born 4 April 1963) is an English former professional footballer who played in the Football League for Portsmouth, Aldershot, Sunderland, Newport County, Swindon Town and Northampton Town, in the German second division for Darmstadt, and in the Hong Kong First Division League for Instant-Dict.

Career

Berry was born in Liverpool, and played for Gosport Borough before beginning his professional career with Portsmouth. He made his League debut at the age of 18, on 29 August 1981 in the starting eleven for the Third Division home draw with Lincoln City. He played 35 games in all competitions and scored three goals in the 1981–82 season, but played rarely after the arrival of Bobby Campbell as manager.
Aged 21, he made his Sunderland debut on 25 August 1984 in a 3–1 win at home to Southampton. He made 45 league and cup appearances including the League Cup Final at Wembley that season. Sunderland were relegated at the end of the 1984–85 season and he found himself out of favour after the arrival of Lawrie McMenemy as manager. He played just one game early the following season, and was transferred to Newport County for £20,000 in December 1985.
Sometime later, Newport were facing financial problems and Berry was approached by Lou Macari at Swindon Town and subsequently sold for £15,000. He spent six months at Swindon Town, playing three league and all the play-off games as the club gained promotion to the Second Division, then joined Aldershot in October 1987 in part-exchange for Bobby Barnes,
Returning to England, he joined Stevenage Borough, whom he captained to the Conference National title in 1995–96. and, coming out of retirement following two operations on his achilles tendon, at Bedford Town.
In August 2005, at the age of 42, Berry joined Cogenhoe United as a player and helped them in their historic FA Cup run, in which they narrowly failed to reach the fourth qualifying round.
In 2006, having already started a new career in corporate head-hunting and executive coaching, Berry moved to Paris and is currently Global Director of Talent for Ipsos Mori, a leading market research agency headquartered in Paris.



   author=Mike Neasom, Mick Cooper & Doug Robinson  |
   title=Pompey: The History of Portsmouth Football Club|
   publisher=Milestone Publications |
   year=1984|
   isbn=0-903852-50-0}}




