[[Joub Jannine]]

CATEGORIES: Fertile Crescent, Great Rift Valley, Archaeological sites in Lebanon, Populated places in the Western Beqaa District, Beqaa Valley, Trihedral Neolithic sites, Heavy Neolithic sites, Archaeological type sites

Joub Jannine ( / ALA-LC: Jub Jannīn) is located in the Beqaa Valley valley in Lebanon. 
Joub Jannine is the center of the Western Beqaa District, hosting the Serail, which is a main governmental building serving the area. Joub Jannine is surrounded by a number of villages. To the south there is the village of Lala, Ghazze to the north, Kamid al lawz to the east, and Kefraya, known for its wine grape vineyards, to the west.

Archaeological sites

Joub Jannine I is a small surface site brought to the surface through erosional activity of a stream. It is 8 km northeast of Qaraoun in a range of foothills, 1 km north of a small village called Jebel Gharbi, between two tracks, west of cote 878 by about 200 m. The site was found by Dubertret with a collection made by Henri Fleisch and Maurice Tallon that is now in the Museum of Lebanese Prehistory at the Saint Joseph University. Flint tools found on the site included bifaces and rough pieces that were suggested to date to the Acheulean. et Hours, F., Préhistoire et géomorphologie : les formes du relief et les dépôts quaternaires dans la région de Joub Jannine (Béqaa méridionale, Liban). Hannon, Beyrouth, vol. V, p. 63-95, 1970
Joub Jannine II was first discovered by M. Billaux in 1957. It was described by Henri Fleisch as Neolithic in 1960., Les industries lithiques récentes de la Békaa, République Libanaise, Acts of the 6th C.I.S.E.A., vol. XI, no. 1. Paris, 1960. It is located on the right bank of the Litani River northwest of the village, 100 m from the river and 100 m east of cote 861. An abundant amount of flint was collected including nine hundred and forty four tools and one hundred and fifty two cores.
The material from Joub Jannine II was described by Lorraine Copeland as 
Joub Jannine III (The Gardens) is a Heavy Neolithic site of the Qaraoun culture, 






