[[Esma Redžepova]]

CATEGORIES: 1943 births, Living people, Macedonian female singers, Macedonian musicians, Macedonian Romani people, People from Skopje, Pop folk singers, Romani musicians, Eurovision Song Contest entrants of 2013, Macedonian Eurovision Song Contest entrants

Esma Redžepova (

Early life and background

Redžepova was born on 8 August 1943 in Skopje, then annexed by the Kingdom of Bulgaria. 128. She is the second youngest of six children in a Romani family. Her father worked variously as a porter, singer, drummer, circus strongman and shoeshiner. Her parents insisted that all children finish primary school. At age nine Esma was introduced by one of her brothers to a local Romani music organisation, where she was able to quickly learn complicated rhythms. Her mother encouraged her musical gifts and Esma and her brother soon joined their school's folklore group.
In 1957, aged 14, she was invited to sing at a school talent contest for Radio Skopje. This concert proved to be a turning point — not only did she place first, beating 57 other schools and winning 9,000 dinars, but national band frontman and future husband Stevo Teodosievski also happened to be in attendance. After securing permission from her parents, Esma began touring with his musical ensemble. Legend has it she left home with a single suitcase filled with one dress and one Čoček costume.

Recent career

In recent years, Esma has remained popular throughout the Balkans. In 2002, she recorded a duet with the famous Macedonian singer Todor Proeski called "Magija" which was included in Todor's album "Ako Me Pogledneš Vo Oči" which was released in October the same year.
Her best known single Čaje Šukarije is the feature song on the 2006 Borat movie soundtrack, which she claims was used without her permission.  Together with Naat Veliov from Kočani Orkestar she sued the producers of the film for 800,000 euro (USD 1,000,000).  Afterwards, Redžepova won a €26,000 compensation, since it turned out that Cohen got permission from her production house to take the song, which she was not notified about.
The movie Gypsy Caravan (2007) features Esma as one of five Romani music acts on their tour through the USA.
The film Rromani Soul (2008), directed by Louis Mouchet, features Esma as the guide of the true origin of Rroma people located in Kannauj, Uttar Pradesh by Roma linguist Marcel Courthiade.

Eurovision Song Contest 2013

On 28 December 2012, Macedonian Radio-Television (MRT) announced that Redžepova along with Vlatko Lozanoski (Lozano) would represent Macedonia in the Eurovision Song Contest 2013 held in Malmö, Sweden, with the song "Pred da se razdeni".

Political membership

Redžepova has been a member of the Democratic Alternative. After the dissolution of the party, she went over to the conservative party VMRO–DPMNE. During the most recent elections, she became a member of the City Council of Skopje.Večer Online

Selected discography

Filmography








