[[Rat Attack!]]

CATEGORIES: 2000 video games, Nintendo 64 games, PlayStation games

Rat Attack! is an arcade style, puzzle game for the Nintendo 64 and PlayStation. It was first released on the PlayStation in 1999, and later on the Nintendo 64 in the year 2000. Its theme is that of group of Scratch Cats stopping a Rat invasion. It received mixed reviews after its several years in development.

Story

A pair of lab rats, Washington and Jefferson were sent into space aboard a rocket in an experiment. However, after some incident in space, the rats had been mutated and gained super-intelligence. Over forty years have passed, they have returned to earth and immediately commenced with plans for world domination, amassing a huge army of rats with instructions to destroy everything in sight.
The felines of the world band together to combat this menace forming a group called the 'Scratch Cats'. Headed by cat genius Professor Rex Julius, they fight off these rats with several of his inventions which eliminate the rats in a humane way.
Professor Rex Julius sent his special agent Pearl to investigate, but Washington and Jefferson managed to capture her, imprisoning her within a laser cage guarded by giant robots.
They go from location to location, cleaning up the rats. Along the way they meet another mysterious cat in the clutches of King Scarab.
At the end of the game, with all the areas saved from the ravaging rat army, the Scratch Cats manage to defeat Washington and Jefferson in a showdown in their space base. However, the duo manage to escape after their defeat, Julius afterwards revealing that they also taken King Scarab with them.

Gameplay

In single player mode a single Scratch Cat enters a room, from its walls pours an endless supply of rats. The player must catch and eliminate a certain amount of these before a door will appear taking them to the next room. Each area has several rooms, in its particular theme.
The object of the game is to clear each level of a the allotted number of rats, and continue on to the next room. The player uses a loop-like lasso called a 'Eraticator', to catch the rats. With them trapped the player then must take the rats to the 'Destructor Pad', located in each of the rat filled rooms, to dispose of them. If the player is bumped by a rat or other damaging item in the room, the rats can escape the trap until they've been eliminated by the 'Destructor'.
At the end of each level the player receives bonuses reflecting how well they had done. Such as receiving "Damage Bonuses" for how much the room got damaged (the less damage, the higher points), time bonuses (the less time taken, the higher the bonus), and perfect bonuses (if none of the items in the room got destroyed, the player obtains these points.)
In most of the rooms various power-ups will occasionally appear to help the player, they can also be found in treasure chests, which require eliminating a certain amount of rats at the same time. These power-ups allow such things as, some of the damage done by the rats to be reversed, allowing the player to avoid taking damage for a short time, or get back one energy that they lost. Other effects are making the player able to grow large and stomp on the rats, to run much faster, or make the lasso bigger. There is also bate to attract the rats to one location. Besides these power-ups there are also power downs, that are released by the rats when they destroy a box or other things. Resulting in the players controls being reversed, rats being ejected out of their trap, or slowing down, and other such features.
Later gameplay also introduces things like switches, fans, laser beams, and teleporters. Thus, adding puzzle elements to the game. Requiring the player to figure out how to use the various devises before the items in the room get destroyed.
The rats themselves, can hurt the player if they touch them. They can also jump out the lasso if not stunned by a claw swipe, or other type of attack. They can climb up large walls, and be duplicated by a 'Rat Copier'. A special white rat is in several rooms, these have the purpose of only getting to a Mutation Pad and then transforming into a monstrous rat that hunts down the player.
At the end of each area there is a boss that the player must defeat. However the Scratch Cats can't harm the bosses directly. The player must figure out how to harm the boss, in most cases by using their attack against them.
In multiplayer mode the gameplay is almost identical, but with a few additions such as a 'Gold Rat' worth more points, and a few additional power-ups/downs. The players can also choose a special mode which allows them to go after rats of their own color.

Characters

Each cat has different abilities when the game starts, as well as their own special attack which can be used if they get a certain amount of 'Cat Coins'. The Scratch Cats are made up of the following members:

Development

The game took several years to be fully developed. During this time it was given different temporary names such as "Rat", "Cats & Rats", before finally settling on 'Rat Attack'.
A series of six animated, flash videos was also produces, each telling the story of one of the 'Scratch Cats'. Then shortly before its release another early development version of the game was released as a Demo for the "Official UK PlayStation Magazine".

Reception

Rat Attack, received mostly mixed reviews. N64 Magazine said that it was "Simple, well executed puzzle-em-up, with cats trying to catch rats."






