[[Ivan Katalinić]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 births, Living people, People from Trogir, Croatian footballers, Croatian expatriate footballers, Yugoslav footballers, Yugoslavia international footballers, Association football goalkeepers, Croatian football managers, HNK Trogir players, HNK Hajduk Split players, Southampton F.C. players, Expatriate footballers in England, HNK Hajduk Split managers, NK Osijek managers, Hapoel Haifa F.C. managers, NK Zadar managers, Ittihad FC managers, NK Varaždin managers, HNK Rijeka managers, NK Zagreb managers, FC Metalurh Zaporizhya managers, Football managers in Bahrain, KS Dinamo Tirana managers, RNK Split managers

Ivan Katalinić (born 17 May 1951 ) is a Croatian football manager and former Hajduk Split and Southampton goalkeeper. He manages Jedinstvo Bihać in the First League of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. As a member of Hajduk's famous "golden generation" of the 1970w, he won four Yugoslav championships and five consecutive cups.
In early 1980 came a move to Southampton where he stayed for three and a half seasons. On his return from England, Katalinić  once again joined Hajduk becoming part of the coaching staff and a third choice goalkeeper for the 1983–84 season.
So far in his managerial career Katalinić has managed 17 clubs. Most success was achieved with Hajduk from 1993 until 1995. Two Croatian championships and cups were won along with two supercups. Season 1994–95 is remembered as the most successful in Hajduk's history. Besides winning the double, Hajduk reached quarterfinals of the Champions League.
As a goalkeeper Katalinić was capped 13 times for Yugoslav national team. Debut came on 30 January 1977 when Yugoslavia beat Colombia 1–0 at Estadio El Campín in Bogotá and his last game was in Rome on 18 May 1978 versus Italy at stadio Olimpico in a
scoreless draw. From 1996 until 2002 he was part of the Croatian national team's coaching staff that led Croatia to bronze medal in the World Cup 1998.

Playing career

Although signing his first professional contract with Hajduk in the summer of 1970, Katalinić had to wait more than a year for the debut. Long awaited day occurred on 29 September in 1971 when he came on as a substitute for injured Radomir Vukcevic in Champions Cup first round return leg in Split against Valencia. In a stiff competition Katalinić was not a first choice goalkeeper until 1975. He kept his number one jersey in next two seasons before losing it to obligatory military service. Upon his return from army in May 1979, Katalinić played only one game adding three more at the beginning the following season. Transfer abroad was on horizon. After trials with W.B.A. and Derby County followed by unsuccessful attempts to gain work permit, Katalinić finally made a breakthrough with Southampton.
After signing a four-year contract with Southampton in February 1980 Katalinić became first Croatian ever in First Division (today known as Premier League). To date, he is  the only Croatian goalkeeper to have played in English top flight. In next two and a half years he made 54 appearances for Southampton in all competitions. For the 1982–83 season Saints signed England's legendary goalkeeper Peter Shilton whose arrival moved Katalinić to the bench. After cancelling his contract with Southampton in the summer of 1983, he signed with Hajduk as a third choice goalkeeper and an assistant coach.

Managing career

After ten years on Hajduk's coaching staff as an assistant and goalkeeper coach, in March 1993 Katalinić was appointed as a manager. Under his helm, two months later, Hajduk won Croatian Cup after two legged final against great rival Dinamo Zagreb. The following season Hajduk were champions of Croatia and in 1994–95 first Croatian double crown was rounded with Champions League quarterfinal clash with eventual winners Ajax. Following season Hajduk failed to qualify for the Champions League after losing to Panathinaikos. Two months later Katalinić resigned after being knocked out of the Croatian Cup. In 1996–97 came his first managerial job abroad when he signed a one year contract with Hapoel Haifa. Return to Croatia followed where he took over minnows Zadar leading them to championship play-offs. Second spell with Hajduk followed but no trophies were won.
In the new century Katalinić had two more attempts but did not manage to qualify for the Champions League. With Zagreb, in 2002, he failed to overcome ZTE while two years later short episode with Hajduk ended soon after crushing out against Shelbourne. He coached Rijeka on two occasions, saving them from relegation in his first spell with the club. However, in Ukraine Katalinić's effort was not enough to save Metalurh Zaporizhya from the drop. After five years of coaching abroad (Bahrain, Albania, Hungary, Bosnia and Herzegovina) in the summer of 2009 Katalinić surprised many with his move to ambitious Croatian Third Division side Dugopolje.
Katalinić led Dugopolje to its historic first promotion to the Croatian Second Division. In June 2010 return to First Division football followed as he signed a contract with RNK Split.
In May 2013 he became the manager of Slaven Belupo.

Honours and awards

As player

As manager

Individual



External sources


