[[Ukrainian grammar]]

CATEGORIES: Grammars of specific languages, Ukrainian language, Ukrainian grammar

The grammar of the Ukrainian language describes the phonological, morphological, and syntactical rules of the Ukrainian language. As Ukrainian has maintained much of its inheritance from the Indo-European, Ukrainian grammar is quite complex compared with English, containing 7 cases and 2 numbers for its nominal declension and 2 aspects, 3 tenses, 3 moods, and 2 voices for its verbal conjugation. Adjectives must agree in number, gender, and case with their nouns.
In order to understand Ukrainian grammar, it is necessary to understand the various phonological rules that occur due to the collision of two or more sounds. Doing so, decreases markedly the number of exceptions and makes understanding the rules better. The origin of some of these phonological rules can be traced all the way back to Indo-European gradation (ablaut). This is especially common in explaining the differences between the infinitive and present stem of many verbs.
This article will present the grammar of the literary language, which is in the main followed by most dialects. The main differences in the dialects are vocabulary with occasional differences in phonology and morphology. Further information can be found in the article Ukrainian dialects.

Phonology

The following points of Ukrainian phonology need to be considered in order to properly understand the grammar of Ukrainian.

Classification of vowels

Two different classification of vowels can be made: a historical perspective and a modern perspective. From a historical perspective, the Ukrainian vowels can be divided into two categories:
From a modern perspective, the Ukrainian vowels can be divided into two categories:

Classification of consonants

In Ukrainian, consonants can be categorised as follows:

Historical changes

In the Ukrainian language, the following sound changes have occurred between the Common Slavic period and current Ukrainian:

Current changes

|publisher = University of Alberta Press|location= Edmonton, Alberta, Canada |year = 1972|}}[/ref] Given a consonantal grouping C1(ь)C2(ь), where C is any Ukrainian consonant. The fill vowel is inserted between the two consonants and after the ь. A fill vowel is only inserted if C2 is one of the following consonants: k, v, l, m, r, n, and c. In this case:

Assimilation

The following assimilations occur:

Dissimilation

The most common dissimilation is encountered in the infinitive of verbs, where {д, т} + т dissimilates to ст, for example, крад + ти gives красти and плет + ти gives плести.

Morphology

Nominal

=Nouns=

The nominal declension has seven cases (nominative, genitive, dative, accusative, instrumental, locative, and vocative), in two numbers (singular and plural), and absolutely obeying grammatical gender (masculine, feminine and neuter). Adjectives, pronouns, and the first two cardinal numbers have gender specific forms.
A third number, the dual, also existed in Old East Slavic, but except for its use in the nominative and accusative cases with the numbers two, three and four, e.g. dvi hryvni/дві гривні vs. dvoje hryven' /двоє гривень (recategorised today as a nominative plural), it has been lost. Other traces of the dual can be found when referring to objects of which there are commonly two: eyes, shoulders, ears, e.g. plečyma. Occasionally, dual forms can distinguish between meanings.
In Ukrainian, there are 4 declension types. The first declension is used for most feminine nouns. The second declension is used for most masculine and neuter nouns. The third declension is used for feminine nouns ending in ь or a post-alveolar sibilant. The fourth declension is used for neuter nouns ending in я/а (Common Slavic *ę).
Most of the types consist of 3 different subgroups: hard, mixed, and soft. The soft subgroup consists of nouns whose roots end in a soft letter (followed by iotified vowel or soft vowel). The mixed subgroup consists of the nouns whose roots end in a post-alveolar sibilant or occasionally r. The hard group consists of all other nouns.
If the hard group endings are taken as the basis, then the following rules can be used to derived the corresponding mixed and soft endings:
Nouns ending in a consonant are marked in the following tables with -0- (thus no ending).

==First declension==

This declension consists of nouns that end in а or я. It consists primarily of feminine nouns, but a few nouns with these ending referring to professions can be either masculine or feminine. In these cases, the genitive plural is often formed by adding -ів. Nouns referring to people can also take this ending.

==Second declension==

The second declension consists of masculine and neuter nouns.
Masculine nouns: This group consists primarily of nouns, which end in a consonant, a soft sign, ь, or й. In the masculine declension, nouns that end in р can belong to any of the three declension subgroups: hard, mixed, and soft. There is no way of knowing from the nominative form, to which group the noun belongs.
Notes:
|edition = 4th|publisher = Наукова думка (Naukova Dumka)|location= Kiev, Ukraine|year = 1993|}}[/ref]
Neuter nouns
In this category belong neuter nouns ending in о, е, and those substantives ending in я, preceded by either a double consonant, apostrophe, or two consonants, which primarily are derived from verbs. This last category once did end in *ĭjе, but due to the sound change given above developed an я ending.

==Third declension==

This declension consists solely of feminine nouns that end in a consonant. This declension has only 2 subgroups: a mixed and soft group.

==Fourth declension==

This declension consists of solely neuter nouns that are derived from Common Slavic *ę. There are two subgroups: those with an н insert, and those with a т insert.

=Adjectives=

Ukrainian adjectives agree with the nouns they modify in gender, number, and case.
In Ukrainian, there exist a small number of adjectives, primarily possessives, which exist in the masculine in the so-called short form. This "short" form is a relic of the indefinite declension of adjectives in Common Slavic. Common examples of this anomalous declension are бабин (masculine) compared to бабина (feminine); братів (masculine) compared to братова (feminine); and повинен (masculine) compared to повинна. This short form only exists in the masculine nominative form. All other forms are regular.

==Declension==

In Ukrainian, there are 2 different declension types: hard and soft. The soft type can be further subdivided into two types. Unlike for the nouns, the post-alveolar sibilants are counted as hard. There also exists a special mixed declension for adjectives ending in -лиций. These adjectives are derived from the noun лице, describing types of faces, for example, білолиций.
Note about the declensions:

==Other forms of the adjective==

In Ukrainian adjectives also have a comparative and superlative forms.
The comparative form is created by dropping ий and adding the ending -(і)ший. The resulting form is declined like a regular hard stem adjective. As usual, some adjectives have irregular forms.
The superlative form is created by prefixing най- to the comparative form. Words associated with religion often prefix пре- (very) to the comparative form. As usual, some adjectives have irregular forms.

=Adverbs=

In Ukrainian, adverbs are formed by taking the stem of the adjective and adding the ending
For example, гарний gives гарно.
Adverbs can also be derived from the locative or instrumental singular of a noun, for example, ввечері (from в plus the locative of вечера), нагорі (from на plus the locative of гора).

=Pronouns=

==Personal pronouns==

The personal pronouns are declined as follows.

==Demonstrative pronouns==

The demonstrative pronoun, той, is declined as follows.

==Possessive pronouns==

The first (мій) and second person (твій) singular possessive pronouns are declined similarly as can be seen from the table below.
The first (наш) and second (ваш) person plural possessive pronouns are declined as below. The masculine nominative forms are the short forms.
The third person plural possessive pronoun, їхній, is declined as a normal soft adjective.

==Interrogative pronouns==

The interrogative pronouns, хто and що, are declined as follows.
The interrogative pronoun, чий, is declined as given in the table below.

=Numbers=

Comments:
In general, the following rules are used to determine agreement between the cardinal number and a noun. In the nominative case, the nouns agree with the last number in any compound number. Nouns that must agree with a number ending in 2, 3, or 4 are in the nominative plural, but retain the stress of the dual, that is the genitive singular. Nouns, which must agree with a number ending in 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0, and all the teens are in the genitive plural. In any other case, the nouns and numbers are in the same case.

Verbs

Grammatical conjugation is subject to three persons in two numbers and three simple tenses (present/future, future, and past), with periphrastic forms for the future and Conditional, as well as imperative forms and present/past participles, distinguished by adjectival and adverbial usage.  There are two voices, active and middle/passive, which is constructed by the addition of a reflexive suffix -ся/сь to the active form.  An interesting feature is that the past tense is actually made to agree in gender with the subject, for it is the participle in an originally periphrastic perfect formed with the present of быть (moderen: бути) ,"to be." Verbal inflection today is considerably simpler than in Common Slavic. The ancient aorist, imperfect, and (periphrastic) pluperfect have been lost. The loss of three of the former six tenses has been offset by the reliance, as in other Slavic languages, on verbal aspect.  Most verbs come in pairs, one with imperfective or continuous connotation, the other with perfective or completed, usually formed with a (prepositional) prefix, but occasionally using a different root.
The present tense of the verb бути, "to be", today normally has the form, є used for all persons and numbers. Previously (before 1500) and occasionally in liturgical settings, aspects of the full conjugation, can be found. The paradigm shows as well as anything else the Indo-European affinity of Ukrainian:
Note: Ukrainian forms followed by * are considered archaic in Standard Ukrainian (albeit those are still used in dialects) and are replaced by є. In the present tense, the verb бути is often omitted (or replaced by a dash "—" in writing), for example, Я — студент.

=Classification of verbs=

There exist two different classification of verbs: traditional and historical/linguistic.
The traditional classification of verbs subdivides the verbs into two categories based on the form of the 3rd person singular present indicative form of the verb.
The historical/linguistic classification of verbs subdivides the verbs into 5 categories. Classes 1,2 and 3 correspond to the е stems of the traditional classification, while class 4 corresponds to the и stems. Class 5 consists of the athematic verbs.[ref]
[/ref]

=Voices=

Ukrainian had 2 voices: (1) active voice and (2) passive voice. The active voice is the only voice with a complete set of conjugations. The active voice, in general, shows a direct effect of the verb on its subject.

=Indicative active mood=

The indicative mood is used to describe events, which have occurred, are occurring, or will occur. In Ukrainian, the indicative mood contains the present, future, and past tenses.

==Present tense==

Historically, this is derived from the Indo-European present tense. In Common Slavic and later Ukrainian, it retained its present meaning only for imperfective verbs and developed a future meaning for perfective verbs.
For the е stems (Classes 1, 2, and 3), the endings are:
All verbs whose roots end in a velar undergo the first palatalisation in all forms of the present (even though historically speaking the first person singular should not). The endings in є are used for roots whose stem ends in a vowel. All verbs in Class 3 and those that end in a vowel use -ю and -ють. Furthermore, Class 3 verbs undergo iotification in those forms that use -ю-. For reflexive verbs, in the third person singular, the ending has its historical -ть restored before the participle -ся / -сь is affixed. Thus, the ending becomes -еться.
For the и stems (Class 4), the endings are:
All Class 4 verbs undergo iotification in the first person singular. Thus, there is really only one ending, which due to orthographic reasons is given 2 different forms. Verbs ending in a vowel take the endings in the second column. In the third person plural, verbs ending in a labial insert an л before the ending, -ять. The ending -ать is used after the sibilants ж, ш, щ, or ч.

===Examples===

===Athematic verbs===

Ukrainian inherited from Indo-European through Common Slavic, the following 3 athematic verbs. These verbs have their own conjugation in the present. Everywhere else they are regular.

==Past active tense==

The past tense in Ukrainian has the peculiarity of being originally an adjective, since it derives from the original compound perfect. Thus, the past tense agrees in number and gender with the subject of the verb. The following endings are added to the infinitive with the ending -ти removed (Most root final д and т are dropped):
These forms are often called the active past participle I.

==Future active tense==

In Ukrainian, there are 2 different future tenses for imperfective verbs. The first form, called simple (проста форма), formed by adding to the infinitive of the verb the following endings, which are derived from the Common Slavic verb *jęti (Present stem: jĭm−):
The second form, called compound (складена форма), is to take the present tense conjugation of the verb бути and use it with the infinitive of the verb. Thus,
This will translate as will eat with the appropriate personal pronoun.

=Imperative active mood=

The imperative mood is used to give commands. It exists in only the present tense in Ukrainian. There are no forms for the 1st person singular. 
In Ukrainian, the imperative mood is formed from the stem of the verb plus the following endings (The example is based on Ukrainian пити):
The first set of endings is to be used for stems that end in a dentals (з, д, т, с, н, and л). The second set of ending is used for stems that end in a vowel. The third set of endings is used for stems that end in labials or post-alveolar sibilants (б, в, м, п, ф, ш, щ, ч, ж, and р). The fourth set of endings is used with verbs whose unaffixed form (no prefixes or suffixes) have the stress on the ending in the first person singular of the present tense. Thus for example, бери and вибери.
Finally note that all verbs with stems that end in к and г undergo the first palatalisation. Class 3 verbs with stems in к, г, and с undergo iotification (as do their present conjugation).

=Conditional active mood=

The conditional mood is used to state hypothetical states, wishes, and desires. It has 2 tenses in Ukrainian: a present and a past.

==Present tense==

The present conditional is formed in Ukrainian from the participle би or the short form б, which is derived from the archaic aorist conjugation of the verb, бути, and the active past participle I, which is the same as the past indicative participle. Thus, there is agreement between the subject and the participle. An example of this construction would be я би хотів  ... (I would like...).

==Past tense==

The past conditional is formed in Ukrainian from the participle би or the short form б followed by the active past participle I form of the verb бути (був, була, було, були) and then the active past participle I of the verb. Both participles must agree with the subject. An example of this construction would be як я би був знав... (had I  (had) known...). Alternatively, the past conditional can be formed by using the form якби and the active past participle I form of the verb, for example, якби я знав….

=Passive voice=

The passive voice has 2 different functions. It shows either that the subject has had something done to itself or that something indeterminate has occurred to the subject.
In Ukrainian, the passive voice is formed as follows:

=Participles and verbal nouns=

In Ukrainian, there exist traces of all five Common Slavic participles.

==Present active participle==

This participle is formed by taking the third person plural form, dropping the ть, and adding чи(й). Most commonly this participle is used as gerund with the form чи with a meaning approaching the equivalent English construction with -ing. Occasionally, it is used as an adjective. In this case its form is чий. Examples of this participle are несучи, знаючи, and хвалячи.

==Present passive participle==

This participle does not exist in Ukrainian as a separate form. However, it is commonly encountered as an adjective in -мий. Common examples of this participle are відомий and знайомий.

==Past active participle I==

This participle is encountered in forming the past tense in Ukrainian. Occasionally, it is found as an adjective for intransitive verbs. It is formed by taking the infinitive stem and adding the ending -в, -ла, -ло, and -ли to form the past tense participle (in reality the indefinite form of the adjective) and the ending -лий to form the regular adjective. An example of the adjectival form is почорнілий.

==Past active participle II==

This participle is most commonly encountered as a gerund, while it is only used occasionally as an adjective. It is formed by taking the masculine past participle I and adding the ending -ши(й). An example of the gerund is знавши, while a common (dialectical) adjective would be the word бувший.

==Past passive participle==

This participle is the only participle that is commonly used as an adjective. It has 2 different methods of formation. Take the infinitive stem, add а/е, and then either add -тий or -ний. Class 4 verbs undergo iotification. There does not seem to be any difference between the 2 methods of forming the participles. This participle can roughly be translated using the English past participle. Examples of this participle are жатий, посланий, печений, and лишений.

==Verbal noun==

The verbal noun is created by taking the past passive participle, dropping ий, doubling the consonant if permitted by the rules under -ĭjV, and adding a я. This will be a neuter noun declined like all neuter nouns in *ĭjе. It should be noted that if the -е- of the past passive participle is stressed then the е will mutate into an і. Examples include питання from питати and носіння from носити.
The verbal noun in Ukrainian is derived from the Common Slavic verbal noun, where it was formed by adding *-ĭjе to the past passive participle without the *ŭ ending. Thus, in Ukrainian, the consonant is doubled if possible.

Word formation

Ukrainian has a rich set of prefixes, both prepositional and adverbial in nature, as well as diminutive, augmentative, and frequentative suffixes. All of these can be stacked one upon the other, to produce multiple derivatives of a given word.  Participles and other inflexional forms may also have a special connotation. For example, the word напіввідкритий can be split into the following prefixes and suffixes:
на + пів + від + кри (root) + тий. 

=Prefixes=

In Ukrainian, prefixes can be added to a root and stacked on top of each as in the above example. The most common prefixes are given in the table below. Although the prefixes have the given meaning, when attached to a root, it is possible that the resulting new word will have a unique meaning that is distantly related to the original meaning of the prefix. If possible the example is given using the verbal root ходити or the nominal root хід.
(1) The multitude of forms in Ukrainian for the Common Slavic *sŭ(n) (*съ(н)) is a result of the fact that the initial s could assimilate (or dissimilate) with the root's initial consonants. As well, since a ь followed there was the potential for further sound changes. Finally, words entered Ukrainian from different Slavic languages with their own peculiarities or that the original origin of the word was lost. The following are examples of all the given possibilities:
In Ukrainian, the normal form is з except before к, п, т, ф and х where the normal form is с.
The following rules are followed when adding a prefix to the root:

=Suffixes=

In Ukrainian, suffixes can be added to a root and stacked on top of each to produce a family of words. The most common suffixes are given in the table below. The curly brackets {} denote the various possible different suffixes with a similar meaning

=Adjectives=

Two or more adjectives can be combined into a single word using an о as the linking vowel, for example, сільськогосподарський, which consists of the adjectives сільський and господарський. If the second adjective starts with a vowel, then a dash can be used to separate the linking vowel and the second adjective, for example, середньо-європеський.

=Verbs=

In addition to the suffixes and prefixes that can be added to verbs, Ukrainian verbs have inherited occasional traces of the Indo-European ablaut. The primary ablaut is the difference between long and short Indo-European vowels. In Ukrainian, due to the fact that the long and short vowels experienced different reflexes, this ablaut is reflected as a change in vowels. The resulting verbs are often imperfect-perfect pairs. For example, we have скочити and скакати (simpified Indo-European *skoki- and *skōka-).

Fundamental sentence structure

=Coordination=

The common Ukrainian coordinations are:

=Subordination=

Common Ukrainian subordinations are:

Syntax

The basic word order, both in conversation and the written language, is subject–verb–object.  However, because the relations are marked by inflexion, considerable latitude in word order is allowed, and all the permutations can be used.  The word order expresses the logical stress, and the degree of definiteness.

Negation

Unlike English, Latin, and various other languages, Ukrainian allows multiple negatives, as in "nixto nikoly nikomu ničoho ne proščaje" ('no-one ever forgives anyone anything', literally 'no-one never to no-one nothing does not forgive').
Objects of a negated verb are placed in the genitive case, where they would be accusative if the verb were not negated.

Inflectional usage

=Case=

The use of cases in Ukrainian can be very complicated. In general, the nominative, genitive, accusative, and vocative cases can be used without a preposition. On the other hand, the locative and instrumental cases are used primarily with a preposition. Furthermore, and much like in Latin, different prepositions can be followed by nouns in different cases, resulting in different meanings.

=Aspect=

Ukrainian verbs can have one of two aspects: imperfective and perfective. The imperfective form denotes an action that is taking place in the present, is ongoing, is repetitive, or is habitual. The perfective form indicates an action that is completed, is the result of an action, is the beginning of an action, or is shorter or longer than usual. For example, spaty (спати) is imperfective, while pospaty (поспати) is perfective.



Translation of words

Note: All Common Slavic words quoted are translated faithfully by their Ukrainian forms.
Abbreviations used: 






