[[Moreton Say]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Shropshire

Moreton Say is a small village and sparsely populated civil parish in Shropshire, England, near the borders with Cheshire and Staffordshire, just Northwest of the town of Market Drayton. It is sometimes spelled Moreton Saye or Moreton Sea.
The civil parish, which also covers the hamlets of Longford and Longslow, had a total population of 429 at the 2001 census. There are no shops or services within the village. As a result the only employment opportunities are at the local primary school and surrounding farms.
Robert Clive, 1st Baron Clive, "Clive of India", who is credited with securing India and the wealth that followed for the British crown was born in the parish and is buried in the church.
Every year the village holds a flower and produce show during summer where villagers and people from the local community can compete in many classes from best vegetable & fruit, flowers, crafts, cookery as well as other classes.

Parish Church

St Margaret's Church, dedicated to St Margaret of Antioch, dates back to the 12th century, when it was founded as a chapel of Hodnet,
It is a brick structure which was completed in 1788.
It comprises a chancel and nave, with a porch to the south and a square steeple tower to the west which contains two bells,
The interior of the church contains several monuments of the Vernon, Clive and Corser families,
Moreton Say parish, which covers an area of nearly 6000 acres, includes the towns of Longford, Bletchley, Styche with Woodlands, and Tern Hill. The parish is in the diocese of Lichfield which also includes the parishes of Ash, Adderley, Ightfield and Calverhall.

Education

Moreton Say Primary School is a coeducational Church of England controlled primary school with 90 pupils on roll, separated into four classes of mixed ages of two-year groups in each, and is maintained by Shropshire Council.
The nearest secondary school to the village is The Grove in Market Drayton which is  away.

Demographics

Population

At the time of the first census in 1801 the population of the village was 683, the population reached its peak of 858 in the year of 1901, With the lack of employment in the village itself many people moved to towns and cities, such as Market Drayton.

Industry

Generally in the village a majority of the population has been employed in agriculture, at present this is still a sector where a lot of people work in as well as the service sector, although with no shops or businesses in the village around half the working population commutes outside of the village to their place of work.

Transport

By road, the village itself on an unnamed, the nearest main road is the A41 which is less than 1 mile from the centre of the village, and the next closest is the A53, which is the road which connects the village to, Market Drayton, the nearest town 3 miles away.
There is at present no public transport regularly to or from the village.

Climate






