[[Edmund Montgomery]]

CATEGORIES: 1835 births, 1911 deaths, 19th-century philosophers, People from Edinburgh, People from Waller County, Texas, People from Frankfurt, Scottish philosophers, American people of Scottish descent, Scottish emigrants to the United States

Edmund Duncan Montgomery (March 19, 1835 – April 17, 1911) was a Scottish philosopher, scientist and physician.

Early life

Edmund Duncan Montgomery was born March, 1835, in Edinburgh, Scotland.  His parentage is unknown, but the Elisabet Ney Museum relates the possibility that he was the son of Isabella Davidson (or Montgomery) and a prominent Scottish jurist, Duncan McNeill, 1st Baron Colonsay.  He and his mother lived in Paris and Frankfurt, supplemented by a trust fund for him.
By the time he entered his teens, he began to be interested in the philosophical works of Arthur Schopenhauer.  While still living in Frankfurt and only 13 years old, he participated in the Revolutions of 1848 in the German states.

Education

In 1852, Montgomery majored in medicine at the University of Heidelberg, where he did lab work under Robert Bunsen and came under the influence of Christian Kapp, Ludwig Andreas Feuerbach and Jacob Moleschott.  He later attended lectures by Johannes Peter Müller at the University of Berlin during his 1855–1856 enrollment.  While studying in  Bonn  1856–1857, he attended influential lectures of Hermann von Helmholtz.

Medical practice

Montgomery received his MD degree from the University of Würzburg on February 18, 1858.
He interned at Prague and Vienna.  He served his residency at the London German Hospital and Bermondsay Dispensary.  While doing biological research, he became Curator of the St Thomas' Hospital and Demonstrator of Morbid Anatomy.  He was elected to the Royal College of Physicians of London in 1862.
After being diagnosed with tuberculosis in 1863, he left the Royal College of Physicians of London and established medical practices on the resort island of Madeira (1863–1865), in Menton (1866) on the French Riviera, and also in Rome (1867) and Munich (1868), while continuing to do his research.  A life annuity allowed him to retire from medical practice in 1869, and devote the rest of his life to philosophy, scientific research, and writing.

Medicine

Montgomery's work in medicine included the study of cell theory.

Philosophy

Mongomery's study of philosophy complemented his work as a physical scientist. He saw life as the ability of certain chemical compounds to resist damage. He commented on conceptions of knowledge and self in over sixty journal articles and five books. He was an advocate of humanitarianism and a "religion of life," focusing on the idea that man must not ignore the potential of his own yet-to-be-completed evolutionary process.
The two most significant papers written by him were his Refutation of Kant From the Standpoint of the Empirical (1870) and The Revelation of Present Experience (1910).
In the former, he convincingly refutes Immanuel Kant's a priori, the lynchpin of Kant's system, and in the latter, he insists that all knowledge (no exceptions) is based on the evidence provided by the senses.

Personal life

While a student at the University of Heidelberg in 1853, Montgomery began a courtship with sculptor Elisabet Ney, who was visiting friends in the city.  They were married at the British consulate in Madeira on November 7, 1863.
He was diagnosed with tuberculosis in 1863.  By 1870, the Franco-Prussian War had begun.  In the autumn of that year, Ney became pregnant with their first child.  Montgomery received a letter from his friend Baron Carl Vicco Otto Friedrich Constantin von Stralendorff of Mecklenburg-Schwerin who had moved to Thomasville, Georgia with his new wife Margaret Elizabeth Russell of Boston, Massachusetts, declaring the location "Earth's paradise."
In 1873, Ney traveled alone to Texas.  With the help of German Consul Julius Runge in Galveston, Ney was shown Liendo Plantation near Hempstead in Waller County, Texas.  On March 4, 1873, Montgomery and the rest of the family arrived, and he purchased it. While he tended to his research, Ney ran it for the next twenty years. Oldest son Arthur died of diphtheria in 1873.
He was involved in an advisory capacity in the founding of Prairie View A&M, originally called Prairie View Normal School.
He became a naturalized United States citizen, and thereafter became active in local politics and events. He served two terms as Waller County Road Commissioner and oversaw the building of an iron bridge across the Brazos River.  In 1903, he was elected president of the Texas Academy of Science.

Death

Montgomery died on April 17, 1911 after suffering a number of strokes and is buried next to Ney at Liendo.

Published works and/or papers housed at Southern Methodist University



Additional sources




