[[Essentially contested concept]]

CATEGORIES: Concepts in aesthetics, Philosophical concepts, Philosophy of religion, Rhetoric, Social concepts

In a paper delivered to the Aristotelian Society on 12 March 1956,Published immediately as Gallie (1956a); a later, slightly altered version appears in Gallie (1964). Walter Bryce Gallie (1912–1998) introduced the term essentially contested concept to facilitate an understanding of the different applications or interpretations of the sorts of abstract, qualitative, and evaluative notionsThey are "evaluative" in the sense that they deliver some sort of "value-judgement". — such as "art" and "social justice" — used in the domains of aesthetics, political philosophy, philosophy of history, and philosophy of religion.
Garver (1978) describes their use as follows:
Essentially contested concepts involve widespread agreement on a concept (e.g., "fairness"), but not on the best realization thereof.156) speaks of "a uniform or constant feature", and "a shifting or varying criterion used in determining when, for any given purposes, cases are alike or different". 
They are "concepts the proper use of which inevitably involves endless disputes about their proper uses on the part of their users",Gallie (1956a), p.169. The dispute is about the proper use of the concept; and all argue that the concept is being "used inappropriately" by others (Smith, 2002, p.332). and these disputes "cannot be settled by appeal to empirical evidence, linguistic usage, or the canons of logic alone".344.

Identifying the presence of a dispute

Although Gallie's term is widely used to denote imprecise use of technical terminology, it has a far more specific application. And, although the notion could be misleadingly and evasively used to justify "agreeing to disagree",A statement that, in essence, is usually nothing more than a simple observation that the apparent dispute it is simply a consequence of the same label being applied to different referents. the term offers something more valuable:
The disputes that attend an essentially contested concept are driven by substantive disagreements over a range of different, entirely reasonable (although, perhaps, mistaken) interpretations of a mutually-agreed-upon archetypical notion, such as the legal precept "treat like cases alike; and treat different cases differently", with "each party continuing to defend its case with what it claims to be convincing arguments, evidence and other forms of justification"Gallie (1956a) p. 168.).
Gallie speaks of how "This picture is painted in oils" can be successfully contested if the work is actually painted in tempera;Gallie (1956a), p. 167. while "This picture is a work of art" may meet strong opposition due to disputes over what "work of art" denotes. He suggests three avenues whereby one might resolve such disputes:
Otherwise, the dispute probably centres on polysemy.
Here, a number of critical questions must be asked:

Contested versus contestable?

Clarke has made a valuable contribution to the overall debate by suggesting that, in order to determine whether a particular dispute was a consequence of true polysemy or inadvertent homonymy, one should seek to "locate the source of the dispute".
This source might be "within the concept itself", or "within some underlying non-conceptual disagreement between the contestants". 123.
Clarke then drew attention to the substantial differences between the expressions "essentially contested" and "essentially contestable", that were being extensively used within the literature as though they were interchangeable.
Clarke argued that to state that a concept is merely contested, "is to attribute significance to the contest rather than to the concept".  Yet, to state that a concept is contestable is to "attribute some part of any contest to the concept". In other words, this is "to claim that some feature or property of the concept makes it polysemantic, and that the concept contains some internal conflict of ideas"; and it is this fact that provides the "essentially contested concept" with its inherent potential for "generating disputes". 124.

Features

In 1956, Gallie proposed a set of seven conditions for the existence of an essentially contested concept. Gallie was very specific about the limits of his enterprise: it dealt exclusively with abstract, qualitative notions, such as art, religion, science, democracy, and social justiceGallie (1956a), passim. Kekes (1977, p.71) offers art, morality, logic, the novel, nature, rationality, democracy, culture, science, and philosophy as another set of examples of "concepts" that are essentially contested. (and, if Gallie's choices are contrasted with negatively regarded concepts such as evil, disease, superstition, etc., it is clear that the concepts he chose were exclusively positively regarded).
Freeden remarks that "not all essentially contested concepts signify valued achievements; they may equally signify disapproved and denigrated phenomena",Freeden (1998), p.56. and GerringGerring (1999), p.385. asks us to imagine just how difficult it would be to "try to craft definitions of slavery, fascism, terrorism, or genocide without recourse to "pejorative" attributes".
These features distinguish Gallie's "essentially contested concepts" from others, "which can be shown, as a result of analysis or experiment, to be radically confused";Gallie (1956a), p.180. or, as GrayGray (1977), p.337. would have it, they are the features that relate to the task of distinguishing the "general words, which really denote an essentially contested concept" from those other "general words, whose uses conceal a diversity of distinguishable concepts":They are unpackings of, elaborations upon, or extensions of Gallie's original seven features that have been made by a very wide range of scholars spread over a wide range of academic and intellectual pursuits over the last 60 years.

Concepts and conceptions

Scholars such as Hart, Rawls, Dworkin, and Lukes have variously embellished Gallie's proposal by arguing that certain of the difficulties encountered with Gallie's proposition may be due a consequence of the unintended conflation of two separate domains associated with the term concept:
In essence, Hart (1961), Rawls (1971), Dworkin (1972), and Lukes (1974) distinguished between the "unity" of a notion and the "multiplicity" of its possible instantiations.
From their work it is easy to understand the issue as one of determining whether there is a single notion that has a number of different instantiations, or whether there is more than one notion, each of which is reflected in a different usage.
In a section of his 1972 article in The New York Review of Books, Dworkin used the example of "fairness" to isolate and elaborate the difference between a concept (suum cuique) and its conception (various instantiations, for example utilitarian ethics).27-28 (an almost identical passage appears at Dworkin, 1972, pp.134-135). The four-paragraph passage is in Section II of the article  It commences with "But the theory of… " and ends with "…I try to answer it ".
He supposes that he has instructed his children not to treat others "unfairly" and asks us to recognize that, whilst he would have undoubtedly had particular "examples" (of the sorts of conduct he was intending to discourage) in mind at the time he spoke to his children, whatever it was that he meant when he issued such instructions was not confined to those "examples" alone, for two reasons:
Dworkin argues that this admission of error would not entail any "change" to his original instructions, because the true meaning of his instructions was that "he meant the family to be guided by the 'concept of fairness, not by any specific conception' of fairness he might have had in mind". Therefore, he argues, his instructions do, in fact, "cover" this new case.
Exploring what he considers to be the "crucial distinction" between the overall concept of "fairness" and some particular, and specific conception of "fairness", he asks us to imagine a group whose members share the view that certain acts are unfair.
The members of this group "agree on a great number of standard cases of unfairness and use these as benchmarks against which to test other, more controversial cases".
In these circumstances, says Dworkin, "the group has a 'concept' of unfairness, and its members may appeal to that concept in moral instruction or argument."Emphasis added to original.
However, the members may still disagree over many of these "controversial cases"; and differences of this sort indicate that members have, or act upon, entirely different theories of why and how each of the "standard cases" are, in fact, genuine acts of "unfairness".
And, because each considers that certain principles "which must be relied upon to show that a particular division or attribution is unfair" are far a more "fundamental" sort of principle than certain other principles, it can be said that members of the group have different conceptions of "fairness".
Consequently, those responsible for giving "instructions", and those responsible for setting "standards" of "fairness", in this community may be doing one of two things:
It is important to recognize that rather than it just being a case of delivering two different instructions; it is a case of delivering two different kinds of instruction:
As a consequence, according to Dworkin, whenever an appeal is made to "fairness", a moral issue is raised; and, whenever a conception of "fairness" is laid down, an attempt is being made to answer that moral issue.

Not "hotly disputed" concepts

Whilst Gallie's expression "essentially contested concepts" precisely denotes those "essentially questionable and corrigible concepts," which "...230. close examination of the wide and varied and imprecise applications of Gallie's term subsequent to 1956, by those who have ascribed their own literal meaning to Gallie's term without ever consulting Gallie's work, have led many philosophers to conclude that "essentially disputed concepts" would have been far better choice for Gallie's meaning, for at least three reasons:
Waldron's research has revealed that Gallie's notion has "run wild" in the law review literature over the ensuing 60 years and is now being used to denote something like "very hotly contested, with no resolution in sight",[ref]Waldron (2002, p.149) found that the following concepts had been labelled as essentially contested in the Westlaw database:
Yet is also clear that "if the notion of logical justification can be applied only to such theses and arguments as can be presumed capable of gaining in the long run universal agreement, the disputes to which the uses of any essentially contested concept give rise are not genuine or rational disputes at all" (Gallie, 1956a, p.188).
Thus, Gallie argued:



Notes




