[[Ara Darzi, Baron Darzi of Denham]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, Living people, Academics of Imperial College London, 21st-century British medical doctors, British Armenians, Iraqi emigrants to the United Kingdom, Armenian academics, Iraqi Armenians, Knights Commander of the Order of the British Empire, Labour Party (UK) life peers, Fellows of the Royal Academy of Engineering, Fellows of the Royal College of Surgeons, Fellows of the Royal Society, Fellows of the Academy of Medical Sciences, Alumni of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, National Health Service people

{{Infobox scientist
|name              = The Right Honourable The Lord Darzi of Denham
KBE PC
|image             = 250px|Lord Darzi
|caption           = 
|birth_date        = [ref]
[/ref]
| birth_name = Ara Warkes Darzi
|birth_place       = Iraq
| alma_mater = Trinity College, Dublin
|specialism        = Keyhole and cancer surgery
|field    = {{Plainlist|
|known_for         = {{Plainlist|
|years_active      = 
|work_institutions = {{Plainlist|
|prizes            = 

Ara Warkes Darzi, Baron Darzi of Denham, KBE PC, (born 7 May 1960), is one of the world's leading surgeons at Imperial College London, where he holds the Paul Hamlyn Chair of Surgery, specialising in the field of minimally invasive and robot-assisted surgery, having pioneered many new techniques and technologies.

Personal details

Darzi was born in Iraq to Armenian parents displaced by the 1915 genocide. He moved to Ireland at the age of 17 to study medicine.bbc.co. He has become strongly identified with reform of the National Health Service (NHS) in England and is recognized internationally as an advocate for applying innovative reforms to health systems globally.
He moved to the UK from Ireland in 1990 to further his career in surgery. In 1991 he was appointed as a consultant surgeon at Central Middlesex Hospital at the age of 31 and then moved to St. Mary's Hospital in 1994. In 2002 He was awarded a knighthood for his services to medicine and surgery  and subsequently elevated to the peerage in 2007. He was appointed to Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council in June 2009.
He is married to Wendy with whom he has two children, Freddie and Nina.

Medical career

Darzi joined Imperial College London in 1994, obtained his Professorship in 1996 and became the Chair of Surgery and Head of Department in 1998. Darzi holds the Paul Hamlyn Chair of Surgery at Imperial College London and the Institute of Cancer Research. He is also an honorary consultant surgeon at St Mary's Hospital, and the Royal Marsden Hospital.  He has held many senior administrative appointments within the Faculty of Medicine at Imperial College, Research Council, Editorial Board of Scientific Journals, and medical royal colleges.
Darzi was educated in Ireland, awarded an MD from Trinity College Dublin and the Fellowships of essentially all the Royal Colleges in the British Isles (Ireland FRCSI, England FRCS, and both Scottish Colleges FRCSed, FRCPSG). He also holds the Fellowship of the American College of Surgeons and has been elected as a Fellow of the Academy of Medical Sciences, an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering and more recently a Foreign Associate of the Institute of Medicine. From 2005 to 2008 he was president of Bath Institute of Medical Engineering (BIME). In December 2008 he received an Honorary degree (Doctor of Engineering) from the University of Bath. In 2010 he was made a Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, an Honorary Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland, and an Honorary Fellow of the National Institute of Clinical Excellence.
Darzi's main clinical and academic interest is in minimally invasive surgery and allied technologies in which he and his team are internationally recognized.  He leads a team of researchers covering a wide spectrum of engineering and basic sciences research topics including Medical Image Computing, Biomedical Engineering, Clinical Safety, surgical education and training at post-graduate and undergraduate levels and Robotics.  He has published more than 800 peer review papersAra Darzi in Google Scholar and authored, co-authored or edited several books.
This work has received international recognition including the Queens Anniversary Prize for Excellence in Higher and further education 2001,Royal Anniversary Trust Hamdan Award for Medical Research Excellence in 2004. He has also delivered many prestigious and named lectures around the globe.
On 2 May 2013 Lord Darzi was elected to the Fellowship of the Royal Society, one of the world's oldest self-governing Fellowships, established in 1660, with membership made up of the world's most distinguished scientists drawn from all areas of science, engineering, and medicine.org/people/ara-darzi/

Political career

In December 2006 NHS London asked Darzi to "develop a strategy to meet Londoners' health needs over the next five to ten years" and so his report Healthcare for London: A Framework for Action was published on 11 July 2007.healthcareforlondon.uk/a-framework-for-action-2/  Largely implemented, it recommended the development of academic health science centres and the introduction of more primary services in one place: polyclinics.
On 29 June 2007 Darzi was appointed Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State in the Department of Health in the House of Lords at the Department of Health by the Prime Minister, Gordon Brown. He was duly raised to the peerage on 12 July 2007 as Baron Darzi of Denham, of Gerrards Cross in the County of Buckinghamshire. His appointment was a small part of a political shift by government to incorporate more talents, see historical predecessors such as the Ministry of All the Talents.independent.co.html
Darzi was tasked with leading a national review to plan the course of the NHS over a decade, reporting back to the Prime Minister, Chancellor, and Secretary of State for Health in June 2008. He cooperated with the Department of Health to undertake the "NHS Next Stage Review".
Darzi was quoted in The Times as saying that "...  The final report of the Review, High Quality Care for All, was published in June 2008 to considerable public and academic acclaim. The Financial Times stated that it was "the world's most ambitious attempt to raise the quality and effectiveness of an entire nation's healthcare".com  The Lancet acknowledged that:

Through High Quality Care for All, academics have suggested that Darzi has updated traditional notions of professionalism and described a new accountability in clinical practice. Following publication, Darzi remained in his ministerial post. At that time a Department for Health spokesperson was quoted as saying that his revised role would "... Notably, frontline clinical staff will be given more control over budgets, and his proposals will mean that every provider of NHS services will be required to publish Quality Accounts from April 2010".
As a government minister, Darzi found himself responsible for leading the passage of health-related legislation through the Lords.
Darzi's leadership as a health minister was the culmination of many years of involvement in health policy. Immediately prior to joining the government, Darzi led a review of health services in London, identifying the opportunities to raise clinical quality across the capital. He was also National Advisor in Surgery to the Department of Health. Darzi's report in this role 'Saws and Scalpels to Lasers and Robots: Clinical case for change' (April 2007), argued for a change to the way surgery is organised to maximise patient benefits.Saws and scalpels to lasers and robots advances in surgery : Department of Health - Publications
In June 2009 Darzi was appointed as a member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council and in November 2010, under David Cameron, became a United Kingdom Global Ambassador for Health and Life Sciences; a role he continued until 2012.PM announces new Business Ambassadors Number 10
In July 2009, Darzi relinquished his post as Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State. The Prime Minister praised his "outstanding contribution".Lord Darzi resigns: full text of letters exchanged with Gordon Brown - Telegraph and The Guardian said that:
"Instead of waging war on the medics, as his Blairite predecessors had done, Darzi invited them to take a hand in designing their own targets and bound them into reform. He stressed the quality of care after Labour's decade-long obsession with quantity. And while the drive for private involvement continued, it took a less dogmatic turn. The NHS's morale improved, as did its public standing."In praise of ... Ara Darzi | Editorial | Comment is free | The Guardian
In September 2013, Lord Darzi was appointed by the Mayor of London Boris Johnson to lead a new clinically-led review of health and wellbeing and services in London. The London Health Commission, which is expected to report in late 2014, will conduct an evidence-based investigation into healthcare provision and resources for the capital.
In January 2014 Professor Darzi was awarded the Qatari sash of Independence by HH the Emir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani in recognition of his contribution to the development of Qatar's health sector.

Global Health and Innovation

After July 2009, Lord Darzi returned to his clinical and academic work and has expanded his involvement in global health issues. In June 2010 he was appointed Chairman of the Institute for Global Health Innovation at Imperial College, a body dedicated to improving healthcare around the world and reducing health inequalities in developed and developing countries. in 2012 the Institute of Global Health Innovation (IGHI) hosted the inaugural Global Health Policy Summit in London, during the London 2012 Olympic Games. This event brought together global healthcare leaders, academics and industry to debate key topics on global health and included a keynote address by Prime Minister David Cameron.
In 2013, Lord Darzi hosted the World Innovation Summit for Health in Doha, Qatar, under the Patronage of Her Highness Sheikha Moza bint Nasser al Missned and Qatar Foundation. This international event attracted over one thousand delegates from industry, academic and the healthcare sector and world renowned political and royal figures including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi of Burma, His Royal Highness The Duke of York, Princess Lalla Salma of Morocco, HRH Princess Ghida Talal of Jordan and HRH Princess Dina Mired of Jordan.

Awards and honours

Darzi was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 2013. His nomination reads 






