[[Hey There Delilah]]

CATEGORIES: 2006 singles, Plain White T's songs, Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles, Billboard Pop 100 number-one singles, Billboard Adult Top 40 number-one singles, Canadian Hot 100 number-one singles, European Hot 100 Singles number-one singles, Number-one singles in Germany, Pop ballads, Rock ballads, Singles certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America, Hollywood Records singles, Indie pop songs, Emo songs, Acoustic rock songs

  
"Hey There Delilah" is a song in D major by American pop punk group Plain White T's. It was released in May 2006 as the third single from their third studio album All That We Needed. It received radio play over the following year and eventually reached No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 in July 2007. 

Background and writing

The song is from the Plain White Ts' third album, All That We Needed, the song was recorded and produced by Ariel Rechtshaid at Doug Messenger's harddrive analog and digital, in North Hollywood, CA. The intervening fourth album, Every Second Counts, has "Hey There Delilah" added as a bonus track with a string section written and performed by Eric Remschneider augmenting the original recording.
The song was written by frontman Tom Higgenson after meeting Delilah DiCrescenzo, a nationally ranked American steeplechase and cross country runner.

Release

Plain White T's released the song in May 2006 as the third single from their third studio album All That We Needed. In June 2007, over one year after the song's release, it became the band's first hit in the United States, eventually reaching No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 in July. From July 3, 2007 through July 28, the song was the number one most played song on the radio, and the number one downloaded song on the U.S. iTunes Music Store. 
It was the Plain White T's first number one single. It also reached number two in the UK.
Since its release, "Hey There Delilah" has been covered by many artists worldwide in one form or another. It has sold over 4,000,000 digital copies in the US alone.

Music video

The video was directed by Heliodora Ramirez.
It features the band's lead singer, Tom Higgensen, singing the song while the band members are in another room talking behind him. The other band members are not playing in the song. The only other instruments are the strings provided by Eric Remschneider who neither appears in the video, received compensation for the music recording and received no compensation for his music in the video.

Critical reaction

Time magazine named "Hey There Delilah" one of The 10 Best Songs of 2007, ranking it at No. 7.
The song was a double 2008 Grammy Award nominee, for Song of the Year (won by Amy Winehouse) and Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal (won by Maroon 5). The real Delilah attended the Grammy Award show that year as the guest of Tom Higgenson, the song's writer.
On VH1's Top 40 Videos of 2007, "Hey There Delilah" was No. 8, ahead of "If Everyone Cared" by Nickelback and behind "Say It Right" by Nelly Furtado. VH1 also had the song at No. 78 on its list of the 100 Greatest Songs of the '00s.
The band was featured on Sesame Street in 2008 with the song "I'm the Letter T" (to the tune of "Hey There Delilah"). Lead singer Tom Higgenson provided the vocals for the computer animated Letter T who sings the spoof. When asked if he was excited, Higgenson responded: 
"Yeah, hello! It's a dream. But it's just my voice. There's going to be some Muppet singing it on the screen." 

Charts

Year-end charts

Decade-end charts

Certifications

Release history








