[[Bedminster railway station]]

CATEGORIES: Railway stations in Bristol, Former Great Western Railway stations, Railway stations opened in 1871, Railway stations closed in 1885, Railway stations opened in 1885, Railway stations closed in 1932, Railway stations opened in 1932, Railway stations served by First Great Western, DfT Category F1 stations

Bedminster railway station is on the Bristol to Exeter Line and serves the districts of Bedminster and Windmill Hill in Bristol, England. It is .
There is local support for the line to be electrified, as an extension of the planned electrification of the London to Bristol route, and the level of service would be improved if proposals for the reinstatement of a passenger service on the nearby Portishead Branch Line, which was reopened for freight in 2001, are successful.

Description

The station is built on the lower northern slopes of Windmill Hill, on the Bristol to Exeter Line  further along the line.
The station has two island platforms, each  The line is not electrified.
Access between the platforms is via a subway with ramps at the west end of the platforms, although the station is not considered completely accessible as the ramps are steeper than 1 in 12. The subway exits onto Fraser Street, which is the sole entrance to the station.
Facilities at the station are minimal - there is a metal and glass shelter on each of the two islands, and a bench on the eastbound island. The station is completely unstaffed, and there are no facilities for buying tickets. There are customer help points, giving next train information for both platforms. There is no car park or taxi rank, and the nearest bus stop is  away on Malago Road. There is some cycle storage available.

Services

The station is managed by First Great Western, who also operate all rail services from the station. As of the December 2013 timetable, the basic service from Monday to Friday consists of one train in each direction per hour between 
Services are formed by a mix of 
The typical journey time to Bristol Temple Meads is 4 minutes, while to Weston-super-Mare takes 33 minutes.


History

The first section of the Bristol and Exeter Railway's main line opened on 14 June 1841 between Bristol and 
The station was rebuilt in 1932, opening on 30 April. The ornate buildings were demolished to enable the line to be four-tracked, and were replaced by more austere buildings on two island platforms between the tracks, including two waiting rooms, ticket and parcel offices. The new station was accessed, as now, by a subway from Fraser Street. The station employed 15 men in 1938. There was a 74 lever signal box to the east of the northern platform, and also a small siding to serve local coal merchants.
When the railways were nationalised in 1948, the GWR became the Western Region of British Railways. Goods traffic at Bedminster ceased from 1 June 1964, traffic to Portishead ended with the closure of that line in September the same year, and the station became unstaffed from September 1968. The signal box was taken out of service in April 1970, and by 1979 all the station buildings had been demolished.
British Rail was split into business-led sectors in the 1980s, at which time operations at Bedminster passed to Regional Railways. Local services were franchised to Wales and West when the railway was privatised in 1997,
In 2010, the Severnside Community Rail Partnership began a comprehensive scheme to improve the station. The work included removing foliage from the platforms, new lighting and artwork for the subway, community display panels and the installation of help points.

Future

First Great Western declined an option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise, of which services at Bedminster are a part, beyond 2013, citing a desire for a longer-term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line.
With the coming upgrade to the Great Western Main Line, the main line from London to Bristol is due to be electrified by 2016.
Bedminster is on the Weston-super-Mare/ However the date was pushed back to December 2018 due to planning requirements for the rest of the Bristol Metro. It is expected the scheme will cost up to £55 million.
Network Rail, the railway's infrastructure company, is calling for the Down Relief line between Bristol Temple Meads and Parson Street to be reinstated in order to ease congestion.

Incidents

There have been several railway incidents in the Bedminster area over the years. On 1 May 2001, a 
What used to be the westbound relief line at Bedminster was converted into a carriage siding, and is used to stable trains to avoid clogging the platforms at  British Transport Police statistics noted a 53% reduction in reported crime at Bristol area stations between 2007 and 2012.
On 6 January 2009, the Windmill Hill bridge, just to the west of Bedminster station, was hit by a vehicle, causing some delays to train services while it was assessed for damage.






