[[My Love Is Like...Wo]]

CATEGORIES: 2003 singles, Interscope Records singles, Music videos directed by Paul Hunter, Mýa songs, Songs written by Missy Elliott

"My Love Is Like... Mýa re-teamed up with rapper Missy Elliott after the global success of "Lady Marmalade" (2001) to record the song. Before being released, it took Mýa a whole year to decide to record the song because of its graphic lyrical content. The song was written by Elliott along with brothers Charles and Kenneth Bereal. Lyrically, the mid-tempo song is about self-love.
The song received generally mixed to positive reviews from contemporary music critics, applauding Mýa for her newfound sexual freedom. "My Love Is Like... It performed similarly on Billboards Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, where it peaked at number seventeen. Internationally, the single charted within the top forty in Australia, Ireland, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. 
The song's accompanying music video was filmed by director Paul Hunter, who envisioned Harrison to perform a one-woman show. The video earned her two nominations at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards for Best Dance Video and Best Choreography, while choreographer Travis Payne garnered a nomination at the American Choreography Awards for Outstanding Achievement – Music Video.

Background and composition

Recorded in 2001, "My Love Is Like... Additional production on the song was handled by Ron Fair. Before Harrison decided to release "My Love Is... Speaking to Billboard magazine, she explained, "Back then, I wasn't so confident in saying, 'My a** is like wo' ... I was coming out of doing a program with young girls that talked about self-esteem and body image. I realized that I really couldn't worry about what people think of me. I'm at that point in my life now where I can say, 'My ass is like wo.' I wasn't even considering the song to be on the album at that time, but I later fought for it to be the single."
"My Love Is Like... The song's tempo is set a slow moderate sixty-nine beats per minute in common time. Mýa's vocal range spans from G3 to D5. The lyrics for "My Love Is Like... Mýa opens the song with brief spoken lyrics. She begins the first verse, followed by the chorus leading her into the second verse. The song continues to the bridge, chorus, then fades out with the piano.

Critical reception

Billboard magazine gave the song a positive review:
 
 "The doe-eyed girl next door is proving to be quite a versatile performer, with a decidedly vampish performance in the movie Chicago and new imaging that redresses Mýa as a sexy and certain young woman. The first single from forthcoming Moodring ... is a playfully coy call to arms for the singer's more tactile attributes, from her love, her kiss, and her touch to her sex, ass, and body—all of which 'are like wo.' Get it? An appropriately hip-swaying beat swirls around the vocal, courtesy of ever-hitworthy producer Missy Elliott. This is the record that will propel Mýa to the A-list among today's pop/R&B icons; throughout the song, she delivers womanly strength and sass with a knowing wink. Moodring sounds like a perfect fit."

Commercial performance

In the United States, "My Love Is Like... peaking at number seventeen on August 23, 2003. It spent a total of nineteen consecutive weeks on the chart and became Mýa's sixth non-consecutive top forty solo hit on that chart.
Elsewhere, "My Love Is Like... The single debuted and peaked at number thirty-three on the UK Singles Chart for the week of September 14, 2003, dropping to number fifty-three the following week before falling off the top seventy-five. It debuted on the Irish Singles Chart at number thirty-six on September 11, 2003, and it remained on the chart for one week. In Australia, "My Love Is Like... The song debuted at number forty-nine in New Zealand for the week of September 21, 2003, peaking at number thirty-three six weeks later.

Music video

The song's music video was featured on MTV
The video earned Mýa two nominations at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards for Best Dance Video and Best Choreography.

Live performances

Mýa made several television appearances to promote and perform "My Love Is Like... She first performed the song on Live! with Regis and Kelly on the release day of Moodring album on July 22, 2003.

Track listings

Personnel

Credits adapted from Moodring liner notes.

Charts

Weekly charts

Year-end charts

Release history






