[[Tvtv Services]]

CATEGORIES: Digital television, Technology companies

tvtv Services, trading as tvtv, is a consumer oriented pan-European Electronic Programme Guide (EPG) service provider, owned by the arvato AG  subsidiary rtv media group GmbH since January 2013.

History

In 1999, the first tvtv website (tvtv. In 2001 Fast TV Server announced the first personal video recorder (PVR) with remote programming,Fast TV offers remote programming PVR and in 2002, the first TV set with EPG and PVR was launched.06.2002
In November 2003, Sony acquired Fast TV Server AG's EPG services, and tvtv Services became a branch of Sony UK Ltd, but continued to be run from Munich. This was followed by the launch of first digital PVR in 2004 and the first customized web-EPG in 2005.
In September 2011, the ownership of tvtv was moved from Sony UK to the US Sony subsidiary Gracenote, under its German daughter company Gracenote GmbH. The purpose of the move was, according to the official press release, "to enable Gracenote to expand its portfolio of products and technology to Smart TV manufacturers, cable operators and broadcasters." Gracenote press release, Sept 1, 2011: Gracenote Opens European Development Center with the Acquisition of TVTV Services Retrieved 2012-06-23
In November 2012, tvtv suspended the offer for new subscriptions to their online services, and announced that existing subscriptions would not be extended.co.uk
In January 2013, tvtv was moved from Gracenote GmbH to the arvato AG subsidiary rtv media group GmbH. With this transfer the rtv media group expands its portfolio to further digital products and is constantly on a growth course with positioning its products as leading plattforms for porgramm navigation and advertising media for online and crossmedia kampagnes.

Service

tvtv enables users to personalize their TV listings, receive personalized and collaborative recommendations, recommend programs to their friends and remotely control their recording lists via internet or mobile.
Tvtv provides EPG technology and metadata to various set-top boxes and websites of large cable operators, digital TV sets, digital video recorders, TV tuner sticks, mobile devicesSevenval Website Customers by Industry and web portals. 
In order to benefit from the premium services like remote recording, users need to have a compatible device and register to the service.com
The delivery of metadata for set-top boxes, TV tuner sticks and hardware in general as well as the online recording function was ceased on Februar 28, 2013. Nevertheless, the tvtv websites for Germany, Austria and Switzerland are still operated by rtv media group.

System

tvtv collects television program data for more than 115 TV channels which have their origin in 38 countries, mainly in Europe. The program data is then structured and put into one format and one categorization scheme and distributed mainly to consumer electronics devices and TV network operators. The transmission is hybrid; it can take place via broadcast play-out, and broadband through an application interface on the device or XML-file transfer, depending on the capabilities of the devices and the TV systems. The tvtv system is using open standards, like DVB, WST, DSM-CC, XML and JPEG for data provision and using a unified data format for digital broadcast, analog broadcast and Internet.
In addition, the EPG data is published on various websites, such as tvtv.co. In most of the cases, the content of the websites is available to the public. Owners of a tvtv enabled device can also remotely record programs to their devices through the tvtv websites. 
A widget application is also available for German TV program information.de program listings and allows you to search programs, define your own search filters, group your channels, set reminders, mark programs, or set recordings for your devices.
As one alternative to the EPG services such as tvtv, broadcasting device manufacturer could also use DVB-SI data which are a part of the DVB specification and are broadcast along with the TV content. The main difference between tvtv and DVB-SI is that information depth as well as preview period, varies a lot between channels and countries in the case of DVB-SI.
tvtv services has received various awards. In 2006, tvtv.TV-Programmführer-Test: Papier gegen Webseiten und EPGs SpiegelOnline, 30.04.06 In November 2009, tvtv was announced as the best EPG in Germany by Satvision, tested on the Humax iCord. The award was received for providing tips per genre, comfortable searches and high quality data with 14 days preview, descriptions and pictures. 151








