[[The Darjeeling Limited]]

CATEGORIES: 2000s comedy-drama films, 2007 films, American comedy-drama films, Films set in Darjeeling, English-language films, Films about dysfunctional families, Films directed by Wes Anderson, Films set in India, Films shot anamorphically, Films shot in India, Road movies, Fictional trains, Screenplays by Wes Anderson, Screenplays by Roman Coppola, Films set on trains, Dune Entertainment films

The Darjeeling Limited is a 2007 comedy-drama film directed by Wes Anderson, and starring Owen Wilson, Adrien Brody,  and Jason Schwartzman. It was written by Anderson, Schwartzman, and Roman Coppola. The film also features Waris Ahluwalia, Amara Karan, Barbet Schroeder, and Anjelica Huston, with Natalie Portman, Camilla Rutherford, Irrfan Khan and Bill Murray in cameo roles.

Plot

A businessman in India (Bill Murray) fails to catch his train as it pulls out of a station. He is beaten to it by a younger man, Peter Whitman (Adrien Brody), who is carrying heavy luggage. Peter reunites with his brothers Francis (Owen Wilson) and Jack (Jason Schwartzman) on the luxury train called "The Darjeeling Limited," which is traveling across India. The brothers have not seen each other since their father's funeral.
Francis, the oldest of the three brothers, has planned their journey in advance. The journey is supposed to culminate in a reunion with their mother (Anjelica Huston), but Francis tells his brothers that they are making the journey for spiritual self-discovery. He tells them of a motorcycle crash that he was in, which explains the reasons for the bandages on his head, and saying that he technically died, and wants to reconnect to his brothers. His brothers are not convinced of this, and get annoyed with Francis' controlling behaviour such as choosing from the menu for them or making their decisions without their input, which turns out to be a trait inherited from their mother. It is clear that the three do not really trust one another (Jack plans to leave the trip early, Peter is hiding the fact that his wife is pregnant). With his assistant Brendan's help, Francis draws up an itinerary for the trip and takes his brothers' passports to prevent them from getting off the train too early. The youngest Whitman, Jack, has written a short story which is similar to his own life, but he denies the similarities. He obsessively listens to the messages on his ex-girlfriend's answering machine at every train stop. Moreover, he has a fling with the train's stewardess Rita (Amara Karan), whom Francis nicknames "Sweet Lime" for the drinks she offers.
Peter, the middle brother, justifies his keeping many of his late father's possessions (his glasses, his keys) by claiming that he was their father's favorite. His wife, Alice (Camilla Rutherford), is expecting a baby, but Peter fears that their relationship may end in divorce.
In their trips through the Indian provinces, Francis has one of his loafers stolen by a shoe-shine boy; Peter buys a cobra, which later escapes from its transport container. This escape results in the brothers being confined to their cabins in the train. Francis and Peter get into a fight over the latter being their father's "favorite" and Jack uses pepper spray, trying to stop the fight. The train's Chief Steward (Waris Ahluwalia), whom the three brothers have repeatedly annoyed, throws the three of them off the train with all their luggage. Jack is sad to leave Rita, who did not want to carry on her relationship with him before. She asks him what is wrong with him, and he replies that he is "not sure" and will "tell her the next time he sees her". On their way back to civilization, the brothers see three young boys fall into a river while attempting to pull a raft across it. Jack and Francis rescue two of the boys, but Peter fails to save the third, who dies. This affects Peter deeply. In the boys' small village, where nobody really speaks English, the three brothers spend the night and are befriended by the villagers. They attend the boy's funeral.
In a flashback, the three brothers and Alice are in a car, going to their father's funeral. They stop to pick up their father's Porsche from the repair shop, but the car is not ready so the brothers leave. They find a suitcase of his things in the trunk. It is reveled that their father's death was a result of him getting hit by a car, and that their mother did not attend the funeral. During their time at the repair shop, the three brothers as they're grieving, get into a confrontation with a truck driver. Jack forgoes his father's funeral and impulsively skips town for Paris.
Back in the present, the Whitmans get on a bus, which takes them from the village to the airport. However, they rip up their tickets and decide to go visit their mother. She is a nun at a Christian abbey in India. The reunion is very emotional (it is learned that Francis's accident was, in fact, a suicide attempt) and the family is reunited for a time. The next morning, the three brothers find that their mother has left, after leaving the boys their breakfast. They find out that apparently, she "leaves for a while" sometimes.
On the way back the three brothers run for a train, and jettison all their baggage on the railway line as they and some porters run after the train. Jack reads his new short story, and gives in, accepting that it is representative of his own life. Francis wants to give the passports back to his brothers, but the brothers decide that the passports are safer with him.

Hotel Chevalier

Anderson also wrote and directed the 2007 short film Hotel Chevalier, starring Jason Schwartzman and Natalie Portman. The 13-minute film acts as a prologue to The Darjeeling Limited. In it, Jack's ex-girlfriend (Natalie Portman) turns up unexpectedly at his hotel room in Paris, and they spend the night together. Originally attached to festival screenings of The Darjeeling Limited, it was removed during the limited theatrical release and instead made available on Apple Inc.'s iTunes Store as a free download. On October 26, 2007, Hotel Chevalier was removed from iTunes in favor of releasing it in theaters with the wide release of The Darjeeling Limited.

Cast

Themes and motifs

The Darjeeling Limited includes many of Anderson's signature themes and styles, such as despair, abandonment, sibling relationships, a privileged class who rarely work, and timeless fashions and props. Anderson has revealed that The River by Jean Renoir, the films of Satyajit Ray and documentaries on India by Louis Malle were his inspirations for this movie. The film was dedicated to Satyajit Ray and makes allusions to him and his work (e.g., the portrait of Ray in the compartment of the train Bengal Lancer towards the end of the film).

Production

Locations

Much of the film was shot in Jodhpur, Rajasthan. The Himalaya scenes were shot in Udaipur, and the opening scene of the film was also shot on the streets of Jodhpur. The International Airport shown near the end is the old terminal building of Udaipur Airport. The scenes set in New York were shot in Long Island City.

Music

The soundtrack features three songs by The Kinks, "Powerman", "Strangers" and "This Time Tomorrow", all from the 1970 album, Lola versus Powerman and the Moneygoround, Part One, as well as "Play With Fire" by The Rolling Stones. "Where Do You Go To (My Lovely)" by Peter Sarstedt is prominently featured as well, being played within the film more than once. Most of the album, however, features film score music composed by Bengali filmmaker Satyajit Ray, Merchant-Ivory films, and other artists from  Indian cinema. Director Wes Anderson has said that it was Satyajit Ray's movies that made him want to come to India. The works include "Charu's Theme", from Ray's 1964 film, Charulata, film-score cues by Shankar Jaikishan and classic works by Claude Debussy and Ludwig van Beethoven. The film ends with the 1969 song "Aux Champs Élysées" by French singer Joe Dassin, who was the son of blacklisted American director Jules Dassin.

Release

The Darjeeling Limited made its world premiere on 3 September 2007 at the Venice Film Festival, where it was in competition for the Golden Lion and won the Little Golden Lion. The film's North American premiere was on 28 September 2007 at the 45th annual New York Film Festival, where it was the opening film. It then opened in a limited commercial release in North America on 5 October 2007.
The film opened across North America on 26 October 2007 and in the UK on 23 November 2007, in both territories preceded in showings by Hotel Chevalier. The film grossed $134,938 in two theaters in its opening weekend for an average of $67,469 for each theater.
The film (widescreen edition) was released on DVD 26 February 2008 on Fox Searchlight, with features limited to a behind-the-scenes documentary, theatrical trailer, and the inclusion of Hotel Chevalier. The film was re-released by the Criterion Collection on 12 October 2010 on both DVD and Blu-ray, the latter being the film's first release on the format.

Critical reception

The film received generally favorable reviews. 
Chris Cabin of Filmcritic."
Timothy Knight of Reel."
Nick Schager of Slant Magazine gave the film 2 stars out of 4 and said "the ingredients that have increasingly defined Wes Anderson's films..."
Glenn Kenny of Premiere named it the fifth best film of 2007, and Mike Russell of The Oregonian named it the eighth best film of 2007.






