[[The Brussels Journal]]

CATEGORIES: Blogs critical of Islam, 2005 establishments in Belgium, Publications established in 2005, Internet properties established in 2005, Libertarianism in Belgium

The Brussels Journal is a conservative blog, founded by the Flemish journalist Paul Beliën. It is consistently named as one of the Counterjihad movement's main channels. It was founded in 2005, and has both an English language section with various international contributions, and a Dutch section. 
The Brussels Journal bills itself as a member of the OpinionJournal Federation but does not appear among the list of members on OpinionJournal's own site.

Political Affiliations

Paul Beliën's wife, Alexandra Colen, is a parliamentary member of Vlaams Belang. However, Beliën has since been employed as an advisor by Geert Wilders, leader of the Dutch, right-wing Party for Freedom. According to the Brussels Journal, it is a nonpartisan publication, and most of its writers, both Belgian and non-Belgian, have no affiliation to any political party or organization.

Notable debates

Allegations of racism

According to an article in the Wall Street Journal by Bret Stephens, after a 17-year old Belgian boy, Joe Van Holsbeeck, was murdered by romani from Poland, Paul Beliën wrote an article calling for the decriminalization of the possession of "self-defense weapons." The article was titled "Geef ons Wapens!" (Give us Weapons!). Het Centrum heeft een einde gesteld aan haatartikel van Beliën The government anti-discrimination agency Center for Equal Opportunities and Opposition to Racism claimed the article constituted incitement to violence and warned that unless it was removed, the blog would face state prosecution, among other things based on the quote
 Muslims are predators that have learned from childhood (…) during the yearly feast of the sacrifice (…) how to slaughter warm herd animals. 
Belien removed the article. The article has been framed as an important event in the development of a harsher climate towards immigrants. The incident caused the site to shift to English-centric in order to be able to present future such cases to the international media.
In June, Belgian police summoned Belien for questioning regarding several articles, he wrote for the Brussels Journal. Politie tevergeefs bij Belien, De Standaard, 20 July 2006  According to Belien the police continued to invite him in for questioning but he refused to show up.Belgian Regime Keeps Harassing The Brussels Journal (2), Brussels Journal, 9 August 2006
On 27 July 2011 Belgian media reported that the Belgian security agencies will ask the federal prosecutor to open a case file investigating relations between The Brussels Journal and Anders Behring Breivik, the confessed perpetrator of the 2011 Norway attacks. The security agencies would want clarity about a number of articles that have been published on the web site, and that are part of 2083: A European Declaration of Independence, Breivik's manifesto. Veiligheidsdiensten vragen onderzoek naar verband Breivik en Belgische site, Gazet Van Antwerpen, 27 July 2011.

Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy

The Brussels Journal was the first news and opinion site to cover the Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy in English, bringing it to the attention to US bloggers, including Michelle Malkin, and the mainstream media.
The Brussels Journal republished the cartoons. This action was called a "deliberate
provocation by the neocons," by an editorial in the Dutch language Knack magazine. According to Knack, Brussels Journal's aim was to "make Americans and Europeans believe that all Muslims are violent and dangerous, after which the clash in Palestine, Iran and Syria can really kick off." Paul Beliën en zijn vriendjes, Knack, 15 February 2006

Notable contributors

The Brussels Journal has featured contributions by Diana West, Daniel Hannan, John Laughland, Fjordman, Tiberge, Koenraad Elst, Takuan Seiyo, Jos Verhulst, and Matthias Storme among others.






