[[MacEwan University]]

CATEGORIES: Grant MacEwan University, Educational institutions established in 1971, Universities and colleges in Edmonton, Terminating vistas in Canada, Public universities, Universities in Canada

MacEwan University is a post-secondary educational institution located in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. Founded in 1971 as Grant MacEwan Community College, the institution got its start by offering primarily one and two-year certificate and diploma programs. In 1988 it received approval to offer university transfer credit, and in 1999 dropped the word "community" from its name. In 2005 the institution rebranded itself through the creation of a one-word logo and began referring to itself simply as "MacEwan".  Since 2004, MacEwan has offered full bachelor's degrees, and on September 24, 2009, the institution was officially renamed Grant MacEwan University. Since 2012 the university has been actively re-branding itself as "MacEwan University."

History

Established in 1971, MacEwan University was named after Dr. J.W. Grant MacEwan, author, educator and former lieutenant governor of Alberta. MacEwan became an accredited degree-granting institution in 2004 and offers baccalaureate degrees in arts, child and youth care, commerce, nursing, science, communications, psychiatric nursing, and music. The institution expects to add additional degrees in the subject areas of social work and early learning education. Prior to the renaming, MacEwan was the largest college in Alberta, and it remains the largest transfer institution in the province. On September 24, 2009 it became Alberta's sixth university. The City Centre Campus is built on the old Canadian National rail yards on the northern fringe of the downtown core. CN donated the land and construction began in the early 1990s.

Academics

MacEwan University has an intentional focus on teaching, and as a result has scored very well in the Globe and Mail Canadian University Report 2011, receiving top marks for its size category in student satisfaction (A), quality of education (A), student-faculty interaction (A+), class size (A+), and quality of teaching (A).
MacEwan University is an undergraduate institution that has four schools and faculties: the Faculty of Arts and Science, the Faculty of Health and Community Studies, the Faculty of Fine Arts and Communications, and the School of Business. Four-year degrees are offered in arts, science, nursing, child and youth care, commerce, communications, and music, as well as diplomas, certificates and applied degrees in a variety of disciplines. As of 2011, there are 68 programs offered in a variety of delivery formats, including full-time, part-time, online and distance. A School of Continuing Education is currently being developed, along with a new bachelor degree in social work. The School of Business also offers a bachelor's program with Coop.Supply Chain Management Coop

Scholarships and bursaries

The Government of Canada sponsors an Aboriginal Bursaries Search Tool that lists over 680 scholarships, bursaries, and other incentives offered by governments, universities, and industry to support Aboriginal post-secondary participation. MacEwan University scholarships for Aboriginal, First Nations and Métis students include: Aboriginal Business Leadership Awards; Martin Nilsson Memorial Award; CN Native Education Award; Peace Hills Aboriginal Business Leadership Award; Sylvia Schulze Memorial Women's Bursary; Métis Education Foundation Scholar Awards; Astral Media Radio GP Scholarship; Robert C. Carson Memorial Bursary.Aboriginal Bursaries Search Tool
Student-athletes in basketball, hockey, soccer, cross country running and volleyball are eligible for the Jimmie Condon Provincial Scholarship worth up to $1,800. A number of other athletic awards, scholarships and bursaries are also available.

Athletics

MacEwan University's sports teams are known as the Griffins. Men's and women's sports include: basketball, hockey, volleyball, soccer, cross country, curling and golf. The Griffins compete in the Alberta Colleges Athletics Conference (ACAC), against 17 other post-secondary institutions in Alberta as well as in the Canada West conference of Canadian Interuniversity Sport (CIS). Student-athletes on all teams are expected to meet academic requirements and adhere to sport-specific athletic requirements.
In 2011, the athletic department submitted an application to Canada West Universities Athletic Association in an effort to transfer to the national Canadian Interuniversity Sport (CIS) level of competition. MacEwan University was admitted as a probationary member in 2013.

Campuses

In its early years, MacEwan operated out of a number of small store-front-style campuses. The facilities included Old Scona School (10523 - 84 Avenue), the Workmen's Compensation building (10048 - 101A Avenue), and the former Dominion Store in Cromdale (8020 - 118 Avenue), with offices and administration located in the Canada Trust building (10150 - 100 Street). In 1988, Don Getty's provincial government committed $100 million for the construction of the City Centre Campus which, at the time, was Alberta Advanced Education and Technology's largest single capital project in its history.
As of 2013, MacEwan University has four campuses. City Centre Campus is the largest of the four campuses, currently spanning six city blocks in downtown Edmonton. The Alberta College Campus (ACC) is also located downtown. South Campus is located in the south side neighbourhood of Mill Woods, and the Centre for the Arts and Communications is located on the west end of the city in West Jasper Place.
In September 2009, MacEwan University's Board of Governors approved a plan for a single sustainable campus that will see operations of campuses consolidated to downtown Edmonton. Construction for the new Centre for the Arts and Culture is expected to begin in 2014 on the west end of the City Centre site and to be open by 2017.

City Centre Campus

City Centre Campus houses the majority of MacEwan University's degree programs.  The campus is also home to university courses, diplomas and certificates in health, human services and business. Most of the university's administration is located at City Centre Campus as well.
The main complex consists of a long grouping of structures stretching from east to west; the 105 Street Building (Building 5), the 106 Street Building (Building 6), the 107 Street Building (Building 7), and the Christenson Family Centre for Sport and Wellness (Building 8). Between each of these buildings is grouping of four concrete spires which gives the campus its distinctive look.  Each of these groupings of towers forms a  terminating vista both when viewed from the north or the south, interrupting the streets after which the buildings are named.  The towers which terminate 107 Street also feature public clock between the spires on the south face. The section of 108 Street to the south of the campus is known as "Capital Boulevard" and runs to the  Alberta Legislature Building seven blocks to the south where its forms another terminating vista. A pedway over 109 Street connects these buildings to the Robbins Health Learning Centre (Building 9, 2007) and the University Service Centre above the parkade (Building 10, 2011).macewan.pdf
The Christenson Family Centre for Sport and Wellness is home to a pool, gymnasium and fitness centre. The Griffins, MacEwan University's athletic organization, compete in intercollegiate sports within the Alberta Colleges Athletic Conference (ACAC) and the Canada West conference of Canadian Interuniversity Sport (CIS).

Alberta College Campus

In June 2000, the government of Alberta assumed control of the formerly private Alberta College. Alberta College was then incorporated as a MacEwan campus. Alberta College is only 1 km from the City Centre Campus, and houses academic upgrading, music and English as a Second Language (ESL) programs. 

Centre for the Arts and Communications

The Centre for the Arts and Communications (formerly known as Jasper Place Campus) is located in Edmonton's west end on the north east corner of 156 Street and 100 Avenue. This campus is in the process of relocating to new facilities at the City Centre Campus site.
The Centre for the Arts and Communications houses several creative programs in arts and cultural management, design, fine art, communications, music, theatre arts and theatre production, including MacEwan University's new Bachelor of Music in Jazz and Contemporary Popular Music.thumb|none|Centre for the Arts and Communications

South Campus

South Campus is located in the Mill Woods area of Edmonton's southeast. The campus is home to a variety of programs in health, human services and business, including the Bachelor of Child and Youth Care.thumb|none|South Campus








