[[West Tanfield]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in North Yorkshire, Civil parishes in North Yorkshire

West Tanfield is a village and civil parish in the Hambleton district of North Yorkshire, England. The village is situated approximately six miles north of Ripon on the A6108, which goes from Ripon to Masham and Wensleydale.  The parish includes the hamlets of Nosterfield, Thornborough and Binsoe.

History

The toponym is from the Old English tāna feld, meaning "open land where young shoots grow", or possibly "open land of a man called Tana". 
The village has a monument called the Marmion Tower, a 15th-century gatehouse which belonged to the now vanished manor house and former home of the Marmion family. At first floor level there is an example of an oriel window. The tower is now in the care of English Heritage and is a Grade I listed building.
The village had a railway station on the Masham branch line of the North Eastern Railway until the line was closed in 1963.
Not far from the village are the Thornborough Henges, known as the 'Stone Henge of the North'. 

Governance

West Tanfield was historically a parish in the North Riding of Yorkshire.  In 1974 it was transferred to Hambleton district in the new county of North Yorkshire.
The village lies within the Richmond (Yorks) UK Parliament constituency. It also lies within the Bedale electoral division of North Yorkshire County Council and the Tanfield ward of Hambleton District Council.
The parish shares a grouped parish council, Tanfield Parish Council, with the much smaller parish of East Tanfield. 

Geography

The village lies on the A6108 Ripon to Leyburn road and on the north bank of a large meander on the River Ure. The settlements of Nosterfield, Thornborough, Binsoe, Mickley and North Stainley all lie within  of the village.

Demography

The 2001 UK Census recorded the population of the Parish as 532 of which 48.5% were male and 51.5% female. There were 242 dwellings in the Parish of which 92 were detached.

Amenities

Village services include two public houses and a village store encompassing the post office. The Memorial Hall serves as a venue for events in the village and was built as a monument to the men of West Tanfield who died during the two world wars.

Education

St Nicholas CE School is located in the village and is within the catchment area of Bedale School for secondary education. The present structure in Marmion Court was built in 1965.

Sport

The first stage of the 2014 Tour de France will pass through the village on 5 July 2014 just  
There is a village football team.

Religion

The church in the village is dedicated to St. Nicholas and is situated on Main Street. It is a Grade II Listed building erected in the 13th century and has undergone renovation in the 15th century and in 1860.






