[[Michael Keane (footballer born 1982)]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, Republic of Ireland association footballers, Living people, Rotherham United F.C. players, Grimsby Town F.C. players, Preston North End F.C. players, Hull City A.F.C. players, St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players, League of Ireland players, The Football League players

Michael Thomas Joseph Keane (born 29 December 1982 in Dublin) is an Irish former professional footballer who played on the left side of midfield. He played as a professional from 2000 until 2008, turning out for Preston North End, Grimsby Town, Hull City and Rotherham United before ending his career when he was released by League of Ireland Premier Division team St Patrick's Athletic in 2008.

Playing career

Preston North End

Keane started his career in 2000 at Preston North End, he was part of a decent youth team under David Moyes that helped strengthen the clubs position in the First Division. Keane came to prominence in the 2001–02 season where he played alongside Jon Macken. After twice breaking his foot, and only making one start during the 2002–03 season, he was made available for loan and joined fellow First Division side Grimsby Town on the transfer deadline day in March 2003. he returned to Deepdale following the end of the season and returned to first team action for Preston.

Hull City

After four years and over 50 games at Preston, Keane signed for Hull City for £50,000 in June 2004, saying "It's dropping down a division, but I look at it as a stepping stone. I think this is a club that's definitely on the up",

Rotherham United

After impressing during his loan spell at Millmoor, Keane signed for the club permanently on a two-year contract.

St Patricks Athletic

Following his release he signed with St Patricks Athletic where he remained for one season and played in the UEFA Cup. but he was not offered a contract.

Coaching career

Keane moved into coaching for O'Deveney Dunard in the AUL before replacing Anto Brennan as manager when Brennan moved on. He lasted only a few months in this role before been removed from the club. He later took over at Stella Maris Under 15s before leaving a few months later. He then has a stint with Brendanville followed by his appointment at current side Dingle United football Club Aul premier b side.






