[[Andrew Hughes (footballer, born 1978)]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, 1978 births, People from Stockport, English footballers, Association football midfielders, Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players, Notts County F.C. players, Reading F.C. players, Norwich City F.C. players, Leeds United A.F.C. players, Scunthorpe United F.C. players, Charlton Athletic F.C. players, The Football League players

For the Welsh footballer see Andrew Hughes (Welsh footballer)
Andrew John Hughes (born 2 January 1978 in Manchester) is an English footballer who plays for Charlton Athletic in The Championship of the English Football League. Known for his versatility, his main position is as a central midfielder, but he has also played regularly at fullback during his career. Hughes has played over 100 games for each of Notts County, Reading and Leeds United.

Playing career

Hughes began his career at Oldham Athletic making 44 appearances scoring once before joining Notts County, where he made 130 appearances scoring 18 times. At Notts County Hughes helped earn them the Division Three championship.

Reading

He joined Reading on 5 July 2001 on a three-year deal as a replacement for Darren Caskey, but Notts County and Reading failed to agree a transfer fee Hughes became an important player for Reading and helped earn the side promotion to the First Division of The Football League, finishing second in the Nationwide League Division Two. His earlier seasons at Reading had seen him play in his preferred midfield role and he flourished, going on to make 183 appearances and scoring 19 times.

Norwich

Hughes joined Norwich from Reading on 21 July 2005 for a fee believed to be around £500,000. He endured a tough start to his Norwich career, as his own form and that of the team was poor for much of the 2005–06 season. In 2006–07 season, new manager Peter Grant used him more as a utility player, covering on either wing or full back position. Hughes played 41 games that season.

Leeds United

Hughes moved to Leeds United on a two-year deal on 9 August 2007 for an undisclosed fee. Hughes joined Leeds the same day that the club was deducted 15 points in League 1. In an interview, Hughes explained his reasons for leaving Norwich: "Dennis Wise told me the challenge and the position the club was in. He wants fighters and I felt the challenge of playing for Leeds United and Dennis Wise was too good to turn down ... The manager at Norwich told me he didn't want me to leave, but I didn't want to stay and be a squad player."
He scored his first and what turned out to be only goal for Leeds on 19 April against Millwall, tapping in from close range to finish a flowing move that Hughes had himself started on the edge of Millwall's box.
At Leeds Hughes was mainly used as a utility player, playing in various positions. He started the 2009–10 season playing for Leeds at left back due to the absence of Ben Parker through injury. Hughes missed a few games himself with an injury but returned to the Leeds side playing in either full back position, eventually ousting loan signing Tony Capaldi at left back.
Hughes played for Leeds against Manchester United when Leeds won 1–0 at Old Trafford on 3 January 2010 in the FA Cup. However, Hughes picked up an injury against Manchester United and was not fit enough to be involved in the following game against Wycombe Wanderers, but returned to the line-up in the next game, against Exeter City. He played left back for Leeds when they earned a 2–2 draw against Tottenham Hotspur in the FA Cup on 23 January.
Hughes played an instrumental part as Leeds were promoted to the Football League Championship after finishing in second place in League One and thus earning automatic promotion. Of the 33 games Leeds won, Hughes started in 32 of them. On 26 May 2010, Hughes signed a new one-year deal with the club.
After being an unnamed substitute against Derby County, Hughes came on as a second half substitute in the following game against Lincoln City. He also came on as a half time substitute in the 1–0 win against Watford where he played at left back after regular left back Fede Bessone picked up an injury. On 8 January 2011, Hughes came on as a second half substitute and helped earn Leeds a 1–1 draw against Arsenal. Leeds were 1–0 up from a Robert Snodgrass second half penalty, before Arsenal equalised in the 90th minute when Cesc Fabregas also scored a penalty.leedsunited.
Hughes' totemic status at Leeds was due more to his willingness to work hard in whichever position he was asked to play, his humility, and his rapport with fans and team-mates, than to any exceptional football ability. The esteem he is held in by the club's fans is evident in the popular chant 'Andy Hughes is fucking brilliant', and in the continued use of a photograph of him as the website banner of fan magazine The Square Ball, even after he left the club.thesquareball.net/

Scunthorpe

On 21 January 2011, it was announced Hughes would join Scunthorpe United on an 18-month contract.

Charlton

On 1 August 2011, Hughes was transferred from Scunthorpe to Charlton Athletic.

Honours

Club

Personal

Career statistics

|url=
|title= Statistics
|author=
|work=Soccerbase
|accessdate=1 October 2008}}[/ref]






