[[North Carolina Blumenthal Performing Arts Center]]

CATEGORIES: Theatres in Charlotte, North Carolina, Performing arts centers in North Carolina, Visitor attractions in Charlotte, North Carolina

Blumenthal Performing Arts (also NC Blumenthal Center and NCBPAC) is located in Charlotte, North Carolina. It opened in 1992 and is named in honor of the people of the state of North Carolina and the Blumenthal Foundation established by I.D. Blumenthal who founded RSC Brands, the largest private donor to the capital campaign. The idea for the center dates back to the late 1970s. Momentum for the project grew in the 1980s resulting in a $15 million allocation from the state of North Carolina, approval of a $15 million bond by the citizens of Charlotte and an additional $32 million contributed by individuals, corporations and foundations. In 1987 the Belk Brothers donated a valuable piece of land as the site of the new theatre complex. Total construction cost for the Blumenthal Center was over $62 million.

Architecture

The Blumenthal Center and the adjacent Founder's Hall and Bank of America corporate center were all designed by César Pelli
and Associates. Acoustical design was completed by acoustical consultant Kirkegaard Associates. Project management was provided by Theatrical Project Consultants (TPC). General contractor on the project was Becon Construction of Charlotte, NC. 

Theaters

Although the Blumenthal Center as a company has six theaters under its management, the Belk Theater, Booth Playhouse, and Stage Door Theater are physically part of the Blumenthal Performing Arts Center. The McGlohon Theatre and Duke Power Theatre are both contained in the Spirit Square facility. The Knight Theater is located within close proximity to the Center. The Blumenthal also presents shows at Ovens Auditorium.

Belk Theater

The Belk Theater is the largest venue in the North Carolina Blumenthal Performing Arts Center, seating 2,097 at its full-capacity configuration. It features state-of-the-art equipment, production and support capabilities and can host any event - from grand opera to rock to corporate annual meetings and lectures. The theater is designed in a contemporary European horseshoe arrangement for an intimate atmosphere and world-class acoustics. The most distant seat is less than 135 feet from the stage. A hallmark of the theater's design is some 2,400 "points of light" in the audience chamber, part of a dazzling fiber optic network with multi-color capabilities.

Booth Playhouse

The Booth Playhouse of the North Carolina Blumenthal Performing Arts Center is a courtyard-style proscenium theater with cabaret and theater-in-the-round capabilities. This intimate theater contains 434 seats with seating in orchestra and gallery levels. It hosts a variety of dance, choral and other musical ensembles, as well as meetings, seminars, and workshops.

Stage Door Theater

The intimate Stage Door Theater is a new entertainment hot spot on Charlotte's North College Street.  Seats up to 172 in a flexible configuration.  Entrance is near the corner of College and 5th Street.

Knight Theater

Seating capacity of 1,193.  Part of the Levine Center for the Arts on Tryon at 1st Street.  Adjacent to the new Bechtler Museum of Modern Art.

McGlohon Theatre at Spirit Square

The McGlohon Theatre at Spirit Square Center for Arts & Education seats 716 and is a showplace for local and national performances. Opened in 1980, this intimate space was the former First Baptist Church. With its stained glass windows and Byzantine dome, this historically designated space makes each event a unique experience. The McGlohon Theatre comprises two levels: the Orchestra (stage) Level and the Balcony Level.

Duke Energy Theater at Spirit Square

The Duke Energy Theater, is a truly multi-purpose space. It is a black box theater and is completely equipped with theater lighting capabilities and sound system. The space also has stained glass windows and hardwood floors. Duke Energy Theater is ideal for receptions, seminars, meetings or lectures. Maximum capacity for Duke Energy Theater is 190.

Ovens Auditorium

Ovens Auditorium is owned and operated by the Charlotte Regional Visitors Authority (CRVA) of the City of Charlotte. The facility seats more than 2,400 and is located at 2700 East Independence Boulevard.

Broadway Productions

The Blumenthal Performing Arts Center hosts Broadway productions through the Duke Energy Broadway Lights Series.  The 2011/12 Duke Energy Broadway Lights series includes: Addams Family, West Side Story, Million Dollar Quartet, Memphis,  Bring It On: The Musical, Come Fly Away, La Cage Aux Folles and Jersey Boys.

Economic impact

Since opening its doors in 1992, 7.3 million people have attended an event, performance, activity or meeting at the Center & Spirit Square.  The Center infused $52.25 million into the economy during the 2007-2008 season.

Resident companies

NCBPAC is currently home to 6 different resident companies (between the Blumenthal Center complex and Spirit Square) whose goals include visual and performing arts as well as education.  The Duke Power Theatre and the McGlohon Theatre also host annual productions by Charlotte Shakespeare.




