[[Chambira River]]

CATEGORIES: Rivers of Peru, Tributaries of the Amazon River

The Chambira River is a major tributary river of the Marañón River, and has been the traditional territory of the Urarina peoples for at least the past 350 years, if not much longer.upf.asp?id=DEANXS07 Located in the Amazon jungle of Peru, otherwise known as the Selva, this river is a tropical waterway with many purposes. There is a diversity of plants and animals in this region which creates a unique ecosystem around the Chambira River.  Made up of "palm-swamps," the region takes its name from the Chambira palm. Until relatively recently, the Chambira Basin has not been the focus of mapping by the Spanish empire or the Peruvian nation. No major geographical surveys of the Chambira Basin were mounted during the nineteenth century heyday of exploration. It was not until the 1970s discovery of hydrocarbons in the region and subsequent indigenous peoples' mobilization and government-backed neo-liberal legislation that the Chambira River's lands have been mapped.

Ecosystem

The name "Chambira" refers to the dense growth of Chambira palms that cover the region.  Otherwise known as Astrocaryum chambira, this native plant has many uses.  The plant produces edible fruit consumed by humans and animals alike, and the leaves can be used as fiber for tying rope.  Medicinal value is also a benefit of the Chambira palm.  The Selva is a tropical climate so it is home to a variety of plants and other life forms.  Tropical fruits such as bananas grow there.  In the river itself is a plethora of different freshwater species, not limited to but including turtles, fish, caimans, sting rays, and electric eels.  All of these species make up an aquatic food chain that indirectly feeds the land as well.  Land animals eat the aquatic fish which is returned to the earth in the form of fertilizer.  This feeds plant which is the starting block of the land food chain.  It is in this manner that the Chambira River plays a role in the environment around it.

Human Interaction

The Urarina, or an indigenous population living along the Chambira River, receive many benefits from the water system.  Because they have access to a fresh water source, these people have developed different farming methods which make use of the river.  The first of these is slash and burn farming, which involves exploiting a farm plot for three to five years before moving on to a new area.  The Chambira River not only supports a complex ecosystem, but it also aids humans in their endeavors along the waterway.

Effects of Pollution

The Chambira River is a life source for many things near its waters, but pollution in the river is starting to raise questions whether this will be a viable water source in the future.  Dating back to the 1970s, Occidental Petroleoum, and later Pluspetrol started extracting oil out of the Peruvian rainforest and transporting it back to the coast using the river system.  In addition to 18 other previous spills, the most recent spill on January 16, 2011, was of over 400 barrels of crude oil.  Although there are methods of cleaning oil out of a water system, the buildup of heavy metals and other toxins in the Chambira are of concern given the vast number of spills.  The most recent spill occurred near a humedal, or a part of the wetland rainforest that remains partially flooded, which poses risks for the fish-spawning grounds located there.  Hunting and fishing are far more crucial than farming to the indigenous population's survival.  The food source provided by the river maintains the Urarina's lifestyle.  With so much depending on the stable balance of the Chambira River's ecosystem, manmade disasters such as oil spills are of concern for Pluspetrol, the indigenous populations, as well as the Peruvian government.




