[[Syldavian]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional languages, Tintin

Syldavian is a fictional West Germanic language created by Hergé as the national language of Syldavia, a small fictional Balkan kingdom that serves as a major setting in many of The Adventures of Tintin stories. Hergé modeled the language on Marols, a dialect of Dutch spoken in and around Brussels. The entire corpus of the language has been analyzed by Mark Rosenfelder, and his work forms the basis of this article. (See References below.)

Characteristics

As presented in the Tintin books, Syldavian resembles a Slavic language due to its orthography. It is most commonly written in the Cyrillic alphabet, albeit with the Latin alphabet by the royal court. It shares numerous orthographic features found in various Eastern European languages, most notably the "sz" and "cz" of Polish. However, the language is clearly a Germanic language. Its vocabulary and grammar resembles that of Dutch and German and has little in common with any Slavic languages. The language also appears to have been influenced by Bordurian, Slavic languages and Turkish. The Syldavians often bear names of Slavic origin, such as Wladimir; the dish szlaszeck that Tintin encountered also appears to be a borrowing (szaszłyk is the Polish word for "shish kebab", borrowed in turn from Turkish). Many words are based on common French slangs. For examples, "clebcz" is constructed on the French Parisian slang "clebs" meaning "dog".
This language, which is Germanic but bears a great resemblance to Polish, may be likened to the artificial Romance language Wenedyk, or to the endangered Wymysorys language.

Phonology

Syldavian boasts a rich range of sounds.

Vowels

In addition to the diacritical marks shown in the chart below, there are acute and grave accents that may indicate stress.
In addition to these letters, Syldavian also contains several digraphs and letters for which the pronunciation is uncertain:

Consonants

Note: As in Czech, the letter  can be syllabic, as seen in names such as Staszrvitch and Dbrnouk.
There are some additional digraphs and trigraphs, including . These demonstrate that the Latin-based orthography has a number of irregularities, or else these are old inconsistent spellings that have been preserved in family names but are no longer used in the standard orthography.

Grammar

Plurals

Definite articles

Unlike Marols, but like German (shown in italics in the table), Syldavian definite articles are extensively inflected.

Indefinite articles

Adjectives

Pronouns

Personal pronouns

Note: "yhzer" may be an inflected form, with the base form being "yhz". The second person plural forms are unknown, and the sound correspondences with Dutch and German are irregular enough to make reconstructing them impossible, although one possibility would be "jei", "jou", "öhz".

Demonstrative pronouns

czei - this 
tot - that

Verbs

Adverbs

Most adverbs tend to be identical to adjectives in form.

Interjections

szplug - a curse word, perhaps equivalent to "damn". (Not found in original French edition, only English translation.)
szplitz on szplug- a more extreme form of szplug

Syntax

Historical changes

Samples of Syldavian from only two periods - the 14th century and the 20th century - are available to us. But even with such a small sample, some changes can be seen in the language over a 600 year period:

Sample text

From a 14th-century manuscript, Noble Deeds of Ottokar IV:
English translation:

More examples

Czesztot on klebcz. - "That's a dog."
Hamaïh! - "Wow!"
Kzommet micz omhz, noh dascz gendarmaskaïa. - "Come with us to the Police Station." ("politzski" in the English translation.) Note that because gendarmaskaïa is a borrowing from French  gendarme, it is likely pronounced closer to ʒandarmaskaja than *gendarmaskaja. The suffix -skaïa is also apparently borrowed from the Russian feminine adjective ending -ская.
On fläsz Klowaswa vüh dzapeih... Eih döszt! - "A bottle of Klow water for this guy... He's thirsty!" (cf. Swedish törst, "thirst". Note: It's unclear why it isn't something like *eih dösztigh, which is what one might expect from the other Germanic languages. döszt is a verb: Swedish "han törstar", English "he thirsteth/him thirsteth", German "ihn dürstet", in Dutch: hij dorstig (he thirsty).
Czesztot wzryzkar nietz on waghabontz! Czesztot bätczer yhzer kzömmetz noh dascz gendarmaskaïa? - "That's surely not a tramp! Isn't it better for him to come to the police station?" (Lit. probably "Is it better that he comes to the police station?")
Rapp! Noh dzem buthsz!-"Quick! Into the boat!" (cognate literally to German Nach dem Boot!, "after the boat!" although in German, Ins Boot! would be used instead)






