[[Shaun Perry]]

CATEGORIES: 1978 births, Living people, English rugby union players, Sportspeople from Wolverhampton, Bristol Rugby players, CA Brive players, Rugby union scrum-halves, England international rugby union players, Expatriate rugby union players in France, Coventry R.F.C. players, English expatriate rugby union players, English expatriates in France

Shaun Perry (born 4 May 1978) is a former English rugby union footballer, who last played for Worcester Warriors in the Aviva Premiership. His usual position was at scrum half.
Perry began playing rugby in the Youth Section of Dudley Kingswinford RFC at age 7. He rose through the age groups to eventually make his senior debut in the DKRFC Colts team. The next year at age 18 he was playing for the 1st XV, where he played for seven seasons before joining Coventry.

Biography

Born 4 May 1978 in Wolverhampton, Perry played for Coventry in National Division One for two seasons, during which time he scored a try in a match against his future club, Bristol.
Towards the end of the 2005–06 season, Perry sustained a wrist injury which ruled him out for approximately eight weeks of play, and therefore also put him out of contention to represent England during the summer tests to Australia, for a two-test Cook Cup series.
In October 2006, Perry was named in the squad that would compete in the 2006 Autumn Internationals against New Zealand, Australia, South Africa and Argentina. Perry scored a try for 
Perry made another appearance for England on 24 February against Ireland in the 2007 Six Nations match at Croke Park. He came on as a substitute replacing Harry Ellis. Perry gave away a try and a conversion after having his pass intercepted, providing an easy touch down for the Irish.
He missed the 2008 Six Nations Championship after sustaining a fractured windpipe against Harlequin F.C. where he was caught with a stray boot.
In February 2011, it was announced that Perry has signed for Worcester Warriors for the 2011/12 season.
In October 2012, he went down with a Knee Injury which required an operation and he was out for six months.
In June 2013, he announced his retirement from Rugby and a high contributing factor was the knee injury and operation from earlier in the year.






