[[ZZ Top]]

CATEGORIES: ZZ Top, Blues rock groups, American hard rock musical groups, Rock music groups from Texas, Musical groups from Houston, Texas, RCA Records artists, Warner Bros. Records artists, Columbia Records artists, Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees, Southern rock musical groups, Musical groups established in 1969, Musical trios

|title= ZZ Top: Mescalero |work= PopMatters |date= January 4, 2004 |accessdate= February 20, 2014}}
|years_active    = 1969-present
|label           = American Recordings, RCA, Warner Bros., London
|associated_acts = Moving Sidewalks, American Blues
|website         = 
|current_members = Billy Gibbons
Frank Beard
Dusty Hill
|past_members    = Lanier Greig
Dan Mitchell
Billy Ethridge
}}
ZZ Top (pronounced zɪː tɒp) is an American Texas blues and Hard rock band formed in 1969 in Houston, Texas. The band consists of guitarist and lead vocalist Billy Gibbons, bassist and co-lead vocalist Dusty Hill, and drummer Frank Beard. One of the few major label recording groups to have consisted of the same lineup for more than forty years, ZZ Top has been praised by critics and fellow musicians alike for their technical mastery. Of the group, music writer Cub Koda said "As genuine roots musicians, they have few peers; Gibbons is one of America's finest blues guitarists working in the arena rock idiom... while Hill and Beard provide the ultimate rhythm section support."
Since the release of the band's debut album in January 1971, ZZ Top has become known for its strong blues roots and humorous lyrical motifs, relying heavily on double entendres and innuendo. ZZ Top's musical style has changed over the years, beginning with blues-inspired rock on their early albums, then incorporating New Wave, punk rock and dance-rock, with heavy use of synthesizers.
ZZ Top was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2004. As a group, ZZ Top possesses 11 gold records and 7 platinum (13 multi-platinum) records; their 1983 album, Eliminator, remains the group's most commercially successful record, selling over 10 million units. ZZ Top also ranks 80th in U.S. album sales, with 25 million units.

History

Early years (1969–1972)

The original line-up formed in Houston, by Billy Gibbons, organist Lanier Greig (died February 2013)Houston Chronicle, February 16, 2013 Unwilling to sign a recording contract, Ethridge quit the band and Dusty Hill was selected as his replacement. After Hill moved from Dallas to Houston, ZZ Top signed with London in 1970. They performed their first concert together at the Knights of Columbus Hall in Beaumont on February 10.
In addition to assuming the role as the band's leader, Gibbons became the main lyricist and musical arranger. With the assistance of Ham and engineer Robin Hood Brians, ZZ Top's First Album (1971) was released and saw the inclusion of the band's humor, with "barrelhouse" rhythms, distorted guitars, double entendres and innuendo. The music and songs  reflected ZZ Top's blues influences. Following their debut album, the band released Rio Grande Mud (1972), which failed commercially and the promotional tour consisted of mostly empty auditoriums.

First decade and signature sound (1973–1982)

ZZ Top released Tres Hombres in 1973. The album's earthy and infectious sound was the result of the propulsive support provided by Hill and Beard, and Gibbons' "growling" guitar tone. Dan Erlewine wrote that the album "brought ZZ Top their first Top Ten record, making them stars in the process". The album included the boogie-driven "La Grange", which was written about a brothel in La Grange, Texas. On the subsequent tour, the band performed sold-out concerts in the US. ZZ Top recorded the live tracks for their 1975 album, Fandango!, during this tour; the album showcased their prowess in exciting live audiences. Fandango! was a top ten album and its single, "Tush", peaked at number 20 on the Billboard Hot 100. Tejas, released in 1976, was not as successful or as positively received as their previous efforts, although the album went to No.17 on Billboard's Pop Albums chart.[ref]
</ref> ZZ Top continued the Worldwide Texas Tour in support of ''Tejas'', though they had been touring for seven years.
The band went on what was supposed to be a 90-day break from public appearances. Gibbons traveled to Europe, Beard went to Jamaica, and Hill went to Mexico.[ref]
