[[Z]]

CATEGORIES: ISO basic Latin letters

Z (named zed "Z", Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd edition (1989); Merriam-Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged (1993); "zee", op. cit.) is the twenty-sixth and final letter of the ISO basic Latin alphabet.

Name and pronunciation

In most dialects of English, the letter's name is 'zed' 
Another English dialectal form is izzard . It dates from the mid-18th century and probably derives from Occitan izèda or the French ézed, whose reconstructed Latin form would be *idzēta, perhaps a popular form with a prosthetic vowel.
Other languages spell the letter's name in a similar way: zeta in Italian, Spanish and Icelandic (no longer part of its alphabet but found in personal names), zäta in Swedish, zæt in Danish, zet in Dutch, Polish, Romanian and Czech, Zett in German (capitalised as noun), zett in Norwegian, zède in French, zê in Portuguese, and , although the English 'zed' and American English 'zee' have become very common.

History

Semitic

The Semitic symbol was the seventh letter, named zayin which possibly meant "weapon". It represented either  (as in Italian zeta, zero).

Greek

The Greek form of Z was a close copy of the Phoenician zen (15px|Zayin), and the Greek inscriptional form remained in this shape throughout ancient times. The Greeks called it zeta, a new name made in imitation of eta (η) and theta (θ).
In earlier Greek of Athens and Northwest Greece, the letter seems to have represented , as it remains in modern Greek.

Etruscan

In Etruscan, Z may have represented .

Latin

In the 1st century BC, Z was introduced again at the end of the Latin alphabet to accurately represent the sound of the Greek zeta. The letter Z appeared only in Greek words, and is the only letter besides Y that the Romans took directly from Greek, rather than from Etruscan.
Zeta was earlier transliterated as s at the beginning of words and ss in the middle of words, as in sōna for ζώνη "belt" and trapessita for τραπεζίτης "banker".
In Vulgar Latin orthography, Z seems to have represented the affricate , the sounds they still have in Italian today. In other languages like Spanish, further evolution of the sound occurred.

Early English

Early English used S alone for both the unvoiced and the voiced sibilant. The Latin sound imported through French was new and was not written with Z but with G or I. The successive changes can be well seen in the double forms from the same original, jealous and zealous. Both of these come from a late Latin zelosus, derived from the imported Greek ζῆλος zêlos. The earlier form is jealous; its initial sound is the . John Wycliffe wrote the word as gelows or ielous.
Z at the end of a word was pronounced ts, as in English assets, from Old French asez "enough" (Modern French assez), from Vulgar Latin ad satis ("to sufficiency").

Last letter of the alphabet

In earlier times, the English alphabets used by children terminated not with Z but with & or related typographic symbols.  In her 1859 novel Adam Bede, George Eliot refers to Z being followed by & when her character Jacob Storey says, "He thought it  had only been put to finish off th' alphabet like; though ampusand would ha' done as well, for what he could see."George Eliot: Adam Bede. Chapter XXI. online at Project Gutenberg
Some Latin based alphabets have extra letters, such as the Icelandic and Swedish making Ö the last one or Å in case of the Danish and Norwegian.

Variant and derived forms

A glyph variant of Z originating in the medieval Gothic minuscules and the Early Modern Blackletter typefaces is the "tailed z" (German geschwänztes Z, also Z mit Unterschlinge). In some Antiqua typefaces, this letter is present as a standalone letter or in ligatures. Combined with long s (ſ), it is the origin of the ß (Eszett) ligature in the German alphabet.
Z in an Antiqua typeface may be identical with the character representing 3 in other fonts.
A graphical variant of tailed Z is Ezh, as adopted into the International Phonetic Alphabet as the sign for the voiced postalveolar fricative. Tailed Z is to be distinguished from the similar insular G and yogh found in Old English, Irish, Middle English, etc.
Unicode assigns codepoints  in the Letterlike Symbols and Mathematical alphanumeric symbols ranges respectively.

Image:Z-small-VA-64x88.svg|lowercase cursive z
Image:Z-small-Variante.svg|z in a sans serif typeface

Use in English

In modern English orthography the letter 'z' usually represents the sound .
Z represents  by yod-coalescence.
Few words in the Basic English vocabulary begin with Z, though it occurs in words beginning with other letters. It is the most rarely used letter in written English. One native Germanic English word that contains 'z', 'freeze' (past 'froze', participle 'frozen') came to be spelled that way by convention, even though it could have been spelled with 's' (as with 'choose', 'chose', 'chosen').
Z is used in writing to represent the act of sleeping (sometimes as 'zzz' or 'zzzz').  It is used because closed-mouth human snoring often sounds like the pronunciation of the letter. 

Use in other languages

Z stands for a voiced alveolar or voiced dental sibilant  (depending on the regional variant) at the end of syllables.
The letter Z on its own represents ). Z can also appear alone with diacritical marks, namely ź	or ż.
Among non-European languages that have adopted the Latin alphabet, 'z' usually stands for z, such as in Azerbaijani, Igbo, Indonesian, Shona, Swahili, Tatar, Turkish, Turkmen, and Zulu.
In the Kunrei-shiki and Hepburn romanisations of Japanese, 'z' stands for a phoneme whose allophones include .

Metalinguistic usage

In mathematics,  is used to denote the set of integers.

Related letters and other similar characters

Computing codes

Other representations








