[[White Wolf Publishing]]

CATEGORIES: White Wolf, Role-playing game publishing companies, Game manufacturers, Card game publishing companies, Companies established in 1991, Horror book publishing companies

White Wolf Publishing was an American roleplaying game- and former book publisher. The company was founded in 1991 as a merger between Lion RampantA Brief History of Game #10: Lion Rampant: 1987-1990, RPGnet (Retrieved 14 June 2007) and White Wolf Magazine, and was initially led by Mark Rein·Hagen of the former and Steve Wieck and Stewart Wieck of the latter.  Since White Wolf Publishing, Inc. merged with CCP Games in 2006,Announcement of merger with CCP hf. White Wolf Publishing has been an imprint of CCP hf, but doesn't make any books. The name "White Wolf" originates from Michael Moorcock's works.



White Wolf published a line of several different but overlapping games set in the "World of Darkness", a "modern gothic" world that, while seemingly similar to the real world, is home to supernatural terrors, ancient conspiracies, and several approaching apocalypses. The company also published the high fantasy Exalted RPG, the modern mythic Scion, and d20 system material under their Sword & Sorcery imprint, including such titles as the Dungeons & Dragons gothic horror campaign setting Ravenloft, and Monte Cook's Arcana Unearthed series. In order to complement the World of Darkness game line, a LARP system dubbed Mind's Eye Theatre has been published.
White Wolf has also released several series of novels based on the Old World of Darkness, all of which are currently out of print (although many are coming back into availability via print-on-demand).
White Wolf has also ventured in the collectible card game market with Arcadia, Rage, and Vampire: The Eternal Struggle (formerly Jyhad). V:TES, perhaps the most successful card game, was originally published by Wizards of the Coast in 1994, but was abandoned just two years later after a revamped base set, name change and three expansions were published. White Wolf acquired the rights to the game in 2000, even though no new material had been produced for the game in over four years.  Since then, several V:TES expansions have been released, and the game was the only official source of material for the Old World of Darkness, until 2011 when the 20th Anniversary Edition of Vampire: The Masquerade was published and the Onyx Path was announced.
Video games such as Vampire: The Masquerade - Redemption and Vampire: The Masquerade - Bloodlines are based on White Wolf's role-playing game Vampire: The Masquerade.  There are also several Hunter: The Reckoning video games.

Merger

On Saturday, 11 November 2006, White Wolf and CCP Games, the Icelandic MMO development company responsible for EVE Online, announced a merger between the two companies during the keynote address at the EVE Online Fanfest 2006. It was also revealed that a World of Darkness MMORPG was already in the planning stages.

The "Old" or "Classic" World of Darkness game lines

The games of this series use White Wolf's Storyteller System.  Several games inspired spinoffs in the form of "historical" period settings such as the Dark Ages.
In addition to those game lines a series of books was produced under the title World of Darkness.  These provided stand-alone materials for multiple game lines with the focus on a specific region or theme, e.g. WoD: Blood dimmed Tides (about the oceans), WoD: Combat (an alternative 'crossover' combat system to resolve contradictory mechanics and add some sophistication), WoD: Tokyo and WoD: Mafia.
For the Third Edition of Ars Magica, White Wolf hitched that game's pseudo-historical setting to the 'future' World of Darkness setting.  This was a simple adjustment (since the core premise of both settings is 'Earth as we know it' + 'supernatural fiction is reality') and particularly suited to the 'Tremere connection' between a clan of vampires from the original Vampire and a House of magi in the Order of Hermes (the central organization of Ars Magica as well as one of the 'Traditions' in M:TA).

The "New" World of Darkness game lines

The games of this series use White Wolf's newer Storytelling System.

Age of Sorrows

Trinity Universe

Other

Mind's Eye Theatre (LARP)

The majority of the Old World of Darkness games were adapted into the original Mind's Eye Theatre format for live-action roleplaying. Product lines in this era include:
Subsequently, the Mind's Eye Theatre was revamped for the New World of Darkness. A core Mind's Eye Theatre rulebook was published as the LARP analogue to the World of Darkness core rulebook, with several Mind's Eye Theatre adaptations following in suit: The Requiem, The Forsaken, and The Awakening each adapted their respective namesakes to the new system of MET rules.

Imprints and labels

White Wolf has different imprints under which various books are published, most notably:
Black Dog Game Factory was also a fictional company in the World of Darkness, as detailed in the Subsidiaries: A Guide to Pentex game supplement.

The Onyx Path

At GenCon 2012 it was announced that CCP Games/White Wolf would not continue to produce table-top RPGs . Onyx Path Publishing, a new company by White Wolf Creative Director Richard Thomas, purchased the Trinity games and Scion from CCP and became licensee for the production of World of Darkness titles (classic and new), as well as Exalted. Onyx Path does not, however, hold a license to the Mind's Eye Theatre titles.








