[[Del Rosario University]]

CATEGORIES: Colegio mayor nuestra señora del Rosario, Educational institutions established in the 1650s, 1653 establishments, Universities and colleges in Bogotá

Del Rosario University () is a prestigious Colombian university originally founded on Roman Catholic principles, in 1653 by Fray Cristobal de Torres.  Located in Bogotá, due to its important place in Colombian history, it is known as "The Cradle of the Republic". Most faculties reside at the Cloister, the main campus located in the historic-geographical centre of Bogotá. Nowadays the institution is based on secular ideas and remains very influential in Colombian culture and public life. At least 28 of Colombia's presidents have been students of this university. It has influenced and participated in very important transitional processes like the revolution for the independence from Spain and the drafting of the Political National Constitution of 1991. As a curious fact, one of the most important  1886 Constitution's Supreme Court (1936), the so-called golden court, was composed in its majority by lawyers from the Faculty of Jurisprudence.

History

Under the authorization of King Philip IV of Spain, the Archbishop of Santa Fe, Fray Cristobal de Torres founded the Colegio Mayor de Nuestra Señora del Rosario in 1653. By the Royal Decree of 1768 Charles III recognized the institution as a 'College' among with the six halls of Spain, which continued the tradition of the University of Salamanca. Original constitutions of the University, were written by its founder Fray Cristobal de Torres and published by Crístobal de Araque Ponce de León, then Chancellor.
The founder established the Calatrava Cross as the symbol of the University and issued the Constitutions, which remain the governing documents of the school.  The University of El Rosario has always been "from" and "for" the students, established on the basis of "Universitas Scholarium".
It is the only Colombian university that made an accreditation process, supported by the European Association of Universities. It is ranked as "Very Superior" by the ICFES.

Directives

*"Consiliatura"
It is composed by the Rector, who chairs the "Consiliatura" and five members, who are called "Consiliarios". It's the supreme governing body of the University of El Rosario. Besides from acting as advisory board to the Rector, takes care of the university's assets and approves the annual budget of revenues and expenses, among other functions conferred by the Old and New constitutions.
The "Consiliarios" are chosen by an electoral body composed by the Rector and the fifteen "Colegiales", for a period of four years with the possibility of an indefinite re-election. The "Consiliatura" has the responsibility to call the election and elect the president ("Rector") among with "Colegiales".
Current "Consiliarios" are Andrés Pastrana, Alejandro Figueroa Jaramillo, Alberto Fergusson Bermúdez, María Luisa Mesa Zuleta and Jorge Restrepo Palacios.
The current "Rector" (Provost) of the University of Rosario is Hans-Peter Knudsen, elected on November 18, 2002. He holds a degree in Business Administration and a degree in 'University Teaching', both from the University of El Rosario. He also completed studies on 'Renovation of Research Universities' at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and 'University Management' at Harvard University.
The Vice Rector is appointed by the Rector and may hold office indefinitely. The current Vice Rector is Alejandro Venegas Franco. Mr. Venegas is the former Dean of the Faculty of Jurisprudence and former Director of FASECOLDA's Legal Department.
He is a Numerary Member of the Colombian Academy of Law, Corresponding Foreign Member of the National Academy of Law and Social Sciences of Córdoba (Argentina), as well as of the "Grupo de los 100 Juristas de Iberoamérica" (Group of the 100 lawyers of Ibero America), the World Council of the Presidency of the International Association of Insurance Law (Association Internationale de Droit des Assurances) and the Colombian Association of Insurance Law (Acoldese), which he also chairs as its Honorary President.
The "Consiliatura" appoints the Síndico' (Trustee) for the same period of the Rector and may hold office indefinitely. The Trustee is responsible for the management of the resources and assets of the University and must submit an annual report to the then Consiliatura. Miguel Francisco Diago Arbeláez is the current 'Síndico'.
The mission of the 'Secretaría General' (Secretary-General) is to certify the institutional acts of the University, acting as Notary and guaranteeing the legality of the decisions adopted by the University's authorities.  The 'Secretaria General' also ensures the conservation and restoration of the historical heritage of the University and supports the Rector and the Consiliatura in the fulfillment of their responsibilities. The current 'Secretaria General' is Catalina Lleras Figueroa.

Undergraduate Programs

The University has six Faculties and two Schools, which offer both undergraduate and postgraduate degrees.
Until 2008 the University sponsored a male primary/secondary school, which shared its name (Colegio Mayor de Nuestra Señora del Rosario).

Interesting facts

Symbols

The symbols of the University of El Rosario are:
"The Bordadita" Virgin is the Patroness of the University. The  Chapel is named in her honor.
Preserves original documents on the history of the university, which are also part of the historical memory of Colombia. The oldest document dates from 1646. It is the response of King Philip IV of Spain to the intention of the Archbishop of Santafé, Don Cristobal de Torres, to form the Universidad Colegio mayor nuestra señora del Rosario, following the model of the College Archbishop in Salamanca. Among the most significant documentary series are: real ballots, information and cleaning of nobility of blood, decrees on education, text books and medieval tuition books.
This architectural symbol is in the Historic Center of Bogotá, separated from the Avenida Jimenez de Quesada by Plazoleta del Rosario and located at 14th Street and Old Town Street, classified by experts as the oldest in the city, thus informing the Teusaquillo Zipa with the urban areas demarcated by the conquerors. The cloister, was built in the colonial era in Spanish seventeenth century architecture style by Fray Cristobal de Torres. It has been declared a "National Architectural and Cultural Heritage" good. In its interior, it is possible to admire the statue of the founder, Fray Cristóbal de Torres, erected in bronze by Catalan sculptor Renart Dionisio Garcia in 1909.
This landmark has been preserved throughout these three centuries almost in its entirety. The Aula Máxima, where the protocolary ceremonies are held, is one of the best art galleries in the country, with beautiful paintings dating from 1700.
"The Cloister' is listed as a National Heritage Monument of the Republic of Colombia.

Notable alumni

In almost four centuries of history, many distinguished figures have been formed at the Universidad del Rosario, including twenty-eight Presidents of the Republic and many other members of their Cabinets. There has never been a Government in Colombian history that is not composed by at least one alumni from the University. Among them:
Primary/Secondary Male School (Colegio Mayor de Nuestra Señora del Rosario):




