[[Ryan Leslie]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, 1978 births, 21st-century musicians, American Christians, Musicians from Washington, D.C., African-American singer-songwriters, African-American rappers, African-American record producers, American record producers, American pop singer-songwriters, American male singers, Songwriters from Washington, D.C., American male singer-songwriters, American hip hop singers, American musicians, American multi-instrumentalists, Harvard University alumni

Anthony Ryan Leslie (born September 25, 1978), professionally known as Ryan Leslie, is an American record producer, singer-songwriter, multi-instrumentalist and rapper from Washington, D.C. Founder of the media company NextSelection Lifestyle Group, Leslie has produced singles for a number of artists in a variety of genres, ranging from R&B/hip hop to pop to gospel. From 2005–2006, he had his most commercial success to date with NextSelection/Bad Boy/Atlantic recording artist Cassie and her single "Me & U". Leslie's debut album, Ryan Leslie (2008), features the songs "Diamond Girl", "Addiction", and "How It Was Supposed To Be".  He was nominated for a Grammy in 2011.

Early life

His parents are Salvation Army officers who frequently relocate for work. Ryan's family is practicing Christians. Ryan has lived in various states, cities, and countries. At an early age, Leslie taught himself how to play the piano. He developed the ability to recite music, as well as arrange chords to create songs. 
Leslie grew up around music, playing cornet as a child in the Salvation Army band. Ryan later switched to piano because his overbite made it difficult to get proper embouchure on a brass instrument. At Harvard, he joined the Krokodiloes, an a cappella group. Leslie suddenly saw a new future for himself when a friend played him a Stevie Wonder CD freshman year. "I became obsessed with him," says Leslie.  "I wanted to chase that man's career." Thus began the transition from premed Poindexter to R&B Romeo. Leslie became a constant presence at the on-campus recording studio. Fellow student Chiqui Matthew remembers Leslie making beats at every free moment. "He was on a different level of intensity. Most of us were pretty realistic—we're Harvard students; this music stuff is fun, but this isn't the future," says Matthew, who now works with credit derivatives at Goldman Sachs. "But Ryan always had a ten-year plan about how he was going to take over the music industry." While still a college student, Leslie began producing tracks for local Boston artists. Meanwhile, Leslie was beginning to mold his own image, too. "He had this pseudo-sexual, thugged-out Lothario thing," says Matthew. "I never really bought it. He seemed more like a music nerd to me".

Music career

1997–2003: Career beginnings

During his freshman year at Harvard, Leslie devoted many hours per week to creating and developing music in a studio basement on campus. He taught himself basic production skills and also developed a musical style of his own. As the semesters progressed, Leslie spent more and more time in the school's studio molding his craft. He also performed many events around campus and was a part of the school's all male a cappella group The Krokodiloes. Due to the conflict with music and school, Leslie was put on academic probation three times during his college career. He has said in many interviews that during those college years, he became accustomed to getting 2 to 3 hours of sleep per night. To earn disposable income during these years, Leslie sold instrumentals to local artists in the Boston area.
After graduating college, Leslie urged his parents to allow him to go in to the music industry. They told him that he could have  a better future considering he graduated from college at the age of 19. Leslie insisted that he was going to pursue his musical interests for two years and if he didn't like it he would stop. Leslie remained in Boston because of its music scene. He took on community service jobs to help support himself and would spend nights in the recording studio working on his music.
Under the management of Combs, Leslie worked on various Bad Boy Records projects, including releases from Loon, Cheri Dennis, B5, New Edition and Danity Kane. During that time, Leslie co-produced a record for Britney Spears. Also in 2003, Leslie was introduced by his then attorney Ed Woods to Tommy Mottola. Mottola soon became a mentor of Leslie's and offered him a publishing deal with Aspen Songs and a recording contract with Casablanca, Mottola's imprint distributed by Universal Music Group. Under the mentorship of Mottola and Combs, Leslie signed then-aspiring model Cassie Ventura to his imprint, NextSelection in 2005.
In late 2003, Leslie began recording his debut album, entitled Just Right, and released two singles: "The Way That U Move Girl" and "Used 2 Be" (with Fabolous). The album was never officially released due to creative differences between Leslie and his record label.

2004–2010: Debut album, Transition and leaving label

Ryan Leslie returned to the studio in 2006 to record a new debut album. The lead single, "Diamond Girl"  was released in December 2007. The video for "Diamond Girl" was premiered on BET's 106 & Park, and released on Leslie's YouTube channel with a special behind-the-scenes clip. In November 2007, he released a video for a song named "I-R-I-N-A" that was produced in-house and released through his YouTube channel as well.
His second single, "Addiction"  features pop singer and protege Cassie, with a rap cameo from long-time collaborator, rapper Fabolous. The song was officially released in August 2008. Of the two music videos made for the song, the "Making of 'Addiction'" clip became Leslie's most popular video on YouTube, with more than 3.2 million views.
His third single, "How It Was Supposed To Be" also has two music videos: a rock version and a military take on the song, which was Leslie's directorial debut and was co-directed by model Tyson Beckford. The single was released March 23, 2009. After many setbacks, his self-titled album, Ryan Leslie, was finally released on February 10, 2009.  Leslie wrote, arranged, produced, and performed every song on his album. Notable instrumentalists on his debut set include Tommy Mottola, Tom "T-Bone" Wolk, and Brent Paschke.
Ryan Leslie enamored old and new fans alike (June 23) during the first of two back-to-back performances at New York City's Bowery Ballroom. The R&B singer/rapper/songwriter/producer/multi-instrumentalist(who parted ways with former label Universal Motown mid-2010) celebrated his new-found independence with performances of former hits like "Addicted" and "How It Was Supposed to Be," as well as two new tracks: "Glory" and "Maybachs and Diamonds."
"Never had a top ten, but they still respect my art," Ryan Leslie sang during "Glory," which is slated to be included on his third release, "Les Is More"—his first independent album following 2009's self-titled debut and "Transition." "Maybachs and Diamonds" is a slow, groovy tune about flourishing his partner with more than just material things, like "Maybachs and Diamonds."
Initially, Leslie had a four-album deal with Universal, but toward the end of that contract, "Universal was interested in reshaping my deal to more of a 360, and they actually made a counter-offer from the initial recording fund," Leslie tells Billboard. "At that point I saw that as a window to potentially branch off and try something that was going to be new and dynamic."
While Leslie did not make any formal announcements about his departure from Universal Motown during the set, he took some subtle jabs at his previous label home. "I've always wanted to play these songs but I couldn't before," he said while singing "Guardian Angel." "I always felt like this song should be a single.

2011–present: Les Is More and Black Mozart

Ryan Leslie announced on Twitter and Facebook in January 2011, that his third album would be released July 4th, 2011. His first official single from the album released was 'Glory', despite the first singles performed being 'Beautiful Lie' and 'Breathe'. However Leslie would later announce on his website and Twitter account that the album has now been pushed back for a release 'This Fall'. On October 11th, he sent an e-mail to his fanbase saying "I promise 'Les Is More' is just a few weeks away."
Les is More is now a visual album. So far "Glory", "Beautiful Lie", "Good Girl" and "5 Minute Freshen Up" are out on his website. The latter was released on March 20, 2012. "Dress You To Undress You" and "Swiss Francs" are still scheduled for release. Other Tracks Mentioned to be on the album by Leslie via his official Twitter are "Ready or Not" and " Live Good (Riviera Flow) Feat. Raekwon". Leslie has performed the tracks "Breathe (Feat. Mr Hudson) and "One Lonely Heart" live and said they would be included on Les is More. "Joan Of Arc" was released in Mid-2011 and Leslie stated at that time that it would be included on Les is More.
Ryan Leslie announced the date for his album Les Is More via Twitter. The album was released on October 22, 2012. Ryan announced in February 2013 that his fourth studio album Black Mozart would be released 16th April 2013 however delayed the release.  The full album was released to members of Leslie's #Renegades club on August 31, 2013. 

Other ventures

NextSelection Lifestyle Group

While working as a producer, Leslie went on to create NextSelection Lifestyle Group, his music-media company he founded with online marketing partner Rasheed Richmond.
Ryan posts an interactive daily video blog, where he gives viewers a taste of what daily life is like in the music business. Industry parties, TV appearances, and hanging out with beautiful women—it's there for all to see.
"Blogging is something that allows us to document life," Leslie said. "When you look at a lot of successful films, books, a lot of them relate to the experiences of others," and the video blog is a way for him to connect with the masses. "There have been other video blogs, but this one's a first of its kind from a music standpoint," he said  "It's a huge commitment," he said of the video blog. "It takes six, seven hours a day to produce a video blog."  In anticipation for the release of Les Is More, Leslie releases a new music video from his album for every video that reaches one million hits on his website 
Recently, Ryan signed Krys Ivory as his newest act under NextSelection. He also signed YouTube star Mia Rose and singer Clara Castaneda and 
also signed singer-songwriter Corey Neverson. 

Artistry

Musical influences

Leslie has stated in many interviews that Stevie Wonder is one of the biggest influences on his music. He attributes Michael Jackson, Prince, Jimi Hendrix, James Brown, VBak, Quincy Jones, The Beatles, Sconch & McGubbs, Tom Waits and D'Angelo as musical heroes as well. 

Online presence

Leslie's blog, YouTube channel, MySpace page and most recently Twitter have been the biggest contributors to his growing fanbase. His energy and creative spontaneity have earned him the respect from those inside and outside of the music industry. On his website/video diary, there is a clip featuring artists such as Boyz II Men, Chrisette Michelle, Musiq Soulchild, Keri Hilson, Christina Milian, and David Banner praising him for the inspiration they have received from his videos.
Leslie maintains such an active online presence as he believes that it is the future of the music industry. He says that due to the digital music revolution of the past few years, physical compact discs of music will eventually become obsolete, and will become the eight track tape of this generation.

Personal life

Producer Ryan Leslie began spotting Cassie Ventura at clubs and parties in late 2004. He was charmed by Cassie's personality and was finally introduced to her by AJ Crimson, Sean "Diddy" Combs' makeup artist, who had worked with Cassie on one of her photo modeling shoots.
Not long afterward, Cassie approached Ryan Leslie to help her record a song that she wanted to give to her mother as a birthday gift. Leslie put together a duet for the two of them to sing, called "Kiss Me". He was so pleased with the result that he played it for record executive Tommy Mottola who quickly offered Cassie a management deal. Leslie soon signed Cassie to his NextSelection label, and wrote and produced Cassie's first single, "Me & U" in 2005.
Leslie was named one of "New York's 50 Hottest Bachelors" in 2009 by PageSix Magazine, published by the New York Post. 

Legal issues

In October 2010, Leslie's laptop was stolen from his Mercedes, while he was on tour in Cologne, Germany. Leslie would offer $20,000, rising it to $1 million reward for the return of it due to his recent productions that it contained. The laptop was returned however the intellectual property that Leslie was trying to recover was not present, and Leslie did not feel the reward terms had been met. Armin Augstein, who runs a garage in Pulheim, near Cologne, who returned the laptop was granted the $1 million reward in 2012 after a lawsuit. He was later also made pay an extra $180,000 in interest for refusing to pay for those two years. Leslie is still in search for the material that was missing.

Relationships

"Me & U" became a major hit on the Internet, and a video for the song was rushed into production, but withdrawn when it was deemed too risqué. "Me & U" peaked as the No. 3 download on iTunes, and those sales pushed it to No. 6 on the Billboard Hot 100. 
In the meantime, Sean Combs heard "Me & U" in a club, and Ryan Leslie convinced him to partner his Bad Boy Records with Leslie's own NextSelection imprint for the release of Cassie's debut album, Cassie, in August 2006.
Firmly established and working with industry heavyweights, Cassie appeared on AskMen. 62.
Their relationship strengthened as Cassie's whirlwind of success in the music world expanded. "I love Cassie, I love her. I fell in love with her, I fell in love with her music, I fell in love with her family". However, Cassie broke off their relationship and moved on to Sean "Diddy" Combs as they began to work more frequently.
Ironically, Cassie is still signed to NextSelection, though the two have not spoken in some time. "To be honest, we don't really speak. We are still cordial. I saw her at Kanye's Bowery performance and I said 'Hello' to her. You always have the curiosity about what would happen if we got back in the studio, but it's a matter of scheduling and timing. If it ever happens, I am one hundred percent open to it".

Discography

Studio albums

Awards and nominations






