[[Nelson Peltz]]

CATEGORIES: 1942 births, American billionaires, American hedge fund managers, American political fundraisers, Businesspeople from New York City, Corporate raiders, Jewish American philanthropists, Living people, People from Brooklyn, People from Bedford, New York, People from Palm Beach, Florida, Private equity and venture capital investors, Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania alumni

Nelson Peltz (born June 24, 1942) is an American businessman and a founding partner, together with Peter W. May and Edward P. Garden, of Trian Fund Management. L.P., an alternative investment management fund, based in New York. He is non-executive chairman of the Board of The Wendy's Company and a director of Legg Mason, Inc., Mondelēz International and Ingersoll Rand plc. He was formerly a director of H.J. Heinz Company. He was also formerly the Chief Executive Officer of Triangle Industries, a Fortune 100 industrial company.

Early life and education

Peltz was born in 1942 in Brooklyn, New York, and is Jewish, the son of Jewish parents Claire (née Wechsler) and Maurice Herbert Peltz.
Peltz was enrolled at the undergraduate program at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, where he joined the Fraternity of Phi Gamma Delta,  but never completed his degree.
In 1963, he dropped out of school with the intention of becoming a ski instructor in Oregon, Peltz & Sons, the company founded by his grandfather Adolph, which delivered fresh produce and frozen food (Snow Crop)  to restaurants in New York. Ruhling retrieved January 14, 2012
His father gave him free rein with the company, and over the next 15 years he and his older brother Harlan grew the business, later to be called Flagstaff Corporation, into a publicly held company with $150 million in sales
Flagstaff was sold in 1978, having gone bankrupt.nytimes.html

Business career

In the 1980s, Peltz and his business partner, Peter May, who had joined Flagstaff as chief financial officer after having been its accountant, went looking for new acquisitions. They found vending-machine and wire company Triangle Industries, building it into a Fortune 100 industrial company.[ref]
[/ref]  Triangle was sold to Pechiney in 1988.[ref]
[/ref]
In 1997, through an investment vehicle they controlled, Triarc Cos, Peltz and May acquired Snapple, from Quaker Oats. Snapple, together with other beverage brands was sold to Cadbury Schweppes in 2000. The Snapple turnaround was featured as a Harvard Business School case study.
In 2005, Peltz, May, and Ed Garden, founded Trian Fund Management, L.P. As an activist investing firm, Trian has facilitated change at such companies as Heinz, Cadbury, Kraft Foods
, 
and Family Dollar.
In 2006 Trian was involved in a proxy contest with Heinz to get five independent directors on the board of Heinz. In the end Trian succeeded in getting two members on the board, including Peltz.
In 2007, Trian bought a 3% share of Cadbury-Schweppes which may have influenced the spin-off of Cadbury Schweppes Americas Beverages from the Cadbury Schweppes confectionery group. In 2007, Trian also bought $1.8 billion in shares of Kraft Foods, roughly a 3% of the total equity of the food maker.
On April 24, 2008, it was announced that Triarc Cos. would merge with burger chain Wendy's. The merger was completed on September 29, 2008.[ref]
[/ref] The new company was named Wendy's Arby's Group and traded on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol WEN. On July 25, 2011, Wendy's Arby's sold Arby's to Roark Capital Group and changed its name to The Wendy's Company.[ref]
[/ref]
According to CNBC, on February 15, 2011, Trian offered to buy Family Dollar for $55–60 per share.
In mid-February 2011, Trian, announced it had accumulated an 8% stake in the Family Dollar company and indicated a willingness to participate in a take private LBO for the company with a total value of about $7 to $8 billion. This overture was rejected by the company management and board of directors.
Peltz was appointed to the Ingersoll-Rand board of directors in 2012.
In August 2013, it was reported that Trian, under Peltz's management, held an approximate $1.25 billion ownership stake in E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company. 
In January 2014,  as one of the company's largest shareholders, with a current beneficial ownership of more than 46 million shares, Peltz was appointed to the Board of Directors of global snacking company, Mondelēz International, Inc. ([ref]
</ref> 
In February 2014, as a beneficial owner of approximately $1.2 billion of PepsiCo, Inc. (
In February 2014 Forbes listed Nelson Peltz as one of the 25 Highest-Earning hedge fund managers in 2013. His 2013 total earnings was $430 millions, ranked 16th among the 25 top earning hedge fund managers. 

Personal life

Peltz has been married three times. His third wife is Claudia Heffner, a former fashion model, with whom he has eight children. He has two children from his prior marriages. CNN Money: "The reinvention of Nelson Peltz" Among Peltz' children are actors Nicola Peltz 
Peltz resides in Bedford, New York. He also owns Montsorrel, which is his house in Palm Beach, Florida previously owned by Anita Young, the sister of Georgia O'Keeffe. 
His current net worth is estimated at $1.65 billion.

Philanthropy

In 2005, Peltz was among 53 entities that contributed the maximum of $250,000 to the second inauguration of President George W. Bush.

Awards and recognition

He was recognized by the National Association of Corporate Directors (NACD) in 2010, 2011 and 2012 as among the most influential people in global corporate governance.






