[[Carmarthenshire County Council]]

CATEGORIES: Carmarthenshire, Local authorities of Wales

Carmarthenshire County Council () is the local authority for the county of Carmarthenshire, Wales, providing a range of services under the control of elected county councillors that include education, planning, transport, social services and public safety. The council is one of twenty-two unitary authorities that came into existence on 1 April 1996 under the provisions of the Local Government (Wales) Act 1994. It took over local government functions previously provided by Carmarthen District, Dinefwr Borough,  Llanelli Borough councils and the Carmarthenshire area of what was Dyfed County Council.
The council is based in County Hall in Carmarthen. The County Hall was designed by Percy Thomas in 1935 but not completed until 1955. It replaced the Carmarthen Gaol built by John Nash on part of Carmarthen Castle's site.

Antecedents

It is the second body of this name; the previous Carmarthenshire County Council was formed on 1 April 1889 by the Local Government Act 1888 and was abolished on 31 March 1974 by the Local Government Act 1972.
The first election to the original council were held in January 1889 and the majority of the seats were won by the Liberals. This pattern continued until the 1920s from which time most rural seats were held by Independents while the Labour Party dominated the industrial part of the county.

Organisation

It has adopted the Cabinet system of running the county, and since 2004 ran by the Independents and Labour groups. Currently there are 28 Plaid Cymru councillors, 22 Independents, 22 Labour  and 2 others. The Leader of the Council is Cllr Kevin Madge (Labour). The Chief Executive, Mark Vincent James, was awarded the CBE for services to Local Government in Wales in the 2012 New Year Honours. James was forced to step aside temporarily in 2014 after a criminal investigation was launched into his affairs. 

Mark James

In 2013 Chief Executive Mark James was sued for libel by Jacqui Thompson, a local blogger and trenchant critic of the council. He brought a counterclaim against Mrs Thompson; his legal action was funded by the council."Blogger and Carmarthenshire council in High Court libel fight" BBC News 14 February Although he won his action,
In February 2014, a criminal investigation was launched into these payments by Gloucestershire Constabulary: Mark James stepped aside for the duration of the investigation. The episode led to criticism of senior councillors, including the council leader, Kevin Madge, who had agreed these financial arrangements and supported James in his actions.

Political makeup

Elections take place every four years. The last election was held on 3 May 2012

Current composition

Historic results

Electoral divisions

The county is divided into 58 electoral wards returning 74 councillors. Most of these wards are coterminous with communities. Most communities in Carmarthenshire have a community council. For each ward, councillors are elected to sit on Carmarthenshire County Council. The following table lists council wards, community councils and associated geographical areas.  Communities with their own community council are marked with a *.
See also






