[[1913 Paterson silk strike]]

CATEGORIES: 1913 labor disputes and strikes, 1913 in New Jersey, Labor disputes in the United States, Industrial Workers of the World, Economic history of New Jersey, History of Paterson, New Jersey, Textile and clothing strikes, Silk production

The 1913 Paterson silk strike was a work stoppage involving silk mill workers in Paterson, New Jersey. The strike involved demands for establishment of an eight-hour day and improved working conditions. The strike began on February 1, 1913, and ended six months later, on July 28.

History

The strike began on March 3, 1913. During the course of the strike, approximately 1,850 strikers were arrested, including Industrial Workers of the World leaders William Dudley Haywood and Elizabeth Gurley Flynn.
In an effort to support the strike financially, many artists based in Greenwich Village, New York, organized a pageant play in which the events of the strike were reenacted. The pageant was held at Madison Square Garden, and drew a large crowd.
Paterson's strike was part of a series of industrial strikes in the garment and textile industries of the American east from the years 1909 to 1913. The participants of these strikes were largely immigrant factory workers from southern and eastern Europe. Class division, race, gender, and manufacturing expertise all caused internal dissension among the striking parties and this led many reformist intellectuals in the Northeast to question their effectiveness.
The Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) was the main outside agent behind both the Lawrence Textile Strike and the Paterson silk strike and was primarily faulted with causing the disruptions by law enforcement authorities. On February 25, 1913, the first day of the strike, the IWW's prominent feminist leader Elizabeth Gurley Flynn was arrested after giving a talk on uniting strikers across racial boundaries, the authorities falsely charging her and her fellow speakers with inciting violence through radical speech.  Regardless, the strikes were carried out for months even after the arrest of IWW leaders, dispelling the notion that the workers were only agitated by outsiders.
The city's suspicion about the solely external source of Paterson's labor militancy was in direct conflict with the IWW's actual philosophy. It promoted grassroots mobilization and allowed the strikers themselves freedom to choose the direction of their militancy.  William D. Haywood, a founding member of the IWW and man  venerated for his crucial involvement in the Lawrence strike, helped strikers create their own democratically organized strike committee, representing all of the workers' nationalities and not subject to the supervision of other more conservative and centralized labor groups.  Paterson's strike was distinguished because of this decentralization.
The Paterson strikers mobilized after years of declining wages, continued poor working conditions, and long work days.  The increasing number of women and children in the labor supply due to changing social customs and improved health through technological advances provided cheaper labor for mill owners and reduced demand for more expensive male laborers, bidding down their wages.
The first major change in the local silk industry leading up to the 1913 strike was the Doherty Silk Company's construction of a modernized mill in nearby Clifton, NJ in 1911. The multiple-loom system of this mill upset workers who feared the inevitable transformation of all of Paterson's mills and the subsequent loss of jobs. In response, sixty weavers struck, beginning a string of union meetings with business agents to negotiate wages for silk workers in Paterson.
With the help of the IWW, Paterson silk workers were able to put together a general strike recruiting thousands of workers. Two weeks into the strike, all of types of weavers united to create a list of demands from mill owners and employer ranging from minimum age cut-offs to protect children to abolishing the multiple-loom systems to ensure the presence of jobs.   Manufacturers responded with a seven part statement regarding the economic unviability of the demands among other concerns.
Ultimately, the strike ended in failure on July 8, 1913. Scholars cite an important reason for this failure as Paterson's necessary adaptation to the new machinery and new economics of the silk industry.  Manufacturers would not acquiesce to the demand s of strikers because they simply could not. Without producing goods at competitive prices through new machinery and cheap labor, they would be put out of business by firms in Pennsylvania.

Legacy

The strike was featured in the 1981 film Reds. It is commemorated today at the Pietro and Maria Botto House National Landmark in Haledon, New Jersey, which served as a rallying point during the strike.





Further reading


