[[Hiroshima Station]]

CATEGORIES: Geibi Line, Hiroshima City Network, Stations of West Japan Railway Company in Hiroshima city, Kabe Line, Kure Line, Sanyō Main Line, Sanyō Shinkansen, Railway stations opened in 1894

 is a railway station located in Minami-ku, Hiroshima, Japan, operated by West Japan Railway Company (JR West). Hiroshima Station is the terminal station for several lines, and all Sanyō Shinkansen trains stop here.

Station layout

Hiroshima Station has two main entrances: the north — or Shinkansen — entrance, and the south entrance. Until the 1975 opening of the Shinkansen service, the Shinkansen entrance was called the "north entrance", and many local residents, newspapers, and real estate advertisements continue to refer to it as the "north entrance".
A pedestrian tunnel connects the area in front of the Shinkansen entrance to an underground plaza underneath the south entrance to Hiroshima Station. The tunnel includes many gift shops and restaurants, as well as two exits to Fukuya, one to the Hiroshima Station Tram Stop, one in front of the Hiroshima Higashi Post Office, and one directly in front of the south entrance to Hiroshima Station.
Elevator and escalator access is available for several of the entrances. Events are sometimes held in the large area of the underground plaza in front of the entrance to Fukuya.

Platforms

The Shinkansen station has two island platforms which serve a total of four tracks. The non-Shinkansen lines use three island platforms and one side platform serving eight tracks.








Other tracks:

Adjacent stations












Hiroden

History

Connecting bus routes

Chugoku JR Bus

Chugoku JR bus services are operated between Hiroshima Station at the "Shinkansen entrance" (North side) and next stations via Hiroshima Bus Center.

Hiroden Bus

Airport limousine bus service is operated from "Shinkansen entrance" (North side).
Other bus services are operated from "Shinkansen entrance" and "Minami entrance" (South side).

Hiroshima Bus

Airport limousine bus service is operated from "Shinkansen entrance" (North side).
Other bus services are operated from "Minami entrance" (South side).

Geiyo Bus

Airport limousine bus service is operated from "Shinkansen entrance" (North side).
Other bus services are operated from "Minami entrance" (South side).

Hiroshima Kotsu

Airport limousine bus service is operated from "Shinkansen entrance" (North side).
Other bus services are operated from "Minami entrance" (South side).

Highway access

Surrounding area

South

North




