[[Yoko Ono]]

CATEGORIES: 1933 births, Apple Records artists, Artists from New York, Astralwerks artists, Avant-garde singers, COINTELPRO targets, Conceptual artists, Japanese contemporary artists, Counterculture of the 1960s, Japanese women film directors, Female rock singers, Feminist artists, Feminist musicians, Fluxus, Gakushuin University alumni, Geffen Records artists, Grammy Award-winning artists, Japanese feminists, Japanese film directors, Japanese expatriates in the United Kingdom, Japanese experimental musicians, Japanese pacifists, Japanese performance artists, Japanese women artists, Lennon family, Living people, Japanese multimedia artists, Musicians from New York, Musicians from Tokyo, Japanese emigrants to the United States, People from Scarsdale, New York, People from Sunninghill, Plastic Ono Band members, Polydor Records artists, Postmodern artists, Rykodisc artists, Sarah Lawrence College alumni, Singers from New York, Sound artists, The Dirty Mac members, Yoko Ono, American women activists, Synthpop musicians, Electronica musicians, 20th-century singers, 21st-century singers

Yoko Ono (オノ・ヨーコ 小野 洋子 Ono Yōko), born February 18, 1933, is a Japanese artist, singer-songwriter, and peace activist. She is the second wife and widow of John Lennon and is also known for her work in avant-garde art, music and filmmaking.
Dropping out of the graduate track program in philosophy at Tokyo's Peers School, Ono moved to New York in 1953 joining her immediate family who were already there. After some time at Sarah Lawrence College, she became involved in New York City's downtown artists scene, collaborating and working with members in and around the Fluxus group. An independent artist in her own right before meeting Lennon, both the media and the public were critical of her for years. She was repeatedly criticized for her influence over Lennon and his music, and blamed for the breakup of the Beatles: The couple's early years coincided with the band's final ones. Her experimental art was also not popularly understood, and, after Lennon's death, her disagreements with Paul McCartney received as much attention as her billboards and music releases, which the media usually advanced simply as attempts at self-promotion.
This public perception shifted over time, helped by, among other things, a retrospective at a Whitney Museum branch in 1989. This was followed by a 1992 interview in L.A.-based music magazine, Option which coincided with the release of the six-disc box set Onobox. Retrospectives of her artwork were presented at the Japan Society in New York City in 2001, in Bielefeld, Germany, and the UK in 2008, and Frankfurt, Krems, Austria, and Bilbao, Spain in 2013. She received a Golden Lion Award for lifetime achievement from the Venice Biennale in 2009 and the 2012 Oskar Kokoschka Prize, Austria's highest award for applied contemporary art.
As Lennon's widow she works to preserve his legacy, funding and maintaining Strawberry Fields in New York City, the Imagine Peace Tower in Iceland, and the John Lennon Museum in Saitama, Japan. Individually and under her and Lennon's name, she has made significant philanthropic contributions to arts, peace, Philippine and Japan disaster relief, and outreach programs for AIDS and autism. She has a daughter, Kyoko Chan Cox, from her marriage to Anthony Cox and a son, Sean Lennon, from her marriage to Lennon. She and Sean collaborate frequently musically.
She brought feminism to the forefront in her music influencing artists as diverse as the B-52s and Meredith Monk. Her collaborative albums with Lennon under the Plastic Ono Band rubric — Live Peace in Toronto 1969 and 1972's Some Time in New York City — reached No. 10 and No. 48 on the album charts respectively. (Double Fantasy from 1980, released three weeks before Lennon's death, reached No. 1.)  Since 2003, eleven of her songs, mostly remixes of her older work, have hit No. 1 on the US dance chart.
She and Lennon famously used their honeymoon as a stage for public protests against the Vietnam War in their Bed-Ins for Peace in Amsterdam and Montreal in spring of 1969. In addition to co-writing "Give Peace a Chance,"

Early life and family

She was born in Tokyo on February 18, 1933, to Isoko Ono (小野 磯子 Ono Isoko) and Eisuke Ono (小野 英輔 Ono Eisuke), a banker and one-time classical pianist. Isoko's father was ennobled in 1915. Isoko's paternal grandfather Zenjiro Yasuda (安田 善次郎 Yasuda Zenjirō) was an affiliate of the Yasuda clan and zaibatsu Eisuke came from a long line of samurai warrior-scholars. The kanji translation of Yoko's first name Yoko means "ocean child".
Two weeks before Yoko's birth, Eisuke was transferred to San Francisco by his employer, the Yokohama Specie Bank. The rest of the family followed soon after, with Yoko meeting Eisuke when she was two. Her younger brother Keisuke was born in December 1936. Yoko was enrolled in piano lessons from the age of 4. In 1937, the family was transferred back to Japan and Ono enrolled at Tokyo's Gakushuin (also known as the Peers School), one of the most exclusive schools in Japan.
In 1940, the family moved to New York City. The next year, Eisuke was transferred in 1941 from New York City to Hanoi, and the family returned to Japan. Ono was enrolled in Keimei Gakuen, an exclusive Christian primary school run by the Mitsui family. She remained in Tokyo through the great fire-bombing of March 9, 1945, during which she was sheltered with other family members in a special bunker in the Azabu district of Tokyo, far from the heavy bombing. Ono later went to the Karuizawa mountain resort with members of her family.
Ono and her family were forced to beg for food while pulling their belongings in a wheelbarrow. It was during this period in her life, Ono says, that she developed her "aggressive" attitude and understanding of "outsider" status when children taunted her and Keisuke, who were once well-to-do.  Other stories have her mother bringing a large number of goods with them to the countryside, where they bartered them for food. In one anecdote, her mother bartered a German-made sewing machine for 
By April 1946, Gakushuin was reopened and Ono re-enrolled. The school, located near the imperial palace, had not been damaged by the war, and Ono found herself a classmate of Prince Akihito, the future emperor of Japan. She graduated in 1951 and was accepted into the philosophy program of Gakushuin University as the first woman to enter the department. However, she left the school after two semesters. 18, Japan Policy Research Institute, November 2000.

New York

College and downtown beginnings

Ono's family moved to Scarsdale, New York, without her after the war.  When she later rejoined her family in the US, she enrolled nearby in Sarah Lawrence College.  While her parents approved of her college choice, Ono said they were disapproved of her lifestyle and chastised her for befriending people they found "beneath" her.  In spite of her parents' disapproval, Ono loved meeting artists, poets and others who represented the "bohemian" lifestyle for which she longed for herself.  Visiting galleries and art happenings in the city whetted her desire to display her own artistic endeavors publicly. American avant-garde artist, composer and musician La Monte Young, her first important contact in the New York art world, helped Ono start her career by using her Chambers Street loft in Tribeca as a performance space. After Ono set a painting on fire at one performance, her mentor John Cage advised her to treat the paper with flame retardant.

Return to Japan, early career, and motherhood

In 1956, Ono left college to elope with composer Toshi Ichiyanagi, Later that year, on November 28, 1962, Ono married Anthony Cox, an American jazz musician, film producer, and art promoter, who was instrumental in securing her release from the Japanese mental institution. However, because Ono had neglected to finalize her divorce from Ichiyanagi, her second marriage was annulled on March 1, 1963.  After finalizing the divorce, Cox and Ono married again on June 6, 1963. She gave birth to their daughter Kyoko Chan Cox two months later on August 8, 1963.
The marriage quickly fell apart, but the Coxes stayed together for the sake of their joint careers. They performed at Tokyo's Sogetsu Hall, with Ono lying atop a piano played by John Cage. Soon, the couple returned to New York with Kyoko. In the early years of the marriage, Ono left most of Kyoko's parenting to Cox while she pursued her art full-time. Tony also managed her publicity. She and Cox divorced on February 2, 1969. However, in 1971, Cox disappeared with their then-eight-year-old daughter, in the midst of the custody battle. He won custody after claiming Ono was an "unfit mother" for drug use. Ono's ex-husband subsequently raised Kyoko under the name Ruth Holman in an organization known as the Church of the Living Word (or "the Walk"). Ono and Lennon searched for Kyoko for years, to no avail. She first saw Kyoko again in 1998.

John Lennon

Fluxus, a loose association of Dada-inspired avant-garde artists that developed in the early 1960s, was active in New York and Europe
There are two versions of the story regarding how Lennon met Ono.  According to the first, on November 9, 1966, Lennon went to the Indica Gallery in London, where Ono was preparing her conceptual art exhibit, and they were introduced by gallery owner John Dunbar.
Lennon was also intrigued by Ono's Hammer A Nail. Viewers hammered a nail into a wooden board, creating the art piece. Although the exhibition had not yet opened, Lennon wanted to hammer a nail into the clean board, but Ono stopped him.  Dunbar asked her, "Don't you know who this is? He's a millionaire! He might buy it."  Ono supposedly had not heard of the Beatles, but relented on the condition that Lennon pay her five shillings, to which Lennon replied, "I'll give you an imaginary five shillings and hammer an imaginary nail in."
In a second version of Ono's and Lennon's first meeting, told by Paul McCartney, Ono was in London in 1965 compiling original musical scores for a book on which John Cage was working entitled Notations.  McCartney declined to give her any of his own manuscripts, but suggested that Lennon might oblige. Lennon did, giving Ono the original handwritten lyrics to "The Word."
In a 2002 interview, she said, "I was very attracted to him. It was a really strange situation." The two began corresponding and, in September 1967, Lennon sponsored Ono's solo show at Lisson Gallery in London.  When Lennon's wife Cynthia asked for an explanation for Ono's telephoning their home, he told her that Ono was only trying to obtain money for her "avant-garde bullshit." after which, he said, they "made love at dawn"."Lennon, Cynthia, A Twist of Lennon, Avon, ISBN 978-0-380-45450-1, 1978, p. 183
Lennon wrote and recorded "Happiness is a Warm Gun" on September 24 and 25, 1968. 107-108 It contains sexual references toward Ono. A few weeks after Lennon's divorce from Cynthia was granted, Ono became pregnant though suffered a miscarriage of what would have been a male child on November 21, 1968. 800

Bed-Ins and other early collaborations

During Lennon's last two years with the Beatles, he and Ono began attending as well as creating their own public protests against the Vietnam War. They were married at the registry office in Gibraltar on March 20, 1969, and spent their honeymoon in Amsterdam campaigning with a week-long Bed-In for Peace. They planned another Bed-In in the US, but were denied entry to the country. II, "Geographies of John and Yoko's 1969 Campaign for Peace: An Intersection of Celebrity, Space, Art, and Activism," in Johansson, Ola, Bell, Thomas L., eds., Sound, Society and the Geography of Popular Music, Ashgate, ISBN 978-0-7546-7577-8, 2009, p. 16 They held one instead at the Queen Elizabeth Hotel in Montreal, where they recorded "Give Peace a Chance". Lennon later stated his regrets about feeling "guilty enough to give McCartney credit as co-writer on my first independent single instead of giving it to Yoko, who had actually written it with me."Norman, Philip, John Lennon: The Life, 2008, Doubleday Canada, p. 608, ISBN 978-0-385-66100-3 The famous couple often combined advocacy with performance art, such as in "bagism", first introduced during a Vienna press conference, where they satirised prejudice and stereotyping by wearing a bag over their entire bodies. Lennon detailed this period in the Beatles' song "The Ballad of John and Yoko". 550
Lennon changed his name by deed poll on April 22, 1969, switching out Winston for Ono as a middle name.  Although he used the name John Ono Lennon thereafter, official documents referred to him as John Winston Ono Lennon, since he was not permitted to revoke a name given at birth. 64 The couple settled at Tittenhurst Park at Sunninghill, Berkshire, in southeast England. 615 et seq When Ono was injured in a car accident, Lennon arranged for a king-sized bed to be brought to the recording studio as he worked on the Beatles' last recorded album, Abbey Road. 279–80
The two collaborated on many albums, beginning in 1968 when Lennon was still a Beatle, with Unfinished Music No.1: Two Virgins, an album of experimental musique concrète. The same year, the couple contributed an experimental piece to The White Album called "Revolution 9".  Also on The White Album, Ono contributed backing vocals on "Birthday", and one line of lead vocals on "The Continuing Story of Bungalow Bill."  The latter marked the only occasion in a Beatles recording in which a woman sings lead vocals. 284

The Plastic Ono Band

Ono influenced Lennon to produce more "autobiographical" output and, after "The Ballad of John and Yoko", they decided it would be better to form their own band than to put the material out under the Beatles name., Chicago: Chicago Review Press, 2007, ISBN 978-1-55652-733-3, 1556527330 In 1969, the Plastic Ono Band's first album, Live Peace in Toronto 1969, was recorded during the Toronto Rock and Roll Revival festival. This first incarnation of the group also consisted of guitarist Eric Clapton, bass player Klaus Voormann, and drummer Alan White. The first half of their performance consisted of rock standards. During the second half, Ono took to the microphone and performed an avant-garde set along with the band, finishing with music that consisted mainly of feedback, while she screamed and sang. John Lennon: Listen to This Book (illustrated ed.). S.l.: Paper Jukebox. .

First solo album and Fly

Ono released her first solo album, Yoko Ono/Plastic Ono Band, in 1970 as a companion piece to Lennon's better-known John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band. The two albums also had companion covers: Ono's featured a photo of her leaning on Lennon, and Lennon's a photo of him leaning on Ono. Her album included raw, harsh vocals, which bore a similarity with sounds in nature (especially those made by animals) and free jazz techniques used by wind and brass players. Performers included Ornette Coleman, other renowned free jazz performers, and Ringo Starr. Some songs on the album consisted of wordless vocalizations, in a style that would influence Meredith Monk
When Lennon was invited to play with Frank Zappa at the Fillmore (then the Filmore West) on June 5, 1971, Ono joined them. Later that year, she released Fly, a double album. In it, she explored slightly more conventional psychedelic rock with tracks including "Midsummer New York" and "Mind Train", in addition to a number of Fluxus experiments.  She also received minor airplay with the ballad "Mrs. Lennon".  The track "Don't Worry, Kyoko (Mummy's Only Looking for Her Hand in the Snow)" was an ode to Ono's missing daughter,

Separation from Lennon and reunion

After the Beatles disbanded, Ono and Lennon lived together in London and then in New York—the latter to escape the tabloid racism of the former.
By December 1974, Lennon and Pang were considering buying a house together, and he was refusing to accept Ono's phone calls. The next month, Lennon agreed to meet Ono, who claimed to have found a cure for smoking. After the meeting, he failed to return home or call Pang. When Pang telephoned the next day, Ono told her Lennon was unavailable, being exhausted after a hypnotherapy session. Two days later, Lennon reappeared at a joint dental appointment with Pang, stupefied and confused to such an extent that Pang believed he had been brainwashed. He told her his separation from Ono was now over, though Ono would allow him to continue seeing her as his mistress.
Ono and Lennon's son, Sean, was born on October 9, 1975, Lennon's 35th birthday. John did not help relations with his first son when he described Julian in 1980 as being part of the "ninety percent of the people on this planet resulted from an unplanned pregnancy" and that "Sean is a planned child, and therein lies the difference." He said, "I don't love Julian any less as a child. He's still my son, whether he came from a bottle of whiskey or because they didn't have pills in those days."

Lennon's murder, tributes, and memorials

John Lennon retired from music, becoming a househusband to care for Sean, until shortly before his murder in December 1980, which Ono witnessed at close range.  She has stated that the couple were thinking about going out to dinner after spending several hours in a recording studio, but were returning to their apartment instead, because Lennon wanted to see Sean before he was put to bed.
Ono funded the construction and maintenance of the Strawberry Fields memorial in New York City's Central Park, directly across from the Dakota Apartments where they lived and Lennon died. It was officially dedicated on October 9, 1985, which would have been his 45th birthday. In 1990, Ono collaborated with music consultant Jeff Pollack to honor what would have been Lennon's 50th birthday with a worldwide broadcast of "Imagine".  Over 1,000 stations in over 50 countries participated in the simultaneous broadcast. Ono felt the timing was perfect, considering the escalating conflicts in the Middle East, Eastern Europe, and Germany.
In 2000, she founded the John Lennon Museum in Saitama, Saitama, Japan. In March 2002, she was present with Cherie Blair, at the unveiling of a 7-foot statue of Lennon, to mark the renaming of Liverpool airport to the Liverpool John Lennon Airport. (Julian and Cynthia Lennon were present at the unveiling of the John Lennon Peace Monument next to ACC Liverpool in the same city eight years later.) On October 9, 2007, she dedicated a new memorial called the Imagine Peace Tower, located on the island of Viðey, 1 km outside the Skarfabakki harbour in Reykjavík, Iceland. Each year, between October 9 and December 8, it projects a vertical beam of light high into the sky. In 2009, Ono created an exhibit called "John Lennon: The New York City Years" for the NYC Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Annex. The exhibit used music, photographs, and personal items to depict Lennon's life in New York, and a portion of the cost of each ticket was donated to Spirit Foundation, a charitable foundation set up by Lennon and Ono.

Artwork

Association with Fluxus

Ono was an occasional member of Fluxus, whose founder George Maciunas, her friend during the 1960s, admired her work and promoted it with enthusiasm. In one example of Ono's work during this time, she took a fly as her alter ego, then used it as inspiration for her work.
John Cage and Marcel Duchamp were significant influences on Ono's art.
After Cage finished teaching at the New School in the summer of 1960, Ono was determined to rent a place to present her works along with the work of other avant-garde artists in the city. She eventually found a cheap loft in downtown Manhattan at 112 Chambers Street that she used as a studio and living space. Supporting herself through secretarial work and lessons in the traditional Japanese arts at the Japan Society, Ono allowed composer La Monte Young to organize concerts in the loft. The Chambers Street series hosted some of Ono's earliest conceptual artwork, including Painting to Be Stepped On, which was a scrap of canvas on the floor that became a completed artwork upon the accrual of footprints. With that work, Ono suggested that a work of art no longer needed to be mounted on a wall and inaccessible. She showed this work and other instructional work again at Macunias's AG Gallery in July 1961.

Cut Piece, 1964

Ono was an explorer of conceptual art and performance art. A seminal performance work is Cut Piece, first performed in 1964 at the Sogetsu Art Center in Tokyo. It had one simple but destructive verb as its instruction: "Cut." Ono executed the performance by walking to the center of a stage in her best garments and inviting the audience to cut off her clothing, casually sitting on the floor legs tucked underneath, and audience members would begin.
In 1965, she performed the piece at Carnegie Hall, where it received a lot of attention and the audience was more aggressive. She performed it again in London where the audience was even more zealous, and at other venues, garnering drastically different reactions, depending on the audience. In Kyoto, one man dramatically raised the scissors over her head, which culled from Ono a reaction more of dismay than fear. London participants required her to be protected by security; the performance had been publicized as part of Gustav Metzger's Destruction of Art Symposium. Of the piece, John Hendricks in the catalogue to Ono's Japan Society retrospective wrote: "Piece'' unveils the interpersonal alienation that characterizes social relationships between subjects, dismantling the disinterested Kantian aesthetic model..... It demonstrates the reciprocity between artists, objects, and viewers and the responsibility beholders have to the reception and preservation of art."
Other performers of the piece have included Charlotte Moorman and John Hendricks. Ono reprised the piece in Paris in 2003, in the low post-9/11 period between the US and France, saying she hoped to show that this is "a time where we need to trust each other." In 2013, Peaches reprised it at the multi-day Meltdown festival at the Southbank Centre in London, which Ono curated.

Grapefruit book, 1964

Another example of her conceptual art includes her book of instructions titled Grapefruit.  First published in 1964, the book includes surreal, Zen-like instructions to be completed in the mind of the reader.  One example is "Hide and Seek Piece: Hide until everybody goes home. Hide until everybody forgets about you. Hide until everybody dies."  An example of heuristic art, Grapefruit was published several times, most widely distributed by Simon and Schuster in 1971, who reprinted it again in 2000. David Bourdon, art critic for The Village Voice and Vogue, called Grapefruit "one of the monuments of conceptual art of the early 1960's."  He noted that her conceptual approach was made more acceptable when white male artists like Joseph Kosuth and Lawrence Weiner came in and "did virtually the same things" she did, and that her take also has a poetic and lyrical side that sets it apart from the work of other conceptual artists.
Ono would enact many of the book's scenarios as performance pieces throughout her career, which formed the basis for her art exhibitions, including one highly publicized show at the Everson Museum in Syracuse, New York, that was nearly closed when it was besieged by excited Beatles fans, who broke several of the art pieces and flooded the toilets.

Experimental films, 1964–1972

Ono was also an experimental filmmaker who made 16 films between 1964 and 1972, gaining particular renown for a 1966 Fluxus film called simply No. 4, often referred to as Bottoms.
In March 2004, the ICA London, showed most of her films from this period in their exhibition The Rare Films of Yoko Ono. ICA website. She also acted in an obscure exploitation film in 1965, Satan's Bed.

Wish Tree, 1981-present

Another example of Ono's participatory art was her Wish Tree project, in which a tree native to the installation site is installed. Her 1996 Wish Piece had the following instructions:
Her Wish Tree installation in the Sculpture Garden of the Museum of Modern Art, New York, established in July 2010, has attracted contributions from all over the world. Other installation locations include London, and Dublin.

Recognition and retrospectives

John Lennon once described her as "the world's most famous unknown artist: everybody knows her name, but nobody knows what she does." and Zbigniew Rybczyński.
In 1989, the Whitney Museum held a retrospective of her work, marking Ono's reentry into the New York art world after a hiatus.
as well as the Skowhegan Medal for work in assorted media. and where she had worked in the late '50s and early '60s.
In 2008, she showed a large retrospective exhibition, Between The Sky And My Head, at the Kunsthalle Bielefeld, Bielefeld, Germany, and the Baltic Centre for Contemporary Art in Gateshead, England. The following year, she showed a selection of new and old work as part of her show "Anton's Memory" in Venice, Italy. imaginepeace. In February 2013, to coincide with her 80th birthday, the largest retrospective of her work, Half-a-Wind Show, opened at the Schirn Kunsthalle Frankfurt
and travelled to Denmark's Louisiana Museum of Modern Art, Austria's Kunsthalle Krems, and Spain's Guggenheim Museum Bilbao.

Musical career

Pre-Lennon

Ono took piano from the age of 4 to 12 or 13. She attended kabuki performances with her mother, who was trained in shamisen, koto, otsuzumi, kotsuzumi, nagauta, and could read Japanese musical scores. At 14 Yoko took up vocal training in lieder-singing. At Sarah Lawrence, she studied poetry with Alastair Reid, English literature with Kathryn Mansell, and music composition with the Viennese-trained André Singer. Of this time Ono has said that her heroes were the twelve-tone composers Arnold Schoenberg and Alban Berg. She said, "I was just fascinated with what they could do. I wrote some twelve-tone songs, then my music went into an area that my teacher felt was really a bit off track, and..... he said, 'Well, look, there are people who are doing things like what you do and they're called avant-garde.'" Singer introduced her to the work of Edgar Varèse, John Cage, and Henry Cowell. She left college and moved to New York in 1957, supporting herself through secretarial work and lessons in the traditional Japanese arts at the Japan Society.
She met Cage through Ichiyanagi Toshi in Cage's legendary composition class at the New School for Social Research,

1980s

In early 1980, Lennon heard Lene Lovich and The B-52's' "Rock Lobster" on vacation in Bermuda, and it reminded him of Ono's musical sound. He took this as an indication that her sound had reached the mainstream.
On December 8, 1980, Lennon and Ono were in the studio working on Ono's song "Walking on Thin Ice". When they returned to The Dakota, their home in New York City, Lennon was shot dead by Mark David Chapman, a deranged fan who had been stalking Lennon for two months. "Walking on Thin Ice (For John)" was released as a single less than a month later, and became Ono's first chart success, peaking at No. 58 and gaining major underground airplay. In 1981, she released the album Season of Glass, which featured the striking cover photo of Lennon's bloody spectacles next to a half-filled glass of water, with a window overlooking Central Park in the background. This photograph sold at an auction in London in April 2002 for about $13,000. In the liner notes to Season of Glass, Ono explained that the album was not dedicated to Lennon because "he would have been offended—he was one of us." The album received highly favorable reviews and reflected the public's mood after Lennon's assassination. AllMusic. Retrieved January 1, 2012.
In 1982, she released It's Alright (I See Rainbows). The cover featured Ono in her famous wrap-around sunglasses, looking towards the sun, while on the back the ghost of Lennon looks over her and their son. The album scored minor chart success
In 1984, a tribute album titled Every Man Has a Woman was released, featuring a selection of Ono songs performed by artists such as Elvis Costello, Roberta Flack, Eddie Money, Rosanne Cash, and Harry Nilsson.
Ono's final album of the 1980s was Starpeace, a concept album that she intended as an antidote to Ronald Reagan's "Star Wars" missile defense system. On the cover, a warm, smiling Ono holds the Earth in the palm of her hand. Starpeace became Ono's most successful non-Lennon effort.  The single "Hell in Paradise" was a hit, reaching No. 16 on the US dance charts and No. 26 on the Billboard Hot 100, and received major airplay on MTV. In 1986, Ono set out on a goodwill world tour for Starpeace, primarily visiting Eastern European countries.

1990s

Ono went on  a musical hiatus until signing with Rykodisc in 1992 to release the comprehensive six-disc box set Onobox. It included remastered highlights from all of Ono's solo albums, as well as unreleased material from the 1974 "lost weekend" sessions.
In 1994, Ono produced her own off-Broadway musical entitled New York Rock, featuring Broadway renditions of her songs.

2000s

2001 saw the release of Ono's feminist concept album Blueprint for a Sunrise.
In April 2003, Ono's Walking on Thin Ice (Remixes) was rated No. 1 on Billboard's Dance/Club Play chart, gaining Ono her first No. 1 hit. She returned to No. 1 on the same chart in November 2004 with "Everyman ... Everywoman ...", a reworking of her song "Every Man Has a Woman Who Loves Him", in January 2008, with "No No No", and in August 2008, with "Give Peace a Chance". In June 2009, at the age of 76, Ono scored her fifth No. 1 hit on the Dance/Club Play chart with "I'm Not Getting Enough".
Ono released the album Yes, I'm a Witch in 2007, a collection of remixes and covers from her back catalog by various artists including The Flaming Lips, Cat Power, Antony, DJ Spooky, Porcupine Tree, and Peaches, released in February 2007, along with a special edition of Yoko Ono/Plastic Ono Band. Amazon. Retrieved April 4, 2011. Yes I'm a Witch has been critically well received.
In 2009, Ono recorded Between My Head and the Sky, her first album to be released as "Yoko Ono/Plastic Ono Band" since 1973's Feeling the Space. The all-new Plastic Ono Band lineup included Sean Lennon, Cornelius, and Yuka Honda.

2010s

In April 2010, RCRD LBL made available free downloads of Junior Boys' mix of "I'm Not Getting Enough," a single originally released 10 years prior on Blueprint for a Sunrise.

Collaborations

During her career, Ono also has collaborated with Earl Slick, David Tudor, Fred DeAsis, and Richard Maxfield. As a dance music artist, Ono has worked with re-mixers/producers including Basement Jaxx, Bill Kates, Keiji Haino,
In 2012, the album Yokokimthurston was released featuring a collaboration with Sonic Youth's Thurston Moore and Kim Gordon. Notable also as the first collaboration between Moore and Gordon after their divorce, it was characterized by AllMusic as "focused and risk-taking" and "above the best" of the couple's experimental music, with Ono's voice described as "one-of-a-kind."

Public image

Ono was frequently criticized by the press and the public for many years. She was blamed for the breakup of the Beatles and repeatedly criticized for her influence over Lennon and his music. Her experimental art was also not popularly understood. The English press were particularly negative, and prompted the couple's move to the US. As late as December 1999, NME was calling her a "no-talent charlatan," and in October 2014 tennis pro Andy Murray's mother took over a Twitter handle entitled Destroying Yoko Ono on Twitter.
Her name still connotes the figure of the evil female interloper to the mainstream. Courtney Love, Kurt Cobain's widow, has endlessly been compared to Ono for her supposed bothersome role in Nirvana's businesses and as a scapegoat for Cobain's suicide.

2000s

One month after the 9/11 attacks, she organized the concert "Come Together: A Night for John Lennon's Words and Music" at Radio City Music Hall. Hosted by the actor Kevin Spacey and featured Lou Reed, Cyndi Lauper and Nelly Furtado, it raised money for September 11 relief efforts and aired on TNT and the WB.
During the Liverpool Biennial in 2004, Ono flooded the city with two images on banners, bags, stickers, postcards, flyers, posters and badges: one of a woman's naked breast, the other of the same model's vulva. (During her stay in Lennon's city of birth, she said she was "astounded" by the city's renaissance.) via ImaginePeace.com
Ono performed at the opening ceremony for the 2006 Winter Olympic Games in Turin, Italy,
On December 13, 2006, one of Ono's bodyguards was arrested after he was allegedly taped trying to extort $2 million from her, threatening to release private conversations and photographs.
On June 26, 2007, Ono appeared on Larry King Live along with McCartney, Ringo Starr, and Olivia Harrison.
Ono returned to Liverpool for the 2008 Liverpool Biennial, where she unveiled Sky Ladders in the ruins of Church of St Luke (which was largely destroyed during World War II and now stands roofless as a memorial to those killed in the Liverpool Blitz). Imagine Peace (October 21, 2008). Retrieved April 4, 2011. Two years later, on March 31, 2009, she went to the inauguration of the exhibition "Imagine: The Peace Ballad of John & Yoko" to mark the 40th anniversary of the Lennon-Ono Bed-In at the Queen Elizabeth Hotel in Montreal, Canada, from May 26 to June 2, 1969. (The hotel has been doing steady business with the room they stayed in for over 40 years.)
In May 2009, she designed a T-shirt for the second Fashion Against AIDS campaign and collection of HIV/AIDS awareness, NGO Designers Against AIDS, and H&M, with the statement "Imagine Peace" depicted in 21 languages. Designersagainstaids. Retrieved January 1, 2012. Ono appeared onstage at Microsoft's June 1, 2009, E3 Expo press conference with Olivia Harrison, Paul McCartney, and Ringo Starr to promote the Beatles: Rock Band video game,

2010s

On February 16, 2010, Ono revived an early Plastic Ono Band lineup with Eric Clapton, and special guests including Paul Simon and Bette Midler.
On February 18, 2011, her 78th birthday, Ono took out a full page advert in the UK free newspaper Metro for "Imagine Peace 2011". It took the form of an open letter, inviting people to think of, and wish for, peace.March 27 JAPAN BENEFIT Concert: YOKO ONO, Sean Lennon, Sonic Youth, Mike Patton, Cibo Matto & more (Miller Theater Columbia University, NY). Imagine Peace (March 24, 2011). Retrieved April 4, 2011. The effort raised a total of $33,000. In July 2011, she visited Japan to support earthquake and tsunami victims and to buoy tourism to the country. She also collected the 8th Hiroshima Art Prize for her contributions to art and for peace, that she was awarded the year prior. Retrieved February 21, 2014.
In January 2012, a Ralphi Rosario mix of her 1995 song "Talking to the Universe" became her seventh consecutive No. 1 hit on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart. In March of the same year, she was awarded the 20,000-euro ($26,400) Oskar Kokoschka Prize in Austria.
On June 29, 2012, Ono received a lifetime achievement award at the Dublin Biennial. During this (her second) trip to Ireland (the first was with John before they married), she visited the crypt of Irish leader Daniel O'Connell at Glasnevin Cemetery and Dun Laoghaire, from where Irish departed for England to escape the famine.
The next month, she tweeted an anti-gun message with the Season of Glass image of Lennon's bloodied glasses on what would have been her and Lennon's 44th anniversary, noting that more than 1 million people have been killed by guns since Lennon's death in 1980.
She was also given a Congressional citation from the Philippines for her monetary aid to the victims of typhoon Pablo. and the second on June 22 with the band again and Peaches, with other sets by Kim Gordon, The Stooges, and Savages who played their own work.
In July 2013, she released a sequel to Grapefruit, another book of instructions, Acorn. As of its release date, it is only available, in print or as an e-book, directly from its publisher, OR Books. She was made an honorary citizen of Reykjavík, Iceland, on October 9, 2013.

Political activism and social media

Ono has been an activist for peace and human rights since the 1960s. After their wedding, she and Lennon held a "Bed-In for Peace" in their honeymoon suite at the Amsterdam Hilton Hotel in March 1969, where the pair of newlyweds in pajamas invited visitors and members of the press, eager to talk about and promote world peace. Another Bed-In two months later at the Queen Elizabeth Fairmont in Montreal resulted in the recording of their first single, "Give Peace A Chance", a top-20 hit for the newly-christened Plastic Ono Band.
In the 1970s, Ono and Lennon became close to many radical, counterculture leaders, including Bobby Seale,
In 1999, after the Columbine High School massacre, Ono paid for billboards to be put up in New York City and Los Angeles that bore the image of Lennon's blood-splashed spectacles. Early in 2002 she paid about £150,000 ($213,375)Oanda." Later the same year, she inaugurated a peace award, the LennonOno Grant for Peace, by giving $50,000 (£31,900) in prize money originally to artists living "in regions of conflict". The award is given out every two years in conjunction with the lighting of the Imagine Peace Tower, and was first given to Israeli and Palestinian artists. Its program has since expanded to include writers, such as  Michael Pollan and Alice Walker, activists such as Vandana Shiva and Pussy Riot, organizations such as New York's Center for Constitutional Rights, even an entire country (Iceland). (PDF). Taipei Times. December 24, 2008. Retrieved January 1, 2012.
On Valentine's Day 2003, on the eve of the Iraqi invasion by the US and UK, Ono heard about a couple, Andrew and Christine Gale, who were holding a love-in protest in their tiny bedroom in Addingham, West Yorkshire. She phoned them and said, "It's good to speak to you. We're supporting you. We're all sisters together."
In August 2011, she made the documentary film about the Bed-Ins Bed Peace available for free on YouTube,
In January 2013, the 79-year-old Ono, along with Sean Lennon and Susan Sarandon, took to rural Pennsylvania in a bus under the banner of the Artists Against Fracking group she and Sean created with Mark Ruffalo in August 2012 to protest against hydraulic fracturing.
Ono promotes her art, and shares inspirational messages and images, and notes about performances.

Relationship with the Beatles

According to journalist Barry Miles, after Lennon and Ono had been injured in a car accident in June 1969, partway through recording Abbey Road, a bed was installed in the studio with a microphone so the latter could make artistic comments about the album.
While the Beatles were together, every song written by Lennon or McCartney was credited as Lennon–McCartney regardless of whether the song was a collaboration or written solely by one of the two (except for those appearing on their first album, Please Please Me, which originally credited the songs to McCartney–Lennon). In 1976, McCartney released a live album called Wings over America, which credited the five Beatles tracks as P. McCartney–J. Lennon compositions. Neither Lennon nor Ono objected. After Lennon's death, McCartney again attempted to change the order to McCartney–Lennon for songs that were solely or predominantly written by him, such as "Yesterday," 
In a Rolling Stone interview in 1987, Ono pointed out McCartney's place in the process of the disintegration of the band.
In 1995, after the Beatles released Lennon's "Free as a Bird" and "Real Love", with demos provided by Ono, McCartney and his family collaborated with her and Sean to create the song "Hiroshima Sky is Always Blue", which commemorates the 50th anniversary of the atomic bombing of that Japanese city. Of Ono, McCartney stated: "I thought she was a cold woman. I think that's wrong..... she's just the opposite..... I think she's just more determined than most people to be herself." Two years later, however, Ono publicly compared Lennon to Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, while McCartney, she said, more closely resembled his less-talented rival Antonio Salieri. (January 27, 2003) "The ballad of Paul and Yoko". Salon. Retrieved April 4, 2011. This remark infuriated McCartney's wife Linda, who was dying from breast cancer at the time. When Linda died less than a year later, McCartney did not invite Ono to his wife's memorial service in New York.
Accepting an award at the 2005 Q Awards, Ono mentioned that Lennon had once felt insecure about his songwriting. She had responded, "You're a good songwriter. It's not June with spoon that you write. You're a good singer, and most musicians are probably a little bit nervous about covering your songs."
In an October 2010 interview, Ono spoke about Lennon's "lost weekend" and her subsequent reconciliation with him. She credited McCartney with helping save her marriage to John. "I want the world to know that it was a very touching thing that Paul did for John."

Relationship with Julian Lennon

Ono had a difficult relationship with her stepson, Lennon's son Julian which has gotten better over the years. He has expressed disappointment at her handling of Lennon's estate, and at the difference between his upbringing and Sean's, adding, "when Dad gave up music for a couple of years to be with Sean, why couldn't he do that with me?" 
More egregiously, however, Julian was left out of his father's will, and he battled Ono in court for years, settling in 1996 for unnamed amount which the papers reported was "believed to" be in the area of £20 million, which Julian has denied.
He has admitted that he is his "mother's boy," which Ono has cited as the reason why she was never able to get close to him: "Julian and I tried to be friends. Of course, if he's too friendly with me, then I think that it hurts his other relatives. He was very loyal to his mother. That was the first thing that was in his mind." Nevertheless, she and Sean attended the opening of Julian's photo exhibition at the Morrison Hotel in New York City in 2010, appearing for the first time for photos with Cynthia and Julian. She also promoted the exhibition on her website, and Julian and Sean are close.

In popular culture

One of Barenaked Ladies's best-known songs is "Be My Yoko Ono" It includes the lyrics: "Isn't it beautiful to see two people / So much in love? / Barenaked as two virgins hand in / Hand and and / And hand in glove", referring to the couple's famous Unfinished Music No. 1: Two Virgins cover. The Canadian foursome go on to sing, "I know that when I say this, / I may be stepping on pins and / Needles; / But I don't like all these people / Slagging her / For breaking up the Beatles."
American folk singer Dar Williams recorded a 2000 song titled "I Won't Be Your Yoko Ono",
Ono still continues to symbolize the figure of the evil female interloper to many. Courtney Love, Kurt Cobain's widow, has endlessly been compared to Ono for her supposed bothersome role in Nirvana's businesses and as a scapegoat for Cobain's suicide. When American singer Jessica Simpson was dating Dallas Cowboys quarterback Tony Romo in the late Aughts, their relationship was controversial among some Dallas Cowboys fans. Simpson was blamed for Romo's poor performances, some Cowboys' fans giving her the nickname "Yoko Romo."
The British band Elbow mentioned Ono in their song "New York Morning" from their 2014 album The Take Off and Landing of Everything ("Oh, my giddy aunt, New York can talk / It's the modern Rome and folk are nice to Yoko"). In response Ono posted an open letter to the band on her website, thanking them and reflecting on her and Lennon's relationship with the city.

Discography

Albums

Albums with John Lennon

Compilations, soundtrack albums and EPs

Tribute albums

Singles

B-side appearances on John Lennon singles

Books and monographs

Films

Director

Collaborations

Actress or as self



Notes



Further reading

| last=Berger
| first=Joshua
| title=Yoko Ono Interview: from the End of War project
| date=Summer 2013
| work=Plazm Magazine
| url=
| ref=harv
}}
| last=Norman
| first=Philip
| title=A Talk with Yoko
| date=May 25, 1981
| work=New York Magazine
| url=
| ref=harv
}}
| last=Robecchi
| first=Michele
| title=A Conversation with Yoko Ono
| date=July 2006
| work=Contemporary Magazine
| url=
| ref=harv
}}




