[[Desmoulin's whorl snail]]

CATEGORIES: Vertigo (gastropod), Animals described in 1849

Desmoulin's whorl snail, scientific name Vertigo moulinsiana, is a species of minute air-breathing land snail, a terrestrial pulmonate gastropod mollusc or micromollusc in the family Vertiginidae, the whorl snails. 
This species was named in honor of the early 19th century French naturalist, Charles des Moulins.

Habitat

This species lives in marshes and swamps.
Desmoulin's whorl snail lives in calcareous wetlands, where there are tall sedges, saw-sedge (Cladium mariscus), reed-grass (Glyceria maxima) or the reed Phragmites australis.

Distribution

The distribution of this species is Atlantic (the part of the Palearctic area which is under the direct climatic influence of the Atlantic
Ocean), and southern-European. Lisický M. J. (1991). Mollusca Slovenska Slovak molluscs. VEDA vydavateľstvo Slovenskej akadémie vied, Bratislava, 344 pp.
This small snail occurs across Europe as far north as southern Sweden.
Within Western Europe, only the populations in England (Great Britain) and Ireland are considered to be viable, although further populations exist in the Czech Republic (critically endangered, occupying White Carpathians Biospehere Reserve, Kokořínsko Landscape Protected Area and Southern Moravia), Dušek J., Hošek M. & Kolářová J. (2007). "Hodnotící zpráva o stavu z hlediska ochrany evropsky významných druhů a typů přírodních stanovišť v České republice za rok 2004-2006". Ochrana přírody 62(5): appendix 5:I-IV. Its conservation status in Spain is endangered and it occurs in two localities only: near Estañá lake and near Lake of Banyoles. A. (1998). "Implementing the habitats directive for mollusc species in Spain". Journal of Conchology, Molluscan Conservation: A Strategy for the 21st Century, Special Publication 2: 125-132.
Distribution of other European countries include Belgium, Switzerland, Italy, Germany, Austria, Slovakia, Hungary, Romania, Denmark, Norway, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, Belarus, Ukraine,Balashov I. & Gural-Sverlova N. 2012. An annotated checklist of the terrestrial molluscs of Ukraine. Journal of Conchology. 41 (1): 91-109. Russia, Georgia and Azerbaijan. Its distribution also include Algeria and Morocco, but it is possibly extinct in Algeria.
This species is mentioned in Annex II of the European Union's Habitats Directive.

Shell description

The shell is dextral, minute, ovate, ventricose, obtuse at apex, smoothish, subperforate. Aperture is semiovate, 4-toothed: 1 tooth on the parietal wall, another on the columella, and two palatals, the lower one longer. The shell has 4 whorls, parted by a distinct suture, the last doubly larger than all the others together. Rather solid, glossy, subpellucid and of a uniform fulvous color.
The shell of this species reaches about 3 mm in length. The shell is yellowish or brownish and translucent.

Status in the United Kingdom

In the United Kingdom, Desmoulin's whorl snail is listed as endangered, although it occurs in a number of areas in a band from Norfolk to Dorset, with outlying populations in Kent and the Llŷn Peninsula in North Wales and has probably been under-reported in the past because of its minute size. Its presence on the site of the planned Newbury bypass caused the building of that road to be postponed; the building works were able to go ahead once the snails had been moved to a new habitat nearby. It is reported to have since died out at the new site, but the same report states "Desmoulin's whorl snail is now considered less scarce than it was 10 years ago".

On a stamp

Deutsche Post featured V. moulinsiana on a 2002 German €0.51 postage stamp as part of a series on endangered species of animals.



This article incorporates public domain text from reference. A. & Cooke C. M. (1918-1920). Manual of Conchology. Second series: Pulmonata. Volume 25. Pupillidae (Gastrocoptinae, Vertigininae). Philadelphia. page 178.




