[[West Burton, North Yorkshire]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in North Yorkshire

West Burton is a village in the Yorkshire Dales, North Yorkshire, England. It lies  west of the County Town of Northallerton. It forms part of the civil parish of Burton-cum-Walden.

History

There is some evidence of an Iron Age settlement on top of nearby Burton Moor that has been designated a Scheduled Ancient Monument. It consists of about eighteen hut circles and defined fields.
The village is mentioned in the Domesday Book as just Burton. At the time of the Norman invasion the village was part of the manor belonging to Thorkil, but afterwards the manor was granted to Geoffrey of Swaffham by Count Alan of Brittany, who had been awarded the lands by the Crown.
The topynomy of the village is derived from the Old English burh-tūn meaning a fortified farm. The village used to be an important market town and the octagonal market cross and stocks are still seen today on the village green.

Governance

The village is in the Richmond UK Parliament constituency. It is also in the Penhill ward of Richmondshire District Council and the Upper Dales electoral division of North Yorkshire County Council.

Geography

West Burton lies on the B6160 road to Addingham. Two other roads leave the village, both dead ends, but one leads to the two hamlets of Walden and Walden Head. The villages of Aysgarth, Newbiggin and Thoralby are all about a mile from the village.
Cauldron falls is a small waterfall in the village. The village lies in Bishopdale, North Yorkshire, a tributary dale of Wensleydale and at the mouth of Waldendale, the valley through which Walden Beck runs. Walden Beck runs north past the eastern edge of the village to join Bishopdale Beck on its way to the River Ure.

Demography

2001 census

The 2001 UK census showed that the population was split 48.5% male to 51.5% female. The religious constituency was made of 72.3% Christian and the rest stating no religion or not stating at all. The ethnic make-up was 98.7% White British and 1.3% White other. There were 178 dwellings.

2011 census

The 2011 UK census showed that the population was split 48.8% male to 51.2% female. The religious constituency was made of 66.7% Christian, 0.3% Jewish, 0.3% Buddhist, 1.6% Hindu and the rest stating no religion or not stating at all. The ethnic make-up was 94.4% White British, 1.3% Mixed Ethnic, 2.3% Asian British and 2.0% each White Other . There were 192 dwellings.

Community and culture

Education in the village is provided at West Burton Primary school.
Notable people== 
In their retirement, musical theatre actress Pat Kirkwood and her husband Peter Knight, the former president of Bradford & Bingley, lived in the village for ten years.

Religion

The Wesleyan and Independent Methodists both built chapels in the village in 1813 and 1851 respectively. The Wesleyan Methodist chapel was rebuilt in 1898.







