[[United States Conference of Mayors]]

CATEGORIES: Organizations based in Washington, D.C., Organizations established in 1933, Non-governmental organizations of elected officials in the United States

United States Conference of Mayors, sometimes incorrectly referred to as the United States Council of Mayors, is the official non-partisan organization for cities with populations of 30,000 or more.  The cities are each represented by their mayor or other chief elected official.  The organization arose from the shadows of the Great Depression and coalesced under Herbert Hoover until its original charter was signed at the Mayflower Hotel on the eve of the inauguration of Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
The organization sets policy as the collective voice of municipalities and their leaders. Committees and task forces develop policies that the entire body votes on before sending their resolutions to elected leaders in Washington.  They also undertake studies on issues related to their special interests and fund grants and awards to incent execution of their ideals.  The group has continuously evaluated the landscape of public policy and has current issues related to homeland security and economic recovery.
By standing as a unified voice through this organization, municipal leaders have influenced United States Presidents and United States Congresses to enact legislation that has provided a legacy of benefits to cities.  Mayors received relief during the Great Depression and later lobbied during the 1970s for relief during that economic slowdown.  Community Development Block Grants (CDBGs) are a legacy of the latter.

Mission

The organization serves the following functions: Help develop and promote effective national urban/suburban policy; build stronger and more effective federal-city relationships; monitor the effectiveness of federal policy in terms of its service to urban needs; help mayors develop leadership and management tools; and to create a forum in which mayors can share ideas and information.

History

In 1932, Mayor of Detroit Frank Murphy called a conference of mayors to meet in Detroit, Michigan in June.  In the shadow of the depression, he felt it was worthwhile to pursue federal aid for cities.  48 mayors of cities in excess of 100,000 attended. 81.  On June 3, two days after the Adjournment sine die of the first conference, Murphy appointed a seven-person commission (including himself) to lobby Washington using the powers vested in him by the conference.   Murphy along with Mayor of Boston James Michael Curley, Mayor of Cleveland Raymond T. Miller, Mayor of Milwaukee Daniel Hoan, Mayor of New Orleans T. Semmes Walmsley, Mayor of Minneapolis William A. Anderson, and Mayor of Grand Rapids George W. Welsh traveled to Washington, DC to lobby the federal government for aid. 50. The mayors that went with him urgently pled for relief.  On June 6 at 10:00 a.m., they met with United States Speaker of the House John Nance Garner (D), Majority Leader of the United States House of Representatives Henry T. Rainey (D) and Minority Leader of the United States House of Representatives Bertrand H. Snell  (R).   They held out hope for a US$5 billion prosperity loan, but made it clear their true need for any relief for the despair of their constituents.  At 11:00 a.m., they met with United States Vice President/President of the United States Senate Charles Curtis and other Senate leaders. 51.  The presence of the Mayors was unprecedented and despite some Democratic defections, a band of 12 Republicans led by Fiorello LaGuardia enabled the passage of a relief bill by a 205–189 margin. Unfortunately President Herbert Hoover was not receptive to the $1.9 billion scale of the public works plan.  However, the mayors were able to convince the President that federal support for local relief efforts was reasonable and this is considered a watershed event. 52. 42 of the 48 states benefited from the newly empowered Reconstruction Finance Corporation. 53. After the Emergency Relief and Construction Act of 1932 was signed into law by Hoover, the Conference wrote its charter at the Mayflower Hotel on the eve of the inauguration of Franklin Delano Roosevelt. It held its second meeting in 1933 and formed the permanent United States Conference of Mayors with Murphy as its President.
In 1972, USCM President Mayor of Milwaukee Henry Maier led the crusade for municipal resources at a time when federal grants to state and local governments was escalating rapidly.  Richard Nixon started allowing cities to participate in federal revenue sharing.  This source of municipal funding relieved cities until the mid-1980s.  Jimmy Carter capped revenue payments and Reagan discontinued everything except for CDBGs. 12-13  The CDBG program has consistently allocated over $4 billion/year to state and local jurisdictions. Using provisions in the 1995 Crime Bill, Clinton paid for municipal enforcement authorities on behalf of cities. 14.
The current leadership of the conference is President Scott Smith (Mesa, Arizona), Vice president Kevin Johnson (Sacramento, California) and Second Vice President Stephanie Rawlings Blake (Baltimore, Maryland).usmayors.pdf

Current issues

During the Presidential transition of Barack Obama in December 2008, The Conference held a news conference along with United States House Committee on Ways and Means Chairman Charlie Rangel, United States House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee Chairman James Oberstar and Congressional Urban Caucus Chairman Chaka Fattah.  Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa announced that the meeting sought support of the Conferences survey of 11,391 "ready-to-go" infrastructure projects that they hoped to see in a Main Street recovery plan during Obama's first 100 days. According to New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, the $73.1 billion projects had completed the design and approval process and met all political requirement except for the need for funding.
Another issue that the Conference took issue with in 2008 include the misappropriation of federal funds for municipal anti-terrorism emergency equipment through the Homeland Security Department, which was created in 2003, instead of for municipal police forces and other enforcement officials.  On this issue, they stood by the International Association of Chiefs of Police who feel common domestic anti-crime expenditure might better serve the public interest.  Since the September 11 attacks federally funded municipal purchases of bomb robots, chem-bio suits and other anti-terrorism equipment have often gone unused while crime is underserved.  These organizations are calling for a re-evaluation of the federal grant system.
The conference has been active in fighting foreclosures and predatory lending.
Also in 2008, the conference unanimously both supported single-payer national health insurance and City-coordinated drug overdose prevention efforts.
In 2009, the conference adopted a sweeping proposal for lesbian and gay equality by mayors Christopher Cabaldon, Sam Adams, and David Cicilline, making it the first national organization of American elected officials to call for marriage equality, passage of ENDA, and the repeal of Don't ask, don't tell.edgeprovidence.com/news////92742/us_conference_of_mayors_endorses_marriage_equality

Activities

The organization convenes for its winter meeting each January in Washington, D.C. and an Annual Meeting each June in a different U.S. city in addition to ad hoc meetings. At the annual meeting, members vote on policy resolutions. The results are distributed to the President of the United States and the United States Congress.
On January 11, 2007 the Conference leadership approved the annual ten-point platform called "Strong Cities, Strong Families for a Strong America", including positions on energy policy and homeland security, and support for Community development block grants (CDBG), government sponsored enterprises, the State Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIPS), and the Workforce Investment Act.  In 2008, travel and tourism were part of the plan for the first time.
In the past, the Conference has taken stances against Ronald Reagan's 1983 budget.  The conference has actively pursued legislation to curb handgun violence by changing the regulations for purchasing, adding regulatory oversight, and suing manufacturers for unreasonable marketing practices and lax safety standards.
At times, the unified voice of Mayors has had significant impact on federal policies.  An example was the controversy over the decision by investigators from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Bureau of Investigation and the United States Department of Justice to carry out an examination of waste, fraud and abuse in the housing programs in three cities led by black mayors (Kurt L. Schmoke, Marc H. Morial and Willie L. Brown Jr.).  Eventually, the housing subcommittee of the United States House Committee on Appropriations Chairman, Jerry Lewis, in response into the collective voice of the mayors, with the support of President Bill Clinton and Andrew M. Cuomo, the United States Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, mandated a clarification of selection criteria for investigation subjects.
In determining their positions and policies, the Conference has had to balance difficult political choices.  They once opposed the Environmental Protection Agency in a resolution which came out against enforcing stricter smog and soot limits.  The conference members felt that the stricter standards for ozone and fine particles would have hampered the economies of many municipalities, especially those that are steel-, automobile- and fossil fuel-intensive.

Annual awards and grants

The U.S. Conference of Mayors also houses the Mayors Climate Protection Center, created in 2007 to provide support mayors in efforts to reduce global warming in American cities.
The conference has granted City Livability Awards since 1979 for mayors and governments as recognition for developing programs that enhance the quality of life in urban areas.
Since 1997, the Conference of Mayors in conjunction with the Americans for the Arts has annually presented Public Leadership in the Arts Awards.  The awards recognize "elected officials and artists or arts organizations that have demonstrated outstanding leadership in the advancement of the arts."
The Conference has advocated for HIV/AIDS Prevention Grants Programs. Annually, in cooperation with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) it awards approximately hundreds of thousands of dollars in grants for HIV/AIDS prevention service to Native Americans as well as to African American or Hispanic Women at High Risk of HIV Infection.

Organization

Task forces

Temporary task forces are organized to study emerging issues and make recommendations to the body of the Conference. Recent task forces have addressed AIDS, hunger and homelessness, and brownfields. The "Poverty, Work and Opportunity Task Force," chaired by Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa, was formed in January 2006.

Standing committees

The organizations members serve on the Conference's standing committee which recommend policies for the general body to evaluate for endorsement at the summer meetings.  The endorsed policies are delivered to the United States President and United States Congress.   The Conference supports initiatives such as handgun regulation, Mayors may also serve on one or more of the Conference's standing committees: Children, Health and Human Services; Community Development and Housing; Criminal and Social Justice; Energy; Environment; International Affairs; Jobs, Education and the Workforce; Membership; Tourism, Arts, Parks, Entertainment and Sports; Transportation and Communications; and Urban Economic Policy.

Presidents

The following is a comprehensive listing of presidents of the United States Conference of Mayors:

Controversies

The organization has had some controversies.  In Newark, New Jersey, one of its non-partisan presidential straw polls was determined to be contrary to a New Jersey Supreme Court ruling because the court had determined that it was improper for any municipality to test public opinion outside of its jurisdiction.
Also, at the 2004 Democratic National Convention, striking Boston Police Department officers decided to picket a Conference of Mayors meeting.  2004 Democratic Presidential nominee John Kerry, who was the invited speaker, decided to honor the picket line.



Notes

Further reading




