[[Patrick Brompton]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in North Yorkshire, Civil parishes in North Yorkshire

Patrick Brompton is a village and civil parish in the Richmondshire district of North Yorkshire, England. Patrick Brompton is situated about  The Brompton Beck runs through the centre of the village.

Parish history

In the 1880s, Patrick Brompton was described as:
The village of Patrick Brompton and other villages in the parish are mentioned in the Domesday Book which was completed in 1086. When published, there were 27 households in the village consisting of 22 villagers and 5 smallholders. The 'Hundred', Count Alan also had 195 other places including Bedale and Bellerby.
The name 'Patrick Brompton' derives from the personal name 'Patrick' and Brompton derives from broom, a thorny bush or shrub and 'tun' deriving from an enclosure; a village; an estate. Patrick Brompton is also mentioned on the 'Genuki' website  and in the 1820s, described as:
St Patrick is the one church in the village which belongs to the Church of England Diocese of Ripon and Leeds.
Other villages in the parish are Arrathorne, Hunton and Newton Le Willows.

Population and Industry

It had a population of 167 according to the 2011 census. This suggests that the population of the village are of working ability and leave the village everyday for work purposes.
On the right you can see a population time series graph showing the population of Patrick Brompton from 1801 to 2011. It displays a sharp drop in population around 1850. From the 1881 census data, we can see that agriculture is a primary source of work or occupation with 20 people from the village working in that field.
The dramatic drop in population around 1850 could be due to the fact that the parish boundaries have changed over time.

Transportation

The A684 runs through the village and the A1 motorway is approximately 5 miles to the east of the village and 4 hours direct to London. The nearest railway station is 8.77 miles away in Northallerton which lies on the East Coast Mainline. There is also a station in Thirsk which is 12.85 miles away also lying on the East Coast Mainline. The nearest international airport is Leeds Bradford International Airport approximately an hour away.

Housing

According to the Office for National Statistics, there are 83 dwellings in Patrick Brompton, 48 of these being detached houses or bungalows.  This is similar, in the population figures, this could be due to the fact that parish boundaries changed over this time.

Places of interest

9 miles away from Patrick Brompton is the National Trust property, Braithwaite Hall which is a popular tourist attraction.

Climate

The average climate in Patrick Brompton ranges from a high of 20.4 degrees celsius in July and a low of 1.4 degrees celsius in December.






