[[Community Rowing, Inc.]]

CATEGORIES: Rowing clubs in the United States, Clubs and societies in Massachusetts, Organizations based in Boston, Massachusetts

Community Rowing Inc. (CRI) is a non-profit rowing club located on the Charles River in Brighton, Massachusetts just outside of Boston. CRI is dedicated to the belief that the sport of rowing provides unique abilities to promote personal and community growth through teamwork, discipline, and physical fitness. CRI was the first public rowing club in Boston and has become the largest rowing program in the United States with over 5,000 participants annually. CRI is committed to its mission of enriching the greater community, and provides broad based programs for youth and adults, from novice to elite skill levels. Through its demonstrated success, CRI has become a model for similar programs nationally.

History

Community Rowing Inc. was founded in 1985 as a nonprofit organization dedicated to the belief that the sport of rowing provides unique abilities to promote personal and community growth through teamwork, discipline, and physical fitness. CRI is committed to making these opportunities available to all, and has become one of the largest rowing programs in the United States with over 5,000 people rowing with annually.
Located on the Charles River, an internationally recognized attraction for rowing and a gem within the Massachusetts park system, CRI was the first public rowing club in Boston and remains one of the largest in the United States. CRI is committed to its mission of enriching the greater community and provides broad based programs for youth and adults, from novice to elite skill levels.
Since its inception, CRI has provided education and training for over 25,000 people, including:
A reputation for excellence and outstanding accomplishments in the sport, has made CRI the place to learn to row in the Boston area and a model for similar programs nationally.

Mission

Community Rowing, Inc. enriches the Greater Boston community through its comprehensive rowing opportunities for individuals. CRI promotes diversity in the sport of rowing through programs which introduce avenues for athletic development and personal growth for both youth and adults. CRI's programs introduce new rowers to the sport, offer training for competitive rowers, and support the under-represented within rowing.

Youth

Recreational

Competitive

Adult

Sculling

Sculling I
Sculling 1 encompasses the CRI mission of getting every one on the water no matter what prior athletic experience. Rowers in Sculling 1 simultaneously learn the traffic patterns of the river, how to navigate, and row in one person shells called singles. Rowers embark on to the Charles in safe, stable Alden singles. The coaches of Sculling 1 create a safe fun environment for the new CRI sculler.
Sculling II
This program is for the continuation of Sculling 1. Coaches work on refining the skills learned. Depending on skill level, athletes move up to boats which require more skill. Throughout the program, the sculler works towards improving their skills in preparing for the CRI Captains' Test.
Sculling III
Sculling 3 is designed to be more interactive with other athletes by having rowing in 2x and 4x. Sculling 3 creates a team of rowers working together to refine their skills and develop the ability to scull in bigger boats.
Sculling IV
Sculling 4 is designed to help participants prepare for the CRI Captains' Test, and is designed for athletes who are eager to row in the "A Boat" racing shells. Many students will be administered the Captains' Test during the class, after which point they will be free to do logbook sculling independently. The Captain's Test requires thorough knowledge of Charles River bridges and navigation, as well as the demonstration of rowing proficiency.
Logbook Sculling
Logbook Sculling is for the rower who has passed the CRI Captains Test and has been cleared to row CRI club singles. Boats and Oars are available on a first-come first-serve basis. There are additional tests for the 2x. These test are for the rowers safety.
Logbook Coached Sessions
Coached sessions for captain's tested scullers to improve their technique for recreation and/or competition. Keep your independence and gain guidance. This program is for the Independent sculler that wants feed back. Six meetings per week. Coaches will help rowers determine optimal groupings and sessions which will best suit their goals. Coaches will provide a training schedule a month in advance with training and fitness plan. Each class will be composed of a combination of technique, drills and pieces.

Competitive

=Men=

=Women=

Recreational

Novice Sweeps
Participants should have successfully completed Intro to Rowing, or have comparable rowing experience and knowledge of safety protocol. Classes begin in the barge, reinforcing basic skills and knowledge of rowing, and then move into 8's. Rowers take turns in the coxswain seat to help their classmates navigate the river safely and to improve their knowledge of the sport. A coach will be close beside you when it's your turn to cox.
General Sweeps I
Athletes need to have reached a minimum completion requirement in Adult Novice Rowing, be able to demonstrate basic (not expert) proficiency in square blade rowing and feathering, and be ready to try continuous all-8 rowing. Rowers should understand and be able to demonstrate knowledge of the finish position, hands away position, body over position, ½ slide position and catch position.
General Sweeps II
The final level of recreational programs, Sweeps II, is for athletes of all ages who have a solid background in rowing and want to take their skills to the next level while challenging their fitness and strength. Classes take place in 8's, and consist of regular technical critique, drills, and consistent rowing designed to test skills and build fitness.  There are not set line-ups, but coaches group similar ability levels together and, as requested, work with individuals on technique during and after practice. It may be possible to participate in local sprint or head races.
Participants should have achieved minimum completion requirement of Sweeps I, demonstrate proficiency in completion of rowing drills (pic drill, pause drills, sequencing drills), and be comfortable rowing all-8.  In addition, rowers should be: eager to achieve a more polished, efficient rowing stroke; prepared to row continuously, want to complete a workout during meeting times. While this program also features the supportive and friendly environment that characterizes all CRI programs, participants are expected to come to practice ready to focus on team and individual goals.

Outreach Programs

Para-Rowing

Military and Veteran Rowing

Let's Row Boston

OWL On the Water

Corporate

Awards and Honors

In 2014 the Harry Parker Boathouse was the recipient of the American Institute of Architects Institute Honor Award for Architecture and was featured on CNN as one of the 11 Coolest Buildings in North America.

Results






