[[Operation Sharp Guard]]

CATEGORIES: NATO intervention in the former Yugoslavia, United Nations operations in the former Yugoslavia, Blockades involving the United States, Blockades, Battles and conflicts without fatalities, 1993 in Yugoslavia, 1994 in Yugoslavia, 1995 in Yugoslavia, 1996 in Yugoslavia, 1993 in Europe, 1994 in Europe, 1995 in Europe, 1996 in Europe, Military history of the Mediterranean, Military operations of the Yugoslav Wars involving Germany

Operation Sharp Guard was a multi-year joint naval blockade in the Adriatic Sea by NATO and the Western European Union on shipments to the former Yugoslavia. Warships and maritime patrol aircraft from 14 countries were involved in searching for and stopping blockade runners.
The operation began on June 15, 1993.  It was suspended on June 19, 1996, and was terminated on October 2, 1996.

Background

The operation replaced naval blockades Operation Maritime Guard (of NATO; begun by the U.S. in November 1992) and Sharp Fence (of the WEU).

Purpose

The operation's purpose was, through a blockade on shipments to the former Yugoslavia,  The Yugoslav Wars were being waged, and the participants hoped to limit the fighting by limiting supplies to it.

Blockade

Fourteen nations contributed ships and patrol aircraft to the operation. At any given time, 22 ships and 8 aircraft were enforcing the blockade, with ships from Standing Naval Force Atlantic and Standing Naval Force Mediterranean establishing a rotating duty. (Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, the U.K., and the U.S.), and eight maritime patrol aircraft, were involved in searching for and stopping blockade runners.
Most contributors to the operation supplied one or two ships. The Turkish Navy, for example, participated with frigates, submarines, and tankers.
The operational area was divided into a series of "sea boxes", each the responsibility of a single warship.  Each boarding team was composed of a "guard team" to board and wrest control of the target ship, and a "search team", to conduct the search.
The ships were authorized to board, inspect, and seize both ships seeking to break the blockade and their cargo.  The Combined Task Force 440 was commanded by Admiral Mario Angeli of Italy.  It marked the first time since its founding in 1949 that NATO was involved in combat operations.

Lido II Incident

The issue of differing views among nations in the coalition as to the use of force authorized by rules of engagement arose in April 1994. Poe, "Rules of Engagement: Complexities of Coalition Interaction in Military Operations Other than War", Faculty of the Nava War College, February 13, 1995  Faced with the Maltese tanker Lido II making its way towards Montenegrin port with 45,000 tons of fuel oil, a U.S. cruiser asked the NATO commander (a British Commodore) for guidance, and received authorization to use "disabling fire" to stop the tanker, if necessary.  He received confirmation that he should follow the British Commodore's guidance from his own higher authority.  Under U.S. Navy standards, "disabling fire" means firing rounds into the ship's engineering space. The U.S. cruiser was about to pass the order along to the Dutch Kortenaer class frigate HMNLS Van Kinsberger. However, the fact that the Dutch definition of "disabling fire" involves launching rounds into the bridge of the target ship, with an increased risk of loss of life, became important.  The ship was eventually stopped on May 1 and boarded by helicopter from HMNLS Van Kinsberger without firing a shot. Three Yugoslav Navy Končar class corvettes challenged the NATO operation and one of them tried to ram the British frigate HMS Chatham as it was assisting Van Kinsberger. The corvettes eventually fled following the reaction of the British warship, supported by Italian Tornado aircraft which scrambled from an airbase at Gioia Del Colle. The Lido II had to undergo repairs before being diverted to Italy, since the crew had sabotaged the ship's engine room. The leaking was contained by an engineer party from HMS Chatham. Seven Yugoslav stowaways were found on board."NATO and WEU ships encounter Yugoslav Navy while preventing violation of UN embargo". Press Release by NATO/WEU force conducting the Operation Sharp Guard in the Adriatic Sea, 1 May 1994. Release 94/13McLaughlin, Rob (2009). United Nations Naval Peace Operations in the Territorial Sea. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, p. 42, note 81. ISBN 90-04-17479-6

Statistics

The "NATO and WEU forces challenged more than 73,000 ships, boarded and inspected almost 6,000 at sea, and diverted 1,500 suspect ships to ports for further inspection."  Of those, nearly a dozen vessels were found to be blockade runners, some carrying arms in violation of UN Security Council resolutions.  NATO officials said no ships were able to run the blockade successfully, and that the maritime blockade had a major effect in preventing escalation of the conflict.

Suspension

The blockade was suspended following a UN decision to end the arms embargo, and NATO's Southern Command said that: "NATO and WEU ships will no longer challenge, board or divert ships in the Adriatic".  The Independent warned at the time that "In theory, there could now be a massive influx of arms to Bosnia, Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), although senior military and diplomatic sources yesterday said that they thought this would be unlikely."

Applicable UN resolutions

The blockade was conducted in accordance with numerous United Nations Security Council Resolutions:  UNSCR 713,

Ships participating








