[[Jermaine Johnson]]

CATEGORIES: 1980 births, Living people, Sportspeople from Kingston, Jamaica, Association football wingers, Jamaica international footballers, Tivoli Gardens players, Jamaican expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in England, Jamaican footballers, Bolton Wanderers F.C. players, Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players, Bradford City A.F.C. players, Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players, Premier League players, The Football League players, 2005 CONCACAF Gold Cup players, 2009 CONCACAF Gold Cup players

Jermaine Johnson (born 25 June 1980) is a Jamaican professional footballer, who is Sheffield Wednesday's longest-serving player. He started his career in his homeland with Tivoli Gardens, before coming to England, where he has also played for Bolton Wanderers, Oldham Athletic and Bradford City. Johnson has also won 74 caps for Jamaica.

Playing career

Early career

Johnson started his career at Tivoli Gardens before he came to England with Bolton Wanderers, making his debut during the 2001–02 season. He spent that season and the 2002–03 season at the club but started only ten games and came on as substitute in another nine but scored no goals. After his spell at the Reebok he moved to Oldham Athletic spending the next two seasons there making 34 appearances and eight as substitute scoring ten goals.

Bradford City

Johnson was signed by Bradford City manager Colin Todd on a one-year deal in June 2006 to join fellow Jamaican teammate Donovan Ricketts at Valley Parade. His debut came in the first game of the 2006–07 season at Bradford lost to Nottingham Forest. A week later he scored his first goal for Bradford to secure a 4–2 victory over Gillingham. Todd wanted to keep hold of Johnson, but after turning down an offer of £250,000 from Derby County, the club were forced to sell Johnson to Sheffield Wednesday before the end of the January transfer window. Johnson's last game in Bradford colours was in a 2–0 defeat to Yeovil Town when he was sent off after 81 minutes. Overall Johnson played 31 games, 27 in the league, scoring four goals for City.

Sheffield Wednesday

Sheffield Wednesday manager Brian Laws signed the Jamaican for a transfer fee in excess of £250,000 from Bradford City on 31 January 2007. Johnson had to face a three game suspension when he arrived in Sheffield due to a red card he received in his last game for Bradford. He finally made his debut on 20 February 2007 away at Luton Town, showing glimpses of his skill, however he was substituted in the 80th minute and was unable to prevent Wednesday losing 3–2. Johnson added his first goal to his impressive performances scoring Wednesday's third goal in the 3–2 victory over Yorkshire rivals Leeds United on 3 March 2007 in the 54th minute. He was injured during his next game against Plymouth Argyle which combined with a bout of chicken pox prevented him starting for the team until the last game of the season against Norwich City. Johnson scored again to help the team win 3–2.
In December 2007, Championship rivals Queens Park Rangers made an offer for Johnson. It was turned down however as he was described as a "top asset" in the playing squad.
His first full season with the club was disrupted by injuries and suspensions, however he was still voted midfielder of the year by fans of the club.
Johnson was involved in an unusual incident during a derby match at home to Sheffield rivals Sheffield United on 19 October 2008 when he was shown a second yellow card, and subsequently a red card, after being substituted. This occurred after he reacted angrily to his substitution by kicking a water bottle into the home supporters.
Jermaine Johnson was promoted with Sheffield Wednesday in 2012.
On 9 July 2012, he signed a one-year extension with the club.sportinglife. He added his second of the season the following Tuesday against Millwall F.C. After being out of favour for most of the season, he returned to the side against Bristol City and scored his 3rd of the season to put Wednesday in front and added his 4th and 5th just fourth days later on April 6. This was his first league double for Sheffield Wednesday as he secured a crucial win against Blackburn Rovers, equalising against an early Blackburn penalty and scoring the winning goal with a great 25 yard strike in the 78th minute to give Wednesday a 3-2 win. Johnsons 6th of the 2012/13 season came against Yorkshire Rivals Leeds United with a right-footed strike from the centre of the box, headed on from teammate Jérémy Hélan.
On 4 July 2013, he signed another one-year extension, continuing as the club's longest-serving current player.

International career

Johnson made his Jamaica national team debut in 2001.
He was again sent off four months later, this time for Jamaica in an international friendly against Nigeria at the New Den, in London. Johnson was involved in an altercation with Taye Taiwo, for which they were both shown a red card, but Johnson also appeared to push the linesman.
Johnson was recalled to the Jamaica squad in February 2013, making an appearance in their 0-0 draw with Mexico, his first appearance since November 2009, also Johnson made his appearance again as substitute against Panama in a 1-1 draw in a 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifiers match.  

Honours






