[[Cognate]]

CATEGORIES: Historical linguistics, Language comparison

In linguistics, cognates are words that have a common etymological origin. This learned term derives from the Latin cognatus (blood relative)."cognate", The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, 4th ed.: "Latin cognātus: co-, co- + gnātus, born, past participle of nāscī, to be born." Other definitions of the English word include "related by blood; having a common ancestor" and "related or analogous in nature, character, or function". Ibid. 
For example, the English words shirt and skirt are doublets; the former derives from the Old English sċyrte, while the latter is loaned from Old Norse skyrta, both of which derive from the Proto-Germanic *skurtijǭ. Additional cognates of the same word in other Germanic languages include the German Schürze and Dutch schort (which both mean "apron").

Characteristics of cognate words

Cognates do not need to have the same meaning, which may have changed as the languages developed separately. For example, consider English starve and Dutch sterven or German sterben ("to die"); these three words all derive from the same Proto-Germanic root, *sterbaną ("die"). English dish and German Tisch ("table"), with their flat surfaces, both come from Latin discus, but it would be a mistake to identify their later meanings. A later and separate English reflex of discus, probably through medieval Latin desca, is desk (see OED s.v. desk).

Cognates across languages

Examples of cognates in Indo-European languages are the words night (English), nuit (French), Nacht (German), nacht (Dutch), nag (Afrikaans), nicht (Scots), natt (Swedish, Norwegian), nat (Danish), nátt (Faroese), nótt (Icelandic), noc (Czech, Slovak, Polish), ночь, noch (Russian), ноќ, noć (Macedonian), нощ, nosht (Bulgarian), ніч, nich (Ukrainian), ноч, noch/noč (Belarusian), noč (Slovene), noć (Serbo-Croatian), νύξ, nyx (Ancient Greek, νύχτα/nychta in Modern Greek), nox/nocte (Latin), nakt- (Sanskrit), natë (Albanian), noche (Spanish), nos (Welsh), nueche (Asturian), noite (Portuguese and Galician), notte (Italian), nit (Catalan), nuèch/nuèit (Occitan), noapte (Romanian), nakts (Latvian), naktis (Lithuanian) and Naach (Colognian), all meaning "night" and derived from the Proto-Indo-European (PIE) , "night".   
Another Indo-European example is star (English), str- (Sanskrit), tara (Hindustani), étoile (French), ἀστήρ (astēr) (Greek or ἀστέρι/ἄστρο, asteri/astro in Modern Greek), astro (Italian), aster (Latin) stea (Romanian and Venetian), stairno (Gothic), astl (Armenian), Stern (German), ster (Dutch and Afrikaans), Schtähn (Colognian), starn (Scots), stjerne (Norwegian and Danish), stjarna (Icelandic), stjärna (Swedish), stjørna (Faroese), setāre (Persian), stoorei (Pashto), seren (Welsh), steren (Cornish), estel (Catalan), estela (Occitan) estrella and astro Spanish, estrella Asturian and Leonese, estrela (Portuguese and Galician) and estêre or stêrk (Kurdish), from the PIE , "star". 
The Hebrew  salām and the Amharic selam ("peace") are also cognates, derived from Proto-Semitic *šalām-.
Cognates may often be less easily recognised than the above examples and authorities sometimes differ in their interpretations of the evidence. The English word milk is clearly a cognate of German Milch, Dutch melk, Russian молоко (moloko) and Croatian mlijeko.Cf. also Greek ἀμέλγω amelgō "to milk". On the other hand, French lait, Catalan llet, Italian latte, and Spanish leche (all meaning "milk") are less obviously cognates of Ancient Greek 
[/ref] even more contradictorily, the English word black and Polish biały, meaning white, both derive from the PIE , meaning, "to burn or shine."
A word may also enter another language, develop a new form or meaning there, and be re-borrowed into the original language; this is called a Rückwanderer (German for "one who wanders back"). For example, the Greek word κίνημα (kinēma, "movement") became French cinéma (cf. American English movie) and then later returned to Greece as σινεμά (sinema, "the art of film", "movie theater"). Now in Greece κίνημα (kinēma, "movement") and σινεμά (sinema, "filmmaking, cinema") exist together as a doublet (see next section). (The film or movie itself is the unrelated ταινία (tainia).

Cognates within the same language

Cognate doublets can exist within the same language, with meanings which may be anything from slightly to totally different.  For example, English ward and guard (An example of very different and non-obvious English-language cognates is grammar and glamour.

False cognates

False cognates are words that are commonly thought to be related (have a common origin) whereas linguistic examination reveals they are unrelated. Thus, for example, on the basis of superficial similarities one might suppose that the Latin verb habere and German haben, both meaning 'to have', were cognates. However, an understanding of the way words in the two languages evolve from Proto-Indo-European (PIE) roots shows that they cannot be cognate (see for example Grimm's law).  German haben (like English have) in fact comes from PIE *kh₂pyé-, 'to give, to receive', and hence cognate with English give and German geben.  English much and Spanish mucho also look similar and even have a similar meaning yet are not cognates, with much Similarity of words between languages does not prove that the words are related, in much the same way as  facial resemblance does not prove relatedness of people. Over the course of hundreds and thousands of years, words may change their sound completely. For example, English over and Hebrew ′avar are not cognates, and neither are English dog and Mbabaram dog. False cognates arise in the same way as false or folk etymology, spurious explanations for the origin of words.
Contrast this with false friends, which frequently are cognate.






