[[Yahya Khan]]

CATEGORIES: 1917 births, 1980 deaths, Pashtun people, Persian people, People from Peshawar, People from Chakwal District, Pakistani people of Iranian descent, University of the Punjab alumni, Graduates of the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, Non-U.S. alumni of the Command and General Staff College, Indian people of World War II, Indian military personnel of World War II, British military personnel of World War II, Pakistani military leaders, Presidents of Pakistan, British Indian Army officers, Chiefs of Army Staff, Pakistan, Foreign Ministers of Pakistan, Defence Ministers of Pakistan, Military dictatorship, Pakistani generals, Generals of the Bangladesh Liberation War, Generals of the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, Yahya Khan

Agha Yahya Khan  (Urdu: آغا محمد یحیی خان; February 4, 1917 – August 10 1980), also known as Yahya, was a four-star rank general, military leader, and  statesman who served as the third President of Pakistan from 1969 until the fall of East-Pakistan as a follow-up to Pakistan's defeat in the war with India in 1971. Serving with distinction in World War II as a British Indian Army officer, Yahya opted for Pakistan in 1947 and held critical command assignments.
After helping to conduct military infiltration against India in 1965 war, Yahya was appointed commander-in-chief of army in 1966– a position he held until the final days of 1971 war. Amid political upheaval forced President Ayub Khan to resign in 1969, Yahya installed a military government after enforcing the martial law for the second time in Pakistan's history. After promulgating executive order to disestablishment West-Pakistan, he held the country's first nationwide free and fair general elections in 1970, which witnessed Awami League led by Mujibur Rahman gaining majority in East Pakistan. Under pressured by Zulfikar Ali Bhutto whose PPP which had won from the four provinces of Pakistan but had far less votes, Yahya delayed handing over power to Awami League. As civil unrest erupted all over East Pakistan, Yahya initiated military operations to quell the rebellion. With reports of widespread atrocities by the military against Bengali civilians, and counter-killings of Biharis and suspected Pakistani sympathizers by the Mukti Bahini insurgency, the crisis grew deeper under Yahya.
Tensions escalated with India and later intervened on the side of Mukti Bahini insurgency in 1971. he is viewed largely negatively by Pakistani historians, and is considered among the least successful of the country's leaders.Yahya Khan considered major villain within the country - Story of Pakistan

Early life

Agha Yahya Khan was born in Peshawar, Frontier, British Indian Empire on 4 February 1917, according to the reference written by Russian author Alexander Mikaberidze in 2011.


Military career

After graduating with a BA degree from the Punjab University, Yahya entered in the Indian Military Academy at Dehradun and was commissioned into the Indian Army in 1938. He performed well and served with distinction during the World War II in North African theater, and was taken as the Prisoner of war (POW) by Italy. He escaped from there one his third attempt. His active active service further saw actions as part of the 4th Infantry Division in the North Africa, Middle East, and Mediterranean theatres of the war, including Iraq, Italy, and North Africa.

1965 war and Commander-in-chief

After the World War II, he decided to join the Pakistan Army in 1947. At the age of 34, he was promoted as Brigadier-General and commanded the 106th Infantry Brigade that was deployed in LoC ceasefire region in Jammu and Kashmir. He was described as a "hard drinking soldier" who liked both his women and wine; though he was a professional and competent soldier. Yahya also co-founded the Command and Staff College in  Quetta, Balochistan. He played a pivotal role in sustaining the support for President Ayub Khan's campaign in 1965 presidential elections against Fatima Jinnah.  In recognition, he was he was promoted as Major-General and made GOC of 7th Infantry Division of Pakistan Army, which he commanded during the 1965 war with India. At this assignment, he was an instrumental in planning and executing the military infiltration operation, the Grand Slam, which was failed miserably when the Indian Army crossed the intentional border and made a beeline for Lahore.
Despite failure and to utter disgust, Yahya was promoted as Lieutenant-General after his promotion papers were personally approved by President Ayub Khan in 1966, at a stint as an appointed Deputy Army Commander in Chief.  He was appointed as commander-in-chief of Pakistan Army in March 1966.  At promotion, Yahya Khan superseded two of his seniors: Lieutenant-General Altaf Qadir and Lieutenant-General Bakhtiar Rana.R. Siddiqui. "Army's top slot: the seniority factor" Dawn, 25 April 2004

President of Pakistan

During the course of 1968, the political pressure exerted by Zulfikar Ali Bhutto had weakened the President Ayub Khan, who had earlier sacked Bhutto after disagreeing with President Ayub's decision to implement on Tashkent Agreement, facilitated by the Soviet Union to end the hostilities with India.
On March 24, 1969, President Ayub directed a letter to General Yahya Khan, inviting him to deal with the situation, as it was "the beyond the capacity of (civil) government to deal with the... Complex situation."
On immediate effect, he installed a military government and featured active duty military officials:
 
  Yahya Khan Administration  
 
 

National Security Council and LFO

President Yahya was well aware of this explosive situation and decided to bring changes all over the country. His earlier initiatives directed towards establishing the National Security Council (NSC) with Major-General Ghulam Omar being its first advisor. It was formed to analyze and prepare assessments towards issues relating the political and national security.
Secondly in 1969, President Yahya promulgated the Legal Framework Order No. 1970 which disestablished the One Unit programme where West Pakistan was formed. Instead, LFO No. 1970 hence removed  the prefix West, instead adding Pakistan. The decree has no effect on East Pakistan. Following this, President Yahya announced to held nationwide general elections in 1970, and appointed Judge Abdus Sattar as Chief Election Commissioner of Election Commission of Pakistan.  Changes were carried out by President Yahya to reversed the country back towards parliamentary democracy.

Last days of East Pakistan

1970 general elections

By 28 July 1969, President Yahya had set a framework for elections that were to be held in December 1970. Finally, the general elections were held in all over the country. In East Pakistan, the Awami League led by Mujibur Rahman held almost all mandate, but no seat in any of four provinces of Pakistan. The socialist Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) had won the exclusive mandate in the four provinces of Pakistan, but none in the East-Pakistan. The Pakistan Muslim League (PML) led by Nurul Amin was the only party to have representation from all over the country, though it had failed to gain the mandate to run the government. The Awami League had 162 seats, all won from the East-Pakistan; the socialist PPP had secured 88; the conservative PML had 10 seats in the National Assembly. The general elections's results truly reflected the ugly political reality: the division of the Pakistani electorate along regional lines and political polarization of the country between the two states, East Pakistan and Pakistan.
In political terms, therefore, Pakistan as a nation stood divided as a result. Series of bilateral talks between PPP and Mujibur Rahman produced to results and were unable to come to an agreement of transfer of power from to East-Pakistan's representatives on the basis of the Six-Point programme. In Pakistan, the people had felt that the Six-point agenda was a step towards secession. In recent media reports, it since emerged that Mujib met Indian diplomats in London according to his daughter in 1969 from where he agreed to secede from Pakistan 

Crackdown in East-Pakistan

While, the political deadlock remains between the Awami League, PPP, and the military government after the general elections in 1970. During this time, Yahya began coordinating several meetings with his military strategists over the issue in East Pakistan. On 25 March 1971, President Yahya initiated the Searchlight in order to restore the writ of the government. Partially successful, the situation in East-Pakistan worsened and the gulf between the two wings now was too wide to be bridged. Agitation was now transformed into a vicious insurgency as Bengali elements of Pakistan armed forces and Police mutinied and formed Bangladesh Forces along with common people of all classes to launch both unconventional and hit and run operations. 
The Searchlight ordered by Yahya was a planned military pacification carried out by the Pakistan Armed Forces to curb the Bengali nationalist movement in erstwhile East Pakistan in March 1971Sarmila Bose Anatomy of Violence: Analysis of Civil War in East Pakistan in 1971: Military Action: Operation Searchlight Economic and Political Weekly Special Articles, 8 October 2005 Ordered by the government in Pakistan, this was seen as the sequel to Operation Blitz which had been launched in November 1970.
The original plan envisioned taking control of the major cities on 26 March 1971, and then eliminating all opposition, political or military,Salik, Siddiq, Witness To Surrender, p63, p228-9 id = ISBN 984-05-1373-7 within one month. The prolonged Bengali resistance was not anticipated by Pakistani planners.
The total number of people killed in East Pakistan is not known with any degree of accuracy. reviews the various estimates here. Bangladeshi authorities claim that 3 million people were killed,White, Matthew, Death Tolls for the Major Wars and Atrocities of the Twentieth Century while the Hamoodur Rahman Commission, an official Pakistan Government investigation, put the figure as low as 26,000 civilian casualties.Jack, Ian, "It's not the arithmetic of genocide that's important. It's that we pay attention", The Guardian, May 20, 2011. A 2008 British Medical Journal study by Ziad Obermeyer, Christopher J. L. Murray, and Emmanuela Gakidou estimated that up to 269,000 civilians died as a result of the conflict; the authors note that this is far higher than a previous estimate of 58,000 from Uppsala University and the Peace Research Institute, Oslo., "Fifty years of violent war deaths from Vietnam to Bosnia: analysis of data from the world health survey programme", British Medical Jornal, June 2008. According to Serajur Rahman, the official Bangladeshi estimate of "3 lahks" (300,000) was wrongly translated into English as 3 million.
Khan arrested Sheikh Mujibur Rahman on charges of Sedition and appointed Brigadier Rahimuddin Khan (later General) to preside over a special tribunal dealing with Mujib's case. Rahimuddin awarded Mujib the death sentence, and President Yahya put the verdict into abeyance. Yahya's crackdown, however, had led to a Bangladesh Liberation War within Pakistan, and eventually drew India into what would extend into the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971. The end result was the establishment of Bangladesh as an independent republic. Khan subsequently apologised for his mistakes and voluntarily stepped down.

The US role

The United States had been a major sponsor of President Yahya's military government, as noted in a reference written by Gary Bass in the "The Blood Telegram": "President Nixon liked very few people, but he did like General Yahya Khan." Personal initiatives of President Yahya had helped to establish the communication channel between the United States and the China, which would be used to set up the Nixon's trip in 1972.Kissinger's Secret Trip to China
Since 1960, Pakistan was perceived in the United States as an integral bulwark against the globalized Communism in the Cold War. The United States cautiously supported Pakistan during 1971 although congress kept in place an arms embargo.
Over this period, Henry Kissinger would work to prevent sectarian conflicts in Yemen and Lebanon from devolving into regional wars under President Nixon. The Soviet Union's growing support and influence in the Afghanistan, the Nixon administration used Pakistan to try to deter any further Soviet encroachment in the region.
In 1971, President Nixon met with Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi and did not believe her assertion that she would not invade Pakistan;Black, Conrad (2007), p. 752 President Nixon did not trust her and once referred to her as an "old witch".  Witness accounts presented by Kissinger pointed out that Nixon made specific proposals to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi on a solution for the crisis, some of which she heard for the first time, including a mutual withdrawal of troops from the Indo-East Pakistan borders. Nixon also expressed a wish to fix a time limit with Yahya for political accommodation in East Pakistan. Nixon asserted that India could count on US endeavors to ease the crisis within a short time. But, both Kissinger and Gandhi'saide Jayakar maintained, Gandhi did not respond to these proposals. Kissinger noted that she "listened to what was in fact one of Nixon's better presentations with aloof indifference" but "took up none of the points." Jayakar pointed out that Gandhi listened to Nixon "without a single comment, creating an impregnable space so that no real contact was possible." She also refrained from assuring that India would follow Pakistan's suit if it withdrew from India's borders.  As a result, the main agenda was "dropped altogether."[ref]Jayakar, Indira Gandhi, p. 232; Kissinger, White House Years, pp. 878 & 881–82.
[/ref]
On 3 December, Yahya preemptively attacked the Indian Air Force and Gandhi retaliated, pushing into East Pakistan. 753. Nixon issued a statement blaming Pakistan for starting the conflict and blaming India for escalating it because he favored a cease-fire. 755. The United States was secretly encouraging the shipment of military equipment from Iran, Turkey, and Jordan to Pakistan, reimbursing those countriesBlack, Conrad (2007), p. 756. despite Congressional objections.  The US used the threat of an aid cut-off to force Pakistan to back down, while its continued military aid to Islamabad prevented India from launching incursions deeper into the country.  A cease fire was reached on 16 December, leading to the creation of the independent state of Bangladesh. 757.

Fall from power

When the news of surrender of East Pakistan reaches through the national television, the spontaneous and overwhelming public anger over Pakistan's defeat by Bangladeshi rebels and the Indian Army, followed by the division of Pakistan into two parts boiled into street demonstrations throughout the Pakistan. Rumors of an impending coup d'état by junior military officers against President Yahya to swept the country. Yahya became the highest-ranking casualty of the war: to forestall further unrest, on 20 December 1971 he handed over the presidency and government to Zulfikar Ali Bhutto— the ambitious leader of Pakistan's powerful Pakistan People's Party.
Within hours of Yahya stepping down, President Bhutto reversed JAG's verdict against Mujibur Rehman and instead releasing him to saw him off to London. President Bhutto also signed orders for Yahya's house confinement, the man who imprisoned Mujib in the first place. Both actions produced headlines round the world.

Death

Yahya remained under the house arrest orders until 1979 when he was released from the custody by martial law administrator General Fazle Haq. He remained out from the public events and died on 10 August 1980 in Rawalpindi, Punjab, Pakistan.

Notes





|-
|-
|-
|-
|-


