[[Alan Archibald]]

CATEGORIES: 1977 births, Association football central defenders, Dundee United F.C. players, Living people, Partick Thistle F.C. managers, Partick Thistle F.C. players, Scotland under-21 international footballers, Scottish Football League managers, Scottish Football League players, Scottish football managers, Scottish footballers, Scottish Premier League players, Scottish Professional Football League managers, Sportspeople from Glasgow

Alan Maxwell Archibald (born 13 December 1977) is a Scottish football player and manager. Archibald is the player/manager of Partick Thistle in the Scottish Premiership after taking over from Jackie McNamara at the start of the 2013-14 Scottish Premiership season. Archibald, who has played as a defender, has also played for Scottish Premier League club Dundee United.

Career

Archibald was born in Glasgow.  A left-footed defender, he started his professional career with Partick Thistle as an eighteen-year-old. Alan made 231 appearances scoring eight goals during this period with the Jags where, until leaving, he was their longest-serving player. During this time he also gained caps as a Scotland U-21 international.
Archibald was signed by then-manager Ian McCall for Dundee United on 3 June 2003. In his first season at Tannadice – 2003–04 – Archibald was the only player to feature in every match for United, and his assured performances earned him a contract extension. Archibald's first United goal came against Hearts in a 2–1 win at Tannadice. He also scored against Celtic in a narrow defeat for the Tangerines at Celtic Park.
Archibald was one of the club's most consistent performers in 2003–04 and his contribution in the side that achieved a fifth place finish was marked with the Player of the Year award at the club's annual dinner and he also received recognition from the Federation and other supporters' clubs. During the 2004–05 season, Archibald continued his ever-present run by appearing in every match that season as United reached the Scottish Cup Final and secured their place in the SPL following a long battle with relegation. He also added a further four goals to his United tally, including the opener in the 4–1 Scottish Cup win over Aberdeen at Tannadice.
At the end of the 2005–06 season, it was rumoured that Archibald might be returning to former club Partick Thistle. However, following the signing of fullback Christian Kalvenes early into the 2006–07 season, Archibald was moved to his preferred position in the centre of defence. Up until 26 November 2006, all of Archibald's United appearances had been from the starting eleven; he finally made a substitute appearance in the 1–0 win over St. Mirren. On 24 January 2007, Archibald was informed by Dundee United manager Craig Levein that his contract, due to expire in June 2007, would not be renewed.
On 31 January 2009, Archibald signed a contract to return to Partick Thistle, lasting until the end of the 2008–09 season.
On 30 January 2013, he was appointed interim manager

Career statistics

 ''

Honours

Player

Manager

Managerial statistics






