[[Winnie Madikizela-Mandela]]

CATEGORIES: 1936 births, Living people, People convicted of fraud, People convicted of theft, People convicted of kidnapping, First Ladies of South Africa, Anti-apartheid activists, South African activists, South African women in politics, South African politicians convicted of crimes, Rectors of the University of Glasgow, Mandela family, Xhosa people, Members of the National Assembly of South Africa, African National Congress politicians

Winnie Madikizela-Mandela (born Nomzamo Winifred Zanyiwe Madikizela; 26 September 1936)Winnie Mandela. nndb. She is a member of the ANC's National Executive Committee.
She was married to Nelson Mandela for 38 years, including 27 years during which he was imprisoned. Although they were still married at the time of his becoming president of South Africa in May 1994, the couple had separated two years earlier. Their divorce was finalised on 19 March 1996, 
Of all the major figures who came to global prominence during the South African liberation struggle, Ms. Madikizela-Mandela was the most glamorous and the most at home in the world of celebrity culture – which is what made her fall from grace all the more startling; and for many of the years just before Mr. Mandela's release from 27 years in prison, she was his public face, bringing word of his thoughts and his state of mind. She was offered academic honors abroad.
A controversial activist, she is popular among her supporters, who refer to her as the 'Mother of the Nation', yet reviled by others after the South African Truth and Reconciliation commission found "Ms Winnie Madikizela Mandela politically and morally accountable for the gross violations of human rights", concluding that she had personally been responsible for the murder, torture, abduction and assault of numerous men, women and children, as well as indirectly responsible for an even larger number of such crimes.

Early life

Her Xhosa name is Nomzamo ("She who tries"). She was born in the village of eMbongweni,Madikizela-Mandela profile. Sahistory.za. Retrieved 30 May 2011.
Bizana, Pondoland, in what is now South Africa's Eastern Cape Province. She held a number of jobs in various parts  of what was then the Bantustan of Transkei, including with the Transkei government, living at various times in Bizana, Shawbury and Johannesburg. Despite restrictions on education of blacks during apartheid, she earned a degree in social work from  the Jan Hofmeyer School in Johannesburg, and several years later earned a Bachelor's degree in international relations from the University of Witwatersrand.

Marriage/children

She met lawyer and anti-apartheid activist Nelson Mandela in 1957. She was 22 and standing at a bus stop in Soweto when Mandela first saw her and charmed her, securing a lunch date the following week. They married in 1958 and had two daughters, Zenani (born 1959) and Zindzi (born 1960). Nelson Mandela was arrested in 1963 and released in 1990. The couple separated in 1992 and finalized the divorce in 1996 with an unspecified out-of-court settlement. Her attempt to obtain a settlement up to US$5 million, half of what she claimed her ex-husband was worth, was dismissed when she failed to appear in court for a settlement hearing.

Apartheid

Winnie Mandela carved her own name in struggle lore. She was regularly detained by the apartheid government. She was tortured, subjected to house arrest, kept under surveillance, held in solitary confinement for a year and banished to a remote town. She emerged as a leading opponent of the white minority rule government during the later years of her husband's imprisonment (August 1963 – February 1990). For many of those years, she was exiled to the town of Brandfort in the Orange Free State and confined to the area, except for the times she was allowed to visit her husband at the prison on Robben Island. Beginning in 1969, she spent eighteen months in solitary confinement at Pretoria Central Prison. 
In 1985, Mandela won the Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights Award along with fellow activists Allan Boesak and Beyers Naude for their human rights work in South Africa. The Award is given annually by the Robert F. Kennedy Center for Justice and Human Rights to an individual or group whose courageous activism is at the heart of the human rights movement and in the spirit of Robert F. Kennedy's vision and legacy.

Criminal convictions and findings of criminal behaviour

Her reputation was damaged by such rhetoric as that displayed in a speech she gave in Munsieville on 13 April 1986, where she endorsed the practice of necklacing (burning people alive using tyres and petrol) by saying: "With our boxes of matches and our necklaces we shall liberate this country."Bodies probably won't bury Winnie M&G. 15 March 2013
In 1991, she was acquitted of all but the kidnapping. Her six-year jail sentence was reduced to a fine on appeal. The final report of the South African Truth and Reconciliation commission, issued in 1998, found "Ms Winnie Madikizela Mandela politically and morally accountable for the gross violations of human rights committed by the MUFC" and that she "was responsible, by omission, for the commission of gross violations of human rights."
 In 1992, she was accused of ordering the murder of Dr. Abu-Baker Asvat, a family friend who had examined Seipei at Mandela's house, after Seipei had been abducted but before he had been killed."South Africa Police Order Full Probe Of Mandela Charge", Christian Science Monitor, 9 April 1992. Mandela's role was later probed as part of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission hearings, in 1997."Winnie may face fresh murder charge", The Independent,  28 November 1997 She was said to have paid the equivalent of $8,000 and supplied the firearm used in the killing, which took place on 27 January 1989."Panel Hears Evidence Winnie Mandela Sought Doctor's Death", New York Times, 2 December 1997. The hearings were later adjourned amid claims that witnesses were  being intimidated on Winnie Mandela's orders. BBC. 1 December 1997.

Transition to democracy

During South Africa's transition to democracy, she adopted a far less conciliatory and compromising attitude  than her husband toward the white community. Despite being on her husband's arm when he was released in 1990, the first time the two had been  seen in public for nearly thirty years, the Mandelas' 38-year marriage ended when they separated in April 1992 after it was revealed she had been unfaithful to her husband during his imprisonment. The couple divorced in March 1996. She then adopted the surname Madikizela-Mandela. Appointed  Deputy Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology in the first post-Apartheid government (May 1994), she was dismissed eleven months later following allegations of corruption.
She remained extremely popular among many ANC supporters, however. In December 1993 and April 1997, she was elected president of the ANC Women's League, although she withdrew her candidacy for ANC Deputy President at the movement's Mafikeng conference in December 1997. Earlier in 1997, she appeared before the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. Archbishop Desmond Tutu  as chairman of the commission recognised her importance in the anti-apartheid struggle, but exhorted her to apologise and to admit her mistakes. In  a guarded response, she admitted "things went horribly wrong".

Legal problems

On 24 April 2003, Winnie Mandela was found guilty on 43 counts of fraud and 25 of theft, and her broker, Addy Moolman, was convicted on 58 counts of fraud and 25 of theft. Both had pleaded not guilty to the charges, which related to money taken from loan applicants' accounts for a funeral  fund, but from which the applicants did not benefit. Madikizela-Mandela was sentenced to five years in prison.
In June 2007, the Canadian High Commission in South Africa declined to grant Winnie Mandela a visa to travel to Toronto, Canada, where she was scheduled to attend a gala fundraising concert organised by arts organisation MusicaNoir, which included the world premiere of The Passion of Winnie, an opera based on her life.

Return to politics

When the ANC announced the election of its National Executive Committee on 21 December 2007, Mandela placed first with 2845 votes.Newly-elected National Executive Committee, ANC Website, Retrieved on 21 December 2007Winnie Mandela tops ANC election list, The Times, 21 December 2007

Apology to riot victims

Madikizela criticised the anti-immigrant violence in May–June 2008 that began in Johannesburg and spread throughout the country, and blamed the government's lack of suitable housing provisions for the sentiments behind the riots."Winnie speaks out on SA's issues". Iol.co. Retrieved 30 May 2011. She apologised to  the victims of the riotsHawley, Caroline. (16 May 2008) Refugees flee South Africa attacks. BBC News. Retrieved 30 May 2011. and visited the Alexandra township. She offered her home as shelter for an  immigrant family from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. She warned that the perpetrators of the violence could strike at the Gauteng train system."S. Africa attacks may spread to trains – Mandela ex-wife". Africa.com (9 February 2009). Retrieved 30 May 2011.

2009 general election

Madikizela-Mandela secured fifth place on the ANC's electoral list for the 2009 general election, behind party president and current President of South Africa Jacob Zuma, former President of South Africa Kgalema Motlanthe, Deputy President of South Africa Baleka Mbete, and Finance Minister Trevor Manuel. An article in The Observer suggested her position near the  top of the list indicated that the party's leadership saw her as a valuable asset in the election with regard to solidifying support among the party's grassroots and the poor. The Guardian. Retrieved 30 May 2011.

2010 interview with Nadira Naipaul

In 2010, Madikizela-Mandela was interviewed by Nadira Naipaul. In the interview, she attacked her ex-husband, claiming that he had "let  blacks down", that he was only "wheeled out to collect money", and that he is "nothing more than a foundation". She further attacked his decision to accept the Nobel Peace Prize with FW De Klerk. Among other things, she reportedly claimed Mandela was no longer "accessible" to her daughters. She referred to Archbishop Tutu, in his capacity as the head of the Truth and Reconciliation commission, as a "cretin". London Evening Standard.
The interview attracted media attention,"Winnie Mandela accuses Nelson of letting down South Africa's blacks". The Telegraph, 14 March 2010Fernandez, Colin (9 March 2010) "Winnie Mandela accuses Nelson of 'betraying' the blacks of South Africa". Daily Mail and the ANC announced that it would ask her to explain her comments regarding Nelson Mandela. On 14 March 2010, a statement was issued on behalf of Winnie Mandela claiming that the interview was a fabrication."'Ms Naipaul is a liar and a fraud'". Times Live/Sunday Times, 14 March 2010

In media

Mandela was first portrayed by Alfre Woodard in the TV movie Mandela. Tina Lifford portrayed her in the 1997 TV drama Mandela and de Klerk. Sophie Okonedo portrayed her in the BBC drama Mrs Mandela, first broadcast on BBC Four on 25 January 2010.
Mandela was again portrayed in the 2013 film Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom by actress Naomie Harris (British actor Idris Elba played Nelson Mandela). On viewing the film, Madikizela-Mandela told Harris it was "the first time she felt her story had been captured on film".








