[[Yogh]]

CATEGORIES: Middle English language, Palaeographic letter variants, Phonetic transcription symbols, Early Middle Ages, Uncommon Latin letters

The letter yogh () and various velar phonemes.  It was derived from the Old English form of the letter g. 
In Middle English writing, tailed z came to be indistinguishable from yogh.
In Middle Scots the character yogh became confused with a cursive z and the early Scots printers often used z, when yogh was not available in their fonts.. Consequently, some Lowland Scots words have a z in place of a yogh.
Yogh is shaped similarly to the Arabic numeral three (3), which is sometimes substituted for the character in online reference works.  There is some confusion about the letter in the literature, as the English language was far from standardised at the time. The upper and lower case letters ( respectively.

Pronunciation

Yogh is pronounced either  in modern English spelling). 
In Middle English, it also stood for the phoneme , "yowling".
In Middle Scots, it represented the sound  rather than y.
In medieval Cornish manuscripts, yogh was used to represent the voiced interdental fricative .

History

Old English

The original Germanic g sound was expressed by the Gyfu rune in the Anglo-Saxon futhorc (which is itself rendered as  in modern transliteration). Following palatalization, both gyfu and Latin g in Old English expressed the /j/ sound before front vowels. For example, "year" was written as gear, even though the word had never had a g sound (deriving from Proto-Germanic *jērą).
With the re-introduced possibility of a /g/ sound before front vowels, notably in the form of loanwords from the Old Norse (such as gere from Norse gervi, Modern English gear), this orthographical state of affairs became a source for confusion, and a distinction of "real g" (/g/) from "palatalized g" (/j/) became desirable.
In the Old English period, the  glyph was simply the way Latin g was written in the Uncial script introduced at the Christianization of England by the Irish missionaries.
It only came to be used as a letter distinct from g in the Middle English period.

Middle English

Norman scribes despised non-Latin characters and certain spellings in English and therefore replaced the yogh with the digraph gh; still, the variety of pronunciations elaborated, as evidenced by cough, taught, and though. The process of replacing the yogh with gh was slow, and was not fully completed until the end of the fifteenth century. Not every English word that contains a gh was originally spelled with a yogh: for example, spaghetti is Italian, where the h makes the g hard (i.e., .
The medieval author Orm used this letter in three ways when writing Early Middle English. By itself, it represented 
In Melibeus, Chaucer wrote, "Ȝe haue cast alle here wordes in an hochepoche."
In the late Middle English period, yogh was no longer used: .

Scots

In words of French and Gaelic origin, the Early Scots palatal consonant ,SND:Z shows where yogh became zed, but the sound did not change. Menzies Campbell is another example.

After the development of printing

In Middle Scots orthography the use of yogh became confused with a cursive z and the early Scots printers often used z, when yogh was not available in their fonts.
The glyph yogh can be found in surnames that start with Y in Scotland and Ireland, such as the surname Yeoman and sometimes letter z, spelled . Because the shape of the yogh was identical to some forms of the handwritten  z.
In Unicode 1.0 the character yogh was mistakenly unified with the quite different character Ezh (), and yogh itself was not added to Unicode until version 3.0.

List of words containing a yogh

These are examples of Middle English words which contain the letter yogh in their spellings. All are obsolete..

Scots words with 

The town of Hamilton, South Lanarkshire, was previously called Cadzow; and the word Cadzow continues in modern use in many streetnames and other names, e.g. Cadzow Castle, Kilncadzow.

In Egyptology

The symbol actually used in Egyptology is 10px, two half-rings opening to the left. Since Unicode 5.1 it has been assigned its proper codepoints (uppercase U+A722 Ꜣ LATIN CAPITAL LETTER EGYPTOLOGICAL ALEF, lowercase U+A723 ꜣ LATIN SMALL LETTER EGYPTOLOGICAL ALEF); a fallback is the numeral 3. A Unicode-based transliteration system adopted by the Institut Français d'Archéologie OrientalePolices, IFAO. character as the transliteration of the Ancient Egyptian "aleph" glyph: A






