[[Foothill High School (Henderson, Nevada)]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures in Henderson, Nevada, Clark County School District, Education in Henderson, Nevada, Educational institutions established in 1999, High schools in Clark County, Nevada, Public high schools in Nevada, 1999 establishments in Nevada

Foothill High School is a four-year secondary school in the Clark County School District, located in the city of Henderson, Nevada.

Programs and academics

In June 2008, Foothill High School hosted the 2008 National Forensic League National Championships.
Foothill operates a business and leadership class, YES, Inc.
Foothill runs a broadcasting program named FST News, which is broadcast school-wide daily.
The Foothill "Pride of the Falcons Marching Band" won first place in the Open Class at the 2009 Henderson Bandfest. The band has traveled to Dublin, Ireland to march in the Saint Patrick's Day Parade.

Athletics

Football

The school's football program has won several division championships, qualified for the playoffs yearly, and has reached the state tournament several times.com - Sports: High School: Football

Marching band

The Foothill Marching Band currently consists of about 300 students. The Band won the first of their competitions including Henderson Bandfest '09.  The Marching Band also participates at their schools football games, basketball games, assemblies, and pep rallies. They are one of the top bands in the state of Nevada. The Foothill Marching Band is, at this time, the largest marching band in the history of Nevada. The 2011–12 marching band class had a total of 210+ students. The Foothill Marching Band also broke state records when they made Finals in two Bands of America competitions in California and Utah in 2010. They have altogether made Band of America Finals three times. As of right now, they are one of four bands across the country to help TAMA test their new drums (that have not yet been released.) The Marching Band has participated in the St. Patricks Day Parade in Dublin, Ireland. In May, 2012 the band travelled to march in the National Memorial Parade in Washington DC. In December 2012 the Foothill Drumline participated in the Very Vegas Holiday at The Smith's Center and performed with the Las Vegas Philharmonic Orchestra. The band has also been announced to perform at Macy's Parade 2014.  The Foothill Drumline also perfomed with Trace Adkins at the American Country Awards on December 10th, 2013. This was nationally televised on Fox.

Cross country

The girls cross country team won the Sunrise Regional Championships in 2005 and 2006 and made a State Championship appearance in 2013.  The boys team won the Sunrise Regional Title in 2007 and 2010.

Basketball

The 2004 boys basketball team won the school's first Regional title and reached the state finals. The program also hosts the annual Big Time Tournament during the summer, which attracts schools from all over the nation to compete.
In 2006, after losing its first Southeast Division game of the season, Foothill's boys basketball team was 4-9.  But since then, the Falcons were nearly unstoppable. After picking up an 89-76 road win over Silverado High School, Foothill finished the regular season 18-10 and had by then won 14 of its last 15 games.[ref]
[/ref] The Team also won the sunrise regional title for a second time in 2008, but fell short in the state tournament to Reno High School.

Dance

The dance team has won several in and out of state competitions. The Foothill High School Varsity Dance Team has won the Nevada 4A State Dance Championships four times in the past four years and also placed 14th in the national championship.  The team captured two national championship titles at the National Dance Championships in 2007, and another national title in 2008.comFoothill dance team captures national title, March 12, 2008, ocregister.com

Commencement speech controversy

An incident at the school's commencement on June 15, 2006 sparked a lawsuit against the school.  The commencement was held at The Orleans Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas, where 400 graduates and their families were gathered for graduation. The commencement speech of Foothill valedictorian, Brittany McComb (then 18 years old) was cut short after a school employee pulled the plug on the microphone during her speech. A video of the incident shows that the sound system was cut off.
McComb unsuccessfully brought suit against the school in the United States District Court for the District of Nevada, citing as defendants the principal, the assistant principal, and the school employee who turned off the sound system on McComb.[ref]
