[[Convex set]]

CATEGORIES: Convex geometry, Mathematical analysis, Convex analysis

In Euclidean space, an object is convex if for every pair of points within the object, every point on the straight line segment that joins the pair of points is also within the object. For example, a solid cube is convex, but anything that is hollow or has a dent in it, for example, a crescent shape, is not convex.
The notion of a convex set can be generalized to other spaces as described below.

In vector spaces

Let . This implies that a convex set in a real or complex topological vector space is path-connected, thus connected.
A set  is called absolutely convex if it is convex and balanced.
The convex subsets of . Some examples of convex subsets of the Euclidean plane are solid regular polygons, solid triangles, and intersections of solid triangles. Some examples of convex subsets of a Euclidean 3-dimensional space are the Archimedean solids and the Platonic solids. The Kepler-Poinsot polyhedra are examples of non-convex sets.

Properties

If , then one has:
A vector of this type is known as a convex combination of .

Intersections and unions

The collection of convex subsets of a vector space has the following properties:[ref]Soltan, Valeriu, Introduction to the Axiomatic Theory of Convexity, Ştiinţa, Chişinău, 1984 (in Russian).
[/ref]

Convex hulls

Every subset . The convex-hull operator Conv() has the characteristic properties of a hull operator:
|-
| extensive
| ,
|-
| non-decreasing
| , and
|-
| idempotent
| .
|}
The convex-hull operation is needed for the set of convex sets to form a lattice, in which the "join" operation is the convex hull of the union of two convex sets
The intersection of any collection of convex sets is itself convex, so the convex subsets of a (real or complex) vector space form a complete lattice.

Minkowski addition

In a real vector-space, the Minkowski sum of two (non-empty) sets,  formed by the addition of vectors element-wise from the summand-sets
More generally, the Minkowski sum of a finite family of (non-empty) sets  is  the set  formed by element-wise addition of vectors
For Minkowski addition, the zero set  has special importance: For every non-empty subset S of a vector space
in algebraic terminology, .

=Convex hulls of Minkowski sums=

Minkowski addition behaves well with respect to the operation of taking convex hulls, as shown by the following proposition:
Let  be subsets of a real vector-space, the convex hull of their Minkowski sum is the Minkowski sum of their convex hulls
This result holds more generally for each finite collection of non-empty sets:
In mathematical terminology, the operations of Minkowski summation and of forming convex hulls are commuting operations.Theorem 3 (pages 562–563): 

Closed convex sets

Closed convex sets can be characterised as the intersections of closed half-spaces (sets of point in space that lie on and to one side of a hyperplane). From what has just been said, it is clear that such intersections are convex, and they will also be closed sets. To prove the converse, i.e., every convex set may be represented as such intersection, one needs the supporting hyperplane theorem in the form that for a given closed convex set . The supporting hyperplane theorem is a special case of the Hahn–Banach theorem of functional analysis.
The Minkowski sum of two compact convex sets is compact, the sum of a compact convex set and a closed convex set is closed.3: 

Generalizations and extensions for convexity

The notion of convexity in the Euclidean space may be generalized by modifying the definition in some or other aspects. The common name "generalized convexity" is used, because the resulting objects retain certain properties of convex sets.

Star-convex sets

Let . Hence a non-empty convex set is always star-convex but a star-convex set is not always convex.

Orthogonal convexity

An example of generalized convexity is orthogonal convexity.J.E. and Wood D, "Ortho-convexity and its generalizations",  in: Computational Morphology, 137-152. Elsevier, 1988.
A set . It is easy to prove that an intersection of any collection of orthoconvex sets is orthoconvex. Some other properties of convex sets are  valid as well.

Non-Euclidean geometry

The definition of a convex set and a convex hull extends naturally to geometries which are not Euclidean by defining a geodesically convex set to be one that contains the geodesics joining any two points in the set.

Order topology

Convexity can be extended for a space  such that {{math|a 
Convexity spaces

The notion of convexity may be generalised to other objects, if certain properties of convexity are selected as axioms.
Given a set  satisfying the following axioms:
The elements of  is called a convexity space. For the ordinary convexity, the first two axioms hold, and the third one is trivial.
For an alternative definition of abstract convexity, more suited to discrete geometry, see the convex geometries associated with antimatroids.








