[[Feldbahn]]

CATEGORIES: Military railways, Narrow gauge railways, Narrow gauge railways in Germany, Railways by type

A Feldbahn, or Lorenbahn, is the German term for a narrow gauge field railway, usually not open to the public, which in its simplest form provides for the transportation of agricultural, forestry (.

Military use

During the First World War, the enormous logistical demands of trench warfare led to the development of military narrow gauge railway or  was an organic growth of existing agricultural, industrial and mining railways. After the war, much remaining trackage and rolling stock was put to use in more conventional narrow gauge applications throughout Europe.

General use

In the processing industry, these narrow-gauge railways once held an important role. As a result, Feldbahnen were frequently associated with refractory clay factories, brickyards, sugar factories and iron and steel mills. They were also used for pulling canal barges, transporting military materiel and personnel and removing materials from large-scale building sites and the rubble from ruined cities after the Second World War. Rail gauges were between .
The track (rails and sleepers) utilised, ranged from light, rail frames that could be carried and laid by two men and were often laid directly on the ground with no trackbed, to properly laid, ballasted lines for heavy loads and extended use.  Tight curves enabled lines to be more easily routed, largely without structures being required, even in difficult terrain. Provisional track laid along the edges of ditches as they were being extended forward, often on soft ground, led occasionally to derailments. As a result, on many , wooden planks and other lifting gear were carried. Turntables were usually operated by hand.
Simple and robust vehicles characterised everyday operations. Locomotives were not always at the 'coal face', so it was quite common for individual wagons - even when loaded - to be moved with horses or by human muscle power alone. In tight spaces or where access was difficult, the help of children and youngsters was enlisted to haul tipper wagons.
Frequently rolling stock was hand-built or was manufactured to order in small batches. Usually no signals were installed, the low speeds enabling trains to be driven by sight. At level crossings on larger roads, temporary bells or light signals were installed, that enabled trains to cross safely.
A special type of , open to the public and sometimes have signal boxes and extensive rail safety equipment (like the Berlin Pionier-Eisenbahnen).
In the munitions depots of the German Federal Navy (. A DS 90 locomotive, no. 9, is still in the depot at Laboe as a memorial.

Today's situation

The use of  again and to give them new life as museum railways.

Feldbahn museums and working lines

Germany

=Baden-Württemberg=

=Bavaria=

=Berlin=

=Brandenburg=

=Hesse=

=Mecklenburg-Vorpommern=

=Lower Saxony=

=North Rhine-Westphalia=

=Rhineland-Palatinate=

=Saxony=

=Saxony-Anhalt=

=Schleswig-Holstein=

=Thuringia=

Austria

Austria/Switzerland

Switzerland

Czech Republic

Literature






