[[Sandy Island Beach State Park]]

CATEGORIES: State parks of New York, Parks in Oswego County, New York

Sandy Island Beach State Park is a New York State park on the eastern shore of Lake Ontario. Its highlight is a  length of sandy shoreline, coastal dunes, and wetlands (the Eastern Lake Ontario Dunes and Wetlands); a 1959 study noted that "The eastern end of Lake Ontario contains not only the finest beaches on the entire lake, but also the finest wildlife habitat."
The park's facilities include several lake swimming areas with lifeguards (in season), changing rooms and restrooms, and a concession stand; a parking fee is charged through the summer season. The park recorded averages about 30,000 recorded visits each season.  The State Park and the Unique Area are in the Town of Richland in Oswego County.

"The hottest spot on the shoreline"

In the 1950s, Sandy Island Beach was opened as a private beach resort by LeGrande and Eva Smith. The resort became very popular. As Jack Major described it, "Overnight, Sandy Pond Beach – renamed Sandy Island Beach – became the place to go".

"The dune is moving"

North and south of Sandy Island Beach, the shoreline has high dunes that are up to 
One high dune just north of the present boundary of Sandy Island Beach State Park is an example of the rapid changes that are possible in a sandy landscape. Jack Major wrote that, "For many years the most popular spot on the beach was an open-faced sandhill that overlooked North Pond."
What happened to the signature high dune of Sandy Island Beach? Stable coastal dunes and sandhills are structures created by dune-building plants such as beachgrass and cottonwood trees. The loss of the high dune appears to have been the result of the destruction of its vegetation that occurred over the years, and in particular during the 1970s. At that time the area around Sandy Island Beach was privately owned, but wasn't staffed, occupied, or maintained. In 1982, Dyke Riggs described the situation, "Bonfires fueled by trees on the beach and dune buggies, trucks and three-wheeled motorcycles careening around destroyed growth that holds the sand."
Since 2000, the dune overlooking Sandy Island Beach was partially rebuilt and replanted with beachgrass by New York State. At the nearby Sandy Pond Beach Unique Area, about 1–2 miles north of Sandy Island Beach, replanting has led to regrowth of low sand dunes. lower than at present, which is also the era in which the present ponds were river mouths. Presumably there was much more blowing sand at that time, permitting the dunes to grow fairly tall. The amount of sand that presently blows annually onto the coastal dunes appears to be insufficient to feed the growth of high dunes.



Further reading

External links (including park contact information)


