[[North-Eastern Federal University]]

CATEGORIES: Education in the Sakha Republic, Universities and institutes established in the Soviet Union, Universities in Siberia, Yakutsk, Educational institutions established in 1956, Buildings and structures in the Sakha Republic

North-Eastern Federal University, previously known as Yakutsk State University, is a school for higher learning in Yakutsk, Siberia. It is the largest institution of higher learning in the north east of Russia.
Full name
Federal State Autonomous Educational Institution of Higher Professional Education "M. K. Ammosov North-Eastern Federal University"
Brief name
North-Eastern Federal University (NEFU).

History

NEFU was officially established in April 2010th on the basis of Yakutsk State University named after M.K. Ammosov, the university with 75 years history.
The university was named after Maksim Kirovich Ammosov, an outstanding statesman, the son of the Yakut nation and one of the founders of Yakutia and Kyrgizstan statehood.
North-Eastern Federal University in Yakutsk (NEFU) is one of the eight Russian federal universities. Recent reforms in the Russian Federation have created a new network of federal universities. This trend towards integration and modernization in higher university education is typical of many countries. As international experience shows, additional financial support from government promotes the high quality of education and higher performance in international rankings. The North-Eastern Federal University is to become a strategic center for the formation of a common cultural, scientific and educational space, based on the values of indigenous culture of the peoples of the northeast of Russia, providing quality personal education in a multiethnic environment. The NEFU development program towards the year 2020, was approved by Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin on October 7, 2010. The following six priority areas were identified in the Program: the new quality of the university; efficient environmental management and environmental security; efficient use of mineral resources; the use of science-based technologies and production in the North; the quality of life in the North; the preservation and development of languages and cultures; the analytical and personnel support for innovative socio-economic development of the northeastern part of the Russian Federation. In all areas of university activities large-scale transformations have been initiated, primarily to create a unified scientific and methodological foundation. A comprehensive plan for the transition to a two-level system of educational, scientific and methodical aspects of basic educational programs has been developed, innovative Master's programs are ready for implementation, and all education departments are being restructured.
Statistics
NEFU 's total undergraduate student population numbers over 23,000.
More than 500 students are engaged in postgraduate work.
1,600 academic staff are currently employed at the University. Of these 200 hold doctor's degree, 800 – candidate of science degree.
15 Institutes, 9 faculties, 3 University branches in Mirny, Nerungry and Chukotka, 5 major research institutes.
119 degree courses are available to students.
The University occupies 9 buildings and 12 residence halls located mostly in the University campus.
1 500,000 books, periodicals and other items are held in the University Library.
The University has Geology Field Station, Museum of Archeology and Ethnography, Botanical garden and Orangery open to staff and students' research and study.
The University has a Stadium, a Swimming Pool, a Social Centre.
Students and staff have free access to the Ethernet and Wi-Fi in all University buildings and Residence Hall

Structure

'''
The North-Eastern Federal University consists of the following Institutes and Faculties:'''
Institutes:
Institute of Medicine
Institute of Finances and Economics
Institute of Mathematics and Information Science
Institute of Physics and Technologies
Institute of Sports and Physical Education
Institute of Foreign Languages and Regional Studies - A Kate Marsden scholarship is given to the top English Language student each year.
Institute of Psychology
Institute of Languages and Cultures of the Peoples of the North-East
Teacher Training Institute
Technological Institute
Faculties:
Faculty of History
Faculty of Philology
Faculty of Law
Faculty of Biology and Geography:
Faculty of Civil Engineering
Faculty of Road Construction
Faculty of Mining
Faculty of Geology and Survey
Faculty of Pre-Undergraduate Education offers preparatory courses to schoolchildren
Branches:
Nerungry Technical Institute (branch) of North-Eastern Federal 
University
Mirny Polytechnic Institute (branch) of North-Eastern Federal University
Chukotka branch of North-Eastern Federal University
There work 5 research institutions such as the Institute of Mathematics and Health Institute, the Institute of applied ecology of North and the Institute of regional economy of North and, certainly, the Institute of Olonkho.

University's priorities

- New higher quality of the university.
- Safeguarding of ecological security and effective reproduction of mineral and raw base; rational nature management.
- Technology usage and production in the North.
- Rise in living standards in the North.
- Preservation and development of the Arctic nation culture.s-vfu.ru/en/university/university_in_brief

Address






