[[Paul Hurst]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, Living people, Sportspeople from Sheffield, English footballers, Association football defenders, Rotherham United F.C. players, Burton Albion F.C. players, The Football League players, Football Conference players, English football managers, Ilkeston Town F.C. managers, Boston United F.C. managers, Grimsby Town F.C. managers, Football Conference managers, Alumni of Staffordshire University

Paul Michael Hurst (born 25 September 1974) is an English former professional footballer and manager of Conference National side Grimsby Town.
As a player he was a defender from 1993 to 2008, notably playing his entire career for Rotherham United, bar a brief loan spell with Burton Albion in his final year as a player. After retiring from the playing side of the sport in 2008 he became joint manager of Ilkeston Town along with former team mate Rob Scott. The pair later took over Boston United before joining Grimsby in 2011.

Playing career

Rotherham United

Hurst figured regularly on the left side of the back four and in this position he performed well. He played over 430 games for Rotherham United.
On 6 March 2004 Hurst scored a consolation on 74 minutes in the 1–2 defeat at home to Bradford City, a chipped free-kick over the wall found Hurst to fire home.
FourFourTwo magazine decided before the 2007–08 season, that they would sponsor a player from every team within the top four divisions in England. Hurst was the player they chose for Rotherham United.
On 15 February, Hurst joined Conference National side Burton Albion on a one month loan to regain his fitness after injury and extended for a second month.
He was released by Rotherham after 15 years at the club, at the end of the 2007–08 season. Hurst stated that he wants to return to Rotherham as part of the backroom staff in the future.

Management career

Ilkeston Town

Hurst and former Rotherham team mate Rob Scott were appointed joint managers of Northern Premier League outfit Ilkeston Town in January 2009. The pair led Ilkeston from ninth in the league to second, and ultimately promotion to Conference North via the play-offs. Afterwards, uncertainty surrounded whether or not they would remain at the helm of the Derbyshire club due to the club's worrying financial position, and eventually they moved to York Street to sign as joint managers of Boston United.

Boston United

In their first season at United they gained a second successive promotion to the Conference North with a win in the play-off final, this was to complete a treble of trophies as they had already collected the Northern Premier League Challenge Cup and Lincolnshire Senior Cup.

Grimsby Town

On 22 March 2011, both Hurst and Scott resigned from Boston
Grimsby who had suffered relegation from the Football League in the previous season had hoped for an instant return but following a mid-season slump that led to the sacking of the previous manager, Hurst and Scott could only manage to salvage an 11th place spot come the end of the 2010–11 campaign. During the summer months the duo bolstered Grimsby's ranks in order for a promotion push but were hit by a blow as previous seasons top scorer and player of the year Alan Connell left to join Swindon Town.com/2011/07/16/alan-connell-set-to-join-paolos-revolution-at-swindon/ The eventual signing of Liam Hearn Grimsby, like the year previously finished 11th in the Conference National.
The 2012–13 season started slowly, but by Christmas Grimsby were top of the league and leading a closely contested pack of Newport County, Wrexham and Forest Green Rovers. On 6 January 2013 speculation about the pairs future at Blundell Park came into light when rumours circulated a potential move to Football League One side Doncaster Rovers surfaced. Rovers who had lost manager Dean Saunders earlier that day to Wolverhampton Wanderers were rumoured to have placed Scott and Hurst on their managerial shortlist. The rumour was quashed the following day with Hurst saying that the pair were focused on earning promotion with Grimsby.thisisgrimsby.co.html Grimsby went on to reach the final of the FA Trophy but were defeated on a penalty shootout after drawing 1-1 with Wrexham at Wembley Stadium. The Mariners also despite leading the Conference for part of the season had dropped off towards the end of the year and had to settle for 4th place, eventually losing to Newport County in the play-off semi finals.
On 6 September 2013 Scott was suspended amongst circumstances not released by the club, leaving Hurst in sole charge.thisisgrimsby.co.html#axzz2e6wRedSx On 19 September 2013 Grimsby confirmed Scott had been sacked for gross misconduct and that Hurst would remain in sole permanent charge.grimsby-townfc.co.aspx On 07 January 2014 Hurst signed an improved deal reflecting the fact that he was now sole manager.co.php?id=8502547

Broadcasting career

In summer 2008, he graduated from Staffordshire University with a degree in Professional Sports Writing and Broadcasting.
Hurst worked for Rotherham United's Community Sports Trust as Participation Officer.

Personal life

He is married to Melanie and has a daughter Millie and a son Zack

Honours

Player

Joint Manager

Individual




