[[Artie Maddicks]]

CATEGORIES: Marvel Comics mutants, Marvel Comics characters, Marvel Comics telepaths, Film characters, Comics characters introduced in 1986, Characters created by Bob Layton

Arthur "Artie" Maddicks is a fictional comic book character in Marvel Comics' shared universe, the Marvel Universe. He first appeared in X-Factor #2 (March 1986) and was created by Bob Layton and Jackson Guice.

Publication history

Created by Bob Layton and Jackson Guice and appearing in X-Factor #2, as the mutant son of Dr. Carl Maddicks, Artie's characterisation was as a mute mutant whose father was trying to cure him.  Upon his father's death, Artie became a ward of X-Factor appearing sporadically in the X-Titles in the mid to late 1980s.  These included the first series of X-Factor and the New Mutants and appearing in a supporting role in the limited series, X-Terminators.  He also was seen in titles that were affected by the Mutant Massacre such as Thor and Power Pack before his character fell into comicbook limbo with his appearances being limited and occasional.
In the mid-1990s, Artie resurfaced, alongside Leech, as a ward of Gene Nation in the pages of Generation X.  How he came about being with Gene Nation has yet to be addressed.  Later, he and Leech become wards and supporting cast members of Generation X, alongside Franklin Richards, who had become an "orphan" after the "death" of his parents.  This led the three boys to star in their own limited comicbook series, Daydreamers, alongside Man-Thing and Tana Nile.  After the Generation X title ended with issue #75, Artie fell into limbo again with his fate unclear.
Since the end of Generation X, Leech reappeared having been captured by Weapon X and later as part of The 198.  Artie was briefly mentioned as being one of the many mutants who was depowered and whose powers were being "used" by the Collective in New Avengers #18, and although the full circumstances about his being powerless and where he has been have yet to be revealed; he (along with Leech) appeared as guests of Franklin's birthday party within Fantastic Four #574.
Artie Maddicks received an entry in the Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe Update '89 #4.

Fictional character biography

Artie was raised by his father, Dr. Carl Maddicks, until his eleventh birthday, when he gained his powers. Artie mutated into a lumpy pink form with no nose and large round eyes. Furthermore, the speech center of his brain was altered, rendering him mute. Desperate, Dr. Maddicks forced Dr. Hank McCoy to help him make a cure. McCoy was used as Dr. Maddicks' guinea pig, while Artie watched. X-Factor came to save McCoy and ended up saving Artie as well. Brand Corporation security guards (whom Dr. Maddicks worried would kill his son) arrived as he fired a gun at them. The guards fire back, killing him.
Afterwards, Artie became the ward of X-Factor.
For a time, Artie and the personnel of X-Factor live aboard Ship, a massive artificial intelligence with a spacecraft body that dwarfs all skyscrapers.

St. Simons

Some time later, X-Factor splits their wards between two boarding schools that were about a mile apart. Artie's school, St. Simons recognizes that he, Leech and the tech-manipulating child Taki are mutants, and more importantly, best friends and were fully willing to work around this. When the events of Inferno began, N'Astirh's demon hordes first went after Artie and Leech, as they were powerful children. It was determined the two were too old but the demon kept them on hand anyway. The other members of the X-Terminators, joined by Taki, leave their new living situations to help rescue him. Artie is forced to witness at least two murders of innocent humans guards before he is rescued.X-Terminators #1–4 (October 1998–January 1999)
Artie, Leech and Taki move back to St. Simons for a while, where they foil a mutant kidnapping plot by a group of murderous humans."X-Force Annual" #1 (1991) Artie gains an unofficial grandmother in Ida Fassbender, a nervous but kindly woman who lives near St. Simons.New Mutants Annual #7 (1991)

Generation X

Gene Nation disrupts the school with another kidnapping scheme, this time successful. After a battle with Hemingway, Generation X finds Artie hiding in the shadows. Artie quickly bonds with Jubilee (who is the first to approach and reassure him), Synch (who would become one of his preferred playmates), and inexplicably Skin (who states more than once in Artie's presence that he dislikes kids). Artie uses a hologram to guide them to his kidnapped friend Leech, who is similarly rescued. They spent much of their time in a treehouse (built for them by Synch and Skin) within the Bio-Sphere." They also met Howard the Duck and his two female companions, Beverly Switzler and Tana Nile. When Black Tom Cassidy attacks the school, an extension of his plant form personally attacks the children in the area called the Danger Grotto. Howard, at great personal risk, managed to distract Tom while Artie and the others make a break for it. Tom is seemingly destroyed in an explosion that sets fire to the entire grotto. Man-Thing arrives and took the entire group away,Generation X #25 into several adventures. They are given image inducers to hide their appearances, and frequently used them to wreak playful havoc. 
After Generation X suffers the death of Synch due to terrorist activity,

Future Foundation

During a mission, the New Avengers viewed a screen of de-powered mutants. Artie was on that screen with other mutants de-powered after the House of M event.  Artie also received a special helmet made by Valeria Richards which allows him to communicate by creating images in the air - he remains mute due to the deformity caused by his mutations.Fantastic Four #578

Powers and abilities

Artie is a young mutant with bright pink skin and a lumpy, misshapen skull. He possesses the ability to project telepathic holograms of his thoughts. Usually he uses his power to communicate, because he is mute. However, he can make large-scale holograms as a means of defense. Artie can also tap into and project images of the thoughts of other people, at times on the scale of a city's population. He can also use this limited form of telepathy to mind-lock people and prevent them from acting.
Artie was stripped of his mutant abilities by the Scarlet Witch at the conclusion of the "House of M" incident, but now wields these same powers artificially through the use of a helmet created by Valeria Richards.

Other versions

In other media

Film






