[[Darren Sheridan]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, Living people, People from Stretford, English footballers, Association football midfielders, Barnsley F.C. players, Wigan Athletic F.C. players, Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players, Clyde F.C. players, St. Johnstone F.C. players, Barrow A.F.C. players, Radcliffe Borough F.C. players, Droylsden F.C. players, Premier League players, The Football League players, Football Conference players, Scottish Football League players, English football managers, Barrow A.F.C. managers, Salford City F.C. managers, Football Conference managers, Footballers from Greater Manchester

Darren Stephen Sheridan (born 8 December 1967) is an English footballer and manager. As a player, Sheridan played as a centre midfielder. He has had one spell as a player-manager, with Barrow, before managing Salford City. He is currently Chief Scout at Plymouth Argyle.
Sheridan began his career at Barnsley, with whom he played in the Premier League in 1997–98. He then spent time with Wigan Athletic and Oldham Athletic, before moving to Scotland for three years with Clyde and St. Johnstone. He moved back to England with Conference North club Barrow in January 2007, After a very brief spell with Radcliffe Borough, Sheridan joined Droylsden of the Conference North.

Career

Sheridan was born in Stretford, Lancashire. After starting out in non-league football, he signed for Barnsley in 1993 and helped them win promotion to the Premier League in 1997. He played for them in their only top flight season to date (1997–98) and also helped them reach an FA Cup quarter-final that year. He featured as a substitute in Barnsley's shock FA Cup win over Manchester United in the fifth round. 
In 1999 he was transferred to Wigan Athletic where he played 58 games and scored three goals, enduring two successive play-off failures in Division Two (one in the final) before linking up with his brother, John at Wigan's local rivals Oldham Athletic. He left Oldham Athletic for Clyde of Scotland in 2004.
Sheridan spent one season at Clyde, scoring twice in 29 games, before moving to St. Johnstone, where he made 42 goalless appearances in 18 months, after which he moved south of the border to play non-League football for Barrow. He was hired as joint manager alongside Dave Bayliss in December 2007 following a successful run as caretaker managers, and took the team to promotion to the Conference National following a twenty game unbeaten run. Sheridan continued to play for the club whilst managing, as Barrow managed to retain their Conference National status in the 2008/09 season.
Along with Bayliss he continued the good work with the Cumbrian side in 2009–10 as Barrow yet again stayed up finishing a respectable 15th. Barrow also won the FA Trophy beating league champions Stevenage Borough 2–1 at Wembley Stadium to claim the non-league knockout competition. He continued to be a regular during the 2010–11 season, as Barrow secured their longest spell in the Conference National since its formation as the Alliance Premier League in 1979. 
In the 2011–12 season Sheridan made only two league appearances as a player for Barrow, whilst the club enjoyed mid-table stability in the league. Following allegations made against Sheridan, he was suspended from Barrow on 3 February 2012. It was announced on 11 February that he had left Barrow by mutual consent, with Darren Bayliss remaining as sole manager of the club.
Immediately after leaving Barrow, Sheridan signed for Radcliffe Borough of the Northern Premier League Division One North, with whom he had played as a youngster.C. Accessed 19 March 2012 After a month, he stepped back up to the Conference North, signing with Droylsden.pitchero. 
In May 2012 he was appointed as manager of Salford City,
On 26 June 2013 Darren was appointed chief scout at Football League Two club Plymouth Argyle
Honours== 

As a player

As manager

Personal life

He is the younger brother of former Sheffield Wednesday star, John Sheridan. He is also the uncle of Stockport County midfielder Sam Sheridan.






