[[Wendell Pierce]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 births, Living people, American male film actors, American male television actors, Juilliard School alumni, Male actors from New Orleans, Louisiana, African-American male actors, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors

Wendell Edward Pierce (born December 8, 1966) is an American actor, best known for his work in HBO dramas, including his portrayals of Detective Bunk Moreland in The Wire,  trombonist Antoine Batiste in Treme and "Michael Davenport" in Waiting to Exhale.

Early life & education

Pierce was born in New Orleans, Louisiana.  He was one of three sons born to a teacher and a decorated World War II veteran who worked as a maintenance engineer.
Pierce was raised in the black middle-class community of Pontchartrain Park.  It was the first African-American post-war suburb.  His father, along with many black veterans, bought into the neighborhood after returning home from the war.  The neighborhood was wiped out during Hurricane Katrina in 2005, including Pierce's family home, which was flooded with 14 feet of water.
After first attending Benjamin Franklin High School, Pierce graduated from the New Orleans Centre for Creative Arts (along with Wynton Marsalis, Branford Marsalis, Harry Connick Jr., and Lolis Eric Elie) where he was a Presidential Scholar of the Arts.
He then attended the Juilliard School's Drama Division (Group 14: 1981–1985) where he graduated with a Bachelor of Fine Arts.

Career

Pierce has been in over 30 films, appeared in nearly 50 television shows and has performed in dozens of stage productions. He worked on the HBO dramas The Wire and Treme. He appeared in The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn – Part 2 as "J. Jenks". 
For his role in Treme, Pierce learned to play the trombone, though relies on "sound double", Stafford Agee, of the Rebirth Brass Band. Agee actually records the music, while Pierce shadows the sound.
Pierce was nominated for an Independent Spirit Award for Best Male Lead for his portrayal of "Joe" in Four, playing a married, closeted gay man who steps out on his family with a young white man he met online. The film was released on September 13, 2013, around the same time that The Michael J. Fox Show debuted on NBC, in which Pierce played Michael J. Fox's character's boss until the show's cancellation some five months later.

Feature Film

Television

Stage

Pierce has been in numerous stage productions.  He was lauded for his performance as Holt Fay in Queenie at the John F. Kennedy Center.  He has performed  on Broadway in staged productions of The Piano Lesson, Serious Money and The Boys of Winter.  He has performed off Broadway in  The Cherry Orchard (for which he was nominated for a VIV Award for Lead Actor, Waiting for Godot (which was set on a New Orleans rooftop post-Hurricane Katrina, and Broke-ology, performed at Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts.
Other performances include Cymbeline (at The Public Theater),  The Good Times Are Killing Me, Two Gentlemen of Verona, Tis Pity She's a Whore and Ms. Ever's Boys performed at the ACT Theatre.
Pierce is also a theater producer, having produced the Broadway show, Clybourne Park.  The show was nominated for four Tony Awards.  It went on to win the Tony Award for Best Play in 2012.


Radio

In 2009, Pierce became the host of the nationally syndicated, Peabody Award-winning radio program, Jazz at Lincoln Center, which features live recordings from Jazz at Lincoln Center's House of Swing.

Business & Philanthropy

Pierce considers himself a "true capitalist" and a "classic entrepreneur."

Pontchartrain Park Community Development Corp.

Pierce started the non-profit, Pontchartrain Park Community Development Corp., to build new affordable solar and geothermal homes in the area for families displaced by Hurricane Katrina.

Sterling Farms

Inspired in part by Michelle Obama's initiative to bring more supermarkets to "food deserts" – where residents lack easy access to fresh produce – Pierce, along with 2 partners (childhood friend, Troy Henry, and James Hatchett), started a chain of grocery stores, Sterling Farms, in the Ninth Ward of New Orleans in 2012.  Sterling Farms opened its first store, a 30,000-square-foot supermarket, in Marreo, LA.

Personal life

Pierce is "tri-coastal," splitting his time between L.A., New York and New Orleans.  His favorite sports team is the New Orleans Saints.
Pierce is politically active.   He attended the 2012 Democratic National Convention, was one of President Barack Obama's top campaign fundraisers in 2012 (along with Harvey Weinstein and Eva Longoria), and once escorted Gwen Ifil to a White House State Dinner.
When first cast in The Wire, Pierce and his cast mates doubted the show would be a hit: 






