[[Atkinson Graduate School of Management]]

CATEGORIES: Business schools in Oregon, Willamette University, Educational institutions established in 1974, 1974 establishments in Oregon

The George H. Atkinson Graduate School of Management (Atkinson) is the Masters in Business Administration (MBA) program at Willamette University in Salem, Oregon, United States. It is one of only two MBA programs in the world accredited for both Business Administration (AACSB International) and Public Administration (NASPAA). Atkinson was established by Willamette in 1974 and has an enrollment of approximately 312 students.

History

Atkinson Graduate School was founded at Willamette University in 1974 and moved into the new Seeley G. Mudd Building in 1975. The Oregonian, January 4, 1988. The first year had 52 students and five professors, and the program is older than the management program at Yale University. Stephen Archer served as the school's first dean. The school was first named as the Willamette University School of Administration before being renamed as the George H. Atkinson Graduate School of Management. Atkinson teaches success. The Oregonian, January 17, 1988. Atkinson was a businessman in the construction industry and a trustee of Willamette before he died in 1978. He served as president of the board of trustees and made the largest single donation in school history up to that time in 1969 when his foundation gave $3.4 million to the university.
In 1978, the Center for Business-Government Studies was added to the school after Willamette received a grant from the M. J. Murdock Charitable Trust. The program was designed to better the relationships between the government and businesses. In 1988, the school was recognized by U.S. News & World Report and the fifth best business school in the Midwest and West region. It was the highest ranked of any school in the Pacific Northwest. Enrollment was 130 students with 10 full-time professors. At that time the program was led by Dean David L. Puryear with a tuition of just over $8,000 per year.
In 1990, the school hired G. Dale Weight to serve as dean, the same year he was removed as chief executive officer of the Benj. Franklin Savings and Loan after the thrift was seized by the government during the Savings and loan crisis. Tuition was $14,900 per year then and incoming students scored an average of 550 on the Graduate Management Admission Test. From 1998 to 2002, Atkinson was led by Dean Bryan Johnston. "Two vie for top post at OSU campus", The Bulletin. Retrieved December 12, 2007. Johnston had been the interim president at Willamette and a member of the Oregon House of Representatives."Willamette names Johnston dean of Atkinson grad school", The Oregonian, June 2, 1998.
Atkinson opened a center to the north in Portland's Pearl District in August 2005 to provide a two-year MBA program in the Oregon's most populous city.
The Atkinson Graduate School of Management was ranked among Forbes magazine's "Best Business Schools" list in 2009 and 2011. It is the only ranked program on Forbes' 2011 list in Oregon.

Academics

Atkinson offers several different graduate programs. The school offers full-time, part-time, and evening enrollment. The Princeton Review. Retrieved December 11, 2007. MBA programs include the MBA for Professionals, Accelerated MBA, Early Career and Career Change MBA.  In the Early Career and Career Change MBA, students can choose areas of interests including accounting, finance,  general management, human resources, information systems, marketing, organizational analysis, public management, international management, and quantitative analysis/management science.[ref]
What Atkinson Says About. The Princeton Review. Retrieved December 11, 2007.[/ref] Students in their first year in a program are required to enroll in an entrepreneurship course called PACE that includes strategies that are used to develop a business plan. The Oregonian, June 10, 2007. The graduate programs also require courses in business ethics, including the Oregon Ethics in Business Awards evaluation program. Enron offers case for ethics courses. The Oregonian, August 19, 2002. Located across the street from the Oregon State Capitol, unlike similar management schools, Atkinson has been able to maintain some of its focus on public management programs. The Changing Environment of Education for Public Service. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 15, No. 2. (Spring, 1996), p. 161.
The school also offers a four-year joint MBA-JD degree in association with the Willamette University College of Law. The Princeton Review. Retrieved December 11, 2007. Willamette's MBA for Professionals program in Portland and Salem focuses management skill development, broad based strategic thinking and cross-functional knowledge.
Atkinson offers three study abroad programs, Copenhagen Business School in Denmark and Bordeaux Business School and EM Strasborg Business School in France. In addition to student programs, AGSM also offers an Executive Development Center (EDC) designed to educate businesses and organizations as consultants to those groups. Willamette University. Retrieved December 11, 2007. The PACE Program is the centerpiece of Atkinson's full-time MBA Program, specifically for students early in their career or changing careers. By working within and outside organizations, students apply what they are learning in the classroom to the inner workings of the private, non-profit, and government sectors.  

Rankings and accreditation

AGSM is accredited by the AACSB in business,Willamette University, Atkinson Graduate School of Management. AACSB. Retrieved December 11, 2007. by NASPAA for government and not for profit administration,2006–07 Roster of Accredited Programs. NASPAA. Retrieved December 11, 2007. and the law school has been accredited by the American Bar Association since 1938. American Bar Association. Retrieved December 11, 2007. It was the first school in the world to be accredited by both the NASPAA and AACSB. Willamette names new business dean. Statesman Journal, January 15, 2003. Atkinson was selected as one of the top 91 programs for preparing MBA's for social and environmental stewardship by "Beyond Grey Pinstripes"Willamette University Atkinson Graduate School of Management. Beyond Gray Pinstripes. Retrieved December 11, 2007. and ranked 28th for the specialty of "Public Affairs, Public Finance and Budgeting" by U.S. News & World Reports.
"Beyond Grey Pinstripes" again recognized Willamette's commitment to ethics, environmental stewardship and social responsibility. 

Facilities

The school is housed in the Seeley G. Mudd Building on the west end of the Willamette University campus in Salem. The building is named after Seeley G. Mudd, a physician, educator, and philanthropist who has many buildings across the country named in his honor. Mudd? Princeton University: Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library. The Mudd building was completed in 1975. This structure was designed by architect Phil Settecase. Two receive chamber awards. Statesman Journal, February 2, 2004. In 2000, the school installed a wireless network in the building. Change helps Willamette avoid rewiring classrooms. Statesman Journal, November 7, 2000. Law classes are held in the neighboring Truman Wesley Collins Legal Center. Collins was built in 1967 and expanded in 1992.
The Willamette University Portland Center was established in 2005 and houses the MBA for Professionals (evening) program.  It is located in a  space in the Pearl District at the RiverTec Building. The Portland Center is also utilized for events through Willamette's Executive Development Center.

Students

Atkinson has an enrollment of 312 students in all programs. Students have an average entering GPA of 3.30 and Graduate Management Admission Test (GMAT) score of 610. Select students are eligible for induction into Beta Gamma Sigma, the honor society for business students. Beta Gamma Sigma. Retrieved December 11, 2007.  The average age of students in the full-time (Early Career MBA and MBA for Career Change) is 25.

Notable alumni






