[[Fotos y Recuerdos]]

CATEGORIES: 1995 singles, Selena songs, The Pretenders songs, Billboard Hot Latin Songs number-one singles, Billboard Regional Mexican Songs number-one singles, Songs written by Chrissie Hynde, Songs written by Ricky Vela, Song recordings produced by A.B. Quintanilla, Song recordings produced by Bebu Silvetti

}}
"Fotos y recuerdos" () is a song recorded by American recording artist Selena for her fifth studio album Amor prohibido (1994). It was released by EMI Latin on 14 February 1995, as the album's fourth single. Inspired by the Pretenders' 1982 song "Back on the Chain Gang", Selena's brother and music producer A.B. Quintanilla III asked Ricky Vela, the lead keyboardist of Selena y Los Dinos, to transform the song into a Spanish-language cumbia. Argentine arranger and composer Bebu Silvetti, produced "Fotos y recuerdos" alongside Quintanilla III. Recording sessions for "Fotos y recuerdos" was delayed because Selena and the band did not get a license to record the song, which stirred a controversy.
"Fotos y recuerdos" is a Spanish-language mid-tempo cumbia that contains influences of house and dance-pop. The central theme and lyrical content of the song is about a lonely women who, kisses the pictures of her beloved boyfriend every night before she goes to sleep, while reminiscing memories she keeps intact. "Fotos y recuerdos" peaked at number one on the US Hot Latin Tracks for seven consecutive weeks, giving Selena her fourth number one single from Amor prohibido. Selena became the first Hispanic singer to have an album produce four number one songs. It also peaked at number 34 on the Hot Singles Sales, number two on the Billboard Top Latin Songs Year-End Chart, and number one on the Latin 40 chart.
"Fotos y recuerdos" was praised by contemporary music critics, who believed that the song is an "improvement" and/or a "better" version of the Pretenders' original recording, while many agreed that "Fotos y recuerdos" is one of Selena's most "famous songs". With "Fotos y recuerdos" and thirteen other of Selena's top-ten singles in the Hot Latin Songs chart, she was named "top Latin artist of the 1990s" and "Best selling Latin artist of the decade" by Billboard magazine. There has been a number of covers that were done as a tribute to Selena after she was murdered.

Inspiration, production and songwriting controversy

While on her tour for Live!, Selena's brother and producer of her music A.B. Quintanilla III heard on the radio the Pretenders' song "Back on the Chain Gang". Quintanilla III was mesmerized and took fond of the chants and musical arrangements the song had and believed that the song could be a really good cumbia. While being interviewed for the Selena: 20 Years of Music Collection, Quintanilla III stated that at the time he had a nervous breakdown because he was running out of songs that would "fit" with Amor prohibido (1994). Quintanilla III then asked Ricky Vela, the lead keyboardist of Selena y Los Dinos, to rewrite the Pretenders' "Back on the Chain Gang" into a Spanish-language cumbia.
Vela, who was interviewed for the Selena: 20 Years of Music Collection, reminisced that he was awaken from his sleep by Selena and Quintanilla III about the license for the song. The music producers of Hynde's reported "Fotos y recuerdos" and halted any production to go on because it sampled the Pretenders' song. They told Selena and Quintanilla III that they needed a clearance in order to record the song. Vela then wrote down the lyrics for "Fotos y recuerdos" for the producers. After this, they were allowed to record "Fotos y recuerdos".

Music, theme and lyrics

"Fotos y recuerdos" is a mid-tempo cumbia that contains influences of house
The song's lyrics are constructed in the verse-pre-chorus-chorus-verse form. It begins with the Spanish guitar and the violins playing in a down-tempo notation while Selena opens the song with the title before the electric guitar begins strumming. Selena sings the intro: Tengo una foto de ti, ohh whoa ohh oh, que beso cada noche antes de dormir, ohh whoa ohh oh, ya está media rota ya se está borrando, ohh whoa ohh oh, por tantas lágrimas que estoy derramando, ohh whoa ohh oh. (English interpretation: I have a picture of you with me, ohh whoa ohh oh, which I kiss every night before I go to bed, ohh whoa ohh oh, its semi ripped and its fading, ohh whoa ohh oh, so many tears I'm shedding, ohh whoa ohh oh.) She then sings that all she has left of her boyfriend's love is his pictures. The chorus follow with Selena telling herself that every time she looks at his pictures it makes her happy. She then sings that they meet at a club and shared "shy kisses". Selena sings the chorus and pre-chorus two times before the song concludes.
Frank W. Hoffmann and Howard Ferstler wrote in their book Encyclopedia of recorded sound that "Fotos y recuerdos" is a "hard-edged rock" song.

Released and reception

"Fotos y recuerdos" was released as the fourth single from Amor prohibido on 14 February 1995. A promotional single was later released in the US with "El chico del apartamento 512" (1995) serving as the B-side track. In Mexico, only a CD single and cassette single were released, while in South American countries, a 12" single was released.
Many music critics believed that "Fotos y recuerdos" is an "improvement" and/or a "better version" of the Pretenders' original version.

Tributes

Puerto Rican salsa singer José Alberto covered "Fotos y recuerdos" for his album Oro salsero.

Formats and track listings

Credits and personnel

Credits adapted from Amor prohibido liner notes.

Charts

Weekly charts

Year-end charts








