[[Mannar, India]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Alappuzha district

Mannar is a major It is situated on the banks of the Pampa River and Manimala River. Mannar is 9 km from Chengannur, Thiruvalla, Haripad and Mavelikara. It is connected by four railway stations (Chengannur, Thiruvalla, Harippad and Mavelikara) at a distance of 9 km each on four sides.
There is a community of Tamil-speaking people here, whose ancestors were believed to brought from Tanjavoor for the construction of Thrikkuratti Mahadevar Temple.

Industry

Traditional bronze metal industry

Mannar is well known for its flourishing bronze industry, as well as other metals. There are hundreds of traditional 'ALA'S'(kilns or furnaces) There are many small-scale manufacturing establishments engaged in this business, employing traditional workers, where prospective buyers can visit, observe the making and then purchase the artifacts produced. the most importnt household utensil they used to make are kiNNanfor taking foods like kanji and boiled rice., nilavilakk,uruLi, chempi[ for par boiling padyfor taking water for washin hands and feet. The most famous utensil makers were chinkili achari and kollan neelakantan achari. thee was on expert craftman kuraTTiyil neelakantan achaari, who made the minutest gold ornaments. later industry shifted to manufacturing big size artifacts and Craftsmen from this town created many well known artifacts, such as a Varpu displayed at Delhi Museum, the lamp at Kuravilangad Church, the lamp of Chettikulangara Devi Temple, the bell at Simla Temple, the bell at Cathedral Church New Delhi and a replica of famous tree of life and knowledge. This town is second only to market leader manufacturing city Moradabad. Now almost all things you see in our shops are those brought from Moradabad.
Mannaar dEsaperumayute kathha by Dr.K.Balakrishna Pillai

Alind Switchgear Division

The Aluminium Industries Limited came into existence, on 2 January 1946, promoted by then Seshasayee Group with its Conductor Division set up in Kundra, Kerala under technical collaboration from the world renowned ALCAN, Canada, The Aluminium Development Laboratories U.K. and ALCAN S.A., Zurich, Switzerland. Since then, Alind has produced more than a million kilometres of AAC, ACSR and AAAC conductors building the lifelines of power in India and aboard, and hence Alind could rightly call itself "The Power Movers."
Presently Alind with its Corporate Office in Mumbai has manufacturing units located in the three states of Kerala, Orrisa and Andhra Pradesh manufacturing cables and conductors, steel wires, wire-working machinery, high-voltage switchgears and static relays, Export Division, Consultancy and Engineering Services Division.Alind's Switchgear Division

Religious sites

Religious sites in and around Mannar include the famous Panayannar kavu devi temple Panayannar kavu devi temple, Thrikkuratti Mahadevar Temple Thrikkuratti Mahadevar Temple, Mannar Juma Masjid, Kurattikkadu Pattambalam Devi Temple, Pattambalam,Eramathoor Mahadeva temple,Eramathoor Pattambalam Devi Temple,Eramathoor Suryadeva Temple, Oorumadom Bhadrakaali Temple, Vishavarsherikkara Subrahmanya Swami Temple, Pothuvoor Bhadrakaali Temple, Viruppil Devi Temple, 553-no SNDP Pavukkara Temple, Edayadi Bhadrkaali Temple,  Chakkulathu Kavu Devi Temple, Kunnathoor Devi Temple,Kottarkavu Devi temple, Parumala Church, st.peters catholic church pavukkara.
Panayannarkavu temple is said to be thousands of year old. The ancient Panayannar Kavu devi temple, worshipping "Saptha Matha", is famous for its Sarpa kavu and mural painting  drawn on Sricovil. One of these paintings became the cover page for Sri. E.M.S. Nampoothripad's biography (veteran Communist leader and ex-chief minister of Kerala). The annual Vishu Festival attracts many pilgrims.
The Aalthara Ganapathy temple at Kannamkavil Muthaaramman Temple, near Thrikkuratti temple attracts many devotees, in particular motorists. Vinayaga Chathurthy Festival is the major festival celebrated at Aalthara Ganapathy Temple. Manjal Neerattu conducted during Kumbha Bharani festival at Kannamkavil Mutharamman temple is a major attraction for many devotees.
The Eramathoor Soorya temple is believed to centuries old and is known for being one of the three known temples in Kerala dedicated to deity "Surya" (Sun God). The Adithya Ponkala conducted at this temple attracts lots of women devotees from South Kerala.

Thrikkuratti Mahadevar Temple

Thrikkuratti Mahadevar Temple is one of the 108 sivalays built by Lord Parasurama. It is believed that the mammoth temple compound wall was built by a troupe of Bhootas of Lord Paramasiva in one night. The unique festivities of Thrikkuratti temple (Sahasra kalasam, Maikatti puja and Sivarathri Nritham) attract many pilgrims. The antique wooden carving of Thrikkuratti mahadeva temple Sricovil was featured in visual media, attracting lot of art lovers including foreigners. At a special Nada (gate) on the east side of the Thrikkuratti temple compound wall, other religious members, in particular, Muslims, present offerings on a daily basis. This practice is believed to be centuries old and is considered to be a true embodiment of religious harmony. The Thrikkuratti Mahasivarathri Festival, second only to Aluva Sivarathri in terms of mass congregation, attracts thousands of devotees. The West Nada (Parvathi) will be open for ten minutes during Sivarathri Nritham on Sivarathri day only. All other days during the year it remains closed. The Srikovil of Thrikkuratti Mahavishnu temple is built on North Indian Architecture.

Chettikulangara Devi Temple

The Chettikulangara Bhagavathi temple is about 10 km from Mannar.  The Kettukazcha festival on the day of Chettikulangara Bharani attracts lakhs of people across the globe. The goddess Chettikulangara amma is considered as the mother goddess of Onattukara.
It is believed that, Lord Parashurama had established 108 Durga temples, 108 Siva temples, numerous Sastha temples, besides 108 Kalaris (place to learn traditional martial arts in front of the deity), Sakthi Kendras etc. Besides he had established five Ambalayas. Jagadambika of Chettikulangara, the Goddess of Oodanadu, is among the five Ambalayams. Though enough historical evidences and authentic study materials are not available to support, it is believed that this temple dates back to more than1200 years.
According to one version, this temple was consecrated by Padmapadacharyar (a leading disciple of Adi Shankara) on the Uthrittathi day of Makara month in A.D. 823.

Kurattikadu Pattambalam Devi Temple

Parumala Valiya Panayannar Kavu Temple

Parumala Church

The famous Parumala church or St.Paul's Church is dedicated to Saint Gregorios of Parumala (Gheevarghese Mar Gregorios of Parumala), who is also popularly known as 'Parumala Thirumeni'.
Parumala Church or St.Peter's Church is located in east Mannar.

New Central Travancore District

The unscientific measures adopted in the formation of Pathanamthitta district have badly affected the development of Central Travancore. Considering this as the root cause of the backwardness of this area, a proposal for the formation of a new district, i.e., Central Travancore district, has been in the air since the late eighties. 
The proposal proceeds to include Thiruvalla taluk wholly and parts of adjoining panchayats of Pandalam, Thumpamon and Pandalam-Thekkekkara of the present Pathanamthitta district and Mavelikara and Chengannur taluks wholly and parts of the adjoining Karthikappally taluk of Alappuzha district in the new district. The new district will have five  taluks, namely, Thiruvalla, Chengannur, Pandalam and Mavelikara and Kayamkulam. It may be noted that a major chunk of the culturally renowned Onattukara will be part of the new district along with the Thiruvalla-Kumbanad NRI belt, which accounts for a substantial inflow of foreign currency. 
Apart from other parts of the State, the Central Travancore region has a cultural identity of its own. Moreover, the geographical topography itself makes its identity unique, that it can neither be a part of the hilly Pathanamthitta district nor the "watery'' Alappuzha. 
The "Central Travencorean'' spirit is something enjoyed by the people here in all its sense and spirit, which cannot be expressed by mere words. 
The formation of the new district would certainly boost the efficiency of administration in the region. Moreover, the five-decade-long urge for the formation of the proposed Pandalam taluk by grouping together Pandalam, Thumpamon, Pandalam-Thekkekkara, Kulanada, Mezhuveli, Nooranad, Palamel panchayats can be realized with the formation of the new district.

Events

Thrikkuratti Mahadeva temple shivarathri is celebrated as the biggest and famous event held in mannar every year.
The Anpoli conducted as part of festival in Devi temples are another attraction and unique one. Among the Anpoli festivals Anpoli Areeppara Mahothsavam of Kurattikkadu Pattambalam Devi Kshethram is the most famous, attracting thousands of devotees on Medam 24th (7 May). Here Bhuvaneswari and Bhadra are worshipped with equal importance. The festival at Pattambalam starts on Medam 10th (23 April) and ends on Medam 25th (8 May). The festival includes several rituals like AttilChattam, Changayilottam, Vithideel which aren't practised anywhere else in the world. Among these AttilChattam attracts Muslim devotees also.
The annual Mahathma Boat Race, conducted during Onam festival season, attracts lot of visitors and water sports lovers including foreigners.

Education

Mannar has well known educational institutions like Dewaswom Board Pampa College, Nair Samajam Higher Secondary School, Nair Samajam Teacher Training Institute,Nair Samajam High Schools (one of the oldest schools in Central Travancore),Sree Bhuvaneswari English Medium School and Good Shepherd School. The Mannar Library at Kuttiyil Junction is a full-fledged library, equipped with lot of reference books.
Mannar Nayar Samajam School was started in the year 1903. It was established by the initiative of Vechooreth V S Krishna Pillai who had stated it  first in his house with 20 pupils in 1902. Old stalwarts like Puthuppally Krishna Pillai, Kainikara Brothers, Makkappuzha Vasudevan Pillai and many great leaders studied there. K P Krishna Menon was the Second Headmaster of the School, the First being Cherian Sar, father of erstwhile Minister George. Thjer was no discremionation between the high class and harijans for studying in the schools. Fees concessions were also given to the poor students.

Sree Bhuvaneswari Higher Secondary School

Sree Bhuvaneswari Higher Secondary School, managed by the Kurattikadu Pattambalam Devaswam, was founded in 1974 with LKG classes and has now grown into a cluster of schools comprising the Sree Bhuvaneswari Sisu Vidyalayam: the nursery, Sree Bhuvaneswari English Medium High School, Sree Bhuvaneswari Higher Secondary School and Sree Bhuvaneswari CBSE School.

N.S.H.S. For Boys, Mannar

Nair Samajam High School For Boys, Mannar Panchayat, Mannar, Alleppy Dist. Kerala State
Syllabus : STATE
Medium : Malayalam
class: 5-10

N.S.H.S. For Girls, Mannar

Nair Samajam High School For Girls, Mannar Panchayat, Mannar, Alleppy Dist. Kerala State
Syllabus : STATE
Medium : Malayalam

M.D.L.P.School, Mannar

Mannar Syrian Lower Primary School, Muttel Junction, Kuttemperoor P.O., Mannar, Alleppy Dist. Kerala
Syllabus : STATE
Medium : Malayalam

M.D.L.P.School, Pavukkara

Pavukkara PO, Mannar, Alleppy Dist. Kerala
Syllabus : STATE
Medium : Malayalam

D.B College Paumala Mannar

Banking Services

Government Services

Mannar Grama Panchayat

Mannar Village Office

Mannar Post Office

Mannar Telephone Exchange

Government Hospitals

Govt. General Hospital

Govt. Ayurveda Hospital

Government HOSPITAL Mannar is a community health near store junction. a faculty of crs doctors and medical officers. has a capacity to look around 342 people per day.
it has very good in patient setup with more than 25 beds.

Other notability

The St. Gregorious Cardiovascular Center of St. Gregorious Hospital  Parumala, is promoted by Padmasree Dr. K.M. Cherian of Frontier lifeline and Dr. K.M. Cherian Heart Foundation, Chennai, is one of best fully equipped Super Specialty Heart Hospital in rural India. The de-addiction centre operating at St. Gregorious hospital helps a lot of alcohol and drug addicts recover.
This place is also famous for Ayurvedic treatment and Traditional herbal medicine. Centuries old traditional family herbal treatment by Kollasseril family is very effective for jaundice and hepatitis. Reaping the benefits of Ayurvedic medical research and recent development of medical tourism, Padma Ayurvedic Medical Centre and Punchkarma Hospital, Kuttamperoor attracts lot of patients. To maintain the quality of medicines used, the firm maintains its own full-fledged herbal garden and its own medicine manufacturing facilities. This is a GMP-certified company engaged in exporting Ayurvedic medicines to many countries. Omkar Ayurvedic Medical Centre is a speciality hospital for punchkarma and Ayurvedic treatment.
There is a municipal bus station recently built near Store Junction which is the heart of Mannar.

Demand for Mavelikkara district.

Mar 25, 2008:
The demand for a new Central Travancore district with Mavelikkara as its headquarters is being raised once again.
The demand, which was not heard for the last seven years or so, was raised by the Thiruvananthapuram-based Janakeeya Samithi led by freedom-fighter K.E. Mammen and Mavelikara MLA during a public function attended by Chief Minister V.S. Achuthanandan at Mavelikara on Monday.
Pointing out that the demand for a separate Central Travancore district centered on Mavelikara or Onattukara was a long-standing one. The region also required more attention from Railways, he said, requesting Mr. Achuthanandan to pressurise Railways to establish a Mavelikara-Punalur railway line.
The Janakeeya Samithi, on the other hand, submitted a memorandum to the Chief Minister citing the demand for the new district. Signed by Samithi director and general secretary, the memorandum recalled that Mavelikkara was the central hub pivotal to administrative affairs during the days of the Travancore monarchy.





Related links


