[[Craig Fagan]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, English footballers, English people of Jamaican descent, Association football forwards, Association football wingers, Birmingham City F.C. players, Bristol City F.C. players, Colchester United F.C. players, Hull City A.F.C. players, Derby County F.C. players, Bradford City A.F.C. players, Bury F.C. players, Premier League players, The Football League players, Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands, Living people, Gillingham F.C. players, Black English sportspeople

Craig Anthony Fagan (born 11 December 1982) is an English footballer. He can play as a forward or on the wing for Gillingham.

Club career

Early career

Fagan began his football career as an under-nine with Birmingham City. When the club dismantled its youth system he spent a few months with West Bromwich Albion, but returned to Birmingham City when they opened their academy, in part because the club was nearer to his home in Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, where he attended Catshill Middle School and South Bromsgrove High School. his future club. He failed to make the breakthrough to Birmingham's first team, and joined Colchester United on a free transfer in 2004, after a successful loan spell at the club.

Hull City

Fagan joined Hull City on 28 February 2005 for an undisclosed six-figure transfer fee (believed to be around £125,000). Five days later he scored on his debut in a 3–1 victory over Tranmere Rovers. He was reunited with his former Colchester boss, Phil Parkinson, when Parkinson was appointed Hull City manager in the summer of 2006 – Parkinson's tenure however did not last long. Under Parkinson, Fagan was played on the right wing, whereas under Peter Taylor he had played as a striker. Following Parkinson's departure, Hull changed from a 4-4-2 formation to  4-3-3, and Fagan flourished in his role on the right hand side of the front three.
His good form led to interest from other clubs and speculation around his future arose when he was left out of the squad for the FA Cup Third Round tie against Middlesbrough on 6 January 2007. Finally, on 9 January, top of the table Derby County confirmed the signing of Fagan for a fee of £750,000, rising to £1,000,000 dependent on their promotion to the Premiership.
Despite leaving halfway through the season, Fagan led the assists chart for Hull in 2006–07,

Derby County

Upon joining Derby, Fagan quickly worked his way into the first team and made his debut in a 1–0 win over Sheffield Wednesday on 13 January 2007; ironically he had made his final appearance for Hull against the same opponents 12 days previously, a game which Fagan was also on the winning side. Fagan was mostly employed as a wide player whilst at Derby, rather than his preferred role as striker, with boss Billy Davies preferring to employ Steve Howard in the lone striker role. He made 17 league and one cup appearances, scoring only once, in the 1–1 draw away to Leicester City, as Derby's form faltered and they fell into the playoff positions, finishing in third. Fagan then went on to play in all three matches in Derby's successful playoff campaign, including the 1–0 win over West Bromwich Albion in the 2007 Championship Playoff Final.
Whilst Derby's return to the Premiership proved to be a difficult one, as they found themselves bottom of the table for the majority of the season, Fagan himself was consistently involved in the first team and, alongside Stephen Pearson, was top of the club's appearance chart on 1 March 2008 with 25 league and cup appearances, scoring once in the League Cup against Blackpool,

Return to Hull City

Fagan made his second debut for Hull in a 2–0 win over Scunthorpe United on 8 March 2008 and was part of the side which eventually secured the club's first ever season in the top flight of English football, following a 1–0 win over Bristol City at Wembley in the 2008 Championship Playoff Final, in which Fagan appeared as a 67th-minute substitute. It was Fagan's second consecutive appearance in the Championship Playoff final following playing for Derby there the previous year. Derby manager Paul Jewell announced on 17 June 2008 that the deal to take Fagan back to Hull on a permanent transfer had been agreed, with the fee believed to be £750,000.
On Saturday 13 September 2008, Fagan suffered a broken tibia after being on the end of an "horrific tackle" by Newcastle United midfielder Danny Guthrie. Guthrie was sent off in the incident, which occurred in the closing stages of Hull's victory at St James' Park.
Following Hull City's return to the Championship Fagan spent all of the 2010–11 season sidelined through injury. After the end of the season, on 10 May 2011, the club announced that Fagan had been released from Hull City along with three other players, ending his second stint at the East Riding of Yorkshire club.
During the close season, Fagan had trials at Championship clubs Cardiff City and Crystal Palace.

Bradford City

He signed for Bradford City on 16 September 2011.

Bury

In February 2013, Fagan signed for League One Bury until the end of the season.

Gillingham

On 12 November 2013, Fagan signed for Gillingham.

International career

Fagan is eligible for both England and Jamaica through his grandparents.

Career statistics

Honours






