[[Intercollegiate Socialist Society]]

CATEGORIES: Student wings of political parties in the United States, Socialist Party of America, 1905 establishments in the United States, 1921 disestablishments, Student wings of social democratic parties

The Intercollegiate Socialist Society was a Socialist student organization active from 1905-1921. It attracted many prominent intellectuals and writers and acted as an unofficial student wing of the Socialist Party of America. The Society sponsored lecture tours, magazines, seminars and discussion circles all over the US aimed at propagating socialist ideas among America's college population. The group expanded into a philosophy in the 1920s that did not focus exclusively, or even primarily on college students. To symbolize the shift in emphasis, the group changed its name to the League for Industrial Democracy in 1921.

History

Establishment

Supporters of the Socialist Party of America (SPA) were heartened by the results of the Presidential election of 1904, which saw the party's candidate, Eugene V. Debs, win approximately 400,000 votes. Laidler, "Ten Years of ISS Progress," The Intercollegiate Socialist, vol. 4, no. 1 (Oct.-Nov. 1915), pg. 16. One supporter in particular, novelist Upton Sinclair, was motivated to help advance the socialist idea among the political leaders of tomorrow by establishing a new organization targeted at college students. Sinclair made contact with a number of leading public intellectuals of the day, gaining formal endorsements for a new national college socialist organization from a number of important figures, including novelist Jack London, magazine publisher B. O. Flower, attorney Clarence Darrow, writer Charlotte Perkins Gilman, and abolitionist hero Thomas Wentworth Higginson.
Over the signatures of these and other prominent public figures, in the Spring of 1905 Sinclair issued a call for the formation of a new organization, a group to be called the Intercollegiate Socialist Society.
The new organization gathered for the first time shortly after the start of the new academic year, meeting on September 12, 1905 in a room at a restaurant in lower Manhattan. 17. About one hundred supporters of the new organization attended this meeting, chaired by Sinclair, including a number of prominent socialist intellectuals. The gathering elected Jack London as the first president of the organization, Sinclair as first vice-president, and millionaire philanthropist J. Graham Phelps Stokes as second vice-president, with anti-child labor activist Owen R. Lovejoy chosen as treasurer.
The Intercollegiate Socialist Society set goals for its organization. It sought to promote and intelligent interest in Socialism among college men and women,Paul W. Shafer and John Howland Snow, The Turning of the Tides. Long House Publishing, 1962; pg. 1., familiarize students with the inherent evils of the American economic and social system based on laissez-faire policies,George Dykhuizen, The Life and Mind of John Dewey. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1973; pg. ???. and promote the establishment of a socialist order. Dykhuizen, George (1973). Carbondale: Southern Illinois The Intercollegiate Socialist Society was sought to achieve these goals by organizing chapters on college campuses, introduce socialist supporters into society, and bring socialist party members into labor unions, schools, and government. Sprik, "Stealing Capitalism: The Crime of the Century," American Thinker, March 28, 2010.

Structure

Rules were laid down as to how to structure the collegiate chapters of the Intercollegiate Socialist Society, organizing students on each campus into individual chapters who would fund the central organization through a small percentage of their membership dues collected to the national Society. Chapters would appoint officers, consisting of a President, two Vice Presidents, a Secretary, and a Treasurer, who would be elected annually by the vote of the entire society. The Society's activities would be overseen by these appointed individuals along with six additional members who would form an Executive Committee.

Development

The Intercollegiate Socialist Society organized slowly at first, as chapters were banned in most colleges and universities by conservative administrators who had the power to prohibit establishment of student organizations. Chapters slowly came to existence, frequently with names that did not signify its connection to the Intercollegiate Socialist Society at all, an example being the Wesleyan Social Study Club of Wesleyan University, which was one of the first collegiate organizations associated with the Intercollegiate Socialist Society as well as a chapter established at Columbia University.
Following these clubs, other affiliated socialist clubs were formed at Harvard University, Princeton, Bernard, New York University Law School, and the University of Pennsylvania. The college socialist clubs discussed current issues as well as distributed socialist propaganda and arranged lectures on their campuses to try and get more support the socialist cause.marxisthistory.org/
The Intercollegiate Socialist Society promoted their clubs with advertisements in school newspapers similar to this, which is taken from the Vassar College newspaper, the Vassar Miscellany.

Transformation

In 1921, the Society recognized that socialism had become extremely unpopular in the United States after the violent Russian revolution.  While its objectives to promote socialism in the United States didn't change, the name was changed to the League for Industrial Democracy.



Footnotes

Further reading




