[[Garry Kenneth]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 births, Living people, Sportspeople from Dundee, Scottish footballers, Scotland youth international footballers, Scotland under-21 international footballers, Scotland international footballers, Association football defenders, Dundee United F.C. players, Cowdenbeath F.C. players, Bristol Rovers F.C. players, Brechin City F.C. players, Scottish Premier League players, Scottish Football League players, The Football League players, Scottish Professional Football League players

Garry Kenneth (born 21 June 1987) is a Scottish footballer who currently plays for Brechin City. He has previously played for Dundee United, Cowdenbeath and Bristol Rovers. Kenneth, who plays as a Centre back, has also represented Scotland twice at full international level.

Club career

Kenneth, who was brought up in Dundee, played for Dundee United Social Club and St.
Kenneth, who is a keen Dundee United supporter and came through the Jim McLean School of Excellence, Kenneth regained his place in the team in early 2008, playing in the League Cup final defeat to Rangers.
In mid-January 2010, Dundee United rejected a £75,000 bid from Blackpool for Kenneth, stating that the offer was "ridiculously small".
Kenneth played as a trialist for Airdrie United in a closed doors friendly against Rangers in July 2012. and also in a tournament held by Partick Thistle. 

Bristol Rovers

At the end of July 2012, he signed a three-year deal with League Two side Bristol Rovers.
After an injury-plagued 16 months, in December 2013 Bristol Rovers announced Kenneth had left the club by mutual consent.

Brechin City

On 12 February 2014, Kenneth signed for Scottish League One club Brechin City until the end of the season.

International career

Kenneth was part of the Scotland under-19 team who lost in the final of the 2006 European Under-19 Football Championship. Kenneth also played two warm-up games for the Scotland under-20s as preparation for the 2007 FIFA U-20 World Cup, featuring again in May and July 2007. Kenneth made his début at under-21 level in the 3–2 defeat to Finland in September 2007, going on to win eight caps over the next twelve months.
He was selected in the full national team for the first time along with teammate Paul Dixon for the friendly with the Czech Republic. He made his debut for Scotland in August 2010, playing 90 mins against Sweden.

Honours

Dundee United
Scotland U-19s
Personal






