[[Arni, Tiruvannamalai]]

CATEGORIES: Cities and towns in Tiruvannamalai district

Arni is a town and a municipality in Tiruvanamalai district in the state of Tamil Nadu, India. The name comes from the word araneeyam which means a place surrounded by a forest. As of 2011, the town had a population of 63,671.

Geography

Aarani is located at .
It is located about  from Thiruvannamalai.
The city is well connected through various well formed roads, the state highways SH-4 (Arcot - Arni - Gingee - Villupuram Road), SH-132 (Kannamangalam - Arni Road) are the major roads connecting arni.
A bypass road works has been completed outside Arni.

Demographics

According to 2011 census, Arani had a population of 63,671 with a sex-ratio of 1,036 females for every 1,000 males, much above the national average of 929.

Etymology

In olden days Arni was called Aranyam. Aar means Athi tree; such trees once covered the region. In the north of Arni, there was a river, the Kamandala Naga river. These trees and river looked like an ornament; hence the name Arni.
The river Kamandala Naga Nathi flows in one side and the Tatchur river flows in other side as ornament (In Tamil literature ornament means "Ani") so Aaru(River) is making Ani(Ornament) hence the name Arani.
In Sanskrit Aranyam means 'Forest'. Hence, Derived from Aranyam.

History

Arni was ruled by the Cholas after they defeated the Pallavas. Some of the important Chola kings who ruled out Arni are Kulothunga Cholan I, Vikrama Cholan, and Kulothunga Cholan II.
During the rule of the Vijayanagara Kingdom in Arni, the Dasara function was celebrated grandly. In 1640 jagir of Arani was granted to Vedaji Bhaskar Pant a Marathi bramhin. The jagir continued to be headed by the descendents of Bhaskar Pant till the Zamindari Abolition Bill was passed in 1948. 
Poosi Malai Kuppam is  away from Arni. Thirumalai Saheb built a sophisticated bungalow for his lover, an Anglo-Indian lady, there. During the Nawab period, there was a struggle between the British, French and Nawab Hyder Ali. The victorious British captured Arni. There is also a palace near the town, now used by the Agriculture Department.
The town was used by Arcot nawabs for their military training campus. The famous 18th-century Marathi poet, author of the very beautiful poem "Nal-Damayanti Swayamvarakhyana" (the story of swayamvara of Nal & Damayanti) Raghunath Pandit is believed to have lived here.
The tomb situated in the heart of city for Sir. Ensign Robert Kelly who was a surveying Arni area, a Colonel by then, died in September 1790.hinduonnet.pl?file=2003081800140300.htm&date=2003/08/18/&prd=mp

Arni and the Congress Movement

The Congress movement in Arni was started by M. V. Subramania Sasthriar, S.A. Allala sundaram Mudaliyar, Y. N. Govindaraju Chettiar, and others. In 1922, Mahatma Gandhi went to Arni twice, to attend a meeting for Harijan development. These people welcomed Gandhiji, and took part in the Simon Commission movement.

Fort

There is a fort in the heart of the town which surrounded by agazhi called in Tamil.

Industry and commerce

Aarani is well known for its rice paddies; there are around 278 modern rice mills in the town.
The town also has a large community of silk weavers, called MUDALIYARS and Patnūlkarar, who specialize in making silk sarees. Hand looms are most frequently used for the weaving, although recently some have turned to mechanized methods such as Power looms. Arni is the number one in revenue earning in Tiruvannamalai District, Tamil Nadu. Though the town is not well known outside Tamil Nadu, a bulk of India's silk apparels is produced by the people of Arni.

Events

Politics

Recently Arni has been converted into a MP constituency Arani (Lok Sabha constituency). Arni assembly constituency was once a part of the Vellore (Lok Sabha constituency).

Tourism

Arahanthgiri Jain Math

Arahanthgiri Jain Math is a Jain Math that was established at the ancient Jain site of Tiruvannaamalai in August, 1998.
The complex includes 3 Jain caves, 4 Jain temples and a 16 meter high sculpture of Neminatha thought to date from the 12th century that is the tallest Jain image in Tamil Nadu.

Education

Anna University College of Engineering Arani

Anna University has its University College of Engineering Arani in Arani
S.S.Hr.School Arni completed 100 years.






