[[Spennithorne]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in North Yorkshire, Civil parishes in North Yorkshire, Wensleydale

Spennithorne is a village and civil parish in the Richmondshire district of North Yorkshire, England. The township is situated on a gentle elevation above the River Ure, 2 miles (3.2km) south-east of the market town Leyburn: with a station on the railway which can be reached within half a mile and a post-office under Bedale.
The River Ure set approximately 1 mile (1.6km) south of the village, is one of many rivers and waterways that drains the Dales into the River Ouse, with its well wooded banks sheltering the village on its north and north west sides. The River Ure offers some exceptional fly fishing for trout and grayling, which improves significantly below Aysgarth Falls. Spennithorne is approximately 7 miles (11.3km) east of Yorkshire Dales National Park containing outstanding scenery, rich culture and a range of wildlife habitats.

History

Although Spennithorne dates from Saxon times, there are very few facts recorded relating to its history. At the period of the Norman Conquest, Alan Rufus, to whom the Conqueror gave the whole of Richmondshire, distributed his vast lands among his retainers in feudal fashion, and in this division Spennithorne and Middleham were allotted to his brother, Ribal Fitzrandolph. 
In Domesday Book Spennithorne is referred to as "Speningtorp" which Dr. Whitaker explains as the thorp or village of the "Spening', or a prickly thorn.
In 1870–72, John Marius Wilson's "Imperial Gazetteer of England and Wales" described Spennithorne as:
 
 a township and a parish in Leyburn district, N. R. Yorkshire. The township lies on the river Ure, near the Leyburn railway, 2 miles SE by E of Leyburn; and has a station on the railway, and a post-office under Bedale. Acres, 1,280. Real property, £2,457. Pop., 198. Houses, 45. The parish includes two other townships, and comprises 4,680 acres. Pop., 852. Houses, 191. The property is much subdivided. S. Hall is a chief residence. The living is a rectory in the diocese of Ripon. Value, £425. Patron, M. Wyvill, Esq. The church is ancient. The p. curacy of Bellerby is a separate benefice. Hutchinson, the Hebraist, was a native.

Parish history

Spennithorne is a parish located in Wenleydale on the north bank of the River Ure. Of its three townships, Spennithorne, Harmby and Bellerby, Spennithorne lies furthest south; just a short distance from the Ure and opposite Middleham. Harmby Beck flows into the River Ure near the village, here perhaps was Spennithorne Mill in existence in 1301, however there is no trace of its remains.

Geography

The parish altogether covers around 5,500 acres, by far the greater part of which is permanently under grass. Near Colliwath Wood lies the northern boundary of the parish and the southern boundary runs along the River Ure almost parallel with the A6108, about 0.3 miles (0.4km) south. 
The nearest settlements to Spennithorne include Harmby 0.8 miles (1.3km) north-west and Middleham 2.9 miles (4.7 km) south. The nearest major city is Darlington 27 miles (43km) north-east. 
The nearest railway station is located in Leyburn which can be reached within 0.5 of a mile (0.8km). 

Geology

The soil is loam; composed of sand, silt and clay on a subsoil of limestone.  

Demographics

The first UK census in 1801 recorded the total population at 655. By 1881 the population fell to a total of 200, with the highest recorded population total in the 1831 census at 848 residents.  

Housing

Data taken from the Vision of Britain website shows the total housing in Spennithorne between 1841 and 1961. The data shows that the largest number of settlements within Spennithorne was in 1841 at 199 houses. The least number of houses was in 1921 at 37, showing a decline of 162 in 80 years. The decline in housing in 1880 reflects the population decrease within the village at a similar time.

Occupational Structure

Using information provided by the Vision of Britain website from 1881, it is possible to see the history of the social structure during the nineteenth century in Spennithorne and specifically the areas of occupation. There are 14 main categories of occupation, with the largest occupational status being Domestic Services and Offices (31%) with 37 people employed within this field. The next occupational status was Unspecified Occupation (12%) with 23 people and lowest occupational status' were Country Defence (1%) and Transport & Communication (1%) employing 2 people, of the 200 residents in the area. 
Landmarks== 
St Michaels Church, a Grade I listed building is said to have been erected by Robert Fitzrandolph in A.D 1166. The Church was completely demolished to make way for its Norman successor with only two or three small fragments being discovered: two stones with Runic ornament which have been built into the east wall of the chancel; and a Saxon monument recently discovered under the floor of the chancel which has now been placed in the wall of the vestry. The interior of the church also contains tablets to the family of Chaytor.
Spennithorne Hall, the seat of C. D. Chaytor, Esq., J.P., dating back mainly to the early 18th century is best seen from the hillside to the east of Middleham. The Hall is a Grade II listed building and is described as "a handsome mansion, occupying a delightful situation". 
Thorney Hall is another mansion in this township, the seat and property of the Hon. A. C. Orde-Powlett. Set within five acres of formal garden and woodland, claiming to have "the finest view in all Yorkshire" Thorney Hall lies in the heart of Wensleydale.

Local Worthy

Spennithorne was the birthplace of John Hutchinson (1674–1737) a philological and biblical writer in his own day, however now almost forgotten. Hutchinson was the son of a yeoman, and through obtaining a liberal education he served steward to several families of position, notably the Duke of Somerset receiving a sinecure appointment worth £200 a year. 






