[[Exilia]]

CATEGORIES: Nu metal musical groups, Italian musical groups

Exlia is a band from Milan.

History

Start,  Unleashed

Exilia formed in 1998 in Milan (Italy), when Masha met the guitarist Elio Alien.
2000,
After nearly two years spent playing in clubs and open air, Exilia released their debut album "Rightside Up". The album was distributed by Universal in Italy and Pangg in Germany.
The release of the album was followed by great reviews, appearances on Music TV programs and more than 120 concerts a year in Italy, Switzerland and Austria.
On October 2001,
They got the possibility to play several gigs in Germany as supporting act of Mambo Kurt and in many other shows also in the Netherlands.
In August 2002,
They won the "MTV New Comers Award" at the Gun Records Birthday Bash in Koln, Germany. Headliners at the Bash were H-Blockx, Skin-Dredd, Paradise Lost and Guano Apes.

On Tour,  Can't Break Me Down

On May 2003,
They took part as special guests in some important Festivals and Open Air (such as: "Taubertal Festival", "Forestglade Festival", "MTV Campus Invasion" etc.) playing with bands as HIM, Within Temptation, Therapy?, Rollins' band, Underwater Circle, Cardigans, SEEED, Guano Apes etc.
After the publication of their EP Underdog, on September 2003 (GUN Records; distributed by the BMG in Germany, Switzerland and Austria and by Audioglobe in Italy), they got good reviews from the specialized magazines in Germany (Rock Hard 8/10, M. Hammer 5/7, etc.) and Italy (M. Hammer 6/7, Rock Sound 7/10, Metal Shock 7/10, Flash 75/100 etc.).
From October 2003,
EXILIA undertake a tour with the German band In Extremo playing in the most important cities of their country and subsequently took part in the Paradise Lost Italian tour.
In March 2004,
They appeared on the double CD compilation "Crossing all over Vol.17" together with bands as: Placebo, Machine Head, Radiohead, Coldplay, HIM, Nickelback, Oomph, POD, Sepultura, Turbonegro, Clawfinger and many others ... which entered in charts in Germany and Austria.
On April 2004,
They realized their first video-clip "Stop Playing God" in Koln (D) with director Ercin Filizli's supervision (Evanescence, HIM, Guano Apes etc.) and with the support of the Action-Concept (film and stunt production) broadcast on VIVA, VIVA+ and Onyx TV in Germany.
On May 2004,
They released the full-length CD "Unleashed" that entered in the German chart at #38.
After the publication of the album (Gun Records/BMG) the band got a dense summer of Festivals and Open Air. To signal their share as supporting act for Ill Nino, Die Artze and P!NK.
In August 2004,
The new single "Coincidence", from Unleashed album, entered in the charts at #34 with a live video that shows to the people the great energy of EXILIA on stage.
On October 2004, they supported Rammstein at their European Tour 2004.
The tour took place in huge venues with a five-figure capacity. Such was the impression left by EXILIA that the RAMMSTEIN musicians declared that they preferred the Milanese to a considerable number of mostly top-class competitors.
On March 2005,
The new single "Can't break me down" is out with a new video.
This song is also the soundtrack of the movie "The Clown" broadcast in 40 countries all over the world.
On April the 4th 2005,
There is a Special Premium new pressing of the album "Unleashed". It contains the brand new tracks "Wake Me" and the current single "Can't Break Me Down".
The exclusive bonus DVD gives a visual of EXILIA power in the form of all of the explosive clips for the smash singles, "Can't Break Me Down", "Coincidence" and "Stop Playing God". This special DVD includes a previously unseen look In' to their show at Bochum TOTAL!;
a behind-the-scenes of the shooting of "Can't Break Me Down" music video is hosted by Masha & Co. themselves!
In the winter 2006,
The band holed up in an old cotton gin that was converted into a studio in Germany to begin writing the follow up to Unleashed. The band took a short break in March 2006 to travel to Texas to perform at all 3 of CaptivaMusicGroups SXSW showcases in Austin. EXILIA's performance and interview was filmed by the True Music Crew and was air nationally in the US starting in May 06. The band captivated the festival audience and won over many new fans.

Nobody Excluded

On July the 21st 2006,
The new album "Nobody Excluded" is released in Europe.
October the 27th 2006,
The new single "Your Rain" is released and became soundtrack for the well known show Grey's Anatomy.
January 2007,
NOBODY EXCLUDED Tour started and brought the band all over Germany, Switzerland and Austria for 30 shows.
July-August 2007, They played in most of the major festivals all over Europe.
September 2007,
Partnership and support hit Exilia from the UK : IMORTAL (Imortal group of companies - www.co.
Imortal already supported bands such as Arch Enemy, Lacuna Coil amongst many others UK and US based bands; in October 2007 released one of their extreme sports DVD's featuring music by Exilia. Starseed, Coincidence, Day in Hell and Stop Playing God were amongst tracks used on this powerful motorcycle stunt riding DVD.
November 2007, Exilia began their European tour, covering Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands and Switzerland.
December 2007,
The pre-production of Exilia's new long awaited album began and is scheduled for release for the summer time of 2008.
February 2008,
The collaboration with a large Italian rock magazine 'Metal Maniacs' keeps Masha busy and very popular amongst Italian rock fans and followers.
Further involvement and partnership with Morena of 'Macbeth' has initiated a successful TV project named 'Lady-Killers' currently being broadcast weekly on Rock Television (Italy).

My Own Army

May - June 2008,
The real recordings of the new album at Principal studios started;
The album was produced by Dave Chavarri (ill Nino, Sepultura) and Masha Mysmane.
October 2008,
The album was going to be mixed at Temple studios in L.A. by Jeremy Blair (Fear Factory, Coal Chamber, Guns and Roses) and Jeff Hannanh (Black Light Burns).
November 2008,
The record was mastered at Sterling sound in N.Y. by UE Nastasi (Walls of Jericho-Pantera).
Finally in this month the band revealed the new album title "My Own Army" whose the first single was "Are You Breathing?"
17 December 2008,
The new video from "Are You Breathing?" was shooted by the director Tobias Dannappel in Germany
February 20th 2009, My Own Army is released all over Europe.
April 20th 2009, My Own Army is released in USA through Koch Records.
On February 2009, The European tour started.
35 gigs together with 2 American bands : Ill Nino and God Forbid; the tour touched Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, Spain, Austria, Switzerland Portugal , Italy and UK : EXILIA will play for the first time in UK at the ACADEMY clubs.
On June 2009,
Peavey - the famous American company for guitar amps - decided to promote EXILIA putting them between their endorsers; Peavey gives to Alien a brand new equipment for his unique guitar sound.
21 September 2009,
The new single and video "In The Air Tonight" is released! For their new video, EXILIA created a powerful and hypnotic vision for their cover of Phil Collins.
The clip works as a perfect warm up for the shortly happening live shows of the Italians around front personality Masha Mysmane.
The second part of the "My Own Army" tour that kept the band on the road started at the end of October 2009, hitting the main cities in Europe between November and December.

Naked

In January 2010,
As soon as EXILIA got off the road, they went straight into the studio to prepare the new upcoming limited edition CD "NAKED".
The new release included unplugged versions of their top hits like "Stop Playing God", "Coincidence", "Starseed" etc, a brand new fully produced song called "No Tears For You" and some unedited bonus material. All the copies were autographed by the band and this special work went to hit the stores in the end of April 2010.
"No Tears For you" became the new EXILIA's single.
It was mixed at White Studios in Berlin by Clemens Matznick (Guano Apes, Within Temptation).
March 2010,
EXILIA received the invitation to attend SXSW festival which is the most important festival in USA showcasing nearly 2,000 musical acts from around the globe at over 80 stages in downtown Austin, TEXAS.
May 28 2010, "Naked" will be released all over Europe.
European Phoenix Fall Tour started on October the 1st 2010 in Milan (I).
The band toured Switzerland, Austria, Germany, United Kingdom and Italy up to December 2010. At the end of February 2011,

Decode

EXILIA went back to the Principal Studios in Germany to record the fifth new album "Decode". This new album will contain 12 tracks and it's going to be a proud, fully power and honest album keeping the pure EXILIA code.
On February the band revealed the new album cover of "Decode" which invites all the Exilia's fans to reflect on the cover's meaning, M s. Masha which is well respected for her lyrical content, dramatic and energetic live performances describes their music as a total impact with something real, something that cannot be contained in a commercial box.
EXILIA's new record "Decode" will be released on March 2012 on ZYX Music. Some great collaborations makes the album more special, the old friend Stephan "Gudze" Hinz bass player of the great crossover band H-Blockx features on "Over The Edge" and Dave Pensado (who has mixed chart-toppers for some of the biggest name in show business such as Deftones, P!nk, Michael Jackson, Alien Aint Farm, Tool) mixed "Satellite" which will be the opening track.
On January 2012,
EXILIA shooted the new video of the first single "Over The Edge" directed by Oliver Sommer from Ava Studios. The concept behind the video is inspired by a weird surreal short tale from Roald Dahl. "Over The Edge" will lead the new record "Decode". On March the 4th, this first single is already taken as soundtrack of the European Wrestling competition EWP and it features Stephan Gudze from HBLOCK.
On March 2012 the 30th,
The new album "Decode" is released and brought the band on a live tour al over Europe with some live dates as special guest for Megaherz and Hed P.E. (USA)
On November 2012,
The band presented the new video of their second single "Satellite", album opening-track, mixed by Dave Pensado (Aguilera, Jackson, Alient Aint Farm). "Satellite" is a protest song that describes the uselessness of bombs, warfare deforestation and compares how thousands can die from starvation and poverty when billions are spent creating bombs, oil plant and nuclear power plant, which are destroying our ecosystem, worlds' oceans and animalsour planet. It also links to globalization, pollution and cruelty on animals especially on commercial whaling.
January 2013,
Reebok choose the song "Unconventional" included in EXILIA fifth album "Decode" to be the soundtrack of "Reebok Crossfit " winter event 2013 creating a promo video for web and Tv.

Otep e Drowning Pool

On March 2013, the band flew to USA promoting their last record "Decode" in a tour touching the main cities starting from San Francisco and Los Angeles, performing at the famous "Whisky a Go Go" club; they participated newly to the SXSW in Austin (TX), playing at the Rooftop Club for two consecutive days making people know that something was happening and in the end they had the honor to play as supporting act of OTEP in some of their shows of "Seduce and Destroy" tour 2013.
Between May and July 2013, EXILIA supported Drowning Pool in their last "Resilience Tour", touring almost two months through the east coast, obtaining a stellar response from the audience.
The band is actually working on the pre-production of the new record that shall be released on February 2014. Closer is the first known track of this new project: it's deeply articulated and it certainly identifies a new sound, that takes its roots from Decode and now is evolving into a new shape and a new vision.

Discography

Albums

Singles/EPs



Video :

