[[Mural Arts Program]]

CATEGORIES: Culture of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 1986 establishments in Pennsylvania, Arts in the United States

The Mural Arts Program is an anti-graffiti mural program in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. It was founded in 1986 and directed by Jane Golden as a division of the Philadelphia Anti-Graffiti Network. Its roots began in a 1984 meeting between Tim Spencer and Golden. Golden asked to run a program within the Philadelphia Anti-Graffiti Network. Spencer envisioned a program that would entice kids towards other arts and crafts, but Golden envisioned what is now the current Mural Arts Program.

History

In 1984, Golden met with Tim Spencer, who was head of the Philadelphia Anti-Graffiti Network, in hopes of creating a program under the umbrella project. Spencer had originally envisioned a program that would rehabilitate graffiti artists and into other arts and crafts. Golden's vision won out and the Mural Arts Program was created. The Mural Arts Program works with community groups to educate and involve children in arts and in creation of murals throughout the city.
In 1986, the Mural Arts Project, headed by artist Jane Golden, In 1996, the Mural Arts Project was split off into a separate program and placed under the umbrella of the Philadelphia Recreation Department.
In 1996, the Philadelphia Anti-Graffiti Network was merged into the Philadelphia Recreation Department and the Mural Arts Program was elevated as an independent entity. The Philadelphia Mural Arts Advocates was founded as a nonprofit corporation to raise funds for the Mural Arts Program. Tim Spencer, who founded of the Philadelphia Anti-Graffiti Network, died that same year.

Legacy

The Mural Arts Program is responsible for the largest mural painted in Philadelphia at 
The program is currently one of Philadelphia's largest employers of artists, employing over 300 artists a year. The Mural Arts Program also hires prosecuted graffiti vandals at a rate of over 100 per year and involves them with the creation of murals around Philadelphia. Currently








