[[Bleecker Street Cinema]]

CATEGORIES: History of New York City, New York City cultural history, Cinemas and movie theaters in Manhattan, Former theatres in Manhattan, Companies established in 1962, 1990 disestablishments in the United States, 1991 disestablishments in the United States, Repertory cinemas, 1960 establishments in New York, Greenwich Village

The Bleecker Street Cinema was an art house movie theater located at 144 Bleecker Street in New York City. It became a landmark of Greenwich Village and an influential venue for filmmakers and cinemaphiles through its screenings of foreign and Independent films. It closed in 1990, reopened as a gay adult theater for a time afterward, then again briefly showed art films until closing for good in 1991.

History

The building at 144 Bleecker Street in New York City's Greenwich Village that would eventually house the Bleecker Street Cinema was originally built in 1832 as two rowhouses at 144 and 146 Bleecker Street. Placido Mori converted 144 into the restaurant Mori in 1883. As architecture historian Christopher Gray wrote,
Mori closed in 1937. The building remained unoccupied until 1944 when political and activist organizations including Free World House headquartered there for two years. Sometime afterward, the space became the Restaurant Montparnasse. By 1959, the building was owned by New York University.
Filmmaker and social activist Lionel Rogosin founded the 200-seat Bleecker Street Cinema in 1960 in order to exhibit his controversial 1959 film Come Back, Africa.
Film critic Rudy Franchi, at one time the theater's program director, recalled that the house cat, Breathless, named for that Godard film, would often "escape from the office area and start to climb the movie screen. ... I would sometimes get a buzz on the house phone from the projection booth with the terse message 'Cat's on the screen.'"Daugherty, p. 231 The theater cat at the venue's 1990 closing was named Wim, after director Wim Wenders.
Sid Geffen purchased the theater in 1973 or 1974, and ran it with his wife, then named Jackie Raynal. In 1990, his widow, by then remarried and named Jackie Raynal-Sarré,Per Lovece, New York Post, she was married to psychologist Jean-Paul Sarré; they appear together in Gérard Courant's 1986 short film "Jackie Raynal and Jean-Paul Sarré" from the filmmaker's "Couples" series. Per Jackie Raynal's official site, she later married real-estate businessman and film producer Joseph J.M. Saleh, and became known as Jackie Raynal-Saleh. said that because Geffen left no will, she partnered with developer John Souto to buy out Geffen's children from a previous marriage. She further said that Souto, after renting to her for four years for $160,000 annually, raised the rent to $275,000, more than the theater could sustain. Following a lawsuit and court proceedings, a judge ordered the two co-owners to bid on the building. "We came in with a $3.3 million bid and he came in with $3.4 million," Raynal-Sarré said. In its final configuration, it had a main auditorium of 171 seats, and the 78-seat James Agee Room.
The theater closed on September 6, 1990. The last film to start was Aki Kaurismäki's 74-minute Ariel, and the last film to end was the nearly two-hour Jesus of Montreal. The last film in the James Agee Room was Roger Stigliano's Fun Down There. By November of that year, it had reopened as a gay adult-film theater. Sometime afterward it returned to its art-house roots and then closed a final time on Monday night, September 2, 1991. Its final features were Alex van Warmerdam's Dutch comedy Voyeur; the documentary Jimi Hendrix at the Isle of Wight; Ari Roussimof's war-veteran drama Shadows in the City; and Francis Teri's horror movie Suckling. The theater's final operator was Nick Russo Nicolaou.

Influence and legacy

The foreign and independent-film programming of the Bleecker Street Cinema helped inspire future filmmakers and contributed to the cinematic education of film historians, critics and academics. As one historian wrote,

François Truffaut was a frequent visitor to the Bleecker Street Cinema (as were other New Wave directors) and the famed scene in La Peau Douce where the professor wanders in back of a cinema screen was inspired by a tour of the theater's back stage during a film performance.  
The back office was also the publishing home of NY Film Bulletin, a publication that was the first to translate the writings of Truffaut and others into English. It is credited with introducing the auteur theory to the U.S. through the writings of such critics as Sarris and a two-part interview with Truffaut on the politique. The second part of that interview was done at the Bleecker Street Cinema.

In popular culture

Several scenes in Desperately Seeking Susan 1985) were shot there, as one of the characters (Dez, played by Aidan Quinn) works there as a projectionist. In Woody Allen's 1989 Crimes and Misdemeanors, the character played by filmmaker-star Allen visits the Bleecker Street Cinema to see Alfred Hitchcock's Mr. and Mrs. Smith and the 1943 musical Happy Go Lucky.








