[[Integra Telecom]]

CATEGORIES: Companies based in Portland, Oregon, Companies established in 1996, Telecommunications companies of the United States, Privately held companies based in Oregon, 1996 establishments in Oregon

Integra is a privately owned provider of fiber-based, carrier-grade networking, communications and technology solutions, headquartered in Portland, Oregon, United States. Founded in 1996, the company is a facilities-based providers of communication and networking services and serves 35 metropolitan markets in the United States.  While the company has expanded to serve large enterprise customers, Integra continues to serve small and medium-sized businesses.  As of 2012, the privately held company had annual revenues of $594.4 million with approximately 2,300 employees company-wide. 

History

The company was founded in 1996 through the acquisition of OGI Telecomm,
By the year 2000 Integra had grown to annual revenues of $42 million, and grown to around $150 million in 2005. The Eschelon purchase was for $566 million in cash and $144 million in assumed debt.
In 2007, Integra had 1,100 employees and annual revenues of $340 million before their purchase of Eschelon. That year they moved part of their operations into the 20-story Lloyd Center Tower in Portland's Lloyd District on the city's eastside. Integra accumulated much of the debt due to its earlier acquisitions, and faced the possibility of bankruptcy due to breaching covenants in its loan agreements.
In 2011, Kevin O'Hara became the third chief executive officer of the company that year when he was named to replace Tom Casey in December.
In 2013, Integra closed a new $845 million senior secured credit facilities, including a $60 million revolving credit facility (undrawn at closing), a $585 million first lien term loan due 2019 and a $200 million second lien term loan due 2020. The net proceeds from the new credit facilities were used to refinance Integra's previously outstanding term loan and bonds, and for general corporate purposes. To better align with its expanded market focus, Integra re-branded in February 2013 and introduced a new company logo and tagline, "Technology You Trust. People You Know."

Products and Services

Integra owns and operates a fiber optic network consisting of a 5,000-mile long-haul fiber-optic network, 3,000 miles of metropolitan fiber and a nationwide IP/MPLS network. Additionally, the company offers data networking and high-speed Internet, managed and cloud services, voice communications, colocation and equipment and business bundles to small-to-medium businesses as well as large enterprises in 35 metropolitan markets including cities in Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Minnesota, North Dakota, Oregon, Montana, Nevada, Utah and Washington.[ref]
</ref><ref></ref>
Data networking and Internet: Integra provides data and Internet solutions for single and multi-location businesses including MEF Certified Ethernet Services (E-Line and E-LAN), IP/MPLS VPN Solutions, Wavelength Services, Dark Fiber and private lines. 
Managed and cloud services: Integra's managed and cloud services portfolio includes hosted and managed voice offerings, Cloud Firewall Service, Collaboration & Messaging and online data storage. 
Voice communications: Including TDM and IP, Integra provides Hosted Voice, Managed Voice, SIP Trunking, voice equipment, traditional voice and conference calling for business customers. 
Colocation and equipment: In addition to communications and data solutions, Integra offers colocation, voice and data equipment. 
Business bundles: Integra's business packages for small and medium-sized businesses include voice communications, Internet and collation and messaging products.








