[[Sammy Moore]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 births, Living people, People from Dover, Kent, English footballers, Association football midfielders, Ipswich Town F.C. players, Brentford F.C. players, Stevenage F.C. players, Dover Athletic F.C. players, AFC Wimbledon players, The Football League players, Football Conference players

Sammy Leslie Moore (born 7 September 1987) is an English professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for League Two side AFC Wimbledon. He made his league debut for Ipswich Town at the age of 19. He went on to play for both Brentford and Stevenage for short spells before signing for non–league side Dover Athletic with whom he remained for two seasons. Dover Athletic proved unable to offer Moore his demands for full–time football however, hence he moved to Conference side AFC Wimbledon. At the end of AFC Wimbledon's first season in League Two, Moore was voted as Player of the Year 2011–12 by "Dons" fans.

Club career

Early years

Sammy Moore was born in Deal, Kent and was educated at nearby Dover College.
On 25 July 2007, it was announced that Moore would join League Two side Brentford on an initial one–month loan deal.

Stevenage Borough

On 28 January 2008, Moore signed for Conference side Stevenage Borough on a non-contractual basis until the end of the 2007–08 season. Moore was not offered a new deal with Stevenage and was subsequently released by the club on 20 May 2008.

Dover Athletic

On 5 June 2008, the 20-year-old midfielder signed a two-year contract with his local club, Dover Athletic, who had just won promotion to the Isthmian League Premier Division. He remained with the club for two years but following his demands for full–time football, which could not be met by Dover, Moore left at the close of the 2009–10 season.

AFC Wimbledon

On 16 July 2010, Moore signed for Conference side AFC Wimbledon following strong performances as a trialist. On 21 August 2010, Moore opened his scoring account for The Dons with a goal in a 3–0 victory over Tamworth.

Honours

Ipswich Town
Dover Athletic
AFC Wimbledon






