[[Romanian presidential election, 2009]]

CATEGORIES: 2009 elections in Europe, 2009 in Romania, Presidential elections in Romania

The first round of 2009 Romanian presidential elections was held in Romania on 22 November and a run-off round between Traian Băsescu and Mircea Geoană was held on 6 December 2009. Although most exit polls favored Geoană in the runoff, the authorities declared Băsescu the narrow victor with 50.33% of the votes. PSD CONTESTĂ ALEGERILE reclamând "acţiunea masivă de fraudare a votului"Romania opposition alleges fraud in presidential poll The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) declared that the election "was held generally in line with OSCE commitments",Romanian President's Election Win Contested by Rival but also urged the authorities to investigate claims of fraud.Romania divided and paralysed by president's disputed, wafer-thin win
On 8 December, the Social Democratic Party submitted their request to annul and repeat the presidential election run-off to the Constitutional Court, saying the election was rigged.
Simultaneously with the first round, a referendum was held on introducing a unicameral parliament of up to 300 deputies instead of the current bicameral parliament. The referendum was declared valid after 50.16% of the registered voters expressed their opinion, and exit polls indicate over 70% support for the reforms. 53,52% DINTRE ROMÂNI AU VOTAT LA ALEGERI. REFERENDUMUL VALID

Candidates

There were twelve candidates of which three ran as independents.
Radu, Prince of Hohenzollern-Veringen, husband of Princess Margarita of Romania first announced his candidacy to the office of President on 9 April 2009, Official site

Campaign

The main contenders, incumbent Băsescu and the President of the Parliament Mircea Geoană, offered different ways to tackle the economic crisis, Romania being in the grip of severe recession with the economy expected to contract eight percent in 2009. While Geoană offered to increase investment to beat the recession and promised "vigorous measures" such as building affordable flats for young people and giving cheap credits to enterprises in order to help create jobs, Băsescu pledged to cut public spending. Christian Mititelu, a political commentator quoted by the BBC, argued that due to extremely vigorous political strife there was no real campaign debate about how the economy should recover or on the structure of the next year's budget, and that the public were not sufficiently aware of these economic issues, while the contenders did not attempt to communicate and involve the public in such decisions."Romania election's strange enigma", BBC
Băsescu tried to portray himself as the champion of the people against what he called "the corrupt political elite". A widely used election poster carried the text: "They cannot avoid what they are afraid of". Băsescu's opponents countered that he is part of that elite, simply with different backers. In a Cluj-Napoca meeting with supporters he claimed he "was the one to stop doubtful privatisations", implicitly accusing rival Social-Democrats of underhand practices while in power. He vowed to fight against the Parliament, which blocked his bid to install the Croitoru cabinet, and the "media moguls". In the campaign for the first round, his favorite campaign theme was reducing the number of lawmakers. This theme proved popular with the overwhelming majority of the electorate voting for the reduction of the number of lawmakers from current 471 to a maximum of 300, and in favor of a transition from the current bicameral parliament to a unicameral one in a referendum held simultaneously with the first round of elections. One of Basescu's favorite themes is his fight against parliament and media moguls such as businessmen Dan Voiculescu, Sorin Ovidiu Vîntu, and Dinu Patriciu, politicians Ion Iliescu, Viorel Hrebenciuc, and Marian Vanghelie.
The main counter-candidate, Geoană, on the other hand, described himself as a "man of dialogue", who can "restore Romania's unity", allegedly "jeopardized" by Basescu. A former ambassador to the United States, former foreign minister, and a seasoned diplomat, Geoană edged aside more powerful figures in his Social Democratic party.
In the first round held on 22 November, Băsescu came first with 32.44% of the votes, and Geoană second with 31.15%. According to a BBC analyst  a victory by Geoană would be caused by the numerous enemies Băsescu has made during his tenure, especially in the  media. One the other hand, a victory of the incumbent could  be generated by his counter-candidate alleged lack of "human touch", and because doubts remain over his ability to control the "red barons" in his own party. Crin Antonescu the National Liberals who scored third with 20.02% was the first choice of all those who are fed up with Băsescu but could not bring themselves to vote Socialist. His voters hold the key to victory on 6 December.
Although Băsescu claimed the results of the first round were "a significant vote for the right" because he and Crin Antonescu together received over 50% of the vote, the next day Antonescu refused to back Băsescu in the runoff, and shortly thereafter announced an alliance with Geoană. Subsequently Băsescu reproached Antonescu to "have thrown himself in the arms of the Social-Democrat party, a party opposed to reforms", and added "This alliance will bring us back to 20 years ago when the PSD was controlling all state institutions".ALISON MUTLER (AP), Romania's president, rival in runoff election
Mircea Geoană promised to appoint Klaus Johannis as Prime Minister of Romania if he was elected President. Johannis was the candidate supported by a majority in the Parliament of Romania. Romania had a caretaker government since the government of Emil Boc fell on 13 October. The parliament rejected Traian Băsescu's nomination of Lucian Croitoru for new Prime Minister on 4 November.

Results

Note:

1. The percentage on row b is calculated from row a

2. The percentages on rows c and d are calculated from b
Source: Biroul Electoral Central

Second round

After the first round, Crin Antonescu with his PNL, Béla Markó with his UDMR and George Becali with his New Generation Party – Christian Democratic (PNG) decided to support Mircea Geoană—the candidate of the Social Democratic Party/Conservative Party Alliance—in the second round. Sorin Oprescu decided not to support anyone and  Corneliu Vadim Tudor with his PRM—at national level—called his voters to boycot the runoff round; however the PRM in Sibiu county decided to support Geoană. UDMR aims for a tight collaboration with liberals , English. HotNews.net, 24 November 2009Basescu – glad an alliance against him was set up, expects PRM to join it ..., Bucharestherald.com, 27 November 2009Political premier in Sibiu: PRM and UDM agree to support Mircea Geoana, hotnews. România lui Băsescu, România lui Geoană
Both runoff candidates declared themselves winners after tight exit polls. Sunt si raman in Sibiu Romanian stock markets fell to a four-month low after the official results were announced, deepening a political crisis that threatens ties with international lenders.Romania Stocks Fall Most in 4 Months on Vote; Bond Risk Jumps

Official partial results

Opinion polls

Note: Opinion polls have been criticised in this election for their unreliability, with large differences in results obtained between different polling agencies. De ce nu dam sondaje politice, Mediafax, 2 November 2009

First round

=Exit polls=

Second round

=Exit polls=

Aftermath

Accusations of electoral fraud

The opposition has decided to contest the result; Mircea Geoană announced that the Social Democrats will contest the elections at the Constitutional Court and will submit evidence of electoral fraud. Dragnea stated: "Romanians voted for Mircea Geoană, but Băsescu's state apparatus is trying to make him the presidential winner through fraud".
Mircea Geoană has also stated that the Social Democrats exclude any collaboration with Băsescu and his party, and maintain the majority with the Liberals and Hungarian Democrats, while Crin Antonescu also stated that the Liberal Party excludes "any participation in a Traian Băsescu puppet government".Liberal leader Crin Antonescu: Basescu does not wish for a Government with PNL, but to engulf, compromise or break the liberals

Proceedings at the Constitutional Court

On 8 December, the Social Democratic Party submitted their request to annul and repeat the presidential election run-off to the Constitutional Court, saying the election was rigged.
On 11 December, in an unprecedented decision the Constitutional Court decided to recount all 138,476 invalid votes. S-a încheiat renumărarea voturilor naţionale nule de la BEC
On 14 December, the Constitutional Court rejected the request to repeat the presidential elections, paving the way to validate Băsescu's election. Geoană: Îi urez succes lui Traian Băsescu!



Further reading


