[[Prakash Jha]]

CATEGORIES: 1952 births, People from Bihar, Living people, Film and Television Institute of India alumni, University of Delhi alumni, Indian film directors, Indian documentary filmmakers, Hindi-language film directors, Indian film producers, Indian screenwriters, Filmfare Awards winners, National Film Award winners, Kendriya Vidyalaya alumni, Sainik School alumni, People from West Champaran district, Candidates in the 2014 Indian general election

Prakash Jha (born 27 February 1952) is an Indian film producer-director-screenwriter, who is most known for his political and socio-political films such as Damul (1984), Mrityudand (1997), Gangaajal (2003), Apaharan (2005), multistarrer hit movie Raajneeti (2010), Aarakshan (2011) Chakravyuh (2012), and the Satyagraha (2013). He is also the maker of National Film Award winning documentaries like, Faces After The Storm (1984) and Sonal (2002).
He now runs a production company, Prakash Jha Productions. Prakash Jha, owns the P&M Mall in Patna.

Biography

Early life and education

Prakash Jha was raised at his family's farm in Baraharwa, Bettiah, West Champaran, Bihar, India. He did his schooling from  Sainik School Tilaya,Sainik Schools Society Koderma district and Kendriya Vidyalaya No. 1, Bokaro Steel City (Jharkhand). Later, he joined Ramjas College, Delhi University to do B.com. and decided to go to Mumbai and become a painter, though while he was preparing for J.J. School of Arts, he happened to witness the shooting of the film Dharma and got hooked on to filmmaking.
Soon he joined the Film and Television Institute of India (FTII), Pune in 1973, to do a course in editing, though midway through it, the institution was closed for while, due to student agitation, so he came to Mumbai, and started working, and never went back to complete the course. Macmillan India, 2000. ISBN 0-333-93410-5, ISBN 978-0-333-93410-4. Page 191-192.

Personal life

Prakash was at one time married to actress Deepti Naval with whom he has an adopted daughter Disha and son Priyaranjhan Jha Today's actors have become picky: Prakash Jha - Hindustan TimesPrakash Jha during the launch of Deepti Naval's book 'The Mad Tibetan'

Career

While still midway through his course, he started working on films independently, in 1974,Interviews Movies, Rediff. and made his first documentary, Under the Blue in 1975, and continued to do so for next 8 years.
During this period he made some highly politically charged documentaries, like the one of 'Bihar Sharif riots', titled, Faces After Storm (1984), which received considerable attention, as it was banned within 4–5 days of its released though later it won the National Film Award for Best Non-Feature Film for the year.
Finally, he made his debut, as a feature film director, Hip Hip Hurray in 1984, scripted by Gulzar and starring, Raj Kiran and Deepti Naval as leads. Next came, the film he received most recognition with, Damul (1984), which won the National Film Award for Best Feature Film and the Filmfare Critics Award for Best Movie in 1985. The film was based on the bonded labour issue in Bihar.
In 1986, he directed, Parinati, based on the story by Vijaydan Detha.com.
Over the years he has made over 25 documentaries, nine feature films, two television features and three television series including the popular TV serial Mungerilal Ke Hasin Sapne.About Prakash JhaAwards at imbd
In 2004,Prakash Jha directed a 112-minute film Loknayak based on the life of Bharat Ratna Jayaprakash Narayan.Uncensored 'Loknayak' to be screened soonDoordarshan decides to air controversial Prakash Jha filmJayaprakash Narayan deserved betterPrakash Jha declines to change his film on JP"I am fully indebted to theatre"
In 2010, he directed Raajneeti, which was a contemporary take on the epic, Mahabharat. It starred Ajay Devgan, Manoj Bajpai, Naseeruddin Shah, Katrina Kaif, Arjun Rampal, Nana Patekar and Ranbir Kapoor and was a critical and commercial success. His next venture was Aarakshan which starred Amitabh Bachchan, Saif Ali Khan Deepika Padukone and Prateik Babbar.net/2010/12/23/finally-the-announcement-for-the-film-aarakshan/ In 2012, Jha's next release Chakravyuh starred Arjun Rampal, Abhay Deol, Manoj Bajpai, Kabir Bedi and Esha Gupta was released in Dussehra 2012.This is the first year in his career that Jha would be directing two films.

Politics

Prakash Jha contested and lost election to the Lok Sabha from his native Champaran in 2004. He again lost election to the Lok Sabha in 2009 as Lok Janashakti Party candidate from West Champaran. Even without being an MP, I do whatever I can' - Indian Express He is contesting 2014 Elections as a JD(U) Candidate from Bettiah.

Social initiatives

For the last five years Prakash Jha has been seriously involved with development initiatives in Bihar. He has been spearheading growth in infrastructure, health care and vocational training facilities in the state through the NGO Anubhooti.

Anubhooti

Prakash Jha is the chairman of Anubhooti, a registered society that has been working for cultural development, improvement of health care, disaster management and the upliftment of farmers and socio-economic backward people in Bihar since 1991.
Most recently, the organization has been working for flood survivors. After the Kosi flood on 18 August 2008, Anubhooti has provided complete relief to 6000 people since September 2008. Anubhooti has created a model village, Hindolwa village, for the flood affected and is working towards their complete rehabilitation.
Anubhooti has provided relief to 5000 people for health care in jamui dist.

Filmography

Awards

National Film Awards

Filmfare Awards

Star Screen Awards

Other Awards

International Awards

International Acclaim






