[[Transportation in Minnesota]]

CATEGORIES: Transportation in Minnesota

Transportation in Minnesota is primarily centered on the Twin Cities metropolitan area, where 60% of its residents live; it is overseen by the Minnesota Department of Transportation, a cabinet-level agency of the state government. Additionally, the state government grants the Metropolitan Council authority over regional planning in the seven-county metro area.

Ground transportation

Almost all north-south through railroads and long-distance four-lane freeways in Minnesota go to or through the Twin Cities. Most east-west through routes do also, except for a northern corridor from the North Dakota border to the port of Duluth/Superior composed of two BNSF rail routes and U.S. Route 2, and a corridor across southern Minnesota from South Dakota to the Mississippi River and Wisconsin including I-90, Minnesota State Highway 60, U.S. Route 14, and the DM&E Railroad.

Highway system

Minnesota's major Interstate Highways are I-35, I-90, and I-94. I-535 is a spur route from Duluth to Superior, Wisconsin. In the Twin Cities I-35 splits into I-35W through Minneapolis and I-35E through St. Paul. I-94 has one spur, Interstate 394 from  Minneapolis to the western suburbs, and two loop routes, Interstate 494 and Interstate 694, which form a beltway around the Twin Cities. 
The interstate highways are part of a class of routes known as interregional corridors, which also includes U.S. Routes 2, 8, 10, 14, 52, 53, 61, 63, 169, and 212 and Minnesota State Highways 23, 34, 36, 60, 210, and 371. Less heavily traveled regional corridors include U.S. Routes 12, 59, 71, and 75, and a number of state highways.
Minnesota may be the only U.S. state with some of its highways enshrined in the state Constitution. A 1920 amendment laid out seventy routes connecting a number of cities. Today, these Constitutional Routes are made up of interstates, U.S. highways, and state highways.
Tragedy struck the state on August 1, 2007 when the I-35W Mississippi River Bridge collapsed in Minneapolis during the evening rush hour. Highway workers, 50 cars, trucks, and a school bus on the bridge plunged down into the Mississippi River, onto a freight train, and the bridge's debris.  This span carried an average of 141,000 vehicles per day on its eight lanes across the river. The state of the art replacement bridge was completed ahead of schedule, opening on September 18, 2008.

Bus services

=Transit buses=

Bus transit systems exist in Rochester, Winona, Duluth, St. Cloud, East Grand Forks, Mankato (Mankato Transit System), Moorhead and the Minneapolis–St. Paul metropolitan area. The last is served by the Metro Transit system, which has an extensive system with over 100 routes. Some portions of the Twin Cities region have opted to create their own bus systems, such as SouthWest Transit and the Minnesota Valley Transit Authority.
Many rural areas and smaller towns also have bus service, though many of those are dial-a-ride services instead of using fixed routes. All but 4 Minnesota counties have some form of public transit service.

=Intercity bus lines=

Intercity bus service on a skeletal network of lines is provided by Jefferson Lines, Greyhound Lines, and Megabus. Jefferson Lines, which is based in Minneapolis, provides the largest number of intercity bus routes and serves the largest number of cities. The other providers focus on providing express service with limited numbers of stops.  The number of intercity bus routes has declined significantly since the early 1990s, and several routes went away when Greyhound restructured in the mid-2000s decade. Greyhound was founded in Hibbing, Minnesota, but cutbacks have led that city to be cut out of the normal intercity bus route network.
In addition to traditional intercity bus services, a network of independently operated long distance airport shuttles serving Minneapolis–Saint Paul International Airport has developed in recent years. Brainerd, Duluth, Mankato, Rochester, Saint Cloud, Eau Claire (WI), and La Crosse (WI) are all connected by daily scheduled shuttle service with the Minneapolis–Saint Paul airport. The shuttles provide transportation between area cities as well as serving airport passengers.
 

Railroads

=Light rail=

Decades before Metro Transit, the Twin City Rapid Transit Company operated streetcars in the Twin Cities area from the 1890s until 1954, when buses supplanted the streetcars.  Light Rail in Minnesota currently consists of one line, the Blue Line, operated by Metro Transit.  Completed in 2004, this line runs from the Mall of America, through the MSP airport via a tunnel, and along Hiawatha Avenue into downtown Minneapolis. The line has been very successful, receiving a 65% higher ridership than expected in its first year of service.
In the future, other light rail lines will be built. The Green Line, which will connect downtown Minneapolis to downtown St. Paul, is near the end of the construction stage as of early 2014 and is expected to open in June 2014. It will be followed by the Southwest Corridor light rail (an extension of the Green Line) from downtown Minneapolis to the southwest metro, which was approved by the FTA to begin preliminary engineering in September 2011,  In 2006, a constitutional amendment was passed that required sales and use taxes on motor vehicles to fund transportation, with at least 40% dedicated to public transit. A few years later, a regional sales tax was implemented in several counties in the Twin Cities area.  It supplies the Counties Transit Improvement Board with funds to help operate and expand the region's bus and rail transit network.

=Commuter and intercity rail=

The 82 mile (131 km) Northstar Corridor line, envisioned to connect Minneapolis with St. Cloud along the BNSF Railway, started service on the first   Several other commuter services are in the planning stages, such as the Red Rock Corridor from Minneapolis via St. Paul to Hastings.
The state is served by one intercity passenger rail line, Amtrak's Empire Builder, which stops daily in each direction at Winona, Red Wing, St. Paul, St. Cloud, Staples, and Detroit Lakes. The Northern Lights Express (NLX) is planned to restore service between Minneapolis and Duluth, which used to have train service until 1985.

=Freight rail=

Major freight railroads in Minnesota include BNSF Railway, Union Pacific Railroad, Canadian National Railway, and Canadian Pacific Railway and its Dakota, Minnesota and Eastern Railroad subsidiary. Principal ladings include coal from the Powder River Basin to ports and eastern power plants, grain and other agricultural products from farm to processors and ports, taconite (a form of iron ore) from the Iron Range in northeastern Minnesota to Lake Superior ports or on all-rail routes to steel mills, timber and forest products, and intermodal traffic.
Minnesota has had many railroads in the past, and reached a peak of over 

Bicycle trails

Minnesota has more miles of bike trails than any other state, and Metro Transit buses feature bike racks for combination commuters. A number of the bike trails are rail trails, utilizing the right-of-ways originally secured for railroads.

Water transportation

Much of Minnesota's early transportation followed the numerous rivers and lakes.  Early European explorers and settlers followed the routes used by the voyageurs and coureurs des bois in the fur trading days, and later on steamboat services operated on the principal rivers. Commercial water transportation now is limited to the shipment of bulk commodities on two routes.  Barges haul grain and other products down the Mississippi River system from the ports of Minneapolis (the head of navigation), St. Paul, Red Wing and Winona on the Mississippi, and Savage (on the Minnesota River), to downstream river ports, and to ports on the Gulf of Mexico for transshipment to ocean-going cargo ships. Cargo vessels known as lakers haul grain, coal, and iron ore from the Lake Superior ports of Duluth, Superior, Two Harbors, Silver Bay, and Taconite Harbor through Lake Superior to the lower Great Lakes, while ocean-going ships referred to as salties operate from the Twin Ports through the St. Lawrence Seaway to the Atlantic Ocean.

Air transportation

Minnesota's principal airport is Minneapolis–St. Paul International Airport (MSP), a major passenger and freight hub for Delta Air Lines.  MSP is also a hub for Sun Country Airlines, and is served by most other domestic carriers.  Large commercial jet service is also provided to and from Duluth International Airport and Rochester International Airport.  Scheduled commuter service is available at Bemidji, Brainerd, Hibbing, International Falls, St. Cloud, and Thief River Falls.




