[[Stuart Duff]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, Living people, Sportspeople from Aberdeen, Scottish footballers, Dundee United F.C. players, Aberdeen F.C. players, Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. players, Ayr United F.C. players, Qormi F.C. players, FC Kairat players, Scottish Premier League players, Scottish Football League players, Scotland under-21 international footballers, Scottish expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in Malta, Expatriate footballers in Kazakhstan

Stuart Duff (born 23 January 1982 in Aberdeen) is a Scottish football player. He is primarily a central midfielder although his versatility has seen him play in most defensive and midfield positions. Duff has played for Dundee United, Aberdeen, Inverness CT, Ayr United, Qormi and Kairat during his career. He also represented the Scotland national under-21 football team.

Career

Dundee United

Having been developed as a player through Dundee United's youth scheme, he turned professional with the club in July 1999. He was given his debut by then-manager Alex Smith in December 2001, when he was used as a right wing back in a match at Kilmarnock, and went on to make nine appearances that season, collecting the April 'Young Player of the Month' award.
In 2005–06, with Gordon Chisholm the new manager, Duff played more first team games, with 29 league appearances. During February 2006, Duff alleged he was spat on by Hearts midfielder Rudi Skacel, No action was taken against Skacel in either incident. Duff scored an important goal in the 1–0 win over Rangers at Ibrox during the season, which helped United avoid relegation. Duff started the 2006–07 season as an attacking midfielder under Craig Brewster and scored once, although was used in a variety of defensive roles under Craig Levein. 
On 29 December 2006, Duff appeared before the Sheriff Court in Dundee and admitted to driving under the influence of alcohol on 17 December. He was fined £750 and banned from driving for 15 months. The judge, however, said Duff's reputation as 'a gentleman' was clear to see.

Aberdeen

In January 2008, Levein told Duff he was free to leave Tannadice and find himself a new club, having been in good form until a freak motorcycle accident which saw him get '3 feet of air'. He was released on 17 January,

Inverness Caledonian Thistle

Duff was loaned to Inverness CT for a month in December 2009.
After his release by Aberdeen, Duff had a trial spell with St. Johnstone and turned down an approach from St. Mirren before signing for Inverness CT. Duff agreed a deal that was to run until the end of the 2010–11 season. Throughout the 2010/11 season he was a regular starter for Caley, and featured in most of their surprising results. These included a 1–1 draw against Rangers at Ibrox and a 2–2 draw with Celtic at Parkhead. His contract expired with ICT at the end of the 2010/11 season, and he stated his desire to stay with Inverness and said he would accept their contract offer after returning from holiday. In the summer of 2011, a contract was offered, but no deal was agreed and the contract offer was eventually withdrawn.

Playing Abroad

Duff played three games for Ayr United as a trialist in September 2011. 
In November 2011, Duff agreed to join Qormi, in the Maltese Premier League, for the remainder of the season.

Kairat

In February 2012, Duff agreed to join Kazakhstan Premier League side FC Kairat

Career statistics

Honours






