[[X-Ray Spex]]

CATEGORIES: English New Wave musical groups, English punk rock groups, Musical groups from London, Musical groups established in 1976, Musical groups disestablished in 1979

X-Ray Spex were an English punk band from London that formed in 1976.
During their first incarnation (1976–79), X-Ray Spex were "deliberate underachievers"

Career

Initially, the band featured singer Poly Styrene (born Marianne Joan Elliott-Said) on vocals, Jak Airport (Jack Stafford) on guitars, Paul Dean on bass, Paul 'B. P.' Hurding on drums, and Lora Logic (born Susan Whitby) on saxophone. This latter instrument was an atypical addition to the standard punk instrumental line-up, and became one of the group's most distinctive features.  Lora played on only one of the band's records.  As she was only fifteen, playing saxophone was a hobby and she left the band to complete her education.x-ray spex official site/x-ray spex history
X-Ray Spex's other distinctive musical element was Poly Styrene's voice, which has been variously described as "effervescently discordant"allmusic review of The Anthology and "powerful enough to drill holes through sheet metal".ca/~rina As Mari Elliot, Poly had released a reggae single for GTO Records in 1976, "Silly Billy", which had not charted. Born in 1957 in Bromley, Kent, of both Somali and British parentage, Poly Styrene became the group's public face, and remains one of the most memorable front-women to emerge from the punk movement. She later actually did at Johnny Rotten's flat prior to a concert at Victoria Park. Mark Paytress recounts in the liner notes for the 2002 compilation, The Anthology, that Jah Wobble, Rotten's longtime friend and bassist for his post-punk venture PiL, once described Styrene as a "strange girl who often talked of hallucinating. She freaked John out."Cinderella's Big Score:  Women of the Punk and Indie Underground by Maria Raha Rotten, known more for his outspoken dislikes and disdain than for praise and admiration, recently said of X-Ray Spex in a retrospective punk documentary, "Them, they came out with a sound and attitude and a whole energy—it was just not relating to anything around it—superb."The Punk Years documentary
Styrene was inspired to form a band by seeing the Sex Pistols in Hastings and, through their live performances, she and X-Ray Spex became one of the most talked about acts on the infant punk scene. 
In late September 1977, a studio recording of "Oh Bondage Up Yours!" was released as a single. Today, the 45 is regarded as their most enduring artefact, both as a piece of music and as a sort of proto-grrrl catchphrase.
In late 1977, Lora Logic was replaced on saxophone, first temporarily by Glyn John, and then permanently by Rudi Thompson (also known as Steve Rudi).
In November 1978, the band released their debut album. With the exception of "Identity", which was partially based on Styrene seeing a girl slash her wrists in a club toilet, the rest of Germ Free Adolescents dealt with the anti consumerist theme. Indeed, The Guardian newspaper described the album as containing "unrivalled anti-consumerism anthems".
X-Ray Spex played at 'Front Row Festival', a three-week event at the Hope and Anchor, Islington in late November and early December 1977. This resulted in the band's inclusion, alongside the likes of Wilko Johnson, 999, The Only Ones, the Saints, The Stranglers, and XTC, on a double album of recordings from the festival. Then, in February 1978, before the release of their second single, X-Ray Spex recorded the first of two sessions for John Peel at BBC Radio 1.X-Ray Spex's John Peel Sessions on BBC Radio 1; Their profile was further enhanced by playing a fortnight's residency at New York's CBGB's, even though the album Germ Free Adolescents was not released in America until 1992.
On 30 April, the band appeared at the Rock Against Racism gig at Victoria Park, Bow, Tower Hamlets. Also on the bill were Steel Pulse, The Clash, The Ruts, Sham 69, Generation X and Tom Robinson Band. Later in the year, to promote the album, X-Ray Spex embarked on their first, and only, full UK tour. Exhausted by touring, Poly Styrene left the band in mid 1979, though she is seen performing with the band in the 1980 film, D.O.A.. She released a solo album, Translucence, before joining the Hare Krishna movement (as did Logic, who left the band aged 16 in 1977 to form a new group called Essential Logic).
Without Styrene, the group lost its momentum and split up. Hurding and Airport went on to form Classix Nouveaux, while Paul Dean and Rudi Thompson went on to form Agent Orange with Anthony "Tex" Doughty, who later become a founding member of Transvision Vamp.
The first incarnation of X-Ray Spex existed from mid-1976 to 1979, during which time they released five singles—"Oh Bondage, Up Yours", "Identity", "The Day the World Turned Day-Glo", "Germ Free Adolescents", and "Highly Inflammable"—and one album, Germ Free Adolescents.
The same reviewer in The Virgin Encyclopedia of Popular Music sums up the band's 1970s contribution as "one of the most inventive, original and genuinely exciting groups to emerge during the punk era".

Reformation

In 1988, Poly Styrene, Jak Airport, Mick Sweeney and Lora Logic reformed the band with no drummer. As a replacement bought in Paul Merron who had a sequencer, small studio set up provided drum loops played keyboards and co-produced demos with Jak. They rehearsed in Oxted at Poly's home and then went into Nomis studios in Olympia London prior to a planned trip to India to shoot video and recording session in Florence. Unfortunately Jak broke his arm in a cycling accident and after a period of 6 months with the band Paul was asked to not only be in the band and make video promos but also to manage them too. This seemed unrealistic so he left and went to live in Crete pursuing his other passions of photography and scuba diving. 
In 1991 X-Ray Spex reformed for a surprise sell-out gig at the Brixton Academy where Poly appeared in a blue foam dress with an army helmet (to her regret). from x-ray spex official site that touring and promotional work suffered an abrupt end when she was run over by a fire engine in central London, suffering a fractured pelvis. The group disbanded, but subsequent releases include a compilation of the group's early records, a live album, and an anthology of all the aforementioned.
Jak Airport later worked for the BBC's Corporate and Public Relations department under his real name, Jack Stafford; he died on 13 August 2004 of cancer.
On 28th April 2008, Poly Styrene gave a performance of "On Bondage, Up Yours" in front of more than 10 000 people at the Love Music Hate Racism free concert in Victoria Park, East London
Symond Lawes, working as Concrete Jungle Productions,together with Poly Styrene, Produced the live show at Camden Roundhouse in 2008. Band members Mark Saxby, Paul Dean and Flash, performed an amazing show to a sell out audience 
The band including original bass player Paul Dean, played what was described as a raucous comeback gig and in front of an audience of 3,000 full at The Roundhouse in London on 6 September 2008. The gig consisted of Germ Free Adolescents in its entirety, with the exception of "Plastic Bag".X-Ray Spex pack out London's Roundhouse NME 8 September, 2008 A DVD and CD of the Roundhouse performance was released in November 2009 on the Year Zero Label by Future Noise Music.
Poly Styrene died of spinal and breast cancer on 25 April 2011.

Discography

Albums

| first= David
| last= Roberts
| year= 2006
| title= British Hit Singles & Albums
| edition= 19th
| publisher= Guinness World Records Limited 
| location= London
| page= 612
| isbn= 1-904994-10-5}}[/ref]

Live

Compilation

Singles

Appearances on various artist compilations (selective)

Listing of those various artist compilation albums mentioned in the text of the main article:
| first= David
| last= Roberts
| year= 2006
| title= British Hit Singles & Albums
| edition= 19th
| publisher= Guinness World Records Limited 
| location= London
| page= 585
| isbn= 1-904994-10-5}}[/ref]









