[[List of giant squid specimens and sightings]]

CATEGORIES: Giant squid, Lists of animal specimens

This list of giant squid specimens and sightings is a comprehensive timeline of recorded human encounters with members of the genus Architeuthis, popularly known as giant squid. It includes animals that were caught by fishermen, found stranded ashore or floating at the water's surface, recovered (in whole or in part) from sperm whales and other predatory species, as well as confirmed giant squid sightings at sea. The list also covers specimens incorrectly assigned to the genus Architeuthis in original descriptions or later publications.
The list generally follows "Records of Architeuthis Specimens from Published Reports" (2001), which was compiled by Michael J. Sweeney of the Smithsonian Institution and includes records through 1999, with additional information taken from other sources (see References).

Number of specimens

According to Guerra et al. (2006), 592 confirmed giant squid specimens were known as of the end of 2004. Of these, 306 came from the Atlantic Ocean, 264 from the Pacific Ocean, 20 from the Indian Ocean, and 2 from the Mediterranean Sea. The figures for specimens collected in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans further broke down as follows: 126 in the northwestern Atlantic, 148 in the northeastern Atlantic, 6 in the southwestern Atlantic, 26 in the southeastern Atlantic, 28 in the northwestern Pacific, 43 in the northeastern Pacific, 183 in the southwestern Pacific, and 10 in the southeastern Pacific (Guerra et al., 2006).
Guerra & González (2009) reported that the total number of recorded giant squid specimens stood at 624. Guerra et al. (2011) gave an updated figure of 677 specimens (see table below). Around 30 of these specimens are exhibited at museums and aquaria worldwide (Guerra et al., 2011). The Centro del Calamar Gigante in Luarca, Spain, had by far the largest collection on public display, but many of the museum's 14 specimens were destroyed during a storm on 2 February 2014 (Anonymous, 2014b; Anonymous, 2014c).

Size considerations

Giant squid size, and particularly total length, has often been misreported and exaggerated. Reports of specimens reaching or even exceeding  in length are widespread, but no animals approaching this size have been scientifically documented in recent times, despite the hundreds of specimens available for study. It is now thought likely that such lengths were achieved by great lengthening of the two long feeding tentacles, analogous to stretching elastic bands, or resulted from improper measurement methods such as pacing (O'Shea & Bolstad, 2008).
Based on the examination of more than 130 specimens, as well as beaks recovered from sperm whales (which do not exceed the size of those found in the largest complete specimens), the giant squid is not known to attain a mantle length (ML) in excess of  for males, from the posterior end of the mantle and fins to the tip of the two long tentacles (O'Shea, 2003b).
Giant squid exhibit sexual dimorphism. Maximum weight is estimated at  can be found in older literature (O'Shea, 2003b).

List of giant squid

Records are listed chronologically in descending order and numbered accordingly. Specimens incorrectly assigned to the genus Architeuthis are not counted and are instead denoted with an asterisk (*) and highlighted in pink. Records that cover multiple giant squid specimens, or remains of more than a single animal (e.g. two lower beaks), are highlighted in grey.

Type specimens

The following table lists the nominal species-level taxa associated with the genus Architeuthis, together with their corresponding type specimens (after Sweeney, 2002).

Abbreviations

The following abbreviations are used in the List of giant squid table.

Oceanic sectors

The Atlantic Ocean is divided into sectors at the equator and 30°W, the Pacific Ocean is divided at the equator and 180°, and the Indian Ocean is defined as the range 20°E – 115°E.

Measurements

Abbreviations used for measurements and counts are based on standardised acronyms in teuthology, primarily those defined by Roper & Voss (1983), with the exception of several found in older references.

Repositories

Institutional acronyms are primarily those defined by Leviton et al. (1985) and Leviton & Gibbs (1988). Where the acronym is unknown, the full repository name is listed.

Specimen images

The number below each image corresponds to the specimen or sighting in the List of giant squid that the image depicts. The date on which the specimen was first captured, found, or observed is also given.

Notes




