[[KIIT University]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in Odisha, Educational institutions established in 1992, Deemed Universities in India, KIIT University, 2004 establishments in India

KIIT University, formerly Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology, is a co-educational, autonomous university located at Bhubaneswar in the Indian state of Odisha. It was one of the youngest institutions to be awarded the deemed university status in India and then the university status in 2004 and is recognised by Limca Book of Records.
The University offers under-graduate and post-graduate courses in Engineering, Bio-technology, Medicine, Management, Law, Computer application, Rural management, Fashion, Film Studies, Journalism and Sculpturing. It has been ranked 18 th among private engineering institutes and 7 th in placement in 2008 by Outlook India.

History

KIIT was established in 1992 as an Industrial Training Institute with only 12 students and 2 faculties. However, later the School of Mass Communication and School of Film Studies were merged to form School of Film and Media Studies, while School of Sculpture was renamed as School of Fine Arts and School of Tourism and Hospitality Management was discontinued. Kalinga Institute of Medical Sciences and Kalinga Institute of Dental Sciences came under the ambit of KIIT University in August, 2009. In 2013, three new schools were established - School of Architecture, School of Leadership and School of Sports. Currently more than 12000 students are enrolled in various courses of the university.

Academic profile

KIIT is an accredited institute having more than 20,000 students into its various distinct streams. Each academic program is functioning in different independent campuses. The university has signed several memorandums with foreign and national institutes of excellences. KIIT also became the youngest member of Association of Commonwealth Universities.

Accreditation and ranking

KIIT has the distinction of becoming the youngest institute ever in the country to be declared a Deemed University by Ministry of Human Resources Development, Government of India. All the academic programmes are accredited by NAAC of UGC and NBA of AICTE, which are benchmarks of excellence. NAAC has awarded KIIT the highest grade of "A" with a CGPA of 3.36/4.naacindia.pdf Bar Council of India (BCI) has approved the courses of KIIT Law School which offers five years integrated courses in law. With its dynamic progress within a short span of time, KIIT is the youngest institution in India to receive accreditation by National Board of Accreditation (NBA) of All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and National Accreditation and Assessment Council (NAAC) of UGC for its Degree in Engineering, MCA and MBA programs. The MBBS course is approved by the Medical Council of India and the Dental course is similarly approved by Dental Council of India.
It has been ranked as 16 th in India, 5 th among private universities, and 4 th in the eastern region in the year 2009 by Times of India. KIIT School of Management has been nominated as the Mentor Institution by AICTE for conducting faculty development programme in eastern India. It has been ranked 5th amongst private engineering colleges in India by The Pioneer in 2012.

Schools and courses

KIIT has expanded from its original three schools to eleven schools in a very short span of five years,since its inception as a university. Most of the schools offers degrees from undergraduate to Ph.D. level.
The KIIT School of Technology offers undergraduate programs in seven distinct streams which includes; Civil Engineering, Computer Science & Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Electronics & Electrical Engineering, Electronics & Telecommunication Engineering, Information Technology Mechanical Engineering, Automobile Engineering and Electronics and instrumentation Engineering.
The KIIT School of Management offers undergraduate, postgraduate, doctoral and diploma degrees in management.
The School of Law offers integrated law degree with humanities, management and science with honours specialisation in 6 different streams of law.
The School of Biotechnology offers five year integrated degree in Biotechnology and two years postgraduate degree in biotechnology and microbiology.
The School of Languages established in 2007, offers undergraduate courses in English, French, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Corporate Communications and Education with or without study abroad facility. It also offers various, certificate, advanced certificate, diplomas, language lab, postgraduate and doctoral degrees.
The School of Fashion Technology offers undergraduate degrees in Fashion Design. The School of Fine Art offers Master degree in Fine Arts (Sculpture) and the School of Film and Media Sciences offers Bachelors degree in Television and Film Production.
The School of Medicine and School of Dental Sciences which offers undergraduate and postgraduate degrees in Medicine and Dental Sciences respectively.
KIIT Group of Institutions, also operates a polytechnic college, industrial training centre, science college, International School and Kalinga Institute of Social Science.

Research and development

KIIT has a Research and Development wing headed by a Director along with other qualified faculty members who collaborate with various Research Organizations. Thrust of the R & D Wing of KIIT University is interdisciplinary research through multidisciplinary interactions. The vision is to unleash creative thinking and enable KIIT U to become a well-known technological university for research and development as well as for post-graduate education and doctoral research. Faculty members (spearheaded by Udai P. Singh) are currently pursuing research funded by organizations, such as, the Department of Science and Technology (DST), the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) and Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR). Industry Institute interactions are also being strengthened through various funded schemes sponsored by AICTE, UGC and DSIR. In this context, a large number of MoUs have been signed with leading research organizations of the country and abroad for facilitating collaborative research and other academic activities. Currently offered in four broad areas, technology, biotechnology, management and humanities, the university has instituted 48 doctoral fellowships. The R & D wing has been actively supporting various National and International conferences hosted by the University like International Conference on Emerging Technology and International Conference on Distributed Computing & Internet Technology.
In 2012, the University had organised the 99th Indian Science Congress.

Admission and scholarships

Admission to undergraduate and postgraduate programs are primarily done through the university's entrance examination KIITEE (KIIT Entrance Examination). Admission to the M. Students are admitted to the law school through a written all India common test known as KLSAT (KIIT Law School Admission Test). For the newly introduced courses of fashion, film studies, journalism and sculpturing the admission will be done on the basis of merit of previous qualifying examinations and additional experiences related to the concerned disciplines.
The University also grants scholarships to meritorious and needy students every year. Among them, Pradyumna Bal Memorial Scholarship is awarded to two economically challenged but meritorious students and they are provided completely free education along with ancillary expenses.

Campus and facilities

The institute is in twelve landscaped and eco-friendly campuses of  Services provided to the users include, Current Awareness Service (CAS), Reference Service, Documentation Service, Reprographic Service, Digital Library and Web Library.  Apart from the central library, every schools maintains its own library for assisting the students and teachers.
Separate hostel facilities are available for boys and girls with modern amenities and 24 hours internet connectivity. The canteens serves hygienic Indian and continental dishes to the students. The cafeterias within the campus offers snacks, soft drinks and beverages.  Students can practice several sports like basketball, lawn tennis, hockey and cricket. It provides facility for all indoor games, including an air-conditioned billiards room. Twelve station Multi-gym, Billiards, Table Tennis, Badminton, Chess and Carom are the main attractions of the indoor stadium. Students and staff avail round the clock medical attention from Kalinga Institute of Medical Sciences, the medical wing of KIIT University which constitute a 1200 bedded hospital with ambulances and out patient department in case of need. KIIT also has buses, shuttle cars to meet the transportation need of the students and staffs. An in-house computerized Post Office is functioning from the Campus. All postal stationeries along with Speed Post facility are available at the post office. Banking services along with 24 hours ATM are available of Allahabad Bank, ICICI Bank, Punjab National Bank, Oriental Bank of Commerce, United Bank of India and State Bank of India to the students. A computerised railway ticket counter is operational from within the campus.  Big Bazaar(super market)and Monginis (bakery) are very close to the campus. Along with it for refreshment of students a Cafe Coffee Day outlet is also present inside the campus.

Student life

KIIT provides on-campus residential facilities to its students, research scholars, faculty members and many of its staff. The students live in hostels throughout their stay in the KIIT. There are in total 17 different hostels out of which six are for girls and rest are for boys. The boys' hostels are generally known as Kings Palace and girls' hostels are known as Queens Castle. Hostel rooms have Wifi internet connections .  Most of the rooms in the hostels are designed to accommodate three student per room. The hostels are provided with a common room with plasma screen television, table tennis boards, carom boards,  and it also acts as place of interaction.
There are different societies in KIIT University to choose from according to the interest and choice of the student. Some of the major societies of the college are Kronicle, the Literary Society, the Social Responsibility Cell and Korus, the Music Society. Students from Kronicle have made a mark at various National and International Level students. The quiz society Qutopia organises a national level quiz competition, Udghosh  every year on 2 October to mark the birthday of Mahatma Gandhi.  It also conducts an Intra-University Quiz competition "Launchpad" every year as a part of induction program.
The KIIT chapter of Society for Promotion of Indian Classical Music And Culture Amongst Youth (SPICMACAY) established in 2003, promotes classical Indian music, dance, and culture among youth and have organised numerous musical concerts. Students can also join National Cadet Corps (NCC) and National Service Scheme (NSS). There are other cultural, literary societies and interest groups. Several schools have their own societies based on the course of the school. The School of Technology, have the Robotic Society, which organizes meetings and workshops to expose the students about robotic concept and how to build and program them. The School of Law have Student Bar Association, which organises moot court competitions and make the students ready for the same.
Apart from the societies, which organises Intra School competitions, the university organises different cultural and academic fest.  The annual Techno-Management fest named Kritansh is organised every year which provides a platform for the progressive brains of our nation to interact, compete and display their creativity and talent. Koncord is the annual cultural fest organised in KIIT. Some of the schools organise their own fest, like the School of Management organises its own fest Kolosseum every year. Other celebrations include Independence Day (India)|Independence Day]], Republic day are organised with great enthusiasm.
THE KIIT TBI - Technology Business Incubator is an initiative of KIIT University supported by DST, Govt. Of India. With more than 10 startup incubatees in KIIT TBI, it has an unique mix of startups pertaining to web 2.0, biotechnology, agriculture, healthcare & legal consulting.

Sister Universities









