[[William Allen (governor)]]

CATEGORIES: 1803 births, 1879 deaths, Burials at Grandview Cemetery (Chillicothe, Ohio), Governors of Ohio, Members of the United States House of Representatives from Ohio, United States Senators from Ohio, People from Chillicothe, Ohio, People of Ohio in the American Civil War, Ohio Jacksonians, Ohio Democrats, Democratic Party United States Senators

William Allen (December 18 or 27, 1803 – July 11, 1879) was a Democratic Representative, Senator and 31st Governor of Ohio.

Biography

Allen was born in Edenton, North Carolina and moved to Chillicothe, Ohio in 1819, after his parents' death. He was of Quaker ancestry. 
Allen and his sister Mary Granberry Allen lived in Chillicothe together. His sister married Reverend Pleasant Thurman, and their son, Allen G. Thurman, followed in his uncle's footsteps, becoming a lawyer and politician.
Allen attended Chillicothe Academy before studying law with Colonel Edward King. He was admitted to the bar in Ohio at age 21. He began his career as a politician in the Democratic Party at a young age. Allen supported "popular sovereignty" and the presidential candidacy of Lewis Cass, identifying himself as a "Peace Democrat" and opposing the U.S. Civil War.

Career

Allen served as United States Representative from Ohio from 1832 to 1834, losing his bid for re-election. He served as United States Senator from Ohio from 1837 to 1849, losing a bid for a third term in 1848. 
While in the Senate, Allen was one of a group of Western Democrat expansionists who asserted that the U.S. had a valid claim to the entire Oregon Country, which was an issue during the 1844 U.S. presidential election.  He suggested that the United States should be prepared to go to war with the United Kingdom in order to annex the entire Oregon Country up to Russian-owned Alaska at latitude 54°40′N.  This position ultimately produced the famous line "54 40 or fight!", coined in 1846 by opponents of such a policy (not, as popularly believed, a slogan in the Presidential campaign).
Allen retired to his farm, "Fruit Hill", which had belonged to his father-in-law, and fellow Ohio Governor, Duncan McArthur, near Chillicothe, Ohio. Allen did not return to public service for nearly a quarter century, until he served as Governor of Ohio from 1874 to 1876. He unsuccessfully sought a second two-year term in an 1875 election. 
Allen was noted for his loud voice. A friend asked Senator Benjamin Tappan if a fellow Ohioan was still in Washington. Tappan replied "No, he left yesterday and is probably by this time in Cumberland, Maryland, but if you will go to Bill Allen and tell him to raise that window and call him he will come back."

Death

At the close of his administration, he retired to private life at Fruit Hill, where he died in 1879.

Legacy

Allen County, Kansas is named for William Allen.
In 1887,The National Statuary Hall Collection Charles Henry Niehaus sculpted a statue of Allen to be placed in the National Statuary Hall. The statue was one of two statues in Ohio donated to the National Statuary Collection. Allen's statue stood in the National Statuary Hall in the United States Capitol until, after a statewide poll run by the Ohio Historical Society, the Ohio National Statuary Committee voted August 26, 2010 to replace him with the statue of inventor Thomas A. Edison. The Ohio General Assembly decided to replace the statue in part because "Allen's pro-slavery position and outspoken criticism of President Abraham Lincoln during the Civil War make him a poor representative for Ohio in the U.S. Capitol." Legacy for Ohio However, lack of funding for the $1.5-$2 million Edison statue has kept the Allen statue within the Capitol.Inventive fundraising is called for Edison's statue 






