[[Steve Hilton]]

CATEGORIES: 1969 births, British political consultants, Conservative Party (UK) officials, English people of Hungarian descent, Living people, People educated at Christ's Hospital, Stanford University faculty

Steve Hilton (born 25 August 1969)

Early life

Hilton is the son of Hungarian immigrants called Hircsák who fled their home during the Hungarian Revolution of 1956. They came to Britain, initially claiming asylum, and anglicised their name to Hilton. 
He won a scholarship to Christ's Hospital School in Horsham before reading Philosophy, Politics, and Economics at New College, Oxford.

Career

After graduating, Hilton joined Conservative Central Office, where he came to know David Cameron and Rachel Whetstone, his future wife and Global VP of Public Affairs and Communications for Google. He liaised with the party's advertising firm, Saatchi and Saatchi, and was praised by Maurice Saatchi, who remarked, "No one reminds me as much of me when young as Steve." During this time Hilton came up with the "New Labour, New Danger" demon eyes poster campaign"Poitics Election 2001: 'New Labour, New Danger'", The Guardian, reproduction of poster for the Conservative's pre-general election campaign in 1996, which won an award from the advertising industry's Campaign magazine at the beginning of 1997.
Hilton talked of the need to "replace" the traditionally minded grassroots membership of the Conservative party, which he saw was preventing the party from embracing a more metropolitan attitude on social issues.channel4.com/gary-gibbon-on-politics/tory-mp-threatens-cameron-with-water-clock-torture/23030
It is alleged that Hilton said "I voted Green" after the Labour landslide of 2001, but since then he has worked with Cameron to re-brand the Conservative party as green and progressive. According to The Economist Hilton "remains appallingly understood". There were reports that Hilton's 'blue sky thinking' caused conflict in Whitehall and, according to Nicholas Watt of The Guardian, Liberal Democrats around deputy prime minister Nick Clegg considered him to be a "refreshing but wacky thinker".Nicholas Watt "Steve Hilton policy leaks show Downing Street divide over David Cameron aide", The Guardian, 28 July 2011
On 2 March 2012, Downing Street announced that Hilton would be a "visiting scholar" at Stanford University's Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies for a year. His last memo concerned the advocacy of severe cuts in the number of civil servants in the United KingdomIain Watson "Steve Hilton's civil service attack uncovers coalition tensions", BBC News, 18 May 2012 and further welfare cuts.Patrick Wintour "Steve Hilton's parting shots: £25bn in cuts and a broadside at the civil service", The Guardian, 16 May 2012
Hilton is co-founder and CEO of Crowdpac.[ biography at University of Chicago Institute of Politics

Personal life

Hilton is married to Rachel Whetstone, a former aide (political secretary) to Michael Howard, who is now head of communications at Google. The couple were godparents to David Cameron's  son Ivan, who died at age six.
On 7 January 2010 it was reported that in October 2008 Hilton had been arrested. He had been rushing to catch a train back to London after the Conservative Party Conference and had a dispute with the train staff. He was later fined £80.




