[[K.N.Toosi University of Technology]]

CATEGORIES: 1928 establishments in Iran, Universities in Iran, Education in Tehran, Educational institutions established in 1928, Science and technology in Iran, Engineering universities and colleges in Iran

Khajeh Nasir Toosi University of Technology (KNTU) (), also known as K. N. Toosi University of Technology, is a public university in Tehran, Iran, named after medieval Persian scholar Khajeh Nasir Toosi. The university is considered one of the most prestigious, government-sponsored institutions of higher education in Iran. Acceptance to the university is highly competitive and entrance to all undergraduate and graduate programs requires scoring among top 1% of students in the Nationwide University Entrance Exams, known as "کنکور سراسری".

History

The university was founded in 1928, during the reign of  Reza Shah Pahlavi, in Tehran and was named the "Institute of Communications"(). It is therefore considered to be the oldest surviving academic institution across the country (Iran has had universities 800 to 2000 years ago from which only the name, ruins and scientific history have survived). This institute was later expanded with an Electronic and Electrical Power Engineering department. The 50th anniversary of the establishment of this academic institute is celebrated in 1978, and a commemorative stamp was also published in this respect by the Post of Iran, prior to the Islamic Revolution of 1979 (See the Photo). 
The department of Civil Engineering was founded in 1955 as an Institute of Surveying. This institute was later joined by the Institutes of Hydraulic Engineering and Structural Engineering. The department of Mechanical Engineering was founded in 1973. These institutes of higher education were formally integrated in 1980 and named "Technical and Engineering University Complex". As a general practice of paying tribute to the scientific and scholastic figures of the nation, the university was renamed in 1984 "Khajeh Nassir-Al-Deen Toosi (K. N. Toosi) University of Technology". This university is affiliated with the Ministry of Science, Research and Technology of Iran.  
As at 2012, the university is planning hi-tech projects, including the production of a new satellite called 'Saar' (Starling) as well as radar-evading coatings for aircraft. The university's scientific board are also involved in many industrial projects, including the building of satellite carriers as well as an indigenous eight-seat helicopter.presstv.com/detail/2012/07/30/253468/iran-to-build-new-indigenous-satellite/

Faculties

The faculties of this university were founded as follows :
Due to the varied origins of K. N. Toosi University of Technology, the faculties are not concentrated in one campus and as a result, the university has five campuses and a central building. However, the plan for centralizing the University is underway. Each faculty has its own computer center, library and educational services office. All libraries are attached to the Simorgh library network. Several housing facilities are available for men, women and couples. There are also sports facilities on all campuses. The university is programming the development of a branch in Venezuela and also several research centers in Tehran.
The Central Building which is located at Mirdamad Ave., Tehran, is the managing body of the university and the presidency, all vice presidencies, the central academic services and registerar's office are located at this building. Management of educational services happens through the Golestan educational management system, while research is managed via the Sepid research management system.

Programs

The university offers Bachelor's (B.S.) degrees in more than 20 and Master's (M.S.) degrees in 50 academic fields. It also hosts more than 5 joint educational programs both at B.S. and M.S. levels. The courses offered have industrial orientation on a broad base. The university has 250 full-time faculty members. The total number of students is about 7,000.

Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering

Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering was founded in 1928.
It is the main and the oldest faculty of K.N. Toosi University of Technology.
It is also the first Electrical Engineering school in Iran. The faculty has more than 70 full-time faculty members. This faculty is among the best Electrical Engineering faculties in Iran, especially in graduate studies in the field of Communications, Controls, and Biomedical Engineering (Signal & Image Processing).
It offers the following programs:
This faculty is located at Seyedkhandan Bridge, beside the Ministry of Communication. A recreational center is located on this campus.

Faculty of Aerospace Engineering

This is the youngest of the KNTU faculties. The core of the faculty was formed as Aerospace group in the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering in the year 2000. It provided MSc programs in aerodynamics, propulsion, flight dynamics and aerospace structures. In the year 2001, it launched the first MSc program in space machinery engineering in Iran. Later, in the year 2004, the BSc joint aerospace engineering program with MATI (Moscow State Aviation Technological University) was launched. In the year 2006, the Faculty had officially become independent from the Mechanical Engineering faculty and the first group of BSc state students were admitted through the Iranian University Entrance Examinations. 
During the years 2000-2007 the faculty used the facilities of the Mechanical Engineering Faculty. In June 2007, the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering moved to its new campus, and the faculty became independent. Some of the facilities of the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering (such as workshops) were kept on the Aerospace Engineering campus.
The campus is located in University Boulevard, Vafadar St., Tehranpars. The faculty has a large library that is being equipped. The Nasir Gym(K. N. Toosi University of Technology's newest recreational building) is also located beside the faculty. There are plans for building several recreational facilities, including a gym, at this site. The workshop complex of K. N. Toosi University of Technology is also located at this campus.
There are about 170 students studying at the faculty and there are 10 full-time faculty members. The faculty also uses many part-time professors, usually from the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering. The first group of joint program students were sent to Russia in August 2007. The faculty is going to launch its P.H.D program in 2008.
The faculty was the host of the Sixth national and Second international Conference of the Iranian Aerospace Society. A new research Center has established at the faculty in 2007, conducting industrial research in aerospace. There are several research laboratories located at the faculty, including:
The table below shows the programs available at the faculty:

Faculty of Civil Engineering

This faculty comprises six groups: Earthquake engineering-water engineering-soil engineering-structural engineering-transportation engineering-environmental engineering
It offers the following programs:
The campus is jointly used by this faculty and the Faculty of Geodesy and Geomatics Engineering. Some important books such as the first Book in Marine and Offshore Structures in Iran "Design of Marine and Offshore Structures Book" written by Dr. Kabir Sadeghi Toosi University of Technology Press.isba.asp?BID=484 The library contains about 7,000 books in Persian, 6,000 books in English and other foreign languages, 130 journals in different languages, and 150 thesis and research reports. The university's bookshop is located on this campus. There is also a housing facility and some sport facilities. The faculty has several fully equipped labs used for research or teaching.
The laboratories are as follows:
Structural Engineering Laboratories:
Concrete, Structures, Mechanics of Materials, Materials of Construction.
Water Engineering Laboratories:
Hydrology, Hydraulics, and Hydraulic Models.
Road and Transportation Engineering Laboratories:
Pavement Properties
Soil and Foundation Engineering Laboratories:
Soil Mechanics Laboratory
Earthquake Engineering Laboratories:
Structural Dynamics Laboratory, including ambient and forced vibration testing devices for the evaluation and measurement of the dynamic characteristics of the existing structures, as well as an earthquake computer site.
Environmental Engineering Laboratories:
Water and Waste Water Chemistry, Redundant Solid Materials, and Microbiology.
This faculty is expert in concrete engineering and has won national and international awards for its achievements in this field. These include first place in 2002 and 2003, second place in 2001 and third place in 2004 in the cement competitions of the American Concrete Institute(ACI). They have also been awarded third place in the bridge design and construction with Balsa wood competition in 2003. The students publish a scientific journal named "Abanegan آبانگان" dedicated to Water Engineering.
The faculty has 28 full-time faculty members. It is located at Valiasr St., opposite the Eskan towers. Student accommodation, a recreational center and the universities bookshop is located on this campus.
Average undergraduate and graduate GPA of Civil Engineering students is very low in comparison with other prestigious universities in Iran- for instance the average GPA of department 2013 civil engineering students is 12.09 out of 20 (2.42 out of 4). It is only because professors of these two faculties are very difficult and strict.

The E-Learning Center

In 2004 K. N. Toosi University of Technology successfully started its E-Learning programs. The following programs are available:
This center is located at the central building of the university (Mirdamad Ave.).

Faculty of Geodesy and Geomatics

The educational activities of this Faculty started in 1954 as Geomatics Institute. This was shortly after the establishment of the Geomatics Organization of Iran. The mission of the newly established Geomatics Institute was mainly to train professional geomatics work force for governmental organizations. In 1980, this institute joined the newly established K.N. Toosi University of Technology. Initially it was known as the Faculty of Civil Engineering and the geodesy and geomatics engineering was one of the departments of this Faculty. With the expansion of the University, in 2001, this department made an independent faculty under the name of Geodesy and Geomatic Engineering to meet the growing demand in the field. 
As the only Faculty of Geodesy and Geomatics in Iran, this faculty is recognized as one of the leading educational and research centers of Iran in geodesy and geomatic engineering. With more than 19 full-time faculty members, this Faculty offers various programs in both graduate and undergraduate levels.
It offers the following programs:
This faculty is located at Valiasr St., opposite the Eskan towers.

Faculty of Industrial Engineering

In 1993, the Department of Industrial Engineering was formed within the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering. In 1999, this Department was separated from the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering to continue its activities as an independent Faculty. Graduates of this Faculty have had outstanding success in getting admission to higher programs. 
With 17 full-time academic members, this Faculty is working hard in order to improve the quality of education and research at the KNTU.
Programs and Degrees Presented at Faculty of Industrial Engineering :
Laboratories :
- precision measurement and quality control
- simulation
- information technology
- industrial systems and automation
- advanced design and production and robotics
- time and motion study
Research Capabilities and Interests:
-         Air Traffic Flow Management & Ground Holding Problem 
-         Information technology- Electronic commerce
-         Quality control systems in production processes
-         Quality management systems 
-         Planning and production control
-         Maintenance systems
-         Industrial design based on human being factors
-         Analysis of ergonomic problems
-         Analysis of industrial systems using computer simulation
-         Internet marketing
-         ISCM
-         e-CRM
-         Commercial intelligence
-         Decision making in trade and industry
-         ERP 
This faculty is located at Mollasadra building, Pardis St., Mollasadra St., Vanak Sq. However, it also operates a building at seyedkhandan bridge, Dabestan alley.

Faculty of Mechanical Engineering

Faculty of Mechanical Engineering was founded in 1973.
In June 2007, the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering moved to its new campus.
The faculty has 44 full-time faculty members. This faculty is the richest faculty of Iran in terms of percentage of associate and full professors because half of the faculty members are associate professors, in addition to 6 full professors. This is one of the most equipped mechanical engineering faculties in Iran and Middle East.
It offers the following programs:
This faculty is located at Mollasadra building, Pardis St., Mollasadra St., Vanak Sq.

Faculty of Science

The ex-Faculty of Basic Sciences started its activities in 1980 by presenting basic science courses to engineering students of different disciplines.  In 1987, the expansion of the Faculty allowed admission of undergraduate applied science students and the name was altered to Faculty of Science. The Faculty consists of four departments: Applied Chemistry, Applied Physics, Mathematics, and the Department of General Courses. The latter department provides courses in theology and ethics, Persian literature, English, and physical education.
This faculty is located at Kavian St., Jolfa St., Shariati St.. A recreational center is located on this campus.
This faculty provides the following programs:

Department of Applied Chemistry

The department has 12 full-time faculty members specialized in chemical physics, analytical chemistry, organic and inorganic chemistry, and electrochemistry. Besides the undergraduate program, the Department offers an undergraduate program leading to BSc in applied chemistry and graduate programs leading to MSc and PhD degrees in different related disciplines.

Joint international programs

KNTU is collaborating in various research and teaching programs with many universities around the world. In this regard, Memoranda of Understanding have been signed between KNTU and universities from Australia, Canada, Cyprus, France, Germany, Russia, and the United Kingdom.
The courses in most international programs are offered in English. Admission to these programs is either through the National Entrance Exam (Konkoor) or through special exams conducted by KNTU. The tuition fee varies for each program. The following joint international programs are active: 

Research

K. N. Toosi University of Technology is known for its industrial relations. It conducts research for many companies such as Iran Khodro, Saipa, Aerospace Industries Organization and research is conducted in all the labarotories throughout the university and even research groups such as ARAS research group exist within faculties. The Launch Vehicle research center has started its work at the faculty of Aerospace Engineering as one of the first centers of its kind. There are several centers of excellence at this university including the following:
There are several research centers at this university including:
There are several research laboratories at this university including:
There are also several workshops such as the following, in many of which research is conducted:








