[[I Am Legend (film)]]

CATEGORIES: 2007 films, 2000s science fiction films, American science fiction horror films, Post-apocalyptic films, Monster movies, Films about viral outbreaks, Solitude in fiction, Vampires in film, Performance capture in film, Films set in 2009, Films set in 2012, Films set in the future, Films set in New York City, Films shot in New York City, Films shot anamorphically, Films shot in multiple formats, Films based on horror novels, Films based on works by Richard Matheson, Films based on science fiction novels, Films directed by Francis Lawrence, Films produced by Akiva Goldsman, Screenplays by Akiva Goldsman, Heyday Films films, Overbrook Entertainment films, Village Roadshow Pictures films, Warner Bros. films, Film scores by James Newton Howard

I Am Legend is a 2007 British-American post-apocalyptic science fiction horror film directed by Francis Lawrence and starring Will Smith. It is the third feature film adaptation of Richard Matheson's 1954 novel of the same name, following 1964's The Last Man on Earth and 1971's The Omega Man.  Smith plays virologist Robert Neville, who is immune to a man-made virus originally created to cure cancer. He works to create a remedy while defending himself against mutants created by the virus.
Warner Bros. began developing I Am Legend in 1994, and various actors and directors were attached to the project, though production was delayed due to budgetary concerns related to the script. Production began in 2006 in New York City, filming mainly on location in the city, including a $5 million scene at the Brooklyn Bridge.
I Am Legend was released on December 14, 2007 in the United States and Canada, and opened to the largest ever box office (not counting for inflation) for a non-Christmas film released in the U.S. in December. The film was the seventh-highest grossing film of 2007, earning $256 million domestically and $329 million internationally, for a total of $585 million.

Plot

In 2009, Dr. Alice Krippin develops a cure for cancer from a genetically-engineered variant of the measles virus. After initially successful clinical trials, the virus mutates into a lethal strain, transmitted by physical contact then rapidly becoming airborne and killing 5.4 billion people worldwide. Most of the survivors devolved into aggressive, cannibalistic mutants referred to as 'Darkseekers' who have heightened strength, agility and animalistic senses, but suffer acute photosensitivity (exposure to sunlight kills them, making them primarily nocturnal creatures). Attracted by the smell of blood, they hunt and kill the remaining humans who are immune to the virus.
Three years later, military virologist Lieutenant Colonel Robert Neville is the last unaffected human in New York City, and possibly the world. Having lost his wife and daughter in a helicopter crash during the chaotic failed quarantine of Manhattan, Robert spends his time experimenting to isolate the gene in his blood that makes him immune to the virus, and ventures into a decaying Manhattan to collect food and supplies. Wild animals, which are immune to the airborne strain of the virus, thrive in the city. Robert spends 30 minutes each noon at the South Street Seaport, waiting for a response to his automated radio broadcast to other survivors. His isolation is broken only by the companionship of his German Shepherd dog Sam and his interactions with various mannequins he has set up around the city.
Robert has transformed his Washington Square Park townhouse into a fortress, including a UV-light perimeter, iron shutters inside the windows, and an armory. Stocked with large amounts of food, there are generators in the house to provide electricity and the basement is now his lab. Robert uses ammonia on his doorsteps and always returns home before nightfall, preventing the Darkseekers from tracking him. One day while Robert is in the city, Sam spots a deer. They chase it to an abandoned building. Sam pursues the deer inside, forcing Robert to reluctantly go in after her. He finds the deer dead and discovers Sam hiding, but the building is full of 'sleeping' Darkseekers who wake and chase them out. 
Needing a new test subject, Robert captures a female Darkseeker. As he does so, a male Darkseeker briefly emerges from the building, screaming in rage and agony as he exposes himself to sunlight. Robert assumes this is due to increased hunger and the further loss of human characteristics in the Darkseekers. In his laboratory, Robert tries his latest experimental serum on the infected woman, but the test seems unsuccessful. 
The next day, he finds one of his mannequins has moved onto the street in front of Grand Central Terminal. He investigates but is caught in a snare trap and passes out. When he awakens, it is dusk. As Robert tries to escape, the male mutant from the day before (who presumably also set the trap) lets loose a pack of infected dogs on them. During the fight, Sam is bitten. Robert brings Sam home and attempts to save her by injecting his serum, but it is ineffective. Sam starts mutating, forcing Robert to kill her. Overwhelmed by grief and hatred, that night Robert waits in the Seaport with his car equipped with UV lights, seemingly as a suicidal last stand. The Darkseekers come and he kills many, but they overwhelm and nearly kill him before he is rescued by an immune woman named Anna and a boy named Ethan, who followed his radio broadcasts from Maryland. Anna and Ethan take Robert back to his home. Anna explains that they are making their way to a survivor's colony in Vermont but Robert does not believe such a colony exists.
The following night, the alpha male leads a horde of mutants to Robert's house, inadvertently led there by Anna who was unaware of Robert's precautions in covering his scent. Robert stops the first wave with the UV-light perimeter, but the mutants then destroy it. He kills some of them with mines planted in the street outside, but the Darkseekers eventually reach the house. As Anna and Ethan hide, the alpha male and another Darkseeker enter the house, and the alpha male attacks Robert. As they fight, the other Darkseeker gets upstairs and rips a hole in the roof so the rest can get in. Robert drives the alpha male out, but the entire horde of Darkseekers come through the roof. Robert, Anna and Ethan retreat to the basement, sealing themselves in a plexiglass room with the mutant female that Robert was experimenting on. They discover that Robert's cure is actually working on the woman. The Darkseekers break into the basement and the alpha male begins to throw himself against the glass. Robert draws a vial of the infected woman's blood and gives it to Anna, before shutting her and Ethan inside a coal chute in the back of the lab. As the alpha male finally breaks through the glass, Robert detonates a grenade, killing the mutants and himself. Anna and Ethan emerge the next morning and make their way to the survivor colony. Once there, Anna hands over the blood containing the cure, stating that the survivors are Robert's legacy as his fight for a cure became legend.

Alternate ending

The Blu-ray and DVD releases gave the option to view the film with an alternate ending. In this ending, the Alpha male creates a butterfly on the glass wall with his dirty hands, and Robert notices a Butterfly tattoo on the mutant woman's arm. Robert realizes what they want and that there is still hope for them, and after taking a vial of her blood, he removes the serum to make her infected again. He then slowly brings the woman out. The alpha male growls for infecting her again. The Alpha male takes her and leaves with all the Darkseekers, letting Robert live. The next morning Robert, Anna and Ethan leave New York City and head for the Survivor colony in Vermont.

Cast

Production

Development

The late 1990s brought a reemergence of the science fiction horror genre. and having already made the 1971 adaptation The Omega Man. Mark Protosevich was hired to write the script after the studio was impressed with his spec script of The Cell. Protosevich's first draft took place in the year 2000 in San Francisco, California, and contained many similarities with the finished film, though the Darkseekers (called 'Hemocytes') were civilized to the point of the creatures in The Omega Man and Anna was a lone morphine addict; as well as the fact that there was a Hemocyte character named Christopher who joined forces with Neville. Warner Bros. immediately put the film on the fast track, attaching Neal H. Moritz as producer.
Actors Tom Cruise, Michael Douglas, and Mel Gibson had been considered to star in the film, Scott had Protosevich replaced by a screenwriter of his own choosing, John Logan, with whom he spent months of intensive work on a number of different drafts. The Scott/Logan version of I Am Legend was a mix of sci-fi and psychological thriller, without dialogue in the first hour and with a sombre ending. The creatures in Logan's version were similar to the Darkseekers of the finished film in their animalistic, barbaric nature. The studio, fearing its lack of commercial appeal and merchandising potential, began to worry about the liberties they had given Scott – then on a negative streak of box office disappointments – and urged the production team to reconsider the lack of action in the screenplay. After an "esoteric" draft by writer Neal Jimenez, Warner Bros. reassigned Protosevich to the project, reluctantly working with Scott again.
In December 1997, the project was called into question when the projected budget escalated to $108 million due to media and shareholder scrutiny of the studio in financing a big-budget film. and the project did not get off the ground.
In March 2002, Schwarzenegger became the producer of I Am Legend, commencing negotiations with Michael Bay to direct and Will Smith to star in the film. Bay and Smith were attracted to the project based on a redraft that would reduce its budget. Lawrence, whose film Constantine was produced by Goldsman, was fascinated by empty urban environments. He said, "Something's always really excited me about that... to have experienced that much loss, to be without people or any kind of social interaction for that long."
Goldsman took on the project as he admired the second I Am Legend film adaptation, The Omega Man. A rewrite was done to distance the project from the other zombie films inspired by the novel, as well as from the recently released 28 Days Later, although Goldsman was inspired by the scenes of a deserted London in the British horror film to create the scenes of a deserted New York City. A 40-page scene-by-scene outline of the film was developed by May 2006. When delays occurred on Smith's film Hancock, which was scheduled for 2007, it was proposed to switch the actor's films. This meant filming would have to begin in sixteen weeks: production was green lit, using Goldsman's script and the outline. Elements from Protosevich's script were introduced, while the crew consulted with experts on infectious diseases and solitary confinement. Rewrites continued throughout filming, because of Smith's improvisational skills and Lawrence's preference to keep various scenes silent. The director had watched Jane Campion's film The Piano with a low volume so as to not disturb his newborn son, and realized that silence could be very effective cinema.

Casting

Will Smith signed on to play Robert Neville in April 2006. To prepare for his role, Smith visited the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Georgia. He also met with a person who had been in solitary confinement and a former prisoner of war. Smith compared Neville to Job, who lost his children, livelihood, and health. Like the Book of Job, I Am Legend studies the questions, "Can he find a reason to continue? Can he find the hope or desire to excel and advance in life? Or does the death of everything around him create imminent death for himself?" He also cited an influence in Tom Hanks' performance in Cast Away (2000).
Abbey and Kona, both three-year-old German Shepherd Dogs, played Neville's dog Sam. Singer Mike Patton provided the guttural screams of the infected "hemocytes," and Dash Mihok provided the character animation for the infected "alpha male". There were several filler characters with uncredited roles in old news broadcasts and flashbacks, such as the unnamed President's voice (Pat Fraley), and the cast of The Today Show.

Filming

Akiva Goldsman decided to move the story from Los Angeles to New York City to take advantage of locations that would more easily show emptiness. Goldsman explained, "L.A. looks empty at three o'clock in the afternoon, but New York is never empty . . . it was a much more interesting way of showing the windswept emptiness of the world." Warner Bros. initially rejected this idea because of the logistics, but Francis Lawrence was determined to shoot on location, to give the film a natural feel that would benefit from not shooting on soundstages. Lawrence went to the city with a camcorder, and filmed areas filled with crowds. Then, a special effects test was conducted to remove all those people. The test had a powerful effect on studio executives.
Filming began on September 23, 2006. Other locations include the Tribeca section of Lower Manhattan, the aircraft carrier Intrepid, the Kingsbridge Armory in the Bronx and St. Patrick's Cathedral. Weeds were imported from Florida and were strewn across locations to make the city look like it had overgrown with them. The closure of major streets was controversial with New Yorkers. Will Smith said, "I don't think anyone's going to be able to do that in New York again anytime soon. People were not happy. That's the most middle fingers I've ever gotten in my career."
A bridge scene was filmed for six consecutive nights in January on the Brooklyn Bridge to serve as a flashback scene in which New York's citizens evacuate the city. Shooting the scene consumed $5 million of the film's reported $150 million budget, which was likely the most expensive shot in the city to date. The scene, which had to meet requirements from 14 government agencies, involved 250 crew members and 1,000 extras, including 160 National Guard members. Filming concluded on March 31, 2007. CGI was used to depict the main spans of the Brooklyn Bridge and the Manhattan Bridge collapsing as missiles from over passing military jets blew them up to quarantine Manhattan island.
Reshoots were conducted around November 2007. Lawrence noted, "We weren't seeing fully rendered shots until about a month ago. The movie starts to take on a whole other life. It's not until later that you can judge a movie as a whole and go, 'Huh, maybe we should shoot this little piece in the middle, or tweak this a little bit.' It just so happened that our re-shoots revolved around the end of the movie."

Effects

A week into filming, Francis felt the infected (referred to as "Dark Seekers" or "hemocytes" in the script), who were being portrayed by actors wearing prosthetics, were not convincing. His decision to use computer-generated imagery (CGI) resulted in an increased budget and extended post-production, although the end results were not always well received. The concept behind the infected was that their adrenal glands were open all of the time and Lawrence explained, "They needed to have an abandon in their performance that you just can't get out of people in the middle of the night when they're barefoot. And their metabolisms are really spiked, so they're constantly hyperventilating, which you can't really get actors to do for a long time or they pass out." The actors remained on set to provide motion capture.
In addition, CGI was used for the lions and deer in the film, and to erase pedestrians in shots of New York. Workers visible in windows, spectators and moving cars in the distance were all removed. In his vision of an empty New York, Lawrence cited John Ford as his influence: "We didn't want to make an apocalyptic movie where the landscape felt apocalyptic. A lot of the movie takes place on a beautiful day. There's something magical about the empty city as opposed to dark and scary that was the ideal that the cast and crew wanted."

Alternate ending

Several scenes were changed before the film's release, especially the stand-off between Neville and the infected in his laboratory. In the ending, the alpha male makes a butterfly-shaped smear on the glass. Neville realizes that the alpha male is identifying the woman he was experimenting on by a butterfly tattoo, and the alpha male wants her back. Neville puts his gun down and returns the infected woman. Neville and the alpha male both stare each other down; Neville apologizes to the Darkseekers; the alpha male accepts his apology, and the infected leave. Shocked by the ordeal, Neville sits down for a moment in his laboratory. Looking over the pictures of his numerous test subjects, the implications of his research methods begin to dawn on him. The final shot follows Neville, Anna, and Ethan as they drive away towards the survivor's camp in Vermont with the antidote. "Must Watch: I Am Legend's Original Ending". FirstShowing. Retrieved July 3, 2011.
According to visual effects supervisor Janek Sirrs: "At that point, Neville's — and the audience's — assumptions about the nature of these creatures are shown to be incorrect. We see that they have actually retained some of their humanity. There is a very important moment between the alpha male and Neville."

Release

I Am Legend was originally slated for a November 21, 2007 release in the United States and Canada, and Ireland having been originally scheduled for January 4, 2008.
In December 2007, China banned the release of American films in the country,
Premieres were held in Tokyo, New York and London. At the London premiere in Leicester Square, British comedian and actor Neg Dupree was arrested after pushing his way onto the red carpet and running around shouting 'I am Legend!'. The stunt was part of his 'Neg's Urban Sports' section of comedy game show Balls of Steel.

Marketing

A tie-in comic from DC Comics and Vertigo Comics has been created, I Am Legend: Awakening.
In October 2007, Warner Bros. Pictures in conjunction with the Electric Sheep Company launched the online multiplayer game I Am Legend: Survival in the virtual world Second Life. The game is the largest launched in the virtual world in support of a film release, permitting people to play against each other as the infected or the uninfected across a replicated 

Box office

I Am Legend grossed $77,211,321 on its opening weekend in 3,606 theaters, averaging $21,412 per venue, and placing it at the top of the box office. This set a record for highest grossing opening for a film for the month of December. The film was the sixth highest grossing film of 2007 in North America, and as of April 2014 it still stands among the top 100 all-time highest grossing films both domestically and worldwide (unadjusted for ticket price inflation).

Home media

The film was released on DVD on March 18, 2008 in two editions: a one-disc release, including the movie with four animated comics ("Death As a Gift," "Isolation," "Sacrificing the Few for the Many," and "Shelter"), and other DVD-ROM features; and a two-disc special edition that includes all these extras, an alternative theatrical version of the movie with an alternate ending, and a digital copy of the film.
The film has sold 7.04 million DVDs and earned $126.2 million in revenue, making it the sixth best-selling DVD of 2008. However, Warner Bros was reportedly "a little disappointed" with the film's performance on the DVD market.2008 Q1 about even with last year: Blu-ray helped offset drops in consumer spending. 2008-04-16, Video Business

Soundtrack

The soundtrack for I Am Legend was released on January 15, 2008, under the record label Varèse Sarabande. The music was composed by James Newton Howard.

Reception

Critical response

Most critics were favorable towards the film.
A. O. Scott wrote that Will Smith gave a "graceful and effortless performance" and also noted the "third-act collapse". He felt that the movie "does ponder some pretty deep questions about the collapse and persistence of human civilization". some critics favoring the alternative ending in the DVD release.
Popular Mechanics published an article on December 14, 2007 addressing some of the scientific issues raised by the film:
The magazine solicited reactions from Alan Weisman, author of The World Without Us, virologist W. Ian Lipkin, M.D., and Michel Bruneau, PhD, comparing their predictions with the film's depictions. The article raised the most questions regarding the virus' mutation and the medical results, and pointed out that a suspension bridge like the Brooklyn Bridge would likely completely collapse rather than losing only its middle span. Neville's method of producing power using gasoline-powered generators seemed the most credible: "This part of the tale is possible, if not entirely likely," Popular Mechanics editor Roy Berendsohn says.
Philosopher Slavoj Zizek criticized the film politically as being the most regressive adaptation from the novel (others being The Last Man on Earth in 1964 and The Omega Man in 1971). He claimed that while the original novel had a progressive multicultural message where Neville became a "legend" to the new creatures and is subsequently killed by them (much like vampires were legends to humans); the 2007 film finds a cure for the Darkseekers and it is delivered by a survivor through apparent divine intervention. According to Zizek this misses the original message and "openly opts for religious fundamentalism."         

Accolades

I Am Legend earned four nominations for the Visual Effects Society Awards,
Will Smith also won the MTV Movie Awards for Best Male Performance.

Possible sequel/prequel

Francis Lawrence said in late 2008 that there would be a prequel and that Will Smith would be reprising his role. He stated that the film would reveal what happens to Neville before the infected take over New York. D. B. Weiss was recruited to write the script, while Lawrence would direct "if we figure out the story". Smith stated the film would have Neville and his team going from New York City to Washington, D.C. and back again, as they made their last stand.
On May 3, 2011, Francis Lawrence stated that, so far as it involved him, the prequel was dead, with Lawrence stating, "I don't think that's ever going to happen."
In 2012, Warner Brothers announced that deals had been made to produce "another installment" (not necessarily the rumored prequel), with the intention of having Will Smith reprise his role. February 17, 2012, deadline. Accessed February 19, 2012.

Bibliography






