[[Abhinav Bindra]]

CATEGORIES: Punjabi people, Living people, 1982 births, People from Uttarakhand, People from Punjab, India, Recipients of the Arjuna Award, Recipients of the Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna, Indian sport shooters, ISSF rifle shooters, Commonwealth Games gold medallists for India, Commonwealth Games silver medallists for India, Commonwealth Games bronze medallists for India, Olympic gold medalists for India, Shooters at the 2008 Summer Olympics, Olympic shooters of India, University of Colorado alumni, Indian Sikhs, Recipients of the Padma Bhushan, Shooters at the 2010 Commonwealth Games, Asian Games medalists in shooting, Olympic medalists in shooting, Shooters at the 2012 Summer Olympics, The Doon School alumni, Indian autobiographers, Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics, Shooters at the 2002 Asian Games, Shooters at the 2010 Asian Games

Abhinav Singh Bindra (born 28 September 1982, in DehradunAthlete Biography: Abhinav Bindra. The official website of the Beijing 2008 Olympic Games.) is an Indian shooter and is a World and Olympic champion in the 10 m Air Rifle event. By winning the gold in the 10 m Air Rifle event at the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games, he became the first Indian to win an individual gold medal at the Olympic Games. It was also India's first gold medal since 1980, when the Men's Field Hockey Team won the gold.[ref]
Abhinav Bindra wins 10m air rifle gold[/ref]Medalists – India, The official website of the Beijing 2008 Olympic Games He is the first and only Indian to have held both the World and Olympic titles at the same time, a feat he accomplished by capturing the Gold Medal at the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, after having won the gold at the 2006 ISSF World Shooting Championships.

Career

Early years

Abhinav Bindra was born in the home of Punjabi Sikh family. His current coach is five-time Olympic shooter Gabriele Bühlmann from Basel, Switzerland, with whom he trained in Germany before the Olympics.
In the 2000 Olympics Bindra achieved a score of 590, placing him 11th in the qualification round, meaning he did not qualify for the finals since only the top eight competed in the finals.

Notable international performance

After these successes he started suffering from a severe back injury, so much so that he was unable to compete or even lift a rifle for a year, upsetting his preparations for the Beijing Games. However, Bindra put all speculation to rest, bringing India perhaps her biggest sporting glory ever
This was India's first individual gold medal at the Olympics, and the first gold in 28 years, since the men's field hockey team won the gold at the 1980 Moscow Olympics. Bindra was rewarded by various Indian state governments and private organisations for his achievement.
Abhinav Bindra won the Gold medal in the Men's 10-metre Air rifle event at the 12th Asian Shooting Championships, which was held in Doha Qatar.
Abhinav Bindra lost in the qualification round in 2012 London Olympics finishing with a score of 594 placing him in 16th, though his compatriot Gagan Narang made it to the finals in 3rd place, and went on to win the bronze medal for India, thereby opening the medal tally for India in London Olympics 2012.

Business career

He holds a B.B.A. (Bachelor of Business Administration) from the University of Colorado, US. He is also the brand ambassador by State-run Steel Authority of India Ltd. and also a member of Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) Sports Committee since 2010.

Personal life

HarperSport published his autobiography, A Shot at History: My Obsessive Journey to Olympic Gold which he co-authored with sportswriter Rohit Brijnath in October 2011. It was formally released by Union Sports minister, Ajay Maken on 27 October 2011 at a function in New Delhi,

Awards and recognition

Awards for 2008 Olympics Gold medal
[/ref]






