[[Jess Vanstrattan]]

CATEGORIES: Australian soccer players, Australian expatriate soccer players, Serie B footballers, National Soccer League (Australia) players, Hellas Verona F.C. players, Juventus F.C. players, A.C. Ancona players, Gold Coast United FC players, Association football goalkeepers, Expatriate footballers in Italy, People from Gosford, Australian people of Dutch descent, 1982 births, Living people, A-League players, Central Coast Mariners FC players

Jess Kedwell Vanstrattan (born 19 July 1982) is a former Australian goalkeeper.

Club career

Born in Gosford, New South Wales, Vanstrattan started his career for Northern Spirit in Sydney, NSW.

Verona

In summer 2001, he was signed by Juventus and sent him to Verona in co-ownership deal (i.e. 50% registration rights) for 250 million lire in 2001. On his return to Verona he made eight appearances collected in 2004–05 and 2005–06 season before a brief loan spell at Ancona in January 2007.

Juventus

He would be involved in a controversial transfer saga in the summer of 2007. After ending his contract with Verona (which was due expire in 2008), Jess returned home to Australia in June, citing personal reasons, only to sign for Juventus a month later.
Officially under contract to Verona again, the two clubs agreed on a loan deal which saw the player return to Juventus on 21 August in time for the 2007–08 Serie A season.
Vanstrattan started his first game for Juventus in Australia in a friendly match against local side Melbourne Victory at the Docklands Stadium in Melbourne. He conceded one goal, from Melbourne's Carlos Hernández, en route to his team's 4–1 success.
In June 2008, Vanstrattan did not formed a contract with Juventus and released by both Verona and Juve.

Gold Coast United

On 7 October 2008, Vanstrattan became the first signing for Gold Coast United after being released by Juventus in June.Former Juventus 'keeper becomes United's first signing
On 3 August 2009 he succumbed to an ankle injury sustained while training in preparation for the first game of the 2009–10 A-League season.Ankle injury sidelines VanstrattanBosnich in talks to stand in for Vanstrattan

Central Coast Mariners

On 19 July 2010, Vantstrattan was signed by the Central Coast Mariners after he wanted to move back home. The deal was officially confirmed by the Mariners on 19 July 2010. Unfortunately, weeks after signing with the club, Van Stratten suffered a second ACL rupture and missed the duration of the season.Van's the Man for the Central Coast
On 14 April 2011 Vanstrattan was then released by the Mariners. He would never sign for another professional club and thus retire from football, playing only 34 games in a 12 year career, averaging a game every 4 and a half months. Depression and lack of skill is most likely the reasoning. He is currently is Goalkeeping coach at the Central Coast Mariners Academy which probably explains why Liam Reddy is so crap.

Honours

International

Australia national football team






