[[Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and NGOs in Disaster Relief]]

CATEGORIES: War casualties, International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, Codes of conduct, Natural disasters

The Code of Conduct for International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and NGOs in Disaster Relief was drawn up in 1992 by the Steering Committee for Humanitarian Response (SCHR) to set ethical standards for organizations involved in humanitarian work.  In 1994, the SCHR adopted the code and made the signing of it a condition for membership in the alliance.  

Formulation of the code

Although the initiative began with a call by the French Red Cross to the IFRC to draw up a code of conduct relating to humanitarian aid in response to natural disasters, many of the sponsoring agencies had been involved in complex emergencies such as Biafra and Rwanda and were also looking for guidance for operating in the midst of violent conflicts.  As of 2007 there were more than 400 organizations who have signed the code,List of signatories registering "their willingness to incorporate its principles into their work."Registration form  
At 26th International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, which included delegates from governments, the Red Cross and Red Crescent National Societies, the IFRC, and the ICRC, a resolution was passed which "took note of" and "welcomed" the code giving it wide international recognition.Resolution 4

Code articles

Principle Commitments of the CodeCode of Conduct

Types of principles

The 10 articles of the code fall into two types:  Articles 1 through 4 are core humanitarian principles required for humanitarian response.  The remaining articles are more aspirational and are important to improving the quality of both humanitarian and developmental work.
The humanitarian imperative, based on the principle of humanity, together with other core principles, impartiality, and independence, stress that humanitarian response must be based on need alone.  They are derived, from the Fundamental Principles of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement Red Cross movement.  Organizations such as military forces and for-profit companies may deliver assistance to communities affected by disaster, but they are not considered by the humanitarian sector as humanitarian agencies as they do not meet all of the core principles.
Articles, 5 through 10, are derived particularly from experience in development work.  Most of the original sponsors have had decades of experience working in the development sector and the articles reflect their experience and commitment.  Some development agencies are deeply committed to such an approach while being unable to subscribe to the core principles.

Voluntary nature

The code of conduct is a voluntary code which is self-enforced by each of the signatory organizations.
The code includes two annexes, Annex I, Recommendations to governments of disaster affected countries, and Annex II, Recommendations to donor governments.

Application of the Code

The code of conduct is widely used to guide conduct within humanitarian agencies. When the code was drawn up a new term was coined: Non governmental humanitarian agencies (NGHAs), to include the NGOs and the components of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement which are not NGOs.
The Disaster Emergency Committee (DEC)Disaster Emergency Committee which is based in the UK has used the code for evaluating humanitarian action, beginning with an evaluation of the Gujarat earthquake of 2001Executive summary and covering many subsequent evaluations.

Limits and misinterpretations

Evaluators differ about the usefulness of the code.  In the DEC evaluation of the Gujarat earthquake of 2001, the evaluators concluded 
However, because of the lack of indicators of compliance with code they were forced to rate overall performance based on the aggregation of their impressions and judgement rather than on an objective measurement. 14 The evaluators of the DEC Tsunami Crisis Response were unable to  do this because of different perceptions of different team members. 46 However, the opening paragraph of the executive summary of the Tsunami evaluation states 
This is at odds with the conclusions of Hillhorst's review of the codeDorothea Hilhorst, Dead letter or living document? Ten years of the Code of Conduct for disaster relief. Disasters ''Vol. 29 Issue 4 Page 351 December 2005, p. 364 which states:
Hillhorst's paper draws on a survey of code signatories and a conference to review the code, as well as detailed analysis of the code itself.

Notes



Recommended reading


