[[Waheed Akhtar]]

CATEGORIES: 1934 births, 1996 deaths, People from Hyderabad, India, Urdu poets, Indian poets, Islamic studies scholars, Shia Muslim scholars of Islam, People from Aligarh, Aligarh Muslim University faculty, Indian Shia Muslims, Muslim philosophers, People from Aurangabad, Maharashtra

Syed Waheed Akhtar () (12 August 1934, Aurangabad (Deccan) — 13 December 1996) was an Urdu poet, writer, critic, orator, and one of the leading Muslim scholars and philosophers of the 20th century.

Life

Waheed Akhtar was born in Aurangabad in what was then the Hyderabad State of Nizam (present day Maharashtra), to a family which had migrated from Jais, the birthplace of poet Malik Muhammad Jayasi), in the district of Uttar Pradesh.
His father was Syed Nazr-e Abbas and his mother was Syeda Aliya Begum. They had seven children. Waheed Akhtar was the second child among six sons and one daughter. After spending his childhood in Aurangabad, and completing his early education, he went to Hyderabad to enroll at Osmania University.
He was in Hyderabad for eight years until he completed his PhD and was then appointed lecturer at Aligarh Muslim University. It is thought  that his years in Hyderabad were crucial for moulding his personality as a poet and writer.
Waheed Akhtar wrote prolifically in Urdu from a very early age and during his initial years he adopted the pen name "Barq". He married Syeda Mahliqa Qarai in Hyderabad in 1962. They had four sons: Hasan, Husain, Haider (who died in the fifth month of his birth)  and Mohsin.
Mrs Mahliqa Qarai was killed in the USS Vincennes attack on Iran Air Flight 655, the civilian airliner shot down on 3 July 1988, over the Persian Gulf.

Education

His early education took place at Chelipura High School, a government school in Aurangabad.

Academic positions held

He was appointed Lecturer in General Education in 1960 at Aligarh Muslim University and Lecturer in Philosophy in 1962.

Academic and scholarly contributions

He specialised in Sufism, existentialism, aesthetics, literary criticism and Muslim philosophy and Shi'ite thought. He has published more than two hundred articles and eight books in Urdu and English.
His research and creative work has been quoted and referred to by a number of scholars in philosophy, Islamic studies and literature, such as Annemarie Schimmel, Abid Husain, Aale Ahmad Suroor, Ehtisham Husain, Majnun Gorakhpuri, Ali Sardar Jafri, Muhi-al-din Qadri Zor, A.Q. Sarwari, Vazir Agha, Khaleel-Ur-Rehman Azmi, Mumtaz Husain, Qamar Raees, Mohammad Hasan, and Gopi Chand Narang.

Works

His published collections of poetry comprise mainly ghazals and nazms, but wrote other forms of poetry, like Marsia (elegy) in the musaddas format; Qasida (Panegyric), Hajv (lampoon), Manqibat, Salaam, Rubai (quatrain). The following verses from one of his ghazal is a satire on that era:
Waheed Akhtar was a strong proponent of freedom, and stressed for the commitment to ideals rather than adopting them as "fashion" or a "cliché" for creativity. Another couplet from the same ghazal is an example of this,
According to Shamsur Rahman Faruqi, "Wahid Akhtar, regarded by many as a Modernist and by many others as Progressive, wrote that Modernism was really an extension of Progressivism". Akhtar is also considered by at least one writer to be among the few successful modern Urdu poets who took Marsia to new heights and gave it new direction this age. ?

Poetry: ghazals and nazms

His following collections of poetry consist mostly of nazms and ghazals

Marsia

Karbala Ta Karbala (collection of Elegies on martyrs of Karbala– Urdu) –1991- consists of eight marasi (plural of marsia)

Prose

His writings in prose are literary criticism, philosophical writings, book reviews, columns and talks. Collection of his writings in Urdu prose have been published by National Council for Promotion of Urdu Language
 Three volumes have already been published and the other three remain to be published.

Published books

=Books in Urdu=

Besides his collections of Urdu poetry Shab Ka Razmiyah, Paththaron ka Mughanni, and Zanjeer ka Naghma. He has published a collection of Elegies (Marsia) of the martyrs of Karbala by the name of Karbala Ta Karbala. He contributed to numerous talks, discussions, and poetry recitations at All India Radio Stations.

=Prose=

=Books and other scholarly articles in English=

In English, in addition to The Early Shiite Imamiyyah Thinkers and Iqbal in Modern Perspective, he wrote numerous articles on various philosophical subjects, besides several translations from Persian to English, and book reviews. His later work was mostly published in Al-Tawhid, a journal for Islamic thought published in Iran, Aligarh Journal of Islamic thought (a journal published by the department of philosophy, of Aligarh Muslim University, which was revived during his chairmanship of the department with him as its editor) and Message of Thaqalayn, another English journal published in Iran.

Articles

He has published more than five hundred articles, reviews and write-ups published in journals of India and Pakistan, including Saba (Hyderabad), Sabras (Hyderabad), Chiragh (Hyderabad), Gajar (Hyderabad), Shi'r wa Hikmat (Hyderabad), Ham Qalam (Karachi), Mashrab (Karachi), Adab-e-Latif (Lahore), Awraq (Lahore), Adabi Dunya (Lahore), Sha'ur (Delhi), Shabkhoon (Allahabad), Sha'ir (Bombay), Ahang (Gaya), Sharah & Atkar (Delhi), Ajkal (Delhi), Indo-Iranica (Calcutta), Mankind (Hyderabad), Fikr-o-Nazar (Aligarh), Islam aur A'sr-e-Jadid (Islam and Modern Age) (Delhi), Funun (Lahore), Iqbaliyyat (Lahore), Fikr-o-Nazar (Lahore), Guftugu (Bombay) and Urdu International (Canada).

Translations

Foreign assignment

Editor of Al-Tawhid (English) a journal of philosophy and culture, Islamic Propagation Organization, Tehran, Iran – May 1984-April 1987.

Awards and honours

1960: Andhra Pradesh Sahitya Academy Award
1967: Ghalib Award of the Uttar Pradesh Urdu Academy – for the best Urdu Book
1972: Uttar Pradesh & Andhra Pradesh Urdu Academy Awards on Khwaja Mir Dard's Sufi Doctrines and Poetry.
1973: Uttar Pradesh & Andhra Pradesh Urdu Academy Awards, on Philosophy and Literary Criticism
1974: Uttar Pradesh & Andhra Pradesh Urdu Academy Awards
1983: 'Makhdoom Award'-the Highest National Award in India for Literary Criticism in Urdu by Andhra Pradesh Urdu Academy Hyderabad








