[[Lake Awoonga]]

CATEGORIES: Central Queensland, Reservoirs in Queensland

Lake Awoonga was formed on the Boyne River by the dam located  from Gladstone, in Central Queensland, Australia. It is approximately 30 minutes drive from Gladstone, via Benaraby.
Lake Awoonga is the main water supply for the Gladstone region.Attractions in the Gladstone Region

Specifications

Built across the Boyne River south west of Gladstone, the Awoonga Dam is a rockfill structure with a concrete upstream face slab. The embankment was formed from rock excavated from a quarry on the side of the dam wall. The embankment is over .
When full the lake is 40 m (111 feet) above sea level. Approximately 200,000 fish are released each year including barramundi and some mangrove jack. By early 2006 a total of over 2.9 million fish had been released into Lake Awoonga including 2.4 million barramundii, 470,000 sea mullet and 15,000 mangrove jack. These fish were bred at Gladstone Area Water Board's Fish Hatchery facility. The largest barramundi caught, as at November 2008, weighed in at a 36.5 kg (80.5 lbs).Gladstone Area Water Board: Hatchery

Fauna

thumb|150px|Squatter PigeonLake Awoonga is home to an array of small animals, several of which are of conservation significance including the Grey-headed Flying Fox and the Yellow-bellied Glider. Other species of birds, reptiles, and native fauna including bandicoots, rufous bettongs, kangaroos, wallabies, Greater Gliders, and brushtail possums can be found around the lake.Gladstone Area Water Board: Recreation & Hatchery - Flora and Fauna
The lake hosts more than 225 species of birds. Species include the Southern Squatter Pigeon which is listed as vulnerableDept of the Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts' List of Threatened Fauna and a further twenty-seven bird species listed on International Migratory Conservation Agreement Lists.

Image:EagleWedgetail2.jpg|Wedge-tailed Eagle
Image:Water Dragon2.jpg|Eastern Water Dragon
Image:Duck, Plumed Whistling Sep 09.jpg|Plumed Whistling Duck
Image:Blue-Winged_Kookaburra2.jpg|Blue-winged Kookaburra

The Gladstone Area Water Board has a fish breeding program in place and breeds Barramundi and Mangrove Jack for stocking into Lake Awoonga as well as some of the surrounding waterways. Approximately 200,000 fish are released into Lake Awoonga each year (200,000 Barramundi and small numbers of Mangrove Jack). The fish are bred at a purpose-built fish hatchery, operated jointly by the Gladstone Area Water Board and the Gladstone Ports Corporation.
The hatchery is one of the largest breeders of barramundi fingerlings in Queensland and their mangrove jack breeding program has resulted in Lake Awoonga holding the largest stocks in Australia with more than 50,000 released. Other fish species include Agassiz's Glass Perch, Banded Grunter, Barramundi, Bony Bream, Eastern Rainbowfish, Eeltail catfish, Fly-specked Hardyhead, Forktail Catfish, Gudgeon, Long-finned Eel, Longtom, Mouth Almighty, Sea Mullet, Snub-nose Garfish, Spangled Perch. Also present in low numbers are Hyrtl's Tandan, Mangrove Jack, Saratoga, Silver Perch, Sleepy Cod, Sooty Grunter, and Yellowbelly. Since 1996, over 2.5 million barramundi fingerlings and 470,000 mullet fingerlings have been released into the Lake. Barramundi in the 10–25 kg range are regularly caught from the lake.

Flora

More than 415 plant varieties play a vital role in the health of the Lake Awoonga region. Ranging from vine thickets and rainforests to tall woodlands and grassy woodlands, they include over 45 confirmed species of aquatic plants such as ribbon weed, hornwort and sedges found in the shallow water areas. Aquatic plants have an important function in that they provide food and cover for animals, stabilise the river bottom against erosion and recycle nutrients.
Several plants of conservation significance exist in the region Awoonga including Persoonia Amaliae and Eucalyptus melanoleuca which are listed as rare, while Cycas Megacarpa and Grevillea venusta are noted as vulnerable. Banksia integrifolia and Xanthorrhoea latifolia are common protected species that can also be found in the area.
There are a number of declared alien plants and environmental weeds proliferating throughout the river system and the catchment including parthenium, salvinia, cat's claw vine, lantana, oleander and rubbervine. A pest management plan has been developed to supplement the annual weed control programme.
thumb|Recreation sheds at Lake AwoongaThe Gladstone Area Water Board has carried out vegetation re-establishment programs in order to replace remnant endangered regional ecosystems impacted by the lake.

Recreation facilities

Swimming is permitted from the shore and there is a 24 hour boat ramp that provides access for sailing, fishing, and skiing etc.  Various watercraft, including house boats can be hired and organised. Fishing cruises are also available.
The waters of Lake Awoonga are controlled by Queensland Boating and Fisheries Patrol and Queensland Water Police and all users of the lake are required to adhere to the posted speed limits.
The lake is a popular fishing spot, especially for barramundi. The Barramundi closed season does not apply to Lake Awoonga, although some limits do apply. Camping is permitted at two places on Lake Awoonga, the Caravan Park and the Boynedale Bush Camp. The main recreation area is provided free to the public and includes picnic shelters, barbecues, walking paths.
The Boynedale Bush camp is a basic camping facility around the southern side of Lake Awoonga, ten minutes from the townships of Many Peaks and Ubobo. Access is via a dirt road from the Gladstone to Monto Road which may become boggy in wet weather. There is no potable water at this site.

Gallery

Image:AwoongaBehindView.JPG|View of wall from observation area
Image:RecreationAreaSheds.jpg|Some of the shelters at Lake Awoonga
Image:Hut Overlooking Lake Awoonga.JPG|A recreation shelter overlooking the lake
Image:LakeAwoongaScene2.jpg|A view of Lake Awoonga while boating
Image:Lake Awoonga Recreation Shed2.jpg|Shelter shed overlooking the lake
Image:Lake Awoonga Scene.jpg|The sun sparkling on the waters of Lake Awoonga
Image:View of Lake Awoonga from Recreation Area.jpg|A view of the lake from the recreation area
Image:Playground_&_Shed_Ironbark_Gully.JPG|Playground and shelter shed at Ironbark Gully, Lake Awoonga
Image:Landscape view of Awoonga Dam wall and spillway.jpg|Landscape view of Awoonga Dam and spillway
Image:Mt Castletower from Lake Awoonga.jpg|View of Mount Castletower from Lake Awoonga
Image:View of Lake Awoonga.jpg|View of Lake Awoonga








