[[Monument of Lihula]]

CATEGORIES: Monuments and memorials in Estonia, Lihula Parish, World War II memorials, Rae Parish, Buildings and structures in Lääne County, Buildings and structures in Harju County

Monument of Lihula is the colloquial name of a monument commemorating the Estonians who fought for Estonia against the Soviet Union in World War II, located in Lagedi near Tallinn, the capital of Estonia.
The monument has moved twice before ending up in the current location. It was originally unveiled in Pärnu on 2002, but taken down only nine days after prime minister Siim Kallas had condemned the statue.
The monument depicts a soldier in a military uniform, with World War II German helmet, Estonian flag on the wrist and the Cross of Liberty on the collar. There are no Nazi symbols on the monument. It consists of a bronze bas-relief and a dedication tablet mounted on a vertical granite slab.  The tablet reads: To Estonian men who fought in 1940-1945 against Bolshevism and for the restoration of Estonian independence.

Controversy

As the dedication included those who served in the Finnish Army, the Wehrmacht and particularly the Waffen SS, a number of organisations condemned it; most notably the Simon Wiesenthal Center issued an official protest claiming that the monument glorifies "those who were willing to sacrifice their lives to help achieve the victory of Nazi Germany". Tiit Madisson, the governor of the Lihula parish, said at the opening ceremony that Estonians' serving in German army chose the lesser evil.FJC | News | Estonia Immortalizes Nazi CriminalsRussia's Jewish Communities Federation: Setting up monuments to SS soldiers in Estonia is attempt to turn criminals and butchers into heroes of liberation war - Russian News - REGNUMNews Releases - SWC New Design Test

Status of the Baltic Legions

Some Estonians joined these formations voluntarily, the majority were conscripted by Germans. The Nuremberg Trials, in declaring the SS a criminal organisation, explicitly excluded conscripts in the following terms:
On April 13, 1950, a message from the U.S. High Commission in Germany (HICOG), signed by John J. McCloy to the Secretary of State, clarified the US position on the "Baltic Legions": they were not to be seen as "movements", "volunteer", or "SS". In short, they were not given the training, indoctrination, and induction normally given to SS members. Subsequently the US Displaced Persons Commission in September 1950 declared that:

Concerns about Nazi glorification

The monument has been regarded as controversial, including by former Prime Minister Juhan Parts, who labeled the Lihula Monument a "provocation"."Estonia Unveils Nazi War Monument". BBC News. 20 August 2004. Retrieved 9 October 2009.
A number of rumours were circulated about the soldier depicted on the monument wearing Nazi symbolism, and thus constituting an attempt to glorify Nazism.  As no such symbolism is on the bas-relief, sometimes the rumours have taken the form that these symbols were removed between the first and current installment.Postimees September 14, 2004: Semiootikaprofessor Toropi hinnangul ei ole Lihula sammas natslikSL Õhtuleht September 14, 2004: Ekspert Peeter Torop: Lihula mälestussammas pole natslik by Kadri Paas He pointed out the monument's slightly impolite composition but found no basis for the hypothesis that the installment of the monument would constitute an incitement of social hatred.  Under Estonian law, such incitement is a crime punishable by a fine or imprisonment of up to three years. In any case, short of recasting, it would be very hard to modify a bronze-cast statue.

Moving the monument

In 2004, shortly after it was opened, Estonian Government, possibly due to pressure from the EU and the USA as well as other international organisations, opposed the unveiling of the monument, and ultimately ordered it to be removed.
The crane which arrived to remove the monument from Lihula could not enter the cemetery because of a crowd of protesting people. The Riot Police were called in, but as they arrived, locals started to throw stones at them and at the driver of the crane. After a fight between the crowd and the police, the people were driven back using teargas, and some policemen were treated for minor wounds in a hospital.Riot police help remove controversial World War II monument
After the removal of the monument, it was subsequently placed on October 15, 2005 on grounds of the privately owned Museum of Fight for Estonia's Freedom in Lagedi near Tallinn.





Further reading




