[[European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations]]

CATEGORIES: Advocacy groups, International organizations of Europe, Pharmaceutical industry trade groups, Pan-European trade and professional organizations

The European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations (EFPIA) is a Brussels-based trade association founded in 1978  representing the research-based pharmaceutical industry operating in Europe.
Through its direct membership of 34 national associations and 40 leading pharmaceutical companies, EFPIA is the voice on the EU scene of 2,200 companies committed to researching, developing and bringing new medical treatments.
Figures published in 2008 by the European Commission (Eurostat)show that the pharmaceutical industry is the industrial sector which invests most in research & development (R&D). In 2011, it invested an estimated € 27,500 million in R&D in Europe. It directly employs 660,000 people and generates three to four times more employment indirectly – upstream and downstream – than it does directly.
The key contribution of the research-based pharmaceutical industry to medical progress is to turn fundamental research into 
innovative treatments that are widely available and accessible to patients. European citizens can expect not only to live longer, but to live longer and be healthier. High blood pressure and cardiovascular disease can be controlled with anti-hypertensive medicines and cholesterol-lowering medicines, knee or hip replacements prevent patients from immobility, and some cancers can be controlled or even cured thanks to newer targeted medicines. Yet, there remain huge challenges in many disease areas such as Alzheimer, multiple sclerosis, many cancers and orphan diseases.
EFPIA also includes two specialised groups focusing on vaccines and biotechnology respectively:

EFPIA priorities

The industry's efforts are focused around four key areas - the AIMS - Roadmap of priorities Access, Innovation, Mobilization, Security 

Research and Development (R&D)

In 2010 the pharmaceutical industry invested about € 27,800 million in R&D in Europe. After a decade of strong US market dominance, which led to a signiﬁcant shift of economic and pharmaceutical research activity towards the US during the period 
1995-2005, Europe is now also facing increasing competition from emerging economies. Today there is rapid growth in the market and research environment in emerging economies such as Brazil, China and India, resulting in further migration of economic and research activities outside of Europe to these fast-growing markets. The geographical balance of the pharmaceutical market – and ultimately the R&D base – is likely to shift gradually towards emerging economies.
All new medicines introduced into the market are the result of lengthy, costly and risky research and development (R&D) conducted by pharmaceutical companies:
There is rapid growth in the research environment in emerging economies such as China and India. The current tendency to close R&D sites in Europe and to open new sites in Asia will show dramatic effects to maintain the pharmaceutical discovery expertise in the EU. The United States still dominates the biopharmaceutical field, accounting for the three quarters of the world's biotechnology revenues and R&D spending.
In 2007 North America accounted for 45.9% of world pharmaceutical sales against 31.1% for Europe. According to IMS Health data, 66% of sales of new medicines launched during the period 2004-2008 were generated on the US market, compared with 26% on the European market.
Source: Eurostat

Innovative Medicines Initiative

The Innovative Medicines Initiative (IMI) is a public-private partnership designed by the European Commission and EFPIA. It is a pan-European collaboration that brings together large biopharmaceutical companies, small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), patient organisations, academia, hospitals and public authorities. The initiative aims to accelerate the discovery and development of better medicines by removing bottlenecks in the drug development process. It focuses on creating better methods and tools that improve and enhance the drug development process, rather than on developing specific, new medicines.
The European Commission and EFPIA have jointly established a new-non-profit European Community body. This organisation has a legal mandate to award research grants to European public-private collaborations conducting innovative research projects that focus on implementing the recommendation of the IMI Research Agenda.
The IMI Research Agenda was established under the lead of industry following intensive consultations with a broad range of stakeholders from across Europe. It identifies the principal research bottlenecks in the biopharmaceutical R&D process and sets forth recommendations to overcome these bottlenecks by focusing on four areas:
IMI will make Europe more attractive for biopharmaceutical R&D investments and boost the competitiveness of European life science R&D. By directly addressing the challenges facing the biopharmaceutical sector in Europe, IMI has the potential to:

Members

EFPIA represents the pharmaceutical industry operating in Europe. Membership is made up of national organizations (such as the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry, and the Verband Forschender Arzneimittelhersteller ) affiliated organisations, and member companies such as Abbott Laboratories (USA), AstraZeneca (UK/Sweden), Bayer Healthcare AG (Germany), Boehringer Ingelheim (Germany), Bristol Myers Squibb (USA), Chiesi Farmaceutici (Italy), Daiichi-Sankyo (Japan), Eli Lilly and Company (USA), Eisai (Japan), Novartis (Switzerland), Novo Nordisk (Denmark), Pfizer (USA), Sanofi-Aventis (France) and other companies.






