[[Deane, Greater Manchester]]

CATEGORIES: History of Bolton, Geography of Bolton, Areas of Greater Manchester

Deane is an area of Bolton, in Greater Manchester, England. northwest of the city of Manchester. 
Historically a part of Lancashire, the Parish of Deane was once one of four parishes within the hundred of Salford and covered roughly half of the present Metropolitan Borough of Bolton. The church of St Mary on which the parish was centred was in the township of Rumworth.

History

Toponymy

Deane's name comes from the Old English word "denu" - meaning valley.  The stream running in the valley to the west of the present church was given the Saxon name of Kirkbroke - meaning Church Brook. The valley is also referred to as Deane Clough, "cloh" was Old English for a ravine or deep valley.402

Early church history

Since Anglo-Saxon times there has been a chapel at Deane in the township of Rumworth,

George Marsh

Protestant martyr, George Marsh, a farmer's son, was born in Deane in 1515. When Edward VI became King in 1547, Marsh's study of the New Testament led to his appointment as a preaching minister. When Edward VI died in 1553, his half-sister Mary I became Queen. She sought to re-establish Roman Catholicism, Marsh became victim to her persecution of the reformers. He appeared before Justice Barton at Smithills Hall accused of preaching false doctrines. However he made a stand for his beliefs, he was tried and convicted. He was imprisoned at Chester and finally burnt at the stake April 24, 1555.

Governance

Lying within the boundaries of the historic county of Lancashire since the early 12th century, the Parish of Deane was subdivided into townships in 1660. The ten townships were Horwich, Halliwell, Heaton, Rumworth (where Deane Parish Church is situated), Westhoughton, Over Hulton, Middle Hulton, Little Hulton, Farnworth and Kearsley. 
In 1837 Rumworth along with neighbouring townships (or civil parishes) became part of the Bolton Poor Law Union which took responsibility for the administration and funding of the Poor Law in that area. In the 19th century many of the Deane townships became independent civil parishes and were merged into Bolton Borough. In 1872 part of Rumworth township became part of Bolton Borough, the remainder of Rumworth (which included Deane Parish Church) was renamed Deane township in 1894 and in 1898 it too was merged into the County Borough of Bolton.

Geography



Notes
Bibliography




