[[Kyle Letheren]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 births, Living people, People from Llanelli, Welsh footballers, Association football goalkeepers, Newport County A.F.C. players, Barnsley F.C. players, Doncaster Rovers F.C. players, Wales under-21 international footballers, Plymouth Argyle F.C. players, Motherwell F.C. players, Kilmarnock F.C. players, Swansea City A.F.C. players, Dundee F.C. players, The Football League players, Scottish Premier League players, Scottish Professional Football League players

Kyle Charles Letheren (born 26 December 1987 in Llanelli) is a Welsh professional footballer who currently plays for Scottish Championship club Dundee. He is the son of former Leeds United goalkeeper Glan Letheren.

Career

Letheren began his career as a trainee at Swansea City, spending time on-loan at Newport County in 2005,
Having arrived at Barnsley on a short term deal, Letheren then signed a new deal to keep him at Oakwell until 2008 Two years after joining the club, he made his debut in the 3rd round of the FA Cup against Blackpool on 5 January 2008, as a half-time substitute, replacing the injured Heinz Müller. At 0-1 down the tykes went on to win the game 2-1, giving Letheren his first clean sheet on his tykes debut. Barnsley that year went on to beat Liverpool & Chelsea and reached the fa cup semi finals
He was loaned to Doncaster Rovers for the second-half of the 2008–2009 season as cover for veteran goalkeeper Neil Sullivan, but he didn't make an appearance for them.
He was released from his contract in the summer of 2009
On 31 December 2009, Letheren was released from Plymouth Argyle after his contract expired. He remained at fir park to train with the squad for the remainder of the season
Letheren signed for Kilmarnock in August 2010 to provide backup to Cammy Bell. Letheren failed to make an appearance for Kilmarnock in his first season, mostly down to the form of Bell. In 2011-12 Kyle was handed his Scottish Premier League debut as a half time substitute for the injured Bell, ironically against Motherwell, at 0-0 and Kilmarnock went on to win the game 2-0. Later that year he was handed his full SPL debut away to Dunfermline, in a 2-1 win.
During the 2012-2013 season, Cammy Bell suffered an injury leading to Letheren having a run in the first team. That run lasted until mid-October, when Bell returned. His second run in the first team came in early-February, when he played twice, he was involved in a 2-0 win over motherwell & in what was his last appearance for the club, a 1-1 draw against Inverness Caledonian Thistle.
With his contract due to expire at the end of the season, he left Kilmarnock by mutual consent in April 2013.
After leaving Kilmarnock, Letheren was linked with a move to South African side Ajax Cape Town.

International career

Letheren has represented Wales at schoolboy level and at under 21 level.

Honours

Kilmarnock






