[[Thiruvananthapuram Central railway station]]

CATEGORIES: Railway stations in Thiruvananthapuram, Railway centrals in India, Thiruvananthapuram railway division, Railway stations opened in 1931, Rail transport in Kerala

Thiruvananthapuram Central (Trivandrum Central) is the main railway station in the city of Thiruvananthapuram (formerly Trivandrum) in the Indian state of Kerala. It is the largest and busiest railway station in Kerala in terms of passenger movement and an important rail hub in Southern Railway.  It is one of profitable stations under Southern Railway. The building of the railway station is one of the landmarks of Thiruvananthapuram. Thiruvananthapuram Central is also a terminating point for the proposed Chennai - Bangalore - Thiruvananthapuram High Speed Rail (HSR) corridor and the proposed Thiruvananthapuram - Mangalore High Speed Rail corridor. The railway station is located opposite to  Central Bus Station Thiruvananthapuram at Thampanoor.
Trains from here connect the city of Thiruvananthapuram to major cities of India. This station is also noted for a whole range of amenities available within the premises. The station has book-shops, restaurants, accommodation, Internet browsing centers and even an essential commodities shopping mall.
A second satellite station was opened in 2005 at Kochuveli called the Kochuveli Railway Station, near the International Airport. Thiruvananthapuram is the first major city from south along the longest train routes in India, the Kanyakumari-Thiruvananthapuram-Dibrugarh Vivek route and the Kanyakumari-Thiruvananthapuram-Jammu Tawi Himsagar route.
A second terminal (south Terminal) was opened in 2004 to handle passenger traffic and later a West Terminal in 2007. To reduce traffic, the Central Railway Station has 18 railway tracks.
.[ref]
</ref>

History

The Madras-Quilon line was extended to the capital of the Princely State of Travancore, Trivandrum and was opened on 4 January 1918. The line then terminated at Chakka, which was the trading centre of Trivandrum then.M.E. Watts, Dewan of the erstwhile Travancore, took the initiative to extend the railway line to the heart of the city. The terminus was shifted to current location Trivandrum Central Thampanoor on 1931. The Thiruvananthapuram Central station building was built during the reign of Sethu Lakshmi Bayi, the Maharani of Travancore, and inaugurated on 4 November 1931. No bricks were used for the construction of this station building; it was built completely with rock masonry. Irfca. Retrieved on 2011-11-10. Thiruvananthapuram was a branch line station but the Maharani built it at par with the counterparts in the major cities of India.

Layout

This station has 5 platforms to handle long and short distance trains and a proposal to build more platforms in pipeline. The main entrance is opposite to Central Bus Station Thiruvananthapuram and eastern entrance is on Power House road.Nemom and Kochuveli Railway stations are  announced in railway budget as satellite terminals to Thiruvananthapuram Central. Kochuveli satellite terminal has started functioning with trains originating from here.

Facilities

Thiruvananthapuram Central is well equipped with modern security gadgets, and is the first station in the state to install video surveillance. The Networked electronic surveillance system is installed in this Central Station by Railway Protection Force (RPF) for improving the security and for monitoring the movement of passengers arriving at the station. Hindu. Retrieved on 2011-11-10.
The station handles over 200,000 passengers daily. Hindu businessline News 15 January 2007

Thiruvananthapuram Central at a glance

Some of the major trains originating from the station.

Future expansion plans

It was announced in railway budget to convert Thiruvananthapuram Central railway station into world-class standards. The foundation stone for expansion and modernisation of station was laid by Former Union Minister for Railways, Lalu Prasad in December 2006. Tenders have been invited for carrying out feasibility studies for this proposed project. More than Rs.100 crores is needed for first phase of this project.Rs.100 crores for modernization. Hinduonnet. Retrieved on 2011-11-10.
A new complex of railway station will be built with a built-up area of . All modern facilities including an office and commercial complex is planned here. The proposal to set up a passenger terminal at Nemom is announced in rail budget and yet to begin work. It is estimated that only a consortium would be able to take up expansion project of Thiruvananthapuram Central, since the project is a massive one. Hindu. Retrieved on 2011-11-10.
Feasibility study for Chennai Bangalore Thiruvananthapuram High speed rail corridor ongoing and is being planned along with other few corridors in country.



Notes






