[[Marudhanayagam]]

CATEGORIES: Indian films, Unreleased films, Unfinished films

Marudhanayagam is a long-delayed high budget Indian Tamil film directed and produced by Kamal Haasan. The film, which started in October 1997 with an exclusive launch by Queen Elizabeth II, originally pulled together several prominent names across Indian cinema as its principal cast and crew. However since the launch, the film despite rumours of resurfacing, is yet to resume its shoot.

Cast

Production

Development

Kamal Haasan had been pondering directing a historical film for a period of four to five years and unsuccessfully contemplated doing a historical musical on the lines of Ambikapathy, with the idea of making a film which had only verses for dialogue. Writer Sujatha then suggested Kamal Haasan looked at a folk ballad edited by Tamil scholar Vanamamalai, which introduced them to the historical figure of Muhammed Yusuf Khan, an 18th-century warrior.
The producers and Kamal Haasan managed to rope in Queen Elizabeth II to appear as the chief guest at the launch of the project which took place in the MGR Film City on October 16, 1997.

Casting

The original cast included Vishnuvardhan who played Wajid Khan with Nassar, Om Puri, Amrish Puri also given pivotal roles. Om Puri pulled out of the film in mid-1998 due to prior commitments and Sathyaraj replaced him in the film. When the film was postponed, the team were still waiting to hear back from actors Amitabh Bachchan and Rajinikanth who were approached to play guest roles. Kate Winslet was offered the lead female role of Marsha, but her rejection led to the makers casting a French debutant. Actor Pasupathy, who has since gone on to appear in successful films, was set to make his debut with the film in the role of an antagonist and had shot for five days.
The technical team included costume designer Sarika, Kamal Haasan's wife at the time of production, who made a trip to several world museums to get details about the costumes of the British during the 18th century. The make-up duties for the film were shared between Michael Westmore and his apprentice Barry Cooper, with the pair training several Indian make-up artistes during the film's pre-production stages.

Filming

The launch also saw the inaugural shot canned with Kamal Haasan, in the persona of Marudhanayagam, hearing and reacting to an imperial announcement read out by the character played by Nassar, with Om Puri's character looking on.  For the test shoot in Jaipur, Sarika arranged up to 7,000 costumes and accessories to be ready. Official filming began several months later in Velangudi on August 10, 1998 with a scene of where a companion of the lead character, played by Kamal Haasan, is hanged prompting a brief altercation.
The film ran into production trouble in November 1998, when a sector of the Tamil community alleged that the film would contain historical misinterpretations of one of the community's historical icons. Furthermore, another section argued that the film is a distortion of history and that the central character would be portrayed as a hero of the struggle against the British instead of the traitor they felt he was. The allegations prompted Kamal Haasan to abandon extensive sets erected in Karaikudi, in interior Tamil Nadu, and shift to Chalakudy, in Kerala, to continue work on the project.

Delay

However production works suddenly ceased after a British company that had planned to co-produce the film backed out and the film has been indefinitely postponed since.
Kamal Haasan met American producers during his visit to Los Angeles in June 2006 to try and find a financier for the film, but talks were unfruitful. Reports again suggested in 2013 that Kamal Haasan would resume the film in 2014 following the completion of his directorial venture, but reports were once again baseless.timesofindia.com/2013-09-18/news-interviews/42182392_1_kamal-haasan-marudhanayagam-vishwaroopam
The delay of the film has been subject to references in media and film. In Venkat Prabhu's Saroja, the character played by Premji Amaren supposedly stumbles upon a DVD of Marudhanayagam, while in Rajesh's Siva Manasula Sakthi, Santhanam mockingly asks for a song from the shelved film to be played on the radio. Director Vijay revealed that Marudhanayagam was the inspiration behind his successful 2009 film, Madrasapattinam, based on India's Independence movement in 1947.




