[[Charles Williams (British writer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1886 births, 1945 deaths, Alumni of University College London, Writers of modern Arthurian fiction, Christian mystics, Christian writers, English fantasy writers, English novelists, English poets, English theologians, Inklings, Mythopoeic writers, Oxford University Press, People from St Albans, People educated at St Albans School, Hertfordshire

Charles Walter Stansby Williams (20 September 1886 – 15 May 1945) was a British poet, novelist, theologian, literary critic, and member of the Inklings.

Biography

Williams was born in London in 1886, the only son of Richard and Mary Williams of Islington. He had one sister, Edith, born in 1889. Educated at St Albans School, Hertfordshire, Williams was awarded a scholarship to University College London, but was forced to leave in 1904 without taking a degree because his family lacked the financial resources to support him.  In the same year he began work in a Methodist bookroom.  Williams was hired by the Oxford University Press (OUP) as a proofreading assistant in 1908 and quickly climbed to the position of editor. He continued to work at the OUP in various positions of increasing responsibility until his death in 1945.  One of his greatest editorial achievements was the publication of the first major English-language edition of the works of Søren Kierkegaard..
Although chiefly remembered as a novelist, Williams also published poetry, works of literary criticism, theology, drama, history, biography, and a voluminous number of book reviews. Some of his best known novels are . 
[ref]David N. Samuelson, "Charles Williams" in  E. F. Bleiler, Supernatural Fiction Writers : Fantasy and Horror.
New York : Scribner's, 1985,  ISBN 0684178087, (pp.631-638 ).[/ref] T. S. Eliot, who wrote an introduction for the last of these, described Williams's novels as "supernatural thrillers" because they explore the sacramental intersection of the physical with the spiritual while also examining the ways in which power, even spiritual power, can corrupt as well as sanctify. All of Williams' fantasies, unlike those of J. R. R. Tolkien and most of those of C. S. Lewis, are set in the contemporary world. More recent writers of fantasy novels with contemporary settings, notably Tim Powers, cite Williams as a model and inspiration. W. H. Auden, one of Williams' greatest admirers, reportedly re-read Williams's extraordinary and highly unconventional history of the church, Descent of the Dove (1939), every year. Williams's study of Dante entitled The Figure of Beatrice (1944) was very highly regarded at its time of publication and continues to be consulted by Dante scholars today.  Williams, however, regarded his most important work to be his extremely dense and complex Arthurian poetry, of which two books were published, Taliessin through Logres (1938) and The Region of the Summer Stars (1944), and more remained unfinished at his death.  Some of Williams' best essays were collected and published in Anne Ridler's Image of the City and Other Essays (1958).
Williams gathered many followers and disciples during his lifetime. He was, for a period, a member of the Salvator Mundi Temple of the Fellowship of the Rosy Cross.  He met fellow Anglican Evelyn Underhill (who was affiliated with a similar group, the Order of the Golden Dawn) in 1937 and was later to write the introduction to her published Letters in 1943.
Although Williams attracted the attention and admiration of some of the most notable writers of his day, including T. S. Eliot and W. H. Auden, his greatest admirer was probably C. S. Lewis, whose novel .

William's theology

Williams developed the concept of Co-inherence, described as a theology of romantic love. Co-inherence was a term used to describe the relationship between the human and divine natures of Jesus Christ, and the relationship between the persons of the blessed Trinity.  Williams extended the term to include the relationship between God, humanity, and the whole of creation. It is our mutual indwelling: Christ in us and we in Christ, interdependent.  Co-inherence is a way of talking about the Body of Christ and the Communion of saints.  For Williams, salvation was not a solitary affair.  "The thread of the love of God was strong enough to save you and all the others, but not strong enough to save you alone."  He proposed an order, Companions of the Co-inherence, who would practice substitution and exchange, living in love-in-God, truly bearing one another's burdens, being willing to sacrifice and to forgive, living from and for one another in Christ.

Williams's novels



Works

Novels

Plays

Poetry

Theology

Literary Criticism

Biography

Other works

Secondary Literature



1. INKLINGS Forever, Vol V, a collection of essays presented at the Fifth Francis White Colloquium on CS Lewis and Friends, presented at Taylor University in 2006: Charles Williams: Priest of the Co-inherence, by Susan Wendling.
2. The Ways of the City, a homily by Robert Gallagher, in Order of the Ascension, a Benedictine Community, website.
3. What About Charles Williams, by Thomas Howard, in the Criswell College Touchstone, Dec. 2004.




