[[Hans Tanzler]]

CATEGORIES: 1927 births, 2013 deaths, American judges, Florida Democrats, Florida Gators men's basketball players, Mayors of Jacksonville, Florida, People from Jacksonville, Florida

Hans Gearhart Tanzler, Jr. (March 11, 1927 – July 25, 2013) was an American politician and judge.  He served as Mayor of Jacksonville, Florida from 1967 to 1979.  During his administration, the City of Jacksonville consolidated with Duval County, making him the last mayor of the old city government and the first mayor of a consolidated Jacksonville.  He was a member of the Democratic Party.

Early life

Tanzler was born in Jacksonville, and graduated from Robert E. Lee High School in 1945. He was an outstanding athlete, lettering in football, basketball and baseball, and Duke University offered him a football scholarship. When a fire at Lee High School incinerated his academic record, Duke declined to enroll him; however the University of Florida would, and offered him a football scholarship. Tanzler decided to go to Gainesville, but with World War II still ongoing, he was required to serve 18 months in the United States Navy. After arriving late for the fall term, Florida football coach Raymond Wolf decided to redshirt Tanzler, and recommended that he play basketball to stay in shape. Tanzler was a walk-on for the 1946-47 Florida Gators men's basketball team, and averaged nearly 11 points per game. He became a stand-out player, scoring in double figures all four years, and was named third-team All-SEC in his senior year, when he became the first Florida basketball player to pass 1,000 points in his college career.

Career

In 1967 Tanzler ran against incumbent mayor Lou Ritter for the Democratic nomination. He ran on a ticket of reform as a "white hat", a supporter of consolidation of the City of Jacksonville and Duval County governments.  In those days, the Democratic primary was the real contest in Jacksonville.  Tanzler defeated Ritter in the primary, then easily defeated Republican William Hembree in the general election. Two months later, on August 8, 1967, voters approved the Jacksonville Consolidation. This meant Tanzler had to stand again for mayor of the new government on September 26.  However, no one else filed, thus he became the first mayor in Jacksonville history to be elected unopposed. When consolidation took effect on October 1, 1968, Tanzler became the last mayor of the old city government and the first mayor of a consolidated Jacksonville.
As mayor, Tanzler initiated a number of projects to revitalize Jacksonville's downtown with new revenues brought in by consolidation. Among the projects were the creation of what is now the Downtown Campus of Florida State College at Jacksonville, the construction of a large-scale public health facility, and the completion of major commercial construction projects including the skyscraper now known as the Wells Fargo Center. His most lauded contribution was his effort to clean up the St. Johns River, toward which he implemented sewage treatment and other environmental regulations.
Tanzler married the former LaMercedes Hutchins Woodard in 1973. The couple had one child, Hans, III, and two stepchildren from her former marriage to an Air Force test pilot.
In 1978 Tanzler announced his candidacy for Governor of Florida. He placed third in a seven-way Democratic primary eventually won by Bob Graham. The run required him to step down as mayor as of January 2, 1979; Jacksonville City Council President Jake Godbold was appointed to succeed him.
Hans Tanzler died on July 25, 2013 at age 86.






