[[Euergetism]]

CATEGORIES: Philanthropy, Ancient Athens

Euergetism (also spelled  evergetism), derived from the Greek word "εὐεργετέω" meaning "doing good deeds," was the ancient practice of high-status and wealthy individuals in society distributing part of their wealth to the community.  This was evident in the patron-client relations in ancient Rome. The term was coined by French historian André Boulanger, and subsequently used in the works of Paul Veyne.

Development of Euergetism in the Hellenistic Period

During the second half of the 4th century BC., and even more so in the following Hellenistic period, profound changes occurred in the financing of public institutions. Without the backing of funding from the wealthy, at least symbolically, the legitimacy of these institutions could be called to question by the city. The idea emerged that the rich people were not contributing unless required or compelled to do so. At the same time, around 355 BC, Demosthenes mentioned the lack of funding from the wealthy in the Counter Leptines and Xenophon in Poroi.
At the end of the century, Demetrius Phalereus abolished the two most important Athenian liturgies. The trierarchy was no longer necessary because Athens withdrew from the international arena after his defeat at 322,
However, many honorary degrees in honor agonothetai were available, showing that the amounts incurred by them voluntarily to supplement those supported by the city far exceeded the cost of the former choregy. Thus, in 284/3, the agonothetai elected, the poet Philippides, ceased to be reimbursed by the city money it avancées. Similarly, some old magistrates were often funded by their owner: Athens, priests generally provided the victims of sacrifice, when the cosmetic and continues to oversee the ephebia in the Hellenistic period, that is now on his own money that finances most of the sacrifices, prizes for competitions, and routine maintenance of equipment and buildings. Although no document mentions as such that the holder of the office shall assume the financial cost of its charge, entries published annually in his honor shows that oversees the flow of the institution, some emphasizing that the city does not have to spend this year.
We thus gradually to operate close to the philanthropy, which, like Aristotle wrote, "to safeguard the oligarchs" for the most important ..., magistrates must attach their public expenditure, so that people do not agree to participate and have the same indulgence to the judges that they must pay their judiciaries of a large sum.
However, until the middle of the 2nd century BC., the Greek philanthropy does not match the definition in Veyne. As demonstrated Philip Gauthier,Philippe Gauthier, Les cités grecques et leurs bienfaiteurs, Athens-Paris, 1985 (BCH Suppl. XII) this is a philanthropy that takes place most often "exclusively in official and civil (judicial and official business)". the same way that voluntary contributions (epidoseis) enable everyone, in proportion to his income, to demonstrate its commitment to the city by a gift of many talents or just a few pence.
The Euergetism, as they develop next to a liturgical system "which is both a continuation and denial", allows the city to direct its service expenditures of the richest of its members with greater emphasis before the official honors due to them in thanks. The latter can thus be obtained, whenever necessary, that funding is assured for the most urgent of needs, without incurring unnecessary costs, and without giving the feeling of stress to members of its elite, which retain the ability book their wealth to their personal use.
The gradual disappearance of the liturgies such as occurs in the shift of the vocabulary of the Hellenistic period: the name leitourgia - and the verb leitourgein - loses its meaning strictly "expenditure imposed by the city" to mean "any part taken in an expenditure of public interest", including in conjunction with a public office (Judicial or priesthood).
This dilution of the immune system in a Liturgy of Euergetism will be consumed as part of low Hellenistic period. Financing Cities can then be compared to that in force throughout the Roman Empire at that time, the full Euergetism analyzed by Veyne in his book Bread and Circuses.

Hellenistic Generosity

Hellenistic Generosity is a social practice, which appeared in the Hellenistic world, of the rich helping out the poor. This soon became a moral obligation for the wealthy when seeking high magistrate positions, such as Consul or Aedile. Hellenistic generosity not only benefited panis et circenses, but also public buildings and roads which bore the inscription D.S.P.F. (De Sua Pecunia Fecit, "Done with His Own Money") along with the name of the donator.

End of euergetism

From the 3rd century AD on, economic pressures made euergetism more difficult to practice. It eventually disappeared after Justinian's death and was replaced by the churches' redistribution action.

Notes

Bibliography


