[[Roshchino, Leningrad Oblast]]

CATEGORIES: Urban-type settlements in Leningrad Oblast, Karelian Isthmus

Roshchino (
In the wooded areas surrounding Roshchino there are multiple marshes and small lakes. Lintula larch forest is located some  to the west from the railroad station.

History

Raivola was first shown on maps of Finland in the 16th century.. (Ibid)
In first quarter of the 20th century Raivola was a summer home to Finnish-Swedish family of modernist poet Edith Södergran who died in Raivola in 1923.
After the Russian October Revolution and independence of Finland, Raivola was recognized as part of Finnish Karelia by articles of Treaty of Tartu in 1920, and the majority of Russian inhabitants have left. The Soviet Union gained control of Raivola following Winter War in 1940.  Soviet government's decree of May 28, 1940 provided for establishment of collective farms and resettlement of Russians from Yaroslavl Oblast. Plans of Stalin's government also included forced population transfer of native Finns (116 people, mostly sick and elderly) . (Ibid) to Kazakhstan however were disrupted by the Nazi invasion. Finland has joined hostilities hoping to reverse losses of 1940 but as result of the war the USSR regained Raivola by Paris Peace Treaties, 1947. 
On May 16, 1940 Kannelyarvsky District with the administrative center in the selo of Kanneljärvi was established. It was a part of Leningrad Oblast. On August 22, 1945 the district center was moved from Kannelyarvi to Raivola, and the district was renamed Rayvolovsky. On October 1, 1948 the district was renamed Roshchinsky, and on January 12, 1949 all Finnish names of the localities were replaced with Russian names. In particular, Rayvola was renamed Roshchino. On July 31, 1959 Roshchino was granted urban-type settlement status. On February 1, 1963 Roshchinsky District was abolished and merged into Vyborgsky District.
In 1948, the village again became suburb of Leningrad (the railroad was electrified in 1954) with seasonal swelling of population due to widespread construction of summer cottages, development of privately owned and leased garden plots, establishment of recreational facilities, and youth summer camps.

Lintula Larch Forest

The Lintula Larch Forest () had a major impact on the cultivation of larch throughout the world and is considered one of the most important cultivated forests in northern Europe. The Lintula Larch Forest. Scandinavian Journal of Forest Research 20.3, 252-282. It was established by order of Peter the Great to supply the Russian Navy with shipbuilding timber. Ferdinand Gabriel Fockel, a German forest expert, established the oldest stands in 1738–1750 with seedlings of European Larch (Larix decidua) from the province of Arkhangelsk. Since then the area of the forest has expanded and currently the total area of larch is 55.9 ha (23.5 ha of the 'old stands' established before 1851 still remain).

Possible origins of name

Economy

Transportation

Roshchino railway station is located on the railway line between Saint Petersburg and Vyborg. There is suburban service to the Finland Station in Saint Petersburg.
Roshchino is adjacent to Zelenogorsk and is thus a suburb of Saint Petersburg. It is included in the suburban road network of Saint Petersburg.



Notes

Sources




