[[Colm Cooper]]

CATEGORIES: 1983 births, Living people, Dr Crokes Gaelic footballers, Gaelic football forwards, Irish international rules football players, Kerry inter-county Gaelic footballers, Munster inter-provincial Gaelic footballers, Texaco Footballers of the Year, Winners of four All-Ireland medals (Gaelic football)

Colm 'Gooch' Cooper (born 3 June 1983 in Killarney, County Kerry) is an Irish sportsperson.  He plays Gaelic football with his local club Dr Crokes and has been a member of the Kerry senior inter-county team since 2002.

Playing career

Club

Cooper helped Dr. Crokes win the 2000 Kerry Senior Football Championship at the age of 17. They beat An Ghaeltacht in the final.
Crokes reached the Kerry Senior county final again in 2005 and 2006, but were defeated on both occasions by South Kingdom. However, South Kingdom are a divisional side and not a club hence Crokes qualified to represent the county in the Munster Senior Club Football Championship. In 2006 Dr. Crokes won the Munster Club Championship, beating The Nire of Waterford in the decider. They advanced to the All-Ireland Senior Club Football Championship after beating Moorefield of Kildare after a replay  in the semi-final, and faced Crossmaglen of Armagh in the All-Ireland Club final in March 2007. The game finished in a draw. Crossmaglen won the replay to claim their fourth All-Ireland title. In 2010 Cooper was allowed play against Austin Stacks in Tralee in the Championship final finally giving Dr. Crokes the title after the 3 losses in finals. Cooper and Crokes were back again the year after 2010 to win back to back county titles. They secured the KSFC title in 2011, 2012 and 2013 to make it five in a row.
In February 2014, Cooper suffered a cruciate ligament rupture in All-Ireland Club Championship semi final against Castlebar Mitchels which will keep him out of action for the remainder of 2014.

Inter-county

Cooper was first called up to the kingdom team in 2002. After performances in the National Football League, he continued his rise in that year's Championship, with performances against Wicklow, Kildare, Galway and Cork en route to the All-Ireland final, where they faced Armagh. Armagh defeated Kerry in the final. Cooper was awarded an All Star award for that year.
In 2003 Kerry won a Munster Senior Football Championship, but were knocked out of the All-Ireland Championship by Tyrone at the semi-final.
2004 proved to be a year for Cooper. It began on January 1st with the county winning the 2004 National League, with victory over Galway in the decider. They also defended their Munster title, before going on to win the All-Ireland Championship – beating Mayo in the final. Cooper put in a performance in the final, scoring 1–05 including a superb individual goal where Cooper caught a ball and scored a goal. Cooper received an All Star and was named Texaco Footballer of the Year.
Kerry won their third consecutive Munster Championship in 2005, beating old rivals Cork in the decider. Kerry reached an All-Ireland final, this time against Tyrone. After a bright start, Cooper was injured in a clash with Tyrone goalkeeper Pascal McConnell which limited his involvement. Tyrone won the game 1–16 to 2–10. He did however win a third All Star.
In the 2006 Championship Cork defeated Kerry in the Munster final. Kerry did advance to the All-Ireland final, where they once again met Mayo. Kerry won the game by 13 points and Cooper was again one of Kerry's main contributors scoring 1–02. He was the Kerry captain for part of that year, although the other captain Declan O'Sullivan was restored as captain for the All-Ireland final. After winning the game, the Sam Maguire Cup was lifted by both O' Sullivan and Cooper.
In 2007 Cooper played with Kerry regaining their Munster Championship title after an enthralling game against Cork, which Kerry won 1–15 to 1–13. Having been quiet for long spells, he burst into life and in a five minute period scored 1–02. After beating Dublin by two points in the semi-final, Kerry progressed to face their bitter rivals Cork in the first ever all-Munster All-Ireland final. Kerry comfortably beat Cork 3–13 to 1–09, to become the first team to retain the title since Cork themselves 17 years before. Cooper got the goal that put Kerry in the driving seat, rising to fist the ball over the onrushing Alan Quirke. Cooper finished the game with 1-05. He received another All Star and was nominated as one of three contenders for 2007 Footballer of the Year. He was also named on the GPA Team of the Year.
Kerry reached the 2008 National League final, but were beaten by Derry. Cork beat Kerry in the 2008 Munster final. Kerry nevertheless advanced to the All-Ireland final, to face Tyrone for the third time in six years. Tyrone once again came out on top. Cooper did win an All Star award that year and was once again named on the GPA Team of the Year.
Cooper  made a poor start to the 2009 championship in the Munster championship and early qualifier games. He and Tomás Ó Sé were dropped from the starting Kerry 15 for the qualifier game against Antrim, due to a breach of team discipline. Cooper came on against Antrim and made an immediate impact notching 4 frees in another win for Kerry. Kerry progressed to face Dublin in the quarter final and were given little chance that Lynch had got the better of Cooper  in the season's earlier meetings. Lynch was booked early on for consistent fouling on Cooper who was the fulcrum of many Kerry attacks. Kerry eventually won an encounter 0–16 to 1–09, giving Cooper his fourth All Ireland Medal at 26.
In April 2010, Cooper sustained a serious eye injury in a NFL Division 1 win over Monaghan. He tore a duct in one of his eyes: doctors in Kerry expressed concern about his condition. He collided with Monaghan defender Darren Hughes after seven minutes and required treatment on and off the field. However, he returned to the Kerry team for the championship. After winning the Munster Championship, beating Limerick in the final, Kerry progressed to the All-Ireland quarter final, facing historic rivals Down. Despite a fine individual performance from Cooper, the Mournemen prevailed, thus preserving their 100% record against Kerry in the championship.
The 2011 championship ended in final day disappointment for Cooper. Kerry, in control of the all Ireland final having been 4 points up in the closing minutes, succumbed to a quickfire blitz from rivals Dublin, who outscored the Kerrymen 1–3 to 1 point in the final stages to win the cup for the first time since 1995.

International rules

Cooper has represented Ireland in the International Rules Series.
He has declined any invitation to represent Ireland in the hybrid game since as he claims not to have enjoyed the experience in 2005,a year when the series was marred by violence and intimidation.

Province

Cooper has played for Munster in the Railway Cup.






