[[Ron Roenicke]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, Living people, Baseball players from California, Major League Baseball outfielders, Los Angeles Dodgers players, Seattle Mariners players, San Diego Padres players, San Francisco Giants players, Philadelphia Phillies players, Cincinnati Reds players, People from Chino Hills, California, Nashville Sounds players, Clinton Dodgers players, Albuquerque Dukes players, Las Vegas Stars (baseball) players, Oklahoma City 89ers players, Maine Guides players, Lodi Dodgers players, San Antonio Dodgers players, Phoenix Giants players, Tacoma Tigers players, Anaheim Angels coaches, Los Angeles Dodgers coaches, Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim coaches, Major League Baseball bench coaches, Major League Baseball third base coaches, Minor league baseball managers, Mt. SAC Mounties baseball players, People from Covina, California, UCLA Bruins baseball players

 
Ronald Jon Roenicke (; born August 19, 1956) is a former Major League Baseball player, minor league baseball manager, former bench coach for the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim, and the current manager of the Milwaukee Brewers. He is also the younger brother of former Montreal Expos and Baltimore Orioles outfielder Gary Roenicke.

Early life and playing career

Roenicke attended Edgewood High School in West Covina, California and Mt. San Antonio College in Walnut, California. He was drafted four times (by the Oakland Athletics in 1974, the San Francisco Giants in 1975, the Detroit Tigers in 1976 and the Atlanta Braves in 1976) but declined to sign each time. He played college baseball at UCLA in 1977 where he hit .284 with 9 home runs and 40 RBIs.com, September 30, 2011 
In 1977 he was drafted by the Los Angeles Dodgers in the 1st round (17th overall), and decided to join the Dodgers organization. He spent time in the Dodgers' farm system until making his major league debut with the club in  National League Champion San Diego Padres. He played in the two games of the 1984 World Series against the Detroit Tigers, serving as an outfielder and pinch runner. 
Roenicke continued to bounce around the major leagues, playing as an outfielder and first baseman for San Francisco (1985), Philadelphia (1986–7) and Cincinnati (1988). In his playing career, he compiled a .238 batting average, 17 home runs and 113 RBIs.

Coaching career

From , Roenicke served on the coaching staff of the Dodgers' major league team. He began his managerial career in 1994 with the rookie-level Great Falls Dodgers, and was named California League Manager of the year as he led the single-A San Bernardino Spirit to a league title in 1995. He served as the hitting instructor for triple-A Albuquerque in 1996 before being named Manager of the Year for guiding the double-A San Antonio Missions to the Texas League Championship in 1997. He managed San Antonio until 1998 when Glenn Hoffman's elevation as the Dodgers' interim manager led to his return to Albuquerque, this time as manager.
In 1999, Roenicke left the Dodgers organization after seven seasons to manage the triple-A affiliate of the San Francisco Giants, the Fresno Grizzlies. He led them to a 73–69 record, only one game behind the eventual league champion, Los Angeles Angels affiliate Salt Lake. 
Roenicke switched allegiances once again in , joining the Angels organization as the third base coach for the major league club. After six seasons in that role, he was promoted to bench coach in 2006 after long-time bench coach Joe Maddon departed to manage the Tampa Bay Devil Rays.
After a brawl between the Angels and the Texas Rangers on August 16, 2006 led to a four-game suspension for Angels skipper Mike Scioscia, Roenicke served as the club's acting manager. He compiled a 4–0 record during his tenure, leading the team to its first four-game sweep of the Seattle Mariners since 1986. He served his one-game suspension immediately afterwards.

Brewers manager

Roenicke was interviewed by the Milwaukee Brewers for their managerial opening in October 2010. He was a finalist along with Bob Melvin, Bobby Valentine, and Joey Cora. He was hired as Brewers manager on November 2, 2010.latimes.html
Ron's first season as the Brewers manager was a resounding success as the Brewers finished the season 96–66, the most wins in franchise history, and also won the National League Central Division title, the first divisional title for the team in 29 years. The Brewers went on to win the NLDS against the Arizona Diamondbacks but lost the NLCS to the St. Louis Cardinals. Roenicke is only the 4th manager in Brewers history to have a winning season in his first full season as manager, joining George Bamberger, Tom Trebelhorn, and Phil Garner. 
Roenicke is also only the 4th Brewers manager to make the playoffs and the only manager to make the playoffs while managing the team for a full season: Harvey Kuenn and Dale Sveum each took over for a fired manager during their playoff seasons, and Buck Rodgers managed the team during a season shortened by a players' strike. The Brewers' success in 2011 resulted in Roenicke finishing in second in NL Manager of the Year voting.
Roenicke and the Brewers looked to try to capitalize on their success in 2012, but inconsistent play from several players caused the Brewers to scuffle for most of the season. However, the team was able to rebound and finish the season 83–79, the first time since 2008 that the Brewers had finished with back-to-back winning seasons.

Managerial statistics

Personal life & family

Roenicke's nephew, Josh Roenicke (son of Gary Roenicke), is currently a relief pitcher for the Minnesota Twins. Roenicke's son, Lance, is currently an outfielder for Wisconsin Timber Rattlers in the Midwest League. Roenicke's wife, Karen is currently a P.E. teacher at Chino Hills High School.






