[[Cassandra]]

CATEGORIES: Trojans, Characters in the Aeneid, People of the Trojan War, Characters in the Iliad, Classical oracles, Anatolian characters in Greek mythology, Princesses in Greek mythology, Mythological rape victims, Mythological Greek seers

In Greek mythology, Cassandra (Greek  also known as Alexandra or Kassandra, was the daughter of King Priam and Queen Hecuba of Troy. She had the power of prophecy and the curse of never being believed. A common version of her story is that Apollo gave her the power of prophecy in order to seduce her, but when she refused him, he gave her the curse of never being believed. In an alternate version, she fell asleep in a temple, and snakes licked (or whispered in) her ears so that she was able to hear the future. Snakes as a source of knowledge is a recurring theme in Greek mythology, although sometimes the snake brings understanding of the language of animals rather than an ability to know the future. Cassandra is a figure of both epic tradition and of tragedy.

History

Cassandra was the daughter of King Priam (Priamos) and Queen Hecuba (Hekabe) and the fraternal twin sister of Helenus and a princess of Troy. According to legend, Cassandra was both beautiful and considered insane. However, her perceived insanity is the result of being cursed by the god Apollo.   Many versions of the myth relate that she incurred the god's wrath by refusing him sex, sometimes after first promising herself in exchange for the power of prophecy.  Hyginus says:
In another version, Cassandra consented to have sex with Apollo in exchange for the gift of prophecy, and then broke her promise. Her punishment was the curse of never being believed. This version of the myth is told by Cassandra in Aeshylus's Agamemnon: "Oh, but he struggled to win me, breathing ardent love for me....I consented to Loxias (Apollo) but broke my word...."
In some versions of the myth, Apollo curses her by spitting into her mouth during a kiss.  In Aeschylus' Agamemnon, she foretells the betrayal of Clytemnestra. She also bemoans her relationship with Apollo:
 
 Cassandra had served as a priestess of Apollo and taken a sacred vow of chastity to remain a virgin for her entire life.
Her cursed gift from Apollo became a source of endless pain and frustration to Cassandra. Cassandra was seen as a liar and a madwoman by her family and by the Trojan people. In some versions of the story, she was often locked up in a pyramidal building on the citadel on her father King Priam's orders.  She was accompanied there by the wardress who cared for her under orders to inform the King of all of his daughter's "prophetic utterances". She was driven truly insane by this in the versions where she was incarcerated; though in the versions where she was not, she was usually viewed as being simply misunderstood.
According to legend, Cassandra had instructed her twin brother Helenus in the power of prophecy for him to be a prophet.  Like her, Helenus was always correct whenever he had made his predictions; but unlike his sister, people believed him.
Cassandra made many predictions, with all of her prophecies being disbelieved except for one. She was believed when she foresaw who Paris was and proclaimed that he was her abandoned brother. This took place after he had sought refuge in the altar of Zeus from their brothers' wrath, which resulted in his reunion with their family. Cassandra foresaw that Paris's abduction of Helen for her to be his wife would bring about the Trojan War and cause the destruction of Troy. She did warn Paris not to go to Sparta along with Helenus who echoed her prophecy, but their warnings ended up being ignored. Cassandra ended up seeing Helen coming into Troy at Paris's return home from Sparta and she furiously snatched away Helen's golden veil and tore at her hair for she had foreseen the calamites of the Trojan War that Helen's arrival would bring and cause Troy to be destroyed, but the Trojan people gave Helen a warm welcome into their city.
Cassandra foresaw the destruction of Troy.  She warned the Trojans about the Greeks hiding inside the Trojan Horse, Agamemnon's death and her own demise at the hands of Aegisthus and Clytemnestra, her mother Hecuba's fate, Odysseus's ten year wanderings before returning to his home, and the murder of Aegisthus and Clytemnestra by her children Electra and Orestes.  However, she was unable to do anything to forestall these tragedies since no one believed her.
Coroebus and Othronus came to the aid of Troy during the Trojan War out of love for Cassandra in exchange for her hand in marriage. Priam decided to betroth Cassandra to Telephus's son Eurypyplus after Telephus had reinforced the Trojans by sending them an army of Mysians to come to defend Troy for them. Cassandra was also the first to see the body of her brother Hector being brought back to the city.
In The Fall of Troy told by Quintus Smyrnaeus, Cassandra had attempted to warn the Trojan people that she had foreseen about the Greek warriors hiding in the Trojan Horse while they were celebrating their victory over the Greeks with feasting.  They disbelieved her, calling her names and degrading her with insults. She grabbed an axe in one hand and a burning torch in her other, and ran towards the Trojan Horse, intent on destroying it herself to stop the Greeks from destroying Troy. The Trojan people stopped her before she could do so. The Greeks hiding inside of the Trojan Horse were relieved that the Trojans had stopped Cassandra from destroying it, but they were surprised by how well she had known of their plan to defeat Troy.
