[[Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals]]

CATEGORIES: Environmental treaties, Treaties concluded in 1979, Treaties entered into force in 1983, Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals, 1983 in the environment, 1979 in West Germany, Treaties of Albania, Treaties of Algeria, Treaties of Angola, Treaties of Antigua and Barbuda, Treaties of Argentina, Treaties of Armenia, Treaties of Australia, Treaties of Austria, Treaties of Bangladesh, Treaties of Belarus, Treaties of Belgium, Treaties of the People's Republic of Benin, Treaties of Bolivia, Treaties of Bulgaria, Treaties of Burkina Faso, Treaties of Burundi, Treaties of Cameroon, Treaties of Cape Verde, Treaties of Chad, Treaties of Chile, Treaties of the Republic of the Congo, Treaties of the Cook Islands, Treaties of Costa Rica, Treaties of Ivory Coast, Treaties of Croatia, Treaties of Cuba, Treaties of Cyprus, Treaties of the Czech Republic, Treaties of Zaire, Treaties of Denmark, Treaties of Djibouti, Treaties of Ecuador, Treaties of Egypt, Treaties of Equatorial Guinea, Treaties of Eritrea, Treaties of Estonia, Treaties of Ethiopia, Treaties of the European Union with third countries, Treaties of Fiji, Treaties of Finland, Treaties of France, Treaties of Gabon, Treaties of the Gambia, Treaties of Georgia (country), Treaties of West Germany, Treaties of Ghana, Treaties of Greece, Treaties of Guinea, Treaties of Guinea-Bissau, Treaties of Honduras, Treaties of the Hungarian People's Republic, Treaties of India, Treaties of Iran, Treaties of Ireland, Treaties of Israel, Treaties of Italy, Treaties of Jordan, Treaties of Kazakhstan, Treaties of Kenya, Treaties of Latvia, Treaties of Liberia, Treaties of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Treaties of Liechtenstein, Treaties of Lithuania, Treaties of Luxembourg, Treaties of Madagascar, Treaties of Mali, Treaties of Malta, Treaties of Mauritania, Treaties of Mauritius, Treaties of Monaco, Treaties of Mongolia, Treaties of Montenegro, Treaties of Morocco, Treaties of Mozambique, Treaties of the Netherlands, Treaties of New Zealand, Treaties of Niger, Treaties of Nigeria, Treaties of Norway, Treaties of Pakistan, Treaties of Palau, Treaties of Panama, Treaties of Paraguay, Treaties of Peru, Treaties of the Philippines, Treaties of Poland, Treaties of Portugal, Treaties of Moldova, Treaties of Romania, Treaties of Rwanda, Treaties of Samoa, Treaties of São Tomé and Príncipe, Treaties of Saudi Arabia, Treaties of Senegal, Treaties of Serbia, Treaties of Seychelles, Treaties of Slovakia, Treaties of Slovenia, Treaties of the Somali Democratic Republic, Treaties of South Africa, Treaties of Spain, Treaties of Sri Lanka, Treaties of Swaziland, Treaties of Sweden, Treaties of Switzerland, Treaties of Syria, Treaties of Tajikistan, Treaties of the Republic of Macedonia, Treaties of Togo, Treaties of Tunisia, Treaties of Uganda, Treaties of Ukraine, Treaties of the United Kingdom, Treaties of Tanzania, Treaties of Uruguay, Treaties of Uzbekistan, Treaties of Vietnam, Treaties of Yemen, Treaties of Zimbabwe, Treaties extended to Aruba, Treaties extended to the Netherlands Antilles, Treaties extended to Hong Kong, Treaties extended to the Faroe Islands, Treaties extended to Akrotiri and Dhekelia, Treaties extended to Bermuda, Treaties extended to the British Indian Ocean Territory, Treaties extended to the British Virgin Islands, Treaties extended to the Cayman Islands, Treaties extended to the Falkland Islands, Treaties extended to Gibraltar, Treaties extended to Guernsey, Treaties extended to Jersey, Treaties extended to the Isle of Man, Treaties extended to Montserrat, Treaties extended to the Pitcairn Islands, Treaties extended to Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha, Treaties extended to the Turks and Caicos Islands


The Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (also known as CMS or the Bonn Convention) aims to conserve terrestrial, marine and avian migratory species throughout their range. It is an intergovernmental treaty, concluded under the aegis of the United Nations Environment Programme, concerned with the conservation of wildlife and habitats on a global scale. Since the Convention's entry into force, its membership has grown steadily to include over 100 Parties from Africa, Central and South America, Asia, Europe and Oceania. The Convention was signed in 1979 in Bonn (hence the name) and entered into force in 1983. The depositary is the government of the Federal Republic of Germany.

Parties to the Convention

At April 2013, there were 119 Parties to the Convention.

Countries participating in CMS Agreements/MoU that are not yet Parties to CMS

As at September 2011 there were 34 nations participating in CMS Agreements or MoU that are not yet Parties to the Convention. This list includes Afghanistan,   
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Brazil, Cambodia, Central African Republic, China (incl. Hong Kong), Comoros, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Indonesia, Lebanon, Malaysia, Maldives, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Niue, Oman, Papua New Guinea, Russian Federation, San Marino, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Sudan, Thailand, Tonga, Tuvalu, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, United States of America, Vanuatu, Viet Nam.

Fundamental principles

Fundamental Principles of the Convention are set out in Article 2. The Parties acknowledge the importance of migratory species being conserved and of Range States agreeing to take action to this end "whenever possible and appropriate", "paying special attention to migratory species the conservation status of which is unfavourable and taking individually or in cooperation appropriate and necessary steps to conserve such species and their habitat." Further in Article 2(2) The Parties "acknowledge" do not commit in stronger language, cf Art 2(3) "shall" "the need to take action to avoid any migratory species becoming endangered".
In Article 2(3) the Convention states that "the Parties: 
(a)	should promote, cooperate in and support research relating to migratory species;
(b)	shall endeavour to provide immediate protection for migratory species included in Appendix I; and
(c)	shall endeavour to conclude AGREEMENTS covering the conservation and management of migratory species included in Appendix II."

Appendix I – Threatened Migratory Species

Migratory species threatened with extinction are listed on Appendix I of the Convention. CMS Parties strive towards strictly protecting these animals, conserving or restoring the places where they live, mitigating obstacles to migration and controlling other factors that might endanger them. Besides establishing obligations for each State joining the Convention, CMS promotes concerted action among the Range States of many of these species. As of January 2011 there are 176 species in Appendix I.

Appendix II – Migratory Species requiring international cooperation

Migratory species that need or would significantly benefit from international co-operation are listed in Appendix II of the Convention. For this reason, the Convention encourages the Range States to conclude global or regional Agreements.

Agreements

In this respect, CMS acts as a framework Convention. The Agreements may range from legally binding treaties (called Agreements) to less formal instruments, such as Memoranda of Understanding, and can be adapted to the requirements of particular regions. The development of models tailored according to the conservation needs throughout the migratory range is a unique capacity to CMS.
Several Agreements have been concluded to date under the auspices of CMS. They aim to conserve:

Memoranda of Understanding (MoU)

In addition, several Memoranda of Understanding (MoU) have been concluded to date under the auspices of CMS. They aim to conserve:

Institutions

Secretariat

A Secretariat under the auspices of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) provides administrative support to the Convention. It is based in the UN Campus in Bonn, Germany. From 2013 the Executive Secretary of the Convention is Bradnee Chambers. 

Conference of the parties

The Conference of the parties is the CMS' principal decision-making body. It meets every three years. Its functions are enumerated in Article VII of the Convention. For example, it reviews the Convention's implementation, adopts budgets, resolutions and recommendations, amends Appendix I and II and decides on priorities for future CMS activities.

Committees

A Standing Committee provides policy and administrative guidance between the regular meetings of the COP. A Scientific Council consisting of experts appointed by individual member States and by the COP, gives advice on technical and scientific matters.

Implementation

Reporting

Article 6(3) requires Parties which are Range States for migratory species listed in Appendix I or II to inform the CoP through the Secretariat, at least six months prior to each ordinary meeting of the Conference, on measures that they are taking to implement the Convention for these species.

Domestic legislation

To varying degrees the Bonn Convention has been incorporated into domestic law by the Parties.








