[[Toyota Auris]]

CATEGORIES: Euro NCAP small family cars, Front-wheel-drive vehicles, Toyota vehicles, Compact cars, Vehicles introduced in 2006, Road vehicles manufactured in the United Kingdom

The Toyota Auris is a compact hatchback which shares the same E150 platform with the Corolla for the three- and five door first generation, and a compact five-door hatchback and station wagon called the Touring Sports using the E180 platform for the latest generation. The name "Auris" is based on the Latin word for "gold", aurum.
In Europe, Toyota positioned the Auris as the replacement of Corolla hatchback, while the notchback sedan continued with the Corolla nameplate. It is not sold in North America, as the larger Toyota Matrix takes its place in the lineup.
The more luxurious Auris was also called the Toyota Blade in Japan. The Auris succeeds the Toyota Allex in Japan and the Corolla RunX. Toyota Australia and Toyota New Zealand resisted suggestions from Toyota Japan to adopt the new European Auris name for the Corolla.
Japan model went on sale at "Netz" dealers in 2006, while European models went on sale in 2007.

 First generation (E150; 2006–2012)

The Toyota Auris space concept is a concept using Vibrant Clarity design philosophy. It included panoramic glass roof, flat rear passenger floor, high window surfaces, 19-inch alloy wheels, freeform geometric lamps, prominent brake callipers, deep rear bumper with integrated chrome exhausts, gold-coloured body.
The vehicle was unveiled at the October 2006 Paris Motor Show.
Exterior styling was done by ED², Toyota's European design base located in southern France.
The Auris has received a five star cabin protection rating from Euro NCAP for safety.

Auris Hybrid

The Auris HSD Full Hybrid Concept was unveiled at the September 2009 Frankfurt Motor Show. The concept version included Hybrid Synergy Drive technology, 18-inch alloy wheels with low rolling resistance tyres, a larger, more efficient rear spoiler, 20 mm lower ride height, seats and upper dashboard with blue Gaucholino leather upholstery, instrument cluster with hybrid blue illumination, solar panel roof with ventilation.
On 17 July 2009, Toyota announced the production of hybrid Auris by Toyota Motor Manufacturing (UK) Ltd (TMUK) beginning in 2010. It will be equipped with engines produced at TMUK's Deeside Plant and be produced at TMUK's Burnaston Plant.
The production version of the Auris Hybrid was presented at the March 2010 Geneva Motor Show.
The Auris Hybrid shares the same powertrain and batteries as the Prius.
In 2010, Toyota sold 15,237 Auris Hybrids in Europe,

Toyota Blade

The upscale sister of the Auris is called the Blade. It replaced the Toyota Allex, which, in turn, was the replacement for the Toyota Sprinter. The Blade was sold at Japanese Toyota dealerships Toyota Store and Toyopet Store locations, while the Auris was exclusive to Toyota Corolla Store and Toyota NETZ Store locations. It has different front and rear sheetmetal, and is powered by Toyota's 2.4 litre 2AZ-FE engine. Recently Toyota released the Blade Master and Blade Master G, an upgraded trim of the Blade which features Toyota's  3.5 L 2GR-FE V6 engine, larger brakes, and an upgraded suspension. Toyota discontinued the Blade in April 2012, currently without a direct successor ahead of the replacement of the Auris.

Japan

Introduced as a new model in 2006, the Auris replaced the Corolla Runx. Trim levels were 150X and 180G. For model year 2007 on Japanese models only, G-BOOK, a subscription telematics service, was offered as an option. 
Japanese models were built by Iwate Plant, Kanto Auto Works, Ltd.
Designed by TUMI, this was a Japanese market limited edition (1000 units) version. It included model specific seat cloth, floor mats, a luggage mat, illuminated scuff plates, shift knob, instrument panel ornament, and badging.
The vehicles were sold through Toyota's Netz dealers. Prices were between 
This version came with a grey interior, dual zone climate control, passenger side under-seat tray. The 150X M package version added rear privacy glass, smart entry and start system, and anti-theft system. The models went on sale in 2008-01-29 through Toyota's Netz dealers.
With the 2008 update, keyless entry, under-seat tray became standard on all models.
In January 2011, Toyota revealed the Toyota Auris GT at the Tokyo Auto Salon. Based on a 1.8L Auris. The concept was shown in Gold metallic paint with a black TRD graphic along the lower side of the car.

Australia

In Australia, the Auris is sold as "Corolla" hatchback with "Seca" emblem on the hatch door above the licence plate. Grades are: base-model "Ascent", mid-spec "Conquest", sports "Levin SX" and sports luxury "Levin ZR".
All models are powered by the 1.8 Litre 2ZR-FE engine, with either a 6-speed manual or 4-speed automatic. All, but the Ascent come with standard alloy wheels and fog lights. The Levin models have sports style body kits. Electric moonroof is only available as an option on Levin ZR. As of January 2009, ESC has been made available as standard on Conquest and Levin ZR – Ascent and Levin SX have ESC as an option.
The Australian Corolla Hatchback received a facelift during the fourth quarter of 2009 and sold under MY10. The entire body design has been given a sporty makeover. Major changes were made to the front and rear fascia, wheel designs and interior trims. The "Seca" branding has been removed from the hatch door, taillights design has been changed. A newer bumper design has also been adapted with a special "diffuser" fitted at the bottom to give the rear a sportier look and on either side of the diffuser are reflectors which were lacking in any other previous Corolla Hatchback models. The front receives new grille and revised headlamps. Fog lights have been removed from the Conquest model. Ascent continues to receive 15 inch steel wheels while the rest receive 16 inch alloys with Conquest and Levin SX sharing the same alloys. Side mirrors now feature indicators. The trim materials have also been changed along with a new D-shaped sports steering wheel available on Conquest and Levin models. Other changes have also been made to equipment and technology. Moonroof is still only available as an option on Levin ZR alone.

Europe

The Auris was released on February 1, 2007 in the United Kingdom. It replaced the Toyota Corolla hatchback. Toyota positioned the Auris at the lower-medium segment to compete with cars such as Volkswagen Golf, Vauxhall Astra and the Ford Focus. UK levels were T2, T3, and T Spirit – followed by the T180 model in April 2007.
European trim levels were Terra, Strata, Luna, and Sol.
In 2007, Toyota announced an investment of £100 million in its Deeside engine factory to build a petrol engine for the Auris.
Engines for the European Auris are :
TOD engines were introduced since 2008. The 1NR-FE 1.33 Dual VVT-i engine featured Toyota's first Stop & Start system sold in Europe, and replaced the 1.4 VVT-i engine. 1.6 Valvematic replaced 1.6 Dual VVT-i engine.

 Second generation (E180; 2012–present)

The second generation of the Auris was revealed on 20 August 2012. It features a wider and lower stance with a more luxurious interior.
It was first shown at the September 2012 Paris Motor Show, with European sales starting in early 2013.
It went on sale in Japan in September 2012, and in Australia and New Zealand in October 2012, as the Toyota Corolla Hatchback. In Asia, the sales of the new Auris is expected be sold from the 2nd quarter of 2013.

Japan

For the Japanese market, the Auris is available with either 1.5 liter 1NZ-FE or 1.8 liter 2ZR-FAE engine. The smaller motor is installed in the base model 150X. Front wheel drive and Full-Time 4WD are offered. The more powerful engine is reserved for the more luxurious 180G and sporty RS models. The 180G comes only with CVT, while the sole transmission for the RS is 6 speed manual. All cars with 1.8 liter engine are front wheel drive.
In August 2013, Toyota in Japan launched an advertising campaign for the Auris, featuring Char Aznable from the Mobile Suit Gundam series. As part of the collaboration, Toyota unveiled a one-off "MS-186H-CA" Auris that takes styling cues from the anime.

Australia and New Zealand

In Australia, the Auris continued to be called the Corolla Hatchback. Model grades are Ascent, Ascent Sport, Levin SX, and Levin ZR. All models are motored by 1.8-litre engine matched to 6 speed manual or 7 speed CVT gearbox. The Levin sport models have front sports seats, carbon fiber-like interior trim, and 17 inch alloys. Panoramic roof is available for the top-of-the-line Levin ZR.
Meanwhile, for the New Zealand market the GX and GLX are the equivalent of Ascent and Ascent Sport. Manual transmission is only for the base GX. The GLX, as well as the sporty Levin SX and ZR come with CVT only.

Touring (wagon)

Toyota unveiled a world premiere in 2012 Paris Auto Show of the Auris in a new estate/wagon variant, which is 285mm longer than the five-door hatchback. It also represents the first model in its segment to be offered with a full hybrid powertrain. The wheelbase is kept to 2600mm just like its five-door twin however its profile of the estate version is different, with the steeply raked windscreen flowing into the extended roofline. Its length has been lengthened to be 285mm longer so it provides more loadspace.
The bumper and the tailgate has a different styling, while the sill is set to be 80mm lower than it is on its hatchback twin. The engine lineup is carried over from the hatchback, including 1.33-litre Dual VVT-i and 1.6-litre Valvematic petrol units, plus a 1.4-litre D-4D diesel. A hybrid will also be offered encompassing a 1.8-litre VVT-i petrol engine and an electric motor, providing a maximum output of 136 HP (100 kW), enough for a 0–62 mph (0–100 km/h) sprint in 10.9 seconds and a top speed of 112 mph (180 km/h).





|  | Australia
|  | Japan
|  | UK
}}

