[[Sharjah English School]]

CATEGORIES: Schools in Sharjah, Educational institutions established in 1974, International schools in the United Arab Emirates, British international schools, 1974 establishments in the United Arab Emirates

Sharjah English School (SES) is a private, not for profit, coeducational school in Sharjah that follows the British Curriculum. The school provides primary and secondary education for English-speaking children between the ages of 3 and 18, preparing them for the British GCSE and A Level qualifications. 
Situated on a purpose-built site adjacent to Sharjah University City, the school's founder and patron is Sultan bin Mohamed Al-Qasimi, the ruler of Sharjah.
SES has been included among the top British schools in the UAE by Telegraph among the likes of Repton School and Jumeirah College and has been described as the main choice for British expats in Sharjah, while Khaleej Times reviewed the school as "one of the leading educational institutions in the Emirates", while boosting the "finest facilities of any school in the UAE".khaleejtimes.asp?xfile=/data/educationnation/2012/May/educationnation_May13.

History

The primary section of Sharjah English School was opened in 1974 by a group of British companies who were seeking to provide quality British education to their children. In September 2005 a secondary section catering for grades 7 - 10 was opened and year 11 was added in September 2007. The much anticipated Sixth-Form was opened in September 2008 and the school had its first graduating class in 2010. The school has grown to provide education to more than 500 students, the majority of whom are British in classes averaging twenty in number.

Admissions and academic performance

Admission to Sharjah English School is extremely competitive and is entirely based on a student's academic achievement and merit. Priority is mainly given to UK nationals and families of the school's sponsoring companies.sharjahenglishschool. 
The school has come at the top in the UAE for GCSE and A Level results. At GCSE, 42 per cent of grades were at A* or A in the academic year 2010, with 94 per cent of pupils achieving five or more A*-Cs, including English and maths, and 88 per cent gaining eight or more passes at A*-C.telegraph.co.html A wide range of subjects are offered both at Key Stages 4 and 5 from the examination boards of Edexcel and AQA. 
Sharjah English School students has gained acceptances to international academic institutions belonging to the Ivy League, Russell Group, and 1994 Group. Destinations for the class of 2011 included elite universities such as Brown University, the University of Manchester, Warsaw University of Life Sciences and many others. The school also held considerable success in the university acceptances for the graduating class of 2012 where students received offers from top UK universities, most notably Durham, Edinburgh, Imperial, Exeter and the University of London colleges such as Goldsmiths and Royal Holloway.

Campus

The school's flagship campus in Sharjah University City houses a range of facilities with a separate sports gym, swimming pool, two secondary blocks and one primary block. Facilities include both outdoor and indoor sports pitches, music rooms, a range of specialist classrooms such as science labs and Design and Technology workshops. One of the main features of the secondary section are the two sixth form common rooms which include separate computer and ICT clusters, learning resource centers, dining facilities, separate spaces for independent learning and generic furniture for student activities and socializing.
The school also has a performing arts center which was officially opened by Sultan bin Mohamed Al-Qasimi in May, 2012. The theater includes seating facilities for over 400 people with comparable sound and lighting equipment.

Primary Education

The primary school which was established in 1974, includes the two Foundation Stages and extends to grade 6 and takes pupils in September after their fourth birthday. The primary school has around 350 students from Foundation 1 to Year 6.

Secondary Education and sixth form

The secondary section caters for years 7-13. In grades 10 - 11, students are prepared for their GCSE examinations . A Levels are taken in grades 12 and 13 and the sixth form center hosts a wide range of separate facilities including study rooms, ICT suits, common rooms for both grades 12 and 13, a purpose built library and specially equipped science labs. The average class size for sixth form pupils is about 5 students per class, which give them a more liberal and independent approach towards their study. Sixth form students are also supported throughout their university applications cycle and given help with personal statements, admission inquiries, university interviews and visa application procedures.

Competition

Victoria English School, Jumeirah College, English College Dubai and Repton School are some of the schools which provide an elite British style education in both Sharjah and Dubai and are seen as one of the main competitors towards Sharjah English School both in academic excellence and sports.






