[[Poovellam Un Vasam]]

CATEGORIES: Indian films, Tamil-language films, 2001 films, Tamil films of 2001

Poovellam Un Vaasam () is a 2001 Tamil film directed by Ezhil and produced by Venu Ravichandran, starring Ajith Kumar and Jyothika in leading roles. Nagesh, Sivakumar, Sayaji Shinde, Vivek also appear in supporting roles while Yukta Mookhey appeared in a solo item number. It was released in August 2001 to critical acclaim and commercial success.itgo.htm

Plot

Two families stay in identical bungalows, adjacent to each other, tracing their friendship to over forty years. Their respective progenies Chinna and Chella (Ajith and Jyotika) are childhood buddies, their easy camaraderie and strong bonding carried over to their adult years. The two study in the same college, same class, zoom together on the motorbike, their togetherness at home and college, as accepted a fact as it was in films like 'Piriyadha Varam Vendum', etc. Somewhere along the way, the duo fall in love, throwing some soft glances at each other, when the other is not looking. Their college mate, Karna (Yugendran, son of Malaysia Vasudevan), makes devious plans to separate the duo and make Chella his. He doesn't seem to have any running feud with Chinna, is quite friendly with the duo, nor does he seem to be particularly in love with Chella. Chinna laps up all that Karna tells him about Chella loving him, and is heartbroken and goes out of station on a business trip.
Chella, persuaded by both families to marry an NRI, boldly informs them that she loved Chinna, and would marry him. The two families are of course happy. Chinna returns home and learns of the preparation for his engagement ceremony. Feeling that since Chella loved Karna, it must be family pressure that must have forced her to agree, Chinna backs out. Now it is Chella's turn to be indignant about Chinna's mistrust of her love, and after giving him a piece of her mind, she backs out, with Chinna pleading for acceptance. After a period of separation, during which all ties between the two families are severed, Chella's family soon come to realise that they cannot live without their dearest friends (and lover). The two families then reunite.

Cast

Production

Ajith Kumar signed the film in early 2001 after he pulled out of Praveenkanth's commercial film Star.hindu.htm The producers had initially approached Simran, Aishwarya Rai and then Preity Zinta to appear in the lead roles, with their refusals leading to the casting of Jyothika.itgo.htm Miss World 2001, Yukta Mookhey was roped in to appear in an item number.itgo.htm Ajith gained mass image before the filming so producer Ravichandran expressed his doubts to Ezhil about carrying on with such a family oriented film with an action hero like Ajith in hand. But Ezhil was confident about Ajith's capabilities in pulling off varying roles.com/tamil-movies-cinema-news-10/when-ajith---the-action-hero-proved-he-could-do-varied-roles-ajith-poovellam-un-vaasam-14-03-13.html
Twin bungalows were erected in Prasad studios for the film by art director Prabhakaran as the director could not locate a twin bungalow in the same compound. One house was built to feature antiques and the other with modern artifacts and computers.free.htm During the making of the film, Ajith was admitted to a Chennai city hospital for a surgery of his backbone causing a month's delay in the film.free.htm
The shooting was happening in Vizag and during a sequence, an auto collided with Ajith and as a result his hand became heavily swollen. Seeing the impact, the director and his crew felt that Ajith must have definitely fractured his hands as the glasses in the auto were shattered and Ajith was toppled over a couple of times and then crash-landed. Post this accident, Ajith just quietly went into his caravan and the crew was uncertain about what to do at that moment. They were evaluating whether to take their star to a nearby hospital. But after a few moments, Ajith came out of his caravan and said that he was ready for the next shot. He took the services of just some healing oils and ointments and was in readiness for the shot as he didn't want to delay the shoots and waste the time of his team. The swelling bulge on his hand was still there and he even refused the requests of his director to go for an X-Ray checkup. Ezhil was amazed by the dedication and will power of Ajith.com/tamil-movies-cinema-news-10/ajiths-risky-stunt-sequence-way-back-in-2002-ajith-ezhil-17-03-13.html

Release

The film opened to positive reviews with The Hindu critic labelling it as "reasonably interesting", with Ajith's performance being praised as "Ajith is natural and neat" with claims that "he has to work harder on his soliloquies and sad expressions".hindu.htm
The success of the film prompted Ezhil, Ajith Kumar and Jyothika to team up for a venture the following year with Raja.hindu.htm It went on to win Tamil Nadu State Film Awards, securing second place in the Tamil Nadu State Film Award for Best Family Film and Ajith winning a special prize from the committee for his performance. It also saw awards for Sai for Best Costume Designer, Prabhakaran for Best Art Director, Kovai Sarala for Best Comedian and Vidyasagar for Best Music Director.

Soundtrack




