[[Reedley College]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in Fresno County, California, Educational institutions established in 1926, Schools accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, California Community Colleges System, Forestry education

Reedley College often referred to as Reedley, UC Reedley, or RC, is a public community college located in Reedley, California, USA  southeast of the Fresno Metropolitan Area and only a 3 hour drive south to Los Angeles or 3 hour drive north to San Francisco. Reedley College is a part of the California Community Colleges system, within the State Center Community College District (SCCCD), and fully accredited by the Accrediting Commission for Community and Junior Colleges of the Western Association of Schools and Colleges  The school offers Associate's Degrees, and students can earn a Certificate of Completion, or transfer to a 4-year university of their choice. Reedley College students can choose to either pursue their AA (Associates in Arts) or their AS (Associates in Science), or obtain their GED (General Education Degree). Reedley College offers more than 80 major degrees and certificates for students to choose from.

History

Reedley College was founded in May 1926, as Reedley Junior College on the campus of Reedley High School.  It became a full community college on July 1, 1946.  In 1954, the school district voted to move Reedley College to its own campus and in 1956 it moved to its present location on  remain used as farmland.  In 1963 the college joined the SCCCD and was renamed Kings River Community College in 1980.  However, by popular demand, the name Reedley College was restored in July 1998.

North Centers

The North Centers are a group of Reedley College satellite centers which include the Madera Community College Center, Clovis, Oakhurst, and Willow International Centers.
The Madera Community College Center is located in Madera, California on . academic village which houses state of the art computer and science labs as well as additional classroom and office space. Future expansion projects are being planned. The campus currently offers some associate degree majors as well as general education courses transferable to four-year universities.
The Clovis Center is located in Clovis, California on  of land just east of the city of Fresno. The center opeded in 1992 and has provided students with general ed courses to transfer to a four-year institution. 
The Oakhurst Center is located in Oakhurst, California and opened at its current location in 1996 on  of land. The center is housed in four buildings adjacent to the town's library.
The Willow International Center is the newest community college center campus of the State Center Community College District. The Willow International center is on tap to become a full-scale campus of the SCCCD. The campus was opened in 2007 on  academic building  which will house a fitness center, student services, offices and classrooms. The SCCCD is in the process of naming the eventual third college of the district.

Housing

Reedley College is one of the only community colleges in the state of California to house students on campus. Sequoia Hall houses 40 women and 100 men. Sequoia Hall is located on the southern corner of the campus. One wing is for women and the other wing is for men. Construction of a new Sequoia Hall to replace the original aging facility started during the summer of 2008 and completed in spring of 2010. The original building was razed.

Athletics

The Reedley College Athletic Department fields teams in 10 intercollegiate sports with five men's teams and five women's teams.  The Tigers are a member of the Central Valley Conference in all sports except for football, which is a member of the Northern California Football Alliance(NCFA). The Reedley College football team won the Northern California Football Championship, the COA State Championship, and finished #1 in the nation in 2002 with a 12-0 record. The women's basketball team has been to the COA Final 16 more than 4 of the last 10 years. The women's tennis team has become a state power with an undefeated conference record since 2007 and various championship titles in recent years. Tiger athletes have gone on to four-year colleges such as Cal, Texas Tech, Fresno State, Oregon, Boise State, Minnesota, Texas State, and Michigan State, to name a few.

Notable alumni

Publications






