[[Eric Green (tight end)]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, American Conference Pro Bowl players, American football tight ends, Baltimore Ravens players, Liberty Flames football players, Living people, Miami Dolphins players, New York Jets players, Sportspeople from Savannah, Georgia, Pittsburgh Steelers players



Bernard L. Eric Green (born June 22, 1967 in Savannah, Georgia), is a former professional American football player who was selected by the Pittsburgh Steelers in the 1st round (21st overall) of the 1990 NFL Draft. Green was a two-time Pro Bowl selection for the Steelers in 1993 and 1994.

Professional career

Green played in 10 NFL seasons from 1990-1999 for the Steelers, the Miami Dolphins, the Baltimore Ravens, and the New York Jets.

Pittsburgh Steelers

Green was drafted twenty-first overall by the Pittsburgh Steelers in the NFL Draft. He initially held out for 54 days, causing him to miss training camp, preseason, and the opening game of the 1990 NFL season.com: Stewart Makes Impact on Rams' Defense Initially Green had threatened to sit out the entire season, which would have made him eligible for the 1991 NFL Draft. It took a call from Liberty head coach Sam Rutigliano to the Steelers front office to tell them to keep pursuing Green and that a deal could be made. Green signed the day after the season opening game, but did not play until week five.com: The Beginning Of The End (October 14, 1991) When Green did return to the Steelers lineup, his impact was immediately noticed. The Steelers offense did not score a touchdown until Green returned to the lineup. When he returned, he caught five of Bubby Brister's seven touchdown passes. With Green's return being noticed, defensive line coach Joe Greene commented, "Without Eric Green, we might not have scored a touchdown last year.". Green's versatility was shown in his rookie season by having him play several different positions, including wide receiver, slotback, wingback, H-back, and even running back.
On November 9, 1992, Green received a six game suspension for violating the National Football League's drug policy. The league did not say which part of the policy that Green violated, but did confirm that it was not for steroids. At the time of the suspension, players who tested positive for steroids received a six game suspension. Although the league would not confirm, this was the second time Green had violated the drug policy. A player receives treatment and counseling for a first offense and no announcement is made.Steelers' Tight End Suspended by NFL
After a Pro Bowl season in 1993 season where Green achieved career highs in receptions (63), yards (942), and yards per reception (15.0), Green chose to hold out at the beginning of the 1994 season. "I want to be compensated for what I've done, but the Steelers weren't prepared to do that," said the 290-pound Green, the NFL's biggest tight end.com Steelers' Green Signs 1-Year Deal With the ultimatum of either signing with the Steelers or miss the opening weekend game against the Dallas Cowboys, Green signed a one year, $1.4 million contract on September 1, 1994. Green had rejected the Steelers earlier offer of a $10 million contract and took the lower offer to ensure his right to free agency after the season. After back to back Pro Bowl seasons with the Steelers, Green became an unrestricted free agent at the end of the 1994 NFL season.

Miami Dolphins

On March 11, 1995, Green signed a six year, $12 million contract with the Miami Dolphins.  Green had also visited with the Raiders prior to signing with the Dolphins, but they did not make him an offer.
On July 9, 1996, Green was released from the Miami Dolphins. His weight problems and work ethic caused then-coach Jimmy Johnson to release Green from the team, which terminated his six year, $12 million contract. Green attempted to collect his $1.5 million salary by going to arbitration. He said that his knee injury was caused by jogging with the team at mini-camp, while the Dolphins said it occurred while jogging at home.com: Ravens Cut Rison; Steelers Release Morris

Baltimore Ravens

Green worked out with the Ravens in late September 1996Ravens Close to Signing Morris, Green and later announced that he and former Steelers teammate Bam Morris each signed two-year contracts with the team.

New York Jets

Green finished his NFL career with the New York Jets. Of the 10 games that he played with the Jets organization, he started 7 games and caught 7 passes for 37 yards.

NFL stats

Personal

Green was sued for unpaid child support for his 16-year-old daughter Erica in Pittsburgh, reportedly owing over $200,000.com - Former Steeler Sued For Back Child Support The court ruled that Green did not have to pay the $200,000 in back child support because he has little income and that he could even recover the $50,000 that he had placed in a college education fundKDKA.com: Court:Ex-Steeler Doesn't Have To Pay Child Support






