[[Encounters with the Archdruid]]

CATEGORIES: Environmental non-fiction books, 1971 books

Encounters with the Archdruid (1971) is a narrative nonfiction book by author John McPhee.  Encounters is split into three parts, each covering environmentalist David Brower's confrontations with his ideological enemies. The book chronicles his struggles against miners, developers and finally the United States Bureau of Reclamation.  McPhee blurs traditional journalism—the reporting of facts and accounting of events, with thematic elements more common to fiction.  The book was generally well received in the popular press and became an enduring part of the portrait of David Brower.

Synopsis

While notionally a profile of Brower, Encounters is broken into three sections.  The first chronicles Brower's conflict with Charles Park, a mineral engineer hoping to find and exploit mineral reserves in Glacier Peak Wilderness.
The second section introduces Charles Fraser a real estate developer in Hilton Head Island, South Carolina.  Fraser's characterization of environmentalists as modern druids who "worship trees and sacrifice human beings to those trees" provides the charge against Brower that forms the title of the book.  Brower would eventually win this battle, with a groundswell of opposition forcing Fraser to sell his development on Cumberland Island to the National Park Foundation. 149–150
The third section presents David Brower's unraveling.  Here Brower battles Floyd Dominy, then the commissioner of the United States Bureau of Reclamation.  Displaying only some of the reserve and pragmatism of the previous two figures, Dominy relished the damming of rivers, while Brower considered damming the ultimate offense.

Reception and influence

McPhee's catalog of these conflicts between the growing needs of society and the shrinking wilderness "pre-saged" what would become known as "wise use", or prescriptions for use that balance the existential value of the environment against societal needs.

Notes


