[[Cat intelligence]]

CATEGORIES: Animal intelligence, Cat behavior, Cognitive psychology, Neuropsychology, Behavior, Intelligence, Consciousness studies, Cognitive neuroscience, Brain

Cat intelligence is the capacity of the domesticated cat to learn, solve problems, and adapt to its environment. Research

Brain

Brain size

The brain of the domesticated cat is about 
The surface area of a cat's cerebral cortex is approximately 83 cm² whereas the human brain has a surface area of about 2500 cm².

Brain structures

According to researchers at Tufts University School of Veterinary Medicine, the physical structure of the brains of humans and cats are very similar.
The number of cortical neurons contained in the brain of the cat is reported to be 763 million.
Analyses of cat brains have shown they are divided into many areas with specialized tasks that are extremely interconnected and share sensory information in a kind of hub-and-spoke network, with a large number of specialized hubs and many alternate paths between them. This exchange of sensory information allows the brain to construct a complex perception of the real world and to react to and manipulate its environment.
The thalamus of the cat
Grouse et al. 1979 ascertained the neuroplasticity of kittens' brains, with respect to control of visual stimulus correlated with changes in RNA structures.

Secondary brain structures

The domestic cat brain also contains the hippocampus,

Brain and diet

For the optimum health and functioningion2011-12-29

Intelligence

Intelligence through behavioural observation is defined as a composite of skills and abilities.
The WAIS test is a measure of intelligence in adult homo sapiens. The test scores on four criteria; verbal comprehension, perceptual organisation, working memory and processing speed.
Factors that contribute to greater intelligence are the velocity at which electrical transmission is conducted and with the greater number of cortical neurons.Roth & Dicke 2005
Experimental results seemed to indicate that cats have no capacity for object permanence, as defined through investigation by J. Piaget with infants,
Some studies have suggested that cats may dream.

Memory

Taken as a whole, cats have excellent memories.

Kittens

For kittens, play is more than simple enjoyment and fun in the animal world. These things rank social order and prey-capturing skills and hone the cat for survival. In addition to this, they are exercising their minds and bodies in rehearsal for their adult roles. Before they were domesticated, kittens learned survival skills such as where to find food from observing their mothers. The first two to seven weeks are a critical time for kittens. This is when they bond with other cats. Without any human contact during this time, the cat would forever mistrust humans, according to some experts.

Older cats

Just as in humans, advancing age may affect memory in cats. Some cats may experience a weakening of both learning ability and memory that affects them adversely in ways similar to those occurring in poorly aging humans. A slowing of function is normal, and this includes memory. Aging may affect memory by changing the way their brain stores information and by making it harder to recall stored information. Cats lose brain cells as they age, just as humans do. Family Doctor. 22 January 1996. Web. 24 March 2011. The older the cat, the more these changes can affect its memory. There have been no studies done on the memories of aging cats and memory, but there is some speculation

Diseases may affect memory

Disease may also affect cat memory. There is a syndrome called Feline Cognitive Dysfunction (FCD) that is similar to Alzheimer's disease in humans. The symptoms include disorientation, reduced social interaction, sleep disturbances, and loss of house training. This syndrome causes degenerative changes in the brain that are the source of the functional impairment.

Domestication effect

Cat intelligence study is mostly from consideration of the domesticated cat. Evidence of possible domestication of Felis silvestris dated to 3700 B.C. was found in 2007.
The intelligence of the cat is believed to be largely dependent upon its inter-species relations,

Considering the fossil-based family tree of placental mammalsweb.org 2011-12-26 above; the feline line diverged many years previously from the primate line; the cat both feral and domesticated is likely to be maintained in a stasis by its niche position in the current food web.

Learning capacity

