[[San Diego State University College of Business Administration]]

CATEGORIES: San Diego State University, Business schools in California, Educational institutions established in 1955, 1955 establishments in California

The San Diego State University (SDSU) College of Business Administration (CBA) is a business school in San Diego, California, United States. The school offers a variety of undergraduate and graduate degree programs.

History

Business courses at SDSU have been taught as far back as 1922 in the Division of Social Sciences. Today's College was formed in 1955 and became one of the first business schools in the California State University system to become accredited by AACSB in 1959. Since then the College has grown into one of the largest and most prestigious business schools in Southern California. The College has made a substantial impact on the region's and nation's business environment having educated many of today's business leaders.

Undergraduate degree

The unit divisions and academic majors offered to undergraduate students by the SDSU College of Business Administration within the overall Bachelor of Science (BS) in Business Administration degree program include: 

Graduate programs

The College of Business offers several Master of Business Administration (MBA) programs. The general MBA programs allows students to specialize in one of the following areas: Accounting; Athletics & Fitness Mgt.; Entrepreneurship; Finance; Health Services Administration; Information Systems; International Business; Management; Marketing; Project Management; Real Estate; Supply Chain Management. Students take 12 courses in one area to complete the MBA specialization. In addition, the college offers the following dedicated MBA programs: Executive MBA (EBMA); Sports Management MBA.
The college also offers a concurrent MBA major with a Master of Arts in Latin American Studies (MA/LAS).
The Master of Science in Accountancy (MSA) degree allows students to specialize in: Accounting Information Systems; Financial Reporting; and Taxation. The MSA curriculum meets the accounting education requirements for the Certified Public Accountant (CPA) exam in California. Students can customize the curriculum for other professional certification exams including Certified Management Accountant (CMA), Certified Information Systems Auditor (CISA), Certified Internal Auditor (CIA), and Enrolled Agent (EA).
The Master of Science in Business Administration (MSBA) degree allows students to specialize in: Entrepreneurship; Finance; Financial & Tax Planning; Information Systems; International Business; Management; Marketing; and Supply Chain Management.
The Malta program allows students to study at the University of Malta in Europe and earn two degrees. The program is designed for students to earn an MSBA with a specialization in Marketing at SDSU as well as a Master of Arts in Integrated Marketing Communications from the University of Malta. 
The College of Business offers a Master of Science in Information Systems (MSIS).
Concurrent programs lead to MBA and Juris Doctorate (JD) degree through partnerships with California Western School of Law of Law and Thomas Jefferson School of Law.
The College of Business offers programs an Executive Financial Planner Advanced Certificate.

The Lavin Entrepreneurship Center

The Lavin Entrepreneurship Center within San Diego State University's College of Business Administration provides academic, business, and social entrepreneurial communities with resources. The Lavin Center supports San Diego State University (SDSU) graduate program in entrepreneurship and provides resources for entrepreneurs, investors and service providers to partner with one another and provide resources for start-up companies. In addition to the collections and holdings at the Malcolm A. Love Library with an entrepreneurship-related indexed collection of business plans.

Recognition and distinction

The College of Business Administration financial planning program was named one of 10 "Stand Out Financial Planning Schools" in the U.S. by Financial Planning magazine in their November 2011 issue.

Notable alumni



Notes




