[[List of Olympic medalists in skeleton]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of Winter Olympic medalists by sport, Skeleton at the Winter Olympics, Olympic medalists in skeleton

Skeleton is one of the Olympic sport disciplines contested at the Winter Olympic Games. Dropped from the 1932 and 1936 Winter Olympics program, skeleton returned in 1948, when St. Moritz hosted again the Winter Olympics, but was discarded from the following Games in Oslo. After 54 years of absence from the Olympic program, skeleton was reinstated as an official medal sport at the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, featuring individual events for men and women.
In 1928, the first Olympic skeleton event was won by American sledder Jennison Heaton, who also won a silver medal in the bobsleigh's five-man event. His younger brother, John Heaton, was runner-up, spending an additional second to complete all three runs (the fourth was cancelled). He repeated this result 20 years later, placing behind Nino Bibbia of Italy, who won his country's first Winter Olympic gold medal.
In 2002, American sledder Jimmy Shea – grandson of Jack Shea, two-time Olympic speed skating champion at the 1932 Lake Placid Games 
The following day, Alexander Tretiakov – who had won Russia's first Olympic skeleton medal in Vancouver – beat the 2010 Olympic silver medalist Martins Dukurs of Latvia in the men's event to secure his first Olympic title. 
Having won two medals in an equal number of participations, John Heaton, Gregor Stähli, Martins Dukurs and Alexander Tretiakov are the joint medal leaders in Olympic skeleton, although only Tretiakov managed to win a gold medal. As of 2014, the United States are the most successful National Olympic Committee (NOC) in Olympic skeleton, having won eight medals (three golds, four silvers and one bronze). Great Britain comes next with six medals (two golds, one silver and three bronzes), and is the only NOC to have collected a medal each time that skeleton was featured at the Winter Olympics, particularly in the women's event. Thirty medals have been awarded to twenty-six sledders representing nine NOCs.

Men

Women

Statistics

Multiple medalists

Medals per year






