[[Caelum]]

CATEGORIES: Caelum (constellation), Constellations, Southern constellations

Caelum  is a faint constellation in the southern sky, introduced in the 1750s by Nicolas Louis de Lacaille. Its name means "the chisel" in Latin, and it was formerly known as Caelum Scalptorium ("the engraver's chisel"). It is the eighth-smallest constellation, and subtends a solid angle of around 0.038 steradians, just less than that of Corona Australis.
Due to its small size and location away from the plane of the Milky Way, Caelum is a rather barren constellation, with few objects of interest. The constellation's brightest star, Alpha Caeli, is only of magnitude 4.45, and only one other star (Gamma1 Caeli) is brighter than magnitude 5. Other notable objects in Caelum are RR Caeli, a binary star with one planet approximately  away; X Caeli, a Delta Scuti variable that forms an optical double with Gamma1 Caeli; and HE0450-2958, a Seyfert galaxy that at first appeared as just a jet with no host galaxy visible.

History

Caelum was first introduced in the eighteenth century by Nicolas Louis de Lacaille, a French astronomer who also introduced thirteen other southern constellations at the same time. Johann Elert Bode stated the name as plural, Caela Scalptoris, but this did not stick.

Characteristics

Caelum is bordered by Dorado and Pictor to the south, Horologium and Eridanus to the east, Lepus to the north, and Columba to the west. Covering 125 square degrees, it ranks 81st of the 88 modern constellations in size. It appears prominently in the southern sky during the Southern Hemisphere's summer, and the whole constellation is visible for at least part of the year to observers south of latitude 41°N.

Notable features

Stars

Caelum is a faint constellation, having no star brighter than fourth magnitude and only two brighter than fifth magnitude. Lacaille gave six stars Bayer designations, labeling them Alpha to Zeta in 1756, but omitted Epsilon and designated two nearby stars as Gamma. Bode extended the designations to Rho for other stars but most have fallen out of use. Caelum is too far south for any of its stars to bear Flamsteed designations.
The brightest star, Alpha Caeli, is a double star, containing an F-type main-sequence star of magnitude 4.45 and a red dwarf of magnitude 12.5, 
Gamma1 Caeli is a double star with a red giant primary of magnitude 4.58 and a secondary of magnitude 8.1. The primary is 
Three other stars in Caelum are still occasionally referred to by their Bayer designations, although they are only on the edge of naked-eye visibility. Nu Caeli The other twelve naked-eye stars in Caelum are not referred to by Bode's Bayer designations anymore, including RV Caeli.
One of the nearest stars in Caelum is the eclipsing binary star RR Caeli, at a distance of 

Deep-sky objects

Due to its small size and location away from the plane of the Milky Way, Caelum is rather devoid of deep-sky objects, and contains no Messier objects. Two galaxies somewhat of note are NGC 1571, a lenticular galaxy,

Notes






