[[Daz Eden]]

CATEGORIES: Emmerdale characters, Fictional characters introduced in 2003, Fictional mechanics

Darren "Daz" Eden is a fictional character in the ITV soap opera Emmerdale, portrayed by Luke Tittensor until April 2009. He made his first appearance in the show on 9 October 2003.
On 21 April 2009 it was revealed that Tittensor had been released from Emmerdale because of a conviction of grievous bodily harm. Following a meeting with the show's bosses, the decision was taken to terminate Tittensor's contract after almost six years with the soap, due to the serious nature of the charge.

Creation and development

Daz came to Emmerdale in 2003 and introduced himself to Andy Sugden (Kelvin Fletcher) as his half-brother. During his time on show, the character has developed and grown up, dividing his time between Butler's Farm and the village.
Daz's mother, Denise Eden, went on holiday with her latest boyfriend and left Daz home alone so he went looking for his half-brother. Andy, however, initially refused to believe they were related as he hated his biological father Billy Hopwood (David Crellin). He only believed Daz was his brother when Billy confirmed it. It was clear Daz needed someone so Andy and his girlfriend Katie (Sammy Winward) took him in.

Storylines

Daz was initially a bit of a troublemaker as he had a history of stealing cars but tried to make amends with community service. Unfortunately, things didn't go according to plan. Daz and his half-brother, Andy Sugden (Kelvin Fletcher), had company when Cain Dingle (Jeff Hordley) and his daughter, Debbie (Charley Webb), moved in. Daz got involved in Cain's schemes but a more serious problem was soon discovered. Andy and Debbie were having a relationship but kept it secret. When Cain found out, he told Andy to end things with Debbie or he would lead Daz astray. Wanting to protect Daz, Andy ended his relationship with Debbie, unaware of her pregnancy.
Daz discovered that Debbie was pregnant, which she had concealed, only weeks before the baby was due to be born. When she phoned, Daz found her in Seth Armstrong's (Stan Richards) old hide and almost delivered her. He offered to stand by her and Sarah but Debbie said no so Daz settled for being friends. For the first time in his life, Daz felt he had someone he could love unconditionally and was bereft when Debbie gave Sarah away. Daz didn't want anything to do with Debbie but this was difficult as they were both friends with Jasmine Thomas (Jenna-Louise Coleman). Daz had a crush on Jasmine and was horrified to discover that she and Debbie were dating. Meanwhile, at home, there were more problems. He and Belle Dingle (Eden Taylor-Draper) almost died at Christmas, after they fell down an old mine shaft. Thankfully they were found and after a brief stay in hospital, sent home after they were given the all-clear. Daz finally felt loved, secure and settled at Butler's Farm until Andy's wife, Katie (Sammy Winward), returned. Everything fell apart as Daz couldn't believe Andy would forgive Katie and take her back so he demanded that Andy choose - him or Katie. Andy chose Katie and Daz stayed with Jack and Diane Sugden (Elizabeth Estensen).
Jack was happy to have Daz permanently but Diane was recovering from colon cancer and didn't feel able to cope with two teenagers. Jack suggested they adopt Daz but Diane said no and insisted he return to Butler's Farm. Daz, however, wasn't happy with this. Andy might have forgiven Katie but Daz hadn't and he made sure she knew that. Following a heated argument, he kissed her and horrified, she pushed him away. He apologised and they agreed not to tell Andy but Jo Stiles (Roxanne Pallett), Andy and Katie's lodger, saw them. She knew Katie wanted her out and threatened to tell Andy that she and Daz had kissed unless Katie agreed she could stay.
His mother returned to the village and swearing she had reformed, asked Daz to move back in with her. Feeling guilty about kissing Katie, Daz agreed. Andy was upset by his departure. A couple of months later, Daz returned with Pearl Ladderbanks (Meg Johnson). Diane phoned Denise to let her know Daz was safe and tried to help them reconcile. Denise visited but demanded Daz make amends to her boyfriend, fearing he'd leave, Diane threw her out. She and Jack then started adoption proceedings. While Daz's mother seemed happy to allow it, his father - Billy Hopwood (David Crellin) - wasn't. He opposed the adoption as he felt the Sugdens had already stolen one of his sons, he wasn't prepared to let them have both. On his release from prison, Billy moved to the village. He got a job with King & Sons and moved into Edna Birch's (Shirley Stelfox) spare room. He tried to rebuild relationships with Andy and Daz but Andy made it clear that Jack was his father. He also tried to make amends with Viv Hope (Deena Payne), Kelly Windsor (Adele Silva) and Donna Windsor-Dingle (Verity Rushworth). 
Jack wasn't happy about Billy having contact with Daz, even after he saved Victoria Sugden's (Isabel Hodgins) life, but Daz and Billy built a relationship, regardless. Daz even took baby Sarah to see him when she returned to the village. When Andy found out, he made Daz promise not to do it again. Unfortunately, Daz's relationship with Billy was damaged when Daz found out about Billy and Diane's affair. When Victoria accidentally set fire to the house, injuring herself, Billy and Jack, Billy rescued Andy and Jack. All three were taken to hospital but made full recoveries. Needing a clean break, Billy discharged himself and left the area, getting a new job in Sheffield. Following the fire, the Sugdens moved into Butler's Farm with Andy, Jo and Sarah. Unfortunately overcrowding meant Daz soon moved out. Sam Dingle needed a lodger so Daz moved in with him and his infant son. He and his girlfriend, Penny Drury (Amelia Sefton), were happy as they had more room and fewer adults telling them what to do. Everything was fine until Penny left a vodka and coke lying around. Samson found it and drank it so Sam rushed him to hospital. Luckily, he was fine but Daz asked Penny to apologise to Sam. She refused and called Sam names so Daz ended their relationship.
Daz was happy to stay single but Scarlett Nicholls (Kelsey-Beth Crossley) had other ideas. They met in early 2007 when she and her mother, Carrie (Linda Lusardi), moved to the village so Scarlett could get to know her half-brothers. Scarlett fancied him instantly and Daz found out when she made him a CD of what she thought were his favourite songs. Victoria had helped Scarlett with it but didn't tell Scarlett that she was friends with Penny and had done it as a practical joke. When Scarlett found out, she ran off and Daz went after her. He said he was flattered but was dating Penny but made both girls apologise to Scarlett. When Scarlett and Daz did get together, just after Scarlett's 16th birthday, Jimmy felt Daz wasn't good enough and that Scarlett was too young for boyfriends but Lexi talked him round. 
When Sam returned to the Dingle house, leaving Daz alone, Scarlett suggested she move in. Daz, however, wasn't ready for that so he asked his best mate Jake Doland (James Baxter) to move in instead. Together, they did their best to make sure that Scarlett wouldn't want to move in and it worked, thanks to some advice from Lexi. In early 2008, Jack went to Spain to look after his mother and Andy was in prison. Daz helped Jo on the farm but was unaware that a former inmate, who Andy had annoyed, was terrorising her. He threatened to have Andy harmed if she didn't do as he said and even started threatening Sarah. Jo told Debbie, who - aided by Chas and the McFarlanes - made sure that Charlie would never return to Yorkshire. Unfortunately Jo's problems continued on Andy's release, when he started beating her.
By autumn 2008, Andy's abuse had been exposed, but Daz refused to believe Jo. He supported Andy until he saw Andy threatening her. Horrified and disgusted, Daz turned against him. Weeks later, when Andy tried to see Jo, he and Daz argued, leading to punching Andy. Daz was scared as he worried he was turning into Andy and his father. In December, Andy began to convince Daz he had changed. Daz was suspicious but couldn't prove anything. He was proved right to be suspicious when Lee Naylor caught Andy sabotaging farm equipment so Jo would ask him to mend it. Throughout these problems, Daz and Victoria became closer. This resulted in them kissing on Christmas Day 2008. Both felt guilty, as they were practically siblings, and were awkward around each other. Later that day, he and Victoria were on the lake when the ice cracked and Victoria fell in. Daz jumped in, looking for her, and pulled her out of the lake. He performed CPR, desperately trying to save her and succeeded. They were taken to hospital and kept in overnight. Later, Victoria told him she had found a dead body in the lake. They found the body (Shane Doyle) a few days later and a police enquiry was launched.
On 5 February 2009, Annie Sugden (Sheila Mercier) phoned The Woolpack, informing them of Jack's death. Daz was devastated to lose the father figure he loved and respected. He was one of the pallbearers at Jack's funeral. When Annie revealed that Jack had wanted Andy to take over as head of the family, he moved into Butler's Farm with Andy, who also reclaimed his daughter from the Dingles. At this point, Victoria decided to live with Annie in Spain. This upset Daz and the night of the funeral, Daz said he couldn't imagine life in the village without her and would miss her too much. She asked what their relationship was and he told her he wasn't sure. He was thrown by the chemistry between them, just as she was, but knew the village saw them as brother and sister. Encouraged by what Daz had said, Victoria agreed to move into Butler's Farm too.
In April, Daz took Victoria out for a drive in a sports car to celebrate her birthday. It was meant to be Scarlett, Daz and Victoria but the car was a two-seater so Scarlett insisted Daz take Victoria out. Daz had suggested sending the car back but Scarlett wouldn't hear of it. Following a row, after they got lost, Daz and Victoria slept together in a deserted barn. Victoria was thrilled - she thought she and Daz would be a couple. She was devastated when Daz said he had no intention of dumping Scarlett. He felt guilty about cheating on Scarlett but that was it. He said it was a mistake and that they should forget about it and move on. Victoria hoped Daz would change his mind but when he didn't, he threatened revenge if she ever told anyone that it was him she lost her virginity to and left Victoria to announce her pregnancy in secret, just as he and Scarlett were going away for a weekend. The weekend was a disaster as he kept thinking of Victoria and on his return, Daz took Victoria for a drive. He told Victoria that she'd have to see a doctor and that people would think he was a pervert if they announced her pregnancy and that he was the baby's father, so Victoria admitted she'd lied. Furious, Daz moved back into Dale View with Jake.
Knowing it would annoy Daz, Victoria reconciled with Aaron Livesy (Danny Miller). In May, Aaron and Victoria slept together and, thinking Daz and Jake would be at work, she "borrowed" Jake's keys and took Aaron to Dale View. Unfortunately Daz and Scarlett went home for lunch and found them together. Angry, Daz went for Aaron and trying to stop them fighting, Victoria blurted out that Daz didn't want her any more, making Aaron and Scarlett realise Daz and Victoria's relationship was more than brother/sister. Horrified, Daz tried to repair the damage but Aaron and Scarlett didn't want to know. Scarlett rushed home in tears and Aaron told Andy about Daz and Victoria's new relationship. Disgusted, Andy threw Daz out, ordering him to leave the village and never return. Daz was reluctant to go but felt he had no choice, and left with only Jake to see him off. He stopped at the farm, perhaps wanting to see Victoria but didn't stay, not wanting to risk seeing Andy.
On 9 June, on Diane's return to the village, she asked about Daz but was told he had decided he wanted a change of scene and had left the village.






