[[1988 Giro d'Italia]]

CATEGORIES: 1988 in cycle racing, 1988 in Italian sport, Giro d'Italia

The 1988 Giro d'Italia was the 71st edition of the Giro d'Italia, one of cycling's Grand Tours. The Giro started off in Urbino on 23 May with a  team. Second and third respectively were Dutchman Erik Breukink and Swiss rider, Urs Zimmermann. It was the third time – and the second year in succession – in the history of the Giro, that the podium was occupied solely by non-Italian riders. Breukink had been part of the non-Italian podium in 1987, behind Ireland's Stephen Roche and Great Britain's Robert Millar.
Hampsten first gained the race lead after the famed fourteenth stage, which crossed the Gavia Pass towards Bormio, and where the riders battled against a snowstorm, strong winds, and muddy roads. Beforehand, the overall classification had been headed for several days by Massimo Podenzana. He had participated in a breakaway during stage 4a, which won him sufficient time to hold the race leader's maglia rosa () for more than a week. Franco Chioccioli also wore the pink jersey for a two-stage period, before Hampsten took the lead. After stage 14, Hampsten began to build up a solid two-minute barrier against the second-placed rider, Breukink. This gap was sufficient to win Hampsten the race, despite losing around twenty seconds in the final two stages.
Hampsten became the first American, and non-European, to win the Giro. He also won the secondary mountains and combination classifications, as well as the special sprints classification In the other classifications, Fanini-Seven Up rider Stefano Tomasini of Italy placed ninth overall to finish as the best neo-professional in the general classification; Johan van der Velde of the GIS-Ecoflam-Jolly team was the winner of the points classification, and  finished as the winners of the team classification.

Teams

Twenty teams were invited to participate in the 1988 edition of the Giro d'Italia, The presentation of the teams took place on 22 May, in the courtyard of the Ducal Palace in Urbino. From the 180 riders that began this edition, 125 made it to the finish in Vittorio Veneto.
The teams entering the race were:

Pre-race favorites

The starting peloton of 180 riders did not include the 1987 winner, Stephen Roche, who was sidelined for the majority of the 1988 season with a knee injury. squad, coming off from a cycling break as a result of injuries sustained in a hunting accident. Due to this, most did not see him as a front-runner for the overall victory. Swiss rider Tony Rominger also partook in the race and was considered by some as a dark-horse candidate for the victory after experiencing success at the beginning of his season.
During the presentation of the teams, the riders were asked to choose their top picks for the overall victory. Roberto Visentini garnered the most votes from his fellow riders, but Delgado, Hampsten, and LeMond also received many votes. Many media outlets felt that the overall victory would likely go to a non-Italian rider.
Guido Bontempi was seen by some newspapers as a favorite to win a couple of stages. Before he injured his right knee, many newspapers also believed Moreno Argentin to be a favorite to take several stages. Stampa Sera writer Curzio Maltese believed that Flavio Giupponi could take one of the stages containing many categorized climbs, if properly supported by his team Del Tongo.

Route and stages

The route for the 1988 edition of the Giro d'Italia was revealed to the public on television by head organizer Vincenzo Torriani, on 5 March 1988. The organizers chose to not include any rest days.
The eleventh stage was cancelled due to protests near the finish line. The route originally had the riders crossing the Stelvio Pass, but it was skipped due to snowdrifts that had developed on the pass. Excluding the finish on the Merano 2000, the stage was relatively flat after the adjustments.
In previous years, the organizers had made the race easier for the Italian favorites by disregarding some of the harder climbs. La Stampa writer Gian Paolo Ormezzano praised the route saying it was beautiful and well crafted but containing only one flaw in that the race did not finish in any major Italian cities. He also expressed his delight with the uphill time trial to Valico del Vetriolo as well as the inclusion of the Stelvio, Rombo, and Gavia mountain passes.

Race overview

The Giro began with a short . Podenzana's lead shrunk to a little over two minutes after his team, Atala-Ofmega, finished two minutes and thirty-six seconds later than Del Tongo.
The eleventh stage was run without a problem until the final mile, where environmentalist protestors occupied the finish line and forced the annulment of the stage. The protestors were upset with a nearby factory, owned by chemical manufacturer Montedison, which had been polluting the Bormida river. The ensuing stages saw the general classification shift more frequently due to the intensity of the mountains and the fatigue setting in.
The fourteenth stage was memorable for its extreme weather, most notably on the final climb of the Gavia Pass.
The start of the fifteenth stage was moved ahead from Bormio to Spondigna because of snow covering the Stevio Pass; the summit finish in Merano was maintained. The sixteenth stage was marked by rain – which turned into snow as the peloton rose higher – and by two protests while climbing the Rombo Pass. Near the summit of the last climb, Hampsten and a few others formed an escape group that was eventually caught in the final kilometers. The group rolled into Innsbruck, while Franco Vona made a last minute attack that won him the stage.
The eighteenth stage would prove critical in deciding the overall winner of the Giro, as it was an  The nineteenth stage featured three categorized climbs. Zimmermann attacked on the first climb, the Duran Pass, and remained out in front for the whole stage. However, he was later caught by Stefano Giuliani, who bridged the gap to Zimmermann from a chase group, on the descent of the Duran. Although Giuliani won the stage, Zimmermann moved into second place overall after gaining over three minutes on the general classification contenders.
The twentieth stage came down to a sprint finish won by Paolo Rosola, who was later disqualified as his teammate, Roberto Pagnin, was found to have pushed him during the sprint. As a result, the second place finisher, Alessio Di Basco, was awarded the stage victory. The penultimate stage was completely flat and culminated in a bunch sprint, won by Urs Freuler. Hours later, the final stage – a hilly 
Stage success was limited to eleven of the competing teams, seven of which achieved multiple victories. Four individual riders won multiple stages: Bernard in stages 1, 8, and 15; Piasecki in stage 21b, and the team time trial in stage 4b.
Selca-Conti, Ariostea-Gres, Gewiss-Bianchi, and Atala-Ofmega won one stage apiece. Ariostea-Gres rider Stephan Joho took stage 3 in a sprint finish, Atala-Ofmega rider Podenzana won stage 4a after a solo breakaway.

Doping

The organization performed anti-doping controls throughout the race. Riders would be selected for testing after a stage and the results would be returned roughly between thirty minutes and one hour. No rider tested positive in this edition of the Giro, but had this happened, the following penalties would be applied: the rider would be demoted to last place of the stage, given a ten-minute penalty in the general classification, a one-month suspension, and a fine of a thousand francs.

Classification leadership

Five different jerseys were awarded in the 1988 Giro d'Italia. For the general classification – calculated by adding the stage finish times of each rider, and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass-start stages – the leader received a pink jersey. This classification was considered the most important of the race, and its winner was considered the winner of the Giro.
There was also a points classification, which awarded a purple (or cyclamen) jersey. In this classification, cyclists got points for finishing a stage in the top 15. In addition, extra points could be won in intermediate sprints. The green jersey was awarded to the mountains classification leader. In this classification, points were won by reaching the top of a climb ahead of other cyclists. Each climb was categorized as either first, second, or third category, with more points available for the higher-categorized climbs. The Cima Coppi, the race's highest point of elevation, awarded even more points than the other first category climbs. The Cima Coppi for this Giro was supposed to be the Stelvio Pass, however the day the Giro was supposed to climb it, a heavy snow cover forced the organization to skip the mountain pass from the stage route. The white jersey was worn by the leader of young rider classification. This ranking was decided the same way as the general classification, but only neo-professional cyclists – those in their first three years of professional racing – were eligible.
The combination classification, represented by a blue jersey, was calculated by summing up the points obtained by each rider in the other classifications; the leader was the rider with the lowest total of points.
Although no jersey was awarded, there was also one classification for the teams, in which the stage finish times of the best three cyclists per team were added; the leading team was the one with the lowest total time.

Final standings

General classification

Points classification

Mountains classification

Young rider classification

Team classification

Combination classification

Special sprints classification

Intermediate sprints classification

Combativity classification

Footnotes




