[[Czesław Miłosz]]

CATEGORIES: 1911 births, 2004 deaths, People from Kėdainiai District Municipality, People from Kovno Governorate, Polish nobility, Polish people of Lithuanian descent, Vilnius University alumni, Polish Roman Catholics, Polish political writers, Polish poets, Diplomats of the Polish People's Republic, Polish emigrants to the United States, Catholic Righteous Among the Nations, Harvard University people, Nike Award winners, Nobel laureates in Literature, American Nobel laureates, Polish Nobel laureates, Lithuanian Nobel laureates, American Catholic poets, Polish Righteous Among the Nations, American Righteous Among the Nations, American Roman Catholics, Polish–English translators, Roman Catholic writers, Translators from Polish, United States National Medal of Arts recipients, University of California, Berkeley faculty, Burials in Kraków, Guggenheim Fellows

Czesław Miłosz (

Life in Europe

Czesław Miłosz was born on June 30, 1911 in the village of Szetejnie ( His brother, Andrzej Miłosz (1917–2002), a Polish journalist, translator of literature and of film subtitles into Polish, was a documentary-film producer who created Polish documentaries about his brother.
Miłosz was raised Catholic in rural Lithuania and emphasized his identity with the multi-ethnic Grand Duchy of Lithuania, a stance that led to ongoing controversies. He refused to categorically identify himself as either a Pole or a Lithuanian. He said of himself: "I am a Lithuanian to whom it was not given to be a Lithuanian.", He often is quoted as having said, "Language is the only homeland."
In his youth, Miłosz came to adopt, as he put it, a "scientific, atheistic position mostly", although he was later to return to the Catholic faith., "'A Sacred Vision': An Interview with Czesław Miłosz", in Haven, Cynthia L. (ed.), Czesław Miłosz: Conversations. University Press of Mississippi, 2006, p. 145. After graduation from Sigismund Augustus Gymnasium in Vilnius, he studied law at Stefan Batory University and in 1931 he travelled to Paris, where he was influenced by his distant cousin Oscar Milosz, a French poet of Lithuanian descent and a Swedenborgian. In 1931, he formed the poetic group Żagary together with the young poets Jerzy Zagórski, Teodor Bujnicki, Aleksander Rymkiewicz, Jerzy Putrament and Józef Maśliński. University of Alberta Press, 1988. pp 2f. Miłosz's first volume of poetry was published in 1934. After receiving his law degree that year, he again spent a year in Paris on a fellowship. Upon returning, he worked as a commentator at Radio Wilno, but was dismissed, an action described as stemming from either his leftist views or for views overly sympathetic to Lithuania. Miłosz wrote all his poetry, fiction and essays in Polish and translated the Old Testament Psalms into Polish.
Miłosz spent World War II in Warsaw, under Nazi Germany's "General Government". Here he attended underground lectures by Polish philosopher and historian of philosophy and aesthetics, Władysław Tatarkiewicz. He did not participate in the Warsaw Uprising, which has been attributed to his residence outside Warsaw proper.
After World War II, Miłosz served as cultural attaché of the newly formed People's Republic of Poland in Paris and Washington D.C. For this he was criticized in some emigre circles. Conversely, he was attacked and censored in Poland when, in 1951, he defected and obtained political asylum in France. In 1953 he received the Prix Littéraire Européen (European Literary Prize).

Righteous Among the Nations

During the Nazi occupation of Poland, Miłosz was active in the work of Organizacja Socjalistyczno-Niepodległościowa "Wolność" ("The 'Freedom' Socialist Pro-Independence Organisation"). In his activity with "Wolność", Miłosz gave aid to Warsaw Jews. His brother Andrzej Miłosz was also active in helping Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland, and in 1943 Andrzej transported the Polish Jew Seweryn Tross and his wife from Vilnius to Warsaw. Czesław Miłosz took in the Trosses and found them a hiding place and supported them financially. The Trosses ultimately died during the Warsaw Uprising. Miłosz helped at least three other Jews, Felicja Wołkomińska and her brother and sister. For these efforts, Miłosz received the medal of the Righteous Among the Nations in Yad Vashem, Israel in 1989.

Life in the United States

In 1960 Miłosz emigrated to the United States, and in 1970 he became a U.S. citizen. In 1961 he began a professorship in Polish literature in the Department of Slavic Languages and Literatures at the University of California, Berkeley. In 1978 he received the Neustadt International Prize for Literature. He retired that same year, but continued teaching at Berkeley. Milosz' personal attitude about living in Berkeley is sensitively portrayed in his poem, "A Magic Mountain," contained in a collection of translated poems entitled, Bells in Winter, published by Ecco Press (1985). Having grown up in the cold climates of Eastern Europe, Milosz was especially struck by the lack of seasonal weather in Berkeley and by some of the brilliant refugees from around the world who became his friends at the university.
In 1980 Miłosz received the Nobel Prize for Literature. Since his works had been banned in Poland by the communist government, this was the first time that many Poles became aware of him. When the Iron Curtain fell, Miłosz was able to return to Poland, at first to visit, and later to live part-time in Kraków. He divided his time between his home in Berkeley and an apartment in Kraków. He received an honorary doctorate in 1977 from the University of Michigan. Two weeks after he received the 1980 Nobel Prize in Literature he returned to Michigan to lecture, becoming the Visiting Walgreen Professor of Human Understanding in 1983. In 1989, he received the U.S. National Medal of Arts and an honorary doctorate from Harvard University.
Miłosz's 1953 book, The Captive Mind, is a study about how intellectuals behave under a repressive regime. Miłosz observed that those who became dissidents were not necessarily those with the strongest minds, but rather those with the weakest stomachs; the mind can rationalize anything, he said, but the stomach can take only so much. Throughout the Cold War, the book often was cited by U.S. conservative commentators such as William F. Buckley, Jr., and has been a staple in political science courses on totalitarianism.
In an 1994 interview, Miłosz spoke of the difficulty of writing religious poetry in a largely post-religious world. He reported a recent conversation with his compatriot Pope John Paul II; the latter, commenting upon some of Miłosz's work, in particular Six Lectures in Verse, said to him: "You make one step forward, one step back." The poet answered: "Holy Father, how in the twentieth century can one write religious poetry differently?" The Pope smiled."Czesław Miłosz Interviewed by Robert Faggen", The Paris Review No. 133 (Winter 1994). A few years later, in 2000, Miłosz dedicated a rather straightforward ode to John Paul II, on the occasion of the pope's eightieth birthday. 192 (20 August 2004), p. 14.

Death and legacy

Czesław Miłosz died on 14 August 2004 at his Kraków home, aged 93. He was buried in Kraków's Skałka Roman Catholic Church, becoming one of the last to be commemorated there. His first wife, Janina (née Dłuska, b. 1909), whom he had married in 1944, had died in 1986. They had two sons, Anthony (b. 1947) and John Peter (b. 1951). His second wife, Carol Thigpen (b. 1944), an American-born historian, died in 2002.
Miłosz is honoured at Israel's Yad Vashem memorial to the Holocaust, as one of the "Righteous among the Nations". A poem by Miłosz appears on a Gdańsk memorial to protesting shipyard workers who had been killed by government security forces in 1970. His books and poems have been translated by many hands, including Jane Zielonko, Peter Dale Scott, Robert Pinsky, and Robert Hass.
In November 2011, Yale University hosted a conference on Miłosz's relationship with America. 2011 was deemed "The Milosz Year," which culminated in a large conference in Kraków (May 9–15, 2011).

Selected works

Poetry collections

Prose collections

Translations by Miłosz



Further reading




