[[Sikh Rehat Maryada]]

CATEGORIES: Sikh practices

The Sikh Rahit Maryada

Preceding codes

Sikh Rehat Maryada is based on earlier codes (Rehat nama), to include:

Principal points

The Sikh Rehat Maryada addresses key issues such as the definition of a Sikh, personal and communal obligations such as meditation and volunteer service, rules for gurdwara services to include appropriate music and festivals, and the conduct of assorted Sikh ceremonies.sgpc.html
[/ref]

Definition of Sikh

A Sikh is defined as any person male or female who faithfully:

Sikh living

There are two aspects to a Sikh living. One is the adherence to a personal discipline and the development of a strong family life. The other is the involvement in communal life and to ensure community well-being and infra-structure for support of the weak within the community local and globally. This is the practical aspect of  the three pillars of Sikhism promoted by Guru Nanak called Wand kay Shako (share and consume).

Personal life

Communal life

The Sikh has a duty to actively contribute to the community outside the family unit. Time needs to be given to the greater Sikh community and the even wider world community. It is the duty of the Sikh to hold a continuous dialogue with all members of the larger community, to treat them as equals, and respect their religions and their customs.

Meditating and scriptures

It is the duty of all Sikhs to engage in personal and communal meditation, Kirtan and the study of the holy Scriptures. Meditating and understanding of the Guru Granth Sahib is important to the proper development of a Sikh. One must study Gurmukhi and be able to read Gurbani and understand the meaning of the text. Translations and other material may be used to assist the Sikh but must not be the primary text for the Sikh. The Sikh has to revert to the Guru Granth Sahib for the all spiritual guidance in ones life – from birth to death.

Congregation and scripture

It is believed that a Sikh is more easily and deeply affected by Gurbani when engaged in congregational gatherings. For this reason, it is necessary for a Sikh to visit Gurdwaras, the places where the Sikhs congregate for worship and prayer. On joining the holy congregation, Sikhs should take part and obtain benefit from the joint study of the holy scriptures.
No one is to be barred from entering a Gurdwara, no matter in which country, religion or caste he/she belongs to. The Gurdwara is open to all for the Guru's darshan (seeing the holy Guru) and Langar. However the person must not have on his/her person anything, such as tobacco or other intoxicants, which are tabooed by the Sikh religion. Shoes must be removed, one's head must be covered, and respectful clothing is a must.

Service in gurdwaras

During a service in a Gurdwara and while congregational sessions are in session,  only one activity should be done at a time in one hall in the presence of the Guru - performing of kirtan, delivering of discourse,  interpretative elaboration of the scriptures or  the reading of the scriptures.

Kirtan

Only Sikhs are allowed to perform Kirtan (Spiritual hymn singing) in a congregation and only hymns (Shabads) from the holy scriptural compositions in traditional musical measures should be sung. Only Shabads from Gurbani (Guru Granth's hymns) and the compositions of Bhai Gurdas and Bhai Nand Lal, may  be performed. It is improper to sing Kirtan to rhythmic folk tunes or popular film tunes.

Ardas and Guru's Hukam

Before taking a Hukam from the Guru, an Ardas must be done where all the congregation would stand for the Ardas and then sit down and carefully listen to the Hukam of the Guru.

Akhand Paath and Sadharan Paath

Akhand Paath: Is the non-stop reading of the Guru Granth Sahib carried on during difficult times or during occasions of joy and celebration. The reading takes approximately forty eight hours of continuous and uninterrupted reading by a relay of skilled Gurbani readers. The reading must be done in a clear voice and with correct and full pronunciation. Reading the Gurbani too fast, so that the person listening in cannot follow the contents, is discouraged and is considered as disrespect for the Scriptures and the congregation (Sangat).
Sadharan Paath: This is a non-continuous reading of the Guru Granth Sahib and one can take from seven days to many months to complete the full reading of the 1430 Anga (Pages) of the text.

Festivals

The important Sikh festivals that are celebrated are:

Living according to the Guru's Way

To live and promote the tenets stipulated by the Gurus.

Sikh ceremonies

Voluntary Service (Seva)

Seva (voluntary service) is an important prominent part of the Sikh religion and all Sikhs must get involved in this communal service whenever an opportunity arises.  This in its simple forms can be: sweeping and washing the floors of the Gurdwara, serving water and food (Langar) to or fanning the congregation, offering provisions or preparing food and doing other 'house keeping' duties.
Guru ka Langar (Guru's free food) is a very important part of Sikhism. The main philosophy behind the langar is two-fold : to provide training to engage in seva and an opportunity to serve people from all walks of life and to help banish all distinctions between high and low castes.

Communal life

Sikhism offers strong support for a healthy communal life and a Sikh must undertake to support all worthy projects which would benefit the community and promote Gurmat principles. Importance is given to Inter-faith dialogue, support for the poor and weak; better community understanding and co-operation.






