[[Meg Masters]]

CATEGORIES: Supernatural (U.S. TV series) characters, Fictional demons, Fictional murderers, Fictional characters with superhuman strength, Fictional characters who can teleport, Fictional characters introduced in 2006, Fictional women soldiers and warriors, Fictional bisexual females

Meg Masters is a fictional character on The CW Television Network's drama and horror television series Supernatural. Created by the series' writers to develop a story arc for the first season, Meg is an unnamed demon who assumes the name of the host she possesses and begins antagonizing the series protagonists Sam and Dean Winchester. Nicki Aycox portrays her in the first season, with Jared Padalecki assuming the role in the second season. The writers wanted Aycox to reprise the role in later seasons, but ultimately cast Rachel Miner for storyline purposes. Miner's incarnation slowly evolves into an ally of the Winchesters throughout her appearances. The character received generally mixed reception from critics, with many favoring Aycox's version.

Plot

After possessing a young woman named Meg Masters (Nicki Aycox), the demon assumes her name and tracks down series protagonist Sam Winchester in the first season episode "Scarecrow". The two briefly meet while hitchhiking—Sam left his brother Dean to track down their missing father John—and then yet again at a bus station. Despite her attempts to convince him otherwise, Sam eventually leaves to help Dean with one of their supernatural investigations. Meg later slits a man's throat and uses his blood to communicate with her father Azazel, the demon responsible for the death of Sam and Dean's mother.
Sam encounters her again in the episode "Shadow". Finding her reappearance suspicious, Sam later spies on her and realizes that she is responsible for recent deaths of women from his hometown. The brothers confront Meg and learn that the recent killings were actually a trap set for John, who has been hunting her father Azazel.
After Lucifer is freed from Hell, Meg (Rachel Miner) briefly appears in the fifth season premiere "Sympathy for the Devil" attempting to stop the brothers from finding a weapon said to be capable of defeating Lucifer. Her attack leaves Bobby paralyzed, but she is forced to flee before Sam can kill her.
Crowley is later revealed to have faked his death,

Characterization

Actress Nicki Aycox described Meg as having a "playful side" and a "sexuality", both of which are "tempered with an evil side underneath". In her mind, the human qualities represented the real Meg whom the demon was possessing."Masters of the Universe", p.21 Aycox also found the character sarcastic, "sharp-tongued, witty, and smart", as well as determined to get what she wants.140-141 Likewise, series creator Eric Kripke noted that she can "really twist the knife psychologically."Supernatural: The Official Companion Season 1, p.115
The word "fiery" summed up the character for actress Rachel Miner, who noted the "devilish enjoyment" that the "obviously very evil" Meg gets from playing cat-and-mouse games with the Winchesters.146 In her opinion, Meg's "sense of fun" stems from her "thousands and thousands of years" of living, which have provided her "a little bit more of relaxation" because "the little things wouldn't be significant to her". In addition to describing the character as "quite powerful" and a "free spirit", Miner deemed Meg an "ambitious demon" who always has a plan and who seizes any opportunity to gain power."Meg Uncaged", p.36"The Devil and Miss Masters", p.64 The actress attributed Meg's longevity to the character's sense of "knowing when to exit". She elaborated, "Meg made a hasty withdrawal and gathered her forces to come back. That's her strength... she doesn't take the brothers on unless she has the upper hand."
Writer Sera Gamble noted that Meg becomes "a bit of a free agent and kind of a demon rebel" following Lucifer's defeat at the end of the fifth season. Already an enemy of the new demonic ruler Crowley, her failed attempt to kill him in the sixth season puts her on "Crowley's most-wanted list".tvguide.aspx
[/ref] According to Miner, Meg is "just basically trying to survive" after that. Although she keeps an eye on "everything she can that might affect her, including what the Winchesters are up to", her main objective is avoiding Crowley. This desperation forces her to work with the Winchesters in later appearances.
In regards to Meg meeting the angel Castiel for the first time in the fifth season, Miner noted the "fun moment where it looks like maybe Cass and I could kiss". The actress enjoyed the flirtation, pointing out that "of course the demon would want the angel to give in to his lesser instincts".59 This "demon-angel dichotomy" continues in the sixth season, although Miner was uncertain whether Meg was merely toying with Castiel. "It's complex when you are dealing with a demon," she explained, "but Castiel definitely sparks her interest more than most. He had some effect on her especially with that kiss." "Meg Uncaged", p.34 Nevertheless, she later deemed the flirtation as "just a fun deviation" for the characters. Actor Misha Collins, who portrays Castiel, acknowledged that Meg "is still turning up the heat on the sexual tension between Cas and herself" in the seventh season. Describing her as "sort of a helper", he joked, "Again, of course, it's a strained relationship. Cas likes her... Sam and Dean have a little more trouble with her."

Development

With the initial episodes of the first season featuring mostly unconnected storylines, the writers became desperate to begin developing a mythology for the series.66 They thus crafted Meg as a recurring antagonist, but at the time were otherwise unsure of what direction to take her. Executive producer Kim Manners previously directed an episode of the series Over There featuring Aycox, and hand-selected her for the role of Meg. On developing the character and her storyline, Aycox noted that they "really just felt their way through" and described it as "very trial and error"."Masters of the Universe", p.20
The actress's strategy in "Scarecrow" was to surprise the audience—the episode's conclusion reveals that Meg is a demon—by portraying her as "a truly innocent girl who's lost and on her way to somewhere else". In designing the costume for that episode, Diane Widas wanted to reflect that Meg was traveling but also dress her as "a girl that the boys would be interested in". As Aycox became more comfortable on-set and saw how the series leads Jared Padalecki and Jensen Ackles were "playful" and "up for anything", she gained the confidence to bring a "sexuality" to the character. Given free rein over the character by production, Aycox also tried to make Meg "very stylized". Widas reflected this character progression by giving her a yellow leather jacket as she "got stronger" and a red leather jacket when her demonic side fully emerged in the first season finale.113 The character was seemingly killed off in the same episode, a decision that Manners disagreed with because he thought that she had potential to be a "great nemesis" for the Winchesters, akin to the Cigarette Smoking Man of the series The X-Files. Agreeing that Meg was "a really formidable adversary" for the Winchesters, Kripke chose to bring her back to the series later on.digitalspy.html
The show's second season involves a subplot of whether Sam would turn evil, and the writers wanted an episode where Sam would wake up covered in blood after having killed a person. Realizing that demonic possession could explain his actions, the writers brought back Meg because she would want revenge for being exorcised. This became the episode "Born Under a Bad Sign". Cathryn Humphris, the writer of that episode, felt that the idea of Meg possessing Sam "provided a good opportunity to see what evil would look like for Sam, and what Dean's response to that might be".78-79 For most of the episode, Sam is depicted as "scared, confused, and angry", only to reveal the "characteristic demon swagger" after he takes Jo hostage.79 Padalecki prepared by watching Aycox's performance as Meg in past episodes and the actress praised him on his portrayal of her character, feeling that he picked up on her "own personal mannerisms... like little tics and looks and things like that"."Masters of the Universe", p.23 Director J. Miller Tobin believed Padalecki did a "terrific job of... just being so smarmy and so in your face".
After Meg's disappearance, Kripke repeatedly asked the writers what she was doing off-screen and eventually elected to write her into the fifth season premiere "Sympathy for the Devil" himself. The writers wanted Aycox to again reprise the role—the actress had already returned in the fourth season episode "Are You There, God? It's Me, Dean Winchester" as the spirit of the actual Meg Masters—and brainstormed reasons why the demon would want to return to her old host after the body had been buried and rotting for years, but ultimately deemed it too impractical and chose to recast.20-21 Because the writers still wanted to pay credit to Aycox, "the bar was set very high" during the casting process. Miner received the role, with Kripke finding her "just so interesting and complicated and sexy and idiosyncratic" and with "so many different layers".21
Miner had not seen the series before, and only had the opportunity before filming to view a few clips of Aycox's episodes. She wanted to avoid merely copying Aycox's performance, but at the same time did not want to stray too far because it was the same character. However, she found that she did not have to alter her performance because the character was "written so specifically that the choices were very similar". Respecting prior depictions of Meg, Miner said, "I did take to heart that the character meant so much to people... That became something I took into consideration because I didn't want to disappoint people by taking away from what was originally there."  Upon being asked to return for "Abandon All Hope...", she declined a film offer because it conflicted with the series' filming.
The sixth season episode "Caged Heat" originally involved Lenore, a vampire whom the Winchesters spared in the second season, but the writers replaced her with Meg when Lenore's actress Amber Benson was unavailable.60 Meg's increased presence in the episode as compared to previous appearances with Miner in the role surprised the actress."Meg Uncaged", p.32 Deeming it her favorite episode, Miner commented, "The episode took Meg in a lot of directions that you might not have expected and that were fun to play.""The Devil and Miss Masters", p.63
The character was killed off in the eighth season. Feeling that "when someone dies, you want it to count a little bit", executive producer Jeremy Carver stated that "there are no immediate plans to bring her back".ew.com/2013/08/08/once-upon-a-time-parks-and-rec-greys-anatomy-spoilers/2/

Reception

Maureen Ryan of Chicago Tribune deemed Aycox's incarnation of Meg a "good addition to the show" who "spiced things up a bit". She enjoyed how the character toyed around with the Winchesters, and thought Meg's final moments were "well done".chicagotribune.html Diana Steenbergen of IGN, on the other hand, found Meg's attempts to "out-tough and out-snark the boys" uninteresting. She opinioned, "The show has managed to make interesting, three-dimensional, flawed yet heroic male characters; it is high time to spread that care toward the recurring female characters."
Despite these mixed reviews of the character, however, critics praised Padalecki for his performance. Steenbergen found Padalecki's portrayal of the character "exceptionally entertaining". She noted, "Padalecki effortlessly switches from taunting... Comparing Padalecki's previous portrayals of an evil Sam, Tina Charles of TV Guide believed Padalecki "outdid himself" as Meg. "I just think that Jared had to relish the different levels of intensity Sam was put through," she wrote. "It showed, and he did such a great job."
Tim Janson of Mania believed that neither Aycox nor Padalecki portrayed Meg "with such dripping sarcasm as Rachel Miner". He felt that she "always adds spice when she appears", and deemed the bonding scenes between Meg and Sam in "Goodbye Stranger" to be "priceless".mania.html
Similarly, Steenbergen felt Miner played the role "with vicious flair" and "conveyed Meg's brutality well, right from the beginning".ign. Like Janson, Steenbergen particularly enjoyed the conversation between Meg and Sam in "Goodbye Stranger". In regard to this final appearance, she wrote, "If you had told me a few years ago that Meg's death would be sad I wouldn't have believed you, but it was." Miner's incarnation of Meg received praise from Jordan Farley of SFX, as well. Farley wrote, "As a demon turned good (sort of) she occupies a moral grey zone that leaves her actions completely unpredictable even after year's of guest appearances, a refreshing quality for a character to have. And she's funny."
However, other reviewers were not as favorable to Miner. Laura Prudom of Huffington Post felt Aycox portrayed the character with a "lot more subtlety" than Miner and preferred Meg's darker appearances prior to Miner, finding it "hard to reconcile the demon who possessed Sam and went on a killing and torture spree in the phenomenal 'Born Under a Bad Sign' with the character we've seen in the past couple of years".huffingtonpost.html Nevertheless, she was "impressed that Meg went out fighting for what was right".huffingtonpost.html Though Charles liked Miner's portrayal, she criticized that the character's dialogue "always seemed to be a series of one-liners" and found that the character's large role in "Reading is Fundamental" detracted from the episode for her, explaining that she "likes Meg but in smaller doses." She, too, preferred Aycox over Miner in the role. John Kubicek of BuddyTV and Sandra Gonzalez of Entertainment Weekly also favored Aycox's portrayal of the character.buddytv.aspx



Bibliography

Footnotes


