[[Loveland High School (Ohio)]]

CATEGORIES: Loveland, Ohio, High schools in Hamilton County, Ohio, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, Public high schools in Ohio

Loveland High School is a public high school located in Loveland, Ohio, United States, within Hamilton County.  It is the only high school in the Loveland City School District, serving the communities of Loveland, Symmes Township, and Miami Township. It offers a range of educational programs, including college preparatory and vocational.

Affiliations

Loveland High School has been accredited by the Ohio Department of Education and North Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools.

Academics

Loveland High School uses a 10-point grading scale. U.S. News & World also recognized Loveland High School in 2012 as a top school of the nation by awarded them a silver medal and placing them 46th in the state of Ohio.

Athletics

Ohio High School Athletic Association State Championships

Division II

History

Evelyn Hawley was Loveland High School's first graduate, the only graduating member of the Class of 1881.
Until 1926, Loveland City Schools operated as separate Loveland East and Loveland West districts, and each district had its own high school. Loveland West High School was located in present-day Loveland's central business district, in the building that now houses Loveland Elementary School. Loveland East High School was built by Cincinnati architect Samuel Hannaford on Broadway Street and has since been converted into a church.
The unified high school, named Loveland Hurst High School, was eventually located on the Hamilton County side of the city. Ann Donahue, a Loveland High School graduate, modeled the set of the television show M.Y.O.B. after this building.
Loveland High School's current facilities were built in 1994 to replace aging Hurst High School. Hurst was then converted into a middle school. Two years earlier, Loveland City Schools purchased land in Symmes Township, just outside Loveland city limits. The district signed a contract in which the City agreed to provide the new high school with water and sewage services; in return, the district would push for Hamilton County to annex the high school into Loveland at the city's request.

Notable alumni

Notable faculty







