[[Tropical Storm Beryl (1994)]]

CATEGORIES: 1994 Atlantic hurricane season, Atlantic tropical storms, Hurricanes in Florida, Hurricanes in South Carolina, 1994 natural disasters in the United States

Tropical Storm Beryl, was the second named storm of the 1994 Atlantic hurricane season. Beryl originated north of Puerto Rico as an upper-level low pressure system, then passed over Florida, then entered the gulf where it became a tropical depression. The storm had advisories on it for five days; its winds peaked at  before dissipating over the Northeast United States. Beryl caused $73 million (1994 USD) in damage, over the eastern portion of the United States. Most of the damage was from tornadoes or flooding from the tropical storm. Beryl caused moderate to minor injuries, and 1 death.(FEMA totals)

Meteorological history

A large upper-level low pressure area developed over the southeastern Atlantic Ocean that was situated to the north of Puerto Rico on August 9. The disturbance moved westward, and despite weakening to a trough in the upper levels of the atmosphere, there was evidence of a low- to mid-level circulation off the southwest coast of Florida on August 12. The next day, surface observations and ship reports suggested the presence of a weak 1014 mb surface low pressure system. Moving towards the north-northwest, a cloud-pattern was identified on satellite imagery, and Dvorak estimates were initiated at 0000 UTC on August 14. Based on data from surface observations, satellite imagery, and information from reconnaissance aircraft, the system is estimated to have become a tropical depression at 1200 UTC on August 14; at the time, the depression was located approximately 
The depression drifted slowly towards the north after being designated, while its poorly defined center of circulation was organizing. Between 1630 and 2011 UTC on August 14, the system was nearly stationary; a few hours later, there were indications that the storm's center reformed to the east of its original location. The depression tracked slowly towards the east-northeast while producing rainfall throughout portions of Florida. Becoming better organized, the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Beryl on August 15. Possibly influenced by a mesoscale featured noted to the south of Beryl's circulation, the center of circulation began moving erratically after being upgraded. However in response to an approaching trough, the storm turned towards the north and made landfall near Panama City, Florida at 0000 UTC on August 16. Offshore winds generated coastal flooding along portions of the coast, and even after the storm moved inland, high winds were reported in the Apalachee Bay area.
About 12 hours after moving ashore, Beryl weakened to a tropical depression. With increasing forward motion, the depression continued towards the north-northeast. By 1800 UTC the depression was situated to the south of Atlanta, Georgia; slowly weakening, the storm's remnants were identified near Asheville, North Carolina early on August 17. While located over Maryland, rainfall associated with the low extended into the Mid-Atlantic, New York, and New England. The system also maintained rainbands accompanied by thunderstorms and heavy rainfall. Throughout the East Coast, the system spawned heavy precipitation and tornadoes. The low continued to track northeastward; after passing through Connecticut, the low was absorbed into a frontal trough on August 19.

Preparations

In advance of the storm, a tropical storm watch was posted from Pensacola, Florida to Cedar Key on August 15. Later that day, the watch was replaced with a tropical storm warning that extended from Fort Walton Beach, Florida to Yankeetown, Florida. The warning was discontinued for areas west of Apalachicola, Florida, and by 1200 UTC on August 16, all tropical cyclone warnings and watches were lifted. Initially, the public advisories issued by the National Hurricane Center on the storm warned primarily of heavy rain, as Beryl was expected to remain a weak cyclone. However, when the storm slowed in forward motion and the potential for intensification increased, the advisories emphasized the potential for coastal flooding.
Flash flood watches, warnings, and tornado watches were posted for portions of Georgia as Beryl progressed inland.

Impact

Tropical Storm Beryl was a weak system, and unlike Alberto, its rapid motion up the Eastern Seaboard spread its heavy rainfall across a large area. Beryl caused inland flooding as it moved through Georgia, across the Carolinas, and all the way to Connecticut. Property damage was estimated at  in New York, with other states likely having smaller totals. Although there were no deaths caused by Beryl, a large number of people were injured by the 37 tornadoes Beryl produced as it weakened.(NOAA Newspaper Archive st0901p1)

Florida

Oysters in the Apalachicola Bay could not be harvested in the prime winter of 1994, due to runoff from the sediment of rivers, from . Residents also reported that there was high wind in their areas.(NOAA Newspaper Archive wp0817p1)

Georgia and the Carolinas

10 inches of rain fell in 24 hours, across Georgia. A confirmed report of  occurred in Tallulah Falls in northeast Georgia. A spokesman for Thomas County said that roads were flooded, but passable by cars. She also said that "we really don't have anything that's blown out as far as bridges and culverts, but we do have a lot of trees down." A tornado was reported east of Athens, that destroyed a house and a shop. However, no injuries were reported.
10 inches of rain fell in 24 hours across North Carolina and South Carolina. A total estimated $37 million (1994 USD) in damage resulted from thunderstorms and tornadoes. Several tornadoes also were reported across South Carolina, from rainbands from Beryl. Several tornadoes resulted from the hurricane in Lexington, South Carolina, just west of Columbia. The Village Center shopping center caved in, as a result of an F3 tornado, which resulted in 35 people being injured, none seriously, and two people missing initially. 25 people were taken to Lexington Medical Center, mostly for cuts, bruises, and broken or dislocated bones. 40 to 50 buildings in total, were damaged or destroyed. The F3 tornado went across  long. It overturned a mobile home at the intersection of highways 64 and 301, causing one serious injury. At the WSFO, Weather Bureau, a significant failure of the WSR-88D at the RFA occurred from 1:17 to 1:39 PM local time. This caused the weather bureau to miss a tornado that downed in southwest Richland County at 1:30 local time, even though the emergency technicians tried to quickly respond to the problem. The WSR-74C was used as a backup, but didn't detect the tornado that touched down.(NOAA Newspaper Archive mh0817p2)(NOAA Archive cae02)(NOAA Archive cae03)

Mid-Atlantic

Thunderstorms associated with Beryl's remnants dropped 

New York and New England

Beryl generally produced 



Sources


