[[John Carver (footballer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1965 births, Living people, Cardiff City F.C. players, Gateshead F.C. players, English football managers, English footballers, The Football League players, Leeds United A.F.C. managers, Newcastle United F.C. managers, Newcastle United F.C. non-playing staff, Newcastle United F.C. players, Plymouth Argyle F.C. non-playing staff, Premier League managers, Sheffield United F.C. managers, Sportspeople from Newcastle upon Tyne, Toronto FC coaches

John William Carver (born 16 January 1965 in Newcastle upon Tyne) is a former  English footballer and current assistant manager of Newcastle United.

Career

Early career

Carver was the assistant manager to Bobby Robson at Newcastle United. Following Robson's sacking in August 2004, Carver was appointed caretaker manager and guided the team to a 3-0 win against Blackburn Rovers. Carver later dedicated the win to Bobby Robson. Despite the victory, Carver was not considered for the permanent job, that position going to Graeme Souness who opted to bring in his own backroom staff; Carver left the club in September 2004.
In July 2005 Leeds United appointed Carver as a first team coach, replacing the departed Adrian Boothroyd who left the club to be the new manager of Watford. He was part of the management team of Kevin Blackwell and Sam Ellis. Following the exit of Sam Ellis in May 2006, Carver was promoted to the position of assistant manager.
Carver became a caretaker manager for the second time in his career after Leeds United fired Kevin Blackwell following a disastrous start to the season. Carver left Leeds United on 23 October 2006.
Kevin Blackwell subsequently became the manager of Luton Town, and he recruited Carver as his assistant, along with another ex-Leeds coach Sam Ellis. With Luton going through major financial difficulties, including the administrator's decision to sell players from under the management's feet, Carver, along with Blackwell and Ellis were sacked.

Toronto FC

On 1 February 2008 he became head coach of the Major League Soccer side Toronto FC, with previous coach, Mo Johnston, remaining as manager and Director of Soccer.
In April 2009, Carver was charged $750 (USD) by MLS for openly criticising the standard of refereeing during a 3-2 loss away to FC Dallas. He was absent from the bench during a 1-0 home win over Chivas USA four days later and eventually resigned on 25 April 2009, one day before the team's home clash with Kansas City Wizards.

Plymouth Argyle and Sheffield United

In December 2009, Carver was appointed assistant head coach to Paul Mariner at Plymouth Argyle.
On 14 January 2010 he rejected an approach from Burnley manager Brian Laws to join the Lancashire club as a coach, stating his desire to repay the loyalty shown by Paul Mariner and the club as his reason for staying.
In August 2010, Carver was appointed first team coach at Sheffield United by manager Gary Speed, who had played under Carver when he was assistant manager at Newcastle United. This appointment reunited Carver with Sam Ellis, who was assistant to Speed.  Following Speed's departure from Sheffield United to become coach of the Wales national football team on 14 December, Carver was appointed as caretaker manager.

Return to Newcastle United

On 18 January 2011, Newcastle United announced that John Carver was their new assistant manager until the end of the season.
On 17 March 2013, Carver was sent to the stands by the match officials at half-time during Newcastle's match at Wigan Athletic. This was due to his reaction towards Wigan player Callum McManaman following a high tackle on Newcastle's defender Massadio Haïdara, which saw Haïdara have to be stretchered off and McManaman escape any punishment. Carver was fined £1,000 and warned as to his future conduct as a result.

Managerial stats



| title = The Who's Who of Cardiff City
| first = Dean
| last = Hayes
| publisher = Breedon Books
| year = 2006
| isbn= 1-85983-462-0
}}




