[[Internal Security Operations Command]]

CATEGORIES: Political history of Thailand, Government of Thailand, Government agencies established in 1966, 1966 establishments in Thailand

The Internal Security Operations Command () is a unit of the Thai military devoted to national security issues. It was responsible for suppression of leftist groups during the 1970s and 1980s during which it was implicated in numerous atrocities against activists and civilians. The modern ISOC was implicated in a plot to assassinate Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra. After Thaksin was deposed in a military coup, the junta transformed the ISOC into a "government within a government", giving it wide-reaching authority over the National Counter Corruption Committee, the Department of Special Investigation, and the Anti-Money Laundering Office. The junta also authorized it to help provincial authorities in marketing OTOP products. The ISOC revamp modelled it after the US Department of Homeland Security, and would give ISOC sweeping new powers and allow the ISOC chief to implement security measures such as searches without seeking approval from the prime minister. Apart from this the ISOC is under the authority of the Office of the Prime Minister.

Communist Suppression Operations Command

The CSOC was established in 1966 with the assistance of the United States to coordinate nationwide anti-Communist operations.archive.spp.edu.pdf and  "The Causes of Military Insubordination: Explaining Military Organizational Behavior in Thailand", Paper presented at the 46th Annual Meeting of the International Studies Association in Honolulu, Hawaii, March 2005Murray, Charles, "The domino that didn't fall" The Atlantic, November 1984 v254 p34(8)
Following the 17 November 1971 coup by military dictators Thanom Kittikachorn and Prapas Charusathian, Praphas appointed himself Interior Minister, Chief of Police, and head of the CSOC.
The CSOC was implicated in several atrocities in its 1970s war against leftist groups. This included the murder of southern Thai activists by putting them into drums of boiling oil.
Student leader Thirayut Boonmee showed evidence that the destruction of Ban Na Sai village in the Northeast of Thailand was the handiwork of the CSOC.
The ISOC succeeded the CSOC after the overthrow of Thanom and Prapas.

Operations during the 1970s

The ISOC conducted operations in cities and the Thai countryside to subvert leftist groups through propaganda and violence. "The King Never Smiles", Yale University Press: 2006, page 222 In 1973, the ISOC commenced a bombing campaign against hill tribe villages in the North of Thailand.
Future Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda was a senior officer of the ISOC.
The ISOC's role declined starting in the early 1980s after the downfall of the CPT. However, its still had great influence. In 1 April 1987, after Prime Minister Kukrit Pramoj claimed that the ISOC had been brainwashed by communists, over 200 Thai Army Rangers attacked the Prime Minister's residence.Timeline of modern Thai history

Plot to assassinate Thaksin Shinawatra

ISOC Deputy Director Pallop Pinmanee was sacked from his position after Lieutenant Thawatchai Klinchana, his driver, was found driving a car containing 67 kilograms of explosives around the residence of Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra. Pallop denied all involvement, noting that "If I was behind it, I would not have missed." The Nation, 'If I was behind it, PM would be dead', 25 August 2006, Retrieved 25 August 2006The Nation, "Army officer arrested in alleged car bomb attempt is Pallop's driver: police", 25 August 2006 Metropolitan Police Bureau commissioner Lt-General Wiroj Jantharangsee noted that the explosives in the car were completely assembled, equipped with a remote unit sensor and ready to be detonated, and would have a blast radius of around one kilometre.The Nation, 'Bomb plot to kill Thaksin foiled', questions linger, 15 August 2006

Post 2006-coup ISOC

Thaksin planned a major restructuring of the ISOC prior to the coup which overthrew him in September 2006. Soon after the coup, the junta released three of the Army suspects in the car bomb plot. The ISOC was given wide-reaching authority over the National Counter Corruption Committee, the Department of Special Investigation, and the Anti-Money Laundering Office. The new ISOC was criticized as being a shadowy puppet master pulling strings among existing agencies, answerable to no one but its leader.The Nation, Thailand's Dept of Homeland Security, 12 December 2006
To protect people in the south of Thailand from insurgency-related violence, the ISOC produced Jatukham Rammathep amulets for distribution to the Buddhist minority. The renowned animist amulets were believed by some to have magical powers to protect their holders from violence and large sums are paid for them. The plan was developed by Colonel Manas Khongpan, deputy director of the ISOC in Yala province.The Nation, Amulets to 'help protect' Buddhists in South, 14 March 2007
The Cabinet of General Surayud Chulanont gave the ISOC staff an 84.3 million baht "reward". The ISOC had originally requested the reward in 2003, but was turned down by the Thaksin government.3m in Isoc 'rewards', 23 July 2007






