[[Camp David]]

CATEGORIES: Executive branch of the United States government, Buildings and structures in Frederick County, Maryland, Presidential residences in the United States, Houses in Frederick County, Maryland, Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower, United States Navy facilities, Works Progress Administration in Maryland, Official residences in the United States, Continuity of government in the United States

Camp David is the country retreat of the President of the United States. It is located in wooded hills about 62 miles (100 km) north-northwest of Washington, D.C., in Catoctin Mountain Park near Thurmont, Maryland."Park Map Viewer." Catoctin Mountain Park."Thurmont town, Maryland." US Census Bureau."Frequently Asked Questions." Catoctin Mountain Park, "10. Where is Camp David? The Presidential Retreat is within the park however, it is not open to the public and its location is not shown on our park maps for both security and privacy. If you're interested in historical information, visit our Presidential Retreat webpage." It is officially known as Naval Support Facility Thurmont and is technically a military installation; staffing is primarily provided by the U.S. Navy and the U.S. Marine Corps.
First known as Hi-Catoctin, Camp David was originally built as a camp for federal government agents and their families by the WPA. Construction started in 1935, and was completed in 1938. Camp David is not open to the general public. Catoctin Mountain Park does not indicate the location of Camp David on its official park maps due to privacy and security concerns.

Presidential use

Every president since Franklin D. Roosevelt has made use of Camp David.

Security issues

On July 2, 2011, an F-15 intercepted a small two-seat passenger plane flying near Camp David, when President Obama was in residence. The civilian aircraft, which was out of radio communication, was intercepted approximately 
On July 10, 2011, an F-15 intercepted another small two-seat passenger plane flying near Camp David when President Barack Obama was again in residence; the total number of interceptions over this July 9 weekend was three planes.

Gallery

Image:Camp David 29-0054a. W. Bush meets with his National Security advisors in the Laurel Lodge conference room on August 4, 1990.
Image:Camp David 4 p37126-25a-515h. Bush meets with his advisors at Camp David on January 17, 2004, while preparing for his State of the Union address.
Image:CAMPDAVIDIRAQ. Bush in Baghdad, Iraq.
Image:Georgebushjuly2007campdavid. Bush and Chief of Staff Josh Bolten walk together with the President's dog Barney at Camp David, July 21, 2007.
Image:Shinzo Abe & George W Bush, 2007Apr27. Bush at Camp David in 2007.
Image:NIXONSCAMPDAVIDwithdogs.
Image:Begin, Carter and Sadat at Camp David 1978.
Image:Menahem_Begin_poses_at_Camp_David_1978.
Image:Sadat Carter Begin, Camp David 1978.
Image:Carter and Sadat.
Image:President Reagan and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher at Camp David 1986.
File:JFK & Kids with horse at Camp David, 1963. Kennedy, John F. Kennedy, Jr., and Caroline Kennedy (riding 'Tex')
File:David Eisenhower in Camp David. Eisenhower, poses with sign at presidential retreat named in his honor, 1960
Image:Camp_David_1959.jpg|Main Lodge during Eisenhower administration, 1959
Image:NSC_meeting. Eisenhower meets with his National Security Council at Laurel Lodge, 1955
Image:G8 Summit working session on global and economic issues May 19, 2012. (Clockwise) Obama (standing), Cameron, Medvedev, Merkel, Van Rompuy, Barroso, Noda, Monti, Harper, and Hollande.
File:ObamaBidenCampDavid.



Notes




