[[Dan Ackman]]

CATEGORIES: American columnists, Collegiate School (New York) alumni, Wesleyan University alumni, American civil rights lawyers, Columbia Law School alumni, Living people, Year of birth missing (living people), Place of birth missing (living people)

Dan Ackman is an American journalist and civil rights lawyer, who graduated from Wesleyan University and  Columbia Law School. He has written on law, policy, business, and sports for such publications as The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times, New York Daily News, Newsday, New York Post, The American Lawyer, The New York Observer, Slate, Inc., Pink Magazine, Salon and Forbes. He has also been a columnist for Forbes. At Forbes.
Some of his notable television appearances include:
In addition to writing about law and business, Ackman has written extensively about off-beat sporting events such as ping pong, squash, the world cyber-games World Cyber Games, and white collar boxing Gleason's gym.

Civil rights law

As a lawyer, Ackman has successfully represented taxi drivers in claims against the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission (TLC). These victories include:
On March 25, 2011, in Nnebe v. Daus, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit vacated in large part a district court ruling that permitted the TLC to suspend a taxi driver based solely on an arrest (including misdemeanor arrests) and continue that suspension without a meaningful hearing, and without any evidence or suspicion that the driver had ever harmed a passenger. (New York Law Journal, March 28, 2011). Professor Epstein noted as well that 90% of the cabbies who were arrested and suspended over the years were ultimately exonerated.)
Another case, Rothenberg v. Daus, contests TLC's practice of revoking taxicab drivers' licenses who are convicted of a crime, including non-violent misdemeanors and even traffic infractions, almost always occurring when the cab driver was off duty.  The TLC had succeeded in winning a motion to dismiss, but the Second Circuit Court of Appeals vacated the district court order and reinstated] all of the cabdrivers' claims.
Ackman is challenging the legitimacy of the city's administrative law tribunals in two lawsuits pending in the New York federal courts and has led the successful effort to discredit the TLC's charges that a majority of the city's taxi drivers have overcharged passengers.






