[[Kevin Hart]]

CATEGORIES: 1979 births, 21st-century American male actors, African-American male actors, African-American male comedians, African-American stand-up comedians, American male film actors, American male television actors, Living people, Male actors from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

Kevin D. Hart (born July 6, 1979)

Early life

Kevin Hart was born on July 6, 1979, in North Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. He was raised by his single mother, Nancy, and has one older brother, Robert Hart. His father, Henry, a cocaine addict, was in and out of jail throughout most of Kevin's childhood. Kevin used his natural ability to make people laugh as a coping mechanism to deal with his family struggles and to stay out of trouble.

Stand-up career

Hart's first gig was at The Laff House in Philadelphia under the name of Lil Kev, which didn't go well. His career suffered a slow start, as he was booed off stage several times, once even having a piece of chicken thrown at him.
It took time for Hart to develop a unique comedic style. After an early period of attempting to imitate comedians like Chris Tucker, he found his own rhythm by delving into his insecurities and life experiences.  "Because of what I do, it has to be an open book," he has said. "But right now this is a book that is being written."
Hart draws his inspiration from role models like fellow Philadelphian Bill Cosby, Chris Rock, Eddie Murphy, and Dave Chappelle. He strives to combine the best qualities of all these men into his own act. "When you talk about your flaws, people gravitate towards you," Hart said in an interview with Rolling Stone magazine. "I'm just not that manly man." This humility may be somewhat attributed to his short stature, since he is only five feet, four inches tall.
Hart's comedy tours began in 2009 with his act titled "I'm a Grown Little Man," followed by "Seriously Funny" in 2010, "Laugh At My Pain" in 2011, and most recently, his TV special titled "Let Me Explain" in 2013. Hart grossed over $15 million from "Laugh At My Pain," making it one of the year's top-selling comedy tours. Hart also has a game available through iTunes called "Little Jumpman." His Facebook page, Twitter account, and YouTube channel are all connected to and accessible through this app. Most overseas fans of Hart discovered him on YouTube, as well.
It was announced in October 2013 that ABC will be making a 30 minute pilot based on Hart's stand-up act.  Hart does not plan to star in the sitcom, but does plan on having a recurring role.

Personal life

On May 22, 2003, Hart married Torrei Hart and they had two children, Heaven Leigh and Hendrix. In February 2010 the couple filed for divorce, citing irreconcilable differences. Hart requested joint custody; looking to prevent Torrei from receiving money in the divorce, due to the fact that she is a comedian herself with sufficient income to support herself. The pair's relationship troubles have made their way into both of their stand-up acts. Even though negative remarks were made about one another during the course of the divorce proceedings, Hart says there are no hard feelings, stating, "We just didn't work out, but we're friends."
Hart's relationship with his father is much better now that the latter has recovered from his addiction. He said in an interview with The New York Times, "My dad said I was supposed to be on drugs.  I was like, 'Dad, shut up,' but then I thought about it, and it was stupid, but it made sense. He was saying that basically he was my example to never go down that road."
Hart also talks about his mother in his stand-up routine, portraying her as a loving, yet intimidating woman. In 2006, she died from cancer.
On April 14, 2013, Hart was arrested on suspicion of drunk driving after his black Mercedes nearly collided with a tanker truck on a Southern California freeway. Hart failed a field sobriety test and was booked for misdemeanor DUI."Drunken driving arrest a 'wake-up' call, comedian Kevin Hart says", CNN, April 15, 2013.  On August 5, 2013, Hart was sentenced to three years' probation after pleading no contest to one count of driving under the influence of alcohol.

Awards and honors

In 2005, he was nominated for the BET Platinum Mic Viewers' Choice Award.
In 2012 Hart was named MVP of the NBA Celebrity All-Star Game regardless of the fact that he was ejected in the fourth quarter for cursing at the referee and taking off one of his shoes and throwing the other across the court. He scored eight points and had six assists in the game.
Hart then hosted the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards. His longtime friend Judd Apatow, the director who gave him his first big on-screen break in the TV series Undeclared, was the one who recommended him for the gig. Hart hopes that this will project him further into a side career as an emcee, stating, "Hopefully after MTV, of course we're talking Emmys, Oscars, whatever."
In 2012, Hart won a Best Actor trophy at the BET Awards for his performance in the box-office hit movie Think Like a Man.
On February 22, 2014, he won 2 NAACP Image Awards including, Entertainer of the year, and best actor in a comedy series.

Filmography






