[[Pallop Pinmanee]]

CATEGORIES: 1936 births, Living people, Thai politicians, Thai generals, Chulachomklao Royal Military Academy alumni, Members of the Senate of Thailand

General Pallop Pinmanee () (born 25 May 1936) is a retired Thai Army general who took part in several coups, ordered the massacre of insurgents at Krue Sae Mosque and allegedly played a role in the attempted car bomb assassination of Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra. After the a 2006 military coup overthrew Thaksin, the military junta appointed Pallop the public relations adviser to the Internal Security Operations Command of Thailand.

Military career

Pallop was a member of Class 7 of the Chulachomklao Royal Military Academy, the so-called Young Turks, where he developed a close personal friendship with his classmate Chamlong Srimuang.New York Times, Thai Security Chief Vows a Tough Stand Against Muslim Separatists, 27 May 2007 With his Young Turk classmates, he was involved in successful military coups against the governments of Seni Pramoj and Tanin Kraivixien, and an unsuccessful April Fool's Day 1981 coup against the government of Prem Tinsulanonda. 
He took part in special guerrilla warfare missions in Laos in 1966 and 1967, and the following year was appointed chief of the Special Thai Ranger Army, a volunteer unit which carried out clandestine, anti-communist guerrilla operations financed by the US Central Intelligence Agency against the North Vietnamese Army along the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos. "The assignment was to kill the leaders of communist groups all over Thailand," he told a reporter.  He claimed to have assassinated many suspected communists.  
Pallop was appointed a senator by the military led government in 1979, and became commander of the 19th Infantry Regiment in 1980.  He also played a role in operations in the Thai-Cambodian border during 1986 and 1987.Bangkok Post, "General urges two-pronged attack", 15 January 2006
Pallop is known to have been involved in several coups.  Along with other members of "Young Turks", he helped topple the elected government of Seni Pramoj after the massacre of 6 October 1976.  He also took part in the coup against the ultra-conservative government of Tanin Kraivixien in 1977.  During the Prem government, the Young Turks tried to seize power on 1 April 1981.  When it became clear that the royal family continued to support Prem, the coup collapsed and Pallop fled to the Lao PDR to escape punishment.  He was jailed for two months by the Laotian government.  Pallop later admitted that he was the mastermind behind a series of assassination attempts against General Arthit Kamlang-ek, commander of the Army during Prem's administration.
Pallop was later "rehabilitated" and retired from the Royal Thai Army with the rank of full general in 1996, but was appointed deputy director-general of the Internal Security Operations Command. It was in this position that he ordered military forces to storm Krue Sae Mosque during a tense stand-off with Southern insurgents.

Krue Sae mosque incident

Pallop was appointed commander of the Southern Peace Enhancement Center to deal with the insurgency in southern Thailand. On 28 April 2004, more than 100 militants carried out attacks against 10 police stations across Pattani, Yala and Songkhla provinces in southern Thailand.  A seven hour stand-off ended when Pallop, the most senior Army commander on the scene, ordered an assault on the mosque.  All the insurgents were killed.  He later said, "I had no choice. I was afraid that as time passed the crowd would become sympathetic to the insurgents, to the point of trying to rescue them."The Nation, "Southern Carnage: Kingdom Shaken", 29 April 2004
It was revealed that Pallop's order to storm the mosque contravened a direct order by Defense Minister Chavalit Yongchaiyudh to seek a peaceful resolution to the stand-off no matter how long it took.  The forward command of the Internal Security Operations Command (ISOC), which Pallop headed, was also dissolved.  A government investigative commission found that the security forces had overreacted.  The Asian Centre for Human Rights questioned the independence and impartiality of the investigative commission.  In 3 May 2004 during a Senate hearing, Senator Kraisak Choonhavan, noted that most of those killed at Krue Se Mosque were shot in the head and there were signs that rope had been tied around their wrists.  
The incident resulted in a personal conflict between Pallop and Defense Minister Chavalit, who was also director of the ISOC.Wassana Nanuam, "Security conflicts erupt in open"

Opposition to Thaksin Shinawatra

Pallop is a noted critic of former prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra.  During protests in early 2006 against Thaksin, Pallop noted that "as a real friend and former classmate from military school, I fully support Chamlong (Srimuang) in his move (to oust Thaksin)."  He also threatened Thaksin with a military coup if Thaksin did not resign from the premiership.[ref]
 Bangkok Post, "Panlop: Military coup possible", 27 February 2006[/ref]

Assassination plot against Thaksin Shinawatra

Pallop was dismissed from his position of ISOC Deputy Director after Lieutenant Thawatchai Klinchana, his driver, was found driving a car containing 4.5 kg of explosives around the residence of prime minister Thaksin. Metropolitan Police Bureau commissioner Lt-General Wiroj Jantharangsee noted that the explosives in the car were completely assembled, equipped with a remote unit sensor and ready to be detonated.The Nation, "Explosives 'live and ready for detonation'", 26 August 2006 The bomb was composed of sticks of a remote control unit, M-8 military fuses, TNT, C-4 plastic explosives, and nine plastic containers containing ammonium nitrate fuel oil (ANFO).
Pallop denied all involvement, noting that "If had wanted to do it, I would have done it more subtly. In my career, I have led death squads.  If I had wanted to kill him, the prime minister would not have escaped.com/2006/08/25/national/national_30011902."The Nation, "'If I was behind it, PM would be dead'", 25 August 2006

After the 2006 coup

A military coup overthrew the Thaksin government in 19 September 2006. The junta appointed Pallop public relations adviser to the ISOC in May 2007.  He claimed that he would apply "secret tricks" and a negotiated approach that would not lead to violent clashes: "Don't see me as a man who favours violence".
During the political crisis that began in October 2013, Pallop confirmed with the media in late February 2014 that he had been asked by the caretaker government to join the Centre for Maintaining Peace and Order (CMPO).

Personal life

Pallop is married to Khunying Naruedee Pinmanee.



Further reading


