[[John Still (footballer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1950 births, Living people, People from West Ham, Sportspeople from London, Footballers from Newham, English footballers, Association football defenders, Leyton Orient F.C. players, Bishop's Stortford F.C. players, Dagenham F.C. players, The Football League players, English football managers, Dagenham & Redbridge F.C. managers, Peterborough United F.C. managers, Barnet F.C. managers, Luton Town F.C. managers, Lincoln City F.C. non-playing staff, The Football League managers, Football Conference managers

John Leonard Still (born 24 April 1950) is an English former footballer and the current manager of Luton Town.
After his playing career was cut short by injury, Still began managing non-League clubs around his hometown area of East London, Essex and Kent, achieving title wins with three different clubs. He was manager of Redbridge Forest in 1992 when the club merged with Dagenham to become its current incarnation – Dagenham & Redbridge. Still accepted his first job in The Football League in August 1994 at Peterborough United, and later joined Barnet in June 1997. He took the club to the play-offs twice, before leaving in 2002 after the club was relegated to the Football Conference. Still returned to Dagenham & Redbridge in April 2004, promoting the club to League Two in 2006–07 and then to League One in 2009–10. The club was relegated back to League Two the following season. In February 2013, after nine seasons in charge, Still left Dagenham to join Luton Town. In his first full season as Luton's manager, the club were crowned as Conference Premier champions and won promotion to League Two, making Still the only manager to lead three different clubs to promotion out of non-League football.
Still has earned a reputation for spotting young talented footballers in the non-League game, particularly during his time at Dagenham. A number of players that Still has developed have gone on to play in the Championship and even the Premier League.

Playing career

Born in West Ham, Still joined Leyton Orient as a junior, signing as an amateur for them in May 1967. He made his league debut the following season, playing at centre-back against Torquay United, but that proved to be his only league appearance before being released, having injured his knee in the game.

Management career

Part-time career

Still's first managerial job came with Leytonstone in the late 1970s, who subsequently merged with Ilford to become Leytonstone & Ilford. He took the club to their first Isthmian League title in the 1981–82 season. In 1983, Still joined Dartford as manager, where he won the Southern League title before returning to Leytonstone & Ilford for a short time. His next post was in 1986 at Maidstone United, where he guided them to the Conference title and promotion to The Football League in 1989. Still resigned soon after, having no desire to move into a full-time role, and moved to Isthmian League side Redbridge Forest, which had been formed in 1989 by a merger of his former club Leytonstone & Ilford and Walthamstow Avenue. He guided Redbridge to the Isthmian League title, and with it promotion to the Conference, in the 1990–91 season. Still took Redbridge to a seventh placed finish in the next season, and remained with the club as it yet again merged, this time with Dagenham to become Dagenham & Redbridge, in the summer of 1992. The club finished the 1992–93 season in third and the 1993–94 season in sixth.

Peterborough United

In August 1994, Still accepted the manager's role at recently relegated Second Division side Peterborough United. In his first season in charge, Still led the club to a 15th placed finish. He was sacked by the club on 24 October 1995 after winning only three of Peterborough's first 13 league games of the 1995–96 season. While at Peterborough, he gave debuts to players such as Adam Drury, Giuliano Grazioli and Mark Tyler. 

Barnet

After leaving Peterborough, Still became a coach at Third Division club Lincoln City, before being appointed as manager of their divisional rivals Barnet in June 1997. In preparation for the 1997–98 season, Still primarily signed players he had worked with at Peterborough, including Ken Charlery, Greg Heald, Billy Manuel, and Scott McGleish. In his first season in charge, Still took Barnet to the Third Division play-offs, but lost 3–2 in the semi-final to Colchester United.
In November 2000, Still became Barnet's director of football following the high-profile appointment of former England international Tony Cottee as player-manager. At the time, Barnet were sitting in tenth place in the league, but soon suffered a sharp loss of form and plunged down the table to the relegation zone. On 16 March 2001 Cottee left after losing 13 of his 19 league games as manager, and Still returned to lead the team for the remainder of the season. At the time, Barnet were 14th in the table, winless in seven league games and had been knocked out of the FA Trophy. 
Still remained as Barnet's director of football until the end of the 2001–02 season, before leaving to become the assistant manager of Third Division side Bristol Rovers in May 2002, joining up with Ray Graydon.

Dagenham & Redbridge

On 16 April 2004, Still returned to non-League football, taking over as manager of Dagenham & Redbridge for a second time.
In his third season in charge, his team began well, losing only three of their first 20 matches to sit in second place in the table by November. The team continued its winning form and, on 7 April 2007, won the Conference National title and promotion to League Two for the first time in the club's history with five games of the season left to play.
In the 2007–08 season, Still prevented Dagenham from being immediately relegated back into non-League by guiding them to a 20th place finish, seven points away from the relegation zone. In the following season, Dagenham missed out on a play-off place by one point. Still's team ended that campaign as the league's top scorers with 77 goals in 46 games, and had the second best goal difference behind only league winners Brentford.
In the 2009–10 season, Still led the club to their then-highest ever finish in their history – seventh in League Two – which allowed them to qualify for the play-offs. His team beat Morecambe 7–2 on aggregate in the play-off semi-final, which included a 6–0 win in the first leg. 
Still's team struggled to compete on their limited budget in League One, and were relegated on the last day of the 2010–11 season following a 5–0 defeat to Peterborough United. On 13 May 2011, Still turned down the managerial job at League Two side Bradford City. 
He presided over the reconstruction of Dagenham & Redbridge's squad in 2011–12 as his team finished in nineteenth position. At the beginning of the following season, Still was assured by the Dagenham board that no players would be sold; information which he then relayed to his players. Before leaving Dagenham, Still was the longest serving Football League manager, having spent nine years at the club.

Luton Town

On 26 February 2013, Still joined Conference Premier side Luton Town, replacing Paul Buckle. Still signed a two-and-a-half-year contract with the club, stating that he wanted to bring stability after it had employed four different managers in four seasons.
The changes began to have the desired effect; on 21 December 2013, following a run of form in the league that put Luton in a strong position to challenge for the title, it was announced that Still had signed a new contract through to 2015 with the condition that, for each promotion the club won, an additional year would be added to the contract. Still hailed the campaign as "the most remarkable season ever" that he had been involved in, with his side breaking a number of long-standing club records including the longest league unbeaten run (27 games), most consecutive away games unbeaten (15), most clean sheets (23), and most points accumulated (101).

Managerial style

Still has been described as a "direct and conventional tactician", often utilising a target man and fast wingers and/or strikers in either a 4–4–2 or 4–3–3 formation. 
Still's teams have been labelled as "fit and organised", and he has stated that he always employs a fitness and conditioning coach.
He has won praise for his man-management and talent spotting skills, especially his ability to discover young players in non-League football at the sixth tier and below, develop them and then sell them – often for a significant profit. Players that Still has developed that have gone on to play at a higher level include Marlon King, Craig Mackail-Smith, Paul Benson, Sam Saunders, Danny Green, and Dwight Gayle. Dagenham & Redbridge managing director Steve Thompson has stated that Still's ability to do this kept the club consistently able to compete while operating on a far smaller budget than its rivals. have also led to highly-rated young players from Premier League academies joining his teams on loan. Examples include Marlon Pack, Ben Reeves and Matt Ritchie at Dagenham, and Ryan Inniss, Cameron McGeehan and Pelly Ruddock at Luton.
Elite Soccer Coaching magazine has stated that Still's "likeable character" and ability to find and develop players from the non-League game have made him one of the most respected coaches in English football.

Honours

Managerial statistics








