[[Dorabase]]

CATEGORIES: Comedy anime and manga, Baseball anime and manga, Children's manga, Doraemon

小学館：ドラベース ドラえもん超野球(スーパーベースボール)外伝 1) is a baseball manga spin-off series by Shintaro Mugiwara based on the characters of long-running series Doraemon since 2000. Though an official series, it is unlike The Doraemons, which is more closely related to the main series.
It is published in Shogakukan's CoroCoro Comic magazine. It is also published in Indonesia by Elex Media Komputindo, in Malaysia by Tora Aman, in Thailand by Nations group and in Vietnam by Kim Dong Publishing House.

Plot

The story takes place in 22nd century, Tokyo. It is about Doraemon's friend in the same type of robot, Kuroemon, who keeps fighting to be a notable baseball athlete. Though it shows Doraemon in the beginning, it doesn't focus on Doraemon as he didn't continue to be Kuroemon's teammate. It features a lot of imaginary ability, and in the baseball game, each team is allowed to use up to three gadgets.
The story of Kuroemon ends in 2011. In 2012, CoroCoro Comic starts the second series with the new protagonist, Tamaemon and his team.

Series 1 teams

Clubs

=Edogawa Doras=

The main characters' team. Started out as a rookie team that never wins, until Hiroshi joined up as the new pitcher (replacing Doraemon) and help them win their first victory against the Mongas. Most members of the team are cat-like robots.
Kuroemon
Captain of the Edogawa Doras. Originally a 'freelance' robot that lives with, as well as work for, Hiroshi's family. His passion for baseball started when he arrives at Hiroshi's house and watches a baseball game on television. He then formed up the Doras. He has an intimate rivalry with Shiroemon, an old friend from the Robot School. Initially lacking in skills that Shiroemon possesses, he grew more skillful on an exponential scale as the story progresses, and have achieved a status to be considered one of Japan's best amateur baseball players. He has defeated most (if not all) pitchers from Edogawa, as well as countless other enemies from other provinces of Japan and even from overseas. His special move is called the "Daikon-slicing Fullmoon Swing" (a variant of the "Fullmoon Swing" originated by Pokoemon), "Black Hole" (which he used to hit Amoll's Red dragonfly ball), "Deadly Driver Shoot" (swinging the bat downward in mid-air in a slicing motion to counter's Shiroemon's WWW ball) and "Crescent Moon Sword" (used when Pokoemon knew the weakness of the Deadly Daikon-slicing Fullmoon Swing). He have also learned the Flamingo style batting by raising one leg, bending it like a Flamingo, increasing his power by tenfold, he learned this in order to defeat Drump in the WABC.
Hiroshi Fujimoto
The only son of a family that owns a delivery business, called the "Doraneko Delivery Service". Before joining team Doras, he has been helping his mother run the delivery business ever since his father died. Years of lifting heavy delivery boxes gave him strong shoulders, resulting in powerful pitches. Initially, his pitches lack control, and only after 'training' on the island that his accuracy and ball control improves. While he was selected to represent Japan in the WABC with Shiroemon's recommendation, he was unable to play due to an accident. The only human member of the Doras. His special skill is the forkball.
Pakuemon
A large cat robot who works at a pre-school. He's very kind to human children, but probably not child robots (observed from his reaction to Chibiemon's curiosity when Chibiemon first met the team). His large body makes him a natural catcher. He's always seen eating dorayakis. He played a big part in the match against the Yamadera Bears, by hitting Pokoemon's fast ball, scoring the final point.
Hyoroemon
A tall and very talkative cat robot who works as a shopkeeper of a fish shop. Hyoroemon can be very passionate, ranging from his passion to fight for the team, to getting angry at other team members (especially at Chibiemon), although he rarely acts hostile. Often cheer up the team when the morale is low. Being the tallest member of the team, Hyoroemon has the ability to lunge for a hit ball further than any other member, as well as being able to jump higher and catch higher balls. In volume 18, he challenged Shiroemon, Arakawa Whiters' pitcher in a duel, after losing he admits that he will quit the Edogawa Doras.
Suzuemon
Apparently a robot cat assembled for a privileged family. He seems to have some talent for baseball, but because he does not want to get his uniform dirty, he usually avoids sliding and lunging. Possibly by luck, he tends to be one of the first members to experience a particularly powerful or tricky pitch. Thus finally being noticeable at the WABC (World Amateur Baseball Classic) finals, by hitting Drump's Queen ball.
Aimond
Another passionate member of the team. Normally very cool and collecting, in the baseball field he becomes hot blooded. Originally from a team called "Lobsters" in Florida, he left America for Japan to pursue his dream in improving his skills when the team broke up after another member of the team, Randy, quit. Rumor has that he joined the Doras because he mistook them for a professional team. He's living with Mr. Inazuma presently without paying for the accommodation (or indeed, for anything). His special moves, most notably the "Barbecue Impact", sets the ball on fire that is sparked from the impact of the ball onto his heavily oiled metal baseball bat. He then was called for at the WABC, to represent America, giving them the glory after hitting Shiroemon's 180 km/h fastball.
Toraemon
The fastest member of the Doras. Possess tiger stripes around his body. In one case he had puzzled the opposing team by doing a bunt that drops directly in front of the pitcher, and yet Toraemon was able to reach the first base before he is forced out. He lives in a boat situated in the Edogawa river and loves fishing. He has super speed, and seem to be interested in soccer more than baseball.
Pyokoemon
A member of the team who looks somewhat like a half-broken cat robot and works at the robot repair facility. His ability to send his hands some distance away from his body (attached by a spring) result in many fine plays, even when the ball looks like it's going to be a home run. His ability also has a disadvantage: his body often falls apart from moderately forceful contacts due to its instability. While most of the time he is very reliable, he can come out as being completely unglued, for example sending out his head to catch the ball instead of his gloved hand. He was then took apart by Retsu in the match against the Edogawa Boros, given that he crashed to the Boros' pitcher, Borosuke.
Guriemon
Guriemon works at a tutoring school. A born strategist, Guriemon can read the game effectively and give hand signals and read them with great efficiency. It is Guriemon who noticed that Monga's hair correlates with what kind of pitch he's about to make, in the Dora's game with Mongas. Before the second match of the Big Dome Cup, he told the team that he has to leave the team, because he passed the highly competitive exam to enter the nation's best university to study biology, but the university is situated very far from the team's base of operation. This angered Hyoroemon, who took it as an act of selfishness. Kuroemon, however, saw it as Guriemon simply following his dream, like how he himself follows his dream to one day defeat Shiroemon in baseball. Initially replaced by Mikachan, his position is further replaced by Chibiemon. Kuroemon promised him that Guriemon can keep his number and he is free to come back and rejoin the team anytime he wishes. Now, he is in a team called "Hokkai-Snowfoxes". But even so he continued to play because Kuroemon told him that baseball is a fun thing. He was asked by Hyoroemon to play in his place in the Baseball Tournament Across Japan.
Chibiemon
The  member of team Doras, he is an absolute beginner at the sport. He was found floating in a cardboard box in the Edogawa river just as the team was pondering where to find another member after Guriemon quit. After being taught the basics of baseball (in which he falls in love with the sport almost immediately), Kuroemon noticed the talent and potential that's hidden within the small cat robot. He can be a crybaby sometimes, but that is usually handled by Kuroemon giving him a dorayaki to chew/suck on to stop him from crying. On the surface he appears to be nothing more than a weight on the team, but has great potential (for example, he is able to outrun Toraemon). His will power is not any less than other member's. Currently lives with an old man on a house on Edogawa's riverside. He is clumsy to hit the ball. He was called 'having no use' by Hyoroemon in the match against Arakawa Whiters, then he caught the perfect homerun by Hirai by climbing up the vertical fence and catching the ball as he jumped and fell.
Mika-chan
Hiroshi's childhood friend. Mika-chan had always believed that Hiroshi has potential in being a good baseball player. Normally acts as a manager for the team. Also takes care of the equipments and first-aid of injured team members. Sometimes fill in as an emergency substitute when members are not enough, but such substitutions are often short-lived. When Mika-chan is about to get a chance at batting in Big Dome's Cup's third game, for example, Kuroemon arrives at the game. Also a beginner at the sport, but lacks the talent Chibiemon has.
Mikeemon
A former spy from the rival team Flyers, Mikeemon is extremely unskilled in baseball. At the match against Flyers, he scored the winning score for Doras. He is the only player who can time Amoll's "Dragonfly Ball" correctly.
Akaemon
An excellent and enthusiastic firefighter of Edogawa district, he loves baseball more than anything else and always has his baseball glove with him. He helped team Doras win all the matches in which he participated with his powerful pitches. His special skill is the "Water Slider".
Doraemon
The guest character. He is the main character of the manga with the same name, and the team's pitcher before he leaves the team for Nobita. He is introduced as Kuroemon's friend.

=Arakawa Whiters=

The team of Kuroemon's sworn opponent - Shiroemon. The names of the team members are references to bridges in Japan.
Shiroemon
Sworn opponent of Kuroemon, captain and pitcher of the Whiters. He used to be Kuroemon's best friend when they was at the robot academy, but their difference in attitude towards baseball caused their friendship to be broken. His trademark pitch is his "White (W) ball" which causes the ball to slide up and down continuously, creating a W pattern. This pitch is very hard to hit at the start of the series, but as the story progresses, players like Amoll and Drump can hit it easily on the first try. His pitches are the W ball, WW (Wide white ball) ball, WWW (Wonder wide white ball) ball, and World ball.
Hirai
The team's catcher and close friend of Shiroemon. He is a player with good physique, and that makes him one of the team's best hitter. He is also the only one who can catch Shiroemon's W ball. Although in the WABC, he wasn't used to Shiroemon's World ball, therefore made a mistake that led to Japan's defeat, but for the sake of his team, he can finally catch it as the Baseball Tournament Across Japan starts.
Komatsugawa
He used to be a bad player, but thanks to the hard training he made a great progress. He is also chosen to be one of Japan's representative for the WABC, along with Shiroemon and Hirai.
Senju
Kinegawa
Yotsugi
Shikahama
Oogi
Horikiri

=Yamadera Bears=

Pokoemon's team. All of the players are raccoons, and except for the Pokoemon brothers, they all have "Yama" in their names.
Pokoemon
Captain of the Yamadera Bears. He is able to use illusions by blinking his eye and stopping the time of everyone except himself for a brief period. He is initially a raccoon, but can transform into a ferocious bear once angered. His key tactic is by hypnotizing his opponents. He joined the WABC Japanese team. He is a first base couch at the war against Britain and is a pitcher against Australia. His Magic Balls are "Full moon throw" and "Super Full moon throw" and his Batting Technique is "Fullmoon Swing". He can also do Hypnosis.
Pon'emon
Pokoemon and Poroemon's brother. When he is angry he can transform into a giant lion and can run fast. He can also do "Fullmoon Swing" just like Pokoemon and Poroemon.
Poroemon
Pokoemon and Ponemon's brother. Nicknamed as Polo. When he is angry he can transform into a panda. He can also do "Fullmoon Swing" like Pokoemon and Ponemon. His Magic Balls are "Global Soap" and "Floating art of China".
Yamashita
Yamazaki
Kameyama
Was initially the second baseman, but converted to right fielder after Ponemon and Poroemon joined.
Yamakura
Aoyama
Was injured during training. Poroemon later replaced him.
Toyama
Yamamoto
Hirayama
Was injured during training. Ponemon later replaced him.

=Akane Flyers=

Amoll
Captain of the Akane Flyers. His killer pitches are the 'Dragonfly Ball', 'Red Dragonfly Ball' and variety of Dragonfly ball. The former pitch causes the ball to halt in the middle of the pitch and resume its movement seconds later, but is only limited to a straight line. The latter pitch is an upgraded version of the 'Dragonfly Ball', which causes the ball to shift its direction after the halt, making it harder to hit, and the latest one is the one that stop multiple times mid-air randomly. He also have the 'Dragonfly's return' where he jump and hit the ball if he can't reach it and hit the first baseman.
Ginjiro
Along with Yago, he is the team member who is closest to Amoll. He is good at doing surprise safety bunt.
Yago
A player who always end with "~yago" when talking. At first he cannot handle the curve balls, but he managed to overcome that weakness after Mikeemon joined the Edogawa Doras.

=Edogawa Boros=

Retsu
Founder, captain and catcher of the Edogawa Boros. He works at his dad's batting cage and is very good at technology. He is the kind of person who will do anything to gain wealth.
Borosuke
Formerly a pitching machine used in a batting cage, it was reproduced into a mechanical player by Retsu. It has a magic ball named "Spring Ball".

=Devil Kings=

America's strongest team, led by Drump.
Drump
He is captain of the Devil Kings, and the American WABC team. His killer pitches are the "Queen (Q) Ball" and "Royal Straight Flush". The Q Ball is a ball that makes a loop making the batter difficult to hit. The ball he showed in WABC, the Royal Straight Flush, that is a ball that turns into a giant metal ball. He is also good in one of his hit, "The King of Spade" - which is very fast that makes you think he made the ball disappear. He asked Aimond to join in the American Team, and beat Japan.
Randy
He used to play for the Lobsters and is Aimond's former teammate.  He joined the Devil Kings in order to cure his leg injury. He possesses a great jumping power, good catching ability and an impregnable defense. He is also good at batting. He has been selected to represent the United States in the WABC, as a catcher.
Lou
A talented player. He is excellent in both attack and defense. He has also been selected to represent the United States in the WABC.
Ryan
Although he is the team's shortstop, he can perform very well while playing as a pitcher. Like Lou, he is a talented player. Has been selected to represent the United States in the WABC, along with Drump, Randy and Lou.
Mark
The team's personal doctor. He is a highly skilled doctor who can cure any injuries. When Shiroemon was injured, Kuroemon had challenged Drump to a match, with the condition that if the Edogawa Doras wins, Mark will have to cure Shiroemon's injury, but if the Doras loses, Kuroemon must play for the Devil Kings.

=Edogawa Doras 2nd Squad → Great Doras=

Since Dora Nosuke was not accepted as Doras' coach, he built the Doras' Second Squad.
Dora Nosuke
Former coach of Kunugiyama Bugs. After losing to Edogawa Doras, he decided to help the Doras win against the Akane Flyers. However, he was not accepted as their coach, so he applied many newcomers, including the Pigsy Brothers: Bubuta, Bebeta and Bobota, to form the Doras' second squad. Eventually, they quit the Doras and then took up the name "Great Doras".
Bubuta
Captain of the 2nd Squad. He is a pig-like robot who always wanted to join the Doras after seeing the match between Doras and Whiters. His special hand allows him to throw the curveball, slider and forkball very well. He is also fairly good at batting.
Bebeta
One of the 3 pig-like robots. He is the strongest member of the team and can even break a metal bat easily, however he lacks endurance (he fainted after throwing a 170 km/h fastball). He performed fairly well in catching and batting.
Bobota
The biggest member of the team, he can do a pitch with his nose instead of his hand. His specialty is the Multi-image ball.
Makkuroemon
A black cat-like robot, he is believed to bring bad lucks. However, with this "ability", he helped team Doras win the quarter-final and semi-final of the 32nd Big Dome Cup without doing anything. He is also the only one from the second squad to survive in the marathon which will decide the main players of the Doras.

=Edogawa Doras (23rd century)=

The Edogawa Doras of the 23rd century.
96-emon
The captain of the team. He looks like Kuroemon. His technique is "Deadly Daikon-Slicing Sun Swing".
46-emon
He looks like Shiroemon. His technique is "Masshiro Ball" (M Ball) which causes the ball to go zigzag, making an M pattern.
Gurita
Looks similar to Guriemon.
Amorl
Looks similar to Amoll. He shows a brilliant defense in the team.
Ponpokoemon
Looks similar to Pokoemon.
Beruemon
Looks similar to Suzuemon.
Aimond Jr.
Looks similar to Aimond.
Drumper
Looks similar to Drump.
Dora Saburo
Looks similar to Dora Ichiro.

WABC

Other players

Series 2 teams

Clubs

=Tamagawa Doras=

Tamaemon
Shou
Mojaemon
Goroemon
Gonzaemon
Suneemon
Chokoemon
Takoemon
Jiroemon

Edogawa Doras' Game

 *Yamadera Bears (10-9)
 *Boso Turtles (1-0)
 *Arakawa Whiters (7-6)
 *Hana-chans (0-21)
 *Hokkai Snow-Foxes (9-7)
 *Ayakashi Lions (8-0)
 *Kunugiyama Bugs (8-2)
 *Akane Flyers (6-5)
 *Great Okapus (Win by default)
 *Tanagawa Giants (Win by default)
 *Arakawa Whiters (0-1)
 *England (7-5)
 *Australia (6-5)
 *Cuba (11-10)
 *America (2-4)
 *Boso Turtles (2-1)
 *Iriomote Mangroves (2-1)
 *Akita Orions (3-2)
 *Yamadera Bears (6-5)
 *Great Doras (Lose by default)






