[[Dave Mitchell (footballer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, Living people, Australian soccer players, Australian soccer coaches, Rangers F.C. players, Eintracht Frankfurt players, Feyenoord players, Chelsea F.C. players, NEC Nijmegen players, Newcastle United F.C. players, Swindon Town F.C. players, Altay S.K. footballers, Millwall F.C. players, Seiko players, Sydney Olympic FC players, Sydney United FC players, Perth Glory FC, Scottish footballers, Eredivisie players, Bundesliga players, Hong Kong First Division League players, Australia international soccer players, Olympic soccer players of Australia, Footballers at the 1988 Summer Olympics, Sydney Olympic FC managers, British expatriates in Hong Kong, Football Hall of Fame (Australia) inductees, Australian expatriate soccer players, Australian expatriates in the United Kingdom, Australian expatriates in Germany, Expatriate footballers in Germany, Australian expatriates in the Netherlands, Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands, Expatriate footballers in England, Australian expatriates in Turkey, Expatriate footballers in Turkey, Australian expatriates in Hong Kong, Expatriate footballers in Hong Kong, Australian expatriates in Malaysia, Expatriate footballers in Malaysia, Sportspeople from Glasgow, Scottish emigrants to Australia, National Soccer League (Australia) players, A-League managers

David Stuart "Dave" Mitchell (born 13 June 1962 in Glasgow, Scotland) is a former Scottish-Australian football (soccer) player and head coach of Malaysian Premier League club Kedah FA. A powerful striker, Mitchell is remembered as one of the pioneers for Australian players in Europe, appearing in the German Bundesliga, Dutch Eredivisie, Scottish Premier League, Turkish Super Lig, as well as the top-flight and second tier in England. In Asia, he played for clubs in Hong Kong and Malaysia. He made 44 appearances for the national team, scoring 13 goals, and appearing in the 1988 Summer Olympic Games in Seoul.

Playing career

Mitchell was born in Glasgow, but moved to Adelaide as a young child. In a stellar career, Mitchell successfully played for overseas clubs for more than a dozen years before returning to Australia to coach Sydney Olympic, Sydney United and Parramatta Power in the National Soccer League. He was the assistant manager to Ron Smith at A-League club  before taking the top position after Smith's sacking, helping the club end its winless streak.
As a player, Mitchell bought out his own contract at Adelaide City so he could join Rangers F.C, the club that his family supported in 1983. He broke into the first team at the same time as acclaimed Scotland striker Ally McCoist. Both he and McCoist scored their first goals for the club in the same Scottish League Cup game.
In 1985, Mitchell became the first Australian to feature in the Bundesliga, playing for two seasons for Eintracht Frankfurt. He also played for Dutch glamour club Feyenoord before securing a move to Chelsea FC in the top flight of English football. He also played - and scored - on-loan for Newcastle United becoming first Aussie to play and score for the famous North-East club.
Playing in the second-tier of English football, he had successful spells at Swindon where he played with Glenn Hoddle and helped them earn promotion to the English Premier League and Millwall where he scored 15 league goals in 55 games. He then moved to Malaysia and became a hero for scoring the winner in the 1995 Malaysia Cup final; this was a golden goal, the first golden goal to be scored in a Malaysia Cup final.
Mitchell finished his career with Australian clubs Sydney Olympic and Sydney United as he transitioned into coaching.  

Managerial career

Mitchell's coaching career in the NSL spanned six seasons and 154 matches, in which he recorded 68 wins, 31 draws and 55 losses. When he returned from playing in Europe he was a player/coach for clubs Sydney Olympic and Sydney United. Some of his coaching achievements include a Grand Final appearance in 1998–99 with Sydney United and also being the inaugural coach of Parramatta Power in 1999–2000.
Mitchell was appointed interim head coach of Perth Glory after the sacking of Ron Smith in November 2007 and was then given a contract until March 2009. It was further extended to the end of the 2010–11 season in November 2008.
Mitchell stepped down as  coach during the 2010–11 A-League season after an unbeaten run of five games until his side conceded four consecutive losses. He decided to move to the role of Director of Football. Mitchell then moved Ian Ferguson to the head coaching role to replace himself. Both positions were for the 2010–11 and 2011–12 seasons. On 4 March 2011, Mitchell was released from his contract from the club after the role was deemed redundant after an independent review of football operations at Perth Glory.  
In November 2013, Malaysian Premier League club Kedah FA announced on its website that Mitchell had been appointed head coach and was preparing for the 2014 Premier League season.
Mitchell has also worked as a scout for Feyenoord, acknowledging them about Brett Emerton, Brett Holman and Stephen Laybutt.

Honours

Player

Manager






