[[Megestrol acetate]]

CATEGORIES: Acetate esters, Antiandrogens, Antiestrogens, Antigonadotropins, Antineoplastic drugs, Glucocorticoids, Hormonal contraception, Progestogens, Steroids

Megestrol acetate (INN, USAN, BAN, JAN; sold mainly under the brand names Megace and Megace ES), also known as 17α-acetoxy-6-dehydro-6-methylprogesterone, and sometimes abbreviated as MGA or MA, is a steroidal progestin and progesterone derivative (specifically, a 17-hydroxylated progesterone) with predominantly progestational and antigonadotropic effects.
Though sometimes referred to simply as megestrol, it is important to clarify that megestrol acetate is not the same as megestrol, which is a closely related but different compound.

Uses

Megestrol acetate is used mainly as an appetite stimulant in a variety of conditions and as an antineoplastic agent in the treatment of breast, endometrial, and prostate cancers. When given in relatively high doses, it can substantially increase appetite in most individuals, even those with advanced cancer, and is often used to boost appetite and induce weight gain in patients with cancer or HIV/AIDS-associated cachexia. It is also used as a contraceptive in combination with an estrogen at relatively low doses.
In addition to its use in humans, megestrol acetate has been used extensively in veterinary medicine in the treatment of medical conditions in cats and dogs.

Dosage

Megestrol acetate is available as 5 mg, 20 mg and 40 mg tablets and in oral suspensions of 125 mg/ml and 40 mg/ml. It is used at a dose of 5 mg in combination with an estrogen for contraception. Appetite stimulation is achieved with doses ranging from 400 mg to 800 mg a day.  Doses used to treat cancer usually range from 40 mg to 320 mg.

Pharmacology

Megestrol acetate acts predominantly as a potent agonist of the progesterone receptor (PR) to exert its effects.
Megestrol acetate has powerful antiandrogenic and antiestrogenic effects in humans at sufficient doses, capable of decreasing circulating androgen and estrogen concentrations to castrate levels in both sexes and significantly lowering the expression of the androgen receptor (AR) and the estrogen receptor (ER) in the body;
Megestrol acetate is a high-affinity, weak partial agonist/antagonist of the AR,
Unlike the case of the AR, megestrol acetate has no significant affinity for the ER. As such, it does not possess the capacity to directly activate the ER. Furthermore, unlike conventional antiandrogens like cyproterone and flutamide, there is relatively little risk of indirectly-mediated estrogenic side effects (e.g., gynecomastia) with megestrol acetate. This is because conventional antiandrogens only suppress androgen activity (which, because androgen and estrogen activities are typically inversely proportional, results in heightened estrogen levels), whereas megestrol acetate suppresses both androgen and estrogen levels at the same time.
Megestrol acetate is an agonist of the glucocorticoid receptor, with similar but less affinity in comparison to the PR and the AR (about 37% and 50% of the affinity, respectively, according to one assay). One study found that, in the dose range tested, it possesses about 50% of the eosinopenic and hyperglycemic activity (markers of glucocorticoid activity) of an equal amount of medroxyprogesterone acetate, and about 25% that of cortisol.
Megestrol acetate is frequently used as an appetite stimulant. The direct mechanism of appetite enhancement is unclear, but it is known that megestrol acetate induces a variety of downstream changes to cause the effect, including stimulation of the release of neuropeptide Y in the hypothalamus, modulation of calcium channels in the ventromedial hypothalamus, and inhibition of the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines including IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α, all of which have been implicated in facilitation of appetite.

Side effects

The most common side effect of megestrol acetate is weight gain. Other side effects may include nausea, vomiting, impotence, edema, breakthrough bleeding, and shortness of breath. Rare and more severe side effects may include thrombophlebitis and pulmonary embolism. It may also cause glucocorticoid-related adverse effects such as adrenal insufficiency in some individuals and/or cases (especially if the medication is suddenly discontinued following prolonged use).

Contraindications

Megestrol acetate should not be used in pregnancy under any circumstance as it crosses the placenta and malignantly affects the fetus.answers.com/topic/megestrol-megace






