[[John Parke Custis]]

CATEGORIES: 1754 births, 1781 deaths, 18th-century American Episcopalians, American people of English descent, American planters, British North American Anglicans, Columbia University alumni, Custis family of Virginia, George Washington, Members of the Virginia House of Delegates, People from New Kent County, Virginia, Washington family, Children of Presidents of the United States

John Parke Custis (27 November 1754 – 5 November 1781) was a Virginia planter, the son of Martha Washington and stepson of George Washington.

Childhood

The son of Daniel Parke Custis, a wealthy planter, and Martha Dandridge Custis, he was most likely born at White House, his parents' plantation on the Pamunkey River in New Kent County, Virginia. Kneebone et al., eds., Dictionary of Virginia Biography (Richmond: Library of Virginia, 1998-    ), 3:639-640. ISBN 0-88490-206-4
Following his father's death in 1757, almost 18,000 acres (73 km²) of land and about 285 enslaved Africans were held in trust for him. In January 1759, his mother married George Washington. The Washingtons then raised him and his younger sister Martha (Patsy) Parke Custis (1756–1773) at Mount Vernon. Washington became his legal guardian, and administrator of the Custis Estate. Upon his sister's death in 1773 at the age of seventeen, Custis became the sole heir of the Custis estate.
Jacky also was a lazy, difficult and "free-willed" child. He took little to no interest in his studies.

Family

In 1773, at the age of eighteen, "Jacky", as he was known by his family, announced to the Washingtons his engagement to Eleanor Calvert, a daughter of Benedict Swingate Calvert and granddaughter of Charles Calvert, 5th Baron Baltimore.  George and Martha were greatly surprised by the marriage choice due to the couple's youth. During that year, Custis began to attend King's College (later Columbia University) in New York City, but left soon afterwards when his sister died.
On February 3, 1774, Custis married Eleanor at her family's home at the Mount Airy estate, whose restored mansion is now in Rosaryville State Park in Prince George's County, Maryland.
According to one account, Custis served on Washington's staff during the Siege of Boston in 1775-1776 and served as an emissary to the British forces there. He became the friend of a young British officer who gave him a weeping willow (Salix babylonica) twig that he planted at Abingdon.  The tree that grew from the twig reportedly became the parent of all weeping willows in the United States.
In 1778, Custis was elected to the Virginia General Assembly as a delegate from Fairfax County.
The terms of Abingdon's purchase were extremely unfavorable to Custis.  His behavior in this and other matters prompted Washington to write: "I am afraid Jack Custis, in spite of all of the admonition and advice I gave him about selling faster than he brought, is making a ruinous hand of his Estate."  By 1781, the financial strains of the Abingdon purchase had almost bankrupted Custis.
John and Eleanor had seven children, four of whom lived to maturity: 

Death

Custis served as a civilian aide-de-camp to Washington during the siege of Yorktown. However, Custis contracted "camp fever" there. Shortly after the surrender of Cornwallis, Custis died on November 5, 1781, in New Kent County at Eltham, the home of Colonel and Mrs. Burwell Bassett, brother-in-law and sister of Martha Washington. He was buried at his family's plot near Queen's Creek in York County, near Williamsburg, Virginia.
With Custis's premature death at age 26, his widow left their two youngest children (Eleanor and George) at Mount Vernon to be raised by the Washingtons. In 1783, she married Dr. David Stuart of Alexandria, Virginia, with whom she had 16 more children.
Custis died intestate, so his estate was not fully liquidated until the 1811 death of his  widow; his four children inherited more than 600 slaves.
Part of the Abingdon estate is now on the grounds of Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport At the time that he purchased Abingdon, Custis also bought a nearby property that after his death became the Arlington Plantation and later, Arlington National Cemetery

Ancestry

Notes




