[[2001 Michigan vs. Michigan State football game]]

CATEGORIES: College football games, Michigan Wolverines football, Michigan State Spartans football, 2001 Big Ten Conference football season, 2001 in Michigan

The 2001 Michigan vs. Michigan State football game, also known as Clockgate, was played on November 3, 2001 at Spartan Stadium.
While the game was closely played throughout, it is the game's conclusion that is most remembered. On fourth-and-goal, Michigan State quarterback Jeff Smoker threw a touchdown pass to running back T. J. Duckett as time expired to win 26–24.

Lead-up to the game

The Wolverines came into East Lansing with a 6–1 (4–0) record and a #6 ranking behind wins against Miami (Ohio), 
The Spartans came into the contest 4–2 (2–2) with early losses at Northwestern and Minnesota
By kickoff time at 3:30 pm EST, the weather was partly cloudy with a temperature of  The game was sold out to Spartan Stadium's capacity of 72,027 days in advance, and the final attendance was later announced as 75,262. ABC Sports carried the game live regionally with commentary from play-by-play announcer Brent Musburger, color commentator Gary Danielson, and sideline reporter Jack Arute.

Scoring

1st Quarter

On the opening drive of the game Michigan State found itself in a fourth down situation on Michigan's 31 yard line and sent punter Craig Jarrett onto the field along with two wide receivers to attempt a fake punt. Although Jarrett's pass was incomplete, Michigan cornerback Marlin Jackson was flagged for pass interference for his coverage on Charles Rogers, which gave Michigan State a fresh set of downs and 15 extra yards. Two plays later, Smoker threw a 17-yard touchdown to Rogers in the back of the end zone to give the Spartans a 7–0 lead.
On the ensuing drive, Michigan kicker Hayden Epstein made a school-record 57-yard field goal to put the Wolverines on the board and cut the lead to 7–3.

2nd Quarter

At 12:07 of the 2nd quarter, Michigan took its first lead on a 14 yard touchdown pass from John Navarre to Marquise Walker, capping an eight-play, 67-yard drive and making it 10–7.
On 3rd and 4, 7:45 into the 2nd quarter, the Spartans were driving on the Wolverines 13-yard line. Smoker threw an incomplete pass to Rogers in the end zone, but Michigan was flagged for pass interference once again. The penalty gave Michigan State a first down with goal to go, and on the very next play, T. J. Duckett ran 2 yards up the middle for a touchdown that put the Spartans up 14–10.
The Wolverines struck back on the next series, as Walker caught a 32-yard touchdown pass to complete an 80-yard drive and give Michigan a 17–14 lead.

3rd Quarter

The only scoring in the 3rd quarter came courtesy of Michigan State placekicker Dave Rayner, who kicked a 17-yard field goal with 12 seconds remaining in the quarter to knot the score at 17.

4th Quarter

With 7:33 left, Rayner hit another 17-yard field goal that gave Michigan State a 20–17 lead.
A Smoker fumble on the Michigan State 38 yard line was recovered by Michigan defensive tackle Grant Bowman with six minutes left. On the ensuing possession, Navarre threw a 20-yard touchdown to backup quarterback Jermaine Gonzales, who had lined up as a wide receiver, that gave the Wolverines a 24–20 lead.

Final drive

With 2:28 left in the fourth quarter, Michigan was forced to punt from deep in its own zone. Hayden Epstein's kick was his shortest of the day, a 28-yarder that gave the Spartans excellent field position at the Wolverines' 44 yard line. On first and second down, Smoker was sacked for two of the Wolverines' school-record 12 sacks. Following an incompletion, the Spartans faced 4th and 16 from midfield.
On fourth down, Smoker's pass fell incomplete, but Michigan defensive back Jeremy LeSueur was flagged for grabbing the facemask of receiver Charles Rogers, giving the Spartans fifteen yards and an automatic first down. Two plays later, wide receiver Herb Haygood caught a pass over the middle for 17 yards and another first down.
On 1st and 10, Smoker was sacked again by the Wolverine defense, but Michigan was flagged for having 12 men on the field. However, referees failed to stop the clock at the time of the penalty, forcing the Spartans to use their final timeout. After an incompletion on the resulting 2nd and 4 from the 12 yard line, LeSueur broke up a 3rd down pass intended for Duckett in the end zone to bring up 4th down. Facing 4th and 4, Smoker completed a slant up the middle to Duckett for 8 yards that resulted in a first and goal on the Michigan 3 yard line.
Michigan State rushed to spike the ball on 1st down, stopping the clock with 17 seconds left. On second and goal, Smoker rolled to the right and ran the ball down to the two yard line, but was tackled inbounds, so the clock continued to run. With time running out, the Spartans frantically lined up to spike the ball; when they did so, the stadium clock showed a single second remaining. Michigan coaches, players, and the ABC broadcasters argued that the clock should have expired on the play and that the timekeeper, known as "Spartan Bob", purposely stopped the clock before the ball was grounded. Michigan commentator Frank Beckmann speculated that Michigan State had benefited from its home field advantage, even calling the unfolding controversy "criminal" on the air. On the ensuing play, Smoker lobbed a pass into the back of the end zone where it was caught by Duckett, giving the Spartans a 26–24 victory.

Controversy

Debates on the last remaining second continue to this day. Some contend that clock operator Bob Stehlin, known colloquially as "Spartan Bob,"
Not all responses laid blame on the timekeeper. An editorial cartoonist at the Michigan Daily, the University of Michigan student newspaper, depicted the aftermath of the game with a Michigan player trying to explain to two referees that the clock ran out, but also holding a gun that he had used to shoot himself in the foot (implying that had they not made critical mistakes previously, the clock would have not been an issue).

Fallout

Three years after the game, Big Ten officials told The Detroit News that, upon further review, the clock operator acted appropriately. Dave Parry, the conference's coordinator of football officials, said, "that play, as much as we've put that under a high-powered microscope, was correct. We could not prove that timer wrong."
To prevent the controversy caused by this game and others, the Big Ten changed its timekeeping policy for the 2002 season, having previously studied changing the policy prior to the Michigan–Michigan State game. Now, time is kept on the field by a neutral official appointed by the Big Ten.
In addition to agreeing to change its policy on timekeeping, the Big Ten began a study on the feasibility of an instant replay system in 2003.
Still, to this day, the game has been dubbed a classic by college football fans due to the 1 tie, 7 lead changes, and ending controversy. ESPN Classic and the BigTen Network have both featured the game as part of their classic college football series.

Records






