[[Forward caste]]

CATEGORIES: Indian caste system

Forward caste (also known as Forward Class, Forward Community, and General Class) is a term used in India to denote groups of people who do not qualify for any of the positive discrimination schemes operated by the government of India. These schemes are known as Reservation Benefits. Those groups who qualify are listed as Other Backward castes or Scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, and they can take advantage of defined quotas amongst other benefits for education, tax benefits, special government schemes, government employment and political representation. The lists of Forward, Other Backward and Scheduled castes, and Scheduled tribes are compiled irrespective of religion... - Google BooksRural banking in India: an empirical ... - Google BooksSocial development and demographic ... - Google Books The lists are subject to change from time to time, dependent upon social, educational and economic factors. However, although lists are produced for those groups entitled to take advantage of the quotas, there is no such list for the forward caste group; if a person does not belong to any of the listed groups then that person is by default a member of a group classed as forward caste.

Status of reservation quotas in various states of India

The table below gives the proportion of the households belonging to various reserved categories in the total population as per the NFHS 2007 survey conducted by the Government of India.National Family Health Survey

Economic and educational status

The Government of India does not collect community census data except for SC/ST. Economic and educational level of various social groups are gauged using large-sample surveys. The National Sample Survey taken in 1999–2000 and the National Family Health Survey taken in 2005-2006 (or perhaps an earlier round of the NFHS)
, forward castes had to compete only in the open category, as they are considered socially, educationally, and economically advanced. At that time the reservation proportion stood at 50% in central-government educational institutions and central-government jobs. However, in certain states, such as Tamil Nadu, the reservation percentage was around 69%.Tamil Nadu's quota stir an assertion of its 69 percent? (NEWS ANALYSIS) - India

Reservation for economically backward among forward castes

Currently forward castes are only allowed to compete for seats in the unreserved category in educational institutions and central government jobs, irrespective of their educational/economical status in the society. However, a significant percentage of the Forward caste population lives below the poverty line and more than 30% of the members of this community are illiterate. To meet their aspirations, demands have been raised for providing separate reservations for the poor among Forward caste populations. Many political parties like BJP, Samajwadi Party, LJP, Rastriya Janata Dal, Communist Party of India(Marxist), Bahujan Samaj PartyExspressIndia.com Link 02The Hindu : National : Paswan for quota for economically backwardThe Hindu : Cong. for 'quota' for poor among forward castes have supported proposals for providing separate reservation for the poor among the forward castes. These parties account for over 400 of the 542 members in the current parliament, as well as holding power in most states in the union.

Timeline

Many backward caste leaders allege forward castes are over represented in many spheres of life. State and central governments have not released adequate data regarding representation of various communities in their services and admissions to educational institutions. Most of the private companies in India do not collect data regarding community of their employees. Very few reports are available regarding representation of various communities in public–private services and admissions in educational institutions.

Shrinking educational opportunities

During April 2006, India's Human Resource Minister announced that 27% seats will be reserved exclusively for candidates from Other Backward castes in addition to existing 22.5% reservation for Scheduled castes and Scheduled Tribes.The Hindu : Front Page : Quota for OBCs: "No escape for Government"
The implementation of OBC reservation meant that 50% of seats are available in open competition. All communities can compete in open competition which means forward castes must secure between 72% and 78% of the 'open competition' seats in order to maintain their representation in keeping with their estimated population of 36-39%, whereas other communities will get major chunk of seats through exclusive reservations. This has resulted in protests from Forward caste community members and supporters from other communities under the banner of Youth for Equality. and by All India Anti Reservation Front. They have pointed out following as reasons for their protests:
Many states do not have 27% of other backward caste population, as per national sample surveys. (This includes major Indian states like Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Goa, Maharashtra, Punjab, West Bengal). Some Indian states like Assam, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, has more than 50% forward castes population, which means the number of seats secured by forward castes will not be equal to their population proportion even if they secure 100% seats in open competition in central government institutions of these states. Central government, however, excluded 27% reservations to other backward castes to the areas with high tribal populations.com India News





Further reading


