[[Tristan Wilds]]

CATEGORIES: 1989 births, Living people, Male actors from New York City, African-American male actors, Hispanic and Latino American male actors, American male film actors, American male soap opera actors, American male television actors, American male child actors, American people of Dominican Republic descent, American people of Irish descent, People from Staten Island, 21st-century American male actors

Tristan Paul Mack Wilds (born July 15, 1989) is an American actor and Grammy-nominated recording artist. He is best known for his roles as Michael Lee on the HBO original drama series The Wire and as Dixon Wilson on the CW drama series 90210.

Early life

Wilds was born in Staten Island, New York, to Monique Moncion and Paul Wilds. He attended Michael J. Petrides School. He started acting at age seven, following in the foot steps of his older brother.

Acting career

In 2005 Wilds made his acting debut in The N Drama Mini-Series Miracle's Boys. Wilds has since guest appeared on television shows such as Cold Case and Law & Order. The following year Wilds made his film debut in a bit-role in the Independent Drama film Half Nelson alongside Academy Award Nominee Ryan Gosling.imdb. Most recently he made a cameo in the music video for How To Love by American Hip-Hop Rapper Lil Wayne.
In 2006 Wilds joined the HBO Drama television series The Wire in a major recurring role. Wilds portrayed Michael Lee, a troubled middle school student who is living in poverty and caring for his younger brother. The Wire cast mate Jermaine Crawford is his second cousin.
In July 2008 Wilds was cast in The CW Teen Drama television series 90210 a spin-off to Beverly Hills, 90210. The series ended on May 13, 2013, after five seasons.
In March 2009 Wilds was confirmed to star in the George Lucas War film Red Tails which follows the Tuskegee Airmen, a group of African American United States Army Air Force (USAAF) servicemen during World War II.
In July 2011 Wilds announced he had joined the Independent Drama film Indelible. In April 2009 a trailer was filmed to promote awareness of the yet-to-be filmed film.

Music

In 2010 Wilds signed a recording contract with Independent Record Label Ten2one. Wilds received his first Grammy Award nomination for Best Urban Contemporary Album for New York: A Love Story at the 56th Grammy Awards to be held on January 26, 2014.grammy.com/nominees?genre=27

Discography

Studio albums

Singles

Filmography/television






