[[Death of Salvador Allende]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 in Chile, Deaths by person, Salvador Allende

Salvador Allende, President of Chile, died during the Chilean coup of 1973 by the Chilean Army Commander-in-Chief Augusto Pinochet. Although he reportedly committed suicide shortly after giving a radio speech to the Chilean people, there has been great controversy regarding the circumstances of his death. Allende supporters have always dismissed the military junta's version of events because they believe he was assassinated. Allende's family stands by the official version of events, in which he committed suicide.
In May 2011, Allende's remains were exhumed and analyzed by a team of international experts, which concluded that the former president had shot himself with a rifle.

Death

On September 11, 1973, just prior to the capture of the Palacio de La Moneda (the presidential palace) by military units loyal to Pinochet, President Salvador Allende made his famous farewell speech to Chileans on live radio (Radio Magallanes). The president spoke of his love for Chile and of his deep faith in its future. He also stated that, as he was committed to Chile, he would not take an easy way out or be used as a propaganda tool by those he called "traitors" (accepting an offer of safe passage, like Carlos Altamirano). The radio address was made while gunfire and explosions were clearly audible in the background.
Shortly afterwards, an official announcement declared that he had gone to war with an AK-47 rifle. An autopsy also recorded his death as a suicide. 282 and following. 
Allende's weapon was purportedly given to him as a gift by Fidel Castro. It bore a golden plate engraved: "To my good friend Salvador from Fidel, who by different means tries to achieve the same goals". 511-512 and 519-520.

Official version

At approximately 1:50 PM local time, President Allende ordered the defenders  of the La Moneda Palace to surrender. The defenders then formed a line from the second floor, down the stairs and onto the Morande street door. The president went along this queue, from the ground floor up the stairs, shaking hands and thanking everyone personally for their support in that difficult moment. After he finished, he directed himself toward the Independence salon, located in the north-east side of the Palace's second floor.
At the same time, Dr. Patricio Guijón (a member of La Moneda's infirmary staff) decided to return upstairs to recover his gas-mask as a souvenir. He heard a noise, and opened the door of the Independence salon in time to see the president shoot himself with his AK-47 assault rifle. Accessed online 30 June 2008. From the other side of the salon and through an open door Dr. José Quiroga,Patricio Zamorano, Muerte de Allende: los testigos que quedaron fuera de la historia , La Opinión Digital, 11 September 2003. Accessed online 22 September 2006. Arsenio Poupin, a member of the cabinet, Enrique Huerta, a palace functionary, two detectives from the Presidential security detail, and some GAPs (Presidential Security) were able to see the moment of death, or arrive a few seconds afterwards, attracted by the noise.

Witnesses

All sources seem to agree that at least the following witnesses were present:
Of these witnesses, only Dr. Guijón spoke about the events immediately after they happened, and was roundly vilified for doing so. Some sources misattribute Guijón's declarations to "Allende's personal doctor": Dr. Enrique Paris Roa, who was at La Moneda not on his professional role but as a member of Allende's cabinet. He does not appear to have made any such statement as he was executed shortly afterwards. Reproduced online on the site of Oberlin College professor Steven S. Volk, accessed 22 September 2006. The other witnesses kept silent until after the restoration of democracy in Chile, as they believed (according to their own statements) that to corroborate the version of a suicide would in some measure downgrade Allende's sacrifice and lend support to the military regime.
Of the two doctors from the Moneda Palace infirmary who witnessed the suicide, Dr. Patricio Guijón made a statement at the time. But Dr. José Quiroga only confirmed the details in 1999. Reproduced online as part of an archive of Pape's articles, accessed 22 September 2006.

Controversy

Many Allende supporters have always presumed that he was assassinated by the forces staging the coup. On 28 September 1973 (only two weeks after Allende's death), Fidel Castro told a Cuban crowd in Havana's Plaza de la Revolución that Allende had died in La Moneda wrapped in a Chilean flag, firing at Pinochet troops with Fidel's rifle. Over the coming decades, the Cuban leader would continue to make public addresses using this version of events. 
The theory was the basis of Robinson Rojas' 1975 book The murder of Allende and the end of the Chilean way to socialism. It claimed that the Chilean president had been killed by Pinochet's military forces while defending the palace. The murder of Allende and the end of the Chilean way to socialism. 1985.
With the end of the military junta in Chile in 1988, the view that Allende committed suicide has become more accepted as different testimonies confirming the details of the suicide have become available in news and documentary interviews. Likewise members of Allende's immediate family including his wife and his daughter, have never disputed that it was a suicide.
In late January 2011, a Chilean judge ordered the exhumation of Allende's corpse as part of an inquiry into his death. that he died after shooting himself with an AK-47 given to him by Fidel Castro. The shots tore the top of Allende's head off, killing him instantly, because the rifle had been set to automatic fire.
However, on May 31, 2011, Chile's state television station reported that a top-secret military account of Allende's death had been discovered in the home of a former military justice official. The 300-page document was only found when the house was destroyed in the 2010 Chilean earthquake. After reviewing the report, two forensic experts told TVN "that they are inclined to conclude that Allende was assassinated."

Notes








