[[Brent Kite]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 births, Australian rugby league players, Australian people of Tongan descent, Australia national rugby league team players, Tonga national rugby league team players, Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles players, Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles captains, St. George Illawarra Dragons players, Penrith Panthers players, Country New South Wales Origin rugby league team players, New South Wales Rugby League State of Origin players, Prime Minister's XIII players, Clive Churchill Medal winners, People from Queanbeyan, Living people

Brent Kite (born 7 March 1981 in Queanbeyan, New South Wales) is an Australian professional rugby league footballer for the Penrith Panthers of the National Rugby League (NRL). A Tonga and Australia international, and New South Wales State of Origin representative front-row forward, he has played club football for the St. George Illawarra Dragons, and Sea Eagles. Kite was named the Clive Churchill Medallist for his performance in the 2008 NRL Grand Final, in which he helped steer Manly-Warringah to a 40 - 0 thumpingSydney Morning Herald 'Manly Hand Storm record thumping' of the Melbourne Storm, scoring one try.

Background

Kite played junior football with the Queanbeyan Blues.

Professional playing career

In late 2000 he travelled to Europe to play for the Tonga national rugby league team alongside Willie Mason in the 2000 World Cup tournament. 

St George Illawarra Dragons

Kite made his NRL debut for the St George Illawarra Dragons against the Cronulla-Sutherland Sharks at Aussie Stadium on 17 March 2002. 

Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles

Kite moved to the Brookvale Oval for the 2005 NRL season, with Manly beating off the likes of Canberra for his signature. Kite was recalled to the Blues side for the 2006 State of Origin series, where he played the first two games. Kite was also selected to play at international level for Australia, where he played in the 2006 Tri-Nations series off the bench.
Kite was selected to play for the Australian national team at prop forward in the 2007 ANZAC Test victory against New Zealand. by Storm 8-34. 
Kite was selected for the Centenary Test against New Zealand at the Sydney Cricket Ground.
Kite was named in the Tonga training squad for the 2008 Rugby League World Cup.
In May 2009, Kite was named in the 17 man squad to represent New South Wales in the opening State of Origin match on 3 June 2009, in Melbourne.
In April 2013, Brent captained Tonga in their Pacific Rugby League International fixture against fierce Pacific rivals Samoa. He lead his team to demolish Samoa by 36-4.
In October 2013, Brent once again captained Tonga, this time in their 2013 Rugby League World Cup campaign. However, even though he was a great leader, Tonga could not advance past the group stage. He played in all 3 of Tonga's matches.






