[[Onofre R. Pagsanghan]]

CATEGORIES: 1927 births, Ateneo de Manila University alumni, Ateneo de Manila University faculty, Filipino Roman Catholics, Filipino educators, Living people, TOFIL Awardees

Onofre R. Pagsanghan (born on June 12, 1927) is a teacher and screenplay writer from the Ateneo de Manila High School, Philippines. An Ateneo alumni himself, Mr. Pagsi, as he is fondly called by students and colleagues, began his teaching career in his alma mater in 1951. He teaches English and Filipino to high school students. In addition, he is also the moderator of the theater group Dulaang Sibol, which he founded in 1956. Now on his 63rd year of teaching, he has received numerous awards in the fields of teaching and theater. 

Early Life and Education

Pagsanghan was born in Tondo, Manila on June 12, 1927 to parents Hipolito Pagsanghan and Vicente Rivera. Guerrero, 2012 Raised in poverty, Pagsanghan was able to study in Ateneo through a scholarship. Unfortunately, his schooling was halted due to the invasion of the Japanese. Classes eventually resumed in 1945 and he was able to graduate high school in 1947. He pursued a degree in education soon after. He graduated with an AB in education in 1951. Years later, he earned his MA in English in 1984.
He married Florinda Duran in 1960 and they had three children namely Stella, Joel and Sylvia, who is also teaching in Ateneo High School. Knowledge Channel

Teaching and Theater Career

Pagsanghan decided to become a teacher after graduation. He was inspired to take this vocation by his own high school teacher, Fr. John Delaney, S.J. . Fr. Delaney asked him to become a teacher during his high school days, and Pagsanghan took up the challenge in 1951, after graduating college. "A Lifelong Passion He applied to be a teacher in Ateneo High School. However, the principal back then, an American Jesuit, was unsure if he could last as a teacher because of his frail and weak structure. The principle eventually accepted him, under the condition that during lunch breaks, he would sleep in one of the unused rooms in order to gain his strength. Pagsanghan agreed, and began teaching English and Filipino to freshmen high school students.Imbong, 2013 He chose to teach in first year high school because this was the time children could be molded the most, and he wanted to influence and change his students in the right way
He was able to write several books, which were integrated into the curriculum of several schools. "Hasik", "Layag" and "Makabagong Pilipino" are three of those books that are now used in different high schools. Two of his other books, "Reaching Out" and "Sagwan", are still being used by the Ateneo High School. Totanes
Pagsanghan began teaching theater in 1956. He founded the Ateneo High School Dramatics Society, which was later renamed Dulaang Sibol in 1966. Under his guidance, numerous critically acclaimed plays were staged, such as "Doon Po sa Amin", "Ang Paglilitis ni Mang Serapio" and "Sinta!"; all of which he translated from their English counterpart and adapted to the Philippine context. The group became nationally renowned for its polished and professional presentations. 
Throughout the years, Pagsanghan gained numerous awards for his work in education and theater. In 1970, he was awarded the Gawad Balagtas Award and the Patnubay ng Kalinangan award for his theater work. In addition, "Sinta" bagged the award for the Best Musical Film in the 1977 FAMAS.  In honor of his 45th year of teaching, the Dulaang Sibol Theater was renamed to the Tanghalan Onofre R. Pagsanghan by Ateneo. In 1985, he received the first Metrobank Outstanding Educator Award, one of the most prestigious awards that can be given to a teacher. In 2003, he was awarded the Bayaning Gurong Pilipino Award by the ABS-CBN Foundation. 

Teaching Style

From 1980 onwards, Pagsanghan became the moderator of class 1-A, the honors class of first year. In teaching, he combines theater and music into literary works such as "Julius Caesar" and "The Little Prince." He makes sure to use the entire classroom while acting out certain portions of readings to catch attention. Songs are also incorporated into lessons, usually used when introducing a new one. In tests, which are always written on manila paper, he focuses on "why" questions since he considers understanding why something is such as the most important part of learning. In addition, religion and morality are always applied. 
Quotes and memorable passages are also important in his style. Students are pushed to memorize and understand quotes in order to get a better understanding of texts. He also has weekly memorable passages, which are posted at the front of the blackboard. Quotes can range from famous lines from book to famous sayings from historical figures. 

Present Life

Pagsanghan still teaches first year high school at the Ateneo de Manila University and is still the moderator of Dulaang Sibol. He gives lectures all throughout the Philippines with topics ranging from the devotion of teaching to stage plays. Despite being 20 plus years over the retirement age, he has no plans of retiring, and continues to keep on teaching until he no longer has the ability to teach. 

Teaching awards

Cultural awards

Notes




