[[Wigwam Motel]]

CATEGORIES: Motels in the United States, Novelty buildings in the United States, Hotel buildings on the National Register of Historic Places in Arizona, Hotel buildings on the National Register of Historic Places in California, Hotels in Kentucky, Buildings and structures on U.S. Route 66, Buildings and structures in Navajo County, Arizona, Buildings and structures in San Bernardino County, California, National Register of Historic Places in San Bernardino County, California, Visitor attractions in Navajo County, Arizona, Visitor attractions along U.S. Route 66

The Wigwam Motels, also known as the "Wigwam Villages", is a motel chain in the United States built during the 1930s and 40s. The rooms are built in the form of tipis, mistakenly referred to as wigwams. It originally had seven different locations: two locations in Kentucky and one each in Alabama, Florida, Arizona, Louisiana, and California. 
They are very distinctive historic landmarks. Two of the three surviving motels are located on historic U.S. Route 66: in Holbrook, Arizona, and on the city boundary between Rialto and San Bernardino, California.  All three of the surviving motels are listed on the National Register of Historic Places: the Wigwam Motel in Cave City, Kentucky, was listed in 1988 under the official designation of Wigwam Village #2; the Wigwam Motel in Holbrook, Arizona, was listed as Wigwam Village #6 in 2002; and the Wigwam Motel in Rialto/San Bernardino, California, was listed in 2012 as Wigwam Village #7.

History

Frank A. Redford developed the Village after adding tipi-shaped motel units around a museum-cum-shop he had built to house his collection of Native American artifacts. He applied for a patent on the ornamental design of the buildings on December 17, 1935, and was granted Design Patent 98,617 on February 18, 1936.  The original drawing includes the swastika, at the time a symbol associated with native Americans or often worn as a good-luck charm. 
Seven Wigwam Villages were built between 1933 and 1949.

Wigwam villages

Village #1: Horse Cave, Kentucky

The first Wigwam Village was built in 1933 by Frank A. Redford. It was located on the corner of US-31E and Hwy 218 in Horse Cave, Kentucky. 
The central building and gas pumps are visible on undated postcards. Six more wigwams were built to be used as guest rooms. 
This village was reportedly closed in 1935 when the nearby Wigwam Village #2 was opened. Village #1 was razed in 1982.

Village #2: Cave City, Kentucky

Wigwam Village #2 was built in 1937 on U.S. Route 31W in Cave City, Kentucky, close to Mammoth Cave National Park and a few miles south of the original Wigwam Village #1. The address is 601 North Dixie Hwy, Cave City, Kentucky. 
It consists of 15 wigwams used as guest rooms that are arranged in a semicircle. In the center is a much bigger concrete and steel central structure that originally served as a restaurant, plus a common area with playground, recreation space, and pavilion. Each wigwam has a paved pad to accommodate one car. The restaurant is no longer in operation, but the motel is still open and welcoming guests.
The diameter at the base of each tipi is  in height. Behind the main room of each unit is a small bathroom with sink, toilet, and shower. In 2008, the rooms contain the original restored hickory furniture and a window-mounted air conditioner. There are no telephones to maintain the original atmosphere of the motel, but the rooms do have cable TV and internet access. 
Wigwam Village #2 is listed in the National Register of Historic Places. It achieved this status on March 16, 1988.

Village #3: New Orleans, Louisiana

This wigwam village was built in 1940, on U.S. Route 61 in Metairie, a suburb of New Orleans, Louisiana. This village was lost after it went out of business in 1954.

Village #4: Orlando, Florida

Wigwam Village #4 was built in 1948 near the intersections of U.S. Routes 441, 17, and 92 in Orlando, Florida.
This relatively large wigwam village consisted of 27 or 31 guest rooms, each in a separate wigwam constructed to resemble a horseshoe shape. A restaurant was built into the central and larger wigwam and more services were available, including a pool located in the middle of the lot. It was nicknamed and also self-proclaimed as "Orlando's Largest Motel". 
Wigwam Village #4 was razed in 1974.

Village #5: Bessemer, Alabama

The Wigwam Village #5 was built in 1940. It was located  
The village consisted of 15 wigwams arranged in a semicircle. In the center was a much larger wigwam and two smaller ones, which served as offices and a restaurant. 
This wigwam village and cafe fell into ruin after it went out of business in 1964. It was demolished soon afterwards.

Village #6: Holbrook, Arizona

Arizona motel owner Chester E. Lewis built this Wigwam Village in 1950. It is located on historic Route 66, at 811 West Hopi Drive in Holbrook, Arizona. Nearby places of interest include Petrified Forest National Park, Meteor Crater (Barringer Crater), and the Grand Canyon.
The plans for this motel were based on the original of Frank A. Redford. Lewis first became aware of the distinctive wigwam designs when he was passing through Cave City in 1938. He purchased the rights to Redford's design, as well as the right to use the name "Wigwam Village," in a novel royalty agreement: coin operated radios would be installed in Lewis's Wigwam Village, and every dime inserted for 30 minutes of play would be sent to Redford as payment.
The motel is arranged as a square, with 15 concrete and steel wigwams on three sides and the main office on the fourth; there was also originally a gas station on the complex. The individual units are called "wigwams," not "rooms" or "tepees" or "cabins." The units are numbered from 1 to 16 (there is no 13). The base diameter is 
Lewis operated the motel successfully until closing it in 1974 when Interstate 40 bypassed downtown Holbrook. Two years after his death in 1986, sons Clifton and Paul Lewis and daughter Elinor renovated the motel, finally reopening it in 1988.
The Lewis family continues to run and maintain Wigwam Village #6. Elinor often shows up at 4:00 pm to open the office, and if requested, will fill a small ice bucket for customers. Near the registration desk is a small room that contains many of Chester Lewis's memorabilia, including a necklace of human teeth of unknown origin.
Wigwam Village #6 has been listed in the National Register of Historic Places since May 2, 2002.

Village #7: Rialto/San Bernardino, California

Frank Redford built this complex for himself in 1947–49 and not as a franchise of the Holbrook, Arizona, property.  The address of the motel is Rialto, California, but the motel is physically located in San Bernardino. It is on the boundary between the two cities on historic Route 66, with an address of 2728 West Foothill Boulevard, Rialto, California.
Unlike the one arch of wigwams in other surviving villages, Village #7 has a double row of wigwam guest rooms. They total 19 in number, as well as a base for what seems to be another never-completed wigwam in the back of the property. A central building is currently used as an office, with a very spacious lobby that is open 24 hours a day for all travelers. There is also a swimming pool, a large grass front, and over 35 palm trees surrounding the entire property. 
Wigwam Village #7 is considered by many travelers to be the most famous and well-kept of the villages. Attention to detail was the main focus during renovation, as the wigwams lost their zigzag pattern. The restoration restored the motel's reputation and returned confidence to travelers. The Patel family continuously maintains Mr. Redford's beloved Wigwam Village #7 and caters to modern travelers on the Historic 66 "Mother Road." 
The motel is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The owner applied for inclusion in 2011

Other wigwam-like motels

The Tee Pee Motel in Wharton, Texas near Houston, which was built in 1942, is a setup where the tipis are of a different shapes and all line up in a straight line. It is not of the same design nor heritage as the Wigwam Motels.
Wharton's Tee Pee Motel had been in disrepair for decades. Then, in July 2003, Bryon Woods, a diesel mechanic, won the Texas Lottery.

Appearances in popular culture

The motels and their imitators have been parodied many times. Rockstar's 2004 Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas game contains a Tee Pee Motel. In the 2006 Pixar film Cars, one of the characters runs a "newly refurbished" neon-lit motel called the Cozy Cone Motel in which each room is fashioned as a traffic cone. 
In 2012 a digitally altered image of Wigwam Village #6 appeared (without the consent of the owner) in an advert for the Microtel hotel chain as a stand-in for lodgings where "you'll never know what you'll get" despite the Villages' consistently positive ratings from customers.
Wigwam number 1 of the Holbrook, Arizona, Wigwam Village #6 was featured in the second episode of Oprah and Gayle's Big Adventures on The Oprah Winfrey TV show.
Wigwam Motel in Holbrook Arizona is featured in the 1991 movie Dark Wind, based on a Tony Hillerman novel and starring Lou Diamond Phillips.



Further reading




