[[Visakhapatnam Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airports in Andhra Pradesh, Transport in Visakhapatnam, Buildings and structures in Visakhapatnam

Visakhapatnam Airport  The Airport is a non-towered airport, but has an air traffic control system in presence. Controllers are ground-based and direct aircraft movements via radio and other communication links. The airport's new terminal building has 3 Jet bridges.

History

Prior to redevelopment, the airport saw low numbers of air traffic: in 1999 it was served with only one daily flight. On Jun 16, 2007, T. Subbarami Reddy, the then Union Minister announced that the Airport was fully prepared for international flights. A new and extended runway was built to land the Airbus A320 aircraft operated by Air Deccan. There were appeals to make Vizag airport an International Airport ever since then.
A new terminal building was inaugurated on 20 February 2009. wide runway at the Vizag Airport on 15 June 2007. With the installation and calibration of the instrument landing system, Visakhapatnam got night landing capabilities in July 2007, with the Dornier of the Indian Navy taking off from the new landing facility. The night landing facility became operational from 30 March 2008 for commercial airlines with SpiceJet being the first airline to use the facility. A memorandum of understanding between the Airports Authority of India and Sathyabama University was signed to start a Flying Club and Aeronautical Institute at the airport.

International expansion

In January 2012, the state-run national flag carrier Air India announced that they would begin operations between Dubai and Visakhapatnam via Hyderabad from March 25, 2012. 
On February 3, 2012, The director of the Airports Authority of India announced that the First international flight from Visakhapatnam Airport, Air India(AI) Flight 951 would takeoff to Dubai International Airport on March 25, 2012. The bookings were opened both on the Air India Website and also at the airports. It was announced that the inspection of the airport was done and Visakhapatnam was listed as an International Airport. Air India announced the flight numbers as AI951 (Visakhapatnam-Dubai) and AI952 (Dubai-Visakhapatnam), both via Hyderabad International Airport.

Airlines and destinations

Accidents and incidents






