[[Warm Mineral Springs (spring)]]

CATEGORIES: Archaeological sites on the National Register of Historic Places in Florida, Hot springs of Florida, National Register of Historic Places in Sarasota County, Florida, Geography of Sarasota County, Florida

The Warm Mineral Springs (also known as Warm Salt Springs) is a water-filled sinkhole located in North Port, Florida, a mile north of U.S. 41. The primary water supply is a spring vent deep beneath the pool's water surface. Warm Mineral Springs is the only warm water mineral spring in the State of Florida. It is an important geological and archaeological site containing Native American remnants. It functioned as a spa since the 1960s. It was added to the U.S. National Register of Historic Places on November 28, 1977. The springs re-opened for swimming only on April 12, 2014.

Geology

Warm Mineral Springs is a sinkhole formed in carbonate rock by the collapse of the roof of a cavern 30,000 years ago. The land surrounding the sinkhole is flat, and about 
The environment in Florida during the Pleistocene period was much different than today. Due to the enormous amount of water frozen in ice sheets during the last glacial period, the sea level was at least  below the present level of the water, indicating that the water level in the sinkhole was at least low long enough for the dripstone to form.Milanich:38-40Rupert:2Cockrell:64
Although there are many small freshwater springs in the walls of the sinkhole, the primary source is a vent  a day overflows from the sinkhole.Rupert:3-5Cockrell:63

History

In the late 1950s William Royal and other scuba divers found artifacts and human bones from at least seven individuals in Warm Mineral Springs. A partially burned log found in association with some of the human bones was radiocarbon dated to about 10,000 years ago. If the bones were the same age as the log, then the bones were the oldest known evidence of human occupation in Florida at the time. Bone artifacts recovered in association with the human bones were described as of "Archaic period in the Americas-type". The bones and artifacts were apparently deposited above the water level in the sinkhole at the time.
One skull recovered from under sediment about  under the present water level in the sinkhole contained organic matter. Hospital medical staff who examined the contents of the skull observed that it looked like a brain. One doctor reported that he could distinguish the cerebellum from pieces of the cerebrum. A section through the material also appeared to show grey and white matter. Tests were consistent with the material being brain matter, but no cellular structure could be observed.
The property, which was privately owned, was developed into a spa in the 60s. Unrestricted access resulted in scuba divers removing human bones and artifacts and stalactites and stalagmites as souvenirs and for sale. Almost all artifacts had been removed from the sinkhole before scientific exploration began. The property owners started restricting access to the sinkhole and trying to prevent looting and vandalism in the 1970s.Cockrell:63, 64-65, 66
Agencies that care for public property are required to inventory archaeological resources and to ensure their protection and preservation in the long term. They employ archeologists, part of whose job it is to catalog and curate artifacts found on that property. Landowners and those having permission to collect from the landowners are less constrained but not entirely free to do whatever they wish. Like endangered species, unmarked graves are protected by law and it is illegal to disturb them except under certain terms of various federal, state and local laws. 
Wilburn Cockrell, an archaeologist at Florida State University, starting working at Warm Mineral Springs in 1972. This work led to the private owner's protecting the site due to its archaeological significance. Archaeological exploration of the sinkhole paused in 1975, resuming in 1984. Phase II of the project found evidence of tool making by early man. There is evidence of the Paleo-Indian and Archaic cultures.Cockrell:65
Wilburn Cockrell has described Warm Mineral Springs as the "burial ground" for the prehistoric residential community at nearby Little Salt Spring. In a 1988 interview Cockrell stated that the remains of more than 20 Paleoindians have been found in the sinkhole, including some radiocarbon dated to 12,000 years ago. The archaeologists also found bones of several Pleistocene animals, including a giant ground sloth, a saber-toothed cat, a horse, and a camelid. Cockrell found an 11,000 year old human skeleton in a fetal position, apparently placed in a crevice with broken stalactites holding it in place. This may be the oldest known intentional burial in North America.
In 1996-1997 a group of diver explorers conducted an underwater survey of the site resulting in the mapping of two warm water vents ~97 degrees F and two cool water vents ~76 degrees F.
Warm Mineral Springs was purchased on December 20, 2010, by Sarasota County and the city of North Port for $5.5 million.

Architecture

The buildings serving the springs have been attributed to Sarasota School of Architecture architect Jack West and were constructed sometime in the late 1950s. The entry building contains a gift shop, locker rooms/showers and a restaurant.  
A separate circular structure dubbed "The Cyclorama" contains a 226 x 13ft 360-degree mural, with some 3-D figures, depicting 9 scenes of Ponce de Leon's arrival in Florida in 1513 and his search for a fountain of youth, since Warm Mineral Springs is thought to have been that particular fountain. The Cyclorama was created as part of the 1959 commemorations for the 400th anniversary of Tristan de Luna's settlement of Pensacola, the first in "La Florida."  The large mural was painted by local Sarasota artist Don Putman and was originally accompanied by a 22-minute narration by Lowell Thomas. The Cyclorama has been closed since the 1970s and its fate is unknown.

2013 closure

On June 30, 2013, due to the incompetence of the City of North Port Commissioners (Cheryl Cook, Tom Jones, Rhonda Y. DiFranco, Vice-Mayor Jim Blucher, and Mayor Linda M. Yates) and the inability of the Sarasota County Board of Commissioners and staff to convince North Port to act legally and responsibly, Warm Mineral Springs was closed on July 1, 2013. Warm Mineral Springs re-opened on April 12, 2014 for swimming only, run on a short term basis by National and State Park Concessions, Inc. The City of North Port and Sarasota County will choose a long-term vendor for the Springs, to re-open all of the operations starting September 1, 2014.
This action was due to a change of North Port Commissioners in the last election, their unwillingness to honor the co-purchase of the Springs with Sarasota County, their desire to sell the Springs to anyone but Sarasota County, or to get it into private hands, or buy it to turn it into a city park. 
The closing of Warm Mineral Springs cost North Port 60 jobs and a $700,000 a year payroll. The impact on the local economy for tourist and resident dollars for hotels, restaurants, health/wellness professionals, etc. is unknown.

Notes






