[[Copper Peak]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures in Gogebic County, Michigan, Ski jumping venues in the United States, Sports venues in Michigan, National Register of Historic Places in Michigan, Michigan State Historic Sites, Ski flying venues, Ski areas and resorts in Michigan, Ski jumping venues in Michigan, Mountains of Michigan, Event venues established in 1969, Visitor attractions in Gogebic County, Michigan, 1969 establishments in Michigan

Copper Peak is a ski flying hill located in Ironwood, Michigan, United States. Built in 1970 it remains the only ski flying facility in the Western Hemisphere. In 1994 a K-spot on Copper Peak was at . Although there have been no flights at Copper Peak since 1994, there has been some investment in improving the facility to meet the standards of the International Ski Federation (FIS).
Ski flying at Copper Peak involves going much greater distances than normal Ski Jumping.

History

Between 1970 and 1994 there were ten competitions in the hill., set by Mathias Wallner and Werner Schuster (both Austria) on January 22, 1994, and January 23, 1994, respectively. The hill was expanded in the 1980s, but the profile is still outdated compared to current standards.
From summer to fall, the public can visit an observation platform 18 stories up the tower of the "highest man-made ski flying hill in the world". Open on weekends, it presents a view promoted as "the most awesome vista in the Midwest". Clear days give a northeasterly view of the Porcupine Mountains with the Apostle Islands 

World Cup

Hill Record

Renovation

In 2012 the hill was under reconstruction. They have completed reprofiling the landing zone angle with filling the soil from 41° to 36°. New K-point will be at  at the top of the hill from which they intend to make snow.
Currently they are installing safety fence along the landing slope and plans to be completed in the latter half of 2012. Installing the pipes, pipes etc. will commence in summer 2012. They also plan to build new judges tower.
The USA Ski Jumping organization announced that an exhibition ski flying event would take place at Copper Peak, February 28 to March 2, 2014,



Two other ski jumps located in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan:

Notes






