[[Kris Bright]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 births, Living people, Sportspeople from Auckland, New Zealand people of English descent, Association football midfielders, Association football forwards, New Zealand association footballers, New Zealand international footballers, 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players, A-League players, Waitakere City F.C. players, New Zealand Knights FC players, New Zealand expatriate association footballers, Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands, Eerste Divisie players, Fortuna Sittard players, New Zealand expatriates in the Netherlands, Expatriate footballers in Norway, Kristiansund BK players, New Zealand expatriates in Norway, Expatriate footballers in Greece, Panserraikos F.C. players, New Zealand expatriates in Greece, Expatriate footballers in England, The Football League players, Shrewsbury Town F.C. players, New Zealand expatriates in the United Kingdom, Expatriate footballers in Hungary, Budapest Honvéd FC footballers, New Zealand expatriates in Hungary, Bryne FK players, FC Haka players, IFK Mariehamn players, Balzan Youths F.C. players

Kris Bright (born 5 September 1986) is a New Zealand footballer who plays for Lincoln City as a striker. Bright has represented New Zealand at U15, U16, U-17, U-20, and All Whites level.

Career

Born in South Auckland, New Zealand, the son of New Zealand 1982 World Cup representative Dave Bright. Bright started as a Semi-Professional with Waitakere City in 2004. Whilst with Waitakere, Bright was the 2004 top scorer in the Lotto Sport Italia NRFL Premier as a 17-year-old, and played in the club's 0-1 loss to Miramar Rangers in the final of the 2004 Chatham Cup.
In mid-2005, Bright was named as one of three players in the New Zealand Knights' apprenticeship scheme. Shortly after the start of the season, though, Knights player Neil Emblen  was forced onto the injured list, which would allow the club to sign Bright as a replacement for four weeks.
In mid-2006, Bright was asked to trial at Scottish side Kilmarnock, where he was for a month, playing three games & scoring 2 goals. Although he was not signed by Kilmarnock,  Dutch Eerste Divisie club Fortuna Sittard, invited Bright to a trial match against FC Geleen-Zuid where he scored 1 goal. 
Bright managed to gain a spot in the starting line-up for the struggling Dutch side. He played in eleven league games, in which he scored one goal, against HFC Haarlem. After interest from Norway, he signed a six-month contract until the end of the Norwegian season with Norwegian club Kristiansund BK. There he scored an amazing 11 goals in 8 games until his season was ended prematurely . With two games remaining in the season and several Norwegian Tippeligaen & Adeccoligaen clubs following his progress, Bright suffered a broken leg. Bright then renewed his contract with Kristiansund BK until January 2009.
After 6 months of recovery, Bright then made his return in the 2008 season opener against Strindheim. He continued his goal scoring form with 2 goals including a 25 metre free-kick to help Kristiansund to a 3-1 win. After playing 12 games, he was top goal-scorer in the league with 10 goals. Also, in the 3rd round of the Norwegian Cup, Bright scored KBK's only goal against Tippeligaen club & close rivals Molde F.K. in a 2-1 extra-time loss.
After a season full of goals again in Norway,  Bright had done enough to sign a 1 and a 1/2 year contract with Greek Super League side Panserraikos F.C., he was given the #32 shirt. He left the Club in July 2009 by mutual consent with a year remaining on his contract due to unpaid wages, and joined English League Two side Shrewsbury Town on 3 August 2009. 
In November 2009 Bright scored the winner in a 2-1 win over AFC Telford United in the Shropshire Senior Cup final. then scored another on the final day of the season against Port Vale. He made a total of 26 league appearances in the 2009-10 season, including 22 from the bench, scoring three goals.
After interest from Hungary earlier in the year, and with a new manager arriving at Shrewsbury Town, Bright then found himself signing a 2.5 year deal with former Hungarian giants Honved Budapest on a free transfer. Unfortunately at the end of the first season at the club, and with the club having huge financial difficulties and unable to pay full wages, Bright was to find a new club. 
On 3 October 2011 Bright joined Maltese club Balzan Youths on a short-term deal. Bright linked up Balzan until December before he made the move to Bryne FK in Norway in January. Bright accepted the offer of joining Balzan so that he could maintain his match fitness prior to the move to Bryne. The move was a success helping the recently promoted side to a top 6 finish scoring 5 crucial goals in 10 starts for the club. The 25-year-old had agreed a pre-contract with Bryne and joined up on 1.1.2012.
After half a season in Bryne, Bright then found himself playing in an accustomed midfield role. With the team struggling in the league, limited opportunities as a striker, and offers from other teams, Bright signed a short term deal on August 2 with FC Haka in the Finland Premier League. Bright cited his reasons for leaving were "to get regular playing time as a striker to score goals". On March 2013 Bright signed a deal with IFK Mariehamn in the Finland Premier Leageue for the whole season 2013.
On 08/03/14 it was announced Bright had signed for Lincoln City for the rest of the season. 

International career

Bright has represented New Zealand at U15, U16, U17 and U20 levels. He played in all of New Zealand's matches during their failed qualifying campaign for the 2003 FIFA U-17 World Championship, scoring four goals, including a hat-trick in a 13-0 win over Tonga.

Football League Statistics






