[[Allan Haines Loughead]]

CATEGORIES: 1889 births, 1969 deaths, People from Fremont, California, Businesspeople in aviation, Members of the Early Birds of Aviation, American aerospace engineers, National Aviation Hall of Fame inductees

Allan Haines Loughead (January 20, 1889 – May 26, 1969), later changed to Allan Haines Lockheed, was an American aviation pioneer and engineer. He formed the Alco Hydro-Aeroplane Company along with his brother, Malcolm Loughead that became Lockheed Corporation.
Loughead legally changed his name to Allan Lockheed in 1934. He went on to form two other aircraft manufacturing companies in the 1930s. Both were unsuccessful. After World War II, he continued his career as a real estate salesman while occasionally serving as an aviation consultant. Allan Lockheed kept an informal relationship with the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation until his death in 1969 in Tucson, Arizona.

Early life

Allan Loughead was born in Niles, California in 1889, the youngest son of Flora and John Loughead.  He had a half-brother Victor, a sister Hope, and a brother Malcolm Loughead.
Flora Loughead was a well-known novelist and journalist.  After separating from her husband, Flora took the children to Santa Barbara, California where the brothers experimented with kites. Later, Flora moved them to a fruit ranch near Alma, California, where the brothers became interested in the gliding experiments of Professor John J. Montgomery.  The Loughead brothers attended elementary school only, but were ardently mechanically inclined from an early age.
Victor Loughead, who was interested in automobiles and airplanes, moved to Chicago, where he became associated with James E. Plew, a wealthy automobile dealer. There, in 1909, Victor wrote a book, Vehicles of the Air, which became a popular treatise on aircraft design and aviation history. In 1904, Malcolm became a mechanic with the White Steam Car Company in San Francisco.
Allan Loughead went to San Francisco in 1906 where he found work as a mechanic with pay of $6 a week ($ in today dollars).  By 1909, he was driving race cars.

Early experience with aviation

In Chicago, Victor Loughead convinced Plew to acquire rights to one of the Montgomery's gliders and to buy a Curtiss pusher biplane. Plew hired Allan Loughead to convert the Montgomery glider into a powered aircraft. When Allan left for Chicago, he said, "I expect to see the time when aviation will be the safest means of transportation at 40 to 50 miles per hour, and the cheapest, and I'm not going to have long white whiskers when that happens. The airplane will take over both land and water travel. Flying has no barriers."
Allan and Malcolm Loughead installed a 2-cylinder, 12 hp motor on the Montgomery glider with Victor acting as engineer.  Allan Loughead's first flight was in Chicago in 1910 when he climbed aboard a home-made aircraft and operated its ailerons while its builder, George Gates, operated the rudder and elevators. It was the first dual-pilot controlled flight in history.
When two of Plew's trained pilots could not get the Curtiss airborne, Allan said: "I've got a $20 gold piece that says I'll make it fly, and I'm offering three-to-one odds! Any takers?" There being none, he got the airplane off the ground on his second try. Later he said of this flight, "It was partly nerve, partly confidence and partly damn foolishness. But now I was an aviator!"  The Curtis pusher was powered by a 30 H.P. engine.
When Plew withdrew from aviation after two of his planes were wrecked and a student was killed, Loughead became a flight instructor with the International Aeroplane Manufacturing Company in Chicago, and also put on aerial exhibitions for 25 percent of the gate receipts. Later he said: "I was really rich the first week out. I made something like $850."  Unfortunately, during an exhibition at Hoopeston, Illinois, his rain-soaked airplane failed to climb enough and it ended up dangling from some telephone wires. At that point, he decided to build a better aircraft of his own so he could collect all of the gate receipts.

Alco Hydro-Aeroplane Company

Loughead returned to San Francisco in 1912 and went to work as an auto mechanic. There, he and his brother, Malcolm, spent their spare time building a three-place seaplane to operate from San Francisco Bay.  They constantly ran out of money until they convinced Max Mamlock of the Alco Cab Company to invest $4,000 in the plane. Finally, after 18 months, their Model G was christened the ALCO NO. 1 in 1913, and Allan Loughead made a successful flight in it from the waters of the Golden Gate entrance to San Francisco Bay.
That first flight occurred on June 15, 1913.  The flight reached an altitude of 300 feet and a speed of 60 miles per hour.  Allan then returned to take Malcolm for a ride.  The Model G made three flights that day.
Allan Lockheed recalled in 1942 that the Model G was built mostly with hand tools and called the aircraft "one of the first successful three place tractor seaplanes in the United States."
While the Model G, the first plane to bear the Loughead (Lockheed) name, was far ahead of its time, few would pay $10 to fly in it. Mamlock soon lost his enthusiasm for aviation and seized the plane. He told the Lougheads if they wanted it back, they would have to repay his $4,000. Consequently, in the hopes of striking it rich, the Loughead brothers spent two unsuccessful years prospecting in California's gold country.
With the financial aid of Paul Meyer, Allan and Malcolm Loughead bought the Model G back in 1915 and opened a flying concession at the Panama-Pacific International Exposition in San Francisco. In five months, they took 600 paying passengers aloft and netted $4,000. Henry Ford was one person who turned down a ride, saying, "I would not take even a straightaway flight four feet above the bay in anybody's aeroplane for all the money in California."
In early 1916, the Loughead brothers moved the operation to Santa Barbara, where they were swamped by people wanting to make their first flight. In addition, they made charter flights to the off-shore islands, and local movie companies used the plane to take special film footage from the air.

Loughead Aircraft Manufacturing Company

