[[Four Loko]]

CATEGORIES: Products introduced in 2005, Alcopop, American alcoholic beverages, Energy drinks, Drinking culture

Four Loko is a line of alcoholic beverages sold by Phusion Projects of Chicago, Illinois, USA. Phusion operates as Drink Four Brewing Company. Four Loko, the company's most popular beverage, debuted in the United States market in 2005 and is available in 48 states, and in Canada, Puerto Rico, The Bahamas, Bolivia, Honduras, and Europe. The name "Four" is derived from the original energy drink's four main ingredients: alcohol, caffeine, taurine, and guarana.
Four branded products have been the object of legal, ethical, and health concerns related to the company allegedly marketing them to the underaged and the danger of combining alcohol and caffeine. After the beverage was banned in several states, a product reintroduction in December 2010 removed caffeine, taurine, and guarana as ingredients, and the malt beverage is no longer marketed as an energy drink.

History

After Phusion Projects founders Chris Hunter, Jaisen Freeman and Jeff Wright graduated from Ohio State University, they founded the company. In 2005, the entrepreneurial team design an prototype beverage now known as Four Loko. By 2008 a variety of flavors were introduced into the US market. At the start of 2009, they beverage was successful and started making sales overseas. In October 2010 a new flavor called Lemon Lime was first produced.

Product line

There are two product lines within the Four brand:
Four Loko contains carbonated water, sugar, and natural and artificial flavoring including FD&C Red 40.
Four Loko is currently available in nine flavors: Loco Margarita, Uva Berry (Grape), Fruit Punch, Coko Loko (Coconut), Watermelon, Peach, Lemon Lime, Lemonade, and Cranberry Lemonade. Poco Loko is available in four flavors: Mango, Black Cherry, Lemonade, and Green Apple. Four Loko in bottles is available in three flavors: Lemonade, Fruit Punch, and Watermelon.  In Summer 2012, Phusion retired the flavors of Blue Raspberry and Orange Blend.
In early 2011, Phusion Projects introduced its Four Loko XXX Limited Edition line, which featured a new flavor of Four Loko every few months. In January 2011, they debuted with Green Apple, followed by Blueberry Lemonade in May.  In June 2012, Phusion introduced the next flavor in the XXX line, Strawberry Lemonade.
In Summer 2011, Phusion Projects introduced 12 oz. glass bottles of Four Loko, with Lemonade, Fruit Punch, and Watermelon flavors. Bottles came in packs of six and had 8% ABV as opposed to 12%.
In September 2011, Phusion Projects introduced 16 oz. cans of their drink in hi-cone four packs known as Four Poco Loko. They are 8% ABV and have black cherry, mango, lemonade, and green apple flavors.
Original formulations of both beverages were a malt liquor-based, caffeinated alcoholic energy drink with added guarana and taurine. The formulations were developed by three alumni of Ohio State University: Chris Hunter, Jeff Wright, and Jaisen Freeman.
In 2008, Phusion Projects began selling their products in Canada and Europe. The European version of Four MaXed is sold in 8.3–oz. (250mL) glass bottles and aluminum cans and is spirit-based; the United States version has a malt liquor base.
In 2009, Four Loko ranked fourth in sales growth among alcoholic beverages at 7-Eleven stores in the United States.
On November 16, 2010, Phusion Projects issued a press release announcing that the company would be reformulating all Four brand beverages to remove caffeine, guarana, and taurine from the products. The new product was reintroduced in January 2011.
On October 25, 2013,  Started the distribution of Four Loko for the first time in Puerto Rico. Four Loko kept the standard 12% alcohol but in a reduced can size of 16oz. It currently can be found only in three flavors: Grape, Fruit Punch, and Watermelon.

Restrictions on sale

In 2009, a group of US state attorneys general In December 2008, Anheuser-Busch, manufacturer of Tilt and Bud Extra, as well as MillerCoors, manufacturer of Sparks agreed to reformulate their drinks. In 2009, smaller companies such as Phusion fell under investigation because of their rise in market share.
The drink came under major fire in 2010, as colleges and universities across the United States began to see injuries and blackouts related to the drink's use. The University of Rhode Island banned this product from their campus on November 5, 2010.
In October 2010, following the hospitalization of seventeen students and six visitors, Ramapo College of New Jersey banned the possession and consumption of Four Loko on its campus. while several more have placed outright bans on their campuses.
Other efforts to control the statewide use of Four have been under way. The Daily Collegian, Penn State's student newspaper, reported that on November 1, 2010 the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board sent letters to all liquor stores urging distributors to discontinue the sale of the drink. The PLCB also sent letters to all Colleges and Universities warning them of the dangers of the drink.
Several stores, including ShopRite Super Markets Tops Markets, Price Chopper and Wegmans have voluntarily pulled the product from their shelves.
On November 20, 2010, Oregon Liquor Control Commission's five citizen commissioners held an emergency meeting resulting in a 4-1 vote on the ban. The ban became effective immediately and was in effect until May 18, 2011.
Utah, which has a state-run alcoholic beverage distribution system, never allowed alcoholic energy drinks to go on sale there.

FDA warning

On November 17, 2010 the U.S. FDA Food and Drug Administration issued a warning letter to four manufacturers of caffeinated alcohol beverages citing that the caffeine added to their malt alcoholic beverages is an "unsafe food additive" and said that further action, including seizure of their products, may occur under federal law. The FDA also stated that concerns have been raised that caffeine can mask some of the sensory cues individuals might normally rely on to determine their level of intoxication. Warning letters were issued to each of the four companies requiring them to provide to the FDA in writing within 15 days of the specific steps the firms will be taking.
The four companies that received the warning letter were:

Post-ban

Starting weeks prior to the FDA ruling, many fans and others seeking financial gain purchased large quantities of the drink.
In late December 2010, a reformulated version of the drink was put on shelves. The new product had exactly the same design as the original, but the caffeine, guarana, or taurine (ingredients in the original drink) had been taken out of the formula and replaced by Red 40, a food coloring agent.



Further reading


