[[Born again (Christianity)]]

CATEGORIES: Biblical phrases, Charismatic and Pentecostal Christianity, Christian fundamentalism, Christian terms, Evangelicalism

In Christianity, to be born again is to undergo a "spiritual rebirth" (regeneration) of the human soul or spirit from the Holy Spirit, contrasted with the physical birth everyone experiences. The origin of the term "born again" is the New Testament: "Jesus replied, 'Very truly I tell you, no one can see the kingdom of God without being born again.

History and usage

Many historic church denominations understood being "born again" as spiritual regeneration via the sacrament of baptism by the power of water and word. This understanding persists in Roman Catholicism, in some parts of Anglicanism,[ref]
See the section on Anglicanism in Baptismal regeneration
[/ref] 
in Lutheranism and in Eastern Orthodoxy. However, beginning sometime after the Reformation, Evangelical Protestants have predominantly understood being born again[ref]
"born-again." Good Word Guide. London: A&C Black, 2007. Credo Reference. 30 July 2009
[/ref]
as an experience of conversion, and then symbolized by deep-water baptism, and rooted in a commitment to one's own personal faith in Jesus Christ for salvation. This same belief is also an integral part of Methodist doctrine,
and is connected with the doctrine of Justification.
Such " 'Rebirth' has often been identified with a definite, temporally datable form of  'conversion'." Its effects vary with the type of person involved:
 
 With the voluntaristic type, rebirth is expressed in a new alignment of the will, in the liberation of new capabilities and powers that were hitherto undeveloped in the person concerned. With the intellectual type, it leads to an activation of the capabilities for understanding, to the breakthrough of a "vision". With others it leads to the discovery of an unexpected beauty in the order of nature or to the discovery of the mysterious meaning of history. With still others it leads to a new vision of the moral life and its orders, to a selfless realization of love of neighbour. ... each person affected perceives his life in Christ at any given time as "newness of life."
[ref]Encyclopædia Britannica, entry for The Doctrine of Man (from Christianity), 2004.
[/ref]

According to Melton:
 
 Born again is a phrase used by many Protestants to describe the phenomenon of gaining faith in Jesus Christ. It is an experience when everything they have been taught as Christians becomes real, and they develop a direct and personal relationship with God., Encyclopedia Of Protestantism (Encyclopedia of World Religions)
[/ref]

According to Purves and Partee,[ref]Purves, A. and Partee, C., Encountering God: Christian Faith in Turbulent Times, Westminster John Knox Press, 2000, p. 96
[/ref] "Sometimes the phrase seems to be judgemental, making a distinction between genuine and nominal Christians. Sometimes ... descriptive, like the distinction between liberal and conservative Christians. Occasionally, the phrase seems historic, like the division between Catholic and Protestant Christians."
Furthermore, the term "usually includes the notion of human choice in salvation and excludes a view of divine election by grace alone".
The Oxford English Dictionary, finding examples going back to 1961, defines the adjective born-again as:
[/ref]

Origin

=Biblical foundation=

The King James' Version uses the phrase born again three times. Two appear in chapter 3 of the Gospel of John. Jesus is speaking to Nicodemus, a Pharisee described as "a ruler of the Jews", who says that, because of his miracles, Jesus is known "to be a teacher come from God". Jesus immediately replies: "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." 
A few verses later the Gospel quotes Jesus as saying:
John's Gospel was written in Greek, and the Greek word translated as again is ανωΘεν (anothen), which could mean again, or from above. The New Revised Standard Version prefers this latter translation, and both the King James Version and the Revised Version give it as an alternative in the margins.  Hoskyns argues that it is to be preferred as the fundamental meaning and drew attention to phrases such as "birth of the Spirit ()" but continues that this necessarily carries with it an emphasis upon the newness of the life as given by God himself. and Davy, F.N.(ed), The Fourth Gospel, Faber & Faber 2nd ed. 1947, pp. 211,212
The third and last mention of the phrase occurs in the First Letter of Peter. The King James Bible translates this as:
Here, the Greek word translated as born again is αναγεγεννημενοι (anagegennemenoy)., Taking Away the Veil: To See Beyond the Curtain of Illusion, iUniverse, 2003, pp. 55-56.

=Interpretations=

The traditional Jewish understanding of the promise of salvation is interpreted as being rooted in "the seed of Abraham"; that is in the physical lineage from Abraham. Jesus explained to Nicodemus that this doctrine was in error—that every person must have two births—the natural birth of the physical body, the other of the water and the spirit.[ref]
Emmons, Samuel B. A Bible Dictionary. BiblioLife, 2008. ISBN 978-0-554-89108-8.
[/ref] This discourse with Nicodemus established the Christian belief that all human beings—whether Jew or Gentile—must be "born again" of the spiritual seed of Christ. The Apostle Peter further reinforced this understanding in . The Catholic Encyclopedia states that "a controversy existed in the primitive church over the interpretation of the expression the seed of Abraham. It is  teaching in one instance that all who are Christ's by faith are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise. He is concerned, however, with the fact that the promise is not being fulfilled to the seed of Abraham (referring to the Jews)."[ref]
Driscoll, James F. "Divine Promise (in Scripture)." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 12. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1911. 15 Nov 2009 .[/ref]
Charles Hodge writes that "The subjective change wrought in the soul by the grace of God, is variously designated in Scripture" with terms such as new birth, resurrection, new life, new creation, renewing of the mind, dying to sin and living to righteousness, and translation from darkness to light. "Regeneration." Systematic Theology-Volume III. Web: 
Jesus Christ used the "birth" analogy in tracing spiritual newness of life to a divine beginning. Contemporary Christian theologians have provided explanations for "born from above" being a more accurate translation of the original Greek word transliterated anōthen.[ref]
The New Testament Greek Lexicon. 30 July 2009. Online.
[/ref] Theologian Frank Stagg cites two reasons why the newer translation is significant:
An early example of the term in its more modern use appears in the sermons of John Wesley. In the sermon printed under the title of A New Birth he writes "none can be holy unless he be born again", and "except he be born again, none can be happy even in this world. For ... a man should not be happy who is not holy." Also, "I say, man may be born again and so become an heir of salvation." Wesley also states infants who are baptized are born again, but for adults it is different:
 
 ... our church supposes, that all who are baptized in their infancy, are at the same time born again. ... But ... it is sure all of riper years, who are baptized, are not at the same time born again., The works of  the Reverend John Wesley, Methodist Episcopal Church, 1831, pp. 405–406.
[/ref]

Denominational positions

For American Christians, The Oxford Handbook of Religion and American Politics notes: "The GSS ... has asked a born-again question on three occasions ... 'Would you say you have been 'born again' or have had a 'born-again' experience?" The Handbook says that "Evangelical, black, and Latino Protestants tend to respond similarly, with about two-thirds of each group answering in the affirmative. In contrast, only about one third of mainline Protestants and one sixth of Catholics (Anglo and Latino) claim a born-again experience." However, the handbook suggests that "born-again questions are poor measures even for capturing evangelical respondents. ... it is likely that people who report a born-again experience also claim it as an identity."The Oxford Handbook of Religion and American Politics, OUP, p16.

Anglicanism

The phrase is mentioned in the 39 Articles of the Anglican Church in article XV, which is headed "Of Christ alone without Sin". In part, it reads: "sin, as S. John saith, was not in Him. But all we the rest, although baptized and born again in Christ, yet offend in many things: and if we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us."

Catholicism

The Catholic Church identifies regeneration (being "born again") with the sacrament of baptism.catholic.com/tracts/are-catholics-born-again
The catholic.  
The site catholic education.catholiceducation.html adds: How, then, should a Catholic answer the question, "Have you been born again?" An accurate answer would be, "Yes, I was born again in baptism." Yet leaving it at that may generate even more confusion. ... The Catholic, then, should do more than simply point to his baptism; he should discuss his living faith, trust and love of Christ; his desire to grow in sanctity and conformity to Christ; and his total dependence on Christ for salvation. These are integral to the new life of the Holy Spirit that baptism bestows. When the Fundamentalist sees the link between baptism and the Holy Spirit in the life of his Catholic neighbor, he may begin to see that St. Paul was more than figurative when he wrote, "You were buried with Christ in baptism, in which you were also raised with him through faith in the power of God, who raised him from the dead" (Col 2:12).
 
However, at the Council of Trent, on 15 November 1551, the necessity for a second conversion after baptism was delineated:

Lutheranism

The Lutheran Church holds that it "thoroughly teaches that we are cleansed of our sins and born again and renewed in Holy Baptism by the Holy Ghost. But she also teaches that whoever is baptized must, though daily contrition and repentance, drown The Old Adam so that daily a new man come forth and arise who walks before God in righteousness and purity forever. She teaches that whoever lives in sins after his baptism has again lost the grace of baptism."

Methodism and other Evangelicals

In Methodism, the "new birth is necessary for salvation because it marks the move toward holiness. That comes with faith."
The belief in the New Birth is something that Methodists share with other evangelicals. In The Encyclopedia of Protestantism, JG Melton states that "In churches that emphasize evangelism, the 'born-again' experience tends to become the norm, and everyone is expected to recount such an experience."Melton, JG, The Encyclopedia of Protestantism, Infobase publishing, 2009, p. 100.
Evangelical Protestants employ the KJV translation of  as "born again" rather than "born from above". 
"Although many evangelicals allow that conversion can be a process, generally they see it as a specific, identifiable moment of time when a person simply and sincerely trusts in Jesus Christ as savior."Mullen, MS., in Kurian, GT., The Encyclopedia of Christian Civilization, J. Wiley & Sons, 2012, p. 302. They understand  that "with your heart that you believe and are justified, and it is with your mouth that you profess your faith and are saved". I healed you with my word, Xulan, 2007, p. 414.

Reformed

The Reformed churches reject both the Catholic/Lutheran and Methodist/Evangelical concepts of being born again. Here, "regeneration, the equivalent to being 'born again,' is the inward working of the Spirit which induces the sinner to respond to the effectual call". This is "the work of God's Spirit, whereby, convincing us of our sin and misery, enlightening our minds in the knowledge of Christ, and renewing our wills, he doth persuade and enable us to embrace Jesus Christ, freely offered to us in the gospel.":
In Reformed theology, "regeneration precedes faith."

Jehovah's Witnesses

Jehovah's Witnesses believe that individuals do not have the power to be born again, because it is God who calls and selects his followers. This follows from the verse in John 6:44, "No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him." (King James Version) They consider that when Jesus said in John 3:5 that one has to be born from "water and the spirit" to enter the kingdom of God, it was not a command but a necessity, because the text states "Ye must be born again". On this point, their publishing organisation, the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania, prefers the translation: "should be born from above". They write: "Thus, according to that alternate rendering, the new birth originates 'from above'—that is, 'from heaven,' or 'from the Father.' ... Yes it is caused by God."Watchtower, BORN AGAIN What Does It Mean?: THE NEW BIRTH A Personal Decision?, www.org,
For further evidence, Jehovah's Witnesses note that in Mark 1:9-10, after Jesus was baptised in water by John the Baptist, he was baptised by the spirit symbolised by a dove. Also, in Acts 1:5, Jesus assured his disciples that they too would soon be baptised in holy spirit: "For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence." (KJV) The Watchtower states: "Note that Jesus first got baptized with water. Then he received the holy spirit. Similarly, the early disciples had first been baptized in water ... and then they received the holy spirit." This occurred "On the day of Pentecost in the year 33 C.E."Watchtower, BORN AGAIN What Does It Mean?: THE NEW BIRTH How Does It Take Place?, www.org,

Disagreements between denominations

The term "born again" is used by several Christian denominations, but there are disagreements on what the term means, and whether members of other denominations are justified in claiming to be born again Christians.
A Catholic website says: Catholics should ask Protestants, "Are you born again—the way the Bible understands that concept?" If the Evangelical has not been properly water baptized, he has not been born again "the Bible way," regardless of what he may think.  
On the other hand, an Evangelical site argues: Another of many examples is the Catholic who claims he also is "born again." ... However, what the committed Catholic means is that he received his spiritual birth when he was baptized—either as an infant or when as an adult he converted to Catholicism. That's not what Jesus meant when He told Nicodemus he "must be born again" (Jn 3:3-8). The deliberate adoption of biblical terms which have different meanings for Catholics has become an effective tool in Rome's ecumenical agenda.reachingcatholics.html, Accessed 10 Feb 2013. 
The Reformed view of regeneration may be set apart from other outlooks in at least two ways. 

Public stances

In recent history, born again is a term that has been widely associated with the evangelical Christian renewal since the late 1960s, first in the United States and then later around the world. Associated perhaps initially with Jesus People and the Christian counterculture, born again came to refer to a conversion experience, accepting Jesus Christ as Lord and Savior in order to be saved from Hell and given eternal life with God in Heaven, and was increasingly used as a term to identify devout believers. By the mid-1970s, born again Christians were increasingly referred to in the mainstream media as part of the born again movement.
In 1976, Watergate conspirator Chuck Colson's book Born Again gained international notice. Time magazine named him "One of the 25 most influential Evangelicals in America."The 25 Most Influential Evangelicals in America. were artists whose born again conversions had an impact on modern culture.  Others such as department store magnate James Cash Penney, Chick-fil-A founder Truett Cathy, actor/martial artist Chuck Norris, wrestlers Shawn Michaels, Chris Jericho, AJ Styles, Ted DiBiase and Sting, and actors Jesse McCartney, Kirk Cameron, and Mr. T are also mentioned as being born again. Born-again athletes like former New York Jets quarterback Tim Tebow, St. Louis Rams quarterback Sam Bradford and former Rams Super Bowl XXXIV winning quarterback Kurt Warner, Olympic hurdler Lolo Jones, boxer Katie Taylor and Houston Rockets player Jeremy Lin. Former Alabama governor and American presidential candidate George Wallace became born again in the late 1970s, which led him to apologize for his earlier segregationist views.

Chuck Colson

In his book Born Again (1976 and 2008), Watergate conspirator Chuck Colson describes his path to faith in conjunction with his criminal imprisonment and played a significant role in solidifying the "born again" identity as a cultural construct in the US. He writes that his spiritual experience followed considerable struggle and hesitancy to have a "personal encounter with God." He recalls: ... while I sat alone staring at the sea I love, words I had not been certain I could understand or say fell from my lips: "Lord Jesus, I believe in You. I accept You. Please come into my life. I commit it to You."  With these few words... There came something more: strength and serenity, a wonderful new assurance about life, a fresh perception of myself in the world around me. Born Again. Chosen Books (Baker Publishing), 2008. 

Born-again and US politics

The first President of the United States to publicly declare that he was born-again was Jimmy Carter in 1976., Changing party coalitions, Algora Publishing, 2006, p. 203. "In the 1980 campaign, all three of the major candidates ... stated that they had been born-again"Utter, GH. and Tru, JL.,Conservative Christians and political participation: a reference handbook, ABC-CLIO, 2004, p. 137.
Sider and Knippers[ref]Sider, J. and Knippers, D. (eds), Toward an Evangelical Public Policy: Political Strategies for the Health of the Nation, Baker Books, 2005, p.51.
[/ref] state that "Ronald Reagan's election that fall was aided by the votes of 61% of 'born-again' white Protestants."
The Gallup Organization reported that "In 2003, 42% of U.S. adults said they were born-again or evangelical; the 2004 percentage is 41%." Also, "Black Americans are far more likely to identify themselves as born-again or evangelical, with 63% of blacks saying they are born-again, compared with 39% of white Americans. Republicans are far more likely to say they are born-again (52%) than Democrats (36%) or independents (32%)."
Haiven, in speaking of "born-agains",[ref]Haiven, J., Faith, hope, no charity: an inside look at the born again movement in Canada and the United States, New Star Books, 1984, p.218.
[/ref] refers to them having "a type of intolerance". She says, "The instant and thoughtless panaceas of born-again Christianity will be seen as a vast sanctuary by millions of North Americans." She asks, "Is this sanctuary really a recruitment camp for right-wing movements? It would be naive to think otherwise."
The Oxford Handbook of Religion and American Politics,[ref]Smidt, C., Kellstedt, L., and Guth, J., The Oxford Handbook of Religion and American Politics, Oxford Handbooks Online, 2009, pp.195-196.
[/ref] referring to several studies, reports "that 'born-again' identification is associated with lower support for government anti-poverty programs." It also notes that "self-reported born-again" Christianity, "strongly shapes attitudes towards economic policy."

Criticism

Biblical arguments

The quotation from the Gospel of John has raised some questions about the meaning and authenticity of the phrase "born again". In the chapter, Nicodemus is puzzled and asks Jesus what he means by saying that "Ye must be born again". He questions: "How can a man re-enter his mother's womb?" Scholar Bart D. Ehrman says that this confusion is because in Greek (the language of the gospel) the word again is ambiguous. It might mean again or a second time or from above, which would explain Nicodemus' confusion. However, the Jews at Jesus' time were actually speaking Aramaic, in which language there would not have been a double meaning. Ehrman says that this raises questions about the authenticity of the dialogue, the meaning of the words, and, therefore, the use of the phrase.D., Referred to in Edward T. Babinski The "Born Again" Dialogue In the Gospel of John (Another Reason To Doubt Its Authenticity) from 
A 19th-century source notes that the phrase was not mentioned by the other Evangelists, nor by the Apostles except Peter. "It was not regarded by any of the Evangelists but John of sufficient importance to record." And, without John, "we should hardly have known that it was necessary for one to be born again." This suggests that "the text and context was meant to apply to Nicodemus particularly, and not to the world." Otherwise, it would have been mentioned more often.
LeFevre, CF. and Williamson, ID., The Gospel anchor. Troy, NY, 1831–32, p. 66. 

Names inspired by the term

The idea of  "rebirth in Christ" has inspiredOxford Dictionary of First Names some common European forenames: French René/Renée. Αlso used in Belgium the Netherlands and Great Britain, Dutch Renaat/Renate, Italian, Spanish and Portuguese Renato/Renata, Latin Renatus/Renata, which all mean "reborn", "born again". & R. Chambers (1954) p.1355








