[[Stamford Hospital]]

CATEGORIES: Hospital buildings completed in 2001, NewYork–Presbyterian Healthcare System, Teaching hospitals in the United States, Hospitals in Connecticut, Buildings and structures in Stamford, Connecticut

Stamford Hospital is a private, nonprofit, Level II trauma center and community academic hospital in Stamford, Connecticut.  The hospital is a branch of the NewYork-Presbyterian Healthcare System and a major teaching affiliate of Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons.

Hospital Services

The 305 bed Stamford Hospital and its 440 affiliated physicians provide patient care in all of the typical medical specialties, including internal medicine, surgery, obstetrics/gynecology, psychiatry, and medical and critical care units.  In addition, as a regional Level II trauma center, appropriate subspecialty care is on-site, including Trauma surgery, Orthopedics, Neurosurgery and Interventional Radiology.  As of 2005, Stamford Hospital had a total of 2,254 employees, making it one of the cities largest employers.2006 Book of Business Lists, Facts and People published by The Fairfield County Business Journal and The Westchester County Business Journal of Westfair Communications Inc., White Plains, N.Y., early 2006, "Fairfield Hospitals" list, page 57
The Tandet Center, a nursing home adjacent to the main building, was previously operated by the hospital, however decision was made to sell to a private entity.
A large segment of the 2,254 hospital employees are represented by the New England Health Care Employees Union, District 1199, affiliated with the Service Employees International Union.
The hospital's 32-bed Cardiology Department expanded its services in August 2005 when the hospital began offering emergency angioplasty. In addition, the hospital performs open heart surgery and urgent or elective angioplasty."Stamford Hospital is the hospital with a heart," by Nancy Robinson, article in Healthy Connections advertising supplement to The Advocate of Stamford and Greenwich Time, page 10July 30, 2006

History

Founding and Early History
John Clasen, a farmer and former state legislator, town assessor and school board member, is credited with the founding of Stamford Hospital.  After consultation with his friend and attorney, Edwin L. Scofield (later the second mayor of Stamford), regarding possible philanthropies, he gave the initial funding for the hospital by selling some of his property.    Clasen raised about $45,000 from the sale of the property.  Clasen's only conditions for the money were that the new institution would be named Stamford Hospital, be nonsectarian and not discriminate in receiving patients.  Subsequently, the hospital opened with 30 beds on May 7, 1896 in a mansion on East Main Street, just west of the railroad bridge.stamfordhospital.html Stamford Hospital Web site, Web page titled, "About Stamford Hospital: History" Excerpted from: The Story of Stamford Hospital 1896-1971 by Mary Updegraff; publisher, Stamford Hospital, 1971; accessed August 23, 2006
In 1954, Edgar L. Geibel, a graduate of the Yale School of Public Health,  became the chief administrator of the hospital, a position which he held for 23 years until his retirement in 1977. Under his leadership, the hospital experienced significant change and growth, including the  1966-1969 construction of the hospital's signature white pavilion wing designed by Perkins & Will.
Recent history
From 1994 to 2000, the hospital had significant financial difficulties, losing money in six of the seven years, including a $22 million loss in one year.  By 2001 the hospital's pension plan was underfunded by $40 million.  In 2001, Brian Grissler became the president and chief executive officer of the hospital.  Under his leadership, significant budgetary changes were made, including the laying off of 200 employees in 2002 and 2003, in order to address the hospital's loss of market share.  The hospital's finances began to improve, and revenues in 2007 were $357 million.
In early 2006, the hospital actively considered moving to a new, undetermined site and construct a new hospital in order to enlarge hospital rooms (which are approximately half the size of more modern hospitals), as well as expand and modernize clinical departments (particularly the emergency room, critical care units and cardiac labs).  However, this proposal was scrapped in favor of building a large expansion.  The expansion of the hospital, dubbed "New Stamford Hospital" will result in a large 11 story glass structure, to become the dominant portion of the hospital.  Ground was broken on this wing in May 2013 with expected completion date in 2016 and estimated cost of 575 Million dollars.Porstner, Donna, "Stamford to get $7M from feds", The Advocate of Stamford, Connecticut, Stamford edition, page 1

Campus

Main Campus
Stamford hospital is located in the southwestern portion of Stamford, CT, near the downtown area and waterfront. The campus currently consists of five buildings on a site of about , mostly fronting West Broad Street. The oldest existing portion of the hospital, The Physician's Building, was constructed in the 1920s, while the newest wing, The Whittingham Pavilion, opened in 2001.
Cohen Children's Specialty Center at Stamford Hospital
An extensive pediatric ward within Stamford hospital, the Cohen Children's Center provides all branches of pediatric medicine and surgery.
Tully Health Center
The "Daniel P. & Grace I. Tully & Family Health Center" is a satellite campus site located a few miles northwest of the main hospital.  Named after the Tully family who made a significant donation to The Campaign for Stamford Hospital, the center opened in the spring of 2002 at the site of the former St. Joseph's Hospital and includes multiple health care services in an outpatient setting
Auxiliary Sites
In addition to those listed above, Stamford hospital has several additional outpatient facilities, largely clinical offices and phlebotomy labs, scattered throughout Stamford and greater Connecticut.  These include the larger Darien Imaging Center, Darien Medical Center, Wilton Surgery Center, among others.

Awards and recognition

In 2004, the Joint Commission awarded the annual Ernest A. Codman Award for creating a protocol to maintain correct blood glucose levels in critically ill patients. The new protocol cut the death rate among those patients by 29 percent and shortened time spent in the intensive care unit by 11 percent.Lee, Richard, "Healed Hospital: Ernst & Young lauds CEO for getting health system off life support", news article, Business section, The Advocate of Stamford, Connecticut, July 26, 2007, pp C1, C2
Stamford Hospital was awarded American Nurses Credentialing Center Award for Excellence in Nursing Services in 2005.  Stamford Hospital was one of 168 hospitals in the country to receive the award.
In 2007 Ernst & Young LLP gave Brian Grissler, the hospital president, its Entrepreneur of the Year award in the "social enterprise" category.

Alliances and partnerships

Special programs

In early 2007 the hospital started a "Familial Colorectal Cancer Registry" for individuals and families with a history of colorectal or associated cancers. The private registry is the first of its kind in Connecticut and provides general screening information as well as updates on the latest research."Greenwich residents could benefit from state's Colorectal Cancer Registry", article (no by-line) in The Greenwich Post, March 23, 2007
To amuse patients, some volunteers at the hospital roam the halls dressed up as clowns, calling themselves Health and Humor Associates (or "HAHA").Parry, Wynne, "HAHAs sprad laugher to hospital patients", article, The Advocate of Stamford, Connecticut, December 20, 2007, Stamford edition, pp 1, A4



Footnotes




