[[Wincing the Night Away]]

CATEGORIES: The Shins albums, 2007 albums, Sub Pop albums, English-language albums

Wincing the Night Away is an album by indie rock group The Shins. It was released by Sub Pop Records on January 23, 2007. It is the band's third album, and the final under their contract with Sub Pop. The album was recorded in James Mercer's basement studio, Phil Ek's home in Seattle, and in Oregon City with veteran producer Joe Chiccarelli (Frank Zappa, Oingo Boingo).

Writing and recording

Producer Chiccareli had become acquainted with Mercer while in Portland, Oregon, working with Pink Martini. At the time Mercer was recording the new Shins album on his own and finding that it wasn't going the way he wanted and at the speed he wanted. Frustrated and in need of fresh objective feedback he sought Chiccarelli's advice and suggestions, before the producer eventually became involved in a professional capacity.
The duo didn't start the record from scratch; while they started some songs completely anew, they also retained some of the material that Mercer had been recording on his own. According to Chiccarelli in an interview with HitQuarters, the duo spent around two months working together on the album.

Title

The title is a play on the name of a Sam Cooke song "Twistin' the Night Away". As reported in Rolling Stone magazine, it is a reference to band member James Mercer's "crippling insomnia". "Sleeping Lessons", the title of the first track, also references insomnia and was considered as a possible album title.
Prior to the album's release, Mercer confirmed Wincing the Night Away as the album title in an August 2006 interview with Billboard.

Prerelease

The full track listing was announced by Pitchfork Media on October 16, 2006. The first single, "Phantom Limb", was released on iTunes on November 14, 2006 and reached physical retailers on November 21. The new album was previewed in its entirety on the band's MySpace.
The album was leaked from a promo copy on October 20, 2006. Sub Pop responded by hiring a UK company to track down the source of the leak.The Shins Hit The Fans, Sub Pop Calls In The Sheriff - Idolator
On January 9, 2007, iTunes accidentally put the album on sale two weeks before its official release, then removed the option to purchase a day later. It is unknown how many people purchased the album within these two days.
Sub Pop Records also released the album as a vinyl LP, which includes a free coupon to download the album in mp3 format.

Release

Wincing the Night Away debuted at number 2 on the Billboard 200 chart, selling in excess of 100,000 copies. This is the highest chart position reached by not only The Shins, but the whole Sub Pop label as well.  During the same week, it also appeared as the top album in four other category charts: Top Digital Albums, Top Rock Albums, Tastemakers, and Top Independent Albums.
In the album's second week on the Billboard 200, it fell to number eight and sold about 53,000 copies. 1", Billboard. Like Oh, Inverted World, the album went Gold. According to Billboard the album has sold 617,000 in the US as of December 2011.

Description

Mercer stated that the band was "stretching out" on the new album, and that the extended recording period had given them more time to develop their ideas.

Reception

According to review aggregator Metacritic, Wincing the Night Away is rated slightly lower on average than its predecessor, Chutes Too Narrow.  However, the more positive reviews still praise the album highly.  For example, the Austin Chronicle says that Wincing "makes both previous albums sound like fragmented potential".

Track listing

The Japanese edition of the album contains two additional tracks, "Nothing at All" and "Spilt Needles" (alternate version), both taken from the "Phantom Limb" single. "Nothing at All" is also included on the album when purchased on iTunes.

Singles

Personnel

Production

Notes and references




