[[Plutoid]]

CATEGORIES: Plutoids, Dwarf planets, Trans-Neptunian objects

A plutoid or ice dwarf is a trans-Neptunian dwarf planet: that is a body orbiting beyond Neptune that is large enough to be rounded in shape. The term plutoid was adopted by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) working group Committee on Small Bodies Nomenclature, but was rejected by the IAU working group Planetary System Nomenclature. The term plutoid is not widely used by astronomers, though ice dwarf is not uncommon.
There are thought to be thousands of plutoids in the Solar System, although only four have been formally designated as such by the IAU. 
The IAU developed this category of astronomical objects as a consequence of its 2006 resolution defining the word "planet". The IAU's formal definition of "plutoid", announced 11 June 2008, is:
Accordingly, in the language of mathematical set theory, plutoids can be thought of as the intersection of the set of dwarf planets and the set of trans-Neptunian objects.
In light of the difficulty of remotely ascertaining hydrostasis, the IAU only formally confers "dwarf planet" (and by extension, "plutoid") status to those bodies whose minimum estimated size is substantially greater than what is generally thought necessary to guarantee hydrostatic equilibrium. 
Alan Stern of the Southwest Research Institute believes the outer planets show signs of collisions with plutoids 1,000 to 2,000 kilometers in diameter: Uranus could have been tipped off its axis by a plutoid, and Triton, the largest moon of Neptune, is probably a captured plutoid from the Kuiper belt.

History of the term

On August 24, 2006, the IAU decided to re-classify Pluto as a dwarf planet, requiring that a planet must "clear the neighbourhood around its orbit".
The General Assembly of the IAU further resolved:
This new category had been proposed under the name "pluton" or a "plutonian object" earlier in the General Assembly. The former was rejected, in part because "pluton" is actually a pre-existing geological term, and many geological experts wrote in complaints pointing this out. "Pluton" was dropped midway through the Assembly
The definition of the category also fluctuated during its early stages.  When first proposed, the category (then named "pluton") defined members as planets whose rotation period around the Sun was more than 200 Julian years, and whose orbit was more highly inclined and more elliptical than a traditional planetary orbit.
Following the IAU General Assembly, the name "plutoid" was proposed by the members of the IAU Committee on Small Body Nomenclature (CSBN), accepted by the Board of Division III, and approved by the IAU Executive Committee at its meeting in Oslo, Norway, on 11 June 2008.  The term was announced after the Executive Committee meeting, along with a greatly simplified definition: all trans-Neptunian dwarf planets are plutoids. However, due to a communication error, the IAU Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature (WG-PSN) was not consulted, and they subsequently rejected the term. Division III (Planetary Systems Sciences): Triennial Report 2006–2009. Transactions IAU, Volume XXVIIA.
As of 2009, the term had not been widely accepted by the scientific community, with the term ice dwarf (planet) sometimes used instead., 2009. "Exploration Strategy for the Ice Dwarf Planets 2013–2022".

Analogous terminology

Prior to the emergence of the term "plutoid" as an IAU-sanctioned categorization, there had been some attempts at applying a title for this class of object.
The term "ice dwarf" saw some adoption as a near-synonym to the eventual term "plutoid". "Ice dwarf", however, also saw some use as an umbrella term for all so-called "distant minor planets" (trans-Neptunian objects plus centaurs) or other, broad applications; one attempted definition was that an ice dwarf "is larger than the nucleus of a normal comet and icier than a typical asteroid".[ref]
