[[Green Corps]]

CATEGORIES: Environmental organizations based in the United States

Green Corps, the field school for environmental organizing, is a non-profit organization with the stated mission to "train organizers, provide field support for today's critical environmental campaigns, and graduate activists who possess the skills, temperament, and commitment to fight and win tomorrow's environmental battles."  Upon graduating from the program, the participant will have led three to five of these campaigns and will have the tools necessary to become important members of the movement.

History

Green Corps was founded in 1992 by Gina Cummings and Leslie Samuelrich to train young people to become environmental organizers.
Green Corps was founded in response to the momentum created by Earth Day in 1990.  Interest and desire to act burgeoned on university campuses around the country, producing graduates who were passionate and ready to contribute to the movement but who were faced with an obstacle—how do you find a position with one of these activist groups with minimal experience?
During the Green Corps year, participants work with veterans in the field to make progress on important campaigns.  Through partnering with these other influential groups, the Green Corps member creates valuable ties and learns from those who have been on the front lines.  Upon graduating, Green Corps members pursue careers with these leading organizations.

Campaigns

Recent campaigns include: fighting global warming; and safeguarding fisheries in the Gulf of Mexico, advocating clean energy with 1Sky, a national non-profit working to influence bold clean energy legislation by 2010; campaigning with Food and Water Watch's Fair Fish Initiative; and targeting specific college campuses to move away from coal power sources in partnership with the Sierra Club's Beyond Coal Campaign.
Current Campaigns include: Food & Water Watch Healthy Farms, Healthy Families campaign in PA, CO, MD; Sierra Club Beyond Coal in MN, WA, and MI; As You Sow Divestment Campaigns at Duke and NYU; Forest Heros Campaign in MI; Toxics Action Center Coal Campaign in NH.

Notable alumni

File: Phil Radford.jpg | Phil Radford, environment, clean energy, democracy leader
File: Arshad Hasan.jpg | Arshad Hasan, Executive Director, Progress Now








