[[Daniel G. McGowan]]

CATEGORIES: Animal Liberation Front, Earth Liberation Front, Eco-terrorism, American environmentalists, American activists, American arsonists, American prisoners and detainees, Prisoners and detainees of the United States federal government, Living people, 1974 births

Daniel Gerard McGowan (born 1974) is an American environmental and social justice activist who was arrested and charged in federal court on multiple counts of arson and conspiracy, relating to the arson of Superior Lumber company in Glendale, Oregon on January 2, 2001, and Jefferson Poplar Farms in Clatskanie, Oregon on May 21, 2001, the latter of which the Earth Liberation Front (ELF) claimed responsibility for. His arrest is part of what the US government has dubbed Operation Backfire.
McGowan was facing a minimum of life in prison if convicted when he accepted a non-cooperation plea agreement, pleading guilty on November 9, 2006.  A terrorism enhancement was applied to his sentence, and McGowan was ultimately sentenced to 7 years imprisonment.

Biography

McGowan was born in Brooklyn and grew up in Queens, New York City, and graduated from Christ the King Regional High School. Synopsis only at link. Biographical info from film. Viewed 2011-10-23 MPBN. He has worked on many activist issues including military counter-recruitment, demonstrations against the Republican National Convention, the Really Really Free Market, and the support of prisoners such as Jeff LuersFree Jeff Luers, Homepage. and others. McGowan was a graduate student earning a Master's degree in acupuncture, and was an employee of WomensLaw.org, Homepage. a nonprofit group that helps women in domestic abuse situations navigate the legal system.

Arrest and Operation Backfire

On December 7, 2005, one of the largest arrests of environmental activists in American history began. Using the code name Operation Backfire, the FBI arrested six people.  Chelsea Gerlach, William Rodgers, Kendall Tankersley, Kevin Tubbs, McGowan and Stanislas Meyerhoff were arrested for allegedly taking part in a wide variety of crimes, including arson and domestic terrorism. Meyerhoff agreed to be a federal cooperating witness almost immediately. On December 22, Rodgers was found dead in his cell in Flagstaff, Arizona, from an apparent suicide. 
On January 20, federal prosecutors, the head of the FBI, and US Attorney General Alberto Gonzales held a press conference announcing a 65-count indictment against 11 individuals relating to 17 different incidents in Oregon, Washington and California. In addition to the six arrested on December 7, the Oregon indictment also named Jonathan Paul, Suzanne Savoie, Joseph Dibee, Rebecca Rubin and Josephine Overaker.
The Oregon indictment charged certain defendants with arson, attempted arson, and using and carrying a destructive device. The destructive device charge carried a 30-year mandatory sentence and a life sentence for a second conviction. 
On June 28, the government arraigned Nathan Block, Joyanna Zacher, McGowan and Jonathan Paul on a 65-count superseding indictment. All four pleaded not guilty.

Criticism of prosecution

The Christian Science Monitor reports that the "Operation Backfire" indictments have elicited concern, from activists, that authorities have "cracked the super-secrecy of ALF and ELF". Alternative media organizations have condemned the arrests, some calling them a "witch-hunt", "aimed at disrupting and discrediting political movements".indymedia.Environmental + Anarchist witch-hunt under way, a very coherent summary : Indybay The FBI disputes these claims. Director Robert Mueller claims the agency takes action "only when volatile talk crosses the line into violence and criminal activity".Federal Bureau of Investigation - Major Executive Speeches - January 20, 2006

Plea agreement

On November 9, 2006, McGowan and co-defendants Jonathan Paul, Joyanna Zacher and Nathan Block pleaded guilty and signed a plea agreement. The agreement does not require the defendants' cooperation (i.e., informing on others).
Zacher 8, 2006 and Block 9, 2006 each pleaded to one count of conspiracy, attempted arson, and two separate incidents of arson. McGowan pled to conspiracy and to two separate incidents of arson. The government recommended that they be sentenced to 8 years in prison. Paul pleaded to one count of arson and one count of conspiracy.cldc.pdf  Paul Plea, Nov. 8, 2006 The government recommended Paul be sentenced to 5 years in prison. All four defendants were free to argue for a lesser sentence.
Prosecutors asked the court to apply a "terrorism enhancement" at sentencing. The government was seeking the enhancement because, despite the fact that the crimes involved only the destruction of private property, it was possible their actions could have led to people's injuries or deaths. No government property was damaged in any of the incidents.cldc.html Notes from Terrorism Enhancement Hearing, May 15, 2007

Sentencing and prison

On June 4, 2007, McGowan was sentenced to 7 years in federal prison and ordered to pay $1.9 million in restitution. U.S. District Court Judge Ann Aiken presided over the sentencing, which took place at Oregon Federal Court in Eugene, Oregon.
On October 19, 2010, McGowan's request for a transfer from the CMU to general population was granted.arprisoners.
Close to a year prior to the latest transfer, in March, 2010, the Center for Constitutional Rights filed a lawsuit on behalf of multiple prisoners, including McGowan and his wife.org/ourcases/current-cases/aref-et-al-v-holder-et-al In the time following the filing of this case, several news pieces that expose the CMUs have been published.thenation.wnyc.npr.npr.org/2011/03/04/134176614/leaving-guantanamo-north
On December 11, 2012, McGowan was released to a halfway house in New York City.

Documentary

In 2011, Sam Cullman and Marshall Curry's documentary If a Tree Falls: A Story of the Earth Liberation Front was released in theaters and on DVD by Oscilloscope Laboratories. The documentary follows McGowan's history with the ELF while examining the group at large. The film was shown on the PBS documentary series and on-line in September–October 2011.








