[[St. Louis Cathedral, Fort-de-France]]

CATEGORIES: 20th-century Roman Catholic church buildings, Buildings and structures in Martinique, Cathedrals in France, Official historical monuments of France, Roman Catholic cathedrals in the Caribbean, Roman Catholic Church in Martinique, Roman Catholic churches completed in 1895

St. Louis Cathedral () is a late 19th-century Romanesque Revival church that serves as the cathedral of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Fort-de-France in Martinique, an overseas department of France. It is located in the downtown area of the capital city at the intersection of rue Victor Schoelcher and rue Blénac.
The construction of the cathedral began in the mid-17th century and it opened in 1657.  Due to the natural disasters that have plagued Fort-de-France over the years, the current structure dates back to 1895 and was built with an iron frame in order to withstand these calamities.  It is the seventh church to be erected on the site; it was designed by Gustave Eiffel and built by Pierre-Henri Picq.

History

Before the present cathedral was completed in 1895, a total of six churches had previously been constructed on the site, the first of which was built in 1657.
In the mid-1970s,

Architecture

Exterior

St. Louis Cathedral was built in a Gothic Revival style with rounded arches in the Neo-Romanesque style. above the city, while its exterior walls are supported by flying buttresses.  Located in front of the cathedral is a small square that contains two royal palms which appear to flank the structure.  The building is located directly across the square from the consulate of the United States and is one block northwest from the park La Savane.
The entire structure has a frame of iron beams which support the walls, ceiling and steeple making the church a fine example of architecture from the time of the Industrial Revolution.  As a result, the cathedral is referred to in the Caribbean as the "Iron Cathedral" and has been compared to a "Catholic railway station".

Interior

The interior of the church is noted for its "grand organ", ornate walls, beautiful stained glass windows and balustrade made of iron.
Located underneath the choir loft is a crypt containing the tombs of several previous governors of Martinique.




