[[Dominic Cooper]]

CATEGORIES: 1978 births, Male actors from London, Alumni of the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, English male film actors, English male radio actors, English male stage actors, English male television actors, Living people, People from Greenwich, Royal National Theatre Company members, Royal Shakespeare Company members, Male Shakespearean actors, Male actors from Kent

Dominic Edward Cooper (born 2 June 1978) is an English He has worked in TV, film, theatre and radio, in productions including Mamma Mia!, The Duchess, The History Boys, The Devil's Double, Captain America: The First Avenger, and Abraham Lincoln: Vampire Hunter.

Early life

Cooper was born and brought up in Greenwich, London, the son of Julie (Heron), a nursery school teacher, and Brian Cooper, an auctioneer. His maternal great-grandfather was film enthusiast E. T. Heron, who published The Kinematograph Weekly. He attended the Thomas Tallis School in Kidbrooke, London, and trained at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art (LAMDA), graduating in 2000. He also attended John Ball Primary School.

Career

He first worked in television and film before making his stage debut in Mother Clap's Molly House at the National Theatre in 2001.
Cooper was involved in Alan Bennett's play The History Boys from its first reading. He also toured with the production to Broadway, Sydney, Wellington and Hong Kong as well as appearing in the radio and film adaptations of the play.
In 2005, Cooper also appeared in a commercial for condom company Durex.Durex Commercial on YouTube
He has had notable roles in the Royal National Theatre's adaptation of the His Dark Materials trilogy where he played the lead character Will Parry, the TV series Down To Earth and Sense & Sensibility. He is possibly best known for his work in Mamma Mia!, in which he sang several songs. In the film, his character was engaged to the daughter (played by Amanda Seyfried) of the lead (Meryl Streep).
He appears opposite Keira Knightley in The Duchess and can also be seen in An Education.
He guest-starred in the "Aspinol" sketch in James Corden's BBC3 show Horne & Corden. In 2009 he played Hippolytus in Phedre at the National Theatre alongside Helen Mirren and Margaret Tyzack.
In 2010, he played rock-drummer Ben in the film Tamara Drewe, and in 2011 played the leading roles of Latif Yahia and Uday Hussein in the biographical film The Devil's Double.
In 2011 he also appeared as Howard Stark in the Marvel film Captain America: The First Avenger.
In 2012 he appeared as vampire Henry Sturges in Abraham Lincoln: Vampire Hunter.
In 2014, he reprised his role as Stark in both Agent Carter and Captain America: The Winter Soldier. On December 4, 2013, Legendary Pictures announced that Cooper would be joining the cast of Warcraft film adaptation, set to be released in March 2016.

Recognition and awards

Cooper was nominated for a 2006 Drama Desk Award for his work on the Broadway production of The History Boys.
He was nominated for the for Most Promising Newcomer (On Screen) award at the 2006 British Independent Film Awards for his work on the film version of The History Boys.

Personal life

He is a good friend of his former The History Boys co-star, James Corden. Cooper lived for a while in Corden's house until Corden started a family with his girlfriend. He also dated Ruth Negga.

Filmography






