[[List of Olympic medalists in equestrian]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of Summer Olympic medalists by sport, Equestrian at the Summer Olympics, Olympic medalists in equestrian

Equestrian sports are among those contested at the Summer Olympic Games. Equine events began at the Olympics in 1900, when competitions in polo (considered by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) to be a separate sport from the other equestrian events), vaulting, four-in-hand driving, mail coach driving, mixed hacks and hunters and three types of jumping (high jump, long jump and show-jumping) were held.
Modern-day Olympic equestrian events are rooted in cavalry skills and classical horsemanship, The rules for Olympic equestrian competition are set by the Fédération Équestre Internationale, the international governing body for equestrian sports. 
In two instances, the equestrian portion of the Olympics has been held in a different location from the rest of the games. The first was during the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne, Australia when, due to Australian quarantine laws, the equestrian portion was held in Stockholm, Sweden. At the next IOC meeting, it was decided to hold a special Equestrian Olympic Games several months before the actual Olympics, complete with its own opening and closing ceremonies.
The Summer Olympics have included 2,129 equestrian participants, including 1,751 men and 378 women, from 69 countries.

Current program

Dressage, individual

Dressage, team

Eventing, individual

Eventing, team

Show-jumping, individual

Show-jumping, team

Discontinued events

High jump

Long jump

Vaulting, individual

Vaulting, team

Unofficial events

These two events were contested only at the 1900 Summer Games. Today, the IOC does not recognize them as official events, but instead as unofficial or demonstration events.

Mixed hacks and hunters combined

Mail coach

This event was also known as the "Mixed four-in-hand", and appears that way in some references. 

Statistics

Athlete medal leaders

Athletes who have won at least five medals are listed below.

Notes




