[[Jeff Duff]]

CATEGORIES: Australian male singers, Living people, 1956 births

Geoff "Jeff" Stephen Duff, or Duffo, (born 1956) is one of Australia's most eccentric performers;McFarlane (1999). Encyclopedia entry for 'Jeff Duff'. Retrieved 30 January 2010. he began his musical career in Melbourne in 1971 as lead singer of jazz-rock fusion band Kush,Spencer et al., (2007) KUSH entry. Retrieved 30 January 2010. and later fronted various self-named groups., (2007) DUFF, Jeff entry. Retrieved 30 January 2010., (2007) Duff, Jeff entry. Retrieved 30 January 2010. Duff relocated to London in 1978 as "the waif-like androgynous oddball Duffo". His single, "Give Me Back Me Brain" peaked in the top 100 on the United Kingdom (UK) mainstream charts in 1979. He returned to Australia in Sydney in 1986 and continued performing and recording in various styles of music. His 1999 compilation, Martian Girls Are Easy is described by music historian, Ian McFarlane as showing "satirical, new wave origins of "Give Me Back Me Brain", through the soulful classical arrangement of Lou Reed's "Walk on the Wild Side", dipping into funk on the way and then back to his glam roots."

Early career

Jeff Duff was born in 1956 and grew up in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. As lead singer, he formed Kush in 1971 with Ron Anderson on piano and saxophone, Stephen Ball on keyboards, Colin Chapman on trumpet and horns, Tom Cowburn on guitar, harmonica and backing vocals, John Ellis on clarinet, flute and saxophone, Rob Matthews on bass guitar, and Graham McDonald on drums. They released covers of "Peter Gunn", "MacArthur Park" and "Walk on the Wild Side" as well as originals such as "(Livin' on) Easy Street".
From 1978 until 1988, as Duffo, he lived in London enjoying a successful recording/concert career working with some of the world's finest musicians. His keyboard player and arranger for most of this period was Sev Lewkowicz. Duff toured extensively throughout Europe and gained a reputation for his flamboyant live performances. He returned to Sydney in 1988 and found instant success with an award winning video, which accompanied his recording of the song 'Walk on the Wild Side'.
Duff also tried his hand at acting, appearing in a main role in the Australian science Fiction movie Sons of Steel, released in 1989.
Since then he has continued to set trends, performing and recording either as a solo artist or with his eclectic mix of bands, most notably the classically inspired Jeff Duff Orchestra, the jazz-rock of Jeff Duff & the Prophets, jazz swing of The Jeff Duff Big Band, the jazz-pop quartet Duffo and his glam rock combo The Alien Sex Gods. Duff is also vocalist with Australian trombonist Ed Wilson's Big BandWilson Big Band with whom he has recorded a couple of albums.
Duff has recorded 25 albums and is working on album number 26.
Duff also has a number of new cds being released in 2007. Among them are a couple of jazz albums; an exciting project written and recorded with keyboard wizz kid Paul Searles Skunkhour and a few tracks on a new blues album by the 'Hoochie Coochie Men' which features members from legendary British rock bands Deep Purple and Black Sabbath.
Aztec Music is also releasing Duff's classic 70's vinyl albums with his jazz rock band Kush on CD for the first time including Snow White & the Eight Straights.
In 2011 Duff's "Fragile Spaceman" CD inside cover received three awards at the International Photography Awards (IPA) in New York created by fine art Sydney photographer Penelope BeveridgePhotoshop Australia 

Performances

Duff is a regular performer on Australian television and continues to headline some of Australia's leading Jazz festivals including Melbourne Jazz Festival, Manly Jazz Festival, Darling Harbor Jazz Festival, Casino Jazz, Thredbo Jazz Festival, Noosa Jazz Festival.
In 2005, Duff performed a sold-out season of this show at the Opera House Studio in Sydney. He has since performed the show in Melbourne, Queensland and recently performed a sold out season of the show at the 2006 Adelaide Cabaret Festival.
Duff performs regularly at Sydney's premier live music venues including the Basement & the Vanguard alternating shows between his different combos. More at home on stage than off, Duff is constantly creating new performance challenges. He juxtaposes his sophisticated twenty piece Big Band swing repertoire with the raunchy glam rock of his hugely successful Alien Sex Gods shows.

Recent projects

Duff's Ground control to Frank Sinatra project merges the styles of David Bowie and Frank Sinatra. The show features, dancers, singers, audiovisuals and a nine-piece band. Ground control to Frank Sinatra Duff's stage show has produced two albums: Ground Control to Frank Sinatra and Lost in the Stars.
Duff is currently writing & recording a new show based on the music of his favorite singer Scott Walker.
Jeff's direct homage to Bowie is a show called 'ZIGGY'. which is a very successful concert production featuring members of Jimmy Barnes band, Noiseworks & Leo Sayer's band. The ZIGGY show is scheduled to perform at the Sydney Opera House in 2010 and September 2012.

Further reading






