[[Corona Borealis]]

CATEGORIES: Corona Borealis (constellation), Constellations, Northern constellations, Constellations listed by Ptolemy

Corona Borealis  is a small constellation in the northern sky. Its name is Latin for "northern crown", a name inspired by its shape; its main stars form a semicircular arc. One of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy, it remains one of the 88 modern constellations.
The brightest star is the 2.2-magnitude Alpha Coronae Borealis. Four star systems have been found to have exoplanets to date; three of these are orange giants, while the fourth—Rho Coronae Borealis—is a solar twin, very like our own Sun. Abell 2065 is a highly concentrated galaxy cluster located one billion light-years from our Solar System containing over 400 members, the brightest of which are 16th magnitude.

Characteristics

Corona Borealis is a small constellation bordered by Bootes to the north and west, Serpens Caput to the south, and Hercules to the east. The three-letter abbreviation for the constellation, as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922, is 'CrB'. Covering 179 square degrees, Corona Borealis ranks 73rd in area.

Notable features

Stars

Johann Bayer gave twenty stars in Corona Borealis Bayer designations from Alpha to Upsilon in his 1603 star atlas Uranometria. The components of the double star Zeta have since been designated Zeta1 and Zeta2, and John Flamsteed equated his 20 and 21 Coronae Borealis with Nu1 and Nu2.
The seven stars that make up the constellation's figure are all 4th-magnitude stars, except for the constellation's brightest star, Alpha Coronae Borealis. This blue-white main-sequence star, also called Alphekka and Gemma, is of magnitude 2.2, though it is an Algol-type eclipsing binary. It varies by 0.1 magnitudes with a period of 17.4 days.
The other six stars are Theta, Beta, Gamma, Delta, Epsilon, and Iota Coronae Borealis.
Corona Borealis is home to several binary and double stars. Beta Coronae Borealis or Nusakan is a spectroscopic binary system located around 114 light-years away. The two components are separated by 10 astronomical units and orbit each other every 10.5 years.  Accessed on line October 14, 2013. Zeta Coronae Borealis is a double star divisible in small telescopes. It has two blue-white components, 470 light-years from Earth. The primary is of magnitude 5.0 and the secondary is of magnitude 6.0. Another double star is Nu Coronae Borealis; both components are 550 light-years from Earth but have different radial velocities and are assumed to be unrelated. The primary, Nu1 Coronae Borealis, is a red-hued giant star of magnitude 5.2; the secondary, Nu2 Coronae Borealis is an orange-hued giant star of magnitude 5.4. Sigma Coronae Borealis, on the other hand, is a true binary star. Both components are yellow and orbit each other every 1000 years. The system, 71 light-years from Earth, has a primary of magnitude 5.6 and a secondary of magnitude 6.6. Sigma Coronae Borealis is divisible by small amateur telescopes. ADS 9731 is a system composed of six stars, two of which are spectroscopic binaries.
Corona Borealis is home to two remarkable variable stars. T Coronae Borealis is an exploding variable star also known as the Blaze Star.
The nearest star to Earth in the constellation is Gliese 611, a binary system consisting of a yellow main-sequence star of spectral type G8V, and a red dwarf of spectral type M4.
Four star systems have been found to have exoplanets to date. Kappa Coronae Borealis is an orange subgiant of spectral type K0III-IV that has a dust debris disk and one confirmed and one possible planet. Omicron Coronae Borealis is another K-type clump giant with one confirmed planet., believed to be, like HD 100655 b, one of the two least massive planets known around clump giants. Rho Coronae Borealis is a Solar twin, yellow dwarf around 57 light-years distant. It has a planet around the size and mass of Jupiter orbiting it every 40 days. HD 145457 is an orange giant of spectral type K0III found to have one planet.

Deep sky objects

Corona Borealis contains no bright deep-sky objects. Abell 2065 is a highly concentrated galaxy cluster containing over 400 members, the brightest of which are 16th magnitude. The cluster is more than one billion light-years from Earth. At the cluster's center is a large elliptical galaxy containing the supermassive black hole.
In November 2013 astronomers discovered the largest structure in the universe that was found within this constellation, the Hercules–Corona Borealis Great Wall.

History and mythology

In Greek mythology, Corona Borealis was sometimes considered to represent a crown that was given by Dionysus to Ariadne, the daughter of Minos of Crete. When she wore the crown to her wedding, where she married Dionysus, he placed her crown in the heavens to commemorate the wedding. In Welsh mythology, it was called Caer Arianrhod, "the Castle of the Silver Circle", and was the heavenly abode of the Lady Arianrhod (Squire, 2000:154–155). In Arabic mythology, the constellation was known as "the bowl of the poor people" from the Arabic name قصعة المساكين, since the stars form an unsymmetrical pattern with an indent in one side, similar to the bowl of the poor. The Arabs also called the constellation Alphecca (a name later given to Alpha Corona Borealis), which means "separated" or "broken up," a reference to the resemblance of the stars of Corona Borealis to a loose string of jewels.

Equivalents

In Australian Aboriginal astronomy, the constellation is called womera ("the boomerang") due to the shape of the stars.p. 151, Star Lore: Myths, Legends, and Facts, William Tyler Olcott, New York, Dover Publication Inc., 2004
The Wailwun people of northwestern New South Wales saw Corona Borealis as mullion wollai "eagle's nest", with Altair and Vega—each called mullion—the pair of eagles accompanying it.
The Cheyenne nation of Native Americans called the main stars of this constellation the "Camp Circle" as they arranged their camps in a semicircle. Native Americans also used stars to make designs in the ground at the Medicine Wheel in Bighorn National Forest, Wyoming, USA.
In Chinese astronomy, the stars of Corona Borealis are located within the Heavenly Market enclosure (天市垣, Tiān Shì Yuán) AEEA (Activities of Exhibition and Education in Astronomy) 天文教育資訊網 2006 年 6 月 26 日
Polynesian peoples often recognized Corona Borealis; it was likely called Te Hetu in the Tuamotus, whose people called the constellation Na Kaua-ki-tokerau. In Hawaii, the constellation was likely called Kaua-mea; it was called Rangawhenua in New Zealand. The figure of Corona Borealis was called Te Wale-o-Awitu in Pukapuka. Its name in Tonga was unsure; it was either called Ao-o-Uvea or Kau-kupenga.



  | last = Levy
  | first = David H.
  | year = 2005
  | title = Deep Sky Objects
  | publisher = Prometheus Books
  | isbn = 978-1-59102-361-6
  | ref = harv
  }}
  | last = Makemson
  | first = Maud Worcester
  | year = 1941
  | publisher = Yale University Press
  | title = The Morning Star Rises: an account of Polynesian astronomy	
  | ref = harv
  }}
  | last1 = Ridpath
  | first1 = Ian
  | last2 = Tirion
  | first2 = Wil
  | year = 2001
  | title = Stars and Planets Guide
  | publisher = Princeton University Press
  | isbn = 978-0-691-08913-3
  | ref = harv
  }}




