[[Scott Page]]

CATEGORIES: Saxophonists, Living people

Scott Page  is a technologist, entrepreneur, musician and song writer. Most recognised as saxophonist for Pink Floyd, Supertramp and Toto. As an  entrepreneur  formed Walt Tucker Productions an audio video post production company (1987), Co-Founded 7th Level, Inc. CD-ROM game and educational software company (1992), Co-founded New Media Broadcasting Company a social media and collaborative communications enterprise (2001), Co-founder and CEO Direct2Care an online presence management company for healthcare (2011).

Awards

Scott Page has received several acknowledgments and awards, primarily for his technology companies' achievements. Named one of "50 Pioneers of Multimedia," Page has been guest lecturer and panelist at numerous conferences and university symposia. His industry acknowledgments include being named one of "The Top 100 Multimedia Producers" by Multimedia Magazine; the "100 Coolest People in Los Angeles" by Buzz Magazine; and one of "50 New Media Innovators" profiled in Pioneer Electronics' Multimedia Frontier.

Music

At age six, Page's earliest nationally broadcast musical performance was on ABC-TV's "The Lawrence Welk Show." The Lawrence Welk Show His father, Bill Page, was a saxophonist/reed player for Welk from 1955 to 1965.
Page's instrumental work (much of which was done at his film/video/recording company Walt Tucker Productions in Glendale, CA) includes saxophone and other woodwinds, guitar, and keyboards. His most visible successes have been with Supertramp on their 1983 final tour with Roger Hodgson in support of the album ..... and most particularly with Pink Floyd during recording of their 1987 album A Momentary Lapse of Reason and its corresponding tour documented on the live album Delicate Sound of Thunder.

Technology

In 1992, Page transitioned from musical production and performance into technology entrepreneurship via the computer software industry. Recruiting participation and sponsorship from corporate giants IBM, Microsoft and others, as well as publishing companies such as CMP, IDG and Ziff-Davis to raise money for The National Center For Missing And Exploited Children. This was done at a three-ring multimedia circus" format called The Grand Scientific Musical Theatre, a one-time fundraising concert held in the Thomas N. Mack Center at the University of Nevada/Las Vegas (UNLV).
In 1993, Page formed 7th Level, Inc. with music/entertainment producer Bob Ezrin (Alice Cooper, KISS, Pink Floyd, Peter Gabriel, the Mr. Holland's Opus Foundation, Music Rising) and Dallas technology entrepreneur George Grayson, whose first company (Micrografx, Inc.) pioneered PC-based graphics software development in the early 1980s. The company's first software venture was an edutainment product called "Li'l Howie's TuneLand" starring comic and "Deal Or No Deal" TV host Howie Mandel. "Tuneland" featured musical performances by Pink Floyd guitarist David Gilmour, Yes vocalist/songwriter Jon Anderson, Steely Dan/Doobie Brothers guitarist Jeff 'Skunk' Baxter and other popular musicians on such children's songs as "The Little Green Frog."
7th Level's flagship product was a CD-ROM software 'edutainment thingie' called "Monty Python's Complete Waste Of Time." It was produced in 1994 by British comedy troupe's animator and award-winning film director Terry Gilliam, and Ezrin. "Waste Of Time" included such elements as 'The Desktop Pythonizer' and 'Solve The Secret To Intergalactic Success.' The product included video clips from the absurdist icons' seminal BBC-TV series "Monty Python's Flying Circus" as well as new animation from Gilliam.

New Media Broadcasting

In 2004, Page launched New Media Broadcasting Company Inc. (NewMBC) www.com with silicon valley technology veteran Russ Lujan. Initially NewMBC developed interactive distribution services for content creators and consumers. Its MashCast communications platform connected diverse audiences, artists, content owners through a collaborative online network. Mashcast helped users integrate and monetize Internet broadcasts and social networks, using an infrastructure that supported content creation and collaboration. NewMBC's most highly visible clients have included fan-based community sites for the international, Grammy-winning musical group TOTO, as well as for Python (Monty) Ltd.
Page has initiated several notable charity fundraising benefit events, concerts, recordings, film, video, and online projects. In November 1992 he created "The Grand Scientific Musical Theatre," a multimedia concert and fundraiser held at the UNLV Thomas N. Mack Center in Las Vegas (as part of Comdex/Fall, the computer industry's largest trade show) to benefit The National Center For Missing & Exploited Children. This was produced in conjunction with Micrografx, as an adjunct to the company's annual Chili Cook-Off, which tapped computer industry leaders such as Microsoft and IBM, as well as media organizations such as CMP, IDG and Ziff-Davis to sponsor and donate to selected nonprofit organizations. For that one-time/one-night event, he produced live as well as audio/video/film-recorded performances by a wide variety of entertainers, including: the Cirque de Soleil, Todd Rundgren, producer Alan Parsons (The Beatles, Pink Floyd, The Alan Parsons Project), The Turtles (AKA Flo & Eddie - Mark Volman and Howard Kaylan), Jon Anderson (lead vocalist/songwriter from British art-rock-classical group Yes), Rock And Roll Hall Of Fame Inductees Graham Nash (The Hollies, Crosby Stills Nash & Young), John Entwistle (The Who) and James Burton (Elvis Presley, Ricky Nelson), as well as The Tower Of Power, Edgar Winter, Jim Keltner, guitarist Jeff "Skunk" Baxter (Steely Dan, the Doobie Brothers) and others. The event raised more than $1.5 million.
Page's latest venture is Direct2Care (D2C), a social-commerce/wellness network designed to facilitate physician-provider-patient healthcare decisionmaking, relationship building, and trusted-source referrals. Together with longtime business partner Russ Lujan and Dr. Richard Foullon of Verdugo Hills Medical Associates (VHMA), a Q3 2011 launch is planned.




