[[Flexible display]]

CATEGORIES: Display technology, Electronic paper technology, Liquid crystal displays, Flexible electronics

A flexible display is a display which is flexible in nature; differentiable from the more prevalent traditional flat screen displays used in most electronics devices. In the recent years there has been a growing interest from numerous consumer electronics manufacturers to apply this display technology in e-readers, mobile phones and other consumer electronics.

History

Flexible electronic paper based displays

Flexible electronic paper (e-paper) based displays were the first flexible displays conceptualized and prototyped. Though this form of flexible displays has a long history and were attempted by many companies, it is only recently that this technology began to see commercial implementations slated for mass production to be used in consumer electronic devices.

=Xerox PARC=

The concept of developing a flexible display was first put forth by Xerox PARC (Palo Alto Research Company). In 1974, Nicholas K. Sheridon, a PARC employee, made a major breakthrough in flexible display technology and produced the first flexible e-paper display. Dubbed Gyricon, this new display technology was designed to mimic the properties of paper, but married with the capacity to display dynamic digital images. Sheridon envisioned the advent of paperless offices and sought commercial applications for Gyricon.

=HP and ASU=

In 2005, Arizona State University opened a 250,000 square foot facility dedicated to flexible display research named the ASU Flexible Display Center (FDC). ASU received $43.7 million from the Army Research Lab towards the development of this research facility. A planned prototype device was slated for public demonstration later that year. However, due to limitations in technology, HP stated "company doesn't actually see these panels being used in truly flexible or rollable displays, but instead sees them being used to simply make displays thinner and lighter."

=Plastic Logic=

This company develops and manufactures colour and monochrome plastic flexible displays in various sizes based on its proprietary organic thin film transistor (OTFT) technology.

=Organic User Interfaces and the Human Media Lab=

In 2004, a team lead by Prof. Roel Vertegaal at Queen's University's Human Media Lab in Canada developed PaperWindows,Holman, D., Vertegaal, R. and Troje, N. (2005). PaperWindows: Interaction Techniques for Digital Paper. In Proceedings of ACM CHI 2005 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM Press, 591-599. the first prototype bendable paper computer and first Organic User Interface. Since full-colour, US Letter-sized displays were not available at the time, PaperWindows deployed a form of active projection mapping of computer windows on real paper documents that worked together as one computer through 3D tracking. At a lecture to the Gyricon and Human-Computer Interaction teams at Xerox PARC on May 4, 2007, Prof. Vertegaal publicly introduced the term Organic User Interface (OUI) as a means of describing the implications of non-flat display technologies on user interfaces of the future: paper computers, flexible form factors for computing devices, but also encompassing rigid display objects of any shape, with wrap-around, skin-like displays. The lecture was published a year later as part of a special issue on Organic User InterfacesHolman, H. and Vertegaal R. Organic user interfaces: designing computers in any way, shape, or form. Communications of the ACM 51(6), June 2008, 26-30. in the Communications of the ACM. In May 2010, the Human Media Lab partnered with ASU's Flexible Display Center to produce PaperPhone,Byron Lahey, Audrey Girouard, Winslow Burleson and Roel Vertegaal. PaperPhone: Understanding the Use of Bend Gestures in Mobile Devices with Flexible Electronic Paper Displays, Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Pages 1303-1312, May 2011. the first flexible smartphone with a flexible electrophoretic display. PaperPhone used bend gestures for navigating contents. Since then, the Human Media Lab has partnered with Plastic Logic and Intel to introduce the first flexible tablet PC and multi-display e-paper computer, PaperTab,Wired. PaperTab billed as the world's first flexible tablet pc, Jan 2013. at CES 2013, debuting the world's first actuated flexible smartphone prototype, MorePhoneGomes, A., Nesbitt, A., and Vertegaal, R. MorePhone: A Study Of Actuated Shape Deformations for Flexible Thin-Film Smartphone Notifications. In Proceedings of ACM CHI'13 Conference on Human Factors in Computing. ACM Press, 2013, pp. 583-592. in April 2013.

=Others=

Since 2010 Sony Electronics, AU Optronics and LG Electronics have all expressed interest in developing flexible e-paper displays.

Flexible OLED-based displays

Research and development into flexible e-paper-based displays largely began in late 2000s with the main intensions of implementing this technology in mobile devices. However, this technology has recently made an appearance, to a moderate extent, in consumer television displays as well.

=Nokia Morph and Kinetic concepts=

Nokia first conceptualized the application of flexible OLED displays in mobile phone with the Nokia Morph concept mobile phone. Released to the press in February 2008, the Morph concept was project Nokia had co-developed with the University of Cambridge. The Kinetic proved to be a large departure from the Morph physically, but it still incorporated Nokia's vision of polymorphism in mobile devices.

=Sony=

Sony Electronics expressed interest for research and development towards a flexible display video display since 2005.

=Samsung=

In late 2010, Samsung Electronics announced the development of a prototype 4.5 inch flexible AMOLED display.
On 8 October 2013, the Samsung Galaxy Round was unveiled as the world's first mobile phone with flexible display.com/samsung-unveils-galaxy-round-worlds-first-flexible-display-phone/ Featuring a 5.7" touchscreen display made of flexible material, the phone (and the screen) were curved in shape but the phone itself was solid, thus not allowing its body or the screen to be bendable.
The Samsung Galaxy Round was 7.9mm thick and weighed 154 grams.com/samsung-galaxy-round/ The smartphone ran on Android 4.3 Jelly Bean operating system and was sold for $1000 upon release.

=ASU=

The Flexible Display Center (FDC) at Arizona State University announced a continued effort in forwarding flexible displays in 2012. ASU intends the display to be used in "thin, lightweight, bendable and highly rugged devices."

Technical details

Electronic paper

Flexible displays using electronic paper technology commonly use Electrophoretic or Electrowetting technologies. However, each type of flexible electronic paper vary in specification due to different implementation techniques by different companies.

=HP and ASU e-paper=

The flexible electronic paper display technology co-developed by Arizona State University and HP employs a manufacturing process developed by HP Labs called Self-Aligned Imprint Lithography (SAIL). The screens are made by layering stacks of semi-conductor materials and metals between pliable plastic sheets. The stacks need to be perfectly aligned and stay that way. Alignment proves difficult during manufacturing when heat during manufacturing can deform the materials and when the resulting screen also needs to remain flexible. The SAIL process gets around this by 'printing' the semiconductor pattern on a fully composed substrate, so that the layers always remain in perfect alignment. The limitation of the material the screen is based on allows only a finite amount of full rolls, hence limiting its commercial application as a flexible display. Specifications provided regarding the prototype display are as follows:

=AUO e-paper=

The flexible electronic paper display announced by AUO is unique as it is the only solar powered variant. A separate rechargeable battery is also attached when solar charging is unavailable.
Specifications

=LG e-paper=

Specifications:

=List of displays by their reported curvature=

Lower is sharply curved

OLED

Many of the e-paper based flexible displays are based on OLED technology and its variants. Though this technology is relatively new in comparison with e-paper based flexible displays, implementation of OLED flexible displays saw considerable growth in the last few years.

=ASU=

Specifications:

=Samsung=

Specifications:

Concept devices

Mobile devices

In May 2011, Human Media Lab at Queen's University in Canada introduced PaperPhone, the first flexible smartphone, in partnership with the Arizona State University Flexible Display Center. PaperPhone used 5 bend sensors to implement navigation of the user interface through bend gestures of corners and sides of the display. In January 2013, the Human Media Lab introduced the first flexible tablet PC, PaperTab, in collaboration with Plastic Logic and Intel Labs, at CES. PaperTab is a multi-display environment in which each display represents a window, app or computer document. Displays are tracked in 3D to allow multidisplay operations, such as collate to enlarge the display space, or pointing with one display onto another to pull open a document file. In April 2013 in Paris, the Human Media Lab, in collaboration with Plastic Logic, unveiled the world's first actuated flexible smartphone prototype, MorePhone. MorePhone actuates its body to notify users upon receiving a phone call or message.
Nokia introduced the Kinetic concept phone at Nokia World 2011 in London. The flexible OLED display allows users to interact with the phone by twisting, bending, squeezing and folding in different manners across both the vertical and horizontal planes. Nokia envisioned this type of device to be available to consumers in "as little as three years", and claimed to already process "the technology to produce it."
At CES 2013, Samsung showcased the two handsets which incorporates AMOLED flexible display technology during its keynote presentation, the Youm and an unnamed Windows Phone 8 prototype device. The benefit of the curvature allows users "to read text messages, stock tickers, and other notifications from the side of the device even if user have a case covering the screen." The screen is described to be a 16:9 aspect ratio at a 720p resolution. The unnamed Windows Phone 8 prototype device is composed of a solid base from which extends a flexible AMOLED display. The AMOLED display itself bends and was described as "virtually unbreakable even when dropped" according to Samsung representatives. Brian Berkeley, the senior vice president of Samsung Display, believes that this flexible form factor "will really begin to change how people interact with their devices, opening up new lifestyle possibilities ... and allow our partners to create a whole new ecosystem of devices."

Curved OLED TVs

LG Electronics and Samsung Electronics both introduced curved OLED televisions with a curved display at CES 2013 hours apart from each other. The technology journalist website The Verge noted the subtle curve on 55" Samsung OLED TV allowed it to have a "more panoramic, more immersive viewing experience, and actually improves viewing angles from the side." The experience was also shared viewing the curved 55" LG OLED TV. It should be noted that the LG set is also 3D capable, in addition to the curvature.
Lower is sharply curved








