[[Natascha Kampusch]]

CATEGORIES: 1988 births, Living people, 1990s missing person cases, Austrian autobiographers, Austrian television presenters, Children kept in captivity, Kidnapped Austrian children, Missing person cases in Austria, Writers from Vienna

Natascha Maria Kampusch (born 17 February 1988) is an Austrian woman notable for her abduction at the age of 10 on 2 March 1998. Kampusch was held in a secret cellar by her kidnapper Wolfgang Přiklopil for more than eight years, until she escaped on 23 August 2006. The media attention later led to her giving select interviews, writing an autobiography (3,096 Days, published September 2010) and also signing a contract with Austrian channel Puls 4 for her own talk show, which had its premiere on 1 June 2008, but only ran for three episodes.

Early years and family

Kampusch was raised by her mother, Brigitta Sirny (née Kampusch), and her father, Ludwig Koch, in Vienna, Austria. Her early life with her mother was reportedly not a happy one, according to Ludwig Adamovich, head of a special commission looking into possible police failures in the investigation of the kidnapping. He claimed that "the time Kampusch was imprisoned might have been better for her than what she experienced before", a statement absolutely refuted by Birgitta Sirny, who threatened to sue the commission chief over his remarks.
Her family included two adult sisters, and five nieces and nephews. Sirny and Koch separated while Kampusch was still a child and divorced after her abduction. Kampusch spent time with both of them, and had returned to her mother's home from a holiday with Koch the day before her kidnapping.[ref]
[/ref]

Kidnapping

The 10-year-old Kampusch left her family's residence in Vienna's Donaustadt district on the morning of 2 March 1998, but failed to arrive at school or come home. A 12-year-old witness reported having seen her being dragged into a white minibus by two men,
Speculations of child pornography rings or organ theft were offered,[ref]
 Because Kampusch had carried her passport with her when she left (she had been on a family trip to Hungary a few days before), the police extended the search abroad. Accusations against Kampusch's family complicated the issue even more; there have even been unsubstantiated allegations that Kampusch's mother was somehow involved in the abduction or its cover-up.

Captivity

During the eight years of her captivity, Kampusch was held in a small cellar underneath Přiklopil's garage. The entrance was concealed behind a cupboard. The cellar only had 
According to Kampusch's official statement after her escape, she and Přiklopil would get up early each morning to have breakfast together. Přiklopil gave her books, so she educated herself, and according to a colleague of his, she appeared happy. Later, when explaining that in general she did not feel she had missed anything during her imprisonment, she noted, "I spared myself many things, I did not start smoking or drinking and I did not hang out in bad company". But she also said: "I always had the thought: surely I didn't come into the world so I could be locked up and my life completely ruined. I give up in despair about this unfairness. I always felt like a poor chicken in a hen house. You saw my dungeon on television and in the media. Thus you know how small it was. It was a place to despair."  She was given a television and radio to pass the time with, although she was initially only allowed to watch taped programmes and listen to foreign radio stations so she would not be aware of the publicised search for her.
Přiklopil had warned Kampusch that the doors and windows of the house were booby-trapped with high explosives. He also claimed to be carrying a gun and that he would kill her and the neighbours if she attempted to escape. Nevertheless, Kampusch on one occasion fantasized about chopping his head off with an axe, although she quickly dismissed the idea. She also attempted to make noise during her early years of captivity by throwing bottles of water against the walls.
She said that on trips out with Přiklopil, she had attempted to attract attention, but in vain.

Escape

The 18-year-old Kampusch reappeared on 23 August 2006. She was cleaning and vacuuming her kidnapper's White Work Van in the garden. At 12:53 pm, someone called Přiklopil on his mobile phone. Because of the vacuuming noise, he walked away to take the call. Kampusch left the vacuum cleaner running and ran away, unseen by Přiklopil, who, according to the caller, completed the phone call without any sign of being disturbed or distracted. Kampusch ran for some 200 metres through gardens and a street, jumping fences, and asking passers-by to call the police, but they paid her no attention. After about five minutes, she knocked on the window of a 71-year-old neighbour known as Inge T, saying, "I am Natascha Kampusch". The neighbour called the police, who arrived at 1:04 pm. Later, Kampusch was taken to the police station in the town of Deutsch-Wagram.
Kampusch was identified by a scar on her body, by her passport (which was found in the room where she had been held), and by DNA tests. The young woman was in good physical health, although she looked pale and shaken and weighed only 48 kg (approximately 106 lb), almost the same weight (45 kg) as eight years earlier when she disappeared. She had grown only 15 centimetres (approximately 6 in).
Sabine Freudenberger, the first police officer to speak to Kampusch after her ordeal, said that she was astonished by her "intelligence, her vocabulary". After two years, Přiklopil had brought her books, newspapers and a radio, which she kept tuned mainly to Ö1, an ORF station that is known for promoting education and classical music. She also states that she constantly had a feeling that she lacked something: "a deficit. So I wanted to make that better and I tried to educate myself, to teach myself skills. I have learned to knit for example."Transcript: Natascha Kampusch TV interview: Times Online. 6 September 2006. Retrieved 15 September 2006.
Přiklopil, having found that the police were after him, killed himself by jumping in front of a suburban train near the Wien Nord station in Vienna. He had apparently planned to commit suicide rather than be caught, having told Kampusch that "they would not catch him alive".

After the escape

In her official statement she said "I don't want and will not answer any questions about personal or intimate details".
In the documentary, "Natascha Kampusch: 3096 days in captivity", Kampusch sympathized with her captor. She said "I feel more and more sorry for him—he's a poor soul", in spite of having been held captive for eight years by him,
There was speculation that Kampusch may have Stockholm syndrome as a result of her ordeal. Kampusch denies this in her book 3096 Tage (3,096 Days). She suggests that people who use this term about her are disrespectful of her right to describe and analyse for herself the complex relationship she had with her kidnapper.
In 2009, Kampusch became the new face of animal rights group PETA in Austria. In June Kampusch wrote to Ilse Aigner, agriculture minister in Germany where the campaign is based, demanding freedom for zoo animals, stating: "The animals would, if they could, flee as I did, because a life in captivity is a life full of deprivation. It is up to you whether social, intelligent and wonderful creatures are to be freed from their chains and cages where ruthless people keep them."Cellar victim Natascha Kampusch may strip for animal rights, Daily Mail, 19 June 2009
In January 2009, Vienna's public prosecutor stated that DNA tests and questioning of witnesses had led to theories being discounted that Wolfgang Přiklopil had an accomplice. Natascha Kampusch has also maintained that her captor acted alone.

Interviews

After reportedly "hundreds of requests for an interview" with the teenager, "with media outlets offering vast sums of money", Kampusch was interviewed by Austrian public broadcaster ORF. The interview was broadcast on 6 September 2006 with her approval. ORF did not pay for its interview, and said any proceeds from selling the interview to other channels would be forwarded to Kampusch. The interview was sold to more than 120 countries at a fee of 290 euros per minute. This money—estimates say some hundred thousand euros
—will be donated to women in Africa and Mexico by Kampusch. Likewise she plans projects to help these women. Interest was enormous.
The newspaper Kronen Zeitung and news magazine NEWS also interviewed Kampusch. The interview was published on 6 September 2006. Both press interviews were given in return for a package including housing support, a long-term job offer, and help with her education.
New developments Kampusch said that she had lost confidence in Austrian justice. Revelations of mistakes in the interior ministry's investigation of her kidnapping came to light, as well as statements of a policeman which were repeatedly ignored in 1998.
On 16 June 2008, the newspaper The Times published an in-depth interview with Kampusch by Bojan Pancevski and Stefanie Marsh.[ref]
[/ref]
On 17 February 2010, the British TV channel Five broadcast an hour-long documentary about the case, including an exclusive interview with Kampusch, entitled Natascha: the Girl in the Cellar.

Books

The book Girl in the Cellar: the Natascha Kampusch Story
Together with two journalists, Kampusch's mother, Brigitta Sirny wrote a book about the ordeal, Verzweifelte Jahre ("Desperate Years"). Kampusch appeared at the initial presentation of the book in August 2007, but did not want to be photographed or interviewed. Sirny writes that she did not have much contact with Kampusch after the escape because Kampusch was shielded from the outside world."Natürlich verdiene ich daran" Spiegel Online, 10 August 2007. 
Kampusch wrote a book about her ordeal, 3096 Tage (3,096 Days), published in September 2010.Entführungsfall: Kampusch schreibt Autobiografie 

Media endeavors

Kampusch established her own website containing personal information including pictures of herself on 5 December 2007. It ran for only three shows.
On 17 June 2010, German film-maker and director Bernd Eichinger announced that he was making a film based on Kampusch's captivity and wanted Kate Winslet to star in the film.
On 15 April 2012, a German newspaper reported that a movie based on her autobiography with the same name will be made featuring Antonia Campbell-Hughes as Natascha and Thure Lindhardt as Přiklopil. The movie 3096 Tage (3096 days) was directed by Sherry Hormann

House

Kampusch now owns the house in which she was imprisoned, saying, "I know it's grotesque – I must now pay for electricity, water and taxes on a house I never wanted to live in". It was reported that she claimed the house from Přiklopil's estate because she wanted to protect it from vandals and being torn down; she also noted that she has visited it since her escape. In January 2010, Kampusch said she had retained the house because it was such a big part of her formative years, also stating that she would fill in the cellar if it is ever sold, adamant that it will never become a macabre museum to her lost adolescence. Retrieved 2010-01-26. The cellar was indeed filled in, though Kampusch still owns the house.Abductee Natascha Kampusch speaks out about her 8 years in captivity, YouTube



Further reading




