[[Woodward High School (Cincinnati, Ohio)]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 1831, High schools in Hamilton County, Ohio, Cincinnati Public Schools, Public high schools in Ohio

Woodward High School is a public high school located in the Bond Hill neighborhood of Cincinnati, Ohio, United States.  It is part of the Cincinnati Public School District.

History

Old Woodward Building

Woodward was one of the first public schools in the country. The land for the original school was donated by William Woodward and his wife Abigail Cutter in 1826 to provide free education for poor children who could not afford private schooling.
The site is also linked to the Underground Railroad.
The brick, stone, and terra cotta building, designed by Gustav Brach, had some of the most modern facilities of its day, including flush toilets, central heating, and two swimming pools.
The building is listed in the Over-the-Rhine (South) Local Historic District    and the Over-the-Rhine National Register Historic District.

Bond Hill

In 1953 Woodward High School moved to a new location in Bond Hill, and the older building was designated Abigail Cutter Junior High School until the School for Creative and Performing Arts took over the entire facility in 1977. Woodward High School has since moved four times, in addition to opening a secondary campus near its current location on Reading Road.
Woodward High School won the Ohio High School Athletic Association State Championships for baseball in 1931 and 1945
In August 2006, the City of Cincinnati opened Woodward Career Technical High School, which features a mixture of college-preparatory and vocational education. With the new addition, the original campus was now called Woodward Traditional High School.
In June 2011, demolition of the "Woodward Traditional High School" building was begun and the original 1953 Woodward High School building has now been completely demolished.  A synthetic turf football field, baseball field, and fieldhouse will be built in place on the 1953 building.

Notable alumni

Earlier alumni received degrees from Woodward High School.

Notable faculty






