[[Velirs]]

CATEGORIES: Tamil history, History of Kerala, History of Tamil Nadu, Sri Lankan Tamil history

The Velir were top aristocratic chieftains in Tamilakam in the early historic period of South India.
Strong literary and archeological evidence links core Vellalar subcastes with the Velir chieftains.

History

According to Tholkappiyam, the Velirs came to south from the city of Dwarka under the leadership of sage Agastya and belonged to the Yadu clan. van Bakel page 165: "The Velir were an instrusive group in South India... It is now suggested that (...) may have been associated with the Yadu of Dvaraka..."
Potsherds with early Tamil writing from the 2nd century BCE found in excavations in Poonagari, Jaffna bear several inscriptions, including a clan name—vela, a name related to velir from the ancient Tamil country.

Velir chiefs

Athiyamān Nedumān Añci and his son Ezhini, were Adigaman chieftains, based in Tagadur. They were contemporaries of Auvaiyar. The Sangam poem "Thagadur yathirai", now lost, was written about his battle with the Chera king. Another Velir was Irunkōvēl who ruled from Koval (modern day Tirukovilur) on the banks of the Pennai, (the present Ponnaiyar River) which presently discharges into the sea at Cuddalore in Tamil Nadu.  It is likely that the course of the river has changed to the south over many centuries. Other Velir chiefs of repute include Alumbil Vel, Alandur Vel and Nangur Vel
The Kongu Velir dynasty ruled Kongu Nadu, while the Vel Pari dynasty produced numerous kings ruling Parambu Nadu, the most popular of whom was a close friend of the poet Kapilar. Both he and his son Thaervann Malaiyan assisted the early Cholas and Cheras. The most famous Velir dynasty was the Athiyamān dynasty, and this dynasty's powerful and most famous king was Athiyamān Nedumān Añci. His son Elini ruled Kudiramalai of the ancient Jaffna kingdom and Vanni, a co-ruling contemporary of the famous king Korran. These kings belonged to a prolific Tamil horseman tribe. (1963). South India and Ceylon. University of Madras. pp. 39 The ancient Tamil Naka Oviyar tribe of the Velir house, whose nation stretched to the Tamil emporiums of Mantai and Kudiramalai, included the  king Nalliyakkotan who ruled this region and is paid tribute to in the Ciṟupāṇāṟṟuppaṭai.
Each of the Velir dynasties ruled from their own capitals and utilized the seaport of Arikamedu.








