[[J. Patrick Rooney]]

CATEGORIES: 1927 births, 2008 deaths, American insurance businesspeople, American civil rights activists, Businesspeople in insurance, American people of Irish descent

John Patrick Rooney (December 13, 1927 – September 15, 2008) was the chairman and founder of the Fairness Foundation which spends its energies in helping low income Americans on education and health care. He is the Father of Medical Savings Accounts, now known as Health Savings Accounts. He previously was the chairman of Golden Rule Insurance Company, during which he built the company to one of the nation's leaders in the individual health insurance market.  According to Indiana Business Magazine, "in the insurance industry, a description that often precedes Rooney's name is 'maverick'.

Civil Rights Champion

In 1976, Mr. Rooney led a fight against discrimination in insurance agent testing with an eight-year lawsuit against the State of Illinois and the Educational Testing Service ETS: Educational Testing Service – About and was successful.  The suit charged discrimination against minority applicants.  Estimated cost of the litigation and experts was approximately $2 million.  The Civil Rights case was settled with a precedent-setting agreement that requires a method of constructing exams designed to eliminate unnecessary racial disparities.

Education

An advocate of social change, Mr. Rooney's approach to parental choice in education broke into national headlines in 1991 (Wall Street Journal Editorial, August 2, 1991, titled "Education's Golden Rule,") with his founding of the Educational CHOICE Charitable Trust.  Mr. Rooney's action in Indianapolis started a ripple effect across the country (Wall Street Journal Editorial "Fighting the Golden Rule," September 6, 1991).  Today there are over 60 such programs with over 53,000 students in privately funded educational choice programs, based upon Rooney's original model.

America's  PAC

Rooney received attention in the fall of 2006 United States Congressional elections, after America's PAC, a group Rooney donated $900,000 to, ran controversial ads  alleging that Democrats "supported liberal abortion laws"  and that 400,000 abortions each year were of black babies.   Of the 27 radio ads that ran during the 2006 election cycle, only two dealt with the abortion issue. The ads can be heard, and the scripts read, at Vote Our Values   The spokesman for the group is Herman Cain  an African American radio talk show host, author, and former candidate in the 2012 United States presidential election.

Helping the Uninsured

In October 2006, Mr. Rooney was the subject of a NUVO Dispatch titled "Defending the Uninsured." Defending the uninsured - NUVO.5 times what Medicare will pay for services. While Rooney acknowledges that hospitals may need to charge more than Medicare will pay, he contends that authoritative research shows that Medicare plus 25 percent is the reasonable amount for hospitals to charge…. 'Nationally, 35 percent of Hispanics are uninsured; 22 percent of African-Americans are uninsured; and 11 percent of non-Hispanic Caucasians are uninsured. So when you're doubling, tripling, multiplying the price by five times, you're doing it mainly to minority people,' Rooney says. 'I consider that racial discrimination.'  NUVO goes on to report: "Rooney believes that people need tools to defend themselves. 'They need to know how to deal with the hospital and the evidence is if they deal with the hospital correctly almost all the time the hospital will forgive the bill … The hospital is only entitled to collect a reasonable fee. There is case law exactly on this subject. When they enter the hospital, if they sign an unconditional commitment it's generally not binding because they're under duress.'  Rooney has made helping the uninsured a focus of the Fairness Foundation  The foundation has allied itself with lawyers willing to represent people in disputes over hospital bills and has set up a toll free number that people call for help: 800-742-3441. Rooney emphasizes that talking people through the process of dealing with hospitals requires patience, stamina and verbal skills. The Fairness Foundation, he says, is equipped to not only give people useful information but to talk them through what they need to do.  'A sick person is not in a position to adequately defend themselves,' Rooney says. 'But that doesn't mean they can't be defended.'"

Death

Rooney died at home in Indianapolis, Indiana, on September 15, 2008, aged 80.






