[[Madden NFL 08]]

CATEGORIES: 2007 video games, Madden NFL, Electronic Arts games, Wii Wi-Fi games, Nintendo Wi-Fi Connection games, PlayStation 2 games, PlayStation 3 games, PlayStation Portable games, Nintendo DS games, Nintendo GameCube games, Windows games, Xbox games, Xbox 360 games, EA Sports games, Wii games, Sports video games with career mode, OS X games

Madden NFL 08 is the 2008 edition of the American football video game series published by EA Sports and developed by EA Tiburon. It is the 19th installment in the Madden NFL video game franchise. It features the former Titans star quarterback Vince Young on the cover. San Diego Chargers defensive end Luis Castillo was the cover athlete for the Spanish-language version. This was the first Madden game released (on August 14, 2007) for ten different platforms; including Xbox 360, Wii, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 2, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, Xbox, Nintendo GameCube, and Microsoft Windows. This is the last version of Madden to be released for the Microsoft Windows, and Madden NFL 08 would also eventually become the last video game for the Nintendo GameCube produced and released in North America.
EA and Apple Inc. had announced in June 2007 that a version for Mac OS X would be released at the same time as the other versions. It is also the last of the games in the Madden series to include all 6 NFL Europa teams.

Gameplay

Madden 08 runs at 60 frames per second on the Xbox 360, and 30 frames per second on the PlayStation 3. Fatigue also plays a factor when cold-weather teams play in hot weather during the early months of the season. Also returning to this year's incarnation is the much sought after "co-op" play, which had found itself sitting on the sidelines since making the jump to the next-generation consoles.. This mode finds players teaming up with a friend and taking on the CPU or two human opponents.

Presentation

On the next-generation systems former NFL running back and Madden NFL 2003 cover athlete Marshall Faulk hosts a segment called Marshall's Minute in which he discusses key star players and predicts the score prior to the game. Weapons (see below) also get special introductions before games. Also on next-generation systems, the game features an intro composed by David Robidoux titled, "Who Wants It More?", after the Super Bowl XLII slogan.

Features

Weapons

Certain star players are deemed to have "weapons" which can enhance their performances and create game-changing plays. For example, players with the "Smart Quarterback" weapon are able to read defensive schemes and audible accordingly.  Possession receivers can make tough catches over the middle, Shutdown corners can stay on even the toughest receivers, and Spectacular Catch receivers are able to leap over defenders and make difficult grabs.
Another added feature is to change players' positions to utilize their individual talents more effectively, such as Devin Hester (who can be converted from cornerback to wide receiver) and Brandon Marshall (who can be converted from wide receiver to tight end).  It is also possible to move around offensive and defensive linemen with little effect to their overall rating.  However, on the PlayStation 3 version of the game, player positions are locked and cannot be changed.

Superstar Mode additions

With the addition of the Campus Legend mode to the next-gen version of NCAA Football 08, players are now able to take their player from Campus Legend mode and import him into Madden's Superstar Mode. In addition, players are able to create a player, take over the careers of select rookies from the 2007 NFL Draft and use them in Superstar Mode. Also, the superstar's team can be chosen by the user based on what the menu-set "Favorite Team" is. Camera angles have also been tweaked for the next gen of Madden 08 after complaints with its predecessor. Key attributes of superstars are assigned by players when creating them, rather than generated by random parents. A number of features have been left out in this year's Wii version, most notably, the ability to edit the game player's superstars appearance as the Superstar Mirror is no longer selectable, and the Barber Shop in the City Map is also no longer selectable. Users are stuck with the random hair combination given to the user while registering their new superstar. Although certain new features have been added as well. For example, a player can have more control over their character while firing agents, while the selection of rookies is more extensive. Although it is not available for Nintendo DS.

Player attributes

For the first time, a player can receive an attribute of 100 only for the best players and only for skill positions. Devin Hester (speed), Peyton Manning (awareness), Tom Brady (awareness), Champ Bailey (man coverage), Reggie Bush (acceleration), Lorenzo Neal (impact blocking), Larry Allen (strength), and LaDainian Tomlinson (juke move and elusiveness) as well as many of the Hall of Fame (HOF) unlockable players, are the only in the game with such skills. However, if the player's ratings are accessed, these attributes will drop back to 99.

Player info

There are certain players such as Byron Leftwich, Josh Cribbs, and Vernon Davis that are from the District of Columbia whose homestate is blank. If the player moves the state, the blank spot is no longer present.

Trophy room

The trophy room in Madden 08 is similar to the My Shrine feature in NCAA Football 08. Trophies can be earned by completing in-game tasks (such as rushing for over 200 yards) or in other game modes (such as winning a Super Bowl in franchise mode). Trophies can also be wagered in online head-to-head contests. As skill and experience progresses, the user can earn five EA Challenge rings, which have customizable team logos and colors. These features have been left out in the Wii version. Once a ring is unlocked, the player is given a code to buy the ring on Jostens.

Fantasy Challenge

In the current-generation version, the game has a Fantasy challenge mode where the player adds players to an NFL team and plays through three different leagues in a single elimination tournament. Other teams can attempt to trade players and challenge the player to competitions to get players from the player's team. If the player plays well enough they reach the top league which has four fictional teams that play in a special way to win. This mode is similar to Blitz: The League's campaign mode.

Returning features

A number of features missing from the first two next-generation versions of Madden return in Madden 08. These include Owner Mode, fantasy draft, roster-editing, and cooperative play-New, however, to the Xbox 360.

Other features

In addition to the other versions, the Wii version features online gameplay, a Madden first for a Nintendo console, as well as the integration of Mii avatars, and features a few exclusive game modes.
The PlayStation 2, Xbox, and GameCube versions of Madden 08 have a fantasy football-type game mode called Fantasy Challenge Mode. In this game mode, players draft the ultimate NFL dream team while advancing through four levels of gameplay.

Soundtrack

EA Sports officially announced Madden NFL 08's soundtrack on June 28, 2007. The soundtrack is customizable and songs can be put in a playlist order or turned off.

Spanish version

Roster updates

Roster updates were made available via Xbox Live users and PlayStation Network users in the first week of the 2007 season. The first Roster Update of Madden 08 completely removes Michael Vick from the game due to his dog-fighting charges, but his face still remains as a create a player face in case the player wants to recreate him. The final update brought Ricky Williams back on the Dolphins and Ryan Grant on the Packers and Vinny Testaverde on the Panthers were the roster moves of note. Also some players and teams received a substantial ratings boost, the Patriots, Chargers and Cowboys were each rated 99, 98, 97 respectively and on the other hand Detroit and Miami were rated 62 and 64 and were the worst teams in the game. Each of the updates also had players on injured reserve until the end of the season when roster updates came with the injuries removed.

Reception








