[[The Merger (The Office)]]

CATEGORIES: The Office (U.S. season 3) episodes, 2006 television episodes

"The Merger" is the eighth episode of the third season of the American comedy television series The Office and the show's 36th overall. It was written by consulting producer Brent Forrester and directed by Ken Whittingham. It first aired on November 16, 2006, as a special "super-sized" 40-minute (including commercials) episode on the National Broadcasting Company (NBC).
The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton and Stamford branches of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company. In this episode, the two branches are merged. Jim Halpert (John Krasinski) and Pam Beesley (Jenna Fischer) have an awkward reunion, Michael Scott (Steve Carell) tries to make his new employees feel welcome, and a rivalry begins between Dwight Schrute (Rainn Wilson) and Andy Bernard (Ed Helms).
The episode featured recurring guest stars Helms, Creed Bratton, Rashida Jones, Wayne Wilderson, Mike Bruner, and Ursula Burton. According to Nielsen Media Research, an estimated 8.63 million viewers watched "The Merger" on its first broadcast. Critical reception to the episode was mainly positive, with many reviewers spotlighting Helms and his character in particular as highlights.

Synopsis

The Scranton and Stamford branches prepare for the upcoming merger. Pam Beesley (Jenna Fischer) professes excitement over the merger, including the return of Jim Halpert (John Krasinski). Andy Bernard (Ed Helms) proclaims he'll be the No. 2 man in Scranton in six weeks time through "name repetition, personality mirroring and never breaking off a handshake." A rivalry between Dwight Schrute (Rainn Wilson) and Andy begins over the No. 2 position in the office. At the welcoming party, Michael Scott (Steve Carell) plays a videotape he has created called "Lazy Scranton", which features him and Dwight rhyming over the music of Saturday Night Live's "Lazy Sunday".
Michael embarrasses overweight new employee Tony Gardner (Mike Bruner) by attempting to push him onto a table with the rest of the new employees; this causes Tony to quit. However, an angered Michael fires him instead, unintentionally entitling him to severance pay. Michael learns that Jim is the No. 2 in the office, which prompts Andy and Dwight to argue over who is No. 3. After a plan to unite the employees goes awry, they find that they have a common interest: their contempt of Michael. Jim tells Pam that he is seeing someone. Dwight and Andy trade barbs on the way out of the office.

Production

"The Merger" was the fourth episode of the series to be directed by Ken Whittingham. It was written by consulting producer Brent Forrester, 
The season three DVD contains a number of deleted scenes, including Kevin and Angela reacting to Jim's return, Karen noting that she and Meredith have the same thermos and being offered alcohol, Andy introducing himself to Kevin, Michael telling Karen and Phyllis that eventually they will "share the same menstrual cycle," Hannah and Meredith fighting over desk space, Andy asking Kevin if he has lost weight, and Michael performing a magic trick in front of the office. It was removed from the episode for the DVD release and is not contained in the deleted scenes.

Reception

"The Merger" was first broadcast on November 16, 2006 in the United States on the National Broadcasting Company (NBC). As a special promotion, the network broadcast "super-sized", forty-minute episodes of The Office, 30 Rock, and My Name is Earl.
IGN's Brian Zoromski rated "The Merger" 9 out of 10, an indication of an "amazing" episode. He called the opening sequence "arguably the funniest" scene, and believed "Andy's proven to be an even better source of hilarity than he ever was in the Stamford office." Zoromski was unhappy however with the "outright product placement " with Staples, writing that "the show's quality felt a little compromised. It's one thing to see blatant product placement in a reality show like Survivor or American Idol but when it invades a great scripted comedy… well, it kinda drags the show down to the reality level."
Entertainment Weekly columnist Abby West praised Fischer's "masterful" performance, writing that it "really is nice to see Pam coming into her own... And I love that she didn't inhibit herself when Jim walked in — she just ran right up and hugged him." West also highlighted Carell and Helms, explaining that with the former, "Michael is never completely loathsome — because Steve Carell imbues him with such vulnerability."






