[[Chris McKivat]]

CATEGORIES: 1879 births, Dual-code rugby internationals, Australian rugby league players, Australian rugby union players, Australia international rugby union players, Australian rugby league coaches, Australia national rugby league team captains, Rugby union players at the 1908 Summer Olympics, Olympic rugby union players of Australasia, Olympic gold medalists for Australasia, Australian rugby union captains, Glebe rugby league players, Australia national rugby league team players, North Sydney Bears coaches, Western Suburbs Magpies coaches, 1941 deaths, Sport Australia Hall of Fame inductees, Australian Rugby League Hall of Fame inductees, Australasia rugby league team players

Christopher Hobart McKivat (alternatively spelled McKivatt) (27 November 1879 – 4 May 1941)  was an Australian rugby union and rugby league player – a dual-code rugby international.  He represented the Wallabies in over 20 Tests and tour matches from 1907 to 1909 and the Kangaroos in 5 Tests from 1910 to 1912. He is unique in Australian rugby history as the only man to captain both the national rugby union and rugby league teams. Following his playing career he became the most successful coach of the North Sydney Bears in the club's history.

Unique in history

He captained the 1908 Summer Olympics gold medal winning Wallaby side and was the eighth captain of the Australian national rugby league team leading them in all 3 Tests of the 1911–12 tour. Thus he captained his country to victory on tour in two different rugby codes.

Rugby union career

He was born in Cumnock, New South Wales and educated by the Patrician Brothers in Orange. He played country rugby union with the "Our Boys" club in Wellington and was regularly selected in country representative teams until he was 26. He was a tactically brilliant half-back and a great on-field leader of both forwards and backs.
Affectionately known as the "hairy bloke",2005 Annual Report - Australian Rugby League (p. 50) he moved to Sydney to join the Glebe Rugby Club in 1905 and played five-eighth for four seasons outside Fred Wood who would later be vice-captain of the 1908–09 Wallabies. McKivat was selected for New South Wales in 1905 to represent against the visiting All Blacks and then for the Wallabies in 1907 playing three Tests against the All Blacks. He was on the first Wallaby tour of the United Kingdom in 1908–09 and captained the side in 17 tour matches including the historic gold medal winning match against Cornwall representing England in the 1908 London Olympics.

Rugby league career

He crossed over to the professional code joining the Glebe Rugby League Club as a 30 year old veteran in 1910.
He made his rugby league international debut that same year in the first Test in Sydney on 18 June 1910 against Great Britain. Four of his former Wallaby team mates also debuted that day John Barnett, Bob Craig, Jack Hickey and Charles Russell
– making them collectively Australia's 11th to 15th dual code internationals. This repeated a similar occurrence two years earlier when five former Wallabies in Micky Dore, Dally Messenger, Denis Lutge, Doug McLean snr and
Johnny Rosewell all debuted for the Kangaroos in the first ever Test against New Zealand.
The crowning achievement of his distinguished football career came on the 1911–12 Kangaroo tour of Great Britain when he captained Australia in all three Tests against Great Britain for two wins and one draw to a series victory that would not be equalled for more than 50 years
Australia's first Rugby League Ashes success was testament to his on-field genius and off-field leadership. He played in 31 matches on Tour (30 successive appearances) and scored 10 tries. The Heads/Middleton reference describes him a being revered on that tour – a magnificent general, tough, durable and an inspiration to the men around him. It quotes Johnny Quinlan the tour co-manager "He always set a splendid example in conduct and training – a natural leader"Heads, Middleton p47
His representative career ended at age 32 with that Ashes success and in retirement he became the first of the game's high profile non-playing coaches. He coached Glebe, Wests and Norths in the following years, including North Sydney's premiership winning sides of 1921–22. He died unexpectedly in 1941.

The man and his accolades

The Heads/Middleton reference describes him as quiet, good humoured man off the football field, always immaculately dressed and often puffing on a cigar but a lesson in contrasts on the field – voluble, hard-driving and relentlessly barking orders.
In 2005 McKivat was admitted into the Australian Rugby League Hall of Fame.
In February 2008, McKivat was named in the list of Australia's 100 Greatest Players (1908–2007) which was commissioned by the  NRL and  ARL to celebrate the code's centenary year in Australia. thumb|centre|600px|McKivatt middle row 2nd from left, with the 1908 Wallaby tour squad  right|thumb|450px| Glebe RLFC 1911 McKivat (centre with ball), flanked by Roy Algie left Frank Burge right.

Notes






