[[Audi S and RS models]]

CATEGORIES: Sports cars, Sedans, Sports sedans, Station wagons, Coupes, Convertibles, All-wheel-drive vehicles, Executive cars, Upcoming automobile models, Lists of automobiles

Audi S and RS models are a range of high performance versions of certain car models of the German automotive company AUDI AG.  These cars primarily focus on enhanced "sport" performance.

S models

Numerous "S" models, from most of Audi's mainstream model ranges have been produced over the years.  These cars are recognisable by their "S*" badges, and vertical emphasis lines on their front grilles.
All Audi "S" models are equipped with Audi's 'trademark' quattro four-wheel drive system as standard.  Unique internal combustion engines, along with larger, more powerful brakes, stiffer suspension systems, additional exterior body styling, and carbon fibre interior trims set them apart from their related "siblings" of their respective model range.
Like their related 'mainstream' brethren, all Audi "S" cars are still assembled by AUDI AG, and they are manufactured at their relevant factories on the same production lines alongside their other standard or 'lesser' models. 
In the past, some Audi S models competed directly with BMW M and Mercedes-AMG models, such as the B6 Audi S4 4.2 FSI versus the BMW M3 and Mercedes-Benz C32 AMG.caranddriver. For instance the base Audi A4 (B8) engine is the 2.0 TFSI turbo four-cylinder, and with the discontinuation of the 3.2 FSI V6, that makes the Audi S4's 3.0 TSFI V6 the performance option (the B8 Audi S4 3.0 TSFI positioned closer to the E90 BMW 335i than the BMW M3). The Audi A6 (C7) no longer has a V8 engine upgrade in the non-S range, with the discontinuation of the C6 Audi A6 4.2 FSI that was offered from 2004–11, one must go to the C7 Audi S6 4.0 TFSI.roadandtrack.com/2013-audi-s7
Audi "S" models should not be confused with the Audi "S line" models, which feature leather trim, S-line badging, sports steering wheel and sports suspension.

RS models

quattro GmbH, AUDI AGs high performance private subsidiary, creates even higher performance versions, known by their "RS" badging.  The "RS" initials are taken from the  - literally translated as "racing sport".  
RS is Audi's highest performance 'top-tier' trim level, positioned distinctly above the "S" ("Sport") specification level of Audi's regular model range. All "RS" cars pioneer some of Audi's latest and most advanced technology and engineering prowess, therefore, "RS" cars could be described as "halo vehicles". Audi RS cars are some of the most powerful vehicles ever offered by Audi.  The Audi RS6 5.0 TFSI quattro, for instance, is more powerful than the physically larger Audi S8 5.2 FSI quattro.
Available for limited time and only in select markets, on a restricted model range, these "RS" models are wholly designed, developed and produced in-house by Audi AG's high performance private subsidiary company, quattro GmbH, at its Neckarsulm factory,quattro GmbH - Investor Relations for Audi AG whereas Audi "S" models are produced at the same assembly line as regular Audi models. "RS" model also usually have a wider bodyshell (sometimes informally referred to as 'widebody') to allow for a wider front- and rear-axle track than regular Audi and Audi "S" models.
Unlike Audi "S" models whose interiors well-furnished in order to retain the feel of sport luxury, the interior of Audi "RS" models are often spartan by comparison as the emphasis is more on track performance than luxury. The 2008 Audi RS4 sold in Europe had lightweight racing-style front seats and roll-up windows for the rear doors, although its counterpart sold in the United States has luxurious power-adjustable front seats and power windows for all doors.caranddriver.com/comparisons/2007-audi-rs-4-page-2
Audi "RS" models are considered direct competitors to similar-sized hardcore sport models from BMW M and Mercedes-AMG, whereas the Audi "S" models (as of 2010) have been positioned more as engine upgrades. Taking the 2012 model year for example, the Audi RS5 competes directly with the BMW M3 whereas the Audi S5 competes with the BMW 335i, while the Audi RS6 competes with the BMW M5 and the Audi S6 competes with the BMW 550i. However the Audi RS6 (C6) was never exported to the United States due to emissions regulations, leaving the Audi S6 (C6) as the top performing trim to compete against the BMW M5 (E60) in that market.roadandtrack.com/2013-audi-s7
There used to be only one RS model in production at a time, but recently

Model range

The following Audi "S" and "RS" high performance models are being, or have been produced, or are speculated to be in future production:

Current models

(In model range order)

Former models

(In chronological order of production end - oldest first)

Future models

Audi S line

Audi produce a specification of optional sports trim packages to their mainstream models, known as the S line.  This is merely a trim specification which allows customers to effect a sporty appearance in their mainstream Audi model.  Whilst the specific S line trim parts are designed and produced by quattro GmbH at its Neckarsulm factory, these mainstream cars are still manufactured and assembled by AUDI AG at their relevant factories on the same production lines alongside their other standard models.
Cars with S line trim are not to be confused with the specific high performance offerings - the "S" models (made by AUDI AG), and the "RS" models (made by quattro GmbH); Audi cars with S line trim bear identical performance figures to their counterparts with base or SE trim levels.








