[[Ricky Banderas]]

CATEGORIES: 1975 births, Living people, People from Bayamón, Puerto Rico, Puerto Rican professional wrestlers, Puerto Rican sportspeople

Gilbert Cosme (born May 25, 1975) better known by his ring names El Mesías and Ricky Banderas, is a Puerto Rican professional wrestler. He began his career in the International Wrestling Association based on Puerto Rico. While performing in the company, he won the IWA World Heavyweight Championship on five instances and held minor championships on fifteen separate occasions, before leaving the company in 2006. On March 12, 2006 he debuted in Asistencia Asesoría y Administración, a promotion based in Mexico as a character named Muerte Cibernetica and was involved in an angle where this character was "killed." In November 2006, Cosme was involved in the tapings of the Wrestling Society X television series, where he was the second and last wrestler to win the WSX Championship.
Following a month of performing in the International Wrestling Association, Cosme returned to Asistencia Asesoría y Administración in a special event presented by the company, this time under the ring name of El Mesías. In September 2007, the company organized a unification tournament where all of the champions and first contenders participated. Over the course of the tournament, he won the GPCW Super-X Monster Championship and IWC World Heavyweight Championship, and on the tournament's finale, he became the first wrestler to win the AAA World Heavyweight Championship. While working in Mexico, Cosme signed a contract with Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) where he debuted as Judas Mesias on September 13, 2007. In March 2008 his association with TNA came to an end and he focused most of his time on AAA. In 2010 Cosme debuted for Puerto Rican World Wrestling Council, where he won the Universal Heavyweight Championship.

Professional wrestling career

International Wrestling Association (1999–2009)

Cosme began wrestling training in 1996, when he was instructed by a former wrestler. During this time he was enrolled in the Interamerican University of Puerto Rico located in Bayamón, his major concentration was in computer technology, after completing two years of study, he decided to begin wrestling as a profession after meeting Victor Quiñones in the gym. In 1997, after working in the independent circuit he moved to Mexico and performed there, and became involved in a project to develop Hispanic talent organized by the World Wrestling Federation.
Cosme subsequently debuted in the International Wrestling Association (IWA) in 1999. He was given the gimmick of "El Patriota" Ricky Banderas, a name that, according to Cosme, was created by fusing the artistic names of Latin musician Ricky Martín and actor Antonio Banderas.
Cosme's gimmick underwent another change when it joined then-dominant heel stable "La Compania" led by Savio Vega (Juan Rivera). This was followed by his fourth title run after he defeated Gran Apolo on January 6, 2003. He was booked as a heel until October 9, 2003, when Vega's group turned on him. Following this, he feuded with Christopher Kindred under his "Slash Venom" gimmick, which peaked when Vampiro (Ian Richard Hodgkinson) was brought by the company to form a stable which feuded with Gran Apolo and Venom. In 2004, he feuded with Hangman Hughes (Mike Hughes), Kasey James (Kurt Sellers), El Diamante (Julio César Cruz), and Bison. In 2005, he turned heel again, this time leading a stable known as La Cruz del Diablo which feuded with other groups led by Savio Vega and Ray Gonzalez. Following an angle where he feuded over a number one contender spot, Cosme departed from the company and signed a contract to wrestle in Mexico. Subsequently, he continued making sporadic appearances for the company, including a brief stay in 2007. On July 19, 2009, Cosme was booked to defeat Dennis Rivera in the promotion's tenth anniversary event.

Asistencia Asesoría y Administración (2006–present)

Following the culmination of his contract with the International Wrestling Association, Cosme signed a contract with Asistencia Asesoría y Administración (AAA). He debuted on March 12, 2006, as "Muerte Cibernética" a rudo (villanous) enforcer supposedly brought to the company by Octavio López Arriola under his "Cibernético" gimmick to feud with "La Parka". This gimmick consisted of Cosme wearing a traditional Mexican wrestling mask, often a modified version of the one used by La Parka. This character was placed in a feud with La Parka, which lasted several months. This angle came to a conclusion at Triplemania XIV, where Cosme's character was booked to lose a Mask vs. Mask match.
Following a legitimate injury suffered by López, Cosme's gimmick was slightly changed, launching into an angle where he pursued the leadership of Cibernético's stable, which then went by the name of La Secta Cibernetica. The character was booked to be the leader of the stable after supposedly convincing several members of the group to join him changing the name of the group to La Secta Diabólica. The events of the angle were used to hype an eventual feud between López and Cosme's characters that took place in December 2006. In the angle, Cosme won the first encounter between the two with help of his stable. The angle culminated in a Casket match between the two characters. Cibernético was booked to win the match and subsequently "kill" his opponent by throwing him into an active volcano. This was used to explain Cosme's absence when he departed from the company to wrestle in the International Wrestling Association. During this time he also wrestled for Panama Wrestling Crew in Panama and in Ecuador.
Following a month of performing in Puerto Rico, Cosme returned to Asistencia Asesoría y Administración in an annual event entitled Rey de Reyes under a new gimmick, changing his name to El Mesías.
The feud continued for several months, until he regained the title on December 11, 2009, at the main event of Guerra de Titanes. Cosme's third reign as AAA World Heavyweight Champion ended on March 12, 2010, at the 2010 Rey de Reyes event. He was not booked to lose, but Electroshock (Edgar Luna Pozos) submitted Mr. Anderson (Ken Anderson), the third wrestler in the match, to win the championship.

Wrestling Society X (2006)

Cosme participated as Banderas in the Wrestling Society X television series (taped in Los Angeles, California), with the gimmick of a disgruntled and kayfabe disfigured man pursuing a feud with Vampiro.
The reason behind the pursuit was explained in the following episode in a promo, where he claimed that Vampiro rigged a casket with explosives during a match, with the explosion resulting in the damage done to his face. On the eighth episode (which was taped on November 15, 2006) of the series, Banderas won the WSX Championship in his debut match for the promotion. Beforehand, he was involved in a series of brawls with Youth Suicide (Andre Verdun), as well as an allusion to a partnership with 6-Pac (Sean Waltman).

Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (2007–2008, 2013)

As noted on the "TNA Mobile" service, Cosme signed a contract with Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA). Cosme was billed as James Mitchell's kayfabe son and thus Abyss' brother. Beginning on July 1, 2007, vignettes began to air for this "monster-like" character. His name was eventually billed as Judas Mesias.
On September 21, 2007, it was reported that Cosme was suffering from sciatica and that the condition's treatment required several weeks of rest, followed by physical therapy to recover. This injury was the result of a fall from a ladder during a championship match at AAA's Verano de Escandalo pay-per-view, which also knocked him out.
Mesias returned on the December 13, 2007, episode of Impact! where he attacked Abyss by strangling him with a piece of barbed wire, which he also used to cut his forehead open. He then repeatedly hit Abyss in the head with a chair. He finished his assault by delivering his finisher, Straight to Hell to Abyss on the same chair. In March, Cosme was released from his contract with the company.
On March 18, 2013, Cosme made a one night return to TNA to take part in the tapings of the TNA World Cup of Wrestling One Night Only pay-per-view. Working as Messias, he represented Team International in a singles match, where he was defeated by Team United States' James Storm.

World Wrestling Council and La Revancha del Siglo (2009–2012)

An agreement between Cosme and the World Wrestling Council was first rumored on November 26, 2009. Following this match Cosme's involvement in the IWA concluded, remaining inactive in Puerto Rico until  January 7, 2012, when he reappeared in WWC programming asking for an opportunity to challenge Carly Colón for the Universal Heavyweight Championship. The challenge was accepted and took place at Euphoria 2012, but was inconclusive after Savio Vega interrupted by distrating Colón, which drained what was left of the preestablished time.

In wrestling

Championships and accomplishments

Lucha de Apuesta record








