[[Richard Stengel]]

CATEGORIES: 1955 births, Living people, Alumni of Christ Church, Oxford, American magazine editors, American Rhodes Scholars, News editors, Princeton Tigers men's basketball players, Time (magazine) people

Richard Allan "Rick" Stengel (born May 1955 He is famed for being Time magazine's 16th managing editor.
On September 12, 2013 Stengel announced that he would be stepping down from his role as Time's managing editor  in order to serve as Under Secretary of State for Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs for President Barack Obama's cabinet.politico.html?hp=f1

Early life and education

Stengel was born and brought up in New York. He attended Princeton University and played on the Princeton Tigers basketball team as part of the 1975 National Invitation Tournament. He graduated magna cum laude in 1977. After college, he won a Rhodes Scholarship and  studied English and history at Christ Church, Oxford.

Career

Early career

Stengel joined Time in 1981 and contributed to the magazine through the early and mid-1980s, including articles on South Africa, which he also covered for Rolling Stone magazine. He became a senior writer and essayist for Time, covering both the 1988 and 1996 presidential campaigns.
While working for Time, Stengel also wrote for The New Yorker, The New Republic, Spy, and the New York Times and appeared on television as a commentator, even contributing to Indecision '92, the 1992 Comedy Central coverage of the Democratic Convention in New York.
Stengel left Time in 1999, to become a senior advisor and chief speechwriter for Bill Bradley who ran unsuccessfully for the Democratic nomination for the 2000 presidential election.

Time.com

Stengel returned to Time in 2000 and took on the role of managing editor of Time. As announced by Time Inc. in May 2000, Stengel replaced Richard Duncan in the role and took on the responsibilities of overseeing news coverage and editorial content. He later held several other roles at Time, including a period as national editor of the magazine.

National Constitution Center

Stengel left his role as national editor of Time in February 2004

Managing editor of Time

In 2006, Stengel once again returned to Time, this time as managing editor of the magazine. The appointment was announced on 17 May 2006 by the Editor in Chief of Time Inc., John Huey, and he officially entered the role on 15 June 2006 as the 16th managing editor of the magazine, which was in its 83rd year at the time. In his role as managing editor, Stengel oversees Time magazine, which is one of the largest magazines worldwide, and Time.
His first major initiative was to change the magazine's newsstand date to Friday, starting in early 2007.
In 2008, Stengel approved the changing of Time's emblematic red border for only the second time since its adoption. The border was changed to green for a special issue focused on the environment.
Under his leadership, Time has reported on significant world events such as its coverage of the Iraq war, which he describes in an editorial as necessary in order to remind people not to "turn away",
and the 2008 presidential campaign.
Stengel was listed as number 41 on Newsweek's 2010 "Power 50" list in November 2010.
In 2012, Stengel received a News & Documentary Emmy Award for his work as executive producer on Time.com's Beyond 9/11: Portraits of Resilience
Stengel was away from TIME magazine's office for several months from July to September 2013 due to personal reasons. On September 12, 2013 Stengel announced he would be leaving TIME magazine for a role as Under Secretary of State for Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs, Government efforts to confront ideological support for terrorism," according to the State Department's website.usembassy.html

National Service Movement

In September 2007, Stengel wrote a Time cover story called "The Case For National Service" in which he argued that Americans needed to redouble their efforts to get involved in community service and volunteerism, and that the presidential candidates needed to make the issue a top priority in the 2008 presidential campaign.
ServiceNation announced that it had secured both U.S. Presidential candidates to participate in Presidential Forum on National Service at Columbia University on 11 September 2008.
On 12 September 2008, Stengel was a featured speaker at the ServiceNation Summit in New York, along with Caroline Kennedy, Senator Hillary Clinton, First Lady Laura Bush and New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg.
Stengel was awarded Citizen of the Year at the Annual National Conference on Citizenship on 17 September 2010.

Books

Stengel has authored several books including January Sun: One Day, Three Lives, A South African Town, a non-fiction work about the lives of three men in rural South Africa, published in 1990 and You're Too Kind: A Brief History of Flattery a popular history of flattery, published in 2000.
The book that Stengel is best known for is his collaboration with Nelson Mandela on Mandela's autobiography, Long Walk to Freedom. In 1992 he signed a ghostwriting deal with publishers Little, Brown to work on the book, having first been cleared by the African National Congress as a suitable author. The book was published in 1995, and was praised by the Financial Times, which stated: "Their collaboration produced surely one of the great autobiographies of the 20th century". Stengel later served as co-producer of the 1996 documentary film Mandela, which was nominated for an Academy Award.

Personal life

Stengel is married to Mary Pfaff, a native of South Africa. They have two sons. The couple met while Stengel was in South Africa working on Nelson Mandela's autobiography, and Mandela was godfather to their oldest son, Gabriel.

Honorary degrees

Stengel delivered the commencement address and received honorary doctorates from Wittenberg University in 2009,



Further reading




