[[Nagari, Andhra Pradesh]]

CATEGORIES: Cities and towns in Chittoor district, Mandals in Chittoor district

Nagari is a Municipal town in Chittoor district in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh. It is a semi agrarian – semi industrialised town. A sizeable textile manufacturing industry thrives in and around Nagari. Nagari is 5 km from the Andhra Pradesh - Tamil Nadu border and about 45 km from Tirupati.

How to Reach

Chennai   to Nagari  105 km.
Bangalore to Nagari  250 km.
Hyderabad to Nagari  582 km.
Pune      to Nagari  1022 km
Kanchipuram to Nagari 65  km

Geography

Nagari Nose.jpg|Nagari Nose
File:Canal in Nagari.jpg|Galeru Nagari Canal

Nagari is located at .
The town is surrounded by hills all around with the prominent cliff popularly known as Nagari nose is conspicuous for miles around.
The Nagari a.k.a. Kusasthalai river runs on the south of Nagari.

Etymology

The word Nagari is from the Telugu words  "na" and "giri", which means Surrounded by hills. In detail, na = నాలుగువైపుల giri = గిరులు ఉనవి.
that means four sides covered by hills.

Weather

Nagari experiences tropical climatic conditions and due to the close proximity of the Bay of Bengal the humidity is extremely high. Summers are long and hot. Monsoon season brings substantial rainfall and temperatures reduce during this period. Winters are much milder and the temperatures drop considerably. The best time to visit the place is from December to February.
Summer season starts in March and can last till June. Temperatures gradually increase over the summer and it reaches the peak level in May. Temperatures vary from a minimum of 35°C and can rise up to a maximum of 45°C. Summer season is not the best time to visit. Travellers who are not used to the extreme conditions might find it extremely uncomfortable.
Monsoon season is from June to October. The place gets the most rainfall in the months of October and November from the North East Monsoon. Nagari may receive certain amount of rainfall from the South West Monsoon as well. However this is limited and generally erratic.
Winter season is from December to February. Temperatures range between 20°C and 27°C during the winter season. December is usually the coolest month of the year.

Demographics



Economy

The town mainly is a market place for surrounding villagers to sell their agricultural produce. 
Power loom based textile industry also contributes to the town's revenue share. The textile products are exported to Chennai, Bangalore, North Indian cities and European Markets like Germany. The Municipality income comes in the form of Tax, Government Orders and Bills sanctioned for Development by the Government of Andra Pradesh.

Culture

The people of Nagari speak  Telugu and Tamil.hindu.htm Like most Indians, folks of Nagari wear traditional attire like Dhoti, Lungi and Saree, although the current generation prefers modern Western attire .

The local festivals

and many more events are conducting as well as possible

Transport

The town has 24 hours transport facility connecting to Tirupati and Chennai through road and rail. Nagari and Ekambarakuppam are two railway stations maintained by Southern Railways, Chennai. 
Nagari has a newly constructed Bus station for rural transportation. APSRTC buses are the mode of transport in and around Nagari.
Small villages use Auto rickshaws to transport with Nagari. 201 212H and 911 are 24/7 road transport services between Chennai and Tirupati through Nagari.
The town has three domestic and one international airports near by it.

Nearby Airports

Educational institutions

There is a Government Junior College, High school & a Government Degree College which offers Bachelors degrees in Arts and Sciences and affiliated to Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupati.
Other important educational institutions are:

Local Temples

File:Sai Baba Mandir Nagari.jpg|Sai Baba Mandir in Nagari

Assembly Constituency

Nagari Assembly constituency is a constituency of Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly, India. It is one among 14 constituencies in Chittoor district.
Tamil voters constitute around 40 to 50 per cent of the electorate in this constituency which is situated in the southern tip of Andhra Pradesh.
Locking horns here are two senior leaders of Chittoor district. Irrespective of which party they are in, they have always been at loggerheads. In the current Assembly, one represents Nagari and the other Puttur but for the first time they will fight for the same seat.
With Puttur vanishing after delimitation, Law Minister R. Chenga Reddy and TDP strongman Gali Muddukrishnama Naidu are locked in a contest in Nagari, a constituency that is a blend of urban and rural voters.
It earlier had Nagari, Puttur (part), Narayanavanam, Karvetinagaram, Nindra and Vijayapuram mandals, but delimitation has resulted in Narayanavanam being included in Satyavedu and Karvetinagaram in GD Nellore Assembly constituency, while Vadamalapet and the entire Puttur mandal have been tagged on to Nagari. Though both the leaders have their own strongholds, the changed contours have introduced a new set of electorate, forcing them to try all means to keep their vote bank intact.
There were 1,76,873 registered voters in Nagari constituency in 1999 elections.
In 2009 elections, there were 1,68,421 voters in Nagari, out of them 1,40,363 voters participated in election and as a winning candidate, Mr. Gali muddukrishnama Naidu got 60,849 votes (43.35%).
Present (2009–2014) M.L.A : Gali MUDDUKRISHNAMA NAIDU from  the Telugu Desam Party.

History

Banking  and ATMs

Nagari.

Industries

Social Works




