[[Denchworth]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Oxfordshire, Civil parishes in Oxfordshire

Denchworth is a village and civil parish about  north of Wantage. It was part of Berkshire until the 1974 boundary changes transferred the Vale of White Horse to Oxfordshire.
The parish is bounded by the Land Brook in the west and the Childrey Brook in the east. The Great Western Main Line between Reading and Swindon runs through the parish just south of the village, but there is no station.

Manors

The Abingdon Chronicle claims that Cædwalla of Wessex granted Deniceswurth to Abingdon Abbey late in the seventh century AD, and that this was confirmed by Coenwulf of Mercia early in the ninth century.
The Domesday Book records that by 1086 Henry de Ferrers held the manor of Denchesworde:
 "The same Henry de Ferrers holds Denchworth and Reiner holds of him. Aethelric held it TRE. Then assessed at 7 hides now at five and a half hides. There is land for five ploughs. In demesne is one plough and five villans and five cottars with one plough and 
 
Overlordship of the manor remained with the Ferrers family until Denecheswrth was granted to the Earls of Lancaster along with the Honour of Tutbury, presumably starting with Edmund, 1st Earl of Lancaster in the latter part of the 13th century.
Denchworth manor was assessed at half a knight's fee and had been let to Henry de Tubney by the middle of the 13th century.
The landowning Fettiplace family had a home at North Denchworth.

Circourt

Denchworth parish also included a manor that in the 12th century was called Suthcote when it was forced to surrender all its estates to the Crown.
In 1166 Circourt was assessed at one knight's fee.

Cleets

The Domesday Book records a manor of six hides at South Denchworth held by one Laurence of Wilbrighton in Staffordshire.
The earliest recorded ancestor of the Hyde family in Denchworth parish was one Warin, who lived there in the middle of the 13th century. The family's land was in the manor of Circourt and was assessed at one hide, wherefrom the family derived its surname.

Lovedays

A messuage and seven virgates at South Denchworth seems to have come from the estate held by the Wilbrighton family in about 1250 and was the subject of legal disputes involving the Wilbrightons in 1305 and 1307.

Manor houses

There are two moated sites in the parish, both of which are on Childrey Brook.
Denchworth's medieval manor house in the village had a large moat, part of which is still in water. The oldest part of the present house is late 15th or early 16th century. A three-bay wing was added to one side of the house early in the 17th century, and a second wing added to the other side later in the 17th century. The manor house is a Grade II* listed building.
Denchworth's other moated site is in the northeast corner of the parish. It is a small, rectangular site about  southeast of Hyde Farm.
Just north of the Manor House in the village were Brook Lane Barns; an 18th-century five-bayed barn flanked by shelter sheds. Brook Lane Barns were destroyed by fire in the early hours of 11 March 2012.

Parish church

Denchworth had a parish church by 1086, but the oldest part of the present Church of England parish church of Saint James is 12th century.
Later in the 13th century the north chapel and the north-west tower were added.
The Perpendicular Gothic font is also 15th century.
The south porch is neo-Gothic and was added during the 19th century restoration.
The church has monumental brasses to Oliver Hyde (died 1516) and his wife Agnes, to William Hyde (died 1557), his wife Margery and their children,
St. James' has stained glass windows by Sir Edward Burne-Jones.
The tower has a ring of four bells, but they are currently unringable. Ellis I Knight of Reading, Berkshire cast the treble bell in 1624. Henry III Bagley, who had bellfoundries at Chacombe in Northamptonshire and Witney in Oxfordshire, cast the second bell in 1733. The remaining bells are from the Whitechapel Bellfoundry: the third bell cast by Robert Stainbank in 1868 and the tenor bell by Mears and Stainbank in 1869. St. James' has also a Sanctus bell cast by an unknown founder in about 1699.

Economy and amenities

At the junction of Brook Lane and Hyde Road is the base and broken shaft of a 14th or 15th century preaching cross.
The village has a 17th-century public house, the Fox Inn,The Fox controlled by Greene King Brewery.
In 1729 Richard Gilgrasse left £50 to be invested in land and for the income from the investment to fund the teaching of poor children in Denchworth parish. The former school building is now a private house.
The village used to have a post office, which was in a 17th-century former farmhouse in Hyde Road. It is now a private house.
RJN Motorsport is based in Denchworth parish.RJN Motorsport: Contact Us








