[[Craig Finn]]

CATEGORIES: 1971 births, Living people, American Roman Catholics, Musicians from Minneapolis, Minnesota, People from Shaker Heights, Ohio, American indie rock musicians, The Hold Steady members, Vagrant Records artists

Craig Finn (born August 22, 1971) is an American singer and guitarist, best known as the front man for The Hold Steady and his former band, Lifter Puller. Described by Pitchfork as "a born storyteller who's chosen rock as his medium," Finn's lyrics are often noted for having a strong literary bent, stringing together recurring characters and storylines throughout.
During a five-month break from The Hold Steady, Finn recorded a solo album, Clear Heart Full Eyes, which was released in January 2012.

Personal life

Born in Boston, Massachusetts, Finn grew up in Edina, Minnesota.{{cite web|last=Marchese |first=David |url= |title=Lapsed Catholics and Lost Hoodrats 
Musical career

With Lifter Puller

With The Brokerdealer

Craig Finn did a short stint of work with Mr. Projectile after moving to New York City in the fall of 2001. The result of this was two EP's.
Untitled EP 1
Untitled EP 2

With The Hold Steady

He moved to New York City in the fall of 2001, after Lifter Puller broke up, for a change and because he and his wife knew people there.pulsetc.php?sid=963 Kate Siver, 'The Hold Steady: Ex-Lifter Puller Members Return from NYC Exile as the Hold Steady', The Pulse of the Twin Cities, Wednesday 10 March @ 15:12:06 He has said that lyrically, with The Hold Steady, he's been trying to produce a more positive, coherent, story-based message, in a natural way that he could imagine someone saying.

Work with other artists

Craig Finn provided his voice to Titus Andronicus's second album, The Monitor.  He is the voice of Walt Whitman at the very end of their song "A Pot in Which to Piss"
.ca/articles/generalarticlesynopsfullart.aspx?csid1=139&csid2=844&fid1=43177
He worked with Minneapolis rapper P.O.S on the song "Safety In Speed (Heavy Metal)" which was released on the 2006 album Audition. Always close to the Twin Cities music scene, he also contributed to Minnesota musician Mark Mallman's song "You're Never Alone in New York" on the 2009 album Invincible Criminal.
In between Lifter Puller and The Hold Steady, he did a project with Mr. Projectile known as The Brokerdealer, a techno styled group. They released two unnamed EPs on  This website has shut down, but the songs are still floating around the Internet.
In 2010 he co-wrote, with Chris Cheney, the title track from The Living End's 2011 album, The Ending Is Just The Beginning Repeating, while Cheney was in New York. After working together, Cheney called Finn "a hell of a lyricist".
On April 8, 2014, Cheap Girls premiered the song "Man In Question" from their Famous Graves album. The track features Finn on guest vocals.

Solo

In July 2011, Finn started a Tumblr account

Lyrical style

Finn is most notable for his third-person narrative lyrical style, wherein he frequently makes reference to literature, pop culture, adolescence, partying, religion and drugs. Both with Lifter Puller and The Hold Steady, Finn's songs often follow a storytelling format that features recurring characters and locations, with Ybor City, Fla., and the Twin Cities having special prominence.
Particularly in later Hold Steady albums, Finn's songs have explored the darker aspects of his characters' party-centric lifestyles. Finn told an interviewer in 2012: "Artistically, I have always been really interested in the hangover; not just the celebration and the confetti but also the puke in the gutter." 
Finn's lyrics have been a frequent point of praise for The Hold Steady

Influences

Finn has indicated that some of his greatest lyrical influences include Blake Schwarzenbach from Jets to Brazil and Jawbreaker as well as Bruce Springsteen.net In a Guardian article, he described The Replacements' Let It Be as his "favorite ever record."
He found The Doors' L.A. Woman to be influential in a different manner. As he told the same newspaper: "The music meanders, and Morrison was more like a drunk asshole than an intelligent poet. The worst of the worst is the last song, Riders on the Storm: 'There's a killer on the road/ His brain is squirming like a toad' - that's surely the worst line in rock'n'roll history. He gave the green light to generations of pseuds." He is also a huge fan of Drive-By Truckers.






