[[Status attainment]]

CATEGORIES: Sociological theories

Status attainment or status attainment theory is a concept of sociology.
It deals largely with one's position in society, or class. Status attainment is affected by both achieved factors, such as educational attainment, and ascribed factors, such as family income. It is achieved by a combination of parents' status and one's own efforts and abilities. The idea behind status attainment is that one can be mobile, either upwardly or downwardly, in the form of a class system.
In education context, status attainment assumes that social status of parent affects educational level achieved by children, which in turn affects occupational level and social status. Thus, level of schooling would affect (moderate) the degree of intergenerational transmission of social status.Status Attainment Theory

History

Peter M. Blau (1918-2002) and Otis Duncan (1921-2004) were the first sociologists to isolate the concept of status attainment. Their initial thesis stated that the lower the level from which a person starts, the greater is the probability that he will be upwardly mobile, simply because many more occupational destinations entail upward mobility for men with low origins than for those with high ones. After continued research, the initial statement proved to be incorrect. Blau and Duncan realized that people couldn't possibly think that the best way to get a high-social status position is to start at the bottom. They continued to find that the flaw was in the question the information was based upon. They found their research shouldn't be founded upon the question of "How are people mobile" but on "how do people attain their statuses". Peter Blau and Otis Duncan continued on to conduct a landmark research study to provide answers to their new question.
The United States Bureau of the Census began the research when they conducted interviews in 1962 based on questions prepared by Blau and Duncan. The results showed that it was better to start at the top of the stratification system rather than at the bottom. Men whose fathers held high-status jobs had increased odds of gaining a high-status position although the results had shown a considerably weak correlation. The weak correlation continued to show that education was the primary mechanism in occupational status rather than a father's occupational status. Men who held high-status jobs were usually able to give their sons more years of quality education than those who didn't hold high-status jobs.
 Peter Blau and Otis Duncan's conduct of the initial research-study and their status-attainment model continues to be the core behind the theory of status attainment.

Status attainment in the United States

The first factor that affects one's status attainment is one's family of origin. The parent's occupations, levels of education, and incomes are highly correlated with status attainment. Next, ability is usually measured by some sort of achievement test, and therefore refers to academic aptitude. One's ascribed ability strongly affects educational attainment. Academic performance contributes to status attainment because it eventually determines what job(s) one will get. Encouragement from family and friends will affect education and occupational attainment. These aspirations create an expectation of achieving a certain educational level or occupation. Educational attainment strongly influences occupational attainment. It is clear that all of these factors are linked together and continue to affect each other throughout one's lifespan.
Status Attainment in the U.S. is the process of acquiring positions in educational and occupational hierarchies. Major influential factors include: parental social background, cognitive ability, motivation and education. Very trivial, but nonetheless imperative to one's starting status, family background and upbringing play a major role in status attainment. For example, being born into a wealthy family gives an individual a better starting point than an individual being born into poverty. Money is a huge factor on whether or not a child will get a head start in life. Parents that are wealthy can afford to buy their kids their first car, or put a down payment on their kid's first house. This gives their children privileges few are lucky to have, and gives them opportunities not many children receive. Ultimately this experience catapults these lucky kids into a higher status attainment instantaneously.
On the contrary, kids born into poverty may have the same intellectual ability and motivation as the former, but lack the parental wealth and chance for opportunity. Despite being able to buy things for themselves eventually (buy their first car, or put a down payment on a home), they nonetheless are still put at a disadvantage. Therefore, the background family makeup plays a huge and significant role in determining a person's status attainment in the long run. "Status Attainment generally refers to the processes through which initial relative social position is associated with own social status attainment over time". 72–81 Potential attainment can be achieved by the kid coming from poverty, but it is much harder and takes longer to accomplish. There are also two other factors contributing to status attainment that are equally as influential.
Cognitive ability or one's intellect undoubtedly contributes to the probability of one seeking higher education in life. An individual's level of educational attainment reached gives him or her better chance for moving up the occupational ladder as well as giving them a higher status. Cognitive ability is linked to motivation and education which are the other two major influential contributors of status attainment. This aspect of status attainment has nothing to do with one's parental social background, but rather acts on its own as an attribute for achieving higher status attainment. Being a factor independent from family background or motivation and education, cognitive ability cannot be enhanced or a predicate of the likelihood of one achieving a higher status. Someone of great intellect could have no motivation to accomplish anything, and someone of no intellect could be motivated and do great things.
Perhaps the most influential factor in determining one's status attainment is motivation and education. "This plays an important role in status attainment research and has been found to influence both educational attainment and occupational aspirations of young people, as well as the timing of life course transitions" (Schoon, 72). This two way sword works both ways. The higher the motivation a person has the more likely they are to receive higher education and eventually get a higher paying job and vice versa.
Aspects of status attainment that help encourage or influence education and motivation in kids include the symbolic interaction theory. This theory emphasizes the importance of one's family to urge and push their child for achievement. Parent's expectations and aspirations for their kids in socializing them are very influential not only for them to attain better education in life, but also to make them aware of the importance of a good education that will land them a good job in the future. "Correspondingly, social learning theory may serve as a basis for the attainment of youth through such mechanisms as the modeling of parents' attainment behavior, parental encouragement of attainment (reinforcement), and the communication of aspirations". 158–163 Parents in essence teach their kids to become motivated, and inspired for education themselves by setting the example right at home. For instance, if a child sees that his mother or father are lazy and do not care about the well being of his or her education then that child will grow up to believe education is not important. Coincidentally, this negative socializing example from parent to kid leads them astray and their status as an adult will become poor. They may have great intellectual aptitude and have parents that make an average salary, but if they lack one ingredient (motivation), then they will never ascend as far as they could had they been taught better habits at home.
African Americans follow the same path, but their steps are limited. Differences in educational and occupational attainment have declined among African Americans. However, on average, African Americans and Whites begin at different status levels and end in different status levels. Increased schooling benefits everyone, but due to discrimination, white males benefit more. The same results occur in other minority groups and among females.), Pearson Education Inc., pp. 129, 133, ISBN 978-0-205-53052-6
[/ref]

Socialization vs. allocation

Socialization and Allocation are two different types of status attainment. Both models discuss the importance of how others effect attainments of an individual. "While both are the same in that aspect both differentiate on theoretical interpretations of the same observations and direct our attention to different kinds of phenomena." (Kerckhoff 368-379).
According to Rodney Stark, Sociology Tenth Edition, the allocation theories are theories that argue that the primary function of schools is to allocate status, to place students in the stratification system, rather than to train them. (Stark 641). "In other words teachers identify and classify students according to externally imposed criteria." (Kerckhoff 368-379). "Since this seems to imply that social order rests upon consensual values, and that the prestige hierarchy is a function of widespread convergence in moral evaluations, the approach has been criticized as an extension of the functional theory of stratification—although its practitioners strenuously deny this charge." (Marshall 1998). In this model "social agencies" try to determine the path of the individual and the individual is constricted to what they can do, do to the social structure. In most conditions ambition has no effect on outcome and the outcome is usually predictable. Allocation is "based on "plans" and "exceptions" rather than "wishes" or "aspirations". As children get older they become less convinced that everyone has an equal chance to obtain "good things" in life." (Kerckhoff 368-379). The clearest examples of this model are discrimination of race and individual characteristics. In the article "The Status Attainment Process: Socialization or Allocation?" Alan C. Kerckhoff states "rewards black receive for any level of accomplishment are lower than those of whites at the same level".
Socialization, on the other hand, looks for the characteristics that affect the individual. Also it teaches one how to act and participate in the society. Referring to the book Sociology, Socialization is the process by which culture is learned and internalized by each member of society-much of which occurs during childhood. (Stark 657). Or it can be explained as "the process by which we learn to become members of society, both by internalizing the norms and values of society, and also by learning to perform our social roles." (Marshall 1998). Unlike allocation adults can be enabled to perform new roles. With this model motivation and ability are important factors to help one attain status, this means "Individuals are free to move within the social system, attainments being determined by what the individual does and how well they choose to do it." (Kerckhoff). Some people doubt in this system because they can be influenced by others or misinterpreted to how they feel fit.

Female status attainment

In many parts of the world, status attainment for women is changing dramatically. Now that more women are joining the workforce female status attainment is becoming increasingly self-accomplished rather than through family background or gained through marriage.
Even though women hold fewer jobs than men in some societies, women hold jobs of higher prestige than their male counterparts. This is probably because it is not beneficial for women who are married with children to go out and get lower-paying, lower status jobs because the economic benefits cancel themselves out in the end. Married working women also hold less prestigious jobs than their spouses. This is partially because married people tend to share the same economic backgrounds as well as education levels, and partially because in the process of evolutions, sexual dimorphism has triggered women to prefer wealthy husbands. M. (1992). Do women have evolved preferences for men with resources? Ethology and Sociobiology, 12.
In the past, females generally attained their status through family background or marriage. Although it is still true today, females are becoming more independent and socially mobile in many parts of the world. The increased independence and social mobility has led to an increase in women attaining their own status rather than attaining their status through family circumstances and/or through marriage.
"Many researchers have found that male and female status attainment processes are virtually identical while others have reported gender differences in the importance of mental ability and family background variables as predictors of attainment". & Wilson, Stephan M. (1993), "The Process of Educational and Occupational Attainment of Adolescent Females from Low-Income, Rural Families", 55, National Council on Family Relations, pp. 158–163  In low income and rural communities where male and female roles are traditionally distinctly defined female and male job expectations are excluded from one another. Women are generally held at bay as the traditional "stay at home" mother, or occupy secretarial jobs while men occupy business and managerial positions. This indicates that these community's youths are being taught and expected to follow these gender guidelines. Consequentially, in these circumstances women's attainment processes are being hindered by stereotypes and traditional ways of thinking.
As a result women face a different type of socialization process than men do. Early childhood experiences are very influential for women. In particular, family, marriage, and early child bearing have great importance for the attainment of women (Wilson & Peterson). Women's attainment in rural and low income communities are shaped by more traditional views of gender roles. Enhancing educational goals and motivation for seeking higher paying jobs are generally discouraged for women in these rural and low-income communities.

Occupational status

Status attainment is directly related to occupational status. Occupational status and the attainment thereof is perhaps the core idea of status attainment. Status in the workforce is affected by many factors, most notably, gender, parent status, and work trends. Some major studies have proved these factors to be truly important. One such study that of John Porter, a Canadian, we will focus on.
In the 1973 survey conducted in Canada, Porter began to explore ideas of occupational status attainment. John Porter started his study believing that Canadians were less mobile than Americans in terms of climbing the occupational status ladder. In fact it was quite the opposite, Canadians as well as Americans had higher occupational statuses if their parents were high on the status ladder. This study also showed that gender can be important as well. Women who have full-time jobs come from families higher up on the occupational ladder than men do. Work trends as well are a major factor in determining the occupational status of a person. We have seen a large shift of the workforce move from the agriculture aspect to largely skilled jobs. Since, few are left to labor in the agricultural field, we've found that those left are not unskilled laborers but rather farm owners. Thus a large shift in the occupational status of an average person in the agricultural sector has occurred.
To end, these findings and others can tell us many things about the status attainment of average persons. Most importantly they tell us that status is not simply attained through on underlying cause or factor but rather by a multitude of factors. In studying these factors more we can understand how they affect all aspects of status attainment.

Current research

Notes




