[[Burt Kearns]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Year of birth missing (living people), American journalists, American film producers, American television producers, American screenwriters, Fairfield University alumni

Burt Kearns is an American television and film producer, writer, director, journalist and author,  known for his influential work in reality television and his controversial 1999 tabloid television memoir, Tabloid Baby.tabloidbaby.com/2010/12/buy-bye.html

Television and film production

Writer & Producer

Through 2013, Kearns was producing and directing the nonfiction feature film, El Viaje Musical de Ezekiel Montanez: The Chris Montez Story, which was previewed as a work-in-progress on August 15, 2009 at the 35th annual Fest for Beatles Fans in Chicago, and May 14, 2010 at the Pacific Palisades Film Festival.blogspot.html
Kearns is executive producer of the truTV reality television competition series, Guinness World Records Unleashed, which premiered on November 7, 2013, and was co-executive producer of its first season, Guinness World Records Gone Wild, which premiered on February 7, 2013. He was executive producer and showrunner of the truTV reality documentary series, Conspiracy Theory with Jesse Ventura.  He joined the series as co-executive producer during the first (2009-2010) season   
He was executive producer and showrunner of Speed (TV channel) hit series, Dumbest Stuff on Wheels, which debuted on August 3, 2011, and introduced its second season on January 25, 2012, and co-executive producer of the 2011 Syfy series, Legend Quest.vidics.html Kearns was consultant and co-executive producer of Shadow Operations: The Mars Project, 
Kearns produced the documentary films Death of a Beatle (2000) and Bin Laden's Escape (2005) (with Parco Productions). Directed and produced the documentary, Boxing: A Different Look for Showtime and Hollywood Animal Crusaders (featuring John Travolta, Cher, Don Johnson & Esai Morales) for Animal Planet. Co-producer of the HBO documentary Panic, starring Kim Basinger. Producer of Fox Television special, When Good Pets Go Bad 2, and executive producer of the syndicated series, Strange Universe.

Frozen Pictures

In 2000, Kearns formed the production company Frozen Television (later Frozen Pictures) with veteran producer Brett Hudson, formerly of the Hudson Brothers. Kearns has written and produced many television shows and series under the Frozen banner, including the documentary series Adults Only: The Secret History of The Other Hollywood and The Secret History of Rock 'n' Roll with Gene Simmons for Court TV, All the Presidents' Movies, narrated by Martin Sheen for Bravo, the Showtime late night series My First Time, and episodes of the Court TV series, Mugshots.imdb.com/name/nm0443988/
thumb|180px|rightHe directed and produced the 2008 Frozen Pictures documentary musical film, The Seventh Python, about the career and influence of Monty Python collaborator and Bonzo Dog Band member Neil Innes, and  directed and produced Basketball Man, the 2007 Frozen Pictures documentary film that featured basketball stars and legends telling the story of the life and legacy of the game's inventor, Dr. James Naismith. (During the production of Basketball Man, Kearns conducted Boston Celtics legend Red Auerbach's last interview.)
Was also creator, producer and director of Frozen Pictures' The Michael Lohan Reality Project, and American Dunkleman, both of which became viral sensations when their pitch tapes were released on the Internet.  
Kearns received international attention, including front page stories in the New York Times for his controversial Saintmychal. Mychal Judge.

Cloud 9

Kearns wrote and produced the 20th Century Fox movie, Cloud 9 (starring Burt Reynolds), along with Hudson and Academy Award winner Albert S. Ruddy.google.mozilla%3Aen-US%3Aofficial&q=cloud+9+albert+ruddy+burt+kearns&aq=f&aqi=&aql=&oq= The film was released on DVD by 20th Century Home Entertainment on January 3, 2006.com/2012/02/16/cloud-9-2006/

Tabloid Baby

thumb|74px|leftLeft tabloid television and began writing Tabloid Baby in 1996.  
A combination memoir, mea culpa and exposé, the book was published in November 1999 by Hambleton-Hill's Celebrity Books imprint, and became an immediate sensation.  
The book was praised by  Mike Wallace of CBS News' 60 Minutes as "sad, funny, undeniably authentic"  and by tabloid television host Maury Povich as "the Bible." 
Kearns embarked on a cross-country signing tour after network news bosses reacted to his revelations about the television industry by canceling many of his scheduled television appearances.laweekly.tabloidbaby.com

Early career

Graduated from  Fairfield University; became a reporter and editor for newspapers in southern Connecticut and Westchester, New York.  After John Lennon's assassination on December 8, 1980, he moved to Manhattan, where he worked for neighborhood newspapers including the East Side Express and the Chelsea-Clinton News, and later at the assignment desk and as newswriter and show producer at WNEW-TV's Ten O'Clock News. Kearns became a producer and writer for such New York City news operations as WNBC-TV's News 4 New York and CBS News' Nightwatch and CBS Morning News.fairfield.html?q=burt+kearns&cx=015498946738789627574%3Atpcsrquvlhg&cof=FORID%3A10&ie=UTF-8&siteurl=www.edu%2Fdocuments%2Fabout%2Fpubs%2Ffnfall01.    
Hired by Rupert Murdoch's 20th Century Fox as managing editor of the nightly tabloid television series, A Current Affair in the late 1980s, he helped develop and expand the tabloid television genre. In 1990, Kearns accompanied executive producer and genre inventor Peter Brennan to Hollywood,  where, as managing editor and producer of Hard Copy (1990–1993) and Premier Story (1994), he was an influential figure in the heyday of tabloid television.salon.html

Awards

Winner of 2009 Las Vegas Film Festival Golden Ace Award for The Seventh Python.blogspot.html

Personal life

Kearns returned to tabloid journalism in 2005, working once again with mentor Peter Brennan, as consulting producer to short-lived revival of A Current Affair. Kearns is married to television producer and journalist Alison Holloway.tabloidbaby.htm

Sources






