[[Annie Laurie Gaylor]]

CATEGORIES: American atheists, Living people, Atheism activists, Atheist feminism, Atheist feminists, Freethought, People from Madison, Wisconsin, People from Monroe County, Wisconsin, University of Wisconsin&ndash;Madison alumni, 1955 births, American feminists, Writers from Wisconsin

Annie Laurie Gaylor (born in Madison, Wisconsin, on 2 November 1955) is co-founder of the Freedom From Religion Foundation and, with her husband Dan Barker, is the current co-president. She is also editor of the organization's newspaper, Freethought Today, which is published ten times per year. She is a self-described feminist and liberal. She is the author of several books, including Woe to the Women: The Bible Tells Me So and Betrayal of Trust: Clergy Abuse of Children, and is the editor of Women Without Superstition: No Gods--No Masters. She is a 1980 graduate of the University of Wisconsin–Madison School of Journalism.
In 2010 Gaylor received the Humanitarian Heroine award from the American Humanist Association.

Personal life

Gaylor met Barker when both were guests on AM Chicago - hosted by Oprah Winfrey - in 1984. They began dating six months later and married in 1987. They have a daughter, Sabrina Delata.
Gaylor is on the Board of Directors of the Women's Medical Fund, Inc.,
In 1977, Gaylor along with her mother and other feminist groups, led the protest that led to the recall of Judge Archie Simonson after he had made a statement blaming a young girl for her rape.
protesting judicial misconduct in Wisconsin,

Freedom From Religion Foundation

Gaylor and her mother, Anne Nicol Gaylor, and the late John Sontarck, founded the Freedom From Religion Foundation (FFRF) in a meeting around the Gaylors' dining room table in 1978. Gaylor has worked to make the FFRF the largest organization of atheists and agnostics in the United States."

Media Appearances

Gaylor has appeared in numerous print, radio and television media discussing the work of the FFRF, such as an advertising campaign being censored in Las Vegas
Gaylor contributes writings to print media across the United States on women's issues: how politics affects women's access to reproductive health care in the state of Wisconsin,
Gaylor, along with her husband Dan Barker, host a weekly one-hour radio program Freethought Radio. It is broadcast weekly, on Progressive Talk The Mic 92.1, out of Madison, Wisconsin. It is carried on several other stations throughout the Midwest and is available through podcast.

Publications

Author
Editor






