[[The Red Romance]]

CATEGORIES: American rock music groups, Musical groups from New York City, Musical groups established in 2006

The Red Romance is a New York City band formed in late 2006.

History

The Red Romance is an independently released act who feature a blend of Motown-oriented grooves and lyrical moodiness.
Formerly of New York based indie-rock group Ambulance LTD, Matthew Dublin and Darren Beckett formed The Red Romance using a song catalog Dublin had assembled while on tour with their previous band. Soon after recording some demos, the band recruited Adam Chilenski and began playing shows at NYC clubs the Mercury Lounge and Piano's.
At an early show at NYC's downtown club Piano's, Spin. It's classic rock'n'roll, anchored by Beckett's rock steady, Motown-influenced backbeats... the sly chorus on "What You Wanted" shows Dublin's got a bit of attitude to share".spin.com/blog/meet-red-romance
The band continued with an impromptu jam with Brandon Flowers from The Killers at NYC's the Mercury Lounge, where they jammed some of their favorites, including David Bowie's "Heroes".nme. It was during this tour that The Red Romance became one of the first unsigned act to perform at Madison Square Garden's three times, two at Madison Square Theater and then in the arena proper.com/d/stconcertreview. And by the end of their set, the growing crowd apparently agreed giving Red Romance a good, well-deserved hand amidst potentially difficult circumstances".
They performed on September 9, 2007 in Toronto as part of the Virgin Festival.
At CMJ 2007, Spin... Sporting a suit vest and button up, front man Matt Dublin and crew kicked into a solid set of back to back tracks from the newly minted quintet's self-titled debut. "Don't Cry" and "Just One Kiss" illustrate Dublin's affinity for the finer things in life: pop hooks and all their trimmings. At a skin and bones level, the Red Romance's tunes embody cut and dry musical infection. And "Break Away" exemplifies its zenith; a thick frosting of synths and simple, hum-worthy lead guitars float atop a solid Motown bass and back beat spine—something other bands often refuse to do: accept simplicity. True, turning heads with a common mold is tough, but it's tried and true, and Red Romance showed us why."  The Times music writer Dan Cairns also praised the band's departure from their former outfit, writing that "... . . Their EP suggests they won't lack for them."
Critic's have described Dublin's songwriting style with a wide range of influences, including jangly guitar pop, Motown, and "... This earned the band much critical praise during a brief tour of the UK in April 2008 in support of another three-song self-titled EP released via digital download on May 26, 2008. Interest was generated from The Red Romance in London both due to underground popularity of their five-song EP and their former membership in Ambulance LTD, which had toured extensively in the UK. The London Metro described the Dublin and Beckett's new group as a "far less arty, more dancey outfit-and they've managed it winningly if their debut EP is anything to go by.." No wonder The Killers chose the as support on tour".//www.com/images/The%20Red%20Romance-%20London%20Metro-%209th%20April%202008... We're in bittersweet 80s pop territory here-'Hesitate' even brings to mind ABC and Haircut 100..."

Releases

Self-titled five song EP March 2007
Self-title three song EP April 2008

Members

Matthew Dublin – vocals, guitar, songwriter
Darren Beckett – drums
Adam Chilenski – bass, backing vocals






