[[Communication accommodation theory]]

CATEGORIES: Communication, Communication theory

Communication accommodation theory (CAT) is a theory of communication developed by Howard Giles. It argues that "when people interact they adjust their speech, their vocal patterns and their gestures, to accommodate to others". Sometimes when individuals try to engage in convergence they can also end up over-accommodating, and despite their good intentions their convergence can be seen as condescending.

Background

Speech accommodation theory

The communication accommodation theory was developed by Howard Giles, professor of Communication at the University of California, Santa Barbara.

Social psychology and social identity theory

Like speech accommodation theory, communication accommodation theory continues to draw from social psychology, particularly from four main socio-psychology theories: similarity-attraction, social exchange, causal distribution and intergroup distinctiveness. These theories help to explain why speakers seek to converge or diverge from the language, dialect, accent and behavior of their interlocutors. CAT also relies heavily in social identity theory. This later theory argues that a person's self-concept comprises a personal identity and a social identity, and that this social identity is based in comparisons people make between in-groups (groups to which they belong) and out-groups (groups to which they do not belong). Communication accommodation thus, becomes a tool to emphasize group distinctiveness in a positive way, and strengthen the individual's social identity.
Four main socio-psychological theories:
Similarity-attraction
The similarity-attraction theory posits that "the more similar our attitudes and beliefs are to those of others, the more likely it is for them to be attracted to us". An individual on the receiving end of high level of accommodation is likely to develop a greater sense of self-esteem and satisfaction than being a receiver of low accommodation.
Social exchange process
The social exchange process theory "states that prior to acting, we attempt to assess the rewards and costs of alternate courses of action",
Causal attribution process
The causal attribution theory "Suggests that we interpret other people's behavior, and evaluate the individual themselves, in terms of the motivations and intentions that we attribute as the cause of their behavior"
Intergroup distinctiveness
The process of intergroup distinctiveness, as theorized by Tajfel argues "that when members of different groups are in contact, they compare themselves on dimensions which are important to them, such as personal attributes, abilities, material possessions and so forth".

Assumptions

Many of the principles and concepts from social identity theory are also applicable to communication accommodation theory. Under the influence of social psychology, especially social identity theory, communication accommodation theory are guided by mainly four assumptions.
The first assumption indicates that people bring their past experience to conversations. Therefore, communication is not only influenced by situational conditions and initial reactions but the "social-historical context in which the interaction is embedded". People's attitudes and beliefs, derived from those factors, determine the extent to which they are willing to accommodate in a conversation.
The second assumption is concerned with how people perceive and evaluate a conversation. Perception is "the process of attending to and interpreting a message" When someone enters a conversation, usually he first observes what takes place and then decides whether he should make adjustment to fit in. However, the decision about accommodation is not always necessary. In this case, neither of them is likely to evaluate the conversation since they have little possibility to meet again.
The importance of language and behaviours is illustrated in the third assumption since they are indicators of social status and group belongings. When two people who speak different languages try to have a conversation, the language they agree to communicate with is more likely to be the one used by the higher status person. This idea of "salient social membership" negotiation is well illustrated in the situation of an interview as the interviewee usually makes all efforts to identify with the interviewer by accommodating the way he speaks and behaves so that he can have more chance to secure the job.
The last assumption puts emphasis on social appropriateness and norms. Here norms are defined as "expectations of behaviors that individuals feel should or should not occur in a conversation". Those expectations give guidance to people's behaviors, helping them to figure out the appropriate way to accommodate. Most of the time, the accommodation made according to those norms are perceived socially appropriate. For instance, when a young person talks to the seniors in his family, he should avoid using jargons among his generation to show respect and communicate more smoothly.

Convergence, over-accommodation, and divergence

Convergence

Convergence refers to the process through which an individual shifts his or her speech patterns in interaction so that they more closely resemble the speech patterns of his interlocutor(s). Converging also increases the effectiveness of communication, which in turn lowers uncertainty, interpersonal anxiety, and increases mutual understanding. This is another factor that motivates people to converge.

Overaccommodation

However, although people usually have good intentions when they attempt to use convergence in conversation, some interlocutors can perceive convergence as patronizing and demeaning and hence just as it can enhance conversation it can also detract from the processes of communication. The socially categorized stereotypes that people hold of others result in these cognitively linked forms of over-accommodation.
Over-accommodation takes place in all types of circumstances. For example, it is not uncommon for nurses or caretakers to speak to their elderly patients in baby talk. While the nurses may have the purest of intentions to care and to "relate" to them, the patients actually end up feeling degraded and underestimated. In this particular case, it also can cause difficulty in adapting to an institution and a dysfunctional environment.

Divergence

Divergence is a linguistic strategy whereby a member of a speech community accentuates the linguistic differences between his or herself and his interlocutor.

Components of CAT

Further research conducted by Gallois et al. in 1995 has expanded the theory to include 17 propositions that influence these processes of convergence and divergence. They are categorized into four main components: the sociohistorical context, the communicators' accommodative orientation, the immediate situation and evaluation and future intentions. These components are essential to Communication accommodation Theory and affect the course and outcome of intercultural conversations.

Sociohistorical context

The sociohistorical context refers to way in which past interactions between the groups to which the communicators belong influence the communication behaviors of the communicators. It includes "the relations between the groups having contact and the social norms regarding contact". These relations between the different groups to which the communicators belong, influence the communicators' behavior. Amongst these socio-historical factors which influence communicators are: political or historical relations between nations, the different religious or ideological views between possessed by the two groups participating in the conversation, amongst others.

Accommodative orientation

Accommodative orientation refers to the communicator's "tendencies to perceive encounters with out group members in interpersonal terms, intergroup terms, or a combination of the two".

Immediate situation

The immediate situation refers to the moment in which the actual communication takes place. It is shaped by five aspects which are interrelated: (1) "sociopsychological states", (2) "goals and addressee focus" (e.g. motivations and goals for the encounter), (3) "sociolinguistic strategies" (e.g. convergence or divergence), (4) "behavior and tactics" (e.g. topic, accent) and (5) "labeling and attributions".

Evaluation and future intentions

This aspect deals with how communicators perceive their conversational partners' behavior and its effects on future encounters between the two groups. Positively rated conversations will most likely lead to further communication between the interlocutors and other members of their respective groups.

Communication accommodation theory in action

In 1991, Giles, Coupland, and Coupland expressed the belief that a "more qualitative perspective" would be necessary in order to obtain more diverse and clarifying explanations of the behaviors presented within varying contexts.  They referred to this as "the applied perspective" that showed accommodation theory as a vital part of day-to-day activity as opposed to solely being a theoretical construct. They sought to "demonstrate how the core concepts and relationships invoked by accommodation theory are available for addressing altogether pragmatic concerns". For Giles, Coupland, and Coupland, these "pragmatic concerns" were extremely varied in nature.
One of these "pragmatic concerns" included understanding the relational issues that present themselves in the medical and clinical fields, such as the relational "alternatives, development, difficulties, and outcomes," which affected the patients' contentment with their medical interactions and whether or not, through these interactions, they agreed with and implemented said health care regimens.
Another of these situations involved the potential options in a legal arena. The way that the judges, plaintiffs, and defendants accommodated themselves to both the situation and the jury could manipulate the jury's acceptance or rejection of the defendant, and could, thus, control the outcome of the case.
Communication accommodation theory was also found to have a place in media. In regards to radio broadcasting, the alliance of the audience with the broadcaster played an important part in both the ratings that the shows would receive and whether the show progressed or was cancelled.
In the area of jobs and employment, accommodation theory was believed to influence the satisfaction one has with his or her job and the productivity that that person possesses in said job through convergence with or divergence from the co-workers and their work environment.
Accommodation theory also possessed practical applications in the development of learning a second language. This was seen when the student's education of and proficiency in said language was either assisted or hindered by accommodative measures.
Giles, Coupland, and Coupland (1991) also addressed the part that accommodation theory plays in a situation they called "language switching", when bilingual individuals must decide which language they should speak when they are in an organizational environment with other bilingual individuals. This can be an incredibly important choice to make, especially in a business setting, because an incorrect judgment in this area of communication could unwittingly promote negative reactions between the two or more parties involved.
In addition, accommodation theory was strongly intertwined with the way an immigrant accepts and is accepted by their host country. An instance of over-accommodation from the immigrating individual can unintentionally damage that person's sense of individuality while a strong divergence from the immigrating individual from their host culture can prompt the natives of the host country to react negatively to them because of the immigrating individual's use of divergence.
The final area of practical application, as presented by Giles, Coupland, and Coupland (1991), was that of accommodation theory's effect on the lives of people with disabilities. Accommodation theory was thought to either aid them by promoting them to "fulfill their communicative and life potentials," or by hindering them from reaching their full potential by focusing on the disability that made them different rather than the other characteristics that made them similar to their peers.
Despite the fact that communication accommodation theory is theoretical, it has shown itself to be viable by its numerous practical applications.

Shortcomings of CAT

Despite the strengths of the Communication Accommodation Theory, there are short-comings to it. The theory has created scholarly criticism by the three scholars Judee Burgon, Leesa Dillman, and Lesa Stern. These scholars question the "convergence-divergence frame… and they believe that conversations are too complex to be reduced simply to the processes of the Communication Accommodation theory. They also challenge the notion that people's accommodation can be explained by just the practice of convergence-divergence" . It causes conflicts between communicators because the theory relies too heavily on a rational way of communicating. Sometimes we as people do not have a rational way of thinking and this becomes a problem when communicating.

Strengths of CAT

The Communication Accommodation theory has shortcomings and strengths to its practice. The Communication Accommodation theory focuses "on the role of conversations in our lives" . Communication Accommodation Theory can be applied to virtually any situation in which communication occurs.

Communication accommodation theory among diverse cultural groups

Intergenerational communications

Researchers of communication accommodation theory who have been interested in conversations between the elderly and the young, actively apply this theory to analyze intergenerational communication situations. Since the aging of population is becoming a serious issue in current society, communication difficulties of older adults and issues like ageism should be addressed. According to mainstream sociolinguistic studies, age is regarded as a variable only to the extent that it may show patterns of dialectal variation within speech communities across time. However, the existence of potentially important generational differences relating to beliefs about talk, situational perceptions, interactional goals, and various language devices between the young and the elderly are all taken into account as empirical questions in their own rightto point out numerous consequences brought by both negative and positive attitudes towards aging.

=Young-to-elderly language strategies=

Even though young people are more likely to perceive the old by multiple stereotypes, the elderly are negatively evaluated in most situations, in his research concerning psycholinguistic and social psychological components of communication with the elderly, addressing a problem for the elderly that they are vulnerable to the social and psychological circumstances of isolation, neglect,and negative stereotyping. However,it is not appropriate to see problematic intergenerational talk as a one-sided affair since both the young and the old can be responsible for miscommunication and unsuitable accommodation.
The first of these is characterized as overaccommodation due to physical/sensory handicaps, which happens when speakers talk to handicapped recipients, usually those with hearing impairment,and adapt their speech beyond the optimal level.
The second strategy is labelled as dependency-related overaccommodation, which refers to overbearing, excessively directive and disciplinary speech
to the elderly. "It was conjectured that this strategy is encoded as one of the means by which a younger person can control the relationship and induce the elderly individual to become dependent on the former".
Age-related divergence is the third strategy. This tenet proposes that young speakers may seek to amplify the distinctiveness of their own social group by purposefully acting in ways that differ from their stereotype of old speakers. Older speakers might be seen as in physical and mental decline; slowing down with age and unable to keep pace with the current social norms. These young speakers, attempting to differentiate themselves from this image, will talk faster, use fashionable colloquialism and slang, and express more "modern" ideas and values in their communication with seniors.
The fourth strategy is intergroup overaccommodation and it is considered one of the most pervasive of young-to-elderly language strategies.
The "simple perception of an addressee's social category membership being old - and, independently of a particular handicap (if any), considerations
of dependency and in-group symbolization are sufficient to invoke negative physical,social, and psychological inferences for many younger people."

=Communication between old and young people in various relationships=

Giles has studied the interaction of young and elderly persons in business settings using communication accommodation as a theoretical framework. Findings demonstrated that elderly persons tend to be less accommodating than their younger counterparts. Findings also demonstrated that, for example, in business settings, one is much more likely to accommodate and converge to the language of a superior, such as a manager, than to someone with less or equal amount of superiority, such as a co-worker.  While several other factors came into play, convergence, and divergence portions of this theory were used in interpreting and explain this phenomenon.
The prevalence of and consequences for ageism and ageist language in intergenerational interactions in health care contexts such as hospitals and long-term care facilities have also been discussed.

Communication accommodation theory in intercultural communications

Since communication accommodation theory applies to both interpersonal and inter-group communication one of the fields in which it has been most applied has been in intercultural communication. Within this field it has been applied to explain and analyze communication behaviors in a variety of situations, such as interactions between non-native and natives during second language acquisition processes, and interactions between inter-ethnic groups.
Studiesshow the comparison of communication accommodation in foreign countries between tourists and locals. In countries with heavy tourism, many being Third World, it is common that the actual tourists have little to no competency in, or desire of having competency in the language and style of communication of the local natives. On the other hand, the country's local economy as well as the livelihood of its citizens, heavily depends on these tourists. Therefore, there is a great need to accommodate the communication styles of the tourists.

=Communication between native and non-native language speakers in second language acquisition=

Non-Native Language Speakers
The input that non-native speakers (NNS) obtain from their interlocutors during second language acquisition is crucial in their process of language learning .
On the other hand, like the inter-group distinctiveness theory argues, several studies have revealed that when second language learners feel their social identity is threatened due to patronizing behavior towards their ethnic group they are more likely to engage in divergence. In a study conducted by Zuengler (1982) amongst Spanish and Greek speakers learning English, subjects were asked both ethnically threatening and neutral questions by a native English speaker. Those subjects that answered the ethnic-threatening question in a more personal form were noted to decrease the "native English-like pronunciations of the sounds" in their answers.
Native Language Speakers
Meanwhile it has been noted that native language speakers frequently engage in "foreign talk" (FT) when interacting with second language learners. In this type of talk native speakers adopt features such as "slower speech rates, shorter and simpler sentence, more question and question tags, greater pronunciation articulation" amongst others.

=Immigrants=

Immigrants tend to converge according to what they perceive to be the prototypical behaviors of their new group, or according to the norms that they infer make part of their new environment .

="Speak Arabic please!" A case study in communication accommodation=

In Sonia S'hiri's "Speak Arabic please!: Tunisian Arabic Speakers' Linguistic Accommodation to Middle Easterners" she describes how speakers of Tunisian Arabic converge to the "Sharqi" or " Middle Eastern Arabic" of their co-workers.
One of the many ways to divide the Arab world is between the West "Maghreb" and the East "Sharq".  Although there is no official "Sharqi Arabic", the varieties that are usually associated with "Sharqi Arabic" are Egyptian, Levantine, and Gulf/Iraqi Arabic.  Due to Egypt's dominance of the media and arts, the "Sharqi" Arabic spoken in the region has come to be "perceived by Tunisians, as "lighter", more poetic and artistic, more humorous, more romantic and even more beautiful than the local Tunisian variety".  Again, because of its dominance in the media and the arts, Arabic speakers throughout the Arab world are much more familiar with "Sharqi" varieties than they are with "Maghrebi" varieties.  A common yet incorrect belief about speech interactions in the Arab speaking world is that when speakers of different varieties of the language come into contact with one another, the default language for communication is Modern Standard Arabic.
In her study conducted in London, S'hiri examined the social reasons for Tunisian Arabs to converge linguistically to speakers of "Sharqi Arabic".  The data she found also gave ample evidence to show that code-switching into pure fusha for communication is a misconception. S'hiri recorded five Tunisian Arabic speakers (M1, M2, W1, W2, and W3) who worked at two different broadcasting companies and found that they did indeed converge linguistically to their Sharqi co-workers. They did not however, resort solely to fusha.  S'hiri found that when interacting with speakers of "Sharqi" Arabic, her Tunisian informants used linguistic features and lexical items characteristic of the "Sharqi" variety, some English words, (instead of the French words often used in Tunisian Arabic speech) in addition to switching to fusha.  S'hiri found that many of her informants were proud of both their Tunisian variety of Arabic as well as their ability converge linguistically and even posits the idea of "showing off" as a goal of linguistic convergence".
When her informants were asked why they had switched to the "Sharqi" variety, they all agreed it was psychologically motivating, because it allowed them to get closer to their interlocutors.  M1 added that this allowed him to convey friendliness to his interlocutors, to reduce differences and avoid rejection.

Communication accommodation theory and new media

As communication accommodation theory explains "the cognitions and motivations that underlie interactants' communication" with context and identity salience, it's feasible to apply it to new media related settings. Even though research in this field is still at its early stage, interesting case studies have appeared in recent years.
Studies have investigated possible accommodative tendencies of librarians when faced with cyberlanguage use by the patron through instant messaging technology. Since use of cyberlanguage in VRS(virtual reference services) conversations has been suggested as one possible way to strengthen patron relations, patrons who are satisfied with their interaction with a librarian who use cyberlanguage may be more willing to return. However, the result suggests that patron's use of cyberlanguage has no influence on a librarian's use of cyberlanguage and surprisingly convergence doesn't happen .

Other case studies

Giles has also looked at the actions and attitudes in the public's interaction with police officers, using accommodation theory.  Relational and identity aspects of this theory help to illustrate the interaction patterns that exist between the public and the police in the various situations in which these interaction take place., 2005  This study looked at both the accommodation patterns of the officers and the public with whom they were dealing.
In this case of policemen and accommodation, it is important for men and women of the force to find a stable balance between accommodating (displaying care, empathy, respect etc.,) and keeping a firm stance of authority. Studies show that the public believes policemen, overall, should work on being more community oriented and accommodating to all of its citizens, not only to reduce tension, anxiety, and stress, but to build trust and satisfaction between both parties. There are current, as well as up-and-coming community-based police programs to give citizens a more "informal," "down to earth," view of their commanding officers. However, even with all of these accommodations being made, it is necessary for there to remain an understanding of the higher power, so that in the case in life-threatening situations, men and women of the police force can continue to actively and effectively uphold society

Notes




