[[Ugandan Super League]]

CATEGORIES: Football competitions in Uganda, National association football premier leagues, Sports leagues established in 1968, 1968 establishments in Uganda, Ugandan Super League

The Ugandan Super League is the top division of the Federation of Uganda Football Associations.

History

Original concept

The genesis of club football in Uganda was an idea copied from England by Mr. Balamaze Lwanga and Rev Polycarp Kakooza. The objective was to improve Uganda's performances in the Africa Cup of Nations after disappointing results in the finals in 1962 and 1968 held in Ethiopia. The intention was to start a Uganda National League (the forerunner of the Uganda Super League) in order to create foundation for a strong national team. At the same time the identification of players from the grassroots would be made easier and systematic. 
There were no clubs to form a league so institutions and districts were contacted to form teams. The 1968 inaugural top flight league comprised Prisons, Army, Coffee, Express, Jinja, Masaka, Mbarara and Mbale. There were 3 institutions and 4 districts and one club.  The league was known as the National First Division League and the first league champions were Prisons FC Kampala (now known as Maroons FC).
After four seasons, the political turbulence in Uganda impacted on the league and the 1972 and 1973 championship were not completed because of civil unrest. In 1974  the league became known as the National Football League and this title was used until 1982 when the league was trimmed to 10 teams and was renamed the Super League (shortened to Super Ten in that inaugural season).

Super League advent

The emergence of the Super League in 1982 saw the development of Sports Club Villa as the country's leading club.  Through the 1980s and a good part of the 1990s, competition between Express FC, Kampala City Council FC (KCC) and SC Villa lit up the league and fans attended in hoards. 
SC Villa won the league for the first time in 1982 and over the next 22 years totalled 16 league titles.  Kampala City Council FC and Express FC won the championship title in the intervening years.

Match-fixing

In 2003, football in Uganda hit its lowest ebb as Villa put 22 goals past Akol FC when the league title went down to goal difference with Express. This was one of the one of the biggest scandals in Ugandan football and thereafter, there was a complete media shutdown in all matters pertaining to local football. Fans became increasingly disillusioned and deserted the stadia thus affecting the teams financially. 

FUFA Super League

The 2013-14 FUFA Super League is being contested by 16 teams, including Bright Stars FC, CRO FC and Soana FC who were promoted from the Ugandan Big League at the end of the 2013/13 season.

Participants and locations

Some of the Kampala clubs may on occasions also play home matches at the Mandela National Stadium.


League standings

See 2013-14 Uganda Super League for the league table during the mid-season break.

Previous winners

Performances by club

Top scorers

NB: * Joy Ssebuliba was leading league scorer with 17 goals for Lint FC in 1973 but the league was not completed because of the dire political situation.





www.com/fufa super league fans
