[[Adelaide Christmas Pageant]]

CATEGORIES: Recurring events established in 1933, Festivals in Adelaide, Christmas and winter holiday parades, Parades in Australia

The Adelaide Christmas Pageant is a parade held annually in the South Australian capital of Adelaide. It is the largest event of its kind in the world, attracting crowds of over 400,000 and televised to millions more. the pageant is a state institution and is sponsored by four local credit unions.
Beginning in 1933 as the John Martin's Christmas Pageant, the event is staged in early November every year, usually on a Saturday morning. It comprises a procession of 75 sets and 1,700 volunteers, including 57 floats, 15 bands, 164 clowns, dancing groups, and walking performers, all culminating in the arrival of Santa Claus.weekendnotes.com/the-credit-union-christmas-pageant/
The pageant takes place in the Adelaide city centre, along a 3.35 kilometre route which commences on King William Street at South Terrace, and concludes on North Terrace, wherefrom Father Christmas proceeds to the Magic Cave, originally in the John Martin's building, and now in the rebuilt David Jones building on the same site. (The route was changed slightly for 2007).

History

The Adelaide Christmas Pageant was founded by Sir Edward Hayward, owner of the Adelaide department store John Martin's, who was inspired by the Toronto Santa Claus Parade and Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade.
During the war years of 1941-1944, the pageant was in abeyance. It was restored in 1945. By 1969, the event had grown significantly, with attendances reaching 500,000 and television broadcasting commencing. In 1979, the largest induction of new floats took place, with 16 joining the pageant.
In 1985, John Martin's was acquired by David Jones Limited, who continued the pageant under the John Martin's name. However, with the collapse of the Adelaide Steamship Group (of which David Jones was a significant member), and the public float of the David Jones retailing arm, in the mid-1990s the South Australian Government acquired the event. It sought sponsorship from the South Australian business community, and in 1996 sold the naming rights to the six South Australian Credit Unions: Australian Central, Savings & Loans,Christmas Pageant, Savings & Loans Credit Union Community CPS,Credit Union Christmas Pageant, Community CPS Credit Union PowerState,Christmas Pageant competition, PowerState Credit Union SatisfacAbout the Christmas Pageant, Satisfac Credit Union and the Police Credit Union. Today, the pageant is managed by Events South Australia,The people behind the Credit Union Christmas Pageant, cupageant.au a division of the South Australian Tourism Commission. As a result of mergers, the current naming right sponsors are People's Choice Credit Union, Beyond Bank Australia, Credit Union SA and Police Credit Union.
The route was slightly changed for the 2007 Pageant.com.au)
In 2008 there was a Guinness world record attempt for the longest and largest Mexican wave, but it failed.
In 2010 the spectators broke the record for the largest group of carol singers singing Christmas carols at the same time. They set a record of over 9,100 carol singers, breaking the previous record of 7,541 set in the USA.adelaidenow.au

Broadcast

The Pageant is broadcast officially by NWS-9, the local affiliate of the Nine Network. For many years the broadcast was carried separately by both SAS-7 and ABS-2.
Commentators and Presenters in recent years have included:






