[[Revenge Is a Dish Best Served Three Times]]

CATEGORIES: The Simpsons (season 18) episodes, 2007 television episodes

"Revenge is a Dish Best Served Three Times" is the eleventh episode of The Simpsons eighteenth season, which originally aired on January 28, 2007. It was written by Joel H. Cohen, and directed by Michael Polcino.

Plot

After the Simpsons' car is cut off by the Rich Texan, Homer's motivation for revenge prompts his family to tell three stories concerning vengeance, hoping to convince Homer that pursuing revenge is not a good idea.

The Count of Monte Fatso

Marge tells a cautionary tale of revenge taking place in 19th century France.
Moe, parodying Fernand, breaks up the marriage of Homer and Marge, parodying Edmond Dantès and Mercedes respectively, by framing Homer as an English traitor. When Moe marries Marge, Homer, now in a French prison, swears revenge. His cellmate, Mr. Burns, parodying Abbé Faria, tells Homer to find his buried treasure through a tunnel Mr. Burns dug. After initial failure, Homer finds the riches and becomes the Count of Monte Cristo. Five years later, Homer invites Moe and Marge to a party at his mansion, where Homer kills Moe with a homemade machine, expecting Marge to take him back. However, Marge angrily rebuffs him for killing Moe, asking, "Now who's going to take care of the triplets?" and showing him the triplets she had with him.
At the end of the story, Marge's explanation is that revenge can lead to misery and sadness. However, Homer was listening to the radio at the time and was unintentionally reminded of his revenge.

Revenge of the Geeks

Titled as a parody on the movie Revenge of the Nerds, Lisa's story revolves around Milhouse's campaign to fight back against the school bullies and the consequences when he goes too far.
Tired of being bullied by Jimbo, Dolph, and Kearney, the geeks plan their revenge. In the science lab, Martin reveals his latest creation, The Getbackinator, a weapon that shoots a ray causing the targeted individuals to perform various playground tortures on themselves such as wedgies and wet willies. Milhouse — the only geek with hand-eye coordination — uses the weapon on the bullies, but then begins attacking anyone who has ever wronged him, including Martin for accidentally hitting him with a shuttlecock, Richard for being more popular with girls, and Wendell for not giving him "Chinese cuts" in the lunch line. Milhouse even shoots a first-day student of the school who had never done anything to him, claiming it is "prevenge". Milhouse gives Groundskeeper Willie an Ultimate Noogie, which decapitates him. Lisa eventually convinces Milhouse to stop, and he reluctantly throws the device aside. Afterwards, Nelson, whom Milhouse forgot about, returns from an absence due to mumps and finds the weapon. Nelson ends up using the weapon against Milhouse.
Homer enjoys the story, because it has what he likes in a story: an ending. Lisa claims the moral of the story is that taking revenge makes a person as bad as those who hurt them; Homer claims that the moral is for someone to never put down their weapon, at which point he draws a baseball bat and resumes his pursuit of revenge.

Bartman Begins

Bart recounts "Bartman's 'origin story'", based on Batman's origin as revealed in the film Batman Begins.
After leaving the Gotham City Opera House, Homer and Marge, parodying Thomas and Martha Wayne respectively, are killed by Snake Jailbird, parodying Joe Chill, in a dark alley. For his last words, Homer pleads Bart, who is parodying Bruce Wayne, to avenge him "in flamboyant, impractical fashion". Bart does as his father says and swears revenge on Snake, giving birth to his superhero alter ego, Bartman. The alter ego is achieved with the help of his grandfather, who had a past alter ego as the Crimson Cockatoo; Bart's grandfather suggested that Bart become The Crimson Cockaboy. Bartman flies around Gotham City, defeating enemies in his way for justice. The villains' Springfield identities are Otto Mann (The Toker), Ned Flanders (The Diddler), Hans Moleman (Mr. Mole), Patty and Selma Bouvier (Sugar and Spice), and Lenny (Poison Lenny), who was not actually a villain, but a transvestite. When Serpent, Snake's alter ego, attempts to steal the "Stealable Jewels of the Orient" from the Gotham Natural History Museum, Bartman arrives, retrieves the Jewels, and kills Serpent by impaling him on the fangs of a snake statue. Afterwards, a reporter, played by Lisa parodying Vicki Vale, reminds Bartman that the Serpent's death will not revive his parents. Bartman agrees, but adds that he now feels better due to Snake's death and has gained "zillions of dollars" and freedom from his parents.
In conclusion, Bart says that revenge is satisfying and thus goes against the wishes of Marge and Lisa. However, during the story, Homer is seen to have made amends with the Rich Texan after hearing that they are both from Connecticut.

End credits

At the end, the credits read "Dedicated to all who died in the Star Wars films". The list includes Darth Vader, Darth Maul, Greedo, Uncle Owen, Storm Trooper #5, Jango Fett, General Grievous (Droid), Storm Trooper #22, Dak, Obi Wan (Ben) Kenobi, Yoda, "Whoever Jimmy Smits Played", Hutt, Jabba the, Sy Snoodles, "Unfortunately, not Jar-Jar Binks," and "everyone on both Death Stars when they blew up". There are errors in the list, including the names of Jar Jar Binks and Sy Snootles being spelled incorrectly. Also, Sy Snootles was not shown to die in Return of the Jedi.






