[[Schillings]]

CATEGORIES: Law firms based in London, Law firms established in 1984, 1984 establishments in the United Kingdom

Schillings  (originally boutique law firm Schilling & Lom) is a London-based multi-disciplinary business specialising in reputation management and privacy protection. The company is an Alternative Business Structure (ABS) and regulated and authorised by the United Kingdom's Solicitors Regulation Authority (SRA). It employs over fifteen lawyers, risk managers and IT security consultants and offers services covering risk consulting, legal services and IT security.
In November 2012 Schillings were named Law Firm of the Year (Reputation & Privacy) by Spears WMS.

History

The firm was founded in 1984 by Keith Schilling and Nicholas Lom and focused largely on media law, libel, and privacy protection. It soon became known as the scourge of many Fleet Street editors for obtaining anonymised gagging orders to protect celebrity clients' privacy.indexoncensorship.
In 2012 Schillings acquired the information security firm Vigilante Bespoke.legalfutures.co.
The company restructured its organisation in September 2013 and is now an integrated legal, risk management, IT security and investigation business.legalfutures.co.

Notable cases

In 2004, Schillings helped Lance Armstrong in his fight against doping allegations in the book L. A. Confidentiel, by David Walsh and Pierre Ballester. Schillings was told to tell "every UK paper and broadcaster" to not re-state what was in the book.
In May 2008, Keith Schilling won a privacy case in the Court of Appeal for the son of Harry Potter author J. K. Rowling. The case effectively established a law of privacy for children of famous parents granting them protection from intrusive photography by paparazzi.
In April and May 2011, Schillings acted for Ryan Giggs in CTB v News Group Newspapers, and obtained a "super-injunction" aimed at preventing the publication by The Sun of the details of an alleged extra-marital relationship between Giggs and Imogen Thomas. The case was notable for the widespread media coverage and political discussion that it generated in the UK.
In October 2012 Schillings' family division acted for the respondent husband in reported case BP v KP and NI. A unique divorce case, it drew in not only companies by which one of the spouses was employed but also former colleagues and associates with whom a spouse was professionally acquainted.
In January 2013 Schillings acted for Ned RocknRoll, husband to Kate Winslet. The firm obtained an order preventing the Sun newspaper from publishing private images of RocknRoll taken from a Facebook page.
In May 2013 Schillings acted for Dale Vince who won his appeal against his ex-wife's claim for maintenance. This was viewed as a landmark judgment which set a precedent for future financial claims that may be made many years after a relationship has ended.
In July 2013 Schillings acted for the author JK Rowling who brought proceedings against a lawyer who revealed that she had been writing under a pseudonym.

Notable partners






