[[ArchLord]]

CATEGORIES: 2005 video games, Codemasters games, Video games developed in South Korea, Windows games, Webzen games, Active massively multiplayer online games, Fantasy MMORPGs, 2005 MMORPGs

ArchLord is a 3D fantasy MMORPG developed by NHN Corporation and Codemasters Online Gaming (COG). The game was released in March 2005 in South Korea and October 2006 in North America and Europe, receiving poor reviews from the gaming press. In August 2007, ArchLord became free-to-play to coincide with the release of the first episodic expansion pack, Season of Siege. The second expansion, Spirits Awakening, was released in August 2008. From August 2009, Webzen publishes Archlord in additional countries where Codemasters do not have rights to distribute the game. From October 3, 2009, Webzen maintains Archlord globally, is currently playing the seventh expansion, called Heaven & Hell. On December 6, 2013, publisher Webzen announced the closing of ArchLord, the game has been shut down since January 1st, 2014.

Gameplay

ArchLord uses a crafting system, which allows players to upgrade items in a unique way as well as allows players to carve, skin and ransack any defeated monster. The materials achieved using carving, skinning and ransacking skills are used in Alchemy and Cooking to create powerup items. Alchemy creates metamorphosis potions which allows a player to transform into monsters, whereas cooking allows a player to create food which give statistic bonuses, e.g. defense buff.
There is an advanced market system employed in this game for ease of trading between players.
One of the features of ArchLord is the ability to compete to become the ArchLord, the supreme ruler of the game world. Only one ArchLord can exist on each server, reigning for four weeks before he/she is challenged by other players for the position. The ArchLord has access to a castle, a  magnificent dragon mount, control of the weather, huge damage and other great features.

Plot

ArchLord is set on the continent of Chantra and features four playable races; Orcs, Humans, Moon Elves and the new DragonScion. Orcs begin their quests in the Golunndo, Humans begin in Anchorville, Moon Elves begin in Norine, and DragonScions in Cien. They all have access to three classes except for the DragonScion that from level 20 evolves to one of the three races.
The Humans first appeared in Chantra 1000 years after the Orcs had settled. Following the dramatic sinking of their land, key pioneers in Human society initially established a foothold in the Western part of the continent known as Chantra. History suggests they were able to do so due to their ability to handle fire. In the early stages, Humans lived in relative peace. However, they soon began to realize that Orcs had landed on the Eastern part of the continent and before long tensions were raised as the Humans became protective of their territory. Humans have a relatively short lifespan, with 80 years considered to be long. Humans also have an inferior breeding capacity when compared to Orcs, with the average number of offspring being three.
Humans can be Archers, Knights, and Mages.
The Orcs have occupied the land of Chantra for a 1000 years longer than the Humans. For this reason, the Orcs held themselves in higher regard than their Human counterparts and enslaved them for 500 years. Over time the Humans rebelled against their Orc masters and eventually won their freedom. 500 years later the continent was struck by a huge earthquake, which caused much of it to sink into the ocean. Humans and Orcs were forced to flee the western continent of Chantra. Under the leadership of Ugdrasil, the Orcs colonized a small part of the continent where they began the re-building process.
Orcs can be Berserkers, Sorcerers and Hunters.
The Moon Elves are a race that were once considered Elves, but different. Once one of three of the great elf races that inhabited the Nordenland during the 2nd period, they were the first race to fall in the Great War. As a result of this devastating conflict most of the male population was annihilated. A few males were able to escape together with the women; they hid themselves in the shadows from those in the outside world. As time went on, the women took it upon themselves to replace the male roles in their society, and thus learned to master the fine arts of hunting and craftsmanship. The few remaining men were forbidden to enter combat, as they were too precious a commodity. Through a cruel twist of fate the remaining men only seemed capable of producing more women. This forced the Moon Elves to step from their shadowy world and start exploring for additional breeding options; this is how they came to be known by the Orcs and Humans. They were so ashamed of this action that they chose to hide themselves in the dark for centuries, only revealing themselves once their land was invaded by the Orcs and Humans.
Moon Elves can be Swashbucklers, Rangers, and Elementalists.
The Dragon Scion was the last of the 4 races to arrive at the continent of Chantra. They were created from the skin and bone of the great dragon 'Mightthesis' 2000 years ago, after their creation they roamed the world for 1000 years, searching for a place to settle down, finally reaching the continent of Chantra.
DragonScions can evolve to Slayers, Orbiters and Summoners.

Service Transition

Due to failure to reach an agreement with NHN, Codemasters was unable to renew their license for ArchLord, no longer able to provide the game to European and North American customers. As of September 1, 2009, all credit purchases have been disabled, CM accounts transferred to the new provider and the game servers shut down on October 2, 2009.thebitbag. On October 3, 2009, the game was turned over to Webzen, a Korean publisher.com/5350336/codemasters-says-goodbye-to-archlord, Info on the transition to Webzen.

Critical reception

ArchLord received poor ratings; GameSpot criticized the repetitive and tedious gameplay, blurry graphics and lackluster audio, shallow quest and crafting system, and the hours of repetitive combat required to get to Player versus player and high-level content. The reviewer's only positive comment was that ArchLord offered familiar role-playing gameplay of "kill, loot, buy stuff", overall awarding a "terrible" rating of 2.7 out of 10.

Manhwa

An ancillary manhwa created by Korean author Park Jin-hwan goes by the same name. The ArchLord manhwa was first released in South Korea on September 30, 2005. Tokyopop released an English version in 2007.
The manhwa follows the adventures of a human named Zian and his friend, a half-orc named Ugdrasil, who find themselves in the midst of a thousand year old conflict for control of five mysterious relics known as Archons.

Popular culture

The game appears on the Belgian-Dutch drama film Ben X.






