[[Tak Bai incident]]

CATEGORIES: History of Thailand, 2004 in Thailand, Massacres in Thailand, Riots and civil disorder in Thailand

The Tak Bai incident is an event during the South Thailand insurgency that occurred on October 25, 2004 in Tak Bai, Thailand, which resulted in 85 deaths.

Incident

On 25 October 2004, a demonstration of around 1,500 people gathered in front of a police station in Tak Bai to protest the detention of six men. Several hours into the protest, the crowd attempted to cross the police barrier into the station. Police responded with tear gas and water cannon, and the crowd responded by throwing rocks. Police fired into the air and then into the crowd at head height, killing seven.
Almost 1,300 protesters were detained at the scene; they were ordered to strip, lie on their bellies, and crawl to nearby trucks that would transport them to another site. Footage taken by journalists confirmed allegations against the military that many protesters were kicked and beaten with sticks even after complying with orders to lie on the ground.youtube.com/watch?v=fk_ZEuE-70M
The detainees were then stacked atop one another in trucks and transported to Inkayut Military Camp in Pattani Province. The drive took five hours, and by the time the trucks arrived at the destination, 78 detainees had died from suffocation or organ collapse.

Retaliation

On November 2, 2004, Jaran Torae, a Buddhist deputy police chief, was found beheaded in Narathiwat province. A handwritten note described the murder as retaliation for the deaths at Tak Bai.

Responses

Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra expressed regret for the deaths but said there had been no wrongdoing by military personnel.
Prime Minister Surayud Chulanont gave a formal apology for Thaksin's policies in the south on 2 November 2006, In 2012, the Thai government offered reparations to family members of the victims. 
The Bangkok Post called the incident a "tragedy" and "one of the worst blunders ever committed by the military in the restive deep South".








