[[Tan D. Nguyen]]

CATEGORIES: American politicians of Vietnamese descent, 1973 births, Living people, American people of Vietnamese descent, Vietnamese emigrants to the United States, California Democrats, California Republicans, University of California, Los Angeles alumni, University of Minnesota alumni

Tan Duc Nguyen (born 1973) was a two-time candidate for the U.S. House of Representatives in California.  In 2004, he sought the Democratic Party nomination to run against incumbent Republican Dana Rohrabacher in California's 46th congressional district.  In 2006, he ran as a Republican against incumbent Democrat Loretta Sanchez in California's 47th congressional district.
On February 14, 2011, Nguyen was sentenced by United States District Judge David O. Carter to 366 days in federal prison followed by six months in a halfway house for lying to investigators about his knowledge of a letter to intimidate Latino voters from voting in his 2006 race.
Nguyen was born Nguyễn Đức Tân in Da Nang, South Vietnam, in 1973.  In 1981, six years after the Fall of Saigon, he and his family left Vietnam by boat and emigrated to the United States.  They settled in California, where Nguyen attended the University of California, Los Angeles.  He later graduated from the University of Minnesota with a baccalaureate and emphases on business-economics, biochemistry, and Asian studies.  Nguyen married Hanh Lam and settled in southern California, working for American Express.

2004 Congressional campaign as a Democrat

In 2004, Nguyen lost the 46th district Democratic primary to Jim Brandt,Official 2004 primary election results from the Secretary of State of California who lost to incumbent Republican Dana Rohrabacher by a 30% margin.Official 2004 general election results from the Secretary of State of California

2006 Congressional campaign as a Republican

Nguyen won the Republican Party's endorsement to run for the 47th Congressional District of California in the June 6, 2006 primary election with 55.4% of the votes in a three-way race.6% of the votes.Official 2006 election results from the Secretary of State of California

Campaign mailing controversy

Nguyen's campaign was linked to a Spanish-language mailing of 14,000 letters allegedly warning immigrants not to vote, threatening them with prison or deportation. The letter was received by registered Hispanic voters the weekend of October 15, 2006 and sent to then-California Attorney General Bill Lockyer, who launched an investigation into the source of the letter on Monday, October 17, 2006. As translated in the press at the time, it read in part:Spanish-language mailing linked to Tan Nguyen campaign
The letter was issued on the letterhead of the California Coalition for Immigration Reform; however, its chairwoman denied any involvement.
On May 16, 2007, the California Department of Justice investigation determined there was no evidence that Nguyen's campaign had an intent to intimidate those legally entitled to vote. The investigation had found that the original draft of the letter (in English) had warned illegals and those with green cards against voting, but elsewhere had encouraged those with U.S. citizenship to vote.  The phrase "those with green cards" had then been translated into "emigrado" for the Spanish-language letter that was mailed; this had later been translated back into English as "immigrant" when the letter was brought to light in the media.  Senior Assistant Attorney General Gary Schons stated the investigation found that Nguyen did, in fact, know about the letter before it was mailed, in contradiction to Nguyen's repeated assertions that he was not aware of it.  Nguyen, who continued to deny involvement with the letter, in other respects, stated satisfaction with the investigation results and considered himself exonerated.Tan Nguyen cleared by State Attorney General from the OC Register

Obstruction of justice indictment

Despite the California Attorney General declining to press charges against Nguyen, a federal grand jury indicted him on a charge of obstruction of justice brought against him by the United States Attorney's Office for the Central District of California and the Civil Rights Division of the U.S. Justice Department.
Nguyen's conviction was upheld on appeal to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. Nguyen, slip op. (9th Cir. Mar. 23, 2012)








