[[Hybrid vehicle drivetrain]]

CATEGORIES: Hybrid powertrain, Hybrid vehicles, Engines

Hybrid vehicles are vehicles with two or more power sources in the drivetrain.  There are many different types of hybrid vehicles, although only the gasoline-electric hybrid is currently commercially available.
Hybrids are classified by the division of power between sources; both sources may operate in parallel to simultaneously provide acceleration, or they may operate in series with one source exclusively providing the acceleration and the second being used to augment the first's power reserve. The sources can also be used in both series and parallel as needed, the vehicle being primarily driven by one source but the second capable of providing direct additional acceleration if required.
Current hybrids use both an internal combustion (IC) engine and a battery/electric drive system (using ultracapacitors) to improve fuel consumption, emission, and performance.  Electrically assisted pedal bicycles are a form of hybrid drive.  Other combinations of energy storage and conversion are possible, although not yet in commercial production.
Combustion-electric hybrids have larger battery sets than what a normal combustion engine only vehicle would have. Battery and supercapacitor technology is advancing.  A potential advantage is that when these battery sets require renewing in the future, the newer battery sets will be potentially superior having higher energy storage giving greater range enhancing a vehicle.

Types by drive train structure

Parallel hybrid

Parallel hybrid systems, which are most commonly produced at present, have both an internal combustion engine (ICE) and an electric motor coupled. If they are joined at an axis in parallel, the speeds at this axis must be identical and the supplied torques add together. Most electric bicycles are of this type. When only one of the two sources is being used, the other must either also rotate in an idling manner, be connected by a one-way clutch, or freewheel. With cars, the two sources may be applied to the same shaft- for example with the electric motor lying between the engine and transmission. The speeds are thus equal and the torques add up, with the electric motor adding or subtracting torque to the system as necessary. The Honda Insight uses this system.
An alternative parallel hybrid layout is the 'through the road' type. Here a conventional drivetrain powers one axle, with an electric motor or motors driving the other. The batteries can be recharged through regenerative braking, or by loading the electrically driven wheels during cruise. Power is thus transferred from the engine to the batteries through the road surface. This layout also has the advantage of providing four-wheel-drive in some conditions. An example of this principle is a bicycle fitted with a front hub motor, which assists the cyclist's pedal power at the rear wheel.
Parallel hybrids can be further categorized depending upon how balanced the different portions are at providing motive power. In some cases, the combustion engine is dominant (the electric motor turns on only when a boost is needed) and vice versa. Others can run with just the electric system operating. But because current parallel hybrids are unable to provide all-electric (ICE=OFF) propulsion, they are often categorized as mild hybrids (see below).
Because parallel hybrids can use a smaller battery pack as they rely more on regenerative braking and the internal combustion engine can also act as a generator for supplemental recharging, they are more efficient on highway driving compared to urban stop-and-go conditions or city driving. Honda's Insight, Civic, and Accord hybrids are examples of production parallel hybrids. General Motors Parallel Hybrid Truck (PHT) and BAS Hybrids such as the Saturn VUE and Aura Greenline and Chevrolet Malibu hybrids are also considered as utilizing a parallel architecture.

Series hybrid

Series hybrids have also been referred to as extended-range electric vehicles (EREV) or range-extended electric vehicles (REEV) where they are designed to be run mostly by the battery, but have a petrol or diesel generator to recharge the battery when going on a long drive. However, range extension can be accomplished with either series or parallel hybrid layouts. Alternatively, it can be viewed as an electric transmission, with the battery storing reserve power until it is needed. In a series-hybrid system, the combustion engine drives an electric generator instead of directly driving the wheels. The generator provides power for the driving electric motors.  In short, a series-hybrid is simple, the vehicle is driven only by electric motor traction with a generator set providing the electric power.
Unlike piston internal combustion engines, electric motors are highly efficient with exceptionally high power-to-weight ratios providing adequate torque when running over a wide speed range.  Internal combustion engines run at their most efficient when turning at a constant speed.  An engine turning a generator can be designed to run at maximum efficiency constant speed, or a series of constant speeds. Combining the two gives maximum efficiency and performance. Conventional mechanical transmissions add weight, bulk and sap power from the engine with automatic shifting being complex. Unlike combustion engines, with electric motors matched to the vehicle a multiple-speed transmission is not essential and often only a simple constant-ratio gearbox is required. 
This arrangement is common in diesel-electric locomotives and ships. Ferdinand Porsche used this arrangement in the early 20th century in racing cars, effectively inventing the series-hybrid arrangement. Porsche named the system, System Mixt.  A wheel hub motor arrangement, with a motor in each of the two front wheels was used, setting speed records. This arrangement was sometimes referred to as an electric transmission, as the electric generator and electric traction motor replaced a mechanical transmission. The vehicle could not move unless the internal combustion engine was running.
The arrangement was difficult for production cars as synchronization was not possible of the electric driving motors and the generator set power, resulting in higher fuel consumption.  This is no longer an issue with modern computer engine management systems optimizing when the generator runs to match the power needed. Since Ferdinand Porsche's series-hybrid car, electric motors have become substantially smaller, lighter and efficient over the years. These advances have given the advantage to the electric transmission in normal road vehicle operating conditions, over a conventional internal combustion engine and mechanical automatic transmission. One of the advantages is the smoother progressive ride with no stepped gear ratio changes.
The electric transmission is currently viable in replacing the mechanical transmission. However, the modern series-hybrid vehicles takes the electric transmission to a higher plane adding greater value.  There is a difference to an electric transmission. Modern series-hybrids contain:
In addition: 
The electric driving motor may run entirely fed by electricity from a large battery bank or via the generator turned by the internal combustion engine, or both. The battery bank may be charged by mains electricity reducing running costs, as the range running under the electric motors only is extended. The vehicle conceptually resembles a Diesel-electric locomotive with the addition of a large battery bank that may power the vehicle without the internal combustion engine running and acting as an energy buffer. The energy buffer is used to accelerate and a greater top speed. The generator may simultaneously charge the battery bank and power the driving electric motor that moves the vehicle. An advantage is that when the vehicle is stopped the combustion engine is switched off.  When the vehicle moves it does so using the energy in the batteries. This reduces kerbside emissions greatly in cities and towns.  Vehicles at traffic lights, or in slow moving stop-start traffic need not be polluting when stationary or moving very slowly. Series-hybrids can also be fitted with a supercapacitor or a flywheel to store regenerative braking energy, which can improve efficiency by clawing back energy that otherwise would be lost being dissipated via heat through the braking system.
Because a series-hybrid omits a mechanical link between the combustion engine and the wheels, the engine can be run at a constant and efficient rate even as the vehicle changes speed.  The vehicle speed and engine speed are not necessarily in synchronization.  The engine can thus maintain an efficiency closer to the theoretical limit of 37%, rather than the current average of 20%. used in the Nissan concept Infiniti Emerg-e.
As the requirements for the engine are not directly linked to vehicle speed, this gives greater scope for more efficient or alternative engine designs, such as a microturbine, rotary Atkinson cycle engine or a linear combustion engine. Retrieved April 18, 2013.
General Motors in 1999 made the experimental EV1 series hybrid using a turbine generator set.  The turbine weighed 220 lb (99.8 kg), measured 20 inches (50.8 cm) in diameter by 22 inches (55.9 cm) long and ran between 100,000 and 140,000 rpm.  Fuel consumption was  in hybrid mode. Depending on the driving conditions, a highway range of more than 390 miles (627.6 km) was achieved. The results were highly successful, and would have promised to be more successful if a smaller microturbine was used, yet the EV1 project was dropped.
The use of a motor driving a wheel directly eliminates the conventional mechanical transmission elements: gearbox, transmission shafts and differential, and can sometimes eliminate flexible couplings. This offers great simplicity. If the motors are integrated into the wheels a disadvantage is that the unsprung mass increases and suspension responsiveness decreases which impacts ride performance and potentially safety.  However the impact should be minimal if at all as electric motors in wheel hubs such as Hi-Pa Drive, may be very small and light having exceptionally high power-to-weight ratios. The braking mechanisms can be lighter as the wheel motors brake the vehicle. Light aluminum wheels may be used reducing the unsprung mass of the wheel assembly. Vehicle designs may be optimized to lower the center of gravity having the heavy mechanics and battery banks at floor level. If the motors are attached to the vehicle body, flexible couplings are still required. Advantages of individual wheel motors include simplified traction control and all wheel drive if required, allowing lower floors, which is useful for buses. Some 8x8 all-wheel drive military vehicles use individual wheel motors.  Diesel-electric locomotives have used this concept (albeit with the individual motors driving axles connecting pairs of wheels) for 70 years.Churella, 28-30
In a typical road vehicle the whole series-hybrid power-transmission setup may be smaller and lighter than the equivalent conventional mechanical power-transmission setup liberating space.  As the combustion generator set only requires cables to the driving electric motors, there is greater flexibility in major component layout spread across a vehicle giving superior weight distribution and maximizing vehicle cabin space. This flexibility may lead to superior vehicle designs.
In 1997 Toyota released the first series-hybrid bus sold in Japan.
The DA36 E-Star, an aircraft designed by Siemens, Diamond Aircraft and EADS, employs a series hybrid powertrain with the propeller being turned only by a Siemens 70 kW (94 hp) electric motor. A propeller speed reduction unit is eliminated. The aim is to reduce fuel consumption and emissions by up to 25 percent. An onboard 40 hp (30 kW) Austro Engine Wankel rotary engine and generator provides the electricity. A Wankel engine was chosen because of the very small size, low weight and great power to weight ratio offered, which are assets suited to aircraft.  Wankel engines also run efficiently at a constants speed of approximately 2,000rpm which is highly suited to generator turning operation. Keeping to a near constant, or narrow band, of revolutions eliminates, or vastly reduces, many of the disadvantages of the Wankel engine.greencarcongress.html
An example of series-hybrid car was the Fisker Karma, which had a sizable battery bank that could also be charged by the electricity mains to give a longer range on battery operation only. The car was propelled by electric motor traction only.

Power-split or series-parallel hybrid

Power-split hybrid or series-parallel hybrid are parallel hybrids. They incorporate power-split devices allowing for power paths from the engine to the wheels that can be either mechanical or electrical. The main principle behind this system is the decoupling of the power supplied by the engine (or other primary source) from the power demanded by the driver.
A combustion engine's torque output is minimal at lower RPMs and, in a conventional vehicle, a larger engine is necessary for acceptable acceleration from standstill. The larger engine, however, has more power than needed for steady speed cruising. An electric motor, on the other hand, exhibits maximum torque at standstill and is well-suited to complement the engine's torque deficiency at low RPMs. In a power-split hybrid, a smaller, less flexible, and highly efficient engine can be used. The conventional Otto cycle (higher power density, more low-rpm torque, lower fuel efficiency) is often also modified to a Miller cycle or Atkinson cycle (lower power density, less low-rpm torque, higher fuel efficiency). The smaller engine, using a more efficient cycle and often operating in the favorable region of the brake specific fuel consumption map, contributes significantly to the higher overall efficiency of the vehicle.
Interesting variations of the simple design (pictured at right) found, for example, in the well-known Toyota Prius are the:
The Toyota Hybrid System THS / Hybrid Synergy Drive has a single power-split device (incorporated as a single 3 shaft planetary gearset) and can be classified as an Input-Split, since the power of the engine is split at the input to the transmission. This in turn makes this setup very simple in mechanical terms, but does have some drawbacks of its own. For example, the maximum speed is mainly limited by the speed of the smaller electric motor (usually functioning as a generator). Also, the efficiency of the transmission is heavily dependent on the amount of power being transmitted over the electrical path, as multiple conversions, each with their own, less than perfect efficiency, lead to a low efficiency of that path (~0.7) compared with the purely mechanical path (~0.98). Especially in higher speed regimes (>120 km/h or 70 mph) the efficiency (of the transmission alone) therefore drops below that of a generic automatic transmission with hydrodynamic coupler.
General Motors, BMW, and DaimlerChrysler have developed in collaboration a system named "Two-Mode Hybrid" as part of the Global Hybrid Cooperation. The technology was released in the fall of 2007 on the Chevrolet Tahoe Hybrid. The system was also featured on the GMC Graphite SUV concept vehicle at the 2005 North American International Auto Show in Detroit.
The Two-Mode Hybrid name is intended to emphasize the drive-train's ability to operate in all-electric (Mode 1, or Input-Split) as well as hybrid (Mode 2, or Compound-Split) modes.  The design, however, allows for operation in more than two modes; two power-split modes are available along with several fixed gear (essentially parallel hybrid) regimes. For this reason, the design can be referred to as a multi-regime design.

Types by degree of hybridization

Full Hybrids

A full hybrid, sometimes also called a strong hybrid, is a vehicle that can run on just the engine, just the batteries, or a combination of both. The Toyota Prius, Toyota Camry Hybrid, Ford Escape Hybrid/Mercury Mariner Hybrid, Ford Fusion Hybrid/Lincoln MKZ Hybrid/Mercury Milan Hybrid, Ford C-Max Hybrid, Kia Optima Hybrid, as well as the General Motors 2-mode hybrid trucks and SUVs, are examples of this type of hybridization as they are able to be propelled on battery power alone. A large, high-capacity battery pack is needed for battery-only operation. These vehicles have a split power path that allows more flexibility in the drivetrain by inter-converting mechanical and electrical power, at some cost in complexity. To balance the forces from each portion, the vehicles use a differential-style linkage between the engine and motor connected to the head end of the transmission.
The Toyota brand name for this technology is Hybrid Synergy Drive, which is being used in the Prius, the Highlander Hybrid SUV, and the Camry Hybrid. A computer oversees operation of the entire system, determining which half should be running, or if both should be in use. The operation of the Prius can be divided into six distinct regimes.
The hybrid drivetrain of the Prius, in combination with aerodynamics and optimizations in the engine itself to reduce drag, results in 80%–100% gains in fuel economy compared to four-door conventional cars of similar weight and size.

Mild Hybrids

Mild hybrids are essentially conventional vehicles with some degree of hybrid hardware, but with limited hybrid feature utilization. Typically they are a parallel system with start-stop only or possibly in combination with modest levels of engine assist or regenerative braking features. Unlike full hybrids, Mild hybrids generally cannot provide ICE-OFF all-electric (EV) propulsion.
Mild hybrids like the General Motors 2004-07 Parallel Hybrid Truck (PHT) and the Honda Eco-Assist hybrids are equipped with a 3-phase electric motor mounted within the bell-housing between the engine and transmission, allowing the engine to be turned off whenever the truck is coasting, braking, or stopped, yet restart quickly when required. Accessories can continue to run on electrical power while the engine is off, and as in other hybrid designs, the motor is used for regenerative braking to recapture energy. The large electric motor is used to spin up the engine to operating rpm speeds before injecting any fuel.
The 2004-07 Chevrolet Silverado PHT, was a full-size pickup truck. Chevrolet was able to get a 10% improvement on the Silverado's fuel efficiency by shutting down and restarting the engine on demand and using regenerative braking.  However the electrical motor was not used to provide propulsion or assist, rather the electrical energy was used to drive accessories like the A/C and power steering.
General Motors followed the parallel hybrid truck with their BAS Hybrid system, another mild hybrid implementation officially released on the 2007 Saturn Vue Green Line. For its "start-stop" functionality, it operates similarly to the system in the Silverado, although via a belted connection to the motor/generator unit. However the GM BAS Hybridsystem has broader hybrid functionality as the electric motor can also provide modest assist under acceleration and during steady driving, and captures energy during regenerative (blended) braking. The BAS Hybrid can result in as much as a 27% improvement in combined fuel efficiency as noted by the EPA in testing of the 2009 Saturn VUE. The BAS Hybrid system can also be found on the 2008-09 Saturn Aura and the 2008-2010 Chevrolet Malibu hybrids.
Another way to provide for shutting off a car's engine when it is stopped, then immediately restarting it when it's time to go, is by employing a static start engine.  Such an engine requires no starter motor, but employs sensors to determine the exact position of each piston, then precisely timing the injection and ignition of fuel to turn over the engine.
Mild hybrids are sometimes called Power assist hybrids' as they use the engine for primary power, with a torque-boosting electric motor also connected to a largely conventional power train. The electric motor, mounted between the engine and transmission, is essentially a very large starter motor, which operates not only when the engine needs to be turned over, but also when the driver "steps on the gas" and requires extra power. The electric motor may also be used to restart the combustion engine, deriving the same benefits from shutting down the main engine at idle, while the enhanced battery system is used to power accessories.
Honda's hybrids including the Insight use this design, leveraging their reputation for design of small, efficient gasoline engines; their system is dubbed Integrated Motor Assist (IMA). Assist hybrids differ fundamentally from full hybrids in that propulsion cannot be accomplished on electric power alone. However, since the amount of electrical power needed is much smaller, the size of the system is reduced.
A variation on this type of hybrid is the Saturn Vue Green Line BAS Hybrid system that uses a smaller electric motor (mounted to the side of the engine), and battery pack than the Honda IMA, but functions similarly.
Another variation on this type is Mazda's e-4WD system, offered on the Mazda Demio sold in Japan. This front-wheel drive vehicle has an electric motor which can drive the rear wheels when extra traction is needed. The system is entirely disengaged in all other driving conditions, so it does not directly enhance performance or economy but allows the use of a smaller and more economical engine relative to total performance.
Ford has dubbed Honda's hybrids "mild" in their advertising for the Escape Hybrid, arguing that the Escape's full hybrid design is more efficient.

Plug-in hybrid


A plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV) has two defining characteristics: 1) it can be plugged into an electrical outlet to be charged and (2) has some range that can be traveled on the energy it stored while plugged in.  They are full hybrid, able to run in electric-only mode, with larger batteries and the ability to recharge from the electric power grid. And can be parallel or series hybrid designs. They are also called gas-optional, or griddable hybrids. Their main benefit is that they can be gasoline-independent for daily commuting, but also have the extended range of a hybrid for long trips. They can also be multi-fuel, with the electric power supplemented by diesel, biodiesel, or hydrogen. The Electric Power Research Institute's research indicates a lower total cost of ownership for PHEVs due to reduced service costs and gradually improving batteries. The "well-to-wheel" efficiency and emissions of PHEVs compared to gasoline hybrids depends on the energy sources of the grid (the US grid is 50% coal; California's grid is primarily natural gas, hydroelectric power, and wind power). Particular interest in PHEVs is in California where a "million solar homes" initiative is under way, and global warming legislation has been enacted.
Prototypes of PHEVs, with larger battery packs that can be recharged from the power grid, have been built in the U.S., notably at Prof. Andy Frank's Hybrid Center the so-called Daily Bimodale.
The California Cars Initiative has converted the '04 and newer Toyota Prius to become a prototype of what it calls the PRIUS+. With the addition of 
Chinese battery manufacturer and automaker BYD Auto released the F3DM compact sedan to the Chinese fleet market on December 15, 2008. "Warren Buffett's Electric Car Hits the Chinese Market, But Rollout Delayed For U.S. & Europe". CNBC. "China's First Plug-In Hybrid Car Rolls Out". Business Week.  Due to low sales, BYD announced in April 2010 that the F3DM will be replaced by the BYD Qin plug-in hybrid.
General Motors began deliveries of the Chevrolet Volt in the United States in December 2012, and its sibling, the Opel Ampera, was released for retail customers in Europe by early 2012., other plug-in hybrids available in several markets are the Fisker Karma, Toyota Prius Plug-in Hybrid, and Ford C-Max Energi.


Types by nature of the power source

Electric-internal combustion engine hybrid

There are many ways to create an electric-Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) hybrid. The variety of electric-ICE designs can be  differentiated by how the electric and combustion portions of the powertrain connect, at what times each portion is in operation, and what percent of the power is provided by each hybrid component. Two major categories are series hybrids and parallel hybrids, though parallel designs are most common today.
Most hybrids, no matter the specific type, use regenerative braking to recover energy when slowing down the vehicle. This simply involves driving a motor so it acts as a generator.
Many designs also shut off the internal combustion engine when it is not needed in order to save energy. That concept is not unique to hybrids; Subaru pioneered this feature in the early 1980s, and the Volkswagen Lupo 3L is one example of a conventional vehicle that shuts off its engine when at a stop. Some provision must be made, however, for accessories such as air conditioning which are normally driven by the engine. Furthermore, the lubrication systems of internal combustion engines are inherently least effective immediately after the engine starts; since it is upon startup that the majority of engine wear occurs, the frequent starting and stopping of such systems reduce the lifespan of the engine considerably. Also, start and stop cycles may reduce the engine's ability to operate at its optimum temperature, thus reducing the engine's efficiency.

Electric-fuel cell hybrid

Fuel cell vehicles are often fitted with a battery or supercapacitor to deliver peak acceleration power and to reduce the size and power constraints on the fuel cell (and thus its cost); this is effectively also a series hybrid configuration.

Internal combustion engine-hydraulic hybrid

A hydraulic hybrid vehicle uses hydraulic and mechanical components instead of electrical. A variable displacement pump replaces the electric motor/generator.  A hydraulic accumulator, is a vessel which stores energy. The vessel typically has a flexible bladder of pre-charged pressurized nitrogen gas inside. Pumped hydraulic fluid is compressed against the bladder storing the energy in the highly compressed nitrogen gas.  Some versions have a piston in a cylinder rather than pressurized bladder of nitrogen gas. The accumulator replaces the batteries on petro-electric hybrid.  The hydraulic accumulator is potentially cheaper and more durable than batteries. Hydraulic hybrid technology was originally implemented in Germany in the 1930s. Volvo Flygmotor used petro-hydraulic hybrids experimentally in buses from the early 1980s and is still an active area.
Initial concept involved a giant flywheel (see Gyrobus) for storage connected to a hydrostatic transmission, however later changed to a simpler system using a hydraulic accumulator connected to a hydraulic pump/motor. The system is also being actively developed by Eaton and several other companies, primarily in heavy vehicles like buses, trucks and military vehicles. An example is the Ford F-350 Mighty Tonka concept truck shown in 2002. It features an Eaton system that can accelerate the truck up to highway speeds.
The system components were expensive which precluded installation in smaller trucks and cars. A drawback was that the power driving motors were not efficient enough at part load. Focus has now switched to smaller vehicles. A British company has made a breakthrough by introducing an electronically controlled hydraulic motor/pump, the Digital Displacement motor/pump, that is highly efficient at all ranges and loads making small applications of petro-hydraulic hybrids feasible.
The kinetic braking energy recovery rate is higher and therefore the system is more efficient than current battery charged hybrids, demonstrating a 60% to 70% increase in economy in EPA testing.  While the system has faster and more efficient charge/discharge cycling, the accumulator size and pressure dictates total energy capacity, and requires more space than a battery.  However for the energy stored the accumulator is smaller in physical size than a current battery pack.
One research company's goal is to create a blank paper design new car, to maximize the packaging of gasoline-hydraulic hybrid components in the vehicle. All bulky hydraulic components are integrated into the chassis of the car. One design has claimed to return 130mpg in tests by using a large hydraulic accumulator which is also the structural chassis of the car. The small hydraulic driving motors are incorporated within the wheel hubs driving the wheels and reversing to claw-back kinetic braking energy. The aim is 170mpg in average driving conditions. Energy created by shock absorbers and kinetic braking energy that normally would be wasted assists in charging the accumulator. A small fossil fuelled piston engine sized for average power use charges the accumulator. The accumulator is sized at running the car for 15 minutes when fully charged. The aim is a fully charged accumulator with an energy storage potential of 670 HP, which will produce a 0-60 mph acceleration speed of under 5 seconds using four wheel drive.
In January 2011 industry giant Chrysler announced a partnership with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to design and develop an experimental gasoline-hydraulic hybrid powertrain suitable for use in large passenger cars. Chrysler adapted an existing production minvan to the new hydraulic powertrain. Research is ongoing in this field.greencarcongress.html
NRG Dynamix of the U.S.A. claims its approach reduces cost one-third compared with electric hybrids and adds only 300 lbs (136 kg) to vehicle weight vs. 1,000 lbs (454 kg) for electric hybrids. Under tests the company claim a standard pickup vehicle powered by a 2.3 litre 4 cylinder engine returns 14 mpg (16.8 l/100 km) in city driving. Using the petro-hydraulic setup fuel economy climbs to "the mid 20s".com/vehicles-amp-technology/new-hydraulic-hybrid-system-claims-big-mpg-boost

Internal combustion engine-pneumatic hybrid

Compressed air can also power a hybrid car with a gasoline compressor to provide the power. Motor Development International in France is developing such air-powered cars. A team led by Tsu-Chin Tsao, a UCLA mechanical and aerospace engineering professor, is collaborating with engineers from Ford to get Pneumatic hybrid technology up and running. The system is similar to that of a hybrid-electric vehicle in that braking energy is harnessed and stored to assist the engine as needed during acceleration.

Human power and environmental power hybrids

Many land and water vehicles use human power combined with a further power source. Common are parallel hybrids, e.g. a boat being rowed and also having a sail set, or motorized bicycles, or a human-electric hybrid vehicle such as the Twike. Also some series hybrids exist, see in hybrid vehicle. Such vehicles can be tribrid vehicles, combining at the same time three power sources e.g. from on-board solar cells, from grid-charged batteries, and from pedals.

Hybrid vehicle operation modes

Hybrid vehicles can be used in different modes. The figure shows some typical modes for a parallel hybrid configuration.

Adding powertrains and aftermarket kits

One can install conmarket or aftermarket powertrain to a vehicle to hybridise it.
The conmarket solution is used when the user buys the glider (rolling chassis) and the hybrid (two engines) or all-electric (only an electric motor) powertrain kit to the automaker and receives it installed in the car. Also an (electric or hybrid) powertrain can be added to a glider by a third party aftermarket installer.
A University of Central Florida senior design team, On the Green, is currently developing a bolt-on hybrid conversion kit to transform an older model vehicle into a gas-electric hybrid. Retrieved April 18, 2013.
An example of a conversion using a 1966 Mustang was demonstrated by an engineer in California.  The system replaces the alternator with a 12 kW (30 kW peak) brushless electric motor.  Gas mileage and power were improved. Retrieved April 18, 2013.








