[[Dean Williams (footballer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1972 births, Living people, People from Lichfield, English footballers, Association football goalkeepers, Birmingham City F.C. players, Cobh Ramblers F.C. players, Tamworth F.C. players, Brentford F.C. players, Doncaster Rovers F.C. players, Huddersfield Town F.C. players, Gateshead F.C. players, Telford United F.C. players, Stafford Rangers F.C. players, Aberystwyth Town F.C. players, The Football League players, Players in the Welsh Premier League, The New Saints F.C. players

                                                                                      Total Appearances = 409
Dean Williams (born 5 January 1972) is an English former footballer who played as a goalkeeper. He made nearly 100 appearances in the Football League playing for Birmingham City, Brentford and Doncaster Rovers, and represented Welsh Premier League clubs TNS in the UEFA Cup and Aberystwyth Town in the Intertoto Cup. Dean has made 309 appearances for non-league and Welsh premier clubs. Dean was part-time goalkeeping coach for Telford United and is now Head Coach for dwgk Tamworth 

Playing career

Williams, born in Tamworth, Staffordshire, signed for Birmingham City on schoolboy forms at 14. He made his first-team debut aged 17 at the end of the 1989–90 season, in a 2–1 defeat at home to Notts County. 225. He was one of the youngest ever Goalkeepers or Outfield Players to make his debut and play professional football for Birmingham City Football Club. A spell on loan in Republic of Ireland with Cobh Ramblers followed in 1991. Birmingham used five different goalkeepers, including Alan Miller and Kevin Dearden on loan from Arsenal and Tottenham Hotsput respectively, during the 1991–92 season, but Williams was not one of those five;Matthews, p. 50. he was released in March 1992 and joined Tamworth.
Williams played for Brentford in the 1993–94 season before joining Doncaster Rovers in August 1994. He spent three seasons with the club, making nearly 100 first-team appearances, before moving on to Gateshead in late 1997. Released by the club at the end of the 1997–98 season following their relegation from the Conference, he joined Telford United in August 1998.
In nearly three seasons with TNS, Williams played 72 games in all competitions,
He signed for Aberystwyth Town, playing in the 2004 UEFA Intertoto Cup against Dinaburg and keeping a clean sheet in the first leg,

Later career

Williams joined Telford United as part-time goalkeeping coach in 2008. is a member of the Professional Footballers' Association (PFA)
Dean Williams is also a fully qualified FA Licensed Football Coach with qualifications that include, The FA Youth Award Module 1 and Module 2, The FA Goalkeeping Coaching Award Level 1 and Level 2, FA Psychology, FA Coaching Deaf Footballers, FA Coaching Disabled Footballers, FA Emergency First Aid, FA Futsal Coach, FA Coaching Children, FA Player & Match Analysis, FA Soccer Camp Coach, FA Age Appropriate Coaching, FA Equality Programme, FA Safeguarding Children plus many more. He is a highly qualified coach who has been licensed for 12 years with the FA and constantly updates his continuous professional development (CPD)with the Football Association. Dean is also FA CRB Approved and has valid FA Public & Liability Insurance for the 2013/14 season. Dean is also Head GK Coach for Birmingham County Football Associations Partially Sighted & Deaf Centre of Excellence Team and also Head GK Coach for Team Birmingham Futsal who play in the National League and play Futsal at the International Futsal Arena Dean is very passionate about coaching 5–11-year old Boys and Girls.






