[[Postperfusion syndrome]]

CATEGORIES: Neurological disorders, Cardiac surgery

Postperfusion syndrome, also known as "pumphead", is a constellation of neurocognitive impairments attributed to cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) during cardiac surgery.  Symptoms of postperfusion syndrome are subtle and include defects associated with attention, concentration, short term memory, fine motor function, and speed of mental and motor responses.

Evidence

A study by Newman et al. at Duke University Medical Center published in the New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM) showed an increased incidence of cognitive decline after coronary artery bypass surgery (CABG), both immediately (53 percent at discharge from hospital) and over time (36 percent six weeks, 24 percent at six months, and 42 percent at five years).
Subsequent studies have compared "on-pump" CABG to off-pump coronary artery bypass (OPCAB)—essentially establishing controls to compare the incidence of neurocognitive decline in CABG with and without the use of CPB.  A small study (60 patients total, 30 in each treatment arm) by Zamvar et al. demonstrated neurocognitive impairment at both 1 week and 10 weeks postoperatively.  A larger study (281 patients total) by Van Dijk et al. showed CABG surgery without cardiopulmonary bypass improved cognitive outcomes 3 months after the procedure, but the effects were limited and became negligible at 12 months.  Furthermore, the Van Dijk study showed no difference between the on-pump and off-pump groups in quality of life, stroke rate, or all-cause mortality at 3 and 12 months.  A study by Jenson et al. published in Circulation found no significant difference in the incidence of cognitive dysfunction 3 months after either OPCAB or conventional on-pump CABG.
Given the above evidence, there is high incidence of neurocognitive deficit post bypass surgery, but the deficits are transient with no permanent neurological impairment.  Controlled "on-pump" versus "off-pump" cardiac surgery has only been studied in the setting of CABG and is not necessarily generalizable to other types of cardiac surgery.  Recent advancements in transcatheter and percutaneous valve replacement may soon allow comparison of other types of cardiac surgery with and without CPB.

Neurocognitive deficit as a consequence of vascular disease

A study by McKhann et al. concluded patients with coronary artery bypass grafting did not differ from a comparable nonsurgical control group with coronary artery disease 1 or 3 years after baseline examination. This finding suggests that late cognitive decline after coronary artery bypass grafting previously reported by Newman et al. may not be specific to the use of cardiopulmonary bypass, but may also occur in patients with similar risk factors for cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease.

Proposed mechanism

Physicians have theorized that the syndrome is caused by tiny debris and air bubbles (microemboli) that enter the brain via cardiopulmonary bypass.  Surgeons attempt to minimize time spent on bypass to decrease postoperative deficits; studies have shown increased bypass time is associated with increased incidence and severity of postperfusion syndrome

In the press

Postperfusion syndrome has attracted some public notoriety following the coronary bypasses of former U.S. President Bill Clinton and Vice-President Dick Cheney. The National Enquirer speculated that Clinton experienced permanent debilitating brain damage; using the NEJM article discussed above to provide credibility to the claim.



Further reading






