[[Bad Girls Club]]

CATEGORIES: 2000s American television series, 2010s American television series, 2006 American television series debuts, American reality television series, English-language television programming, Television series by Bunim/Murray Productions, Oxygen network shows, Bad Girls Club



Bad Girls Club (BGC) is an American reality television series created by Jonathan Murray The show focuses on the altercations and physical confrontations of seven highly aggressive, quarrelsome, and unruly women. Each of the women tend to have psychological and behavioral problems. Mischievously sexual and rascally moments are also captured among the women. All seven women have different backgrounds and personalities. They are introduced to the show based off their capacity to be a "charismatic, tough chick." The cast, deemed "bad girls", enjoy a luxurious lifestyle in a fine mansion for three months, during which they must obey specified rules. Their lives inside and outside of the house are chronicled and recorded by the production team.
Bad Girls Club airs in three nations besides the United States; MTV Australia, RTL 5 in The Netherlands, and TV11 in Sweden, and as of December 2013 has not been licensed to a broadcaster in another nation for a local version of the series. The program has been negatively reviewed by critics for the effect it may have on teenagers, and the negative attitudes and remarks of the cast members have caused outrage to some viewers.
The format of the show has changed from early seasons. If a "Bad" Girl breaks a rule, she is evicted from the show and, if it is early in the season, replaced by a new "Bad Girl". The fourth season is considered the series' "breakthrough season", becoming Oxygen's first series ever to average over one million viewers per episode.
There have been four spin-offs of the Bad Girls Club. Bad Girls Road Trip, Tanisha Gets Married, Love Games: Bad Girls Need Love Too - where past cast members seek true love, and Bad Girls All-Star Battle.
Of all the contestants, Kerry Harvick (of season one) was a successful country singer before the show. has her own reality television series entitled Tanisha Gets Married. As of Season 8, she's also been the host of the Bad Girls Club  and Bad Girls All-Star Battle reunion specials.

Format

A central goal of the show has become who can last until the final day. Lasting until the final day without ever being kicked out or leaving for another reason is treated as an impressive feat on the series due to the level of violence and hostility. If the cast members engage in violence towards each other or break other rules, they may or may not be evicted under the show's policy, which is whimsically and fickly enforced by the producers. Security guards apparently live in the house behind the scenes as they jump into camera shot to break up the many violent altercations that break out on the series. Beyond the common occurrence of violence and combat, other reasons for the premature exits of cast members have been fatigue from bullying, ostracism and alienation from the rest of the housemates, problems at home, court proceedings, or their own narcissism. On some occasions, multiple "bad girls" may wish to leave the show; this has happened in all seasons. If a girl departs early in the season, a "replacement Bad Girl" is introduced within one or two episodes. The replacement housemate is commonly hazed, aggressed at, and treated with prejudice.
All or most of the girls typically form cliques between each other; create havoc and antagonize each other; book parties in night clubs; and engage in sexual antics and other mischief, all awhile attempting to maintain their personal lives. Bullying and outnumbering gang attacks (where multiple cast members intimidate one cast member or some other fewer number of cast members) are among regular occurrences on the program. The girls, deemed "bad girls", come from different backgrounds and all different walks of life.
Throughout the show, the "Bad Girls" must adapt to the frequent mood and behavior changes of their housemates. The girls must undergo interviews in reality TV confessionals. They are allowed to contact their families and friends using landline telephones and a computer connected to a large-screen television; however, the cast is prohibited from watching nationally and locally televised programming and using mobile phones.
The Bad Girls Club creed, introduced in season three, is:

Seasons 1 and 2

The format for the first season of Bad Girls Club was different from that of subsequent seasons. The age range for season one was from 21 to 31. The use of nicknames was not introduced until the third season. Season one was the first in which multiple "replacement Bad Girls" entered the show.
Although there were differences in season one, the current rules have applied in all subsequent seasons. One feature continued from season one was the way the show opened: viewers were shown the biggest and most intense physical altercation of the season, and the program then went back to a time before it happened. This fight usually gives you an idea of who is going to be the baddest, or one of the baddest, girls in the house. This altercation draws in many viewers and keeps them wondering what will happen next.
In the second season, the format of the show changed drastically. The maximum age dropped from 31 to 27. The cast of season two were given mandatory non-profit jobs to help them build a work ethic and to experience the stabilizing effect of being interdependent with others, for example in teamwork and commitment, to equip them for success in later life. Quitting the job or failure to attend resulted in mandatory removal from the show. The girls were given the jobs of planning, decision making, and building cooperation. Season two was the first and only season of the Bad Girls Club to do this, and was also the last to air 30-minute episodes.

Live shows

On August 3, 2010, during the OxygenLive TV recap episode, the show combined Facebook and Twitter with a live broadcast. Fans submitted opinions and comments about the show and its cast, which were aired during the 10 pm hour.
In January 2011, Oxygen released OxygenLive!, an online talk show hosted by Tanisha Thomas, one of the "bad girls" of season two. It was broadcast after season six debuted on Oxygen, and focused on the cast of season six, occasionally bringing in "Bad Girls" from earlier seasons. Thomas asked the girls several questions to prompt rumors and confessions.

Seasons

Reception

Many homophobic slurs have caught the attention of media outlets. and wrote, "Just like some teens try to emulate rappers in their dress and behavior, the same is true for 'bad girls. '" She also commented that the show gives a "distorted picture" of how to live the good life, calling the cast "wannabes" who are "sleeping in a mansion they can't pay for". Mitchell believes that most people know the cast are living "a bogus lifestyle", and assesses the message of the Bad Girls Club as "disturbing".
Many adolescents have emulated The Bad Girls Club
Brian Lowry of Variety thought that the producers made the "wrong decision" when they created the show. He believed that the cast of Bad Girls Club auditioned for the show for their "15 minutes of fame". He said that Bad Girls Club "arrived a little late in this game, on a channel lacking the kind of exposure or public footprint to qualify the show even as the stuff guilty pleasures are made of". Lowry believed that the show "loses" and that Oxygen attracts viewers who generally get drunk at bars and make a scene. He also suggested that "maybe it's time to "BAG" these bad-attitude girls and beat a hasty retreat back to the real world".
Anita Gates of The New York Times referred to Bad Girls Club as "a great argument for bringing back programming with actors". She believed that the "average emotional age" appeared to be 15, in contrast to the girls' real ages. She stated that the "unpleasant villains cancel one another out and actually make badness uninteresting", commenting that their behavior might not be "bad enough". Gates concluded by suggesting that Bad Girls Club is the on-location equivalent of The Jerry Springer Show.

Controversies

Season 4

During "Off The Wall", the first episode of the fourth season, Natalie Nunn told Annie Andersen that Chris Brown was at a night club that she wanted to attend, and asked Anderson if she was a fan. Anderson said not, because of the domestic violence case that Brown was involved in. Nunn defended Brown, saying "Who cares, Rihanna was a punk bitch, and she got her ass beat for a reason". Shortly before the end of the reunion, Nunn said that she did not condone domestic violence and apologized if her comment had enraged fans and people who had been victims of it.

Season 5

During the episode "The Wicked Witch Of Key West", a stranger at a bar offered to buy drinks for Kristen Guinane and Christina Marie Hopkins. He spiked the drinks with PCP hallucinogenic pills, and Guinane became intoxicated. She claimed to have suffered bruises on her body when the man grabbed her and handled her roughly. Guinane reported that the producers of the show did not want to identify the man on television for fear of a lawsuit. She blamed the drug for her hitting cast-member, Lea Beaulieu, in the face, leading to a fight.
While Hopkins was intoxicated, one of her friends recorded her making racial slurs about an African American woman who had threatened her. The video surfaced on the Internet and outraged many people.
After season five had wrapped, Catya Washington was sentenced to jail for possession of a concealed weapon and illegal use of drugs.

Season 6

During season six production, residents of Sherman Oaks, Los Angeles, complained that noise levels and swearing were unbearable and inappropriate for them and their children to listen to during the night. The residents called local law enforcement agencies four or five times to deal with the late-night disturbances. Clarissa Keller, a Sherman Oaks resident, complained that she had a six-year-old son and didn't want him to listen to the swearing. She set up a petition calling for a ban on all production companies in the Sherman Oaks hills. Location managers and production crew declined to discuss the neighbors' complaints.
The Bad Girls Club permit required the entire production to abide by a "minimum outdoor activity and noise" rule, but local residents claimed that the show did not keep noise levels down. The house for season six was rented for $20,000 a month. The owner said that he would not allow this type of production to rent his home in the future.

Season 7

On March 13, 2011, TMZ.
On April 12, 2011, cast member Tasha Malek complained to an on-duty police officer outside the Bad Girls house about the conduct of fellow cast member Nastasia Townsend. She claimed that Townsend had placed her personal belongings into a garbage bag, telling her "she needed to leave the house", and that the incident had escalated into a fight.
Malek released a statement saying "I don't think it's right to be gay", offending some LGBT fans of the show.
Judi Jai was arrested on November 9, 2011, on suspicion of DUI. While police searched her car for a sobriety test Jackson climbed out of the squad car and attempted to escape on foot where police found her in a nearby home where later charges of resisting arrest and theft.

Season 8

On March 24, 2012, TMZ reported that cast member Gia Sapp-Hernandez was arrested on assault charges for an altercation with several men in a Myrtle Beach, South Carolina nightclub in which reportedly she bit one of them during an event promoting the show. Sapp-Hernandez then released a statement to TMZ saying that she had been partying with the male accuser earlier that night when he "hinted" that he wanted to have sex with her. When she turned him down he became irate and belligerent and punched her in the face twice and that was when police arrived to the scene, Gia claims the officers "ignored" her accusations instead choosing to believe the man.

Season 10

During auditions at the Dick's Last Resort in Dallas, Texas a fight escalated between several women, leading producers to cancel auditions there. A video of it can be found on YouTube.

Season 11

During the final week in the house, cast member Hailey Wade was attacked by four of her fellow housemates. Earlier on in this season, fellow cast member Shanae Thomas
and Sarah Oliver suffered similar fates, while another cast member, Janelle Shanks, was threatened with said fate.

Season 12

Season 12 had caused a stir among residents in Highland Park, Illinois, the suburb of Chicago where the upcoming season was being filmed.

Cast

 Age at time of filming.

Spin-offs

Bad Girls Road Trip

Bad Girls Road Trip premiered on June 12, 2007. It featured season one cast members Zara Sprankle, Aimee Landi, and Leslie Ramsue touring their respective hometowns in search of casting opportunities for the second season of Bad Girls Club. On the series, they also visited their former housemates.

Love Games: Bad Girls Need Love Too

Love Games: Bad Girls Need Love Too premiered on March 16, 2010. The show follows three past "bad girls" in their search for true love. The first of the Bad Girls Club, and Kendra Jones from the fourth season. The season concluded on April 27, 2010.
Oxygen renewed the show for a second run, The second season consisted of eight one-hour episodes aired between April 18, 2011, and June 13, 2011.
The third season aired on December 5, 2011, with Thomas as host once more, and Kori Koether, Sydney Steinfeldt, and Judi Jai as cast members. Kori Koether and Sydney Steinfeldt were on season six of Bad Girls Club; while Jai was on Season 7.
Season 4 aired on November 5, 2012 with Tanisha Thomas as the host yet again. This marked Tanisha's third time being the host in the series. This season also featured Season 8 girls, Danielle "Danni" Victor, Amy Cieslowski, and Camilla Poindexter as the cast members looking for love.

Bad Girls Club: Flo Gets Married

Bad Girls Club: Flo Gets Married is a one-hour special that centers on season-four cast member Florina "Flo" Kaja, who had a traditional Albanian wedding, and on her pregnancy. It aired on Oxygen on February 28, 2011

Tanisha Gets Married

A documentary series titled Tanisha Gets Married premiered on May 7, 2012. It follows Bad Girls Club season two cast member Tanisha Thomas as she prepares for her wedding. With preparations for the wedding in order issues arise between Tanisha and her soon-to-be husband Clive and the show entails the family drama that occurs. Former "Bad Girls" featured in the series include Natalie Nunn and Florina from season four plus Amber M. from the third season; all appeared as bridesmaids. The series also shows how Natalie and Florina's issues with each other turn violent and it shows how their actions effect Tanisha. The series was produced by 495 Productions with SallyAnn Salsano as executive producer.

Bad Girls All-Star Battle

Bad Girls All-Star Battle show features "Bad" Girls competing for $100,000 and the title of "Baddest Bad Girl of All Time." The series has the girls divided into two teams and they are put to the test every week in an array of physical and mental challenges. It is hosted by R&B singer, Ray J.oxygen.com/blog/bad-girls-club-all-star-battle
Bad Girls All-Star Battle premiered on May 21, 2013, Bad Girls Club season 10 alumni Jenniffer "Jenn" Hardwick winning the competition and season 4 alumni Florina "Flo" Kaja being the runner-up.








