[[Ferrari P4/5 by Pininfarina]]

CATEGORIES: Ferrari concept vehicles, Rear-wheel-drive vehicles, Sports cars, Pininfarina, One-off automobiles, 2000s automobiles, Retro style automobiles, Vehicles introduced in 2006

The Ferrari P4/5 (officially known as the Ferrari P4/5 by Pininfarina) is a one-off sports car made by Italian sports car manufacturer Ferrari but redesigned by Pininfarina for film director and stock exchange magnate James Glickenhaus.
The car was an Enzo Ferrari but the owner James Glickenhaus preferred the styling of Ferrari's 1960s race cars, the P Series.

Development

In March 2005 Glickenhaus, stock exchange magnate and car collector, was approached by Pininfarina who asked if he was interested in commissioning a one-off car. Andrea Pininfarina, grandson of the company's founder later said "The Ferrari 612 Kappa and this P4/5 are the first. But we want to grow this business." indicating that Pininfarina is interested in producing other unique cars. Glickenhaus replied that he would like a modern Ferrari P, and in June of that year he signed a contract with Pininfarina to produce the car including the price, approximately US$4 million though in an interview he said "I feel they gave me more than I expected". Pininfarina's styling team leader, Ken Okuyama said that "Pininfarina wanted to stay away from retro design and move towards a more forward thinking supercar" as they were excited by the opportunity to build the car, not just design it.
Its design began in September 2005 with sketches by Jason Castriota moving through computer aided sculpture and stringent wind tunnel testing. More than 200 components were designed especially for the car. Most components, including the engine, drivetrain, are modified from the original Enzo Ferrari. The Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) is unchanged from the Enzo from which it was derived. The P4/5 was publicly revealed on August 18, 2006 at the Pebble Beach Concours d'Elégance and shown again at the Paris Motor Show in late September.
Upon seeing P 4/5 Luca di Montezemolo felt that the car deserved to be officially badged as a Ferrari and along with Andrea Pininfarina and James Glickenhaus agreed that its official name would be "Ferrari P 4/5 by Pininfarina". Ted West wrote an article in Car and Driver about how this came to be "The Beast of Turin".
On September 2009, Glickenhaus announced his intention to race a new version of the P4/5 in the 2010 24 Hours Nürburgring. The car, called the P4/5 Competizione, would not be a conversion of his road car but instead an entirely new car with a Ferrari chassis, VIN and drivetrain. On May 2010 however, it was revealed that the Competizione would in fact be raced in 2011, based on a 430 Scuderia. It would be built to FIA GT2 standards and raced by Scuderia Cameron Glickenhaus in an Experimental Class under the direction of Paolo Garella, former Head of Special Projects at Pininfarina. Ferrari completely distanced themselves from the P4/5 Competizione project in 2011, refusing to sell the team parts for vital engine rebuilds between races.Jim Glickenhaus via FerrariChat

Specifications

The Ferrari P4/5 can accelerate from 0-100 kilometres per hour (0-62 mph) in 3.0 seconds (0.14 seconds quicker than the Enzo). It has a top speed of , but the sharp nose and smooth curves mean it has a drag coefficient of only 0.34.

Interior

The interior of the P4/5 was designed by Glickenhaus himself with an iPod nano stereo and a tablet PC which features not only GPS but a 3D model of the car as well as a complete parts list and manual for easy servicing. The P4/5 also sports improved air conditioning over the Enzo and a high-strength alloy roll bar redesigned because the original was too thick and obstructed Glickenhaus' view.

Exterior

The exterior of the car is made entirely of carbon fibre reinforced plastic and is similar in shape to the Ferrari 330 P4 as Glickenhaus requested, however it has been called a "rolling history of Ferrari-racing-DNA" sharing elements from several historic Ferrari vehicles, not just the 330 P4. The rear window is similar to that of the Ferrari 512S, the side vents are similar to the Ferrari 330 P3 and the nose is similar to that of the Ferrari 333 SP which improves cooling and the car's frontal crash safety. The butterfly doors (similar to those of the McLaren F1) are designed such that even at  there is no wind noise. The improved aerodynamics give the car greater downforce, yet less drag, than the Enzo, which makes the car more stable than the Enzo at high speeds.

Powertrain

The P4/5 has the same engine as the Enzo Ferrari it was built on, a 65° "F140" Ferrari/Maserati engine V12. The 12 cylinders have a total capacity of  at 7800 rpm. The P4/5 uses the 6 speed semi-automatic transmission of the Enzo with black shifting paddles behind the wheel. It has two directional indicator buttons, one mounted on each side of the steering wheel.

Chassis

Much of the suspension was unchanged from the original Enzo, with the same push-rod suspension at the front and rear, and the same Brembo carbon-ceramic anti-lock disc brakes with diameter of  in diameter, the front tyres have codes of ZR 255/35 and the rear, ZR 335/30.






