[[Paclitaxel]]

CATEGORIES: Bristol-Myers Squibb, Microtubule inhibitors, Mitotic inhibitors, Benzoates, Propionates, Benzamides, Alcohols, Ketones, Acetate esters, Taxanes

Paclitaxel is a mitotic inhibitor used in cancer chemotherapy. It was discovered in a US National Cancer Institute program at the Research Triangle Institute  in 1967 when Monroe E. Wall and Mansukh C. Wani isolated it from the bark of the Pacific yew tree, Taxus brevifolia and named it taxol. Later it was discovered that endophytic fungi in the bark synthesize paclitaxel.
When it was developed commercially by Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS), the generic name was changed to paclitaxel and the BMS compound is sold under the trademark Taxol. In this formulation, paclitaxel is dissolved in Kolliphor EL and ethanol, as a delivery agent.  A newer formulation, in which paclitaxel is bound to albumin, is sold under the trademark Abraxane.
Paclitaxel is used to treat patients with lung, ovarian, breast, head and neck cancer, and advanced forms of Kaposi's sarcoma. Paclitaxel is also used for the prevention of restenosis.
Paclitaxel stabilizes microtubules and, as a result, interferes with the normal breakdown of  microtubules during cell division. Together with docetaxel, it forms the drug category of the taxanes. It was the subject of a notable total synthesis by Robert A. Holton of Florida State University.
While offering substantial improvement in patient care, paclitaxel has been a relatively controversial drug. There was originally concern because of the environmental impact of its original sourcing (no longer used) from the Pacific yew. In addition, the assignment of rights to Bristol-Myers Squibb and even the name itself were the subject of public debate and Congressional hearings. Clinicians sometimes use the abbreviation "PTX" for paclitaxel, although (like many medical abbreviations) it is not a unique identifier. 
It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines, a list of the most important medication needed in a basic health system.

Medical use

Paclitaxel is approved in the UK for ovarian, breast and lung, bladder, prostate, melanoma, esophageal, and other types of solid tumor cancers as well as Kaposi's sarcoma.
It is recommended in NICE guidance of June 2001 that it should be used for nonsmall cell lung cancer in patients unsuitable for curative treatment, and in first-line and second-line treatment of ovarian cancer. In September 2001, NICE recommended paclitaxel should be available for the treatment of advanced breast cancer after the failure of anthracyclic chemotherapy, but that its first-line use should be limited to clinical trials. In September 2006, NICE recommended paclitaxel should not be used in the adjuvant treatment of early node-positive breast cancer.

Similar compounds

Albumin-bound paclitaxel (trade name Abraxane, also called nab-paclitaxel) is an alternative formulation where paclitaxel is bound to albumin nano-particles. Much of the clinical toxicity of paclitaxel is associated with the solvent Cremophor EL in which it is dissolved for delivery.
Abraxis BioScience developed Abraxane, in which paclitaxel is bonded to albumin as an alternative delivery agent to the often toxic solvent delivery method. This was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in January 2005 for the treatment of breast cancer after failure of combination chemotherapy for metastatic disease or relapse within six months of adjuvant chemotherapy."Abraxane Drug Information." Food and Drug Administration. January 7, 2005.
Nanoparticle-bound docetaxel is currently being studied in human clinical trials. AACR 2013 meeting
Synthetic approaches to paclitaxel production led to the development of docetaxel. Docetaxel has a similar set of clinical uses to paclitaxel and is marketed under the name of Taxotere.
Recently the presence of taxanes including paclitaxel, 10-deacetylbaccatin III, baccatin III, paclitaxel C, and 7-epipaclitaxel in the shells and leaves of hazel plants has been reported. The finding of these compounds in shells, which are considered discarded material and are mass-produced by many food industries, is of interest for the future availability of paclitaxel.

Restenosis

Paclitaxel is used as an antiproliferative agent for the prevention of restenosis (recurrent narrowing) of coronary stents; locally delivered to the wall of the coronary artery, a paclitaxel coating limits the growth of neointima (scar tissue) within stents.  Paclitaxel drug eluting coated stents for coronary artery placement are sold under the trade name Taxus by Boston Scientific in the United States. Paclitaxel drug eluting coated stents for femoropopliteal artery placement are sold under the trade name Zilver PTX by Cook Medical, Inc.

Side effects

Common side effects include nausea and vomiting, loss of appetite, change in taste, thinned or brittle hair, pain in the joints of the arms or legs lasting two to three days, changes in the color of the nails, and tingling in the hands or toes. More serious side effects such as unusual bruising or bleeding, pain/redness/swelling at the injection site, change in normal bowel habits for more than two days, fever, chills, cough, sore throat, difficulty swallowing, dizziness, shortness of breath, severe exhaustion, skin rash, facial flushing, female infertility by ovarian damage Leuprolide, a GnRH analog may prevent ovarian damage, according to mice studies.

Mechanism of action

Paclitaxel is one of several cytoskeletal drugs that target tubulin. Paclitaxel-treated cells have defects in mitotic spindle assembly, chromosome segregation, and cell division. Unlike other tubulin-targeting drugs such as colchicine that inhibit microtubule assembly, paclitaxel stabilizes the microtubule polymer and protects it from disassembly. Chromosomes are thus unable to achieve a metaphase spindle configuration.  This blocks progression of mitosis, and prolonged activation of the mitotic checkpoint triggers apoptosis or reversion to the G-phase of the cell cycle without cell division.
The ability of paclitaxel to inhibit spindle function is generally attributed to its suppression of microtubule dynamics,

Research use

Aside from its direct clinical use, paclitaxel is used extensively in biological and biomedical research as a microtubule stabilizer.  In general, in vitro assays involving microtubules, such as motility assays, rely on paclitaxel to maintain microtubule integrity in the absence of the various nucleating factors and other stabilizing elements found in the cell.  For example, it is used for in vitro tests of drugs that aim to alter the behavior of microtubule motor proteins, or for studies of mutant motor proteins.  Paclitaxel is sometimes used for in vivo studies as well; it can be fed to test organisms, such as fruit flies, or injected into individual cells, to inhibit microtubule disassembly or to increase the number of microtubules in the cell.  Paclitaxel induces remyelination in a demyelinating mouse in vivo  Angiotech Pharmaceuticals Inc. began phase II clinical trials in 1999MS Society of Canada Phase II Clinical trial of Micellar Paclitaxel for secondary-progressive MS underway in Canada as a multiple sclerosis treatment but in 2002, reported that the results showed no statistical significance.MS Society of Canada Angiotech Halts Study of Micellar Paclitaxel stating no benefit of statistical significance seen

Derivatives

In recent years, extensive research has been done to find a way to mitigate the side effects of paclitaxel, by altering its administration. DHA-paclitaxel, PG-paclitaxel, and tumor-activated Taxol prodrugs are undergoing continued testing, and are actually on the way to being introduced into widespread clinical use.
Protarga has linked paclitaxel to docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), a fatty acid easily taken up by tumor cells; the DHA-paclitaxel "appears not to be cytotoxic until the bond with DHA is cleaved within the cell." The advantage of DHA-paclitaxel over paclitaxel is DHA-paclitaxel's ability to carry much higher concentrations of paclitaxel to the cells, which are maintained for longer periods in the tumor cells, thus increasing their action. With increased activity, DHA-paclitaxel, also known as Taxoprexin, may have a more successful response in cancer patients than paclitaxel, and it may be able to treat more types of cancer than paclitaxel has been able to treat.
Cell Therapeutics has formulated PG-paclitaxel, which is paclitaxel bonded to a polyglutamate polymer; tumor cells are significantly more porous to polyglutamate polymers than normal cells, due to the leaky endothelial membranes of tumor cells. PG-paclitaxel has been introduced into clinical use, and has proven to initiate very mild side effects and to effectively treat many patients who were not responsive to the action of Taxol. The PG-paclitaxel may be a very promising anticancer drug, as it is much more selective than paclitaxel for which cells it targets.
ImmunoGen has been introducing tumor-activated prodrug (TAP) technology in recent years, and is now working to apply this technology to paclitaxel. Tumor-activated Taxol prodrugs are designed for accurate targeting, by the action of a monoclonal antibody that is very specific to certain cells. Tumor-activated Taxol prodrugs research is progressing, and, in mice, the "taxane-based TAP completely eradicated human tumour xenografts at non-toxic doses."
ANG1005 is made up of one molecule of a peptide called angiopep-2 joined with three molecules of paclitaxel.  It is in phase I clinical trials for some types of cancer.

Production

From 1967 to 1993, almost all paclitaxel produced was derived from bark from the Pacific yew, the harvesting of which kills the tree in the process. The processes used were descendants of the original isolation method of Wall and Wani; by 1987, the NCI had contracted Hauser Chemical Research of Boulder, Colorado, to handle bark on the scale needed for Phase II and III trials. While there was considerable uncertainty about how large the wild population of Taxus brevifola was and what the eventual demand for taxol would be, it had been clear for many years that an alternative, sustainable source of supply would be needed. Initial attempts used needles from the tree, or material from other related Taxus species, including cultivated ones, but these attempts were bedevilled by the relatively low and often highly variable yields obtained. It was not until the early 1990s, at a time of increased sensitivity to the ecology of the forests of the Pacific Northwest, that taxol was successfully extracted on a clinically useful scale from these sources.
From the late 1970s, chemists in the US and France had been interested in taxol. A number of US groups, including one led by Robert A. Holton, attempted a total synthesis of the molecule, starting from petrochemical-derived starting materials. This work was primarily motivated as a way of generating chemical knowledge, rather than with any expectation of developing a practical production technique. By contrast, the French group of Pierre Potier at the CNRS quickly recognized the problem of yield. His laboratory was on a campus populated by the related yew Taxus baccata, so needles were available locally in large quantity. By 1981, he had shown that it was feasible to isolate relatively large quantities of the compound 10-deacetylbaccatin, a plausible first step for a semisynthetic production route to taxol. By 1988 he copublished such a semisynthetic route from needles of T. baccata.
The view of the NCI, however, was even this route was not practical.
By 1988, and particularly with Potier's publication, it was clear to Holton as well a practical semisynthetic production route would be important. By late 1989, Holton's group had developed a semisynthetic route to paclitaxel with twice the yield of the Potier process. Florida State University, where Holton worked, signed a deal with Bristol-Myers Squibb to license this and future patents. In 1992, Holton patented an improved process with an 80% yield.  BMS took the process in-house and started to manufacture paclitaxel in Ireland from 10-deacetylbaccatin isolated from the needles of the European yew. In early 1993, BMS was able to announce that it would cease reliance on Pacific yew bark by the end of 1995, effectively terminating the ecological controversy over its use. This announcement also made good their commitment to develop an alternative supply route, made to the NCI in their CRADA application of 1989.
Another group, led by K.C. Nicolaou of the Scripps Research Institute, announced the complete synthesis of paclitaxel at the same time (in February 1994) as Holton's group at Florida State University. Holton argued that his technique was superior to Nicolaou because of the higher yield, whereas Nicolaou said that their yields would be similar if Holton had calculated the yield at every step instead of at an intermediate point of his synthesis.
Currently, all paclitaxel production for BMS uses plant cell fermentation (PCF) technology developed by the Ithaca, New York biotechnology company Phyton Biotech, Inc and carried out at their plant in Germany.
In 1993, taxol was discovered to be produced in a newly described endophytic fungus living in the yew tree.

Biosynthesis

The core synthetic route is via a terpenoid pathway, parts of which having been successfully transplanted into production strains of E.coli

History

The plant screening program, isolation, and preclinical trials

In 1955, the National Cancer Institute (NCI) in the United States set up the Cancer Chemotherapy National Service Center (CCNSC) to act as a public screening center for anticancer activity in compounds submitted by external institutions and companies.[ref]
