[[University of the Philippines School of Library and Information Studies]]

CATEGORIES: University of the Philippines Diliman, Information schools, Educational institutions established in 1961, 1961 establishments in the Philippines

The School of Library and Information Studies of the University of the Philippines or UP-SLIS is the oldest library school in the Philippines. Formally established in March 1961 as the Institute of Library Science, it can trace it roots to 1914, making it one of the first library schools in Asia. It is an independent degree-granting unit of the University of the Philippines Diliman, and offers programs in the field of Library and Information Science.
The UP-SLIS is situated at the South Wing, 3rd Floor, Gonzalez Hall, University of the Philippines Diliman, Quezon City. When all colleges and units of the National Science Complex (NSC) would have already transferred to the NSC's buildings, UP-SLIS shall move into and occupy the Zoology building which shall become its permanent home.

Academics

Starting in 1995, the School offered the Bachelor of Library and Information Science. The program aims to prepare students for career opportunities in professional librarianship, publishing and book trade, and information-related business. This program replaced the Bachelor of Library Science. A new curriculum introduced in 2002 integrated the University's Revised General Education Program and offered several specialization tracks, including archives and records management, health and medical librarianship, information systems, and law librarianship. Since 1962, the then Institute offered a Master of Library Science Program, the first in the country, and has since been updated as Master of Library and Information Science.
Aside from the undergraduate and graduate programs, the School also offers a one year program in librarianship and conducts review courses and simulation exams for the Licensure Examination for Librarians.

Degree programs

History

The School can trace its roots back to 1914, thirty years after Melvil Dewey established the first School of Library Economy in Columbia College. Library courses were offered under the College of Liberal Arts under James Alexander Robertson, UP's first library science professor. This made the University the first library school in the Philippines, and one of the first in Asia. The first full library studies program was offered two years later, in 1916.
In March 1961, the Institute of Library Science was formally established, and a year later, the institute established its graduate program. From 1978 to 1984, the Institute was selected by UNESCO as the host institution to the Postgraduate Training Course for Science Information Specialists in Southeast Asia. In 2002, the Institute was renamed into the Institute of Library and Information Science in order to keep up with the nomenclature for the field. This required the institute to set up the first IT Applications Lab and Computer Lab for a library school in the Philippines. On March 27, 2007, the Board of Regents approved the Institute's petition to rename itself as the School of Library and Information Studies.
Limited space requirements and dilapidated conditions of the current location of the UP-SLIS at the Third Floor of the Gonzalez Hall prompted the school to launch a building fund to raise funds for the construction or renovation of a building for the transfer of its physical facilities in April 2007. Currently, it has reserved the Institute of Biology building as the future site for any such transfer. The building was chosen due to its proximity to the Main Library, which serves as the laboratory for LIS students. UPLSAA Newsletter May-Oct 2009.
Graduates from the school consistently top and register the highest passing rates (93% Passing rate out of the 30% National Average in 2005,Results of the 2005 Licensure Examination for Librarians. Inquirer News Service. 95% in 2006Results of the 2006 Licensure Examination for Librarians. Inquirer News Service. and 98% in 2007,UP SLIS graduates garner 5 out of ten top places in librarians' licensure examination. UP Post 85% in 2008,237 pass Librarian Licensure Examination. ABS-CBNNews. 96% in 2009November 2009 Librarian Licensure Examination results released in two (2) days. Professional Regulation Commission Website.  and 97% in 2010November 2010 Librarian Licensure Examination results released in two (2) days) in the Licensure Examination for Librarians.

Heads

Heads of the UP School of Library and Information Studies

Publications

The UP-SLIS publishes the Journal of Philippine Librarianship, the only academic journal in all fields in the area of library and information science in the country. Aside from scholastic and thematic articles, it also publishes abstracts to graduate and undergraduate theses submitted to the school. In 2008, it started limited publication of its print version and has since been made available through the  University of the Philippines Diliman Journals Online portal. The school publishes the information sheet SLIS Newsletter (available online through the official website) and its library produces guides, updates and current awareness services.

Organizations

Images

File:UPSchoolofLibraryandInformationStudiesjf3350 07.JPG|Entrance inscription
File:UPLibraryjf3303 02.JPG|Gonzales hall
File:UPLibraryjf3303 15.JPG|Facade
File:UPSchoolofLibraryandInformationStudiesjf3334 01.JPG|Seal and logo
File:UPSchoolofLibraryandInformationStudiesjf3334 15.JPG|Left side
File:UPSchoolofLibraryandInformationStudiesjf3334 14.JPG|Bulwagang Dangal

Notes



Community Websites


