[[Uposatha]]

CATEGORIES: Buddhist festivals, Festivals in India, Buddhist holidays

The Uposatha () is Buddhist day of observance, in existence from the Buddha's time (500 BCE), and still being kept today in Buddhist countries. 
Kariyawasam (1995), ch. 3, also underlines the continuity of the ancient uposatha practice in Sri Lanka: "The poya for uposatha observance, which is as old as Buddhism itself, has been followed by the Sinhala Buddhists up to the present day, even after the Christian calendar came to be used for secular matters. Owing to its significance in the religious life of the local Buddhists, all the full-moon days have been declared public holidays by the government."[/ref][ref]The uposatha day is sometimes likened to the Judeo-Christian notion of the Sabbath.  Pali English dictionaries that define "Uposatha" as "Sabbath," are Buddhadatta (2002), p. 63, and, and PED(Rhys-Davids & Stede,1921-25), p. 151. 
For an example of the Uposatha being equated with Sabbath by a modern Buddhist master, see Mahasi (undated), p. 2, where he writes: "For lay people, these rules discipline comprise the eight precepts which Buddhist devotees observe on the Sabbath days (uposatha) and during periods of meditation."  Harvey (1990), p. 192, also refers to the uposatha as "sabbath-like."[/ref] The Buddha taught that the Uposatha day is for "the cleansing of the defiled mind," resulting in inner calm and joy.70: Muluposatha Sutta. On this day, lay disciples and monks intensify their practice, deepen their knowledge and express communal commitment through millennia-old acts of lay-monastic reciprocity. On these days, the lay followers make a conscious effort to keep the Five Precepts or (as the tradition suggests) the Eight Precepts. It is a day for practicing the Buddha's teachings and meditation.

Observance days

Depending on the culture and time period, uposatha days have been observed from two to six days each lunar month.

Theravada countries

In general, Uposatha is observed about once a week in Theravada countries, with the full moon being the most important one, followed by the new moon. Each lunar month has eight days after both the new moon and full moon Uposatha days and then either six or seven days after the other two quarter moon Uposatha days. Thus, in relation to the Gregorian calendar's seven-day week, sometimes there are two uposatha days in a week (such as occurred the week of August 17, 2006, when uposatha days fell on August 17 and August 23, 2006) and sometimes there are none (such as occurred the week of January 15, 2006, which fell between uposatha days on January 14 and January 22, 2006).  Nonetheless, there are four uposatha days a month and the average solar month's week has one uposatha day. in accordance with the four phases of the moon: the new moon, the full moon, and the two quarter moons in between. 151-2): 
According to the Pali English Dictionary (Rhys Davids and Stede, 1921-25, pp. 16, 152), the lunar month's eighth day (that is, the eighth day after the new moon) and twenty-third day (which is the eighth day after the full moon) are called in Pali atthama, which literally means the "eighth," that is, the eighth day of the lunar half-month.[/ref] In some communities, such as in Sri Lanka, only the new moon and full moon are observed as uposatha days. 24, 307 n. 26.  Nyanaponika & Bodhi refers to the quarter-moon days as "semi-Uposatha." Harvey (1990), p. 192, states that the uposatha is observed "at the full-moon, new-moon and, less importantly, two half-moon days."  He goes on to state: "Except at times of major festivals, observance uposatha days are attended only by the more devout, who spend a day and night at their local monastery." Kariyawasam (1995), ch. 3, makes a similar observation in regards to modern Sinhalese society: "The popular practice is to observe Eight Precepts on full-moon days, and, among a few devout lay Buddhists, on the other phases of the moon as well."  
In Burma, Uposatha (called 

Mahayana countries

In Mahayana countries that use the Chinese calendar, the Uposatha days are observed six times a month, on the 8th, 14th, 15th, 23rd and final two days of each lunar month.  In Japan, these six days are known as the .

Names of Full Moon Uposatha Days

The Pali names of the uposatha days are based on the Sanskrit names of the nakśatra (Pali: nakkhatta), the constellations or lunar mansions through which the moon passes within a lunar month.v. 'nakśatra'.

History

The word "uposatha" is derived from the Sanskrit word "upavasatha," which refers to the pre-Buddhistic fast day that preceded Vedic sacrifices. 1  151).  
In the Buddha's time, some ascetics used the new and full moon as opportunities to present their teachings.  The Uposatha Day was instituted by the Buddha at the request of King Bimbisara, and the Buddha instructed the monks to give teachings to the laypeople on this day, and told the monks to recite the Patimokkha every second Uposatha day. 240-41. Also see Khantipalo (1982a) and Pali English Dictionary(Rhys Davids & Stede, 1921-25, p. 152).

Practice

Lay practice

On each uposatha day, devout lay people practice the Eight Precepts.Perhaps echoing the Buddha's teaching that laypeople should "imitate" arahants on Uposatha days (see, for instance, "The Uposatha Observance Discourse" in Nyanaponika & Bodhi, 1999, pp. 216-18 or, using comparable wording, in Nanavara & Khantasilo, 1993), Nyanaponika & Bodhi (1999), p. 307, n. 26, mention: "... The Eight Precepts are modelled after the Ten Precepts observed by novice monks, except that the seventh and eighth precepts for the novices are combined, the ninth novice precept becomes the eighth, and the tenth novice precept (non-acceptance of gold and silver, use of money) is excluded as being impracticable for a lay person."  
For lay practitioners who live near a monastery, the uposatha is an opportunity for them to visit a local monastery, make offerings, listen to Dhamma talks by monks and participate in meditation sessions.
For lay practitioners unable to participate in the events of a local monastery, the uposatha is a time to intensify one's own meditation and Dhamma practice,Bullitt (2005); and, Khantipalo (1982a). for instance, meditating an extra session or for a longer time,Khantipalo (1982a). reading or chanting special suttas,[ref]Khantipalo (1982a), for instance, suggests reading one of the following:

Monastic practice

On the new-moon and full-moon uposatha, in monasteries where there are four or more bhikkhus,Rhys Davids & Oldenberg (1881), p. 281. the local Sangha will recite the Patimokkha. Before the recitation starts, the monks will confess any violations of the disciplinary rules to another monk or to the Sangha. 63, and Bullitt (2005). Depending on the speed of the Patimokkha chanter (one of the monks), the recitation may take from 30 minutes to over an hour. Depending on the monastery, lay people may or may not be allowed to attend.

Communal reciprocity

Describing his experience of Uposatha day in Thailand, Khantipalo (1982a) writes:
"Early in the morning lay people give almsfood to the bhikkhus who may be walking on almsround, invited to a layman's house, or the lay people may take the food to the monastery. Usually lay people do not eat before serving their food to the bhikkhus and they may eat only once that day.... Before the meal the laity request the Eight Precepts the bhikkhus ..., which they promise to undertake for a day and night. It is usual for lay people to go to the local monastery and to spend all day and night there.... monasteries where there is more study, people will hear as many as three or four discourses on Dhamma delivered by senior bhikkhus and they will have books to read and perhaps classes on Abhidhamma to attend....  In a meditation monastery ..., most of their time will be spent mindfully employed – walking and seated meditation with some time given to helping the bhikkhus with their daily duties. So the whole of this day and night (and enthusiastic lay people restrict their sleep) is given over to Dhamma...."

Special uposatha days

In Thailand five full-moon uposatha days are of special significance and are called puja, 'days of worship', :Bullitt (2005). Bullitt orders these special uposatha days in accordance with the Gregorian calendar, where Magha Uposatha thus starts the calendar year.  However, in accordance with Asian lunar calendars, where the new year starts in mid April, Visakha Uposatha is the first special uposatha day of the year.  The lunar calendar ordering of these days is maintained in this article for primarily two reasons: Visakha Uposatha is the most important of the uposatha festivals; and, ordering these uposatha days in this manner (i.e., Visakha Uposatha Day, Asalha Uposatha Day, Magha Uposatha Day) celebrates the Triple Gem (Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha) in the order in which it is traditionally enumerated.  Also see Kariyawasam, ch. 3, "Poya Days," where he identifies the relevance of all twelve full-moon uposatha days in contemporary Sinhala culture.
is the most sacred Buddhist holiday. It is the anniversary of the Buddha's birth, awakening and parinibbana.
Anniversary of the Buddha's delivering the "Anapanasati Sutta." This event is not connected to an Uposatha (Poya) day in Sri Lanka and perhaps is particular to Thailand.  After that month passes, the Buddha delivers the core instructions of the Anapanasati Sutta, instructions which have guided lay people and monastics to higher achievement for millennia.  Thus, given this canonical chronology,  Anapanasati Day is celebrated a lunar month after Pavarana Day. 
Anniversary of the assembling of 1250 monks in the Buddha's presence during which time he delivered the "Ovada-Patimokkha Gatha."The three-line Ovada-Patimokkha Gatha (Pali: "Patimokkha Exhortation Verse") (translated in Dhammayut Order in the United States of America, 1994) includes the Buddha's famous dictum: "Not doing any evil, doing what is skillful, purifying one's own mind, this is the Buddha's teaching."  This verse is familiar to many Westerners because it is rehashed in the widely popular Dhammapada, chapter XIV, verses 183-85 (Thanissaro, 1997a).
In Sri Lanka three full moon Uposatha or Poya days are of special significance.accesstoinsight.html#ch3 Kariyawasam, ch. 3, "Poya Days."



Notes






