[[God in Islam]]

CATEGORIES: Allah, Conceptions of God, Islamic theology

In Islamic theology, God ()F.E. Peters, Islam, p.4, Princeton University Press, 2003
In Islam, there are 99 Names of God (). Creation and ordering of the universe is seen as an act of prime mercy for which all creatures sing God's glories and bear witness to God's unity and lordship. God responds to those in need or distress whenever they call. Above all, God guides humanity to the right way, "the holy ways."Britannica Encyclopedia, Islam, p. 3

Etymology

Allāh is the term with no plural or gender used by Muslims and Arabic speaking Christians and Jews meaning the one God, while  in Berber or "Zot" in Albanian.

Evidence

The Islamic concept of God is formulated from the Quran and Hadith. The Quran is believed by Muslims to be the verbatim word of God as revealed to the Islamic prophet Muhammad. Hadith are the records of Muhammad's sayings and example. Hadith Qudsi is a sub-category of hadith, which Muslims regard as the words of God repeated by Muhammad. According to as-Sayyid ash-Sharif al-Jurjani, the Hadith Qudsi differ from the Quran in that the former are "expressed in Muhammad's words", whereas the latter are the "direct words of God".

Oneness

Islam's most fundamental concept is a strict monotheism called tawhīd, affirming that God (Arabic: Allah) is one and incomparable (), or, "I testify there are no deities other than God alone." The Qur'an asserts the existence of a single and absolute truth that transcends the world; a unique and indivisible being who is independent of the entire creation. Cornell, Encyclopedia of Religion, Vol 5, pp.3561-3562

Muslims reject the Christian doctrine of the Trinity and divinity of Jesus, comparing it to polytheism. In Islam, God is beyond all comprehension or equal and does not resemble any of his creations in any way. Thus, Muslims are not iconodules and are not expected to visualize God.
According to Vincent J. Cornell, the Qur'an also provides a monist image of God by describing the reality as a unified whole, with God being a single concept that would describe or ascribe all existing things: "God is the First and the Last, the Outward and the Inward; God is the Knower of everything." (Sura ) Some Muslims have however vigorously criticized interpretations that would lead to a monist view of God for what they see as blurring the distinction between the creator and the creature, and its incompatibility with the monotheism of Islam. Gottlie (2006), p.210
The indivisibility of God implies the indivisibility of God's sovereignty which in turn leads to the conception of a universe as a just and coherent moral universe rather than an existential and moral chaos. Similarly the Qur'an rejects the binary modes of thinking such as the idea of duality of God by arguing that both good and evil generate from God's creative act and that the evil forces have no power to create anything. God in Islam is a universal god rather than a local, tribal or parochial one; an absolute who integrates all affirmative values and brooks no evil.96
Tawhid constitutes the foremost article of the Muslim profession.D. Gimaret, Tawhid, Encyclopedia of Islam To attribute divinity to a created entity is the only unpardonable sin mentioned in the Qur'an. Muslims believe that the entirety of the Islamic teaching rests on the principle of Tawhid.203

Other attributes

God is described and referred in the Quran and hadith by certain names or attributes (see Names of God in Islam)., which includes a cluster of more than a dozen divine epithets."Böwering, Gerhard. "God and his Attributes ."  Encyclopaedia of the Qurʾān. The most commonly used names for god in Islam are:
Islamic theology makes a distinction between the attributes of God and the divine essence.
Furthermore, it is one of the fundamentals in Islam that God exists without a place and has no resemblance to his creation. For instance, God is not a body and there is nothing like him. In the Quran it says: "Nothing is like him in any way." (see Quran 42:11) Allah is not limited to dimensions.

Mercy

The most commonly used names in the primary sources are Al-Rahman, meaning "Most Compassionate" and Al-Rahim, meaning "Most Merciful". God is said to love forgiving, with a hadith stating God would replace a sinless people with one who sinned but still asked repentance.

Omniscience

The Qur'an describes God as being fully aware of everything that happens in the universe, including private thoughts and feelings, and asserts that one can not hide anything from God:


Relationship with creation

Muslims believe that creation of everything in the universe is brought into being by God's sheer command, "Be' and so it is",

Comparative theology

Islamic theology identifies God as described in the Qur'an as the same god of Israel who covenanted with Abraham. The Quran's Allah is the same Creator God who covenanted with Abraham". Islam and Judaism alike reject the Trinity of Trinitarian Christianity, instead teaching that God is a singular entity beside whom no one else should be worshiped. However, the identification of God both in Islam and in Christianity with the God of Abraham led to a limited amount of mutual recognition among the Abrahamic religions.[ref]Ludovico Marracci (1734), the confessor of Pope Innocent XI, states:
William Montgomery Watt, Islam and Christianity today: A Contribution to Dialogue, Routledge, 1983, p.45 
  That both Mohammed and those among his followers who are reckoned orthodox, had and continue to have just and true notions of God and his attributes, appears so plain from the Koran itself and all the Muslim laws, that it would be loss of time to refute those who suppose the God of Mohammed to be different from the true God.  
[/ref]



Portals

Notes

Bibliography




