[[Second Book of Nephi]]

CATEGORIES: Books of the Book of Mormon

The Second Book of Nephi  is the second book of the Book of Mormon. The book is usually referred to as Second Nephi, and is abbreviated "2 Ne." According to the book, it was written by the ancient prophet Nephi, son of Lehi, who lived around 600 BC.
Unlike the First Book of Nephi, this book contains little history of the Nephite people, but instead discusses visions and prophecies of Nephi himself and other ancient prophets, such as Isaiah.

Narrative

Lehi's Last Counsel

Second Nephi begins with the prophecies of Lehi concerning the future of his seed, and speaks to his posterity. As Lehi is old and will soon die, he wishes to bestow blessings upon his children. .  
Lehi relates a vision whereby he knew that Jerusalem was destroyed, and he says that had they remained in the city they would have perished. He emphasizes that if the people are righteous, they will prosper; but if they are wicked, they will be destroyed. This is a general blessing and curse upon all peoples who inhabit the land where Lehi and his family lived.
In 2 Nephi chapter 2, Lehi expounds to Jacob about the redemption and salvation through Jesus..
To Joseph, he talks about his namesake, which includes Joseph of Egypt. He quotes some of the lost prophecies by Joseph. Joseph predicted that the Lord would raise up Moses to free the people of Israel. He also predicted that a seer named after Joseph, and whose father's name is also Joseph, would the Lord raise up, for the purpose of restoring Israel.. 
On 2 Nephi verses 23 and 24 mentions that the descendants of Joseph (Lehi's son) would not be destroyed "for they shall hearken unto the words of the book" (this books seems to be The Book of Mormon). Then on verse 24, most likely referring to his posterity it says "there shall rise up one mighty among them, who shall do much good, both in word and deed (...)". While the references suggest he is Joseph Smith, this seems contradictory as he is not a descendant of Lehi. Therefore it is not clear who this person may be. 
Lehi blesses Zoram, the servant of Laban who had thrown in his lot with Nephi, as long as he and his seed obey the commandments of the Lord. To the children of his sons Laman and Lemuel he says that if their parents teach them wickedness, that their sins will be the responsibility of the parents..

Division of the People

Nephi continues the narrative by recording the death of Lehi..
After the death of Lehi, Laman and Lemuel and others rebel against Nephi and try to kill him..
Nephi also begins arming his people using the sword that Laban had as a model for production..

Jacob Preaches

Nephi ordains his younger brothers Jacob and Joseph as teachers over the people of Nephi.. The remainder of Second Nephi is a recording of their (Jacob's and Nephi's) teachings and prophecies.
A speech that Jacob delivered to the people of Nephi is recorded in chapters 6-10. Jacob quotes passages from Isaiah. He prophesies that the destruction of the people in Jerusalem has already happened..

Nephi Quotes Isaiah, Gives Final Counsel

Nephi then records in the book  more of Isaiah— chapters 2, The House of Israel is described as having three parts, and Nephi prophesies that one day all their writings would be restored and made known one to the other.
"And it shall come to pass that the Jews shall have the words of the Nephites, and the Nephites shall have the words of the Jews; and the Nephites and the Jews shall have the words of the lost tribes of Israel; and the lost tribes of Israel shall have the words of the Nephites and the Jews." 
Nephi ends his record by pleading with the reader to follow the Savior's example and be baptized,.

Doctrine

According to Daniel H. Ludlow, four different men named Joseph are referred to in 2 Nephi chapter 3 as follows:Daniel H. Ludlow, A Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon, p. 128
(1) Joseph who was sold into Egypt; he is also known as Joseph the son of Jacob (Israel) -- verses 4-22.
(2) Joseph the son of Lehi -- verses 1-3, 22-25.
(3) Joseph Smith, Sr., the father of the prophet -- verse 15.
(4) Joseph Smith, Jr., the prophet -- verses 7-9,11,14-15,18-19.
According to Larry Dahl, the doctrine of Christ as explained by Nephi in 2 Nephi includes the following elements:Larry Dahl, "The Doctrine of Christ: 2 Nephi 31-32," in The Book of Mormon: Second Nephi, The Doctrinal Structure, p. 356
1. Approaching the task "with full purpose of heart, acting no hypocrisy and no deception before God, but with real intent" (2 Nephi 31:13)
2. Seeking understanding, to be "brought into the light," through prayer and effort (2 Nephi 32:4, 8-9)
3. "Repenting of your sins" (2 Nephi 31:13)
4. Being "willing to take upon you the name of Christ, by baptism--yea, by following your Lord and your Savior down into the water" (2 Nephi 31:13)
5. Receiving "the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost." (2 Nephi 31:13)
6. Pressing "forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men and feasting upon the word of Christ" (2 Nephi 31:20; 32:3)
7. Enduring "to the end" (2 Nephi 31:20)
8. Receiving the promise of eternal life (2 Nephi 31:20).



Notes

Further reading

 | editor-last= Nyman 
 | editor-first= Monte
 | editor-link= Monte S. Nyman
 | editor2-last= Tate
 | editor2-first= Charles D.
 | title= The Book of Mormon: Second Nephi, the Doctrinal Structure
 | series= Book of Mormon Symposium Series (Volume 3)
 | url= 
 | location= Provo, Utah
