[[Cavalier (comics)]]

CATEGORIES: Characters created by James Robinson, DC Comics supervillains, Fictional gay males, Golden Age supervillains, LGBT supervillains, Comics characters introduced in 1943, Characters created by Bob Kane, Fictional vigilantes, Comics characters introduced in 1992

 
The Cavalier is a fictional supervillain in the DC Comics universe. The character first appeared in Detective Comics #81, (November 1943), and was created by Don Cameron and Bob Kane.

Fictional character biography

Mortimer Drake

Mortimer Drake was a man of exotic and idiosyncratic taste. When he found himself unable to purchase more exotic valuables for his collection legally, he resorted to theft. Donning a costume resembling that of a Musketeer, he called himself the Cavalier. His course of actions ultimately brought him into conflict with Batman and Robin. 
Drake matched wits against Batman and Robin several times, and escaped them in each encounter, but Batman was able to deduce the Cavalier's identity, leading to Drake's eventual imprisonment.
In Batman Family #10, Batgirl and Batwoman teamed up to defeat the Cavalier. Cavalier could not find a way around his code, which prevented hitting females, but after a self-examination he concludes "the devil with gallantry" and hit Batgirl with his fist. 
A few issues later in Batman Family #15, Killer Moth bet Cavalier that he could find the way into the Batcave from Batgirl before the Cavalier could get it off of Robin. While Killer Moth was led to a fake cave, Cavalier was shown a large nest, to which the Cavalier came to the conclusion that Robin was an alien bird life form.
Before Crisis on Infinite Earths the Cavalier existed both on Earth One and Earth Two. The stories where he harmed women, something that neither the Earth-One nor Earth-Two versions of him would ever do, can be assigned to the alternate world of Earth-B, an alternate Earth that included stories that could not be considered canonical on Earth-One or Earth-Two.letter page on Who's Who the Definitive Directory to the DC Universe #9 (November, 1985)
Post-Crisis, Cavalier appeared in Justice League America #43-44 as part of a group of supervillain drinking buddies who were trying to regain their lost items of power. He was defeated by Blue Beetle, who clotheslined him in an alleyway.
During Knightfall, he faced Batman once again but was defeated with ease. Cavalier had become insane and was kept in Arkham Asylum. It remains to be seen how Drake went insane, or if his origin has changed because of the first crisis. The Cavalier was in a closeted gay relationship with Captain Stingaree, another low-level Batman villain.
He appeared in Justice League of America #2 as an informant for Black Lightning within The Society.
His back was broken by Bane in Secret Six #7, but he acted as a bodyguard for Leslie Thompkins in Battle for the Cowl: Gotham Gazette. In Red Robin #16 he is shown to still be acting as a bodyguard to Dr. Thompkins.
The Cavalier's re-entry into active crime followed, when he was seen attempting multiple small heists around Gotham, only to be foiled each time by Batman or Catwoman. However, those small crimes were merely an attempt to hide his role as the mastermind behind the embezzlement of millions of dollars from the Wayne Enterprises pension fund. Eventually, Batman and Catwoman, working together, were able to follow the money trail to Drake, expose his role in the embezzlement, and return the funds. (Batman/Catwoman: Follow the Money #1, Jan. 2011) 
Cavalier reappears in Gotham City in The New 52 (which takes place after the events of Flashpoint) now amped up on Venom. He is shown battling Batwoman. 2) #2 (October 2011)

Hudson Pyle

In Batman: Legends of the Dark Knight #32-34 (June-July 1992) writer James Robinson and Tim Sale introduced a new Cavalier by the name of Hudson Pyle into the Batman official continuity in his story-arc entitled Blades. Since Blades takes place early on in Batman's career, Hudson Pyle is actually the original Cavalier, and therefore may have even influenced Mortimer Drake.
In Blades, Pyle, an ex-Hollywood stuntman looking for fame, becomes The Cavalier, a masked crime-fighting vigilante that brandishes a razor-sharp sword, quick wit, and handsome smile. It is not long before the people of Gotham fall in love with the new hero.  While Pyle's motives and actions are revealed to be honorable, he harbors a dark secret which ultimately leads to his downfall. Pyle is in love with a woman who is being blackmailed by gangsters, and as a result of this winds up being blackmailed as well.  In order to save his love, Pyle is forced to commit burglaries and thus loses the confidence of the people. 
Pyle soon kills the gangsters. He comes into conflict with Batman, defeating him in a sword duel. He leaves Batman, who is unable to move due to a leg injury and purposely charges nearby police officers. He is gunned down and dies of his injuries.
The beginning of the Blackest Night series shows that his remains are in the Justice League's storage facilities for dead super-villains.Blackest Night #4 (December 2009)

Powers and abilities

The Cavalier has no superhuman abilities; he is however, an athlete, a skilled hand-to-hand combatant, and a swordsman. He carries a rapier that emits electric blasts. The feather plume on the Cavalier's hat is actually a steel tipped dart.

Other versions

Cavalier appears in a 5-page back up story in The Batman Adventures #1. His portrayal is a cross between Robin Hood and Zorro, in stealing from those he perceives rich and using his sword to slash a large "C" in that person's clothes, and is supposedly based on the Hudson Pyle Cavalier.

In other media

Television

Radio








