[[The Stone Roses]]

CATEGORIES: The Stone Roses, 1983 establishments in England, 1996 disestablishments in England, 2011 establishments in England, English alternative rock groups, Madchester, Musical groups established in 1983, Musical groups disestablished in 1996, Musical groups reestablished in 2011, Musical groups from Cheshire, Musical groups from Manchester, Musical quartets, NME Awards winners

The Stone Roses are an English rock band formed in Manchester in 1983. They were one of the pioneering groups of the Madchester movement that was active during the late 1980s and early 1990s. The band's most successful lineup consists of vocalist Ian Brown, guitarist John Squire, bassist Mani, and drummer Reni.
The band released their debut album, The Stone Roses, in 1989. The album was a breakthrough success for the band and garnered critical acclaim, with many critics regarding it as one of the greatest British albums ever recorded. At this time the group decided to capitalise on their success by signing to a major label; then, their current record label Silvertone would not let them out of their contract, which led to a long legal battle that culminated with the band signing with Geffen Records in 1991, and then releasing their second album Second Coming, which was met with lacklustre reviews in 1994. The group soon disbanded after several lineup changes throughout the supporting tour, which began with Reni first departing, followed by Squire.
Following much intensified media speculation, In June 2012, Chris Coghill, the writer of the new film which is set during the Stone Roses 1990 Spike Island show, revealed that the band "have at least three or four new tracks recorded".

History

Formation (1983–1984)

Ian Brown (at the time the bassist) and guitarist John Squire, who knew each other from Altrincham Grammar School for Boys, formed a short-lived Clash-inspired band called The Patrol in 1980 along with singer/guitarist Andy Couzens and drummer Simon Wolstencroft. 40Taylor (2004) They played several gigs in 1980 and recorded a demo tape, but towards the end of that year decided on a change of direction. 46 Brown had got a taste of being a frontman during the last Patrol show, singing The Sweet's "Blockbuster" to close the set, with the band's friend/roadie Pete Garner standing in on bass, and Couzens wanting to concentrate on guitar. The band members lost enthusiasm in 1981, Brown selling his bass guitar to buy a scooter, and Wolstencroft joined the pre-Smiths band Freak Party. 48 Squire continued to practise guitar while working as an animator for Cosgrove Hall during the day, while Brown ran a Northern soul night in a Salford club. 
Squire and Couzens started a new band, The Fireside Chaps, with bassist Gary "Mani" Mounfield, later recruiting a singer named Kaiser and drummer Chris Goodwin, and changing their name to The Waterfront (after the film On the Waterfront), their sound influenced by 1960s groups and contemporary bands such as Orange Juice. 65, 68 Goodwin left before the band recorded their first demo and, shortly after the demo, Squire asked Brown to join as singer. A meeting with Geno Washington at a party at Brown's flat in Hulme, in which Washington told Brown that he would be a star and should be a singer, convinced Brown to take Squire up on his offer. 70–71 Brown joined The Waterfront in late 1983, for a time sharing vocals with Kaiser. 71
Like the earlier attempts at bands, The Waterfront fizzled out, but in late 1983 Couzens decided to try again at starting a band, and approached Brown. 77 They decided on Wolstencroft (who had turned down the job of drummer in The Smiths) as drummer and Pete Garner as bassist (despite his admission that he could not play anything but "Blockbuster"). 78 They also decided that they needed Squire in the band, and when he agreed the band's line-up was cemented. Leaving their previous bands behind, they worked solely on new material. Brown's vocal limitations prompted him to take singing lessons for three weeks. 79 After rehearsing for some time without a band name, Squire came up with 'The Stone Roses'. Several stories later emerged suggesting that the band had initially been called 'English Rose' or that the name was somehow linked to The Rolling Stones, but these were untrue, Brown explaining "No, I don't know where that English Rose story came from. John thought up the name 'Stone Roses' - something with a contrast, two words that went against each other". 80 The band rehearsed for six months, during which time Wolstencroft had been auditioning for other bands, and he left to join Terry Hall's band The Colourfield. 81 They got Goodwin to rejoin, but he only lasted for one rehearsal, so they advertised for a replacement and began auditioning, eventually recruiting Alan Wren in May 1984. 83–4
After rehearsing and writing songs over the summer, they recorded their first demo in late August, making 100 cassettes, with artwork by Squire, and set about trying to get gigs. 91 They played their first gig as the Stone Roses on 23 October 1984, supporting Pete Townshend at an anti-heroin concert at the Moonlight Club in London, Brown having sent the demo with an accompanying letter stating "I'm surrounded by skagheads, I wanna smash 'em. Can you give us a show?". 91–92 The show was seen by journalists including Sounds Gary Johnson, who arranged to interview the band a few weeks later. 98 The band received management offers and more gigs soon followed.
Howard Jones, who had recently left his job as manager of The Haçienda, producer Martin Hannett, and Tim Chambers agreed to work with the band on an album, setting up Thin Line Records to release it, with Jones taking on management of the band, although they had already made a similar agreement with Caroline Reed in London. 99–100 The band got their first positive press in late December, with Johnson tipping them for success in 1985 in Sounds, with a feature on the band following in January. 107

Early tour and releases (1985–1988)

The band played their first headlining gig on 4 January 1985, supported by Last Party, after original headliners Mercenary Skank had pulled out. 108 The band had their first recording session with Hannett in January 1985 at Strawberry Studios in Stockport, aiming to record tracks for a debut single and an album. 103 Further sessions followed in March, during which they recorded their debut single, the double A-side "So Young"/"Tell Me". 110 The band were invited to play a live session on Piccadilly Radio in March, for which they premiered a new song, "I Wanna be Adored". 113 By this time they had started to build a sizeable following in Manchester, and their first gig in the North of England at Clouds in Preston attracted a large audience, but descended into a riot after technical problems and friction between the bands on the bill. 115–7
The Roses embarked on a tour of Sweden in April, with their first gig in Manchester following on their return, at International 1, a venue run by future Stone Roses managers Matthew Cummings and Gareth Evans. 122 A performance at a warehouse party on 20 July helped to build interest in the band, and in August they returned to the studio to record their debut album. 128 Unhappy with the results, and with the band's sound changing, it was shelved (it was later released as Garage Flower). The "So Young"/"Tell Me" single, however, was released in September.
Frustrated with the lack of attention they were getting locally, they engaged in a graffiti campaign, with Brown and Wren spraying the band's name on walls from West Didsbury to the city centre. 138 It brought them much negative publicity, but added to their increasing notoriety. In 1986 they began working on new material, including "Sally Cinnamon", and the planned follow-up singles to "So Young" ("I Wanna Be Adored" and "This is the One") were shelved. 143 They parted company with Jones and took on Gareth Evans as manager, using Evans's International 1 venue as their new rehearsal space. Around this time the band played several UK tour dates including 11 August 1986 at the Mardi Gras club in Liverpool with local Promoter and record label owner Ken Kelly and his band Innervision at which several record company executives would be in attendance. 146–8
As Brown and Squire began collaborating more closely on songwriting, they decided that they should take a larger slice of the money than the other band members; Couzens and Wren left the band in protest, although they soon returned, and Couzens played an ill-fated gig with the band at the end of May before being pushed out of the band by Evans after flying home alone while the rest of the band returned in their van. 150 Although they failed to achieve further success in 1986, their repertoire expanded to include songs such as "Sugar Spun Sister", taking on influences from bands such as The Jesus & Mary Chain and the indie-pop era Primal Scream ("Velocity Girl" being a major influence on "Made of Stone"), and they stopped playing the older songs. 154–5
In December 1986 they recorded their first demo as a four-piece, including the first studio recordings of "Sugar Spun Sister" and "Elephant Stone". 156 In early 1987, Evans negotiated a deal with Revolver FM for a one-off release on the specially created Black Records label; by the time of the release of the single, "Sally Cinnamon", the group's sound had changed considerably, with chiming guitar hooks and a strong melody, alienating some of their old fans but attracting many new ones. 162 "Sally Cinnamon" sold out its 1,000-copy run, but failed to make the desired impact.
In June, Garner announced that he had decided to leave the band, although he stayed until they found a replacement, playing his final gig with the band at the 'Larks in the Park' festival in Liverpool. 166 Rob Hampson was Garner's replacement, with Garner teaching him the bass parts before leaving, although Hampson only lasted a week. 167 A more permanent replacement was found in the form of former-Waterfront bassist Mani (Gary Mounfield), who played his first gig with the band in November 1987. Brown recalled, "When Mani joined it almost changed overnight. It became a totally different groove ... Straight away, everything just fell into place".McReady
In early 1988 the band played at Dingwalls in London, a show attended by representatives of Zomba and Rough Trade's Geoff Travis, and both subsequently wanted to sign the band, Rough Trade even funding studio time to record a single, "Elephant Stone", with Peter Hook producing. 173 Hook was considered to produce an album for the band but was unavailable due to commitments with New Order, so Travis suggested John Leckie. 176 In May the band played a high-profile concert at Manchester's International II with James organized by Dave Haslam to raise funds for a campaign against Clause 28. 180 The band attempted to usurp James by putting up posters around town listing The Stone Roses as headliners, and delaying their start time to get the headline time themselves and limit the time that James could play for. 180 In the audience was a sixteen-year-old Liam Gallagher, for whom it was the inspiration to form a band himself. 181 Noel Gallagher too has stated that he was inspired to the same by attending one of their gigs. Also in the audience was Glaswegian Roddy McKenna (A+R Music executive Zomba Records), who later signed the band to Zomba Records. He asked if they could be transferred internally to Andrew Lauder's newly created Guitar based Silvertone Records subsidiary. The band were signed to an eight-album deal, buying the "Elephant Stone" tapes from Rough Trade and releasing them as a single in October 1988.
The band were co-managed by Matthew Cummings who died in 2007 following an accident.

Debut album and breakthrough success (1989–1991)

In 1988 and early 1989 The Stone Roses recorded their debut album at Battery Studios and Konk Studios in London and Rockfield Studios in Wales, produced by Leckie. The first single for Silvertone, "Elephant Stone", made little impact, and in early 1989 the band's performances outside the north-west were still attracting small audiences. 195 "Made of Stone" received more press attention and was picked up for airplay by DJ Richard Skinner on his late night Radio One show, but peaked at number ninety on the UK Singles Chart. The Stone Roses was released in April It gave them their first top ten hit and the album rose to number nineteen in the chart early the following year.

Their biggest headline gigs in 1989 were to 4000 people at Blackpool's Empress Ballroom on Saturday 12 August
The group won four NME Readers poll awards that year; Band of the Year, Best New Band, Single of the Year (for "Fools Gold") and Album of the Year (for their debut album). although the band themselves were unhappy with the sound on the album, Squire describing it as "twee" and not "fat or hard enough". 186
The Stone Roses' outdoor concert at Spike Island in Widnes on 27 May 1990 was attended by some 27,000 people. The event, considered a failure at the time due to sound problems and bad organisation, has become legendary over the years as a "Woodstock for the baggy generation". In mid-2010 footage of the concert was published on YouTube.
By July the band had released their final single for Silvertone, "One Love", which reached number four in the UK singles chart, their highest placing yet. It was to be the Roses' last original release for four years as they entered a protracted legal battle to terminate their five-year contract with Silvertone, unhappy with how they had been paid by the label. 525Robb, p. 271 Silvertone owners Zomba Records took out an injunction against the band in September 1990 to prevent them from recording with any other label, but in May 1991 the court sided with the group, which was then released from its contract. The Stone Roses subsequently signed with Geffen Records (garnering a million-pound advance for their next record) and began work on their second album. "The Stone Roses: Stone Free". Q. August 1991. However, Silvertone appealed against the ruling, delaying the record for another year. "The Stone Roses: The Morning After". Spin, May 1995.

Second Coming and breakup (1992–1996)

Following the court case The Stone Roses separated themselves from Manchester's club culture and spent much of 1992 and 1993 travelling in Europe before starting work on their second album in mid-1993. Progress was slow, hampered by Brown's and Squire's new fatherhood and the death of several people close to the band. John Leckie ultimately left the project as the band would not sign a production contract. Afterwards The Stone Roses assumed production duties with engineer Simon Dawson at Rockfield Studios in Wales, where they spent 347 ten-hour days working on the album.
The Stone Roses finally released the album, Second Coming, on 5 December 1994. Mostly written by John Squire, the music now had a shady, heavy blues-rock sound. "Love Spreads" reached number two on the UK Singles Chart. Second Coming received a mixed reception from the British press, which music journalist Simon Reynolds attributed to "the resentment that the Roses, divorced from the cultural moment that gave them meaning, were now just another band".
In March 1995, just two weeks before a tour in support of Second Coming was due to begin, Reni exited the band, following a disagreement with Ian Brown.youtube.Larkin, Colin (ed.) (1998) The Virgin Encyclopedia of Indie & New Wave, Virgin Books, ISBN 0-7535-0231-3 Also recruited around this time for the live shows was session-keyboardist/programmer Nigel Ippinson, who had previously played with the band on the re-working of "Begging You" for its release as a single. A secret "come-back" tour of the UK was planned for April 1995 but cancelled after the music press announced the dates. A major blow was the cancellation of their engagement at the Glastonbury Festival in June 1995. John Squire had suffered a mountain-biking accident in northern California weeks before the show, breaking his collarbone. The band finally organised a full UK tour for November and December 1995 and all dates sold out in a day.
John Squire announced his departure on 1 April 1996, releasing a statement saying it was: "the inevitable conclusion to the gradual social and musical separation that we have undergone in the past few years". Simply Red's 1987/88 tour guitarist Aziz Ibrahim, a former classmate of Pete Garner's at Burnage High School, was recruited as a replacement. The band continued for another six months, but there was a noticeable deterioration in the quality of its public performances after Squire's loss, and at Benicassim Festival and the Reading Festival Brown's voice was described as "so off-key it was excruciating to have to listen". The music press was united in its criticism, the NME describing "I am the Resurrection" as "more like the eternal crucifixion".

Post-Roses (1997–2010)

Ian Brown, John Squire and Mani have all had successful careers since the Roses' breakup. Squire formed The Seahorses, who released one album before breaking up, as well as releasing two solo albums. In 2007 he told a reporter that he was giving up music for good to focus on his career as a painter. Brown has released six solo albums, a remixes and a greatest hits collection all but one of which have charted in the top 5 of the UK Albums Chart. (2006). British Hit Singles & Albums (19th ed.). HiT Entertainment. . Mani joined Primal Scream as bassist in 1996 and remained in the band until the Stone Roses reunited.
Reni remained inactive for the most part since the Roses' breakup. He started a new band called The Rub in 1999, and played several gigs but nothing has been heard of The Rub since. In an interview in 2005 he said he was writing new songs to perform with Mani."STONE ROSES REUNION - RENI SPEAKS", NME, 31 May 2005. Retrieved on 23 December 2007
Rumours of a reunion surfaced and were dismissed repeatedly in the time between the break-up and the eventual reunion.
The 20th-anniversary edition of the band's début album was released in August 2009, remastered by John Leckie and Ian Brown, including a collectors' box-set edition and the previously unreleased song "Pearl Bastard"."Stone Roses release remastered album", Press Association, 13 February 2009

Second formation (2011–present)

After the newspaper The Sun published a story on 14 October 2011 citing that the Roses had signed for a series of gigs across the UK,
On 2 December 2011 Ian Brown and John Squire performed together live for the first time since 1995.
On 26 November 2012, it was announced via the event's Facebook page that the band would play the Isle of Wight Festival in June 2013. The Stone Roses played at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival on 12 and 19 April 2013. The Stone Roses also played at Glasgow Green, Glasgow on 15 June 2013.
A documentary was planned for The Stone Roses reunion, with film director Shane Meadows chosen to film it.

Musical style and influences

The Stone Roses's influences included garage rock, Northern soul, punk rock, and artists such as The Beatles,
The band were part of the Madchester movement, a style of alternative rock that mixed acid house rhythms with guitar pop sounds.

Relationship with the media

During the band's time in the public eye their relationship with the mass media was vastly different to other self-endorsing bands. They would often display no interest in promoting themselves, and many journalists were confused, and sometimes angered, when their questions were met with complete silence from the four Stone Roses.
A typical example of their approach with dealing with the press is the Spike Island press conference (attended by the world's media) in 1990. This ended in chaos when the gathered journalists began a small riot, believing the band to be deliberately stonewalling them. As John Robb commented, "The Stone Roses would stonewall the journalists. With shy guffaws, muttered asides, dispassionate staring, foot-shuffling silences and complete mind-numbing gaps, punctuated by the odd piece of incisive home-spun philosophy from Brown, who occasionally hinted at a well-read mind. There would be complete silence from John Squire, witty banter from Reni, and Mani spouting off if he let his guard drop."Robb, P. 225 However, Robb clarified that "we're no fools when it came to the media". And that, "One feature of the band's career had been their ability to stay on the news pages of the rock press almost permanently for years on end, including the years when they did fuck all. And they did this by hardly saying anything at all."

Band members

Discography

Notes






