[[Automated Content Access Protocol]]

CATEGORIES: World Wide Web

Automated Content Access Protocol ("ACAP") was proposed in 2006 as a method of providing machine-readable permissions information for content, in the hope that it would have allowed automated processes (such as search-engine web crawling) to be compliant with publishers' policies without the need for human interpretation of legal terms. ACAP was developed by organisations that claimed to represent sections of the publishing industry (World Association of Newspapers, European Publishers Council, International Publishers Association).

Status

In November 2007 ACAP announced that the first version of the standard was ready. No non-ACAP members, whether publishers or search engines, have adopted it so far. A Google spokesman appeared to have ruled out adoption.IT Wire report of Eric Schmidt's comments on ACAP  No progress has been announced since the remarks in March 2008 and Google,Improving on Robots Exclusion Protocol: Official Google Webmaster Central Blog along with Yahoo! and MSN, have since reaffirmed their commitment to the use of robots.
In 2011 management of ACAP was turned over to the International Press Telecommunications Council and announced that ACAP 2.0 would be based on Open Digital Rights Language 2.0.IPTC Media Release: News syndication version of ACAP ready for launch and management handed over to the IPTC

Previous milestones

In April 2007 ACAP commenced a pilot project in which the participants and technical partners undertook to specify and agree various use cases for ACAP to address. A technical workshop, attended by the participants and invited experts, has been held in London to discuss the use cases and agree next steps.
By February 2007 the pilot project was launched and participants announced.
By October 2006, ACAP had completed a feasibility stage and was formally announcedOfficial ACAP press release announcing project launch at the Frankfurt Book Fair on 6 October 2006. A pilot program commenced in January 2007 involving a group of major publishers and media groups working alongside search engines and other technical partners.

ACAP and search engines

ACAP rules can be considered as an extension to the Robots Exclusion Standard (or "robots.
It has been suggestedNews Publishers Want Full Control of the Search Results that ACAP is unnecessary, since the robots.  However, othersWhy you should care about Automated Content Access Protocol support ACAP's viewACAP FAQ on robots.txt is no longer sufficient.  ACAP argues that robots. ACAP aims to make it possible to express more complex permissions than the simple binary choice of "inclusion" or "exclusion".
As an early priority, ACAP is intended to provide a practical and consensual solution to some of the rights-related issues which in some cases have led to litigation"Is Google Legal?" OutLaw article about Copiepresse litigationGuardian article about Google's failed appeal in Copiepresse case between publishers and search engines.
No public search engines recognise Acap. Only one, Exalead, ever confirmed that they will be adopting the standard,Exalead Joins Pilot Project on Automated Content Access but they have since ceased functioning as a search portal to focus on the software side of their business.

Comment and debate

The project has generated considerable online debate, in the search,Search Engine Watch article contentShore.  If there are linking themes to the commentary, they are that keeping the specification simple will be critical to its successful implementation, and that the aims of the project are focussed on the needs of publishers, rather than readers. Many have seen this as a flaw.








