[[Karthi]]

CATEGORIES: Indian male film actors, Tamil actors, Living people, 1977 births, People from Chennai, Filmfare Awards South winners, Tamil Nadu State Film Awards winners, Padma Seshadri Bala Bhavan schools alumni

Karthik Sivakumar (born  on 25 May 1977), better known by his stage name Karthi, is an Indian film actor, who works in the Tamil film industry. The younger son of actor Sivakumar, Karthi holds a Bachelor's degree in Mechanical Engineering and a Master's degree in Industrial Engineering. Since he had always wanted to become a film director, he returned to India and joined Mani Ratnam as an assistant director. He was offered acting roles and made his acting debut in Paruthiveeran in 2007 as the titular character, a careless village rowdy, winning critical acclaim and several accolades including the Filmfare Award for Best Actor and a Tamil Nadu State Film Award. His next role was that of a coolie in Aayirathil Oruvan (2010), a fantasy-adventure film directed by Selvaraghavan. He achieved consecutive commercial successes with his subsequent releases – Paiyaa (2010), Naan Mahaan Alla (2010) and Siruthai (2011), which established him in the Tamil film industry.
Apart from his film career, Karthi has also been involved in social welfare activities, encouraging fans to do likewise through the "Makkal Nala Mandram", a social welfare club that he inaugurated. In 2011, he became a cause ambassador to promote awareness of lysosomal storage disease.

Early life

Karthi was born on 25 May 1977 in Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India. He was educated at Padma Seshadri Bala Bhavan, While pursuing his masters, he also attended lectures on filmmaking.
He worked part–time as a graphic designer in New York for a short period, then decided to pursue a career in film–making. He attended two courses in basic film–making at State University of New York before entering films. He stated, "I always knew I wanted to be in films but I did not know exactly what I wanted to do. I loved movies and watched a lot of them. But my father insisted that I get a good education before I joined the film industry".

Career

2007: Debut success

When Karthi returned to India, he met director Mani Ratnam, who offered him the role of Arjun (later played by Siddharth) in the film Aayutha Ezhuthu. He declined the offer and worked as an assistant director on the same film and its Hindi version Yuva because he wanted to become a film director and preferred directing to acting.
Critics unanimously praised Karthi's portrayal of a careless village rowdy. Behindwoods said: "He has done away with every trace of sophistication in his body language and even handles the sickle with consummate ease. He looks every inch a hot blooded youngster from some rural part of Tamil Nadu and appears seasoned in the romantic scenes ... Uninformed people might not believe that this is the young man's big screen debut. Look out for this guy ... ".

2010–2011: Break after Paruthiveeran

In October 2006, Karthi signed his second project under Selvaraghavan's direction,
Aayirathil Oruvan was released in early 2010. Karthi's portrayal of a chief coolie was often compared to that in his debut film.
In April 2010, Linguswamy's Paiyaa released. A romantic road–trip film, featuring a blockbuster album by Yuvan Shankar Raja,
Karthi's third 2010 film was Suseenthiran's thriller Naan Mahaan Alla, in which he played a middle class young person from Chennai whose life is disrupted when his father is killed. It received good reviews, was very popular,
Karthi's next film was the action–masala film Siruthai (2011), a remake of the 2006 Telugu film Vikramarkudu. He played two roles; a thief and a police officer.

2012–present: Career slump and resurgence

In May 2011, Karthi began working on a political comedy film, Saguni, directed by Shankar Dayal and featuring him amongst an ensemble cast of supporting actors.
Karthi's next release was Rajesh M's All in All Azhagu Raja, which featured him opposite Kajal Aggarwal and Santhanam. The film was released on Diwali 2013, and received mostly negative reviews from critics, with Behindwoods saying "Though the laughs are spread across a few moments, when 'AAA' is pitted against Rajesh's other wholesome 'laughathons' such as OKOK and Boss, it falls way short" and Sify saying "The trouble with 'AAA' is that it lacks basic storyline and took the audiences for granted. The film has no real script to speak of, at best a skeletal plot."

Personal life

Karthi is the second son of actor Sivakumar and his wife Lakshmi. He has two siblings; an elder brother, Suriya, also a leading actor in the Tamil film industry, and a younger sister named Brindha. Former leading Tamil film actress, Jyothika Sadanah is Karthi's sister–in–law.

Other work

Karthi has been involved in several charities and social service activities. On his 31st birthday, he inaugurated the Makkal Nala Mandram,
On September 2010, he signed a contract with Bharti Airtel to become its brand ambassador in South India and appear in its "Indraikku enna plan" advertising campaign.

Filmography

Discography





|-
! colspan="3" style="background: #DAA520;" | Filmfare Awards South
|-
|-


