[[Allari Naresh]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Indian actors, Telugu comedians, Telugu people, 1982 births, Filmfare Awards South winners, Male actors in Telugu cinema, Male actors in Tamil cinema, 21st-century Indian male actors, Nandi Award winners

Allari Naresh (Original: Edara Naresh) is an Indian film actor who stars in Tollywood films. He is the son of Telugu veteran director and producer EVV Satyanarayana. 
Born and brought up in Chennai, Tamil Nadu, he moved to Hyderabad after completing his schooling at Sri M. Venkatasubbha Rao Matriculation Higher Secondary School at T. Nagar, Chennai. He is fluent in Telugu, Tamil, Hindi and English. He got the tag "Allari" before his name after the success of his first film in Tollywood. His debut film in Tamil, Kurumbu, was a remake of Allari. He received Nandi Award for Best Supporting Actor in 2008 for his performance as "Gali Seenu" in the movie Gamyam.

Film career

2002-2007 : Debut and breakthrough

Naresh made his foray into films under the direction of Ravi Babu in the film Allari, an adult comedy in which he played a role of an 18-year-old who is in head over heals in infatuation with a beautiful girl. His performance was well praised by the critics. idlebrain. His dialogue delivery is perfect and has very good timing in doing comedy. He has a bright future ahead, if he chooses his future projects carefully." The film did exceptionally well at the Box office, giving him recognition as "Allari Naresh". However, his next film Dhana Laxmi I Love You, a remake of Hera Pheri, received negative reviews, ultimately faltering at the Box office. His third release Thotti Gang, co-starring Prabhu Deva and Sunil was successful at the Box office, which was followed by two flops Juniors, the remake of Thulluvadho Ilamai and Praanam, which featured him in a Dual role.
Naresh got his resurgence in the form of Maa Alludu Very Good, co-starring Rajendra Prasad, which was a massive hit at the Box office. He debuted in Tamil with Kurumbu, a remake of Allari, which failed at the Box office. His next was Nenu co-starring Veda and Abhishek, which is a remake of Kaadhal Kondein. Though the film was a failure at the Box office, he received wide critical acclaim for his portrayal of Vinod, a psychotic who falls in love with his friend, only to know that she's in love with his close friend, thus marking it as one of his finest performances till date. IndiaGlitz wrote, "Naresh is more than adequate in a role that is a challenge to even seasoned artistes. He has to kindle detest as well as sympathy. It is a tightrope walk, and he passes muster. The only way for Naresh after this film is up."
Naresh's lean phase continued with flops like Nuvvante Naakistam, Danger and Party, succeeded by Kithakithalu, a Blockbuster at the Box office, with critics appreciating Naresh's performance. Though Roommates and Gopi - Goda Meedha Pilli failed at the box office, his stardom was remained unchanged. His next successful film Athili Sattibabu LKG, boosted his career making him a common name in the Telugu film Industry. Later on, after two back-to-back flops in the form of Allare Allari and Pellaindi Kaani, Naresh got his next success in the form of Seema Shastri, thus ending 2007 on a Happy Note.

2008-2011 : Rise as a Star

Naresh had 8 releases in 2008, a rare feat in those days. His first three releases Sundara Kanda, Vishaka Express, in which he played a negative role, and Pelli Kaani Prasad Bombed at the Box office, with Naresh's performance in the film Vishaka Express getting huge applause from critics. His next film Gamyam, co-starring Sharwanand, was a critical as well as commercial success. Naresh played the role of Gali Seenu, a motorcycle thief who brings a change in the hero's attitude by his actions. His performance was well praised by the critics. Rediff wrote, "Allari Naresh has finally found his groove. He excels as Srinu, a role that somewhat resembles what Jagapathi Babu played in Anthahpuram. The timing of his one-liners is absolutely perfect and natural. One has to see the film to believe it."
He had 7 releases in 2010, again a rare feat. He first starred in Shambo Shiva Shambo, Remake of Tamil Film Nadodigal, co-starring Ravi Teja and Siva Balaji. The film was a failure at the Box office, nevertheless a critically successful film. While Rambabu Gadi Pellam, Aakasa Ramanna, Subhapradam were flops at the Box office, Betting Bangaraju, Saradaga Kasepu and Kathi Kantha Rao were Super hits at the Box office. 2011 saw Naresh acting in 5 films, in which one was a cameo appearance. His first release of the year was Aha Naa Pellanta, co-starring Ritu Barmecha, Srihari, Subbaraju. He played the role of Subrahmanyam aka Subbu, a software engineer whose life takes a drastic turn when he and a girl of faction background misunderstand that they made love with each other. His performance was well praised by the critics. The film was a Huge Success, which was the only Hit for Telugu Cinema along with Ravi Teja's Mirapakay and Nani's Ala Modalaindi. His next release, Seema Tapakai was also a Huge Success at the Box office. He appeared in a cameo appearance in the film Chandamama Katha, while his next film Madatha Kaja was an average at the Box office. His last release was Poraali, a Tamil film which was a remarkable success at the Box office. It was dubbed into Telugu as Sangharshana, which was a Disaster at the Telugu Box office.

2012-Present

2012 saw Naresh starring in 3 films. The first was Nuvva Nena co-starring Shriya Saran and Sharwanand, which is based on Deewana Mastana. The film failed at the Box office. His next film was Sudigadu, a film composed of various spoofs on nearly 100 Telugu films, directed by Bhimaneni Srinivasa Rao. The film did exceptionally well at the Box office, cementing his position in Telugu cinema.

Filmography






