[[Haplogroup O-M176]]

CATEGORIES: Human Y-DNA haplogroups

In human population genetics, Y-Chromosome haplogroups define the major lineages of direct paternal (male) lines back to a shared common ancestor in Africa. Haplogroup O-M176 (aka O-SRY465) is a human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroup. It is best known for its part in the settlement of Korea and Japan. It is a descendant of Haplogroup O-P31.

Distribution

Haplogroup O-M176 is found mainly in the northernmost parts of East Asia, from the Uriankhai and Zakhchin peoples of western Mongolia .

Subclade distribution

=Paragroup O-M176*=

Only branches of this haplogroup that are labeled as Haplogroup O-M176*, i.e., those that do not exhibit the 47z mutation, have been detected among the indigenous populations of Inner Mongolia and northern Manchuria, and even then they are found only at very low frequencies. However, Haplogroup O-M176* Y-chromosomes have been detected with high frequency in Korea, where they account for between 14% ( of the Korean male population.

=O-47z=

The O-47z subclade of O-M176. The first is that it arose in pre-Neolithic Japan and then spread outwards during the Neolithic.

==Japan origin==

A subclade of Haplogroup O-M176, Haplogroup O-47z, is found with high frequency among the Japanese people and Ryukyuan populations of Japan. Its was likely born there to members of the parent lineage who colonized the Japanese Archipelago much earlier, with the subgroup O-47z subsequently evolving within the proto-Japanese-Ryukyuan population of the western parts of the archipelago..

==Neolithic expansion==

Haplogroup O-47z has also been detected in approximately 22% of all males who speak a Japonic language, while it has not been found at all among a total of twenty Ainu males whose Y-DNA has been sampled in two genetic studies (). Based on the STR haplotype diversity within Haplogroup O-47z, it has been estimated that this haplogroup began to experience a population expansion among the proto-Japanese of approximately 4,000 years ago. Haplogroup O-47z also has been found among samples of modern Koreans, though with low frequency in comparison to both the frequency of O-47z in samples of Japanese and the frequency of O-M176(x47z) in samples of Koreans. 

Phylogenetics

Phylogenetic history

Prior to 2002, there were in academic literature at least seven naming systems for the Y-Chromosome phylogenetic tree. This led to considerable confusion. In 2002, the major research groups came together and formed the Y-Chromosome Consortium (YCC). They published a joint paper that created a single new tree that all agreed to use. Later, a group of citizen scientists with an interest in population genetics and genetic genealogy formed a working group to create an amateur tree aiming at being above all timely. The table below brings together all of these works at the point of the landmark 2002 YCC Tree. This allows a researcher reviewing older published literature to quickly move between nomenclatures.

=Original research publications=

The following research teams per their publications were represented in the creation of the YCC Tree.

Phylogenetic trees

This phylogenetic tree of haplogroup O subclades is based on the YCC 2008 tree  and subsequent published research.



Genetics

Y-DNA O subclades

Y-DNA backbone tree



Footnotes

Works cited

Further reading


