[[Primary tumors of the heart]]

CATEGORIES: Heart neoplasia

The primary tumors of the heart are extremely rare tumors that arise from the normal tissues that make up the heart.  This is in contrast to secondary tumors of the heart, which are typically either metastatic from another part of the body, or infiltrate the heart via direct extension from the surrounding tissues.

Types

Benign

The most common primary tumor of the heart is the myxoma.  In surgical series, the myxoma makes up as much as 77% of all primary tumors of the heart.  Less common tumors of the heart include lipoma and cystic tumor of the atrioventricular nodal region.

Malignant

About 20 percent of primary tumors of the heart are malignant in nature.  Malignant tumors of the heart include rhabdomyosarcomas, angiosarcomas, myxosarcomas, fibrosarcomas, leiomyosarcomas, reticulum cell sarcomas, desmoplastic small round cell tumor,and liposarcomas.  The cardiac sarcomas may occur at any age, but are more commonly seen in individuals in their 20s to 40s.  They occur equally in males and females.
Malignant Primary heart tumors are the tumors that originate from the heart tissue. Malignant form of cardiac tumors are extremely rare and account for 25% of the diagnosed cases. It is very hard to find information on cardiac sarcomas due to the limited data and the misdiagnosis with the other cardiac diseases. Most malignant heart tumors are sarcomas,which are very difficult to treat, and they have very poor prognostic results. The difficulty lies in  the advanced tumor representation, the advanced stage at representation and due to the insufficient awareness of the disease.

Mechanism and Causes

It is very hard to find a common reason for the development of heart sarcoma 

Signs and Symptoms

The size and the locations of the tumor mostly dictates the types of the symptoms. The manifestations of the cardiac sarcomas mimic the signs and symptoms of the other cardiac diseases. These signs are often mistaken with coronary or vulvar cardiac disease. Most patients represent with symptoms of obstruction to blood flow and interference with valve function. 

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of cardiac sarcomas happens usually at late stages of the disease. Much of the available data represent post-mortem analysis of the disease.

Treatment and Prognosis

Due to the rarity and the late stage representation of the disease, the prognosis of cardiac sarcomas are considered to be dismal. The last approach is proven to improve the life expectancy of the patient to three years before the occurrence of the disease.

Recent Research

There is no record of ongoing research aimed towards prevention of the actual disease, or taking into consideration the course of disease progression, due to the rarity of the disease and to the limited available data. Most of the current research focuses on representation of case studies and aims on increasing the awareness about the primary cardiac tumors. The reason is because part of the major concern and the high mortality of the disease is based on misdiagnosis with other cardiac diseases, which are the results of unawareness. more studies are done to represent different scenarios on actual case studies with emphasis on the diagnostic approaches.

Valvular

A subset of the primary tumors of the heart are tumors that are found on the valves of the heart. Tumors that affect the valves of the heart are found in an equal distribution among the four heart valves.  The vast majority of these are papillary fibroelastomas. Primary tumors of the valves of the heart are more likely to occur in males. While most primary tumors of the valves of the heart are not malignant, they are more likely to have symptoms related to the valve, including neurologic symptoms and (in a few cases) sudden cardiac death.

Prognosis

The vast majority of the tumors of the heart have a benign course and are not directly fatal. However, even the benign tumors of the heart can be lethal due to either direct extension into the electrical conduction system of the heart (causing complete heart block or a fatal dysrhythmia), or due to emboli from the tumor mass that may have lethal sequelae.
The malignant tumors of the heart have a worse prognosis. Cardiac sarcomas generally lead to death within 2 years of diagnosis, due to rapid infiltration of the myocardium of the heart and obstruction of the normal flow of blood within the heart.








