[[R. J. Williams]]

CATEGORIES: Male actors from Los Angeles, California, American male child actors, American male film actors, American male television actors, American male voice actors, Living people, 1978 births

R. J. Williams or Robert Jackson Williams (born: July 19, 1978) is an actor, television host, television producer and entrepreneur. He is the Founder and CEO of Young Hollywood LLC.

Young Hollywood

Young Hollywood, started in 2007 by RJ Williams, was created from the ground up without any venture financing. Young Hollywood creates and distributes celebrity and lifestyle programming globally; owns several leading entertainment websites,licenses the Young Hollywood trademark internationally for a range of consumer products and services; and works closely with brands in the advertising world to help find innovative ways to touch consumers 
His company owns a library of over 2000 hours of content, and a distribution network that reaches hundreds of millions of viewers a month.
In addition, Williams works closely advising several brands including Coca-Cola, Samsung, AT&T, Unilever, Subway, Rayban, Intuit and Electronic Arts on content production, product integration, experiential marketing and maximizing their social reach.

YouTube Partnership

Notable projects include YouTube Live and The Young Hollywood Network:
September 13, 2010 marked the day YouTube confirmed their first ever live streaming project that had been in stealth mode for quite some time.  They selected Young Hollywood to be their partner and kick things off with segments featuring pro skater Tony Hawk, comedian Dane Cook and "Jackass" star Steve-O.
January 16, 2012 Williams was behind the launch of a new network in partnership with Google (YHN), giving Young Hollywood a platform that reaches a global audience of over 800 million people.

Acting and Hosting

R.J. Williams was a child actor on movies and television shows, one of his credits being the child character Rowdy for two seasons of General Hospital, for which he became a winner of the Young Artist Award for best Actor in a Daytime Series for his role in General Hospital at the 12th annual Youth In Film Awards.
Additionally he was the voice of the title cartoon bear Kissyfur, which started in 1986. He also guest starred in a few episodes of Full House and an episode of Star Trek: the Next Generation (The Child in 1988). In the early 1990s, Williams provided the voice of Kit Cloudkicker in the animated show TaleSpin, and for Calvin in the final season of Disney's Adventures of the Gummi Bears.  He also played the boy whose friend was a robot on the 1990s syndicated children's TV show Wake, Rattle and Roll, a daily syndicated interview show that ran for 130 episodes.  Once Williams Wake, Rattle and Roll stopped producing episodes, he decided to take a hiatus from show business to attend both Crossroads High School, and the film school at University of Southern California (USC).
Williams continued his work in front of the camera by hosting hundreds of celebrity interviews for Young Hollywood with such notables as Cameron Diaz, Taylor Lautner, Jessie Eisenberg, Zac Efron, Justin Timberlake, Enrique Iglesias, Pitbull, Megan Fox, Sigourney Weaver, Nicolas Cage, and Selena Gomez.

Television Production

After graduation, Williams formed a production company, Arjay Entertainment which focused on celebrity and lifestyle programming. Between 2003-2006, his company went on to produce multiple specials and series that were distributed by Showtime Networks. RJ was the creator,host and executive producer of these shows.
In 2004, Williams worked alongside NSYNC's Lance Bass and together they co-hosted a one-hour, primetime American Music Awards Pre-Show with Dick Clark Productions and ABC 
The company formed several distribution alliances and provided content for ABC, Showtime, TV Guide Channel, America Online and various Fox Cable channels and became known for creating Young Hollywood related content.






