[[Singrauli]]

CATEGORIES: Singrauli

Singrauli () is a town in Singrauli district in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh.

History

The area in the eastern part of the state of MADHYA Pradesh and the adjoining southern part of Renukoot district in the state of UP is collectively known as Singrauli. Singrauli is emerging as India's Energy capital, the place earlier known as Shringavali, named after the sage Shringi, was once upon a time covered with dense and unnavigable forests and inhabited by wild animals. The place was considered so treacherous that it was used by the Kings of Rewa State, who ruled the area till 1947, as an open air prison for detaining errant civilians and officers.
Just two generations ago, small holders were tending their parcels of land here, and the original inhabitants were gathering honey and herbs in the forest. In the late fifties, a large scale dam banked up the water of the River Rihand. The dam known as Govind Vallabh Pant Sagar, was inaugurated by Pt. Jawahar Lal Nehru in 1962. Later, rich coal deposits spread over an area of 2200 km² in the state of M.P. (eastern part of Sidhi District) and U.P. (southern part of Sonebhadra District) were discovered close to the artificial lake that could be used to generate electricity.singrauli.in
On 24 May 2008, Madhya Pradesh government has declared Singrauli as its 50th district by separating from Sidhi with 3 tehsils viz. Singrauli, Chitrangi and Deosar. Mada and Sarai.
This area has group of Rock cut caves made in 7-8th century A.D. in Mada which is 32 km from waidhan.Famous caves include Vivah Mada, Ganesh Mada and Shankar mada, Jaljalia and Ravan Mada.
Besides rock cut caves, Singrauli also has Painted rock shelters. Ranimachi, Dholagiri and Goura pahad lies in Chitrangi tehsil of Singrauli. These painted rock shelters belong to the Mesolithic age of Microlithic implememts culture. The paintings are made of red Ochre.mptourism.html

Demographics

District Statistics and south Asia's biggest industrial area

Connectivity

By Air

By Rail

The following trains originate/pass through Singrauli area.
Though this area is full of industries and lot of movement of man and material takes place, the area is not connected properly to major metros of India in terms of rail connectivity. Direct rail connectivity is required for New Delhi, Mumbai, South and the North East regions of India.
Rail department is planning to expand their network here. Recently Singrauli station has been sanctioned two additional  platforms. Renukoot station now has three platforms. This section will be electrified by the end of 2014. The trains from Jabalpur and back get delayed by several hours because this is a single track. One should carry his own supply of food and water, there is hardly any aavailability of food on the stations on this route. The condition of roads is very poor.

By Road

Singrauli district has bad road connectivity to nearby major cities and towns like Rewa, Satna and Shahdol in MP, Varanasi, Mughal Sarai  Mirzapur and Allahabad in UP. Private transport facilities are also available in this area and it is directly connected with Chattishgarh (Ambikapur) by road.
Singrauli is approximately 50 km from Renukoot which has train connectivity with Jammu Tawi,Delhi, Amritsar, Jammu Tawi, Ranchi, Tatanagar and Rourkela.

Industries

All major companies operating in Singrauli are giants of Indian energy industry. The operations of companies include mining of coal to power generation. In recent past, several private companies have also joined the league of companies operating in Singrauli. It is expected by 2017, that Singrauli would feed around 35,000 MW of electrical power to the grid alone.
Major companies operating or coming up at Singrauli are:
MISCELLANEOUS:-
Rail department is planning to expand their network here. Recently Singrauli station has been allotted an extra platform. Renukoot Station is subjected to survey for an additional platform.

Mining

Northern Coalfields Limited, the PSU coal major and the highest profit making subsidiary of coal giant "Coal India Ltd" is the only coal feeder to these power, chemical and cement plants located within the vicinity of Singrauli Industrial Zone. With many billion tonnes of coal being mined for the last 35–40 yrs, it still sits on a geographical reserve of more raw material area. However, there is concern over possible deforestation, and environmental loss from mineral development.
BEML Limited (Under Ministry of Defence) Manufacture of HEMM in Deosar Khadaura village will be started in about two years.
Makrohar stone mining plant, distance from district headquarters 25 km.

Education

Singrauli is fast emerging as a major educational hub in eastern Madhya Pradesh.
Major Schools in and around Singrauli:
Major Colleges
Govt. degree collage waidhan
Performing and Learning art schools
Both are affiliated by Prayag Sangit Samithi,Allahabad
Bold text== Shopping Market places 






