[[1340s]]

CATEGORIES: 1340s

The 1340s were a Julian calendar decade in the 14th century, in the midst of a period in world history often referred to as the Late Middle Ages in the Old World and the pre-Columbian period in the New World.
In Asia, the successors of the old Mongol Empire were in a state of gradual decline.  The Ilkhanate had already fragmented into several political territories and factions struggling to place their puppet leaders over the shell of an old state; the Chagatai Khanate was undermined by religious unrest and fell to rebellion.  The Black Plague swept through the Kipchak Khanate in 1346, and also affected the Genoese colonies under Mongol siege, thence spreading into Europe.  The Yuan Dynasty in China was struck by a series of disasters, including frequent flooding, widespread banditry, urban fire, declining grain, increased civil unrest and local rebellion - the seeds of resistance that would lead to its downfall.  Southeast Asia remained free from Mongol power, with several small kingdoms struggling for survival.
In Europe, the decade continued the period of gradual economic decline, often mistitled the "depression" of the 1340s.  This followed the end of the Medieval Warm Period and the start of the Little Ice Age in the 1300s, and affected most of Western Europe, with the exception of a few Italian city-states.  The state increasingly interfered in the social and economic life of the decade, while Europe entered a period which saw almost continuous war for the next century.  The Hundred Years' War (1337-1453) between France and England continued, and Edward III of England led an invasion resulting in notable victories at the Battles of Sluys and Crécy in 1340 and 1346 respectively.  The medieval crusading spirit continued in Spain, with a Castilian victory at the Battle of Río Salado and the recommencement of the Reconquista in 1340; and in the Baltic, with King Magnus II of Sweden's Northern Crusades against Novgorod in 1347-1348.  In the east, the Byzantine Empire, then under the Palaiologoi, saw the start of the disastrous Byzantine civil war of 1341–1347.  Meanwhile, a crisis of confidence in the Florentine banks caused many of them to collapse between 1341 and 1346.Rothbard, p 70
In Africa, the two great empires were the Christian Empire of Ethiopia in the east and the Muslim Mali Empire in the west.  Amda Seyon I, who had brought Ethiopia to its height, was succeeded in 1344 by Newaya Krestos, who continued to foster trade in East Africa.  Mansa Souleyman assumed office in the Mali Empire in 1341, and similarly took steep measures to reform Mali's finances.  Songhai, which had emerged in this decade, was conquered by Mali for the time being.
In the Americas, cities of the Mississippian culture such as Cahokia, Kincaid and Moundville went into an accelerated state of decline in this decade.  Factors such as depletion of resources, climatic change, war, disease, social unrest and declining political and economic power have been suggested, although the sites were not fully abandoned until the 1400s.  Central America saw the decayed Mayan civilization ruled from their capital Mayapan in the Yucatan Peninsula, while the Mexicas from their capital city of Tenochtitlan were on the rise.

Significant people

Births

Deaths

By Country

Asia

Political developments

=Mongol decline=

In the Kipchak Khanate, Özbeg Khan of the Golden Horde died in 1341, ending what Muslim chroniclers considered a golden age.Saunders, p 165  Janibeg's fifteen year reign was notable for the appearance and rapid transmission of the Black Plague along the trade routes from inner Asia in this decade.  The nation "struggled into new life" after the plague had passed in the following decade.
The Chagatai Khanate was being split by religious dissensions between the traditionalist Mongol adherents of the Yasa and the Mongol and Turkish converts to Islam.  The Khanate continued in Transoxiana, but the Chatagai khans became the puppets of the now enthusiastically Muslim Turkish amirs, and the amir Kazghan overthrew the Khan Kazan in 1347.Saunders, p 173
In the Persian Ilkhanate, the Mongol House of Hülegü had been extinguished in the male line with the death of Il-Khan Abu Sa'id in 1335, .Saunders, p 146  Numerous claimants were set up in the 1330s; by 1339, the two rivals were Jahan-Temür set up by Shaik Hasan-i Buzurg, and Suleiman Khan supported by Shaik Hasan-i Kuchak.  The deposition of Jahan-Temür can be regarded as the final dissolution of the Ilkhanate.  Although his rival retained nominal power among the Chobanids for another year or two, he in turn was deposed by Hasan-i Kuchak's brother and similarly disappears into obscurity.Boyle, p 416  Suleiman was replaced as puppet by Anushirvan, "in whose name his Chobanid masters continued to strike coin until 1353".

=China=

In China, the Mongol Yuan dynasty was in a gradual state of decline, due to complex and longstanding problems such as the "endemic tensions among its ruling elites".  In March 1340, the Yuan chancellor, Bayan of the Merkid, was removed in a carefully orchestrated coup, and replaced by his nephew Toqto'a.Franke, p 568, 572  Bayan's purges were called off; his supporters dismissed; positions he had closed to the Chinese were reopened; the meritocratic system of examinations for official service was restored.Franke, p 573-574
Toghto's first term exhibited a fresh new spirit which took a predominantly centralist approach to political solutions.  He directed an unsuccessful project to connect the imperial capital to the sea and the Shansi foothills by water; he was more successful in his attempt to organise funds for the completion of the official histories of the Liao, Qin and Song dynasties.  In June 1344, however, he tendered his resignation following a series of local rebellions that had broken out against the Yuan in scattered areas of China.Franke, p 574
Toghto's replacement as chancellor was Berke Bukha, an effective provincial administrator who took the oppostite, decentralised approach to Toghto.  Accordingly, he promoted able men to local positions and gave them discretionary authority to handle relief and other problems.  Similarly, he granted local military garrisons blanket authorisation to prevent the spread of banditry.  In 1345, Bukha's administration sent out twelve investigation teams to visit each part of China, correct abuses, and "create benefits and remove harms" for the people.
Bukha's approach failed to arrest the mounting troubles of Yuan China in the 1340s, however.  The central government was faced with chronic revenue shortfalls.  Maritime grain shipments — vital for the inhabitants of the imperial capital — had seriously declined from a peak of 3.34 million bushels in 1329 to 2.6 million in 1342.Franke, p 575  Additionally, the Yellow River was repeatedly swelled by long rains, breaching its dykes and flooding the surrounding areas.  When the river finally began shifting its course, it caused "widespread havoc and ruin".  In 1349, the emperor recalled Toghto to office for a second term.  With high enthusiasm and strong belief from his partisans that the problems were soluble, he began a radical process of recentralisation and heavy restriction of regional and local initiative in the following decade.

=India=

=Ottoman Empire=

Society and economy

Culture, religion and philosophy

Pope Benedict XII had despatched the Italian Franciscan John of Marignolli in 1339, who travelled safely through the Yuan territories of Kipchack and Chagatai during the Pax Mongolica and reached the imperial capital of Ta-tu in 1342.  Marignolli stayed in China for five years, departing by ship in 1347 and returning to Avignon in 1353.Saunders, p 153-154

=Military technology=

Europe

Political developments

=War and decline in Western Europe=

In Europe, the decade continued the period of gradual economic decline,Rothbard, p 67 which followed the end of the Medieval Warm Period and the start of the Little Ice Age in the 1300s. This secular decline, often mistitled a "depression", affected most of Western Europe, with the exception of a few Italian city-states. It was the result of factors which had begun earlier in the century, the main cause being the breaking of the balance between Church and state. The more dominant state increasingly interfered in the social and economic life of late medieval Europe, imposing detrimental taxation and regulation. King Edward III of England faced a brief standoff with some dissident barons in 1341 — one of only two such isolated standoffs in his popular reign.Hollister, p 278
Europe entered a period which saw almost continuous war for the next century.  Fighting took place in the Duchy of Brittany, "a country well suited to guerilla warfare", from 1342-1365 in the Breton War of Succession. One of the earlier English victories was at the naval Battle of Sluys in 1340, which annihilated the French fleet and gave the English control of the English Channel for several years. It successfully established English control over Brittany in 1342. Further armies were sent to Brittany and Gascony in 1345, and Edward himself crossed the Channel in 1346 with 10,000 men — an enormous army by contemporary standards. They plundered Caen, an important town in Normandy, and eventually began moving back toward the Channel.
In 1346, the Battle of Crecy became the first great land battle of the Hundred Years' War, and the most stunning victory of Edward's career. English longbowmen crippled the French knights for many years to come, allowing Edward to take the key Channel port of Calais in 1347.  Meanwhile, public discontent caused the town of Lyon to riot in 1347."

=Central Europe=

Expand on:
In the Holy Roman Empire, Ludwig the Bavarian was in conflict with the Avignon Papacy. He was crowned in 1346 in Bonn. After the death of Emperor Ludwig in September 1347, Charles IV was recognised as King of Germany by all of the German princes.
In 1341, Margarete Maultasch, Countess of Tyrol, had expelled her husband John Henry of Bohemia.  She then married Louis of Bavaria, a son of Ludwig, without an annulment of her previous marriage.  The result was the excommunication of the couple.

=Northern Europe=

In 1340, a German law-code was drawn up by the Teutonic Knights for their long-settled Prussian district of Pomesania.  The latter group included peasants who had the right to demand trial by the written code and could not be sentenced to death in private courts.  However, an appendix to the law-code also made it clear that the Old Prussian peasant converts were discriminated against by the Teutonic Knights, and were allowed remain "semi-pagan, uncouth and lawless".
The Danish monarchy had disintegrated in the 1330s, but was restored in 1340 by Valdemar IV after a long interregnum.Christiansen, p 212  When the lords reacted to falling grain-prices by increasing the level of tithe, which led to the St. George's Night Uprising in 1343.  On 23 April, the Estonians rose up and killed their masters — German sources give a figure of 18,000 dead as a result of the uprising, although this total is unlikely.  The Danish government in Estonia was overthrown when a major group of vassals in Tallinn handed over castles to the Teutonic Order in 1344-1345.  The final sale was approved by the king's Danish counsellors, and the shift of sovereignty took place on 1 November 1346.
In Sweden, the court was continually reminded of its religious duties by Bridget of Sweden, who was the king's cousin and beginning to win fame as a prophetess.  After King Magnus II of Sweden had tried and failed to take possession of Denmark in the early 1340s, she advised him not to offend his people by raising taxes to fund wars against their co-religionists, but instead to raise taxes only for self-defence or in crusading against unbelievers.  Therefore, after Magnus had at least temporarily resolved difficulties at home, he prepared for a crusade against the Russian Orthodox Novgorod.Christiansen, p 192  The army set sail for the campaign in 1348.
Accordingly, there were political divisions in the Russian states in this decade.  The southern territories of Novgorod had been subjugated by Prince Algirdas of Lithuania in 1346, and Simeon of Moscow had failed to intervene.Christiansen, p 191 & 193  Pskov officially broke away from Novgorod that year;Nossov (2007), p 8  and Simeon was again delayed in helping against the Swedes, this time by business with his overlord, the Khan of the Golden Horde.

=Eastern Europe=

Areas to expand on:

=Southern Europe=

In Rome, the general despair brought on by the Plague and the absence of the Pope have been cited as possible causes for the rise of the Roman notary Cola di Rienzo: in 1347, he assumed the title of censor and claimed to restore the Roman Republic.  Cola tried to establish direct government with elections in the rione of the city, but he lacked the means to take the Castel Sant'Angelo and he was cut down by the Roman aristocracy in 1354.
There were several rulers of the Kingdoms of Spain in the 1340s. Alfonso XI the Just ruled until the end of the decade as King of Castile and León. In 1340, at the Battle of Río Salado, he won the first Castilian victory over the Moors for over a century, and crossed the straits to Algeciras. In 1345, he attacked Gibraltar, but was unable to conquer it.O'Callaghan, p 212
Peter the Ceremonious ruled from 1336 as King of Aragon, King of Sardinia and Corsica, King of Valencia, Count of Barcelona and Prince of Catalonia.  Navarre was ruled by Philip III until 1343, his Capetian wife Joan II until 1349, and finally Charles II the Bad ruled into the late 14th century.  The Kingdom of Portugal was meanwhile ruled by Afonso IV, from 1325 until his death in 1357.

Society and economy

=Fashion=

=Economic collapse and crisis=

To finance the continuing wars of the 1340s, Edward III of England granted to a small group of merchants a monopoly on the export of wool. This included a tariff on the import of woolen cloth, which put out of business the Italian and foreign merchants that had dominated the wool export trade. The monopoly merchants went bankrupt in the following decade.
Edward also introduced three new gold coins in 1344: the florin, leopard, and helm.  However, the gold content of these coins did not match their respective value of 6 shillings, 3 shillings, and 1 shilling and sixpence, so they had to be withdrawn and mostly melted down by August of that year.
In France, the king's personal expenditure on dowries, gratuities, the upkeep of the palace, his travels and his wardrobe, consumed the entirety of the royal income.Fossier, p 34  The French salt tax or gabelle itself never amounted to more than 2%.  Fouages were also levied in 1342 and 1349.Fossier, p 115
The Italian city states were booming at the start of the decade.  In 1340, Francesco Balducci Pegolotti wrote his Practica della mercatura.  England found itself unable to repay its debts, and both factors resulted in a crisis of confidence in the Florentine banks  The family-based banks and mercantile associations of Florence and Genoa generally kept only 25-30% of their capital in liquid assets,Fossier, p 100 and between 1341 and 1346, many of the most important of the Florentine banks collapsed. — an "avalanche of bankruptcies", in the words of Robert Fossier.  These were owned by the following banking families: the Acciaiuolis, the Bonaccorsis, the Cocchis, the Antellesis, the Corsinis, the Uzzanos, the Perendolis, the Peruzzis and the Bardis.

=Social unrest=

The situation in the towns remained delicate: while on one hand the trades were dominant, and Villani counted no fewer than 200 textile workshops in Florence around 1340, working conditions and entry restrictions imposed by the guilds created tensions with the unemployed and unskilled labourers.Fossier, p 107  In 1349-1350, the fullers and weavers of Ghent and Liège massacred each other.Fossier, p 40  This was not just because these generations were unused to them, but because they were accompanied by war and followed by epidemic in this decade.

=The Black Plague=

