[[Today's New International Version]]

CATEGORIES: 2005 books, Bible translations into English, 2005 in religion

Today's New International Version (TNIV) is an English translation of the Bible developed by the Committee on Bible Translation. The CBT also developed the New International Version in the 1970s. The TNIV is based on the NIV. It is explicitly Protestant like its predecessor; the deuterocanonical books are not part of the translation. The TNIV New Testament was published March 2002. The complete Bible was published February 2005. The rights to the text are owned by Biblica. Zondervan publishes the TNIV in North America. Hodder & Stoughton publish the TNIV in the UK and European Union.
The translation took more than a decade to complete; 13 evangelical scholars worked on the translation: Ronald F. Youngblood, Kenneth L. Barker, John H. Stek, Donald H. Madvig, R. T. France, Gordon Fee, Karen H. Jobes, Walter Liefeld, Douglas J. Moo, Bruce K. Waltke, Larry L. Walker, Herbert M. Wolf and Martin Selman.
With the 2011 release of an updated version of the NIV, both the TNIV and the 1984 NIV have been discontinued. Keith Danby, president and chief executive officer of Biblica, once known as the International Bible Society, said that they erred in presenting past updates - failing to convince people that revisions were needed and underestimating readers' loyalty to the 1984 NIV.

Translation philosophy

The intent of the TNIV translators was to produce an accurate and readable translation in contemporary English. The Committee on Bible Translation wanted to build a new version on the heritage of the NIV and like its predecessor create a balanced mediating version, one that would fall in-between the most literal translation and the most free; word-for-word (Formal Equivalence) and thought-for-thought (Dynamic Equivalence).
For translation a wide range of manuscripts were reviewed.

Differences

There are a number of changes in the TNIV. Craig Blomberg stated in a 2003 paper titled "The Untold Story of a Good Translation" that 70% of the changes in the TNIV move in a "more literal direction three times more often than not." Mark L. Strauss has stated that the majority of changes are "based on advances in biblical scholarship, linguistics, and archaeology".
In Matthew 1:18, where the NIV says that Mary was "with child," the TNIV simply says Mary was "pregnant."
In Luke 12:38, the phrase "second or third watch of the night" employed in the NIV is changed to "middle of the night or toward daybreak" in the TNIV.
The TNIV translators have, at times, opted for more traditional Anglo-Saxon or poetic renderings than those found in the NIV. For example, "the heavens" is sometimes chosen to replace "the sky," as is the case in Isaiah 50:3: "I clothe the heavens with darkness and make sackcloth its covering."
At times the TNIV offers a different or nuanced understanding of a passage. For example, in the NIV, Psalm 26:3 reads, "For your love is ever before me, / and I walk continually in your truth." The TNIV reads, "For I have always been mindful of your unfailing love / and have lived in reliance on your faithfulness." There are a number of changes in this one verse, but of special note is the TNIV's translation of the Hebrew word 'emet. The TNIV translators took this word to mean more than simple honesty in Psalm 26:3, referring more specifically to reliability or trustworthiness.
Examples of other changes are "truly I tell you" becomes "I tell you the truth;" "fellow workers" becomes "coworkers;" "the Jews," particularly in John's Gospel, often becomes "Jewish leaders" when the context makes the statement's real meaning apparent; and "miracles," especially in John, become the more literal "signs," "miraculous signs," or "works." The word for "Spirit," where there is a good chance it means the Holy Spirit, is now capitalized. "Peter" is now rendered "Cephas" when the Greek merely transliterates the Hebrew name.
Other notable changes are that "Christ" has regularly been rendered as "Messiah," and "saints" has often been replaced with terms such as "God's people" or "believers."

Gender language and the TNIV

Among other differences from the NIV, the TNIV uses gender-neutral language to refer to people. Confessional terms for this kind of language are such as gender-inclusive. Two examples of this kind of translation decision are found in Genesis and Matthew:
Genesis 1:27 reads, "So God created human beings in his own image." Older translations use the word "man" to translate the word 'adam employed in the Hebrew language, the same word used as the proper name of the first man married to the first woman, Eve.
Matthew 5:9 reads: "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called children of God." from the Amplified Bible
However, the 1611 Authorized King James Version also renders this passage as "children" rather than "sons." from the Authorized King James Version Masculine references to God, such as "Father" and "Son," are not modified from the literal translation in the TNIV.
Opponents of this approach claim that inclusive language can provide incorrect translations in various instances. Three examples of the kind of observations made by the critics come from Psalm 1, the Gospel of John, and Revelation.
The original Hebrew of Psalm 1:1 has the word 'ish (man). This is translated in the TNIV, "Blessed are those who do not walk in step with the wicked or stand in the way that sinners take or sit in the company of mockers." The singular in the original highlights the struggle of the individual against the wicked masses. The TNIV renders Revelation 3:20, "Here I am! I stand at the door and knock. If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I will come in and eat with them, and they with me."
The use of them and they in the TNIV appears to be plural to some English readers. John 6:44 in the TNIV reads, "No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws them, and I will raise them up at the last day." The masculine singular in the original depicts the Father and the Son drawing and raising each individual personally, rather than dealing with people as a group.
The two main arguments in favor of inclusive language are the following:
Less than 30% of the changes in the TNIV involve the use of inclusive language.
The TNIV's approach to gender inclusive language is similar to the New International Version Inclusive Language Edition,Comparing the Three NIVs, Christianity Today, January 2002 New Revised Standard Version, the New Living Translation, the New Century Version, and the Contemporary English Version.

The TNIV and hoi ioudaioi

In the TNIV some original Greek text references to hoi ioudaioi (literally, the Jews), are changed from the original English translation of "the Jews" to "Jewish leaders" or simply "they" (such as in John 18:36). This change has been called for by Jewish leaders as a way of avoiding misunderstanding in the Gospel of John.
A number of evangelical scholars agree with this change.

Circulation

Supporters

Denominations supportive of the TNIV include the Christian Reformed Church (CRC), which officially endorsed the TNIV as an acceptable translation for use, the Evangelical Covenant Church and the Free Methodist Church of North America. Scholars from the Free Methodist Church of North America had a varied response from it "constitutes no threat" to "most accurate ever."
Evangelical scholars and pastoral leaders supporting the project include Mark L. Strauss,  Tremper Longman, John Ortberg, Adam Hamilton, Craig Blomberg, Darrell Bock, Don Carson, Peter Furler, Bill Hybels, Ben Witherington III, Lee Strobel, John Stott, Philip Yancey, Dan Kimball, Terri Blackstock, Erwin McManus, Ted Haggard and others.

Critics

In June 2002, over 100 evangelical leaders signed a 'Statement of Concern' opposing the TNIV.[ref]
Wayne Grudem, "A Brief Summary of Concerns About the TNIV", Journal for Biblical Manhood and Womanhood 7 (2002): 6–8. "We cannot endorse the TNIV as sufficiently trustworthy to commend to the church." Names are documented online at Over 100 Christian Leaders Agree the TNIV Bible is not Trustworthy.[/ref] The Presbyterian Church in America and the Southern Baptist Convention passed resolutions opposing the TNIV and other inclusive-language translations.
Evangelical scholars and pastoral leaders critical of inclusive language translations include John F. MacArthur, J. I. Packer, Jack T. Chick, Gail Riplinger, James Dobson, Jerry Falwell, Texe Marrs, Wayne Grudem, Peter Ruckman, D. James Kennedy, Josh McDowell, R. Albert Mohler, Jr., John Piper, Pat Robertson, R.C. Sproul, and Joni Eareckson Tada.






