[[Tobias Schweinsteiger]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, Living people, People from Rosenheim, German footballers, Footballers from Bavaria, Association football midfielders, 2. Bundesliga players, 3. Liga players, VfB Lübeck players, Eintracht Braunschweig players, SpVgg Unterhaching players, SSV Jahn Regensburg players, FC Bayern Munich II players

Tobias Schweinsteiger (

Career

Early career

Schweinsteiger played youth football for FV Oberaudorf (two spells), his hometown club TSV 1860 Rosenheim, Austrian side FC Kufstein and SpVgg Unterhaching before being released in 2001. He joined Bavarian amateur sides SV Nußdorf and Falke Markt Schwaben and spent eighteen months playing for SSV Jahn Regensburg's reserve team before joining FC Ismaning in 2004. After an impressive half-season with Ismaning, he signed for VfB Lübeck of the Regionalliga Nord just after the beginning of the 2004–05 season.

Northern Germany

Schweinsteiger made an immediate impact for Lübeck, scoring within one minute of coming on as a substitute on his debut to secure a 1–0 victory over rivals Holstein Kiel. He formed an effective strike partnership with Lars Kampf, with the pair scoring eleven goals each as the club narrowly missed out on promotion to the 2. Bundesliga, finishing in third place. In the summer of 2005, Lübeck signed forwards Kai Hesse and Enrico Neitzel, and this increased competition meant that Schweinsteiger was often used as a substitute, but still managed to score seven goals. Lübeck experienced a repeat of last season's league position, finishing third again, although Schweinsteiger was to ascend to the second division, signing for Eintracht Braunschweig in July 2006.
He made his 2. Bundesliga debut on the fifth matchday of the season, coming on as a substitute for Torsten Lieberknecht in a 2–2 draw with Karlsruher SC. This proved to be one of only three wins for Braunschweig as they were relegated from the second tier, finishing in last place, by which point Schweinsteiger had found himself less in favour, restricted to mostly substitute appearances in the second half of the season.
After just a year with Braunschweig, Schweinsteiger returned to VfB Lübeck, but this time lasted only six months -  he was part of a large exodus in January 2008, after a poor start to the season made it clear that they wouldn't be able to qualify for the new 3. Liga. He returned to SpVgg Unterhaching, whom he'd played for as a youth, and were now playing in the Regionalliga Süd.

Return to Bavaria

Schweinsteiger made his Unterhaching debut in a local derby against Bayern Munich II, coming on as a substitute for Thomas Rathgeber and scoring the second goal in a 4–2 win. but this was to typify his 2008–09 season: most of his 34 appearances were as a late substitute and as such he only managed three goals has the club narrowly missed out on promotion, finishing 4th. The following season he was a regular starter, and finished as the club's top scorer with fourteen goals, despite the club finishing in a fairly disappointing 11th place.
Unterhaching were forced to cut costs, and Schweinsteiger was one of a number of senior players to leave, joining another of his former clubs, Jahn Regensburg.

FC Bayern

Schweinsteiger was to drop down to the fourth tier, though, to join Bayern Munich II of the Regionalliga Bayern,

Career statistics

Personal life

In 2006, Schweinsteiger was involved in a car accident that left a 13-year-old girl dead. Police investigation revealed that Schweinsteiger was blameless for the fatal accident.






