[[Bruce Schneier]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, Living people, American technology writers, Berkman Fellows, American Jews, American University alumni, University of Rochester alumni, People associated with computer security, Modern cryptographers, Cypherpunks, American chief technologists, People from New York, People from Minneapolis, Minnesota, Wired (magazine) people

Bruce Schneier () is an American cryptographer, computer security and privacy specialist, and writer. He is the author of several books on general security topics, computer security and cryptography.
Schneier is a fellow at the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard Law School, a program fellow at the New America Foundation's Open Technology Institute and the CTO of Co3 Systems. He is also a contributing writer for The Guardian news organization.theguardian.com/profile/bruceschneier

Early life

Bruce Schneier is a son of Martin Schneier, a Brooklyn Supreme Court judge. He grew up in Flatbush, attending P.S. 139 and Hunter High School. he went to American University in Washington, D.C. and got his master's degree in computer science in 1988. Mann Homeland Insecurity www.com He was awarded an honorary Ph.D from the University of Westminster in London, England in November 2011. The award was made by the Department of Electronics and Computer Science in recognition of Schneier's 'hard work and contribution to industry and public life'.
Schneier was a founder and chief technology officer of BT Managed Security Solutions, formerly Counterpane Internet Security, Inc.

Writings on computer security and general security

In 1994, Schneier published Applied Cryptography, which details the design, use, and implementation of cryptographic algorithms. In 2010 he published Cryptography Engineering, which is focused more on how to use cryptography in real systems and less on its internal design. He has also written books on security for a broader audience. In 2000, Schneier published Secrets and Lies: Digital Security in a Networked World, and in 2003, Beyond Fear: Thinking Sensibly About Security in an Uncertain World. In 2012 Schneier published Liars and Outliers: Enabling the Trust that Society Needs to Thrive.
Schneier writes a freely available monthly Internet newsletter on computer and other security issues, Crypto-Gram, as well as a security weblog, Schneier on Security.com The weblog started out as a way to publish essays before they appeared in Crypto-Gram, making it possible for others to comment on them while the stories were still current, but over time the newsletter became a monthly email version of the blog, re-edited and re-organized. 
Schneier is frequently quoted in the press on computer and other security issues, pointing out flaws in security and cryptographic implementations ranging from biometrics to airline security after the September 11 attacks. He also writes "Security Matters", a regular column for Wired Magazine.
Schneier revealed on his blog that in the December 2004 issue of the SIGCSE Bulletin, three Pakistani academics, Khawaja Amer Hayat, Umar Waqar Anis, and S. Tauseef-ur-Rehman, from the International Islamic University in Islamabad, Pakistan, plagiarized an article written by Schneier and got it published. The editor of the SIGCSE Bulletin removed the paper from their website and demanded official letters of admission and apology. Schneier noted on his blog that International Islamic University personnel had requested him "to close comments in this blog entry"; Schneier refused to close comments on the blog, but he did delete posts which he deemed "incoherent or hostile".

Viewpoints

Cryptography

To Schneier, peer review and expert analysis are important for the security of cryptographic systems.
The term Schneier's law was coined by Cory Doctorow in his speech about Digital Rights Management for Microsoft Research, which is included in his 2008 book Content: Selected Essays on Technology, Creativity, Copyright, and the Future of the Future. The law is phrased as:
He attributes this to Bruce Schneier, presumably making reference to his book Applied Cryptography, although the principle predates its publication. In The Codebreakers, David Kahn states:
Similarly, in A Few Words On Secret Writing in Graham's Magazine (July 1841), Edgar Allan Poe stated

DRM

Schneier is critical of digital rights management (DRM) and has said that it allows a vendor to increase lock-in. Proper implementation of control-based security for the user via trusted computing is very difficult, and security is not the same thing as control.

Homeland security

Schneier has said that homeland security money should be spent on intelligence, investigation, and emergency response.
Regarding PETN—the explosive that has become terrorists' weapon of choice—Schneier has written that only swabs and dogs can detect it. He also believes that changes to airport security since 11 September 2001 have done more harm than good and he defeated Kip Hawley, former head of the Transportation Security Administration, in an Economist online debate by 87% to 13% regarding the issue."International terrorism: AQAP tries again: Good intelligence work still leaves questions over airport security", The Economist, dated 12 May 2012.
As a Fellow of Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University, Schneier is exploring the intersection of security, technology, and people, with an emphasis on power.

System design

Schneier has criticized security approaches that try to prevent any malicious incursion, instead arguing that designing systems to fail well is more important. Under Kerckhoffs's Principle, the need for one or more parts of a cryptographic system to remain secret increases the fragility of the system; whether details about a system should be obscured depends upon the availability of persons who can make use of the information for beneficial uses versus the potential for attackers to misuse the information.

Full disclosure

Schneier is a proponent of full disclosure, i.e. making security issues public.

Other writing

Schneier and Karen Cooper were nominated in 2000 for the Hugo Award, in the category of Best Related Book, for their Minicon 34 Restaurant Guide, a work originally published for the Minneapolis science fiction convention Minicon which gained a readership internationally in science fiction fandom for its wit and good humor.

Cryptographic algorithms

Schneier has been involved in the creation of many cryptographic algorithms.
Hash functions:
Stream ciphers:
Pseudo-random number generators:
Block ciphers:

Publications

Activism

Bruce Schneier is a board member of the Electronic Frontier Foundation.








