[[Melanie Morgan]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, Living people, People from Kansas City, Missouri, American radio personalities, American political pundits, Lindenwood University alumni, American journalists, Commentators, People from Marin County, California, Radio personalities from San Francisco, California

Melanie Morgan (born 1956 in Kansas City, Missouri) is an American radio personality, formerly with KSFO (560 kHz AM) in San Francisco where her husband, Jack Swanson, was the General Manager.  She was laid off from KSFO due to budget cutbacks and declining ad revenue, returned to host the morning show, then once more left the station as of July 10, 2013.  She has also previously worked as a reporter for KGO-TV in San Francisco. She is the Chairman of Move America Forward, a non-partisan, non-profit, charitable organization that supports the U.S. armed forces and their missions in the War on Terrorism.  She is known for her advocacy on behalf of the American military, defense of the War on Terror and criticism of American liberals.

Personal life

Melanie Morgan attended the Lindenwood University.
Her addiction to gambling was the subject of the TV-movie High Stakes: The Melanie Morgan Story. In 2006, she told the San Francisco Chronicle that she had not placed a bet in 13 years, and has served as president of the California Council on Problem Gambling.
Morgan is married to Jack Swanson, a senior manager at KSFO. They live in Marin County, north of San Francisco, and have several children.American Thinker: Our Ferocious Home-Front Warrior: Melanie Morgan
Morgan serves on the boards of a number of other nonprofit organizations, including the Bruin Alumni Association.
On February 15, 2010 she revealed she had been diagnosed with thyroid cancer but the cancer has not spread.

Professional career

Morgan began her career reporting on the 1983 Beirut Marine Barracks Bombing, Lebanon, where 241 Marines lost their lives.  While she focuses on San Francisco Bay Area regional issues, she has covered events in China, Mexico and Iraq.
In 2006, Morgan's report on U.S. soldiers serving in Iraq: "Voices of Soldiers" earned was recognized by the Associated Press Mark Twain Awards for Best Special Program.
In October 2006, Morgan and reporter Catherine Moy published American Mourning, which criticized anti-war activist Cindy Sheehan, and her reaction to her son's death.  The book contains allegations from Sheehan's sister-in-law that Sheehan engaged in sexual misbehavior, and contrasts her behavior with the Johnson family, who also lost a son in the war. The book suggests that Johnson family reacted appropriately by supporting the war.
Melanie Morgan co-hosted a highly rated morning show with Lee Rodgers and traffic reporter "Officer Vic" on San Francisco Bay Area radio station KSFO.
Talk Radio Network tapped Morgan to be the host of the network's new morning show, America's Morning News.  It debuted June 15, 2009, co-hosted by John McCaslin and managed by the Washington Times, who contributes reporters to the program. Accessed 2009-05-28. Morgan left the show January 5, 2010, citing health issues.
Morgan was added back to the KSFO morning show in January 2012, but has since left again, as of July 10, 2013.com: KSFO plays musical chairs. January 3, 2012.KSFO: The KSFO Morning Show

Political activism

Morgan and Michelle Malkin organized a pro-troop "webathon"A portmanteau of "World Wide Web" and "marathon. See also, telethon. on June 26, 2008. Conservative talk-show talent Rush Limbaugh, Sean Hannity, and Mark Levin participated. MAF members raised an aggregate of $1.055 million in gifts for U.S. soldiers and Iraqi children.
She is currently Chair of Move America Forward (MAF), a nonprofit neoconservative, political advocacy group promoting a neoconservative agenda as well as providing gifts to U.S. soldiers in Iraq. She was honored by Move America Forward (MAF) members on May 10, 2008.
As the chairman of Move America Forward, Morgan lead a 40-city campaign Heroes for the Holidays Tour to "rally support for the troops and their mission."  During her last trip to the Middle East, Melanie Morgan and one of the Gold Star Mothers, Debbie Lee, brought over 100,000 Christmas cards to troops throughout the area of operations.

Controversial statements and criticism

After The New York Times published a story regarding U.S. government tracking of terrorist funding, Morgan said that editor Bill Keller should be tried for treason and "If he were to be tried and convicted of treason, yes, I would have no problem with him being sent to the gas chamber."
Melanie Morgan's comments about House Speaker Nancy Pelosi on the November 14, 2006 broadcast of the Lee Rodgers & Melanie Morgan Program have drawn criticism from media watchdogs and liberal bloggers. Morgan commented "We've got a bull's-eye painted on her big, wide laughing eyes."Martin Kasindorf, "Media outlets battle it out over free-speech rights", USA Today, January 24, 2007 Morgan said the statement was a political metaphor that had been distorted by critics in order to appear violent.
MSNBC talk show host Keith Olbermann twice named Morgan "Worst Radio Host in America", stating that (KSFO should) 'admit that the station "regrets" that everything Melanie Morgan has ever said... is "not accurate."' 

The News Hour with Jim Lehrer

On May 9, 2007, Morgan appeared with VoteVets. Morgan accused the veteran of "political games" and undermining the U.S. troops serving in Iraq.  May 9, 2007. Executive Producer Linda Winslow responded to complaints by saying, "Since neither guest was in the studio with Judy Woodruff, there wasn't much she could do to prevent them from interrupting one another, short of saying — as she did at least three times — 'please let him/her finish his/her point'. The NewsHour style is to ask pointed questions politely; we expect our guests to subscribe to the same rules. Since the program is produced live, we can't do much to eliminate rude guests from your television screen once the segment has begun; what we can do is guarantee you will never see Morgan on our program again."Poynter Institute, Right-wing talker Morgan isn't welcome back on "NewsHour", May 17, 2007. Retrieved June 9, 2007. Retrieved June 9, 2007. Rather than considering her own actions, and the need to know enough about what one is talking about in the first place, in order to refute a discussion-combatant in a civilized manner, without continued resort to butting into their time-slot, Morgan subsequently blamed Media Matters for America for her persona non grata status, accusing the organization of "a bottom-line effort... where they call their people and ask them to call PBS." Hannity & Colmes, Fox News Channel, May 21, 2007.






