[[Christine McVie]]

CATEGORIES: 1943 births, Living people, Alumni of the University of Greenwich, English contraltos, English female singers, English singer-songwriters, English keyboardists, Female rock singers, Fleetwood Mac members, E1 Music artists, British rhythm and blues boom musicians, English rhythm and blues singers

Christine McVie (born Anne Christine Perfect, 12 July 1943) is an English singer-songwriter and keyboardist. Her fame came as a member of rock band Fleetwood Mac. Eight songs written and sung by McVie are on the band's Greatest Hits album, including "Don't Stop", "Little Lies", "Everywhere" and "You Make Loving Fun". She has also released three solo albums. AllMusic critic Steve Leggett noted McVie's "naturally smoky low alto vocal style", describing her as an "Unabashedly easy-on-the-ears singer/songwriter, and the prime mover behind some of Fleetwood Mac's biggest hits."
In 1998, as a member of Fleetwood Mac, McVie was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and received the Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music. Since retiring from the band, she has worked on solo material in her converted barn at her home in Wickhambreaux in Kent. McVie appeared on stage with Fleetwood Mac at London's O2 Arena in September 2013, and rejoined the band in January 2014.

Early life

Christine was born in the small village of Bouth in the Lake District of England
Although Christine was introduced to the piano at age four, it was not until age eleven that she studied music seriously, when she was re-introduced to piano by Philip Fisher, a local musician and school friend of Christine's older brother John. Other early influences included The Everly Brothers.

Early music

McVie studied sculpture at an art college in Birmingham for five years, with the goal of becoming an art teacher. During that time she met a number of budding musicians in Britain's blues scene. Her first foray into the music field didn't come until she met two friends, Stan Webb and Andy Silvester in a pub one night. At the time, they were playing in a band called "Sounds Of Blue" which had a few dates booked, but no bass guitarist. Knowing that Christine had musical talent, they asked her to join. After five years, Christine graduated from art college with a teaching degree, but by that time "Sounds of Blue" had split up.
Fresh out of art college, McVie found she did not have enough money to launch herself into the art world, so she moved to London, where she worked briefly as a department store window dresser.

Chicken Shack

In 1967 Christine learned that her ex-band mates, Andy Silvester and Stan Webb, were forming a blues band, Chicken Shack, and were looking for a pianist. She wrote to them asking to join, and they invited her to play keyboards/piano and to sing background vocals. Chicken Shack's debut release was "It's Okay With Me Baby", written by and featuring McVie. She stayed with Chicken Shack for two albums, during which her genuine feel for the blues became evident, not only in her Sonny Thompson-style piano playing, but through her authentic "bluesy" voice. 47  Chicken Shack had a hit with "I'd Rather Go Blind", which featured Christine on lead vocals. 48 Perfect received a Melody Maker award for female vocalist in both 1969 and 1970. McVie left Chicken Shack in 1969 after meeting Fleetwood Mac bassist John McVie.

Fleetwood Mac

Christine was a fan of Fleetwood Mac at the time; and while touring with Chicken Shack, the two bands often would meet. They also were "label mates" at Blue Horizon, and Fleetwood Mac had asked Christine to play piano as a session musician for Peter Green's songs on the band's second album, Mr. Wonderful.Mike Vernon's CD Booklet, Fleetwood Mac: The Complete Blue Horizon Sessions 1967-1969, Chapter 2
Encouraged to continue her career, Christine recorded a solo album, Christine Perfect; following her success as a member of Fleetwood Mac, the album was reissued under the name The Legendary Christine Perfect Album. After marrying Fleetwood Mac bass guitarist John McVie, Christine joined Fleetwood Mac in 1970. She had already contributed backup vocals and painted the cover for Kiln House. The band had just lost founding member Peter Green, and its members were nervous about touring without him. Christine had been a huge fan of the Peter Green-era Fleetwood Mac; and since she knew all the lyrics to their songs, she went along.
The early 1970s was a rocky time for the band, with a revolving door of musicians; and only the albums Bare Trees and Mystery to Me, scored any successes. Furthermore, a group impersonating Fleetwood Mac (which later became Stretch) was touring the United States with encouragement from the band's manager, Clifford Davis. The tour collapsed, but it led to a protracted lawsuit between Davis and Fleetwood Mac (or Stretch?)."Bob Brunning – Fleetwood Mac: Behind The Masks", Hodder & Stoughton, 1990.
In 1974 McVie reluctantly agreed to move with the rest of Fleetwood Mac to the U.S. and make a fresh start. Within a year Stevie Nicks and Lindsey Buckingham of Buckingham Nicks joined the band, giving it an added dimension. Their first album together, 1975's Fleetwood Mac, had several hit songs, with McVie's "Over My Head" and "Say You Love Me", both reaching Billboard's top-20 singles chart. It was "Over My Head" which first put Fleetwood Mac on American radio and into the national Top 20. 92
In 1976 McVie began an on-the-road affair with the band's lighting director, which inspired her to write "You Make Loving Fun", a top-10 hit on the landmark smash Rumours, one of the best-selling albums of all-time. Her biggest hit was "Don't Stop", which climbed all the way to number three. The Rumours tour also included McVie's "Songbird", a ballad played as the encore of many Fleetwood Mac concerts.
By the end of the Rumours tour, the McVies were divorced. The 1979 double album Tusk produced three more US top-20 hits ("Tusk", which is also the band's first "conceptual" music video, The Tusk tour continued into 1980 after which the band took time apart. They reunited in 1981 to record the album Mirage at the Château d'Hérouville's studio in France. The album, released in 1982, returned the band to the top of the US charts and also contained the top-5 hit "Hold Me", co-written by McVie. McVie's inspiration for the song was her tortured relationship with Beach Boys drummer Dennis Wilson. My Life and Adventures in Fleetwood Mac. Avon Books, 1991.  Her song, "Love in Store", became the third single from the album peaking at #22 in early 1983."Love In Store"/"Can't Go Back" single page at FleetwoodMac.net Discography
In 1984 McVie recorded another solo album. She created hits with the songs "Got a Hold on Me" (Top 10 pop and #1 adult contemporary) and "Love Will Show Us How" (#30). A Third single, "I'm The One", was released but did not chart. McVie is quoted in The Billboard Book of Number One Adult Contemporary Hits as saying of her solo album, "Maybe it isn't the most adventurous album in the world, but I wanted to be honest and please my own ears with it."Connelly, Christopher. "From British Blues with Chicken Shack to Soft Rock with Fleetwood Mac: Christine McVie Keeps a Level Head after Two Decades in the Fast Lane." Rolling Stone, 7 June 1984
McVie also met keyboardist, Eddy Quintela (12 years her junior), whom she married on 18 October 1986. Quintela went on to co-write many songs with her that were featured on subsequent Fleetwood Mac albums. The couple divorced in the mid-1990s. She rejoined Fleetwood Mac to record the Tango in the Night album, which went on to become the band's biggest success since Rumours ten years earlier. The biggest hit from the album which was top 5 in both the UK and US, was McVie's "Little Lies", co-written with her husband Quintela. Another McVie single from the album, "Everywhere", reached #4 in the UK, which would be the band's third highest ever chart peak there and their final top 40 UK hit to date (the single peaked at #14 in the US).Fleetwood Mac UK singles positions at Chart Stats
In 1990 the band (now without Lindsey Buckingham) recorded Behind the Mask, but the album only reached 'Gold' status in the U.S.,Recording Industry Association of America sales figures. Certified 'Gold' on 19 July 1990. and only McVie's song "Save Me" made the U.S. Top 40. The album did, however, enter the UK album chart at #1 and reached Platinum status there. The second US single release from the album, McVie's "Skies the Limit" did not make the top
100, but did chart the A/C at number 10. Despite the departure of Stevie Nicks, McVie remained loyal to Mick Fleetwood and her former husband John McVie, writing and recording a new track ("Love Shines") for the 1992 boxed set 25 Years - The Chain, and five songs for the band's 1995 album Time.
The members of the band seemed to have gone their separate ways until Mick Fleetwood, John McVie, and Lindsey Buckingham got together again for one of Buckingham's solo projects. Christine was soon asked to sing and play on some of the tracks. The four of them decided a full reunion was possible and Stevie Nicks was called back into the fold and the resulting live album, 1997's The Dance, went to #1 in the US album charts. Despite her reservations, Christine complied with the band's touring schedule, and then performed for the group's 1998 induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, as well as the Grammy Awards show, and the BRIT Awards in the UK.  Christine later revealed (in a 2014 "Rolling Stone" interview) that she had developed a phobia about flying, which was later treated with psychotherapy.  This phobia was the reason she decided not to continue with Fleetwood Mac after 1998.
In 2006 Paste magazine named McVie, together with bandmates, Lindsey Buckingham and Stevie Nicks, as the 83rd greatest living songwriter or songwriting team."Paste's 100 Best Living Songwriters: The List" Paste magazine, 8 June 2006

Hiatus from Fleetwood Mac (1998-2014)

After The Dance, McVie returned to England to be near her family and stepped out of public view until 2000 when she appeared in public to receive an Honorary Doctorate in music from the University of Greenwich."Fleetwood Mac Star, Christine McVie, Awarded Honorary Degree At Rochester Cathedral, 20 July 2000." University of Greenwich press release in March 2000 announcing the event. Sometime after leaving Fleetwood Mac, she and Quintela divorced.
In a 2004 interview, McVie admitted to not listening much to pop music anymore and stated instead a preference for Classic FM. Mid-2004 saw the release of McVie's new solo album, In the Meantime, her third in a career spanning five decades. Recording in her converted barn in Kent, she worked on the project with her nephew, Dan Perfect, who contributed guitar-playing, backing vocals, and songwriting. No tour was organized to promote this album; instead Christine conducted several press interviews in both Britain and America.
In 2006, McVie was awarded the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors' Gold Badge of Merit at a ceremony held in London's Savoy Hotel. During the announcement of Fleetwood Mac's 2012 world tour, Stevie Nicks downplayed the likelihood of McVie ever rejoining the group: "She went to England and she has never been back since 1998 ... as much as we would all like to think that she'll just change her mind one day, I don't think it'll happen ... We love her, so we had to let her go."Christine McVie will never rejoin Fleetwood Mac 6 December 2012

Return to Fleetwood Mac (2014–)

In 2013, McVie appeared on stage in Maui, Hawaii performing with the Mick Fleetwood Blues Band which included her ex-husband John as well as Mick Fleetwood. Both John and Mick currently live in Hawaii, John on Oahu and Mick on Maui. This was her first appearance on stage in 15 years. She played on two dates and her appearance on stage was received with rapturous applause.
On 11 January 2014, Mick Fleetwood announced during a concert he performed in Maui that Christine would be rejoining the band,

Collaborations

McVie sang with Dennis Wilson on his song "Love Surrounds Me" for The Beach Boys' 1979 album L.A. (Light Album). She also sang with Christopher Cross on the song "Never Stop Believing", on his 1988 album Back of My Mind.

Discography

With Chicken Shack

With Fleetwood Mac

Solo albums

Singles






