[[Feste]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional characters introduced in 1602, Characters in Twelfth Night, Male Shakespearean characters

Feste is a fictional fool in the William Shakespeare's comedy Twelfth Night. He is attached to the household of the Countess Olivia. He has apparently been there for some time, as he was a "fool that the Lady Olivia's father took much delight in" (2.4). Although Olivia's father has died within the last year, it is possible that Feste approaches or has reached middle age, though he still has the wit to carry off good 'fooling' when he needs to, and the voice to sing lustily or plangently as the occasion demands. He is referred to by name only once during the play, in answer to an inquiry by Orsino of who sang a song that he heard the previous evening. Curio responds "Feste, the jester, my lord; a fool that the lady Olivia's father took much delight in. He is about the house" (2.4). Throughout the rest of the play, he is addressed only as "Fool," while in the stage directions he is mentioned as "Clown." 
Feste seems to leave Olivia's house and return at his pleasure, rather too freely for a servant. (At the very least he is doing some free-lance entertaining over at the house of Duke Orsino (2.4).) His peripatetic habits get him into trouble with Lady Olivia: when we first see him, he must talk his way out of being turned out — a grim fate in those days — for being absent, as it were, without leave. He succeeds, and once back in his lady's good graces, he weaves in and out of the action with the sort of impunity that was reserved for a person nobody took seriously. 

Performances

There are instances in the play where we believe Feste to be an almost omniscient presence. Some critics have suggested that there are moments where it seems Feste knows more about Viola/Cesario's disguise than he lets on and certain stage and film adaptations have taken this approach with their portrayal of the fool.
A good example is in Trevor Nunn's film adaptation, in which Ben Kingsley is constantly present in the scenes that reveal the plot — in fact he is the narrator at the start of the film, describing the shipwreck and the separation of the twins. He is then shown watching Viola arrive in Illyria and the film ends with him watching the various supporting players leave Olivia's estate. When Viola removes her "Cesario" disguise he gives her a golden necklace which she discarded when first shipwrecked on Illyria's shores.
Kingsley's Feste dresses in old clothes and appears to be a wanderer of no fixed abode, though he slips in and out of Olivia's estate at his will. He plays a number of musical instruments and, like most of the cast, displays a mixture of comedy and pathos.

Songs

Feste, as a fool, has a repertoire of songs:

O Mistress Mine

O Mistress mine, where are you roaming? 
O, stay and hear! Your true love's coming, 
That can sing both high and low. 
Trip no further, pretty sweeting. 
Journeys end in lovers meeting, 
Every wise man's son doth know.
What is love? 'Tis not hereafter. 
Present mirth hath present laughter. 
What's to come is still unsure. 
In delay there lies no plenty, 
Then come kiss me, sweet and twenty. 
Youth's a stuff will not endure.

Come Away, Death

Come away, come away, death, 
And in sad cypress let me be laid; 
Fie away, fie away, breath; 
I am slain by a fair cruel maid. 
My shroud of white, stuck all with yew, 
O prepare it! 
My part of death, no one so true 
O did share it.
Not a flower, not a flower sweet, 
On my black coffin let there be strown; 
Not a friend, not a friend greet 
My poor corpse, where my bones shall be thrown: 
A thousand, thousand sighs to save, 
Lay me, O where 
Sad true lover never find my grave, 
O to weep there!
-Reserved-
Come away come away death lyrics.
1223-1321 poems, by William Shakespheare.

Feste's Song

When that I was and a little tiny boy, 
With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, 
A foolish thing was but a toy, 
For the rain it raineth every day. 
But when I came to man's estate, 
With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, 
'Gainst knaves and thieves men shut their gate, 
For the rain, it raineth every day. 
But when I came, alas! to wive, 
With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, 
By swaggering could I never thrive, 
For the rain, it raineth every day. 
But when I came unto my beds, 
With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, 
With toss-pots still had drunken heads, 
For the rain, it raineth every day. 
A great while ago the world begun, 
With hey, ho, the wind and the rain. 
But that's all one, our play is done, 
And we'll strive to please you every day.

I Am Gone, Sir

I am gone, sir. 
And anon, sir, 
I'll be with you again, 
In a trice, 
Like to the old Vice, 
Your need to sustain. 
Who with dagger of lath, 
In his rage and his wrath, 
Cries "Ah ha" to the devil. 
Like a mad lad, 
"Pare thy nails, dad." 
Adieu, good man devil.

In other works

Feste (now Theophilos) is the main character in Alan Gordon's "Fools Guild" mystery series.
FESTE is a Rock/Blues band from Anaheim, CA. Their debut album, "First Folio," was released in August 2013 and contains two covers from "Twelfth Night," including "Come Away, Death" & "The Wind and The Rain."



Twelfth Night, Elizabeth Story Donno, ed. 1985 (w/additional material, 2003). (New Cambridge Shakespeare)

