[[Hitcents]]

CATEGORIES: Software companies based in Kentucky, Companies based in Kentucky, Application Development

Hitcents is a technology-based creative agency in Bowling Green, Kentucky specializing in web design, application development and mobile games. Hitcents was established by twin brothers Chris and Clinton Mills in 1999.

History

As high school sophomores, Chris and Clinton started Hitcents, which at the time was a company focused in internet advertising. When the company first began, Hitcents paid clients on a cents-per-hit basis, hence the company name. Hitcents was acquired by Houchens Industries in 2003. Since 2004, Hitcents has grown from three employees to 50, and it occupies 13000 sqft of the 4th floor Hitcents Park Plaza commercial wrap.
Today Hitcents is run by twins Clinton and Chris Mills and their father Ed Mills. Hitcents was named one of the best places to work in Kentucky for 2014

Divisions

Omniprise ERP Software

Omniprise is a full-service, customizable software suite for enterprise resource planning. Information gathered in a single central repository is available to every part of an enterprise for use in all applications from simple data mining to mission-critical decision making.

Services

Website Development

Hitcents web development solutions include graphic design, programming and maintenance, administrative access, eCommerce, data transfer and website hosting. Hitcents web department has been recognized over the years with numerous awards for their website work including Marcom Awards, Hitcents designs websites for local businesses, celebrities, and international brands such as Tampico.

Technology

Hitcents technology solutions encompass consulting, data backup, hardware purchasing, Virtual Private Network setup, secure DSL, kiosk development, networking and high-speed internet access.
VPN services allow facilities to share data between remote locations. This allows for a high level of security while providing convenience to facilities. This also limits geographical barriers and decreases fixed costs for many different applications.
Each computer can be on the network no matter the location. If a company has a central office in one location and branches or smaller stores in other places, Hitcents sets up and maintains a VPN network at all locations and provides instant broadband access.

Marketing

Hitcents offers a wide range of public relations and marketing solutions such as Search Engine Resubmission, Cost per Click Marketing Options and social media planning.

Creative Design

Encompassing all design aspects such as logos, print and web, Hitcents creates brand images that influence and generate value for customers.

Software Development

Hitcents creates new custom software for every aspect of business, including a company intranet/extranet, inventory system, employee management program, and more.

Production

Hitcents is also equipped with full video services including shooting, editing and production for a variety of content. Hitcents video department is suited for producing commercials, web videos, radio, long form informational videos, and  product demonstrations.

Mobile Application Development

Hitcents develops mobile applications for both in-house and client projects. These applications vary in genre: from mobile games to enterprise level business applications. Hitcents worked with Sony Music to develop the One Direction scrapbook app which earned a 5 star rating with over 1300 reviews. The success of the 1D app and companion website has also earned nominations in the Social, Content, Media and Entertainment categories.
Internally, Hitcents created the internationally recognized and award-winning series, Draw a Stickman. Started as a website, Drawastickman.

Shanghai Office

In fall 2013, Hitcents opened their first international office, in Shanghai China The Shanghai office specializes in publishing mobile games for the Chinese market and their platforms. The office is located in the prestigious Luwan District, home to famous boulevards, international fashion and high-class restaurants. President Chris Mills is in China overseeing operations in the Shanghai office. Hitcents is working with top industry leaders to translate and culturize games for the Chinese market.

Timeline





www.com

