[[Mannatech]]

CATEGORIES: Companies based in Coppell, Texas, Companies listed on NASDAQ, Multi-level marketing companies, Companies established in 1994

Mannatech, Incorporated, is a multinational multi-level marketing firm engaged in research, development, and distribution of "glyconutrients," the company's name for blends of plant-sourced saccharides.
It operates in the United States, Canada, Australia, the United Kingdom, Japan, New Zealand, Republic of Korea, Taiwan, Denmark, Germany, Mexico, South Africa, Singapore, Sweden, Norway, Austria, the Netherlands, Ireland, Estonia, Finland and Czech Republic. The company's stock is traded on the NASDAQ exchange under the symbol MTEX. Mannatech employs 310 people and sells its products through approximately 229,000 active independent sales associates.
In 2006, Forbes magazine named Mannatech the #5 company on its annual list of the "200 Best Small Companies"
and in 2007 Mannatech was ranked 12th in BusinessWeek magazine's 2007 list of America's "Top 100 Hot Growth Small Companies."
Mannatech has experienced periods of public scrutiny regarding the efficacy of its products, including a class-action lawsuit in 2005
and an attorney general investigation in 2007,

Products

As of July 2011, the company offered 22 nutritional supplement products, two topical products, five skin care products, and four weight management/physical fitness products. Mannatech is most widely known for Ambrotose, its "glyconutritional" dietary supplement which is a patented blend of plant-sourced saccharides used in its line of Ambrotose products. Glyconutritionals were formulated to support cellular communication by positively impacting human glycoforms, a claim that has generated controversy among some members of the scientific community. In an SEC filing, the company stated that its products "are formulated with predominately 

Scientific evaluation

Independent commentary

The opinion of independent glycobiologists is that the body cannot digest Ambrotose, as it lacks the enzymes needed.
Prominent glycobiologist Dr. Ronald Schnaar, PhD of Johns Hopkins School of Medicine
Hudson Freeze, PhD, leading glycobiologist at the Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute
In Glycobiology, another article described the potential for the public to be misled about the science of glycobiology by the nebulous "glyconutrient" term.  It included criticisms and comments from glycobiologists, including Ajit Varki, Raymond Dwek, Gerald Hart, James Paulson, Hudson Freeze, and Ronald Schnaar.
According to the Memorial Sloan–Kettering Cancer Center, Ambrotose has been "promoted aggressively to cancer patients" on the basis that it can help cellular health and boost the immune system, but that "strong scientific evidence to support these claims is lacking".

Company-funded studies

As stated on Mannatech's websites, the company has sought expert scientists to conduct pre-clinical and clinical research on the company's products. Additional studies have indicated that the products also exert positive prebiotic effects

In a study published in the International Journal of Food Microbiology in 2010, Drs. Massimo Marzorati and Sam Possemiers (University of Ghent and ProDigest, Ghent, Belgium) and colleagues employed human gastrointestinal tract simulations and microbiological analysis to show that Ambrotose® complex and Advanced Ambrotose® powder exerted positive prebiotic effects.  Both products exhibited quality selective fermentability throughout the entire colon with a positive and selective bifidus factor. They also demonstrated the possibility of enhancing species belonging to Bacteroidetes, a phylum recently associated with body weight management.
In a five-week combined Phase 1 and 2 open label, forced titration dose response study of 21 healthy adults, physicians and scientists from Southern Cross University showed that the Ambrotose AO dietary supplement was safe and raised serum Oxygen Radical Absorbance Capacity (ORAC) by 36.6%. The study was published in BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine. In a subsequent 21-day randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover trial of 25 healthy adults, scientists from the University of Memphis showed that Ambrotose AO capsules significantly increased two measures of antioxidant capacity in the blood: ORAC and Trolox Equivalent Antioxidant Capacity (TEAC).
Two clinical trials (one conducted in the U.S. and one in Australia) investigated the effect of Ambrotose complex on brain function. Drs. Atiya N. Stancil and Leslie H. Hicks of Howard University conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of Ambrotose in 62 healthy young adults. It was reported that a single one-tablespoon serving of Ambrotose complex significantly improved visual discrimination and working memory. A trial in 109 healthy middle-aged adults conducted by Dr. Talitha Best (a Mannatech-funded researcher) and colleagues from Flinders University showed that Ambrotose complex powder (4 grams/day for 12 weeks) significantly improved memory and psychological well-being.

Public Scrutiny

Securities Exchange Act class-action lawsuit

The company has been known for its literature, websites, and multi-level marketing with claims of scientific links to cellular glycobiology long disputed by the relevant individual Nobel prize winners.
On September 9, 2005 a class-action lawsuit was filed against Mannatech for alleged violations of the Securities Exchange Act. The plaintiff class accused Mannatech of violating the act by "issuing a series of material misrepresentations"; specifically: failing to control its sales associates and allowing them to make false claims concerning the efficacy of Mannatech products. This caused a misleading price inflation of the company's stock.  The plaintiffs consisted of the purchasers of Mannatech stock during the period August 10, 2004 through July 30, 2007.
On March 20, 2008, Mannatech settled the class-action lawsuit by agreeing to pay $11.25 million to the plaintiff class. As part of the settlement, Mannatech admitted no wrongdoing.

Texas Attorney General civil complaint

Mannatech came under investigation by the Texas Attorney General on October 27, 2006 for alleged violations of that state's Deceptive Trade Practices Act.
In response to this criticism, Mannatech's founder and chief executive officer at the time, Samuel L. Caster, offered his view: "We walk the fine line of always stating our case appropriately and always training our people: We're not into the treatment, cure or mitigation of disease. We're into the improvement of quality of life. Now, who can benefit from good nutrition? Sick people, well people, everybody. Everybody benefits from good nutrition."
On July 5, 2007, Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott formally charged Mannatech, Sam Caster, and several related entities with operating an illegal marketing scheme in violation of state law. A press release stated, "Today's enforcement action stems from a large-scale investigation by state authorities, who examined Mannatech's dubious claims about the health benefits of its products." 
In response to the civil complaint, Mannatech expanded its compliance department and began to provide periodic reports to the Attorney General's office to ensure that the marketing efforts of its affiliate network adhere to appropriate guidelines.
Mannatech settled the civil complaint on February 26, 2009 by agreeing to pay $4 million in restitution to clients who purchased products and $2 million to the state to cover its costs in the case. In addition, Sam Caster agreed to pay a $1 million civil penalty and steer clear of any type of leadership position or employment relationship with Mannatech for five years.
When discussing the settlement at a news conference, Abbot stated, "Bottom line, this is a warning to the general public: Be wary of phony claims of magic cure-all pills or false hope in a bottle. You could be duped into purchasing something that has no real effect and no real value."
Mannatech did not admit wrongdoing; settling was easier than debating Abbott, according to then-CEO Wayne Badovinus. "If they do it again, we will ensure they get put out of business," Abbott said.
One year later, Mannatech Co-CEO Robert Sinnott reflected on the ramifications of the legal action, saying, "The civil action related mainly to some actions by our salesforce. We were embarrassed and also financially impacted by the attorney general suit. We learned from that chapter and it is closed. We've reached a settlement and we've paid the fees associated with it. We've done everything in our power to correct that and make sure we're in compliance in the future."

ABC investigation

A 20/20 undercover investigation that aired June 1, 2007 on ABC Television showed Mannatech's sales associates teaching sales recruits how to target Mannatech products to patients with specific illnesses in a manner that purportedly does not violate U.S. federal law, including U.S. Food and Drug Administration regulations, by avoiding direct claims that the products cure any particular diseases.
Mannatech CEO Sam Caster was interviewed for the show and told 20/20 that Mannatech makes no specific health claims about its products. "I don't think dietary supplements treat, cure, mitigate anything. It is not meant to substitute a doctor's oversight, but it plays an important role in the whole health equation."

Company losses

Mannatech announced in August 2007 that company founder Sam Caster was stepping down as CEO of Mannatech,
His efforts had not met the performance expectations of the board of directors.
Another member of the board resigned shortly after.
Mannatech's Chief Science Officer Dr. Robert Sinnott and Mannatech's Chief Financial Officer Steve Fenstermacher were named Co-CEOs.[ref]
</ref> Fenstermacher later resigned.<ref name="title Co-CEO Stephen Fenstermacher Resigns">
</ref>
Publicity over the company's lawsuits began to damage the balance sheets and stock performance. After profits of $32 million in 2006 and $6.6 million in 2007, Mannatech reported a $12.6 million loss in 2008 and a $17.3 million loss in 2009.
By mid-year 2010, one quarter of Mannatech's sales were gone.
2010 losses were $10.6 million. 
As the company's market capitalizations continued to fall, S&P Indices dropped it from the S&P 600 Index, stating "They are no longer representative of the small cap market space." Recruiting efforts continued dropping in 2011, widening company losses to 20.6 million.[ref]
</ref>

Sam Caster

Prior to Mannatech

Samuel L. Caster, founder and former Chairman of the Board of Directors of Mannatech, Incorporated, was an entrepreneur in other lines of business and was part of other organizations prior to Mannatech. Reproduced on this website. Original article available on Barron's website  only for Barron's Online subscribers.
Sam Caster is an early cast member of Up With People, a motivational organization and musical performance troupe. The Up With People International Alumni Association has recognized Caster as an alumnus who exhibits leadership, intercultural understanding, and humanitarian outreach.
Sam Caster's first major business venture, Eagle Shield, was an insulation product that claimed to utilize new technology developed by NASA and could reduce heating and cooling costs by up to 40%. The Attorney General of Texas concluded that the product's technology long predated NASA and did not reduce consumers' bills in the amounts advertised.
Caster's second product, the "Electrocat," was sold as a pest control device. The Electrocat reportedly emitted pulsed vibrations that repelled rats, crickets, snakes, ticks, spiders, mosquitoes, and scorpions. However, in January 1991, the Attorney General of Texas investigated the product and found that the Electrocat emitted no vibrations whatsoever. The Attorney General declared, "The device is a hoax, and stands on the same scientific footing as a perpetual motion machine."

Mannatech's inception

Caster then started Mannatech in 1994, coinciding with Congress' passage of the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994, which made profitable marketing of a wider spectrum of dietary supplements a possibility. His new company quickly became a success. Caster's wife Linda later wrote and released a book titled Undeniable Destiny, in which she refers to Mannatech as a "Joseph company," based on Joseph in the Bible, who, as she noted in her book, had a divinely inspired destiny to fulfill.

Consultant to Mannatech

On August 22, 2007, Sam Caster resigned as CEO of Mannatech.
The Wall Street Journal reported: "Mr. Caster suggested his own resignation so he could focus on company marketing, said (Mannatech board member) Mr. Larry A. Jobe. Mr. Jobe said the board wasn't displeased with Mr. Caster, but that the lawsuits gave members 'a lot of concern.'"
Paperwork filed with the SEC indicate disagreements between Caster and the board of directors were the reason for Caster's resignation.
On October 19, 2007, it was reported that Mannatech Inc. had fired Grant Thornton LLP as its auditor after the accounting firm demanded that Mannatech remove Sam Caster from all responsibilities.
Sam Caster was barred by the attorney general of Texas from serving as a director, officer, or employee of Mannatech for five years—from February, 2009 until February, 2014. Caster was also barred from taking a role in any other multi-level marketing programs during that time. Despite this, then-CEO Wayne Badovinus stated Caster would work as a consultant answering directly to him. The attorney general's office agreed Caster could serve as an outside consultant to the company.
In March, 2014, Caster appeared as main speaker at a Mannatech videoconference event with sales associates for the company's new skin rejuvenation product. Introduced as the company's founder and "visionary," he explained the company's new product and his role in its creation. "Oh my gosh, This stuff really works." he said, of the product. "No one could have predicted it would have that immediate an impact."

MannaRelief Ministries

In 1999, Sam Caster and his wife Linda founded MannaRelief Ministries, a non-profit organization that provides nutraceuticals to orphanages.



Citations and footnotes

  




