[[Pasko Rakic]]

CATEGORIES: 1933 births, Living people, People from Ruma, Croats of Vojvodina, Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences, History of neuroscience, Harvard University faculty, American neuroscientists, Yale University faculty, Yugoslav emigrants to the United States, Croatian scientists, University of Belgrade Faculty of Medicine alumni, American people of Croatian descent, Members of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters

Pasko Rakic, MD, PhD () is a neuroscientist at Yale University.

Early life

Rakić was born in the Syrmian city of Ruma, Kingdom of Yugoslavia into a Croatian family. His father was originally from Pula, but studied to become a tax official in Novi Sad, after which he had to move often because of his job, while his mother was from Dubrovnik and moved to Vojvodina for a job in the postal service. Rakić graduated with a degree in medicine (MD) from the University of Belgrade School of Medicine in Serbia and then embarked on a career as a neurosurgeon. He is a self-described Croat of Serbia.
His research career began in 1962, with a Fulbright Fellowship at Harvard University. He moved from Harvard to Yale in 1978.

Research

According to Nature Medicine, his first experiments required "a special grant, nearly 200 rhesus monkeys and so much radioactive thymidine that manufacturers had to retool their entire production system to provide it." Rakic injected the monkeys' fetuses with radioactive thymidine at a particular time after conception. Only replicating cells took up the radioactive label, which enabled Rakic to trace the lineages of brain cells as they were created. He and his team then sliced the brain of each monkey into 7,000 sections for the benefit of future researchers. Because he used a radiolabel that decays slowly, the slides should be useful for years, and have so far led to more than 24 papers. "Profile: Pasko Rakic", Nature Medicine  11, 362 (2005)
Among the discoveries made by Pasko Rakic is the first description of neurogenesis in the subventricular zone.

Awards and memberships

In 1985, Rakic was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in the United States.
In 1994, he became a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
In 1997, he received a doctor honoris causa from the University of Zagreb.
In 2003 he received the 15th annual Bristol-Myers Squibb Award for Distinguished Achievement in Neuroscience Research, a $50,000 award, which noted two of his hypotheses in particular. The first hypothesis is the radial unit hypothesis, that in the developing cerebral cortex the cells are created at the base of each column, and that each new cell migrates past its predecessors. In the related protomap hypothesis, external signals determine cell function as it grows and forms complex connections.yale.pdf
He is a member of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters.
In 2008, he was a co-recipient, with Thomas Jessell and Sten Grillner, of the inaugural Kavli Prize for Neuroscience.

Personal

He is married to Sandra Biller Rakic, MFT.  Previously, he was married to Patricia Goldman-Rakic, also a neuroscientist, who died on July 31, 2003.  
Patricia Goldman-Rakic 1937-2003 Cerebral Cortex[/ref]






