[[Columbia Business School]]

CATEGORIES: Columbia University, Ivy League business schools, Business schools in New York, Universities and colleges in New York, Universities and colleges in New York City, Educational institutions established in 1916, Universities and colleges in Manhattan

Columbia Business School (CBS) is the business school of Columbia University in Manhattan, New York City. It was established in 1916 to provide business training and professional preparation for undergraduate and graduate Columbia University students. It is one of six Ivy League business schools, and its admission process is among the most selective of top business schools.
Columbia Business School is one of the world's leading business schools, and prides itself on its excellent faculty, who provide students with superior knowledge and thought leadership across divisions and disciplines. Its location in New York City and strong ties to industry promises students access to top business minds, and the diverse community spans sectors and nations, making an impact in small start-ups as well as established industries. Columbia Business School is perhaps best known for value investing and the seminal work completed in that area by professors Benjamin Graham and David Dodd. It is affiliated with 13 winners of the Nobel Prize in Economics including current professors Robert Mundell, Joseph Stiglitz and Edmund Phelps, more than any business school in the United States. The school has an international emphasis, and many alumni have achieved distinction in the public as well as the private sector.

History

A. Barton Hepburn, then president of Chase Manhattan Bank, founded the School in 1916 with 11 full-time faculty members and an opening class of 61 students, including 8 women. The School expanded rapidly, enrolling 420 students by 1920, and in 1924 added a PhD program to the existing BS and MS degree programs.gsb.edu/about/history
In 1945, Columbia Business School authorized the awarding of the MBA degree. Shortly thereafter, in the 1950s, the School adopted the Hermes emblem as its symbol, reflecting the entrepreneurial nature of the Greek god Hermes and his association with business, commerce and communication.gsb.edu/alumni/news/New-Visual-Identity
In 1952, CBS admitted its last class of undergraduates. The school currently offers executive education programs that culminate in a Certificate in Business Excellence (CIBE) and full alumni status, and several degree programs for the MBA and PhD degrees. In addition to the full-time MBA, the school offers four Executive MBA programs: the NY-EMBA Friday/Saturday program, the EMBA-Global program (launched in 2001 in conjunction with the London Business School), the Berkeley-Columbia Executive MBA program (launched in 2002 in conjunction with the Haas School of Business at University of California, Berkeley), and the EMBA-Global Asia program (launching in 2009 in conjunction with the London Business School and the University of Hong Kong Business School). Students in jointly run programs earn an MBA degree from each of the cooperating institutions.
On July 1, 2004, R. Glenn Hubbard became Columbia Business School's eleventh dean.  Hubbard, the former chair of President Bush's Council of Economic Advisers, has worked at the intersection of the private, government and nonprofit sectors and played an active role in shaping national and international economic policy, including the deregulation policy leading up Wall Street bank failures in 2008. In Charles Ferguson's 2010 documentary, Inside Job, when prompted, Hubbard strongly maintains that his political and financial connections to government and Wall Street firms do not create any potential academic conflict of interest.

Campus

Today, Columbia Business School is primarily housed in Uris Hall, a recently renovated 1960s structure at the center of Columbia's Morningside Heights campus. An auxiliary space, Warren Hall, is situated on Amsterdam Avenue and is shared with the law school. Eventually, the school will be moved to a new, more spacious facility at Columbia's planned new campus on 125th Street in Manhattanville,currently under construction.
In October 2010, Columbia Business School announced that alumnus Henry Kravis, the billionaire co-founder of private-equity firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts (KKR & Co.), pledged $100 million to fund expansion of Columbia Business School, the largest gift in its history. The donation will go toward construction of the business school's new site in the Manhattanville section of New York City, where Columbia University is extending its campus. One of the school's two new buildings will be named for Kravis.
In December 2012, Ronald Perlman also donated $100 million to the construction of the second business school building.

MBA program

The Columbia MBA Program is designed to prepare its students for the challenges they will face as emerging leaders in a rapidly changing business world.  The admission process is highly competitive with an admission rate of 15% in 2009.
The revised core curriculum, launched in the fall of 2008, represents about 40% of the degree requirement. Among the most popular electives at Columbia Business School are the Economics of Strategic Behavior, Financial Statement Analysis and Earnings Quality, Launching New Ventures, Modern Political Economy, and the Seminar in Value Investing.
Columbia Business School has a firm grade non-disclosure policy, stating that students refrain from disclosing specific class grades, GPAs, or transcripts until they accept full-time, post graduation positions.com/culture/grade-non-disclosure-gnd Students enter Columbia's MBA program in two tracks.  The traditional fall term is approximately 550 students, while the January term "J-Term" is approximately 200 students.  Students entering in the fall are divided into eight clusters of approximately 65 students that take all first year core classes together. J-Term students are broken into three clusters.  The J-Term is aimed at students who want an accelerated 18 month program who usually plan to return to their previous job, are company sponsored, and will not pursue a summer internship because they take classes during the summer.
The recently launched Columbia CaseWorks program utilizes the faculty's research and industry experience and brings that perspective into the classroom through the development of new cases and teaching materials. Beginning in orientation and continuing through core classes and electives, students are immersed in cases that use faculty research to address real-world business issues. Columbia CaseWorks challenges students to debate corporate decision making and to develop appropriate recommendations and solutions.  During their first year, students study and discuss an integrated case that focuses on a single company and is incorporated into several core courses.  This encourages students to think about a company holistically, analyzing it from the perspective of various disciplines.gsb.edu/mba/academics/versatile
In 2013, the median starting base salary was $110,000, with a median $30,000 signing bonus and a median $20,000 of other guaranteed compensation. According to Forbes magazine, 90% of billionaires with MBAs who derived their fortunes from finance obtained their master's degree from one of three schools: Harvard Business School, Columbia Business School, or The Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.

Areas of focus

Though there are no official tracks within Columbia Business School, many students choose to focus on a particular area in order to gain deeper knowledge in a specific discipline. Columbia Business School offers the following areas of focus:
As part of its MBA curriculum, Columbia Business School offers the Value Investing Program at the prestigious Heilbrunn Center for Graham & Dodd Investing, for a handful of selected business school students. The program also features an extensive list of guest speakers which include Seth Klarman, Michael Price, Bill Nygren, Charles Brandes, David Einhorn and Chris Browne. Notable graduates of the value investing program include Warren Buffett, Mario Gabelli, Leon G. Cooperman, Chuck Royce, Paul Sonkin and William von Mueffling.
Columbia Business School's Entrepreneurship Program strives to provide students with the skills required for venturing and providing opportunities for them to start an entrepreneurial career in four career paths: entrepreneurship in new ventures, entrepreneurship in large organizations, private equity financing and social entrepreneurship. Consequently, entrepreneurship among Columbia MBA students is on the rise, with 20 students in the MBA Class of 2007 starting their own businesses directly after graduation. To supplement its Entrepreneurship Program, the Business School launched, in June 2012, an entrepreneurship lab in downtown Manhattan, an incubator space for entrepreneurs.
"Wednesday evening marked the official launch of the Columbia Business Lab, a free ... co-working space and post-graduate entrepreneurship program for Columbia Business School graduates in downtown Manhattan. The school's Eugene Lang Center for Entrepreneurship will manage the program and provide advisory services to the 21 businesses in the lab's inaugural class"
Columbia University Launches Entrepreneurship Lab, Inc. Magazine. By Issie Lapowsky. July 26, 2012. Retrieved July 27, 2012.

MBA rankings

For 2011, national rankings of Columbia's MBA program include #5 by Forbes,Forbes MBA Rankings 2011 #13 by Bloomberg BusinessWeek,Bloomberg-Business Week MBA Rankings 2012 and #8 by U.S. News and World Report.S. Schools by Financial Times.Financial Times MBA Rankings 2012
In the most recent aggregated "ranking of rankings" of U.S. business schools, Columbia's MBA program ranked #1 in the Financial Times and #5 with Poets&Quants. Each of these rankings is a composite of five major MBA rankings published by Bloomberg BusinessWeek, The Economist, The Financial Times, Forbes, Wall Street Journal and/or U.S. News & World Report which is meant to eliminate anomalies and other statistical distortions that are often present in any single ranking.

Joint-degree programs

Columbia Business School students can combine an MBA with one of ten other professional degrees.  In general, a dual degree requires one less year than it would take to complete the two degrees separately. Candidates must apply separately to Columbia Business School and the other degree program.MBA Student Services : Dual Degrees
Joint degrees offered include:

Student life

Held each year on the first Monday in May, the Annual Dinner is a highlight of the Columbia Business School calendar and brings together more than 1,000 business leaders, faculty members, students, alumni and friends for an evening of support for the School's many programs and initiatives. The event provides critical resources for curriculum development, student financial aid, faculty research and the day-to-day operations of the School.
Additionally, since 1977, two awards have been presented at each Annual Dinner, the Distinguished Leadership in Business Award and the Distinguished Leadership in Government Award, to honorees whose careers exemplify the professional, ethical, and leadership principles that define Columbia Business School.
The Columbia Business School Follies is a student club that works throughout each semester to put together a production in which students write, choreograph, and perform comedy skits. It achieved notoriety in 2006

Admission to the MBA program

Key Admission Stats – Columbia MBA:
Average GPA of admits: 3.5
Average GMAT of admits: 716
Average Age of admits: 28
Candidates applying to the Columbia Business School should be aware of the advantage of applying earlier in the rolling admission process, preferably in the early decision round. The schools' admissions committee appears to view positively candidates who have taken part in extra-curricular activities and who also have actively contributed to the well-being of their communities.gsb.edu/mba/admissions/classprofile The school seems more open to accepting candidates with relatively little work experience, especially those with an entrepreneurial mindset.
Admission requirements include a bachelor's degree or its equivalent from an accredited institution, three essays, two letters of recommendation, a GMAT or GRE score and a TOEFL or PTE score for international applicants.

Executive MBA programs

Columbia offers various executive MBA programs.
The Executive MBA (EMBA) Friday/Saturday Program is a 20-month graduate program designed for individuals that are looking to enhance their education without interrupting their careers. The EMBA program is taught on campus at Columbia University by full-time faculty. The first year of classes consists of the same core curriculum as the Full-Time MBA program. Executive education is the focus of the second year.  This Friday/Saturday program is targeted at individuals with approximately 10 years of work experience.
The Executive MBA (EMBA) Saturday Program is a 24 month graduate degree program designed for individuals that are looking to enhance their education, but cannot take any time away from work.  This program is the same as the Friday/Saturday program, with the exception that classes only meet on Saturdays over a longer period of time.
In addition to the New York–based EMBA Program, Columbia offers three partner programs to meet the differing needs and geographical distribution of prospective students. Because students in the partner EMBA programs must satisfy the separate requirements of each school, they earn an MBA degree from each participating university. Likewise, they become alumni of each university and business school and may avail themselves of all programs and privileges afforded to alumni.

EMBA rankings

publisher=The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.|work=BusinessWeek|accessdate=December 30, 2007}}[/ref]

MS Programs

Columbia Business School currently offers three separate Master's of Science degrees in Financial Economics, Marketing, and Leadership.  Admission to the programs is extremely competitive with 543 applicants to the Financial Economics program in 2011, its first year, and only 10 students accepted.

Doctoral Program

The degree of Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) is offered by the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences and is administered by the Business School.  Admission is highly competitive with 894 applicants in 2010 for positions in an entering class of 18 students (2%).  A PhD in Management or Business is a common precursor to an academic career in business schools.
Throughout the program, students become familiar with research methods and the literature of their major fields through research projects and directed reading. Doctoral candidates begin the program mastering basic research tools by studying subjects such as economics, behavioral science and quantitative methods, in addition to completing course work and examinations in the major field of study. The completion of course work and qualifying examinations normally requires two to three years.
The research phase begins as early as the first year, when students serve as research assistants, and continues throughout their time at the School. Students gradually become more involved in the design and execution of research and, by the end of the second year, have typically produced at least one paper suitable for publication, often as coauthor with a faculty member. The later years of the program are dedicated to original research and the creation of the dissertation.
Recent Columbia Ph.D. program graduates have placed in the following institutions: Harvard Business School, Wharton School, 
London Business School, Kellogg School of Management, Cornell University, University of Notre Dame, Stern School of Business, University of Minnesota, Fordham University, Polytechnic University, Baruch College, University of Washington, EWHA Womans University, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, University of Toronto, IAE Business and Management School, Universidad Austral, and University of Texas at Austin.

Executive Education

Columbia Business School's Executive Education programs offer graduate Executive Certificate Programs such as the Columbia Senior Executive Program (CSEP),"CSEP Program Details" and the Columbia Certificate in Business Excellence (CIBE)."CIBE Program Details" Additional programs and courses are offered in General Management, Leadership, Finance and essential business practices."Columbia Executive Education"

Academic Divisions

The School's faculty are divided into five academic units:

Research centers, programs, and institutes

Research centers, special programs, institutes, and cross-disciplinary areas at Columbia Business School include:

People

Faculty

Columbia Business School's eminence is rooted in the strength, leadership and experience of its 136 full-time faculty members, Rita Gunther McGrath is a well known member of the strategy faculty and the author of four books on the subject, most recently The End of Competitive Advantage: How to Keep Your Strategy Moving as Fast As Your Business (2013, Harvard Business Review Publishing)

Alumni

Columbia Business School has over 39,000 living alumni.About Columbia Business School : Alumni






