[[Carolina Panthers]]

CATEGORIES: Carolina Panthers, National Football League teams, Sports in Charlotte, North Carolina, American football teams in North Carolina, Sports clubs established in 1995

The Carolina Panthers are a professional American football team based in Charlotte, North Carolina. They play in the southern division of the National Football Conference (NFC), one of the two conferences in the National Football League (NFL). The team is worth approximately USD $1 billion, according to Forbes, and is controlled by Jerry Richardson and his family; they have a 48% stake. The remainder of the team is held by a group of 14 limited partners. The head coach is Ron Rivera, while the president is Danny Morrison.
The Panthers first competed in 1995 and fared well in their first two years, finishing  record and won the NFC South. The Panthers have made the playoffs five times, reaching the NFC Championship Game in three of them. They have won four division titles, one of them in the NFC West and three of them in the NFC South; they have qualified for the playoffs five times.
The Carolina Panthers are legally registered as Panthers Football, LLC. The Panthers are supported throughout the Carolinas; although the team has played their home games in Charlotte since the completion of their stadium in 1996, they played home games in Clemson, South Carolina, during their first season, and they host their annual training camp in Spartanburg, South Carolina. At home games, the atmosphere has been described as comparable to that of other NFL teams, with some games playing host to a large number of fans of the opposing team; this has been attributed to several factors, such as the city's relatively recent entry into the NFL, the popularity of basketball in the Charlotte region, and the large number of Charlotte residents who are originally from other cities with NFL teams. The Panthers' uniforms consist of black, white, and blue jerseys paired with white and silver pants, a pattern which has only seen minor changes since the team's inception. The team maintains rivalries with the three other teams in the NFC South, in addition to having out-of-division rivalries with the Arizona Cardinals and Dallas Cowboys.

History

On December 15, 1987, entrepreneur Jerry Richardson announced his bid for an NFL expansion franchise in the Carolinas. A native of North Carolina, Richardson was a former wide receiver on the Baltimore Colts who had used his 1958 league championship bonus to co-found the Hardee's chain of restaurants and served as president and CEO of TW Services. Richardson drew his inspiration to pursue an NFL franchise from George Shinn, who had made a successful bid for an expansion team in Charlotte, the Charlotte Hornets of the National Basketball Association (NBA). Richardson founded Richardson Sports, a partnership consisting of himself and his family; a number of businessmen from North and South Carolina were also recruited to be limited partners in the group. Richardson looked at four potential locations for a stadium, ultimately choosing uptown Charlotte. To highlight the demand for professional football in the Carolinas, Richardson Sports held a preseason game in the region in 1989, 1990, and 1991. The first two games were held in Carter-Finley Stadium in Raleigh, North Carolina, and Kenan Memorial Stadium in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, respectively, while the third and final game was held at Williams-Brice Stadium in Columbia, South Carolina. The matchups were between existing NFL teams. In 1991, the group formally filed an application for the open expansion spot, and on October 23, 1993, the 28 NFL owners unanimously named the Carolina Panthers as the 29th member of the NFL.
The Panthers first competed in the 1995 NFL season; they were one of two expansion teams to begin playing that year, with the other being the Jacksonville Jaguars. The Panthers were put in the NFC West to increase the size of that division to five teams; the Panthers were pleased with their placement because there were two other southeastern teams in the division, the Atlanta Falcons and the New Orleans Saints.
After the NFL's expansion to 32 teams in 2002, the Panthers were relocated from the NFC West to the newly created NFC South division, along with the Atlanta Falcons, Tampa Bay Buccaneers, and New Orleans Saints.
Following a rocky 
In 2010, after releasing Delhomme in the offseason, the Panthers had the worst record (

Logo and uniforms

In choosing the team name, the Richardsons did not run focus groups with potential fans. Their intention had always been the 'Panthers'; Jerry Richardson began driving a car with the license plate 'PNTHRS' near the end of 1989. By the time they had been announced as the 29th NFL team in October 1993, the Panthers' logo and helmet design had already been finalized, but the uniform design was still under creation. After discussion, the Panthers organization decided on jerseys colored white, black, and blue, and pants colored white and silver. The exact tone of blue, which they decided would be "process blue" (a shade lighter than Duke's and darker than North Carolina's), was the most difficult color to choose. The team's uniform has remained largely the same since its creation, with only minor alterations such as changing the sock color of the team's black uniforms from blue to black and changing the team's shoes from white to black.

The Panthers have three main jersey colors: black, white, and blue.
The team's uniform did not change significantly after Nike became the NFL's jersey supplier in 2012, but the collar was altered to honor former Panthers player and coach Sam Mills by featuring the phrase "Keep Pounding". Nike had conceived the idea, and the team supported the concept as a way to expose newer fans to the legacy of Mills, who died of cancer in 2005. Mills had introduced the phrase, which has since become a team slogan, in a speech that he gave to the players and coaches prior to their 2003 playoff game against Dallas; in the speech, Mills compared his fight against cancer with the team's on-field battle, saying "When I found out I had cancer, there were two things I could do – quit or keep pounding. I'm a fighter. I kept pounding. You're fighters, too. Keep pounding!"

Stadium and practice facilities

The Panthers played their first season at Memorial Stadium in Clemson, South Carolina, as their facility in uptown Charlotte was still under construction. Ericsson Stadium, called Bank of America Stadium since 2004, opened in the summer of 1996. It was primarily financed by the Panthers, and they raised money largely through the sale of permanent seat licensess (PSLs);
Bank of America Stadium is owned entirely by the Panthers, making them one of the few teams in the NFL to own the facility they play in.
In addition to hosting home games for the Panthers, Bank of America Stadium has hosted other events. It hosts two college football games annually, the ACC Championship Game
The Panthers have three open-air fields next to Bank of America Stadium where they currently hold their practices;

Culture

Pat Yasinskas of ESPN... there is a strong core of diehard fans who bring energy to Bank of America Stadium. Charlotte lives and dies with the Panthers because there aren't a lot of other options in the sports world".
The Carolina Panthers have sold out all home games since December 2002,  The Panthers recorded the sixth-highest home attendance numbers in the NFL during the 2012 season, averaging 73,293 fans per home game.

Mascot, cheerleaders, and drumline

Sir Purr, an anthropomorphic black cat who wears a jersey numbered '00', has been the Panthers' mascot since their first season. During games, Sir Purr provides sideline entertainment through skits and "silly antics".
The team's cheerleaders are the Carolina Topcats, a group of 24 women who lead cheers and entertain fans at home games. The TopCats participate in both corporate and charity events.

Songs

During the inaugural season of the Panthers, the team had an official fight song, which the team played before each home game.

Charity and community work

The Carolina Panthers support a variety of non-profits in North and South Carolina through the Carolina Panthers Charities. Four annual scholarships are awarded to student athletes through the Carolina Panthers Graduate Scholarship and the Carolina Panthers Players Sam Mills Memorial Scholarship programs.
In 2003 the Panthers and Carolinas HealthCare Foundation established the Keep Pounding Fund, a fundraising initiative to support cancer research and patient support programs. The Panthers community has raised more than $1.4 million for the fund through direct donations, charity auctions, blood drives, and an annual 5k stadium run. The Panthers and Levine Children's Hospital coordinate monthly hospital visits and VIP game-day experiences for terminally ill or hospitalized children.
In addition to these team-specific efforts, the Panthers participate in a number of regular initiatives promoted by the NFL and USA Football, the league's youth football development partner. These include USA Football Month, held throughout August to encourage and promote youth football; A Crucial Catch, the league's Breast Cancer Awareness Month program; Salute to Service, held throughout November to support military families and personnel; and PLAY 60, which encourages young NFL fans to be active for at least 60 minutes each day.

Radio and television

Radio coverage is provided by flagship station WBT (1110 AM) and through the Carolina Panthers Radio Network, with affiliates throughout the Carolinas, Georgia, and Virginia. The Panthers' radio broadcasting team is led by Mick Mixon, Eugene Robinson, and Jim Szoke. The radio network broadcasts pre-game coverage, games with commentary, and post-game wrap-ups. It also live-broadcasts Panther Talk, a weekly event at Bank of America Stadium which offers fans a chance to meet a player and ask questions of the staff. 
National broadcasting and cable television networks cover regular season games, as well as some preseason games. All preseason games and team specials are televised by the Carolina Panthers Television Network on flagship station WCCB and fourteen affiliate stations throughout the Carolinas, Georgia, Virginia, and Tennessee. The television broadcasting team consists of play-by-play commentator Mike Morgan, color analyst Mike Rucker, and sideline reporter Pete Yanity. The network also hosts The Panthers Huddle, a weekly show focusing on the Panthers' upcoming opponent. Panthers Gameday, the Panthers' postgame show, is hosted by sports anchor Russ Owens and former Panthers lineman Kevin Donnalley on WCNC-TV.

Rivalries

The Panthers have developed a number of rivalries during their time in the NFL, including heated ones with the three fellow members of the NFC South (the Atlanta Falcons, Tampa Bay Buccaneers, and New Orleans Saints). and Buccaneers.
The Falcons are a natural geographic rival for the Panthers, as Atlanta is only 230 miles (370 kilometers) and five hours south on I-85.  Indeed, games between the two teams feature thousands of visiting-team fans following their team up and down I-85.  The two teams have played each other twice a year since the Panthers joined the league, first as members of the NFC West and currently in the NFC South.
The Panthers' rivalry with Tampa Bay is perhaps one of the better rivalries in the NFC South. The rivalry originated in 2002 with the formation of the NFC South, but became particularly heated before the 2003 season with verbal bouts between players on the two teams. It escalated further when the Panthers went to Tampa Bay and beat them in what ESPN. The rivalry has resulted in a number of severe injuries for players on both teams, some of which have been caused by foul play.
Outside the division, the Panthers have several other rivals. During their time in the NFC West, the Panthers began developing a rivalry with the San Francisco 49ers. However, this rivalry faded after the NFL moved the Panthers out of the NFC West.

Players

Current roster

Pro Bowlers

The Pro Bowl is the annual all-star game of the NFL. Pro Bowl rosters are determined by a combination of fan, player, and coach voting.

Hall of Honor

The Carolina Panthers Hall of Honor was established in 1997 to honor individuals for their contributions to the Carolina Panthers organization. Each inductee is honored with a life-sized bronze statue outside of Bank of America Stadium's North Entrance, while the names of each original PSL owner are written on the black granite base at each of the six panther statues. A rule added in the mid-2000s by the Panthers organization requires all potential inductees to be retired for at least five years before they are eligible for induction. The members of the Carolina Panthers Hall of Honor are Mike McCormack, who was inducted on September 21, 1997, for his contributions to the team as an executive and general manager; Sam Mills, who was inducted on September 27, 1998, for his contributions to the team as a linebacker; and the team's PSL owners, who were inducted on September 13, 2004.

Pro Football Hall of Fame enshrinees

Nominees for the Pro Football Hall of Fame, which "honors individuals who have made outstanding contributions to professional football",

Ownership and administration

Jerry Richardson is the owner and founder of the Carolina Panthers. Richardson and his family own about 48% of the team,
Mike McCormack, a Hall of Fame lineman for the Cleveland Browns and former coach and executive for the Seattle Seahawks, was the Panthers' first team president, presiding in that role from 1994 until his retirement in 1997; McCormack was inducted as the first person in the Carolina Panthers Hall of Honor later that year. Jerry Richardson's son, Mark, was appointed as the team's second president in 1997 and served in that role until he stepped down in 2009. His brother Jon, who had been president of Bank of America Stadium, stepped down at the same time. The resignations of Mark and Jon Richardson were unexpected, as it was thought that the two would eventually take over the team from their father.
The Carolina Panthers have had four head coaches. Dom Capers was the head coach from 1995 to 1998 and led the team to one playoff appearance. Counting playoff games, he finished with a record of 31–35 (.470). George Seifert coached the team from 1999 to 2001, recording 16 wins and 32 losses (.333). John Fox, the team's longest-tenured head coach, led the team from 2002 to 2010 and coached the team to three playoff appearances. Including playoff games, Fox ended his tenure with a 78–74 (.513) record, making him the only Panthers coach to finish his tenure with the team with a winning record. Ron Rivera, the team's current head coach, has held the position since 2011 and has a career record of 25 wins and 23 losses (.521), current as of the end of the 2013 regular season.

Current staff

Team records

Since they began playing football in 1995, the Panthers have been to three NFC Championship Games; they lost two (1996 and 2005) and won one (2003).
Kicker John Kasay is the team's career points leader. Kasay scored 1,482 points during his 16 seasons (1995 to 2010) with the Panthers. Quarterback Jake Delhomme, who played with the team from 2003 to 2009, is the career passing leader, having thrown for 19,258 yards over his seven seasons with the team. Running back DeAngelo Williams is the career rushing leader for the Carolina Panthers. Williams, who has played with the team since they drafted him in 2006, has rushed for 5,784 yards with the Panthers. Wide receiver Steve Smith, the team's leading receiver, recorded 12,197 receiving yards during his 13-year (2001 to 2013) tenure with the team.

Notes




