[[Tuladhar]]

CATEGORIES: Newar, People from Kathmandu, Nepalese people, Nepalese society, Social groups of Nepal, Newar caste system

Tulādhar (Devanagari: तुलाधर) is a Nepalese caste from the Newar community of the Kathmandu Valley in Nepal. The name Tuladhar is derived from the Sanskrit words "tula" (weighing scale) and "dhar" (possessor), thus meaning scale-bearer or in general, merchant. Tuladhars belong to the Uray group which includes Kansakar, Tamrakar, Sthapit, Bania, Sindurakar, Selalik and other castes.
Traditional Tuladhar neighborhoods are Asan ( Page 112.

Traditional occupation

According to the division of labor laid down from ancient times in Newar society, business is the traditional occupation of Tuladhars. They are best known for their history as trans-Himalayan traders conducting trade between Nepal, India and Tibet. (2005) Rebuilding Buddhism: The Theravada Movement in Twentieth-Century Nepal. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-01908-9. Page 25. Retrieved 3 February 2011.
The merchants used two trade routes to travel to Tibet. One went north from Kathmandu and crossed the Himalaya at Kuti (now known as Nyalam) or Kyirong, also spelt Gyirong. The other route started at KalimpongKalimpong. New Delhi: Nest & Wings. ISBN 81-87592-01-X. Page 20. and passed through Nathula or Jelepla on the Sikkim-Tibet border. These trade routes are offshoots of the ancient Silk Road.
Textiles and other factory products were the main exports to Tibet while they brought back wool, musk pods, hides and yak tails. This traditional business came to an end in the mid-1960s after the route through Sikkim was shut down following the 1962 Sino-Indian War, and all the Tuladhar traders returned home. In the course of conducting trade, they have been a cultural bridge between South and Central Asia. Today, while they are still primarily merchants, many pursue varied professions.

Cultural life

Tuladhars observe an annual schedule of religious performances, devotional musical concerts and hymn singing sessions that are conducted at the community level. Among the prominent street performances are the Dāpā Thāyegu, Gunla Bajan Thāyegu and Bahidyah Bwayegu festivals.
The month-long Dāpā Thāyegu festival is held in October when they gather to sing hymns every evening. A picture of a sacred jar made of wheat, popcorn and black soyabean is displayed at Asan to mark the end of the festival.
During Gunlā,LeVine, Sarah and Gellner, David N. (2005) Rebuilding Buddhism: The Theravada Movement in Twentieth-Century Nepal. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-01908-9. Page 64. Retrieved 13 February 2011. the tenth month in the Nepal Sambat calendar corresponding to August which is held holy by Newar Buddhists, a musical procession goes to Swayambhu daily in the early morning playing Gunlā Bājan music.
The Bahidyah Bwayegu festival is held in August when a procession of musicians playing Gunla Bajan music and followers make a tour of sacred courtyards in Kathmandu where statues of Dipankara Buddha and paubhas are put on exhibition.
Asan Pāyā (असं पाया) is part of the Mohani festival in October when a sword procession is held at Asan. The ceremony ends with the participants chopping up a gourd painted with the face of a demon.
Tuladhars from Asan and Nyata accompany their respective musical bands and take part in the parade organized to celebrate New Year's Day of Nepal Sambat, the national lunar calendar of Nepal, which falls in October.
During the twelve-yearly Samyak festival, the greatest Newar Buddhist celebration Page 198.

Sacred dances

Sacred dances are another major religious performance of the Tuladhars.

Notable Tuladhars

Religion
Social Work
Arts and Sciences
Trade and Industry
Politics

Gallery

Historical

File:tuladhar wedding. 
File:Asan, Kathmandu (1920). 
File:Kathmandu Seto Machindranath 19th century. 1915. 
File:Pushpa sundar tuladhar2. 
File:Bundesarchiv Bild 135-S-12-35-20, Tibetexpedition, Lhasa, Markt. 

Contemporary

File:Nyetamaru Ajima masked dance. 
File:Halimali grain art. 
File:Ihi welcome 2011. 
File:Gunla bajan players. 
File:Nyata gunla bajan. 





Further reading


