[[Motormaster]]

CATEGORIES: Comics characters introduced in 1985, Decepticons, Fictional commanders, Fictional automobiles, Fictional henchmen, Predacons, Stunticons

Motormaster is the name of several fictional characters from the Transformers universe. Motormaster made his first appearance in the Marvel Transformers comic before appearing in the animated series. Other than in Transformers: War for Cybertron, Motormaster is the leader of the Stunticons, an all-car group created by Megatron to counter the dominance of the Autobots on the road. Due to difficulties Hasbro had in trademarking the name Motormaster since his original incarnation, toys originally intend to be Motormaster have been released as Menasor instead, despite looking like Motormaster.

Transformers: Generation 1

Motormaster is depicted as a semi-trailer, similar in appearance in vehicle mode to Optimus Prime; however, unlike the Autobot leader, whose body is formed solely by the tractor unit, Motormaster's robot mode comes from the entire tractor-trailer, with the tractor unit forming his feet. Motormaster is able to reach a top speed of 140 mph in vehicle mode, while in robot mode he is armed with a cyclone gun that can produce winds of up to 400 mph. Motormaster commands his troops with fear rather than respect.

Marvel Comics

In the original Marvel Comics Transformers comic Motormaster was born when Megatron was able to tap into the Creation Matrix to give life to the Stunticons in issue #22. Overstreet - 2010 Motormaster last appeared in the first Transformers series in issue #41, called "Totaled!" Motormaster's biography was printed in issue #2 of the Transformers: Universe title by Marvel.

Animated series

Motormaster first appeared in animated form with the other Stunticons in the episode "The Key To Vector Sigma Part 1". He was created after Megatron ordered the theft of five road vehicles, so that he could create a group of Decepticon warriors who could effectively combat the Autobots on the road. After being extensively modified by Megatron to become almost impervious to collision damage, Motormaster and the other Stunticons were taken to Vector Sigma to receive personalities of their own.
Motormaster's last appearance in the U.S. cartoon was as part of Menasor in the third season episode "The Return of Optimus Prime Part 2."TV.TV.

IDW Publishing

In IDW Publishing's adaptation of Generation 1, as with Dreamwave's, Motormaster first appeared as a pre-existing character rather than a recent creation. Motormaster first appeared amongst Megatron's gathering of gladiators that would eventually become the Decepticons in IDW Publishing's The Transformers: Megatron Origin. Motormaster is later blown apart by Sentinel Prime during the revolution in Kaon.

Devil's Due Publishing

Motormaster in Devil's Due comics appeared in G.I. Joe vs. the Transformers, where he and the rest of the Stunticons where accidentally sent back to 1930's Chicago. Motormaster also appeared in G.I. Joe vs. the Transformers: The Art of War, where he was one of the Decepticon troops of Serpent O.R.

Fun Publications

As part of Fun Publications, although not appearing in the fiction, Motormaster is mentioned in the Fun Publications biography for the Timelines character Breakdown. This biography states that the other Stunticons were left in stasis lock after a pitched battle with Defensor.

Dreamwave Productions

In Dreamwave Productions Generation 1 continuity, Motormaster and the other Stunticons were not portrayed as recently created characters, but as Decepticons from Cybertron. Initially just five individuals, they were chosen to become part of a new group termed the Stunticons - an experiment to improve on the combination process which had created Devastator. Their combined form was called Menasor. In the War Within story, Motormaster was a member of Starscream's Predacon team.com Motormaster would also appear along with the rest of the Stunticons in the second Generation 1 mini-series.

Toys

Transformers: Prime

Motormaster is a Decepticon, but unlike previous incarnations, he is not a Stunticon, as they do not exist in this continuity despite other Stunticons's presence in the game, namely Breakdown, Dead End, and Drag Strip.

Video games

Motormaster is the name of a playable character exclusive to the Nintendo DS version of the 2010 video game Transformers: War for Cybertron (Decepticon version). Once defeated in the sewer levels of the game he becomes a playable character. His transformation is a Cybertronian truck, and is voiced by Fred Tatasciore.

Transformers: Timelines

Appearing in Fun Publications Transformers: Timelines comic produced for the Transformers convention BotCon, Motormaster is a Decepticon and part of the Stunticons sub-group. He transforms into a fire truck.

Fun Publications

A younger version of Motormaster was killed in the Transformers Animated story "Bots of Science".
Motormaster appeared in the Transformers: Timelines story "The Stunt-Con Job". After the events of Transformers Animated, the Stunticons set up a Stunt Convoy show in the city of Kaon and used it as cover to attempt to break Megatron out of his detention at Trypticon. Their efforts were thwarted thanks to the efforts of Cheetor, Optimus Prime and Sideswipe. The Stunticons were placed in detention with Megatron and an attempt to rescue them was made by the Decepticons Blot, Mindwipe, Oil Slick, Scalpel, Sky-Byte and Strika.

Toys

Transformers film series

Film series

Motormaster was originally rumored to be featured in Transformers: Age of Extinction, under the name Motorbreath. His alternate mode, a black and grey 2014 Freightliner Argosy cab over trailer truck, was later given to Galvatron.




