[[Adam Cayton-Holland]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American humorists, People from Denver, Colorado, 1980 births

Adam Cayton-Holland (born June 2, 1980) is an American stand-up comedian in Denver, Colorado. In addition to touring to headline clubs and colleges across the country, he is a member of The Grawlix, a trio of Denver comedians who produce a monthly live comedy show and web series. He is also a writer and has been published in both regional and national publications.

Career

Stand-Up Comedian

Adam Cayton-Holland started dabbling in the world of stand-up comedy by attending open mics at Denver dive bars in 2003. A couple of years later, he competed against nearly 200 other aspiring comedians and came out on top of Comedy Works' New Talent showcase.
Cayton-Holland was included in Esquire (magazine)'s 25 Best New Stand-Up Comedians in 2012.
After making his national television stand-up debut on Conan (TV series) in 2013, he appeared on The Pete Holmes Show in February 2014.

The Grawlix

In 2007, Cayton-Holland founded Wrist Deep Productions with fellow comedians Greg Baumhauer, Ben Roy, Jim Hickox, and Andrew Orvedahl. Wrist Deep developed "Los Comicos Super Hilariosos," a regular show that welcomed big-name comics like Arj Barker, Maria Bamford, Tig Notaro, and Moshe Kasher. The group eventually dissolved and reformed as The Grawlix in 2011.
The Grawlix consists of Cayton-Holland, Roy and Orvedahl. The troupe performs a monthly show at The Bug Theater in Denver, featuring standup sets from each of the principals, a variety of national guest comedians, and screenings of their web series videos. The Grawlix produced a pilot for Amazon in June 2012 called Those Who Can't, about three inept Denver high school teachers.

Writer

Before becoming a comedian, Cayton-Holland was a journalist, working at Denver's alt-weekly Westword from 2003 through 2008. Best known for his "What's So Funny?" column, while at Westword he also did regular long-form feature writing.
His writing has appeared in Spin (magazine) and The Onion's The AV Club.

Other Projects

=High Plains Comedy Festival=

In 2013, Cayton-Holland partnered with Denver comedian/producer Andy Juett to launch the High Plains Comedy Festival. In its inaugural year, the Festival ran three days in venues throughout Denver, and featured both local and national talent—including headliner Reggie Watts, Matt Braunger, and Kyle Kinane. High Plains is set to return to Denver in the summer of 2014.

=Podcast=

Cayton-Holland produces a biweekly podcast called My Dining Room Table that he began in spring 2013. The central concept to the podcast is Cayton-Holland's loyalty to and love of Denver and his home (hence, the majority of the recordings happening at his literal dining room table), and his subsequent decision to stay in the city rather than move to LA or New York. He interviews local and national comics and musicians about a variety of topics, but often returns to the core ideas of "home" and "success" while promoting the burgeoning Denver cultural scene.

Personal life

Cayton-Holland grew up in the neighborhood of Park Hill, Denver. He attended East High School (Denver) and Wesleyan University where he majored in film. His "twin obsessions" are birdwatching and the Colorado Rockies baseball team. His father has held Rockies season tickets since the team was formed. Before the start of the 2014 season, Cayton-Holland campaigned to throw out the ceremonious first pitch at a Rockies' game. He  created a buzz on Twitter with the hashtag #ACHFirstPitch, and took the plea national when he talked about it on The Pete Holmes Show.

Discography






