[[Matthew Saunoa]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 births, Living people, Idols (TV series) winners, New Zealand pop singers, New Zealand Idol, People from Manawatu-Wanganui

Matthew Saunoa (born 1986) is a New Zealand pop singer who rose to musical fame as the winner of the third season of New Zealand Idol in 2006.
After winning the third season, his winner's single, "Hold Out" topped the New Zealand Singles Chart, however it did not secure Saunoa an album contract with  Sony Music. Saunoa did not release any further music independently, and in result experienced disappointment and periods of depression. 
Saunoa later appeared on Pop's Ultimate Star, and has since moved to the Gold Coast, Australia with his family, where he joined a band.

Early life

Saunoa was born in Papatoetoe, Auckland. His mother is English and his father is Samoan. He attended De La Salle College, where he was a lead singer at school events.

New Zealand Idol

Saunoa unsuccessfully auditioned for the initial season of New Zealand Idol in 2004. After this birth of his first son, Harlyn, Saunoa retried and was accepted onto the show.
On 17 October 2006, betting agency Centrebet announced their final-wee kprediction that Saunoa would win the competition, with his odds at $1.66 and runner up Indira Moala's at $2.10. Saunoa shared some of the prize money with Moala, and sold the Tarios to raise money for a deposit on a house purchase to provide security for his family.

After NZ Idol

Saunoa performed his winner's single, "Hold Out", on the finale of New Zealand Idol on 29 October 2006. Written by James Reid of The Feelers, "Hold Out" was also used as TV One's theme tune in the summer of 2006–07. However, due to the low sales of the song, Saunoa did not secure a contract to record a studio album.
Saunoa contested the reality television show Pop's Ultimate Star, and came third, with TrueBliss singer Joe Cotton and New Zealand Idol season two runner-up Nik Carlson receiving first and second places, respectively.
As "Hold Out" was Saunoa's only solo musical release, Saunoa felt guilty for not making more of his New Zealand Idol title, and for letting his supporters down. In an interview with the Manawatu Standard in 2010, Saunoa stated, "I got to release a single, and that was it. I just felt I was left to rot. After climbing what seemed an impossible mountain it felt like I had fallen and landed flat on my face." However, in 2009, Saunoa formed a band with Lionel Nelson, formerly of Herbs, and Melaanie Viether. The group, named Brown Suga, began performing at the Gold Coast, in Australia. Of the collaboration, Saunoa said, "We work really well together and I get to do a lot of solo stuff..." He moved to Mudgeeraba with his partner, Lisa-Jane McKenzie, and children, Harlyn and Ashton.




