[[Tamim Iqbal]]

CATEGORIES: 1989 births, Living people, Bangladeshi cricketers, Bangladesh Test cricketers, Bangladesh One Day International cricketers, Bangladesh Twenty20 International cricketers, Chittagong Division cricketers, Cricketers at the 2007 Cricket World Cup, Cricketers at the 2011 Cricket World Cup, Wisden Cricketers of the Year, Nottinghamshire cricketers, Wellington cricketers, St Lucia Zouks cricketers, Duronto Rajshahi cricketers, Chittagong Kings cricketers, People from Chittagong

Tamim Iqbal Khan ( He is currently the highest run scorer for Bangladesh in T20 international.
He was named an international elite player for the inaugural Caribbean Premier League in 2013.com/player/tamim-iqbal

Early years and background

Tamim Iqbal was born to late Iqbal Khan and Nusrat Iqbal, in the port 
city of Chittagong.  His 
paternal Khan family is a prestigious family of the city.name="Tamim background"/> Tamim used to start his day with a 'cola 
and have a pizza for lunch'.
Tamim's father Iqbal, used to host small cricket tournaments, to help 
his sons train and get better in cricket.opener"/> His brother Nafees, a former national team
cricketer, in an interview said, "Tamim was the more talented one. When
he Tamim was 12 or 13, he hit 148 as the team chased 150".name="Tamim opener"/>
He married his childhood sweetheart Ayesha Siddiqa in June 2013 with a grand ceremony held at Chittagong.

Early career

Tamim, who played in the 2006 U-19 Cricket World Cup in Sri Lanka, was picked for  the 2007 World Cup and played against India in the group stage of the competition, scoring 51 runs from 53 deliveries, helping his team win the match. In December that year, the Bangladesh Cricket Board (BCB) granted Tamim a one-year grade C contract, one of 22 central contracts with the Board at the time. Although he was still in the lowest tier of central contracts, it was an extension form his previous contract, which lasted six months.
On Bangladesh's tour of the West Indies in July and August 2009, Tamim scored his maiden Test century against a West Indies team weakened by disputes between players and administrators, which resulted in seven players making their Test debut in the match,
Bangladesh's coach, Jamie Siddons, opined in January 2010 that Tamim had "the makings of a world-class opener". On 25 January Tamim Iqbal scored 151 in a record partnership with Junaid Siddique against India.

Wisden Cricketer of the Year

During the first innings of the first Test against England in March 2010, Tamim scored 86 runs from 120 deliveries. In the process he became the fastest Bangladesh batsman to reach 1,000 Test runs in terms of innings, taking 19 to reach the landmark.
In May that year, Bangladesh toured England for two more Tests and three ODIs. Though his team lost 2–0, Tamim scored a century in each of the Tests.

Bangladesh vice-captain

In December 2010, Tamim replaced Mushfiqur Rahim as Bangladesh's vice-captain. In the opening match of the 2011 World Cup he scored 70 against India in a losing cause. In the following match against Ireland he scored 44 off 43 balls, and took a catch. In the next game against the West Indies, Tamim was caught at the slips for a third-ball duck as Bangladesh folded for its lowest ODI score, 58 all out. The following game against England he scored a quick fire 38 to get his side off to another good start, Bangladesh eventually winning by two wickets.
Tamim became only the second Bangladeshi to play county cricket in England (Shakib Al Hasan was the first)
When Bangladesh toured Zimbabwe in July 2011 for a single Test and five ODIs they did so with the expectation of winning. Zimbabwe were returning from a six-year exile from Tests, although Bangladesh had not played in the format in more than 14 months.

Post vice-captain

West Indies toured in October, facing Bangladesh in a T20I, three ODIs and two Tests. Though Bangladesh lost the Test series 1–0, Tamim was his team's leading run-scorer with 186 from four innings, including two half-centuries.
In March 2012 Bangladesh hosted the Asia Cup. Tamim, who was recovering from typhoid, was initially dropped from the squad on the orders of BCB president Mustafa Kamal. Controversy ensued as Kamal had overridden selection committee and Tamim was eventually re-added to the squad.
In late October, Wellington Firebirds signed him for the New Zealand domestic HRV Cup, a T20 competition. Tamim is the first Bangladeshi to play in a New Zealand domestic league.
In late 2012 Bangladesh hosted West Indies, where Bangladesh won the ODI series, despite losing the T20 and the Test series. His highest score during the ODI and Test series was 58 and 72 respectively. Tamim's best performance in the overall series was the unbeaten 88 in the lone T20 match, despite losing the match for 18 runs short.
After the West Indies series Tamim, went to New Zealand to join the Wellington Firebirds. In his month-long spell with the Firebirds, he scored 232 runs, including two half-centuries with an average of 38.66. He came back to Bangladesh in mid January to lead Duronto Rajshahi in second edition of BPL, which starts from 18 January.
In March 2013, when Bangladesh toured Sri Lanka, Tamim was not selected in the first test but made 10 & 59 in the next test. In the first ODI, Tamim became the first Bangladeshi to score a hundred against Sri Lanka with a 136 ball 112 before being run out. Bangladesh scored 259 in ther innings, but later Sri Lanka managed to win.

Statistics

Career performance

International centuries






