[[Jean Carbonnier]]

CATEGORIES: Panthéon-Assas University faculty, Sociology of law, French legal scholars, French legal writers, French sociologists, 1908 births, 2003 deaths, University of Paris faculty, University of Poitiers faculty

Jean Carbonnier (1908–2003) was one of the most important French jurists of the 20th century. He was a civil law specialist and a private law professor.

Life and career

Jean Carbonnier was the son of Fernand Carbonnier and Dany Daniel. He married Madeleine Hugues. 
His Protestant beliefs influenced his way of thinking and his work. Although Jean Carbonnier published theological and historical articles about Protestantism, he still supported secularity. 
Jean Cabonnier studied at the Faculty of Law at the University of Bordeaux where he obtained his doctorate in 1932 and private law agrégation in 1937.
He was a professor at the Faculty of Law at the University of Poitiers from 1937 to 1955, teaching French civil law. He became dean in 1950.
Jean Carbonnier became President of L'Année Sociologique in 1964, and worked for the sociology journal during fifteen years.  (Laboratoire de sociologie juridique) at Panthéon-Assas University in 1968 - in order to produce data that would help law making.
On the international level, Jean Carbonnier supported the creation of the Research Committee on Sociology of Law
Apart from his academic career, Jean Carbonnier was also a writer: his book Les incertitudes du jeune Saxon. Une autofiction de Jean Carbonnier  was published posthumously, in 2011. This fiction shows that Jean Carbonnier was not only a theorist, but also an author of literature. This element can be perceived while reading his theoretical works about law, since he always explained his thoughts with an elegant and precise way of writing. Les incertitudes du jeune Saxon represents at the same time a fiction (sort of Bildungsroman) and a reflection about law and history. This work is also linked with the story of his own family and tastes.

Carbonnier's thought

Jean Carbonnier's vision of law was based on his own philosophy, which includes Protestantism, realism, skepticism, and empiricism – always with open-mindedness. He was at the same time a theorist, an author, and a lawmaker. That is why he was – and still is – often called "jurislateur," which can be translated as "jurislator" in English. 
His works are open to the sociology of law and the philosophy of law, cleverly linking legal, political, and social sciences. The author observed society in order to understand it. He also considered legal phenomena as social facts. At the same time a jurist and a sociologist, Jean Carbonnier played an important role in adapting law to society's traditions and customs. He considered law as an artifact, and was interested in every system of norms. In Flexible droit, he explains how law is changeable, uncertain – and "flexible."

Law and Sociology

Jean Carbonnier inspired, constituted, and conceptualized the combination of the study of law with that of sociology (legal sociology) – at a time when it was not popular among French jurists. He practiced "sociology without rigor," as the subtitle of his work Flexible droit  
Since our society is multicultural, law must adapt to its transformations – for instance, concerning family. In Sociologie juridique especially thanks to the concepts he developed, as well as his account of the relationship between jurisprudence and social sciences. 
In Flexible droit
His last work, Droit et passion du droit sous la Vème République (1996),  also is a legal and sociological work. His study of labor law and contract law represents a good example of legal sociology.
In sum, Jean Carbonnier established at the same time a clear and understandable sociological theory for jurists, as well as a legal theory within the reach of sociologists. This synthesis between law and sociology allowed the usage of sociological methods of investigation, thereby breaking with the "rational" tradition in French legislation. These methods include the opinion poll (IFOP, then INED) and field research in order to measure the "demand for law" expressed by citizens. This allowed notably the establishment of divorce by mutual consent (1975), at a time when divorce by fault was the only form offered to divorcing couples.

Civil Code and Family law

Jean Carbonnier renewed the French Civil Code, especially in the domain of Family Law. He wrote a major Treatise on Civil Law (Droit civil), which is not only a theoretical work, but also shows links with history, sociology, anthropology, and philosophy. The author defined the French Civil Code as the "Civil Constitution of French people," i.e. as part of the national, legal, and political culture in France. 
Jean Carbonnier was regarded as an authority on family law and considered family as a legal area. (1979). 
With Pierre Catala, a French law professor, Jean Carbonnier authored a proposition for the reform of inheritance law. It was taken up by the legislature in its law of 3 December 2001.  French inheritance law was thereby adapted to the aspirations of the modern family.

Passion and Inflation of the Law

Through his critical mind and his convincing rhetoric, Jean Carbonnier used the term "passion" in the title of his book Droit et passion du droit sous la Vème République (1996). 
This passion is dangerous, or even destructive. Indeed, the more laws there are, the less likely it is possible to apply them effectively. In particular, inflation leads to misunderstanding or ignorance from citizens – and sometimes even from judges. This results in a lack of substance and credibility. The inflation therefore implies uncertainty (or insecurity). Jean Carbonnier's theories are still topical: for instance, in 2006, the French Council of State (Conseil d'Etat) criticized the excesses that could threaten social cohesion in its annual report  about legal certainty (Sécurité juridique et complexité du droit).

Subjectivisation of the Law

Another evolution described by Jean Carbonnier is the subjectivisation of the law. This refers to the fact that the "rights to..." (droits à...) become more and more important. The author speaks in terms of a "pulverisation in subjective rights" (pulvérisation en droits subjectifs). Subjective rights (or entitlements) are replacing legal principles. This subjectivisation of the legal system reconstructs it, focusing on fundamental rights (substantial notion), instead of the law itself (institutional notion).
Therefore, law considers each individual (fundamental rights), rather than society as a whole. The legislation becomes more particular and precise. As a consequence, there is an inversion of the role and status of lawmakers in France: they are more and more concrete, whereas judges become more abstract. This results in individualization, which is a source of the inflation.

Selected works

On Jean Carbonnier






