[[2010s]]

CATEGORIES: 2010s, 21st century

The 2010s, pronounced "twenty-tens" is the current decade, which began on January 1, 2010, and will end on December 31, 2019.

Mixed pronunciation

Among experts and the general public, there is some disagreement as to how specific years of the 21st century should be pronounced in English.

Global financial crisis

The 2010s began amidst a global financial crisis that started in the late 2000s. In particular, the ongoing Eurozone debt crisis, which stemmed from these economic problems, first became pronounced in May 2010 and continues with a global recovery. Along with the recovery in 2013, the Dow Jones Industrial Average hit a 5-year high on Tuesday, May 28, 2013, and it is continuing to slowly rise. But, economic issues such as inflation, and an increase in commodity prices, sparked immense unrest in many lower-income countries. In some countries, particularly Arab ones, political unrest eventually evolved into socio-economic crises which set off numerous revolutions, such as in Kyrgyzstan and Tunisia in 2010, and Libya, Syria, Yemen and Egypt in 2011 and 2012. This widespread phenomenon is commonly known as the Arab Spring, and it still continues, as of April 2014.

Politics and wars

Wars

The prominent wars of the decade so far include:

=International wars=

=Civil wars, guerrilla wars and political revolutions=

Coups

Terrorist attacks

The most prominent terrorist attacks committed against civilian population during the decade include:

Nuclear weapons controversies

Political events

The prominent political events of the decade so far include:
WikiLeaks
Americas
Asia
Europe
Africa
Oceania

Assassinations, targeted killings, and assassination attempts

Prominent assassinations, targeted killings, and assassination attempts of the decade so far include:

Disasters

The most prominent disasters of the decade so far include:

Non-natural disasters

=Aviation & naval disasters=

=Pollution disasters=

Natural disasters

News | title=Hundreds die in west China quake | date=14 April 2010 | accessdate=23 April 2010| archiveurl=  archivedate= 17 April 2010 | deadurl= no}}[/ref]
[/ref]

Economics

The Great Recession, which began in the year 2007, officially ended in mid-2009, though unemployment has failed to recover. In the United States, a Gallup poll in 2011 found that more than half of Americans believe the country is still in a recession.
A sovereign-debt crisis in Europe began in early 2010, and the Greek government admitted that it was having difficulties servicing its large sovereign debt. Speculation abounded that it would be unable to make required bond payments due in 2010. causing the Euro to drop in value versus the US dollar and pushing the Greek/German yield spread to almost 4%. In May 2010, Eurozone leaders agreed to a billion euro three-year rescue package.
China becomes the second largest global economy, surpassing Japan.
Debt struggles plague advanced countries. The crisis in Greece fuels growing fears of contagion.

Society and trends

The 2010s are notable for being the first decade in which the population of Earth has been more urban than rural; the portion of the human population living in cities and urban areas reached 50% in 2007.World Population Becomes More Urban Than Rural
The world population is projected to peak at 9 billion by 2050, and many countries reported declining fertility rates in the 2010 census. At the same time, the world is grappling with the Great Recession that began in 2007 and continues into the 2010s.

An aging population

The 2010s have been a period of concern for some time to governments and economists due to the fact that it is the decade in which most of the baby boomers in developed nations will retire, putting pressure on their pension programs. An aging society and its consequences have been felt hardest in Europe, Russia, and Japan, which have been experiencing a trend of dramatic population decline over the past few decades.
Reforms to pensions are a volatile subject politically, and lead to major protests from the public. In 2010, France debated and raised the retirement age to 62 from 60, despite widespread demonstrations against the change.nbcnews.UwS0gPldWa8 A few years later, during the Hollande administration, the retirement age was lowered back to 60.

Political polarization

In the United States and, to a lesser degree, elsewhere, political polarization continues and/or increases as conservatives and progressives clash over the role of government and other social, economic, and environmental issues. Polls in the US continue to show a divided electorate regarding job creation, debt reduction, and taxation.

LGBT

Acceptance of LGBT people slowly increases across the world, with significantly higher levels of support among younger generations than among older generations, though a growth in all age groups.
Polls found that by 2012, 53% of Americans supported gay marriage, up dramatically from six years prior when just over one-third of respondents believed it should be legal. In addition, less than four out of ten Americans believed that marriage for gay and lesbian couples should be illegal.
While many western countries are becoming more accepting and tolerant towards gays and lesbians, some nations such as Russia, are becoming more distant. In 2013, Russian President Vladimir Putin signed a law that criminalized free expression.nbcnews. Petersburg drafted its own ban on free expression and banned pride events as well.newsobserver.html

Youth culture

Youth culture such as skateboarding continues to spread to countries such as Afghanistan. Internet memes grew in popularity across the Internet since around late 2009, although internet memes existed as far back as the web's infancy in the 1990s. Current trends set Internet memes to grow hugely and enter the mainstream of TV and general entertainment in the coming years. In 2013, Baauer's Harlem shake is the first internet meme song to reach the #1 spot on the Billboard Top 100, reflecting a shift in popular culture as internet memes become mainstream and not a "geek" counterculture.

Other societal trends

New urbanism and urban revival continue to be forces in urban planning in the United States.com However, evidence shows that growth of American suburbs still outpaces urban growth.truliablog.com/2012/10/even-after-the-housing-bust-americans-still-love-the-suburbs/
Environmentalism slowly continues to become mainstream, though action on curbing fossil fuels has been limited in its success.
The world's major civilizations are now interacting more than ever in history, creating tensions but also bringing new ideas to cultures that previously did not have them. This occurs more often not only physically but in cyberspace. This is radically changing the economic and social fabric in virtually every part of the world. China, considered an emerging power in the 1990s and 2000s, has increasingly been called a superpower in the early 2010s, such as at the 2011 meeting between Hu Jintao and Barack Obama. This is confirmed by China overtaking the US as the world's largest trading nation, filing the most patents, its increasing military buildup, its involvement in space with the Jade Rabbit landing on the moon, ending the nearly four decade malaise of moon exploration, and the creation of China's Oriental Movie Metropolis as a major film and cultural center. China is projected to have the world's largest economy by 2018 and most likely have a GDP per capita equal to the US by the late 2050s.news.com/5/20110119/twl-superpower-talks-china-faces-tough-u-3fd0ae9.html
Individuality and uniqueness continues to be increasingly valued as opposed to conformism. A well noted example of this are baby names, which have become far more individualized since the 1960s, but especially since the 1990s and the introduction of the Internet.
In America, migration to the Sun Belt, large during the last decades of the 20th century and the 2000s decade, declines; migration in general around the US has been in decline since the beginning of the 1980s,
AIDS, a pandemic responsible for killing over 30 million people since its discovery in the early 1980s, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, becomes a treatable condition; though only one case has been cured, the disease is no longer a death sentence and with good treatment victims can generally expect to live normal lives and lifespans. However, as of 2011 only a bit more than 5 million of the 12 million people who need drugs for AIDS get them and hence many people still die from the disease.
Ufology has seen a decline in popularity compared to its heyday in the 1980s and 1990s. In the 1990s, there were well over 100 groups involved in UFO research in the UK; in 2013 this number declined to about 30.

Science and technology

Science

Technology

Additional notable world-wide events

File:Eruption of Mount Eyjafjallajökull Volcano, Iceland April 17, 2010 Detail.jpg|The ash plume from the volcano beneath the Eyjafjallajökull ice cap, over the North Atlantic as seen from space by NASA's Aqua satellite on April 17, 2010
File:Federal District buildings seen from rooftop restaurant.
File:Mina San José - Mario Gómez Rescue - Gobierno de Chile.jpg|2010 Copiapó mining accident
File:All smiles Wedding of Prince William of Wales and Kate Middleton.jpg|Wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton

Popular culture

Film and television

Film and television, two industries that have dominated pop culture for a large part of the last century, found themselves struggling to maintain their predominant influence throughout this decade. Internet piracy was a major concern for the industry as well and a reluctance to adapt to consumer demand through online venues even further harmed the industry's image.Peter Levinsohn - Building Future Digital Business | Carsey-Wolf Center at UC Santa Barbara As of 2010, Hulu was contemplating a US$2 billion IPO.
Cable providers saw a decline in their membership in favor of online streaming services such as Hulu, Netflix and Amazon.YouTube vs HuluCable providers losing ground in fight with 'cord-cutting' - Leader-Telegram: Daily Updates These non-cable, internet-based media streaming services even began producing their own programming.
TV sets, such as the SmartTV by Samsung, start to integrate the internet to traditional television, giving more choices that are more traditional and high quality than cable, along with more family friendly middle class entertainment.
3D films, although not a new technology, saw a resurgence in popularity after the long-awaited release of James Cameron's Avatar in late-2009. The box office success of other 3D releases that year insured the industry that 3D movies were not a fad.4 Reasons 3D Movies Aren't Just a FadJames Cameron Says 3D Is Not A Fad, It's A Renaissance | Rama's Screen In fact, the video game and television industries began to look into utilizing the 3D trend by releasing their own 3D products and services.
Animated films in the 2010s remain predominately computer-generated. Traditional 2D animation has struggled in recent years and is seen by some industry giants like Michael Eisner to be an outdated artform or casualty to the rise of CGI-based films.
The American soap opera format slides in popularity as reality television and daytime talk shows continue to move in on their time slots.
In 2010, Kathryn Bigelow became the first woman to receive the Academy Award for Best Director for the 2009 movie The Hurt Locker.
The highly-controversial, globally-acclaimed 2000 Japanese film Battle Royale was officially released to theaters and home media in the United States after more than eleven years of quiet corporate wrangling by both American and Japanese distributors; the first planned Los Angeles public theatrical run in December 2011 was extended by six days due to popular demand.imdb.com/title/tt0266308/releaseinfo

Academy Award Best Pictures

Theatre

The trend of musicals based on movies reaches a peak in 2013 when for the first time, the four nominees for the Best Musical Tony Award are all based on movies.
Rights for many shows from the 2000s, including The 25th Annual Putnam County Spelling Bee, Spring Awakening, and Hairspray, were released for amateur production.
Locally, many theaters begin to perform smaller productions with less actor and set requirements as a way of coping with the Great Recession. This made shows like the aforementioned Spelling Bee into standards.

Music

Electropop, sometimes combined with hip hop and other forms of dance music, see mainstream success throughout the early 2010s, making a sound that differentiates 2010s music from the popular music styles of the early 2000s.
According to a Nielsen and Billboard report, digital music sales in 2012 topped the physical sale of music.
In terms of popular music, the heavy use of Auto-Tune and talk box has dramatically changed the landscape of the Top-40 charts. Another noticeable trend that began late in the 2000s and is continuing into this decade is the prevalence of dance and pop music.

Record of the Year Grammy Winners

Architecture

Postmodernism and green designsWhat Could the Next Decade Hold for Architecture? - Sustainability, Business, Technology - Architect MagazineAlcorn & Benton Architects | Paul Benton - Energy saving techniques and green architecture methods stand to cut costs, reduce consumption dramatically in the coming decade | L... are common themes seen throughout the architecture of the decade. The aftermath of the energy crisis and the threat of peak oil have pushed developers to creating structures that are as sustainable as possible whether that is through the use of natural lighting, green/white roofs, better insulation, and other cost-saving means.Bjarke Ingels: Hedonistic sustainability | Video on TED.com
China and the Middle East have been regarded as the "architect playgrounds" of this decade.com. Dubai's development has been slowed by the global recession,Architecture in Recession: U.A.E. - BusinessWeek but China continues to flourish in its development towards a modern nation.China Pushes Shanghai As International Financial Centre
A supertall skyscraper race began in the late-2000s and in 2010, Dubai's Burj Khalifa became the tallest man-made structure ever built, standing at  hopes to rise even higher.
The Gotthard Base Tunnel, the world's longest railway tunnel, is scheduled to be completed in 2017 or 2018.
One World Trade Center is expected to be completed in early 2014 as the highest building in the United States.

Sports

Video gaming

Coming into the 2010s, video games and their associated culture matures into an established element of pop culture. According to the Entertainment Software Association, the average age of a person who plays games is 30.The Entertainment Software Association - Industry Facts
Some of the new and innovative trends to gaming culture in this decade include cloud gaming, the rise of 3D gaming, and the ever-increasing advancements in graphic card technologies leading to more photo-realistic graphics. Video game sales declined in the early-2010s, most likely due to the effects of the Great Recession,
The first few years of the decade was dominated primarily with seventh generation consoles. This includes Microsoft's Xbox 360, the Sony PlayStation 3, and Nintendo's Wii. The lack of many wide release titles on the PC lead some industry critics to question whether PC gaming is dead entirely.E3 2011: The Future of PC Gaming | PCWorld The PC, however still remains the preferred choice medium by the Sims franchise and many of Blizzard's popular titles despite they themselves expanding onto other devices. Sony and Microsoft have initially stated that their PS3 and Xbox 360 consoles were to be on a ten-year lifespan which wouldn't place a release of one of their consoles until 2014 or 2016,Microsoft: Xbox 360 'about halfway' through g - Shacknews... | Xbox 720 News | GameZone but the Wii U's announcement had prompted the other two industry giants to make swifter timetables of release. In late 2013, two consoles were added to the eighth generation with Microsoft's Xbox One and Sony's PlayStation 4. The eighth generation consoles are expected to face stiff competition from tablet and smartphone gaming markets, as well as an increased interest in independent games promoted by popular social networking sites.Facebook Gaming: 10 Facebook Games Stats | Digital Buzz Blog
Following in the 3D craze, Nintendo released the Nintendo 3DS in early-2011. It introduced a new interface that does not require special glasses to observe stereoscopic 3D visual during gameplay. Mobility and interaction become a common trend to see in video games. The original Wii revolutionized the industry with the introduction of the sensor bar with compatible sensitive controllers, and Sony and Microsoft reacted by releasing the PlayStation Move and Kinect respectively. This new and innovative direction expanded the video game market to those interested in physical therapy and to the elderly.com

Fashion

The 2010s (2010–present) have thus far been defined by a revival of interwar, Austerity era, 1980s (from late 2012 onwards), early 1990s and skater fashions.1980s style Baseball jacket In the early 2010s, many mid and late 2000s fashions remain popular in Europe, the US, Latin America, Australasia and Asia, especially the indie pop look which largely drew upon 1960s Mod clothing combined with elements of 1970s garage rock, contemporary alternative fashion. Latin American teens and young adults, who started to keep up with general Western fashion more closely since the mid-1990s, proved to be more conservative upon maintaining or abandoning 2000s trends than their European and North American peers until about 2013. Urban, Hipster and Vintage-styles are really common since 2012 and 2013. From 2014, neon and pastel colors are really fashionable. Full-printed T-shirts with diverse patterns (like cosmic, clouds, historic architecture) are a huge fashion trend since then. Their popularity is increasing rapidly, mostly for the youth.



Timeline

The following articles contain brief timelines which list the most prominent events and predicted prominent events of the decade:




