[[Swami Vivekananda Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures in Raipur, Chhattisgarh, Airports in Chhattisgarh, Vivekananda, Transport in Raipur, Chhattisgarh, Memorials to Vivekananda

Swami Vivekananda International Airport  south of Raipur between the old city and the new seat of the state government Naya Raipur. In 2006, this Airport witnessed an 82% increase in passenger traffic (the highest in the country for that year). The Airport is one of the 35 non-metro airports recently modernised by the Airports Authority of India (AAI).
On 24 January 2012, the Union cabinet of India approved the State Government's proposal for renaming Raipur airport after India's greatest son and well known saint Swami Vivekananda who spent 2 years of his teenage in Raipur. It is currently served by Air India, Jet Airways, Jetlite and IndiGo while Kingfisher Airlines suspended its operations in Nov 2011 due to its bad financial condition. There are also non-scheduled services by Air OdishaRoute Map. Airodisha. to Bhubaneswar and Air Taxi services by Chhattisgarh Air Link which flies from here to other cities of Chhattisgarh. Cgairlink.

New Integrated Terminal

A new integrated terminal covering an area of 
Shoppers Stop has opened a retail store in the new integrated terminal making it one of the five Airport Stores operated by Shoppers Stop Ltd. in India.moneyworks4me.
The proposed international terminal is being upgraded along with the runway expansion project to enable the airport to handle larger aircraft for starting international operations, connecting the city to South-East Asia and the Middle East. The new terminal will be used for domestic flights, while the proposed international terminal is being renovated to handle international operations. Currently four international carriers have shown interest to start operations to Bangkok, Dubai, Qatar, New York, Sydney and Singapore once the airport is ready to start international operations.dailypioneer.html
The Airports Authority of India has also cleared the way for starting air cargo operations from the airport by giving nod to develop the old terminal building into a cargo complex.indiatimes.cms
The airfield is equipped with night landing facilities and a CAT- 1 Instrument Landing System (ILS) as well as Navigational facilities like DVOR, DME, and an NDB.


Airlines and destinations

Scheduled airlines

Non Scheduled airlines

Awards and recognitions

Accidents and incidents






