[[Théâtre du Soleil]]

CATEGORIES: Theatre companies in France, Performing groups established in 1964

Le Théâtre du Soleil (lit. "The Theater of the Sun") is a Parisian avant-garde stage ensemble founded by Ariane Mnouchkine, Philippe Léotard and fellow students of the L'École Internationale de Théâtre Jacques Lecoq in 1964 as a collective of theatre artists. Le Théâtre du Soleil is located at La Cartoucherie, a former munitions factory in the Vincennes area of eastern Paris. The company creates new theatrical works using a devising process based on utilizing physical theatre and improvisation.

Sociohistorical context

The Theatre du Soleil was founded as a theatre collective in 1964, in the midst of cultural turmoil that was sweeping the western world. With the capitalist west and the Communist east locked in the midst of the Cold War, nuclear warfare was imminent while the whole of Europe was slowly recovering from the destruction of World War II. In 1965 Charles de Gaulle was re-elected President of France in the first election with universal suffrage. 1968, a watershed year for protests and turmoil around the world, was characterized by rebellion against conventional culture, huge political demonstrations, and labor strikes in France involving 11 million workers, students, and far-left politicians. It was in the middle of this period of uncertainty, changing cultural attitudes, and disillusionment that Mnouchkine, a student in Paris, started Le Theatre du Soleil with her peers who were interested in creating original theatre.

Timeline

1964: Le Theatre du Soleil is established 
1964–65:
Les Petits Bourgeois presented at Théâtre Mouffetard 
1965–66: 
Capitaine Fracasse presented at the Theater Récamier
1967: 
La Cuisine presented at Cirque de Montmartre
1968: 
Le Songe d'une Nuit d'Ete (A Midsummer's Night's Dream) 
L'Arbre Sorcier, Jerome et la Tortue
1969–70: 
Les Clowns presented at Festival d'Avignon, Piccolo Teatro de Milan 
1970–1971: 
Le Theatre du Soleil moves to their permanent base, la Cartoucherie, a former munitions factory on the outskirts of Paris
1789 opens in La Cartoucherie. 
1974:
Film version of 1789 released
1975:
L'Age d'Or 
1976–77:
Don Juan 
1979–80:
Mephisto, Le Roman d'une Carriere 
1981–84:
Translated works of Shakespeare are presented in cycles, including Richard II and Henry IV Parts 1 and 2
1985–86:
L'Histoire Terrible Mais Inachevee de Norodom Sihanouk, Roi du Cambodge
1987–88:
L'Indiade ou L'Inde de leurs Reves
1989:
Film version of La Nuit Miraculeuse
1990–93:
Cycle Les Atrides (including Ipighenie a Aulis, Agamemnon, Les Choephores, and Les Eumenides) 
1993:
L'Inde, de Pere en Fils, de Mere en Fille 
1994:
La Ville perjure ou le Reveil des Erinyes 
1996–97:
Film Au Soleil Meme la Nuit 
1997–98:
 Et Soudain des Nuits d'Eveil 
Tout est Bien qui Finit Bien 
1999–2002:
La Ville Parjure ou le Reveil des Erinyes
Tambours sur la Digue 
2003–2006:
Le Derner Caravanserail (Odyssees) 
 Le Fleuve Cruel 
Origines et Destins
2007–2009:
Les Ephemeres 
2008 :
Film L'Aventure du Theatre du Soleil 
2010–2011: 
Les Naufrages du Fol Espoir (reached 200th performance in February 2011)
March 19–22 – Japanese kyogen troupe, hosted by Le Theatre du Soleil at La Cartoucherie, performs traditional kyogen pieces and an adaptation of Shakespeare's The Comedy of Errors
May 4 – Company tour begins in Nantes

Mission and philosophy

The Theatre du Soleil was founded in the 1960s as a reaction against traditional theatrical institutions in France. 
The company's productions have included both re-imaginings of classics of Western theatre such as Shakespeare's Richard II and Moliere's Tartuffe, but the company is equally well-known for their original works. The collective, consisting of 70 members as of July 2009, takes the concept and direction for their original productions from founder Ariane Mnouchkine, and works together in a collaborative rehearsal process that stretches out over many months to create a finished performance event. For example, their six-hour-long 2005 production Le Dernier Caravansérail (Odyssées) was based on a compilation of letters and interviews collected by Mnouchkine and her colleagues from refugee camps from around the world, while Les Ephemeres in 2009 was based on nine months of improvisations stemming from Mnouchkine's question: What would you do if you found out that all of humanity would die out within three months?
At other times, they provocatively, directly comment on contemporary events, such as their production of Tartuffe in which the title character was presented as an Islamic zealot at a time when there was a movement in France against foreign immigration. 
Beyond their production process, part of the company's philosophy includes communal living and a complete lack of hierarchy for every member of the organization. All employees, whether actors, administrators, or technicians, are paid the exact same wage, and must sometimes go without a salary for months when the company is not performing and earning income. The company lives together in shared housing and equally shares the work of cooking, cleaning, and otherwise maintaining their living space. In addition, all performers do technical work on productions, such as maintaining moving set pieces for Les Ephemeres.

Major works

The Theatre du Soleil's premiere performance was in 1964–65 with Les Petits Bourgeois. The company's first widely recognized production was in 1967 with Wesker's The Kitchen. They continued on to form a theatre collective and produce their first major success 1789, a show about the French Revolution. Their performance suggested "the Revolution was subverted by those more concerned about property than justice". Another of the company's most famous works was Les Atrides. This was made up of Euripides' Iphigenia at Aulis and Aeschylus' The Oresteia. The production took over two years to mount, played in numerous countries including the United States and Germany, and integrated several forms of Asian dance and drama. In 2005, Le Theatre du Soleil presented Le Dernier Caravanserail (Odyssees) or The Last Caravansary (Odysseys). 
One of the company's most recent major works was their production of Les Ephemeres created and directed by Ariane Mnouchkine. The show premiered at the 2009 Lincoln Center Festival. Les Ephemeres is centered around the river of time with its events both past and present. The Village Voice characterized the show's theme as "To go with the flow, to accept the fact that time is the great devastator. Tout passe, tout casse, tout basse, says a French proverb: Everything passes, everything breaks, everything sinks." The performance is split in two three-and-a-half-hour-long sections with the full run time just over seven hours long.

Major players

While Ariane Mnouchkine, acknowledged as the founder of the troupe, regularly acts as the company's concept creator and director, a number of her fellow students were also her collaborators in the initial founding of the company, including: 
Senior members such as Mnouchkine are not given preferential treatment. Mnouchkine, for example, refused to be interviewed alone for a New York Times article, although individuals such as Helene Cixous (playwright) and Jean-Jacques Lemetre (composer and musician) repeatedly fulfill specific production roles and have done so for many years.








