[[The Who]]

CATEGORIES: The Who, 1964 establishments in England, Art rock musical groups, Beat groups, Brit Award winners, British Invasion artists, British rhythm and blues boom musicians, Brunswick Records artists, Decca Records artists, English hard rock musical groups, English power pop groups, Geffen Records artists, Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award winners, Musical duos, Musical groups disestablished in 1982, Musical groups disestablished in 1989, Musical groups established in 1964, Musical groups from London, Musical groups reestablished in 1989, Musical groups reestablished in 1996, Musical quartets, Musical trios, Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees, Pete Townshend, Polydor Records artists, Warner Bros. Records artists, Atco Records artists



The Who are an English rock band formed in 1964. Their best known line-up consisted of lead singer Roger Daltrey, guitarist Pete Townshend, bassist John Entwistle and drummer Keith Moon. For much of their career they have been regarded as one of the three most important British rock acts along with the Beatles and the Rolling Stones.
The Who developed from an earlier group, the Detours, before stabilising around a line-up of Daltrey, Townshend, Entwistle and Moon. After releasing a single (billed as the High Numbers), the group established themselves as part of the mod movement, specialising in auto-destructive art by destroying guitars and drums onstage. They achieved recognition in the UK after support by pirate radio and television, and their first single (as the Who), "I Can't Explain" reached the top ten. A string of hit singles followed including "My Generation", "Substitute" and "Happy Jack". Although initially regarded as a singles act, they also found success with the albums My Generation and A Quick One. In 1967, they achieved success in the US after performing at the Monterey Pop Festival, and with the top ten single "I Can See for Miles". They released The Who Sell Out at the end of the year, and spent much of 1968 touring the US.
The release of their fourth album, Tommy, in 1969 was a major commercial and critical achievement. Subsequent live appearances at Woodstock and the Isle of Wight Festival, along with the live album Live At Leeds, transformed the Who's reputation from a hit-singles band into a critically acclaimed rock act. With their success came increased pressure on lead songwriter Townshend, and the follow-up to Tommy, Lifehouse was abandoned in favour of 1971's Who's Next. The group subsequently released Quadrophenia (1973) and The Who by Numbers (1975), oversaw the film adaptation of Tommy and toured to large audiences before semi-retiring from live performance in 1977. The release of Who Are You in August 1978 was overshadowed by the death of Moon on 7 September, at the age of 32.
Kenney Jones, formerly of the Small Faces and the Faces, replaced Moon and the group resumed touring. A film adaptation of Quadrophenia was released in 1979 along with the retrospective documentary The Kids Are Alright. The group continued recording, releasing Face Dances in 1981 and It's Hard the following year, before breaking up. They occasionally re-formed for live appearances such as Live Aid in 1985, a 25th anniversary tour in 1989 that drew mixed reviews, and for a tour of Quadrophenia in 1996. The Who resumed regular touring in 1999, with drummer Zak Starkey, to a positive response, and were considering the possibility of a new album, but these plans were stalled by Entwistle's death in June 2002 at the age of 57. Townshend and Daltrey elected to continue as the Who, releasing Endless Wire (2006), which reached the top ten in the UK and US. The group continue to play live on a regular basis, and in 2012 they began a further tour of Quadrophenia.

History

Background

The three founding members of the Who, Daltrey, Townshend and Entwistle, all grew up in Acton, London. All three passed the Eleven Plus exam and went to Acton County Grammar School.
Daltrey, who was in the year above them, had moved to Acton from Shepherd's Bush, a more working-class area. He had trouble fitting in as an outsider, and discovered gangs and rock 'n' roll.
Daltrey met Entwistle by chance on the street, telling him "I hear you play bass", which Entwistle subsequently said was strange "considering I was carrying one without a case!"
With the departure of Dawson, Daltrey moved to performing as lead vocalist, and Townshend, with Entwistle's encouragement, became the sole guitarist. Through Townshend's mother, the group obtained a management contract with local promoter Robert Druce,

1964–1978

=Early career=

By the time the Detours had evolved into the Who, they had already found regular gigs including the Oldfield Hotel in Greenford, the White Hart Hotel in Acton, the Goldhawk Social Club in Shepherd's Bush, and the Notre Dame Hall in Leicester Square.
During a gig in late April at the Oldfield, using a stand-in drummer, the band met Moon for the first time. Unlike the other members, Moon grew up in Wembley, and had been drumming in bands since 1961.
In the summer, the group switched management again to Peter Meaden. He decided that the group would be ideal to represent the growing mod movement in Britain which involved fashion, scooters and music genres such as rhythm and blues, soul, and beat music. He renamed the group the High Numbers, dressed them up in typical mod clothes,
Meaden was replaced as manager by two filmmakers, Kit Lambert and Chris Stamp. They were looking for a young, unsigned rock group that they could make a film about, To highlight their music style, the band changed their set towards soul, rhythm and blues and Motown covers, and created the slogan "Maximum R&B".
In June 1964, during a performance at the Railway, Townshend accidentally broke the head of his guitar on the low ceiling above the stage."'Who I Am': Rock icon Pete Townshend tells his story". MSNBC. Retrieved 23 November 2012 Angered by laughing from the audience, he smashed the instrument on the stage, then picked up another guitar and continued the show. The following week, the audience were keen to see a repeat of the event. Moon promptly obliged and kicked his drum kit over.

=First singles and My Generation=

By late 1964, the Who had started to become popular in London's Marquee club, which attracted a rave review in Melody Maker over their live act.
The Who achieved a major boost in popularity when they appeared on the television programme Ready Steady Go! Lambert and Stamp had been given the task of finding "typical teens", and simply invited the group's regular audience from the Goldhawk Social Club.
The transition into a hit-making band with original material, eagerly encouraged by Lambert, did not sit well with Daltrey, particularly after a session of recording R&B covers for an album was shelved.
The group recorded a follow-up single, "My Generation" in October. Townshend had written it as a slow blues, but after several abortive attempts, it was turned into a more powerful song with a bass solo from Entwistle.
After My Generation, the Who fell out with Talmy which meant an abrupt end to their recording contract. Lambert and Stamp claimed the royalty rate was poor,
Subsequent singles released in 1966 included "I'm a Boy", about a boy dressed as a girl, taken from an abortive collection of songs called "Quads",

=A Quick One and The Who Sell Out=

To alleviate some of the financial pressure on the band, Lambert arranged a songwriting deal which required each member to write two songs for the next album. Entwistle contributed "Boris the Spider" and "Whiskey Man" and found a niche role as a second songwriter in the band,
By 1966, Ready Steady Go! had stopped being broadcast, and mod was no longer as popular. The Who found themselves in competition with Cream and the Jimi Hendrix Experience on the London gigging circuit.
The next album was The Who Sell Out—a concept album based on pirate radio, which had been instrumental in raising the Who's popularity, but had been banned that August. It included several humorous jingles and mock commercials between songs,
The group started 1968 with a fairly disastrous tour of Australia and New Zealand with the Small Faces,

=Tommy, Woodstock and Live at Leeds=

By 1968, the Who had started to attract attention in the underground press.
By the end of the year, 18 months of continuous touring had led to a well rehearsed and tight live band, which was evident when they performed "A Quick One While He's Away" at The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus, a planned television special. The Stones considered their own performance lacklustre, and the project was shelved and never broadcast. 
The album was eventually completed and released in May with the accompanying single, "Pinball Wizard", and a debut performance at Ronnie Scott's,
In August, the Who performed at the Woodstock Festival, despite being reluctant to do so and only agreeing after being paid $13,000 up front.
While Woodstock in general has been regarded as culturally significant, the Who have been critical of the event. Roadie John "Wiggie" Wolff, who arranged the band's payment, described the event as "a shambles",
By 1970, the Who were widely considered to be one of the best and most popular live rock bands, with Chris Charlesworth describing concerts as "leading to a kind of rock nirvana that most bands can only dream about."
The Leeds University gig was part of the Tommy tour, which not only included gigs in European opera houses but saw the Who become the first rock act at the Metropolitan Opera House in New York City. In March the Who released the UK top twenty hit "The Seeker", continuing a theme of issuing singles separate to albums.

=Lifehouse and Who's Next=

The success of Tommy secured the Who's future, and made them millionaires. The group reacted in different ways—Daltrey and Entwistle lived comfortably, Townshend was embarrassed at his wealth, which he felt at odds with Meher Baba's ideals, while Moon spent frivously.
During the latter part of 1970, Townshend thought of a suitable follow-up to Tommy. He came up with Lifehouse, which was designed to be a multi-media project symbolising the relationship between an artist and his audience.
In March 1971, the Who began recording the available Lifehouse material with Kit Lambert in New York, which had to be abandoned due to Lambert's increasing dependency on heroin, and then restarted the sessions with Glyn Johns in April. Selections from the material, with one unrelated song ("My Wife") by Entwistle, were released as a traditional studio album, Who's Next. The album became their most successful album among critics and fans, reaching No. 4 in the US pop charts and No. 1 in the UK. Two tracks from the album, "Baba O'Riley" and "Won't Get Fooled Again", are early examples of synthesiser use in rock music; both tracks' keyboard sounds were generated in real time by a Lowrey organ, and on "Won't Get Fooled Again", it was further processed through a VCS3 synthesiser.
Townshend was credited with "VCS3 Organ" and "ARP Synthesizer" on the final album credits. "Baba O'Riley" also featured a violin solo by Dave Arbus, produced by Moon.
The Who continued to release Lifehouse related material over the next few years. In October they released the UK top twenty hit "Let's See Action" which came from the project, followed by further singles "Join Together" and "Relay". British Hit Singles & Albums. London: Guinness World Records LimitedWhitburn, Joel (2006). The Billboard Book of Top 40 Hits. Billboard Books
Following the success of Who's Next, the band went back on tour, replacing much of the old Tommy material with the new songs.

=Quadrophenia, Tommy film and The Who by Numbers=

Following the tour for Who's Next, and needing time to write a follow-up, Townshend insisted that the Who take a lengthy break. Having been continually touring since the band started, there was no group activity for the first part of 1972.
By 1973, the Who had decided to record an album about mod and its subculture, set against clashes with Rockers in the early 1960s in the UK, particularly at Brighton, called Quadrophenia.
The tour for the album started in Stoke on Trent in October,
By 1974, serious work had begun on the Tommy film. Ken Russell was suggested as director by Stigwood, and Townshend had admired his previous work.
The film premiered on 18 March 1975, to a standing ovation from the audience.
Because work on Tommy took up most of 1974, live performances by the Who were restricted to a one off show at Charlton Athletic Football Ground in May in front of 80,000 fans
Their 1975 album, The Who by Numbers, had introspective songs that dealt with disillusionment, lightened by "Squeeze Box", another hit single.

=Who Are You and Moon's death=

Following the end of the 1976 tour, Townshend insisted on having most of the following year off to spend time with his family.
The group reconvened in September, when Townshend announced there would be no live performances for the immediate future, a decision that Daltrey endorsed. By this point, Moon was so out of shape that the Who conceded it would be difficult for him to cope with the rigours of touring. The only live gig performed that year was an informal show at the Gaumont State Cinema in Kilburn, London, on 15 December, as part of an upcoming documentary film about the band, The Kids Are Alright.
Recording of Who Are You started in January 1978. Daltrey clashed with Johns over the production of his vocals, and Moon's drumming was so poor that Daltrey and Entwistle considered he should be sacked. His playing subsequently improved, but on one track, "Music Must Change", he was absent entirely.
The album was released on 18 August, and became their biggest and fastest seller to that date, peaking at No. 6 in the UK and No. 2 in the US.
On 6 September, Moon attended a party held by Paul McCartney to celebrate Buddy Holly's birthday. Upon arriving back at his flat, he took 32 tablets of Heminevrin—a drug prescribed to combat his alcohol withdrawal.

1978–1983

The day after Moon's death, Townshend issued a statement saying "We are more determined than ever to carry on, and we want the spirit of the group to which Keith contributed so much to go on, although no human being can ever take his place".
Bundrick was scheduled to have played on Who Are You, but he was unavailable due to an injury.
On 2 May 1979, the Who returned to the stage with a well-received concert at the Rainbow Theatre in London, followed up over the spring and summer by performances at the Cannes Film Festival in France, in Scotland, at Wembley Stadium in London, in West Germany, at the Capitol Theater in Passaic, New Jersey and in five dates at Madison Square Garden in New York City.
1979 also saw the release of a film of Quadrophenia. It was directed by Franc Roddam in his feature directing début,
The Kids Are Alright was also completed in 1979. It was a retrospective of the band's career to that date, directed by Jeff Stein.
In December, the Who became the third band, after the Beatles and the Band, to be featured on the cover of Time. The article, written by Jay Cocks, said the band had "outpaced, outlasted, outlived and outclassed" all of their rock band contemporaries.

=Cincinnati tragedy=

On 3 December 1979, a short tour of the United States was marred by tragedy in Cincinnati, Ohio, where a crowd crush at the Riverfront Coliseum killed 11 fans.
The Who were not told until after the show because civic authorities feared crowd problems if the concert was cancelled. The band were deeply shaken upon learning of the incident, and requested that appropriate safety precautions be taken at subsequent concerts.

=Change and break-up=

Daltrey took a short break from the Who in 1980 to work on the film McVicar, in which he took the lead role of bank robber John McVicar.
The Who released two studio albums with Jones as drummer, Face Dances (1981) and It's Hard (1982). Face Dances produced a US top twenty and UK top ten hit with the single "You Better You Bet" and its video was shown on MTV on its first day of airing.
By this time, however, Townshend had fallen into a depression, realising his role as a visionary had come to an end.
Townshend wanted to stop touring completely and leave the Who as a studio act, though Entwistle threatened to quit unless there were promises of further tours. Townshend did not change his mind, and so The Who embarked on their 'farewell' tour of the US and Canada
Townshend spent part of 1983 trying to write material for the studio album still owed to Warner Bros. Records from a contract in 1980.

Reunions

In July 1985, the Who reformed for a one-off performance at Bob Geldof's Live Aid concert at Wembley Stadium, London.

=1989 tour=

In 1989, the band embarked on a 25th anniversary The Kids Are Alright reunion tour. Simon Phillips played drums, and Steve "Boltz" Bolton played lead guitar, as Townshend relegated himself to acoustic guitar and some electric rhythm guitar to minimise damage to his hearing.

=Partial reunions=

In 1990, the Who were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame museum.
In 1991, the Who recorded a cover of Elton John's "Saturday Night's Alright for Fighting" for the tribute album Two Rooms: Celebrating the Songs of Elton John & Bernie Taupin. This was the last time they released any new studio work with John Entwistle. In 1994, Daltrey turned 50 and celebrated with two concerts at Carnegie Hall. These included guest spots by Entwistle and Townshend. Although all three surviving original members of the Who attended, they did not appear on stage together except for the finale, "Join Together", with the other guests. Daltrey toured that year with Entwistle, Zak Starkey on drums and Simon Townshend filling in for his brother as guitarist.

Reformation

=Revival of Quadrophenia=

In 1996, Townshend, Entwistle and Daltrey performed Quadrophenia with guest stars at a concert in Hyde Park, with Zak Starkey as the drummer.

=Charity shows and Entwistle's death=

In late 1999, the Who performed in concert as a five-piece for the first time since 1985, with Bundrick on keyboards and Starkey on drums. The first show took place on 29 October 1999 in Las Vegas at the MGM Grand Garden Arena. Critics were delighted to see the band back on form with a basic line-up comparable to the tours of the 1960s and 1970s. Andy Greene, writing in Rolling Stone, claimed the 1999 tour to be even better than the final one with Moon in 1976.
The success of 1999 led to a US tour in 2000 from June to October, moving to the UK in October and November, to generally favourable reviews. The Who were also honoured with a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award that year.
The Who played some concerts in the UK in early 2002, in preparation for a full US tour. On 27 June, the day before the tour was due to commence,

=After Entwistle and Endless Wire=

Entwistle's son, Christopher, gave a statement supporting the Who continuing the tour, which began at the Hollywood Bowl on 2 July with Pino Palladino replacing Entwistle as bassist. Townshend dedicated the show to Entwistle, which ended with a montage of pictures featuring him. The tour lasted until September. The loss of a founder member of the Who caused Townshend to re-evaluate his relationship with Daltrey, which had become strained several times over the band's career. He decided their friendship was important, and this ultimately led to writing and recording new material.
As part of a general plan to combat bootlegging, the band began to release the Encore Series of officially released soundboard tapes via themusic. An official statement read "to satisfy this demand they have agreed to release their own official recordings to benefit worthy causes."
In 2004, the Who released "Old Red Wine" and "Real Good Looking Boy" (with Pino Palladino and Greg Lake, respectively, on bass guitar), as part of a singles anthology (The Who: Then and Now), and went on an 18-date tour playing Japan, Australia, the UK and the US. Later that year, Rolling Stone ranked the Who No. 29 on their list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time.
The Who announced in 2005 that a new album was being worked on. Townshend posted a novella called The Boy Who Heard Music on his blog, which developed into a mini-opera called Wire & Glass, forming the basis for the album.
In November 2007, the documentary Amazing Journey: The Story of the Who was released. The documentary includes footage not in earlier documentaries, including film from the 1970 Leeds University appearance and the 1964 performance at the Railway Hotel when they were The High Numbers. Amazing Journey was nominated for a 2009 Grammy Award.
Since the release of Endless Wire, the Who have continued to tour and receive awards on a regular basis. Highlights include performing on the London stage of the Live 8 concert in July 2005, winning the Freddie Mercury Lifetime Achievement Award in Live Music at the Vodafone music awards,
In August 2009, Townshend announced on the Who's website that he is working on a new musical titled Floss which follows the story of an ageing rocker known as "Walter", some songs of which may appear on a future Who album.
On 19 November 2012, the Who released the album Live at Hull, the band's performance in Hull on 15 February 1970—the night after the Live at Leeds gig was recorded.

=Quadrophenia and More=

The Who performed Quadrophenia at the Royal Albert Hall on 30 March 2010 as part of the Teenage Cancer Trust series of 10 gigs. This one-off performance of the rock opera featured guest appearances from Vedder, Kasabian's Tom Meighan and the London Symphony Orchestra's Tom Norris.
In July, Daltrey stated that they had acquired new equipment, including earpieces, that he and the band are learning to use to enable Townshend to perform. The Who hoped to tour again in 2011, with "a new show," according to Daltrey, or possibly a retooled stage presentation of Quadrophenia.

=Future plans=

In October 2013, Townshend told the London Evening Standard that the Who would stage their final tour in 2015 and will perform in locations they have never performed previously.

Musical style

While the Who have been regarded primarily as a rock band, their style changed during the course of their career. The original group played a mixture of trad jazz and contemporary pop hits as the Detours, which evolved into R&B during 1963
The group became pioneering users of the Marshall Stack. This arose from Townshend perceiving himself to be less technical than contemporary guitarists such as Eric Clapton and Jeff Beck and deciding to stand out visually instead. Entwistle was the first member to get two 4x12 speaker cabinets, quickly followed by Townshend. The group quickly integrated feedback as an integral part of the guitar sound.
Like several other contemporary musicians, the group were influenced by the arrival of Jimi Hendrix, particularly after the two groups met at Montrey (whom Fletcher described as "so much better than The Who it was embarrassing").
Unlike several other major rock acts, the Who have always featured strong backing vocals within the group. Daltrey, Townshend and Entwistle all sang lead on various songs, with Moon joining in for the occasional number. Who's Next featured Daltrey and Townshend sharing the lead vocal on several songs, and biographer Dave Marsh considers the contrast between Daltrey's strong, guttural vocal and Townshend's higher and more gentle voice to be one of the album's highlights.

Legacy and influence

The Who are one of the most influential rock groups of the 1960s and 1970s.
Many notable artists claim to be influenced by the Who. Bono of U2 said, "More than any other band, the Who are our role models." Brian May of Queen said, "They were my inspiration."
Due to their major influence in rock music, the Who have spawned a number of tribute bands. Daltrey has endorsed The Whodlums, which regularly raises money for the Teenage Cancer Trust.
The Who's Mod genesis inspired Mod revival bands such as the Jam,Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "The Jam: Biography". AllMusic. as well as later bands of the Britpop wave in the mid-1990s, such as Blur
In 1967, Townshend coined the term "power pop" to describe the Who's sixties singles. Prominent synthpop act Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark drew influence from The Who on their 1991 hit single "Sailing on the Seven Seas". Granada Reports. ITV Granada. July 1991. Presenter: "OMD..."

Television, film and games

All three versions of the American forensic drama CSI (CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, CSI: Miami, and CSI: NY) feature songs written and performed by the Who as theme songs, "Who Are You", "Won't Get Fooled Again" and "Baba O'Riley" respectively.
Rock-orientated movies such as Almost Famous,

Awards and accolades

TIME magazine wrote in 1979 that "No other group has ever pushed rock so far, or asked so much from it." Rolling Stone wrote: "Along with the Beatles and the Rolling Stones, the Who complete the holy trinity of British rock."
The Who's display at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame describes them as "Prime contenders, in the minds of many, for the title of World's Greatest Rock Band." In 2008, Townshend and Daltrey were given Kennedy Center Honors for their enduring influence on popular culture.

Band members

Discography

Tours and performances

Headlining 1960s
Headlining 1970s
Headlining 1980s
Headlining 1990s
Headlining 2000s
Headlining 2010s








