[[Fethullah Gülen]]

CATEGORIES: 1941 births, Living people, Muslim theologians, Turkish emigrants to the United States, Islamic politics and Islamic world studies

Muhammed Fethullah Gülen (born 27 April 1941) is a Turkish preacher, former imam,Fethullah Gülen's Official Web Site - Fethullah Gülen in ShortHelen Rose Fuchs Ebaugh, The Gülen Movement: A Sociological Analysis of a Civic Movement Rooted in Moderate Islam, p 26. ISBN 1402098944 writer,Fethullah Gülen's Official Web Site - Gülen's Works and Islamic opinion leader. He is the founder of the Gülen movement (sometimes known as Hizmet). He currently lives in a self-imposed exile in Saylorsburg, Pennsylvania, United States. "A visit to the Pennsylvania fortress of "The World's most Dangerous Islamist""Stakelbeck, Eric "The Gülen Movement: A New Islamic World Order?"Berlinski, Claire "Who Is Fethullah Gülen?"
Gülen teaches an Anatolian (Hanafi) version of Islam, deriving from Sunni Muslim scholar Said Nursî's teachings. Gülen has stated that he believes in science, interfaith dialogue among the People of the Book, and multi-party democracy. He has initiated such dialogue with the VaticanHelen Rose Fuchs Ebaugh, The Gülen Movement: A Sociological Analysis of a Civic Movement Rooted in Moderate Islam, p 38. ISBN 1402098944 and some Jewish organizations.Toward a Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance
Gülen is actively involved in the societal debate concerning the future of the Turkish state, and Islam in the modern world. He has been described in the English-language media as "one of the world's most important Muslim figures." However, his Gülen movement has been described as "having the characteristics of a cult" and its secretiveness and influence in Turkish politics likened to "an Islamic Opus Dei". In the Turkish context, Gülen appears as a religious conservative.

Biography

Gülen was born in the village of Korucuk, near Erzurum.M. Hakan Yavuz, John L. Esposito, Turkish Islam and the Secular State: The Gülen Movement, p. 20 His father, Ramiz Gülen, was an imam. Gülen started primary education at his home village, but did not continue after his family moved. He took part in Islamic education in the mosque of Erzurum where the father of Metin Kaplan was educated, too. Gulen Movement: Communicating Modernization, Tolerance, and Dialogue in the Islamic World." The International Journal of the Humanities, Volume 6, Issue 12, pp. 67–78.
Comparing Gülen to leaders in the Nur movement, Hakan Yavuz said, "Gülen is more Turkish nationalist in his thinking. Also, he is somewhat more state-oriented, and is more concerned with market economics and neo-liberal economic policies."
His pro-business stance has led some outsiders to dub his theology an Islamic version of Calvinism.qantara.php/_c-478/_nr-907/i.html Oxford Analytica says:
 "Gülen put Nursi's ideas into practice when he was transferred to a mosque in Izmir in 1966. Izmir is a city where political Islam never took root. However, the business and professional middle class came to resent the constraints of a state bureaucracy under whose wings it had grown, and supported market-friendly policies, while preserving at least some elements of a conservative lifestyle. Such businessmen were largely pro-Western, because it was Western (mainly U.S.) influence, which had persuaded the government to allow free elections for the first time in 1950 sic and U.S. aid, which had primed the pump of economic growth." 
Gülen retired from formal preaching duties in 1981. From 1988 to 1991 he gave a series of sermons in popular mosques of major cities. In 1994, he participated in the founding of "Journalists and Writers Foundation" Journalists and Writers Foundation Official Web Site He did not make any comment regarding the closures of the Welfare Party in 1998 or the Virtue Party in 2001. Henry, Rodney Wilson, The politics of Islamic Finance, Edinburgh University Press (2004), p 236 He has met some politicians like Tansu Çiller and Bülent Ecevit, but he avoids meeting with the leaders of Islamic political parties.
In 1999, Gülen emigrated to the United States, claiming the trip for medical treatment, although arguably it was in anticipation of being tried over remarks (aired after his emigration to U.S.) which seemed to favor an Islamic state. In June 1999, after Gülen had left Turkey, videotapes were sent to some Turkish television stations with recordings of Gülen saying,
 "The existing system is still in power. Our friends who have positions in legislative and administrative bodies should learn its details and be vigilant all the time so that they can transform it and be more fruitful on behalf of Islam in order to carry out a nationwide restoration. However, they should wait until the conditions become more favorable. In other words, they should not come out too early."Clement M. Henry, Rodney Wilson, The Politics of Islamic Finance, (Edinburgh University Press 2004), p. 236 
Gülen complained that the remarks were taken out of context,Gülen's answers to claims made based on the video tapes taken from some of his recorded speeches and his supporters raised questions about the authenticity of the tape,Dogan Koc, Strategic Defamation of Fethullah Gülen: English Vs. Turkish, p. 24. ISBN 0761859306 which he accused of having been "manipulated". Gülen was tried in absentia in 2000, and acquitted in 2008 under the new Justice and Development Party (AKP) government of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.WorldWide Religious News-Gulen acquitted of trying to overthrow secular government
Gülen procured a green card in 2001.

Theology

Gülen does not advocate a new theology but refers to classical authorities of theology, taking up their line of argument. Antony's College Oxford University May 2007). p. 1 His understanding of Islam tends to be conservative and mainstream. Hefner, Muhammad Qasim Zaman, Schooling Islam: The Culture and Politics of Modern Muslim Education (Princeton University Press, 2007) p.  162-3."Thomas Michel S.J., Sufism and Modernity in the Thought of Fethullah Gülen, The Muslim World, Vol. 95 No. 3, July 2005,  pp. 345-5
His teachings differ in emphasis from those of other mainstream Islamic scholars in two respects, both based on his interpretations of particular verses of the Quran. He teaches that the Muslim community has a duty of service (Turkish: hizmet)Mehmet Kalyoncu, A Civilian Response to Ethno-Religious Conflict: The Gülen Movement in Southeast Turkey (Tughra Books, 2008), pp. 19–40 to the "common good" of the community and the nationBerna Turam, Between Islam and the State: The Politics of Engagement (Stanford University Press 2006) p. 61 and to Muslims and non-Muslims all over the world;Saritoprak, Z. and Griffith, S. Fethullah Gülen and the 'People of the Book': A Voice from Turkey for Interfaith Dialogue, The Muslim World, Vol. 95 No. 3, July 2005,  p.337-8 and that the Muslim community is obliged to conduct interfaith dialogue with the "People of the Book" (Jews and Christians), although this does not extend to other religions and atheists. and Griffith, S. Fethullah Gülen and the 'People of the Book': A Voice from Turkey for Interfaith Dialogue, The Muslim World, Vol. 95 No. 3, July 2005, pp. 337–8 Gülen has appeared to be intolerant of atheism, commenting in 2004 that "terrorism was as despicable as atheism".

Activities

The Gülen movement is a transnational Islamic civic society movement inspired by Gülen's teachings. His teachings about hizmet (altruistic service to the "common good") have attracted a large number of supporters in Turkey, Central Asia, and increasingly in other parts of the world. The schools are a form of service to humanity designed to promote learning in a broader sense and to avoid explicit Islamic propaganda." Kurtz also cites in the same work the comments of Thomas Michel, General Secretary of the Vatican Secretariat for Inter-religious Dialogue, after a visit to a school in Mindanao, Philippines, where the local people suffered from a civil war, as follows: "In a region where kidnapping is a frequent occurrence, along with guerrilla warfare, summary raids, arrests, disappearances and killings by military and para-military forces, the school is offering Muslim and Christian Filipino children, along with an educational standard of high quality, a more positive way of living and relating to each other." Kurtz adds: "The purpose of the schools movement, therefore, is to lay the foundations for a more humane, tolerant citizenry of the world where people are expected to cultivate their own faith perspectives and also promote the well being of others... It is significant to note that the movement has been so successful in offering high quality education in its schools, which recruit the children of elites and government officials, that it is beginning to lay the groundwork for high-level allies, especially in Central Asia, where they have focused much of their effort." See, Lester R. Kurtz, "Gulen's Paradox: Combining Commitment and Tolerance," Muslim World, Vol. 95, July 2005; 379–381.

Education

In his sermons, Gülen has reportedly stated: "Studying physics, mathematics, and chemistry is worshipping Allah." Gülen's followers have built over 1,000 schools around the world. ISBN 1402098944 In Turkey, Gülen's schools are considered among the best: expensive modern facilities and English taught from the first grade. However, former teachers from outside the Gülen community have called into question the treatment of women and girls in Gülen schools, reporting that female teachers were excluded from administrative responsibilities, allowed little autonomy, and—along with girls from the sixth grade and up—segregated from male colleagues and pupils during break and lunch periods.

Interfaith and intercultural dialogue

Gülen movement participants have founded a number of institutions across the world which claim to promote interfaith and intercultural dialogue activities. During the 1990s, he began to advocate interreligious tolerance and dialogue. He has personally met with leaders of other religions, including Pope John Paul II, the Greek Orthodox Patriarch Bartholomeos, and Israeli Sephardic Head Rabbi Eliyahu Bakshi-Doron.Advocate of Dialogue: Fethullah Gülen
Gülen has said that he favors cooperation between followers of different religions as well as religious and secular elements within society.

Views on contemporary issues

Secularism

Gülen has criticized secularism in Turkey as "reductionist materialism". However, he has in the past said that a secular approach that is "not anti-religious" and "allows for freedom of religion and belief, is compatible with Islam."European Muslims, Civility and Public Life Perspectives On and From the Gülen Movement
According to one Gülen press release, in democratic-secular countries, 95% of Islamic principles are permissible and practically feasible, and there is no problem with them. The remaining 5% "are not worth fighting for."

Turkey bid to join the EU

Gülen has supported Turkey's bid to join the European Union and has said that neither Turkey nor the EU have anything to fear, but have much to gain, from a future of full Turkish membership in the EU.

Women's roles

According to Aras and Caha, Gülen's views on women are "progressive" but "modern professional women in Turkey still find his ideas far from acceptable." Gülen says the coming of Islam saved women, who "were absolutely not confined to their home and ... never oppressed" in the early years of the religion. He feels that western-style feminism, however, is "doomed to imbalance like all other reactionary movements" and eventually "being full of hatred towards men."
However, Gülen's views are vulnerable to the charge of misogyny. As noted by Berna Turam, Gülen has argued: "the man is used to more demanding jobs ... but a woman must be excluded during certain days during the month. After giving birth, she sometimes cannot be active for two months. She cannot take part in different segments of the society all the time. She cannot travel without her husband, father, or brother."Berna Turam, Between Islam and the State: The Politics of Engagement (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2007), 125.

Terrorism

Gülen has condemned terrorism. He wrote a condemnation article in the Washington Post on September 12, 2001, one day after the September 11 attacks, and stated that "A Muslim can not be a terrorist, nor can a terrorist be a true Muslim."

Gaza flotilla

Gülen criticized the Turkish-led Gaza flotilla for trying to deliver aid without Israel's consent. He spoke of watching the news coverage of the deadly confrontation between Israeli commandos and multinational aid group members as its flotilla approached Israel's sea blockade of Gaza. He said, "What I saw was not pretty, it was ugly." He has since continued his criticism, saying later that the organizers' failure to seek accord with Israel before attempting to deliver aid was "a sign of defying authority, and will not lead to fruitful matters." Wall Street Journal, Joe Lauria, "Reclusive Turkish Imam Criticizes Gaza Flotilla", June 4, 2010

Syrian Civil War

Gülen is strongly against Turkish involvement in the Syrian Civil War.economist.com/news/europe/21578046-turkish-government-under-attack-home-its-assertive-policy-towards-syria-explosive Turkey and Syria: An explosive border

Influence in Turkish society and politics

The Gülen movement has millions of followers in Turkey, as well as many more abroad. Beyond the schools established by Gülen's followers, it is believed that many Gülenists hold positions of power in Turkey's police forces and judiciary. In March 2011, the Turkish government arrested the investigative journalist Ahmet Şık and seized and banned his book The Imam's Army, the culmination of Şık's investigation into Gülen and the Gülen movement.Hurriyet Daily News, 16 November 2011, Banned book goes on sale in Istanbul book fair
In 2005, a man affiliated with the Gülen movement approached then-U.S. Ambassador to Turkey Eric S. Edelman during a party in Istanbul and handed him an envelope containing a document supposedly detailing plans for an imminent coup against the government by the Turkish military. However, the documents were soon found to be forgeries. Gülen affiliates claim the movement is "civic" in nature and that it does not have political aspirations.

Split with Erdoğan

Despite Gülen's and his followers' claims that the organization is non-political in nature, analysts believe that a number of corruption-related arrests made against allies of Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan reflect a growing political power struggle between Gülen and the prime minister.
The Erdoğan government has said that the corruption investigation and comments by Gülen are the long term political agenda of Gülen's movement to infiltrate security, intelligence, and justice institutions of the Turkish state, a charge almost identical to the charges against Gülen by the Chief Prosecutor of the Republic of Turkey in his trial in 2000 before Erdoğan's party had come into power. Gülen had previously been tried in absentia in 2000, and acquitted in 2008 under Erdoğan's AKP government from these charges.WorldWide Religious News-Gulen acquitted of trying to overthrow secular government
In emailed comments to the Wall Street Journal in January 2014, Gülen said that "Turkish people ... are upset that in the last two years democratic progress is now being reversed", but he denied being part of a plot to unseat the government.

Publications

Gülen's official websiteGulen's publications (Turkish), last visisted 2nd March 2014 lists 43 publications by him; these are, however, more akin to essays and collections of sermons than books on specific subjects with a specific thesis. He is also said to have authored many articles on a variety of topics: social, political and religious issues, art, science and sports, and recorded thousands of audio and video cassettes.
He contributes to a number of journals and magazines owned by his followers 

Reception

Fethullah Gulen topped the 2008 Top 100 Public Intellectuals Poll and came out as the most influential thinker.top 100 public intellectual poll"
Fethullah Gulen was named as one of TIME magazine's World's 100 Most Influential People in 2013.100 Most Influential People for 2013
Fethullah Gulen was listed as one of the 500 most influential Muslims by the Royal Islamic Strategic Studies Centre in Amman, Jordan.500 Most Influential Muslims





Specific citations:

General references:




