[[Retrocausality]]

CATEGORIES: Causality, Thought experiments, Quantum mechanics, Metaphysics of science

Retrocausality (also called retro-causation, retro-chronal causation, backward causation, and similar terms) is any of several hypothetical phenomena or processes that reverse causality, allowing an effect to occur before its cause.
Retrocausality is primarily a thought experiment in philosophy of science based on elements of physics, addressing the question: Can the future affect the present, and can the present affect the past?
While some discussion of retrocausality is confined to fringe science or pseudoscience, a few physical theories with mainstream legitimacy have sometimes been interpreted as leading to retrocausality. This has been problematic in physics because the distinction between cause and effect is not made at the most fundamental level within the field of physics.

As philosophy

Although philosophical efforts to understand causality extend back at least to Aristotle's discussions of the four causes, the idea that the arrow of time could be reversed is substantially
Furthermore, the ability to affect the past suggests that causes could be negated by their own effects, creating a physical paradox, grandfather paradox.
In the 1950s, Michael Dummett wrote in opposition to such definitions, stating that there was no philosophical objection to effects preceding their causes.
More recent

As physics

Established physics does not generally employ retrocausality.  Nevertheless, a number of theories allowing particles or information to travel backward in time have been proposed by prominent scientists or have received meaningful evaluation by the scientific community. 

Antimatter

As the modern understanding of particle physics began to develop, retrocausality was at times employed as a tool to model then-unfamiliar or unusual conditions, including electromagnetism and antimatter.
The Wheeler–Feynman absorber theory, proposed by John Archibald Wheeler and Richard Feynman, uses retrocausality and a temporal form of destructive interference to explain the absence of a type of converging concentric wave suggested by certain solutions to Maxwell's equations.
Feynman, and earlier Stueckelberg, proposed an interpretation of the positron as an electron moving backward in time,  The backwards in time point of view is nowadays accepted as completely equivalent to other picturesM. Villata, Reply to a comment to a paper of M. Villata on antigravity, Astrophysics and Space Science 337(1), 15-17 (2012), but it doesn't have anything to do with the macroscopic terms "cause" and "effect", which do not appear in a microscopic physical description.

Current topics

Open topics in physics, especially involving the reconciliation of gravity with quantum physics, suggest that retrocausality may be possible under certain circumstances.
Closed timelike curves, in which the world line of an object returns to its origin, arise from some exact solutions to the Einstein field equation.  Although closed timelike curves do not appear to exist under normal conditions, extreme environments of spacetime, such as a traversable wormhole
Retrocausality is sometimes associated with the nonlocal correlations that generically arise from quantum entanglement,Ellerman, David. "A Common Fallacy in Quantum Mechanics: Why Delayed Choice Experiments do NOT imply Retrocausality"  The description of such nonlocal quantum entanglements can be described in a way that is manifestly free of retrocausality if the states of the observers are included in the quantum treatment,Mark A. Rubin – Locality in the Everett Interpretation of Heisenberg-Picture Quantum Mechanics which is often but not exclusively associated with the many worlds interpretation.
One physicist has reportedly presented the design for an experiment to test for backward causation in quantum entanglement to begin in 2007. "Five Decades of Physics"  Retrieved 2009-12-13.
Hypothetical superluminal particles called tachyons would have a spacelike trajectory, and thus move backward in time according to observers in some reference frames. Despite frequent depiction in science fiction as a method to send messages back in time, theories predicting tachyons do not permit them to interact with normal "tardyonic" matter in a way that would violate standard causality. Specifically, the Feinberg reinterpretation principle renders impossible construction of a tachyon detector capable of receiving information. Within modern quantum field theory, tachyons (or particles with imaginary mass) are interpreted to signify that the theory has been expanded about a configuration that is a local maximum of potential energy, instead of a local minimum.

As para-science

Outside the mainstream scientific community, retrocausality has also been proposed as a mechanism to explain purported anomalies, paranormal events or personal events, but mainstream scientists generally
Efforts to associate retrocausality with prayer healing






