[[Sitar in jazz]]

CATEGORIES: Jazz instruments, Sitars

The history of the sitar in jazz, that is the fusion of the sounds of Indian classical music with Western jazz, dates back from the late-1950s or early-1960s when musicians trained in Indian classical music such as Ravi Shankar started collaborating with jazz musicians such as Tony Scott and Bud Shank. Later jazz recordings containing sitar music include albums by Miles Davis, Alice Coltrane, Yusef Lateef, Joe Harriott (in collaboration with composer John Mayer), and Ornette Coleman.

Early uses of the sitar in Jazz

Although music based around the sitar would later spread from jazz to more popular music via The Beatles, the sitar became more widely known in the western world mainly through the work of Indian musicians such as Pandit Ravi Shankar, beginning in the late 1950s. From there it was taken up by jazz musicians and would later became a youth phenomenon in the mid-1960s after Beatle George Harrison took lessons from Pandit Ravi Shankar, and played sitar on several songs.
The first recorded collaboration between Indian and Jazz musicians occurred in 1961 with Ravi Shankar and a group led by the West Coast American saxophonist/flutist Bud Shank. Their album entitled Improvisations only features one track, "Improvisations on the theme music from Pather Panchali," in which Ravi Shankar and the Western musicians play together. The track is remarkable for little else; it is simply Western film music with the sitar playing the melody. However, it is interesting to note that this session, and that of film composer Shankar Jaikishan (1968), were connected the film industry, for Indian film music surely contributes the most considerable corpus of music that combines Indian and Western musics.
However, both Ravi Shankar and Ananda Shankar are important figures with regard to Jazz because it was primarily through their music that John Coltrane and others became aware of Indian music. Tony Scott recorded a track entitled "Portrait of Ravi" on his Dedications album, as early as 1957. 
Coltrane met Shankar in 1965 after a long period of mutual admiration and letter writing (Thomas 1975:199). Coltrane's name is inextricably linked to the emergence of modal Jazz in 1958 on Miles Davis' album Milestones and it is believed that modal Jazz was inspired by Indian music. Indian influence is an important issue in the later music of Coltrane such as the album Kulu Sé Mama (1965) and also of musicians such as Yusef Lateef and Ornette Coleman.

Collin Walcott

In America, the profile of the sitar in Jazz was maintained by Collin Walcott (b. New York 1945; d. near Magdeburg, East Germany 1984). After graduating from Indiana University in 1967, where his major study was percussion, he travelled to Los Angeles to study sitar with Ravi Shankar and tabla with Alla Rakha, then the most famous tabla player in the West (Kernfield 1988:588).
The most significant corpus of his output was with the groups Oregon, Codona and his own quartet, despite a prolific career as a sideman for players such as Miles Davis and Egberto Gismonti. Walcott was heavily influenced by John Coltrane's Quartet (Cook & Morton 1992) 
Walcott, like Mayer, is musically bi-lingual which helps to explain why the Indian and Western aspects of his musics fit together far more comfortably than previous experiments. Whilst Mayer acted as a bridge between musicians of two cultures, Walcott, like Coltrane, absorbed the Indian music and assimilated it within his own music. His quartet consisted of other American musicians so that the feeling of empathy between the musicians, which is a pre-requisite of good group improvisation, is maintained.
Walcott created a sitar technique which is not found in Indian music. This involves stopping more than one string to create harmonies, usually thirds.

Nishat Khan

The more recent excursion of the sitar into Jazz is that of the sitar player Nishat Khan who is highly regarded as an Indian Classical player. His first experience of playing with a jazz musician was a trio with the guitarist John McLaughlin who has been collaborating with Indian musicians since the mid-seventies with groups such as Shakti. 
In the Nineties, Nishat Khan was working on his own Jazz project. He rehearsed with American alto saxophonist Steve Coleman and recorded with a band which consisted of Django Bates (keyboards), Mark Mondesir (electric bass), Martin France (drums), and two drummers from Africa. The group did not perform in public, and the recording was not released.

Andrew Cheshire

In 2006, Andrew Cheshire released Silent Trees Falling, an album composed solely of 
electric sitar in a mostly trio setting. Widely regarded as an unheralded master of jazz
guitar, Cheshire combined raw jazz improvisation with an eastern flavored vocabulary resulting
in a record that captures the spontaneity of jazz coupled with the sonority of the far east.

Comparative view of jazz and Indian classical music

Indian music is the greatest tradition of improvisation in the East. Therefore it is unsurprising that Jazz musicians, which have become the greatest exponents of improvisation in the West, have developed a certain fascination for Indian musicians and vice versa. Coltrane was fascinated by Indian music. Keith Jarrett returned to improvised music, after a phase of playing entirely Western Classical music, on hearing a concert of Indian Classical music which he claims was "a reminder that what I was doing was not music" (in Carr 1991:157). This statement reveals that to Jarrett, who is primarily a Jazz musician, Indian music contains something intrinsic to his conception of music that does not exist in Western Classical music.
Both Jazz and Indian music are commonly described as improvised music but in fact, composition is integral to both arts. Compositions are used mainly as a springboard for improvisation and would probably account for about a tenth of a performance in both traditions. One of the functions of the composition is to define the structure upon which the improvisation is based. In Indian music, the gat is always played at the beginning of the final portion of an exposition of a rag by the soloist and from this, the tabla player is expected to join in. It is not uncommon for the tabla to have not been told what the tal or what tempo is to be used and would be expected to derive this information from the gat which he may not have heard before. If the soloist wishes to change to a new tal or tempo (other than by acceleration) it is signalled by playing a different gat.
The presentation of the two main instruments in jugalbandi (duet) has become common both in India and outside. What happens in Jugalbandi is not unlike the organisation of collective improvisation in jazz, in the sense that the musicians come together in the precomposed song or whatever the basis of the piece, and otherwise take it in turns to improvise in a spirit both of cooperation and friendly cooperation (Sorrell 1989:2).
In Jazz, the structure of the improvisation is most usually defined by the 'head' which normally comprises a melody and a harmonic structure, but could contain more or less structural information such as changes of feel e.g. from swing to salsa, or changes of tempo or meter. The standard form of a jazz performance would start with the `head' which might be 32 bars long. Then, the musicians would take it in turn to improvise over this cyclic structure. The performance ends with a recapitulation of the 'head'.
Improvisations in both musics take place within cyclic frameworks, with the notable exception of free jazz which consciously eschews predetermined structures. The ability to learn to use these frameworks to assist and inspire improvisation is really the essence of both art forms. Being able to maintain one's place in the tal is precisely analogous to 'keeping the form' in Jazz playing. In fact, there are distinct similarities between the Sam (first beat) of the tal and 'top of the form', the first beat of repeating structure, in Jazz. The special feature of the Sam is that phrases either start or end on it, reinforcing the notion that the tal is a 'circular' structure. Whilst there is no such formalisation in Jazz of the `top of the form', there is no doubt that musicians often use the `top of the form' as the point of maximum release of tension.

Discography

This is a chronological catalogue of recordings which have featured the sitar within a jazz (or indo-jazz) context. 
Ravi Shankar (sitar), Kanai Dutta (tabla, pakhavaj), Modu Mullick (tanpura), Harihar Rao (dholak, tanpura), Bud Shank (flute), Dennis Budimur (guitar), Gary Peacock (bass), Louis Hayes (drums)
"Improvisation on the Theme Music from Pather Pancali"
"Fire Night"
"Karnataki"
"Raga Rageshri"
	Hollywood, California, 1961
	Liberty Records Ltd, London 830 76 E
Ravi Shankar (sitar), Paul Horn (flute, alto sax)
	1965
	World Pacific, 1432
Joe Harriott (alto sax), Eddie Blair (trumpet and flugelhorn), Pat Smythe (piano), Rick Laird (bass), Allan Ganley (drums), John Mayer (violin and harpsichord), Diwan Motihar (sitar), Chris Taylor (flute), Keshav Sathe (tabla), Chandrhas Paigankar (tanpura)
"Overture"
"Contrasts"
"Raga Megha"
"Raga Gaud-Saranga"
	London, 1966
	EMI Records 1966 6025
Irene Shweitzer (piano), (bass), (drums), Diwan Motihar (sitar), (tabla), (tanpura)
	1967
Double record set
Joe Harriott (alto sax), Shake Keane (trumpet and flugelhorn), Coleridge Goode (bass), Allan Ganley (drums), John Mayer (violin, harpsichord), Diwan Motihar (sitar), Chandrahas Paigankar (tanpura), Keshav Sathi (tabla), Chris Taylor (flute)
"Multani" (Mayer)
"Gana" (Mayer)
"Acka Raga" (Mayer)
"Subject" (Mayer/Harriott)
	London, 1967
	Double-Up Duos 1968 123-1
Joe Harriott (alto sax), Kenny Wheeler (trumpet, flugelhorn), Pat Smythe (Piano), Coleridge Goode (bass), Jackie Dougan (bass), John Mayer (violin harpsichord), Diwan Motihar (sitar), Chandrahas Paigankar (tanpura), Keshav Sathi (tabla), Chris Taylor (drums)
"Raga Piloo" (Mayer)
"Song Before Sunrise" (Mayer)
"Purvi Variations" (Mayer)
"Mishra Blues" (Mayer/Smythe)
	London, 1968
	Double-Up Duos 1968 123-2
Ustad Rais Khan (sitar), Manohari Singh (sax), John Pereira (trumpet), Lucilla (piano), Leslie Godinho (drums), Eddie Travers (bass), Dilip Naik (electric guitar), Anibal Castro (electric guitar), Suman (flute), Ramakant (tabla), Dattaram (assistant), Sebastian D'Souza (arrangement). Music by Shankar Jaikishan.
"Raga Todi"
"Raga Bhairav"
"Raga Malkauns"
"Raga Kalavanti"
"Raga Tilak Kamod"
"Raga Miyan Malhav"
"Raga Bairagi"
"Raga Jaijaivanti"
"Raga Mishra Pilu"
"Raga Shiranjani"
"Raga Bhairvi"
	1968
	Gramophone Company of India Ltd 2377
John Mayer (composer and director of all tracks, violin and harpsichord), Chris Taylor (flute), Ian Hamer (trumpet and flugelhorn), Tony Coe (tenor sax and clarinet), Pat Smythe (piano), Coleridge Goode (bass), John Marshall (drums), Diwan Motihar (sitar), Viram Jasani (sitar, tabla, tanpura), Kevan
Sathe (table sic!)
"Intro and Rondo"
"Cappricio"
"Serenade"
"Toccata"
"Sarabande"
	London, 1969
	Sonnet Records SNTF63
	all titles published by Lupur Music Ltd
Tony Scott (Clarinet), Collin Walcott (sitar)
	1969
	Verve Records 1969 68788
McCandless (oboe, English horn, bass clarinet, wooden flute), Glen Moore (bass, flute, violin, piano), Ralph Towner (12-string and classical guitars), Collin Walcott (sitar, tabla, clarinet, percussion, congas)
	1970
	Vanguard Records 1970 79432
Miles Davis (trumpet), Collin Walcott (sitar)
	1972
	Columbia Records 1972 31906
Paul Winter, Collin Walcott (sitar)
	1972
Epic 31643
McCandless (oboe, English horn, bass clarinet, wooden flute), Glen Moore (bass, flute, violin, piano), Ralph Towner (12-string and classical guitars), Collin Walcott (sitar, tabla, clarinet, percussion, congas)
	1973
	Vanguard Records 79326
McCandless (oboe, English horn, bass clarinet, wooden flute), Glen Moore (bass, flute, violin, piano), Ralph Towner (12-string and classical guitars), Collin Walcott (sitar, tabla, clarinet, percussion, congas)
Aurora
Dark Spirit (Towner)
Canyon Song
Song for a Friend
Confession (free improvisation)
	1973
	Vanguard Records 1974 79341
Collin Walcott (sitar, tabla), John Abercrombie (guitar), Dave Holland (bass), Jack DeJohnette (drums)
Marguerite (Collin Walcott, BMI)
Prancing (Collin Walcott, BMI)
Night Glider (Collin Walcott, BMI)
Scimitar (Collin Walcott/John Abercrombie, BMI)
Vadana (Dave Holland, BMI)
Eastern Song (Collin Walcott, BMI)
Padma (Collin Walcott/ John Abercrombie, BMI)
Cloud Dance (Collin Walcott, BMI)
	Ludwigsburg, W. Germany, March 1975
	ECM Records 1976 1062
McCandless (oboe, English horn, bass clarinet, wooden flute), Glen Moore (bass, flute, violin, piano), Ralph Towner (12-string and classical guitars), Collin Walcott (sitar, tabla, clarinet, percussion, congas)
Introduction (George Schutz)
Become, Seem, Appear (Oregon)
Summer Solstice (Towner)
UnderTow (McCandless)
The Silence of a Candle (Towner)
Tryton's Horn (Oregon)
Yet to be (Towner)
	New York, April 8 & 9, 1975
	Vanguard Records 1976 79358
McCandless (oboe, English horn, bass clarinet, wooden flute), Glen Moore (bass, flute, violin, piano), Ralph Towner (12-string and classical guitars), Collin Walcott (sitar, tabla, clarinet, percussion, congas)
	1976
	Vanguard Records 1976 79397
McCandless (oboe, English horn, bass clarinet, wooden flute), Glen Moore (bass, flute, violin, piano), Ralph Towner (12-string and classical guitars), Collin Walcott (sitar, tabla, clarinet, percussion, congas)
	1977
	Vanguard Records 1977 79370
Miles Davis (trumpet), Sonny Fortune (Alto sax, flute), Carlos Garnett, John Stubblefield (alto sax), Steve Grossman (soprano sax), David Liebman (flute), Wally Chambers (harmonica), Cedric Lawson (piano, organ), Herbie Hancock, Keith Jarrett (keyboards), Pete Cosey, Cornell Dupree, Dominique Gaumont, Reggie Lucas, John McLaughlin (guitar), Khalil Balakrishna (sitar), Michael Henderson (bass), Billy Cobham, Al Foster, Bernard Purdie (drums), Airto Moreira, Mtume, Badal Roy (percussion), Additional brass and rhythm arrangements by Wade Jarcus and Billy Jackson.
	New York, 1970-74
	Core/Line 9.009827/8
Collin Walcott (sitar, tabla), John Abercrombie (electric and acoustic guitars, electric mandolin), Don Cherry (Trumpet, wood flute, doussn'gouni), Palle Danielson (bass), Dom Um Romao (berimbau, chica cuica, tambourine, percussion)
Song of the Morrow (Collin Walcott, Grazing Dreams Music)
Gold Sun (Collin Walcott/Don Cherry, Grazing Dreams Music)
The Swarm (Collin Walcott, Grazing Dreams Music)
Mountain Morning (Group improvisation, Grazing Dreams Music)
Jewel Ornament (Don Cherry/John Abercrombie/Collin Walcott,Grazing Dreams Music)
Grazing Dreams (Collin Walcott, Grazing Dreams Music)
Samba Tala (Don Um Romao/Collin Walcott, Berimbau Music Prod.) Moon Lake (Group Improvisation, Grazing Dreams Music)
	Oslo, February 1977
	ECM Records 1977 1096
Egberto Gismonti (guitar), Collin Walcott (sitar)
	1977
	ECM Records 1977 1116
McCandless (oboe, English horn, bass clarinet, wooden flute), Glen Moore (bass, flute, violin, piano), Ralph Towner (12-string and classical guitars), Collin Walcott (sitar, tabla, clarinet, percussion, congas)
	1978
	Elektra 1978 154
McCandless (oboe, English horn, bass clarinet, wooden flute), Glen Moore (bass, flute, violin, piano), Ralph Towner (12-string and classical guitars), Collin Walcott (sitar, tabla, clarinet, percussion, congas)
	1978
	Vanguard Records 1978 79397
Collin Walcott (sitar, tabla, hammered dulcimer, Sanza, voice), Don Cherry (trumpet, flutes, doussn'gouni, voice), Nana Vasconcelos (Berimbau, Cuica, Percussion, voice)
Like That of Sky (Walcott)
Codona (Cherry/Walcott/Vasconcelos)
Colemanwonder
a) Race Face (Ornette Coleman)
b) Sortie (Ornette Coleman)
c) Sir Duke (Stevie Wonder)
Mumakata (Walcott)
New Light (Walcott)
	Ludwigsburg, W. Germany, September 1978
	ECM Records 1979 1132
Oregon- `Oregon in Performance'
McCandless (oboe, English horn, bass clarinet, wooden flute), Glen Moore (bass, flute, violin, piano), Ralph Towner (12-string and classical guitars), Collin Walcott (sitar, tabla, clarinet, percussion, congas)
	1979
	Elektra 1979304
Collin Walcott/ Steve Eliovson- `Dawn Dance'
Collin Walcott (sitar), Steve Eliovson (guitar)
	January 1981
	ECM Records 1981 1198
Collin Walcott/ Don Cherry/ Nana Vasconcelos- `Codona 2'
Collin Walcott (sitar, tabla, sanza, tipmani, voice), Don Cherry (trumpet, organ, doussn'gouni, voice), Nana Vasconcelos (berimbau, mluvici bubinek (?), voice)
Que Faser (Nana Vasconcelos)
Godumaduma (Traditional African)
Malinye (Don Cherry)
Drip-Dry (Ornette Coleman)
Walking on Eggs (Collin Walcott)
Again and Again, Again (Collin Walcott)
	Ludwigsburg, W. Germany, 1980
	ECM Records 1983 1177
Collin Walcott/ Don Cherry/ Nana Vasconcelos- `Codona 3'
Collin Walcott (sitar, hammered dulcimer, sanza, tabla, voice), Don Cherry (trumpet, organ, doussn'gouni, voice), Nana Vasconcelos (berimbau, percussion, voice)
Goshabuchi (Japanese Traditional, Codona Music- ASCAP)
Hey Da Ba Doom (Collin Walcott, Grazing Dreams Music- ASCAP)
Lullaby (Collin Walcott, Grazing Dreams Music- ASCAP)
Trayra Boia (Nana Vasconcelos/ Denise Milan, Nana's Music- BMI)
Clicky Clacky (Don Cherry, Eternal River Music- BMI)
Inner Organs (Don Cherry, Eternal River Music- BMI)
	Ludwigsburg, W. Germany, September 1982
	ECM Records 1983 1243
Oregon- `Oregon'
McCandless (oboe, English horn, bass clarinet, tin flute, soprano sax), Glen Moore (bass, violin, piano), Ralph Towner (Prophet-5, piano, classical guitar), Collin Walcott (sitar, percussion, tongue drum, bass drum, voice)
The Rapids (Towner)
Beacon (Oregon)
Taos (Oregon)
Beside a Brook (McCandless)
Ariana (Moore)
There Was No Moon That Night (Oregon)
Skyline (Oregon)
Impending Bloom (Moore)
	Ludwigsburg, W. Germany, February 1983
	ECM Records 1983, 1258
Oregon- `Crossing'
McCandless (oboe, English horn, bass clarinet, tin flute, soprano sax), Glen Moore (bass, violin, piano), Ralph Towner (Prophet-5, piano, classical guitar), Collin Walcott (sitar, percussion, tongue drum, bass drum, voice)
	Ludwigsburg, W. Germany, October 19
Andrew Cheshire- `Silent Trees Falling'
Cheshire (electric sitar), Joe Michaels (bass), Jared Lippi (Drums), Bhooshit Dikshitar (tanpura)
Legend of Osiris (Cheshire, Ellsworth Music -BMI)
Beamot (Cheshire, Ellsworth Music -BMI)
Parallel Universe (Cheshire, Ellsworth Music -BMI)
Chitraratha (Cheshire, Ellsworth Music -BMI)
Photosynthesis (Cheshire, Ellsworth Music -BMI)
Dervish Dance (Cheshire, Ellsworth Music -BMI)
Remember the Malamo (Cheshire, Ellsworth Music -BMI)
How to Stuff a Wild Bhairavi (Cheshire, Ellsworth Music -BMI)
Silent trees Falling (Cheshire, Ellsworth Music -BMI)
Joule Records 2006, 11






