[[Operation Jackpot]]

CATEGORIES: Bangladesh Liberation War, National liberation movements, Naval operations involving Pakistan, Indo-Pakistani War of 1971

For the 1983–1986 South Carolina drug investigation see Operation Jackpot (drug investigation)

Operation Jackpot was the codename assigned to several different operations during the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971. The original "Operation Jackpot" was the logistical and training operation set up under the Indian Army Eastern Command. Gen. J. F. R., p. 90 The commando operation that sabotaged Pakistan Navy and her assets in Chittagong, Chandpur, Mongla and Naryanganj on August 15 is known  as "Operation Jackpot". 2. The confusion about the date of operation was also clarified in this book, though Major Rafiqul Islam wrote that the operation was done on August 16.A Tale of Millions, Islam, Major Rafiqul Bir Uttam, p. 265 It was the first major involvement of Naval Special Service Group, under Commodore David Felix, in the conflict and actively participated in the conflict. Ironically, SSG(N) also led their counter-operations under the same codename. Finally, the operational plan of Lt. General Sagat Singh, commanding the Indian Army IV corps against Pakistan naval forces defending the eastern naval sector (Syhlet, Comilla, Noakhali and Chittagong districts) during December 3–16 may also have been named "Operation Jackpot". Gen. K. M. Bir Uttam, p. 211

Indian Army operation with Joint Mukti Bahini support (May–December 1971)

After the Pakistan Army launched Operation Searchlight in March 1971 in a bid to curb all resistance (political and otherwise), the Indian government decided to open the borders to admit millions of Bengali refugees and the Bengali resistance forces aided by the Awami League. Gen. J. F. R., p. 42 By mid-May, Pakistan Army had occupied all major towns in Bangladesh and had driven the battered remnants of the Mukti Bahini across the border into India, forcing the Mukti Bahihi to switch to guerrilla warfare under the training and guidance of the Indian Army. The Indian BSF (Border Security Force) had given supplies locally to the Mukti Bahini since March, and had even made some incursions across the border into East Pakistan,Surrender at Dacca: Birth of A Nation, Jacob, Lt. Gen. J. F. R., p. 36/37 but these efforts had been disorganized, uncoordinated and inadequate to meet the needs of the Mukti Bahini. Once the Indian army completely took over aiding the Mukti Bahini, they decided to launch a fully fledged integrated operation, codenamed Operation Jackpot. The Indian Military Intelligence also recognize the operational abilities of Pakistan's Naval Special Service Group that had conducted the Operation Barisal, which resulted in an ultimate success. Prior to launch of this operation, the Pakistan's Eastern Naval Command was well established by its Officer Commanding Rear-Admiral Mohammad Shariff. The part of the objective of this operation was to dismantle to Eastern Naval Command of Pakistan Navy, which had posed a significant threat to Indian Eastern Naval Command.

The Operational Setup

On May 15,A Tale of Millions, Islam, Major Rafiqul Bir Uttam, p. 211 the Indian Army took over the task of aiding the Mukti Bahini, setting up a coordinated enterprise under the Eastern Command for meeting the logistical and training needs and, to some extent, lend operational support and planning advice. The operation was codenamed "Operation Jackpot". The operation was initially commanded by Maj. Gen. Onkar Singh Kalkat and after 2 months operational command was assumed by Maj. Gen. B. N. 'Jimmy' Sarcar. The border areas around Bangladesh was divided into 6 logistical sectors, each to be commanded by a Brigadier from the Indian army. Gen. K. M. Bir Uttam, p. 159
The Indian logistical sectors for this operation were:
Through this network, Mukti Bahini forces communicated with the Mukti Bahini Headquarters Exiled in Kolkata and coordinated all supply, training and operational efforts for the war. Lt. Gen. J. S. Aurora, commander of Eastern Command, was overseeing the entire operation.

Effectiveness and Importance

Despite the limitations and challenges rising from the state of the Indian transport system (training camps were located inside India), remoteness of the guerrilla bases, unavailability and inadequacy of proper supplies,A Tale of Millions, Islam, Major Rafiqul Bir Uttam, p. 215 and the decision of Bangladesh High Command to put the maximum number of guerrillas into battle in the minimum time possible (often after 4 to 6 weeks of training, sometimes resulting in only 50% of the personnel receiving firearms initially),A Tale of Millions, Islam, Major Rafiqul Bir Uttam, p. 288 the operation was effective enough to support the 30,000 regular soldiers (8 infantry battalions, and sector troops) and 100,000 guerrillas that Bangladesh eventually fielded in 1971, and help run a Mukti Bahini campaign that destroyed or damaged at least 231 bridges, 122 railway lines and 90 power stations,Witness To Surrender, Salik, Brigadier Siddiq, p. 101 while killing 237 officers, 136 JCOs/NCOs and 3,559 soldiers,Witness To Surrender, Salik, Brigadier Siddiq, p. 118 of the Pakistan army and an unspecified number of EPCAF and police and an estimated 5,000 Razakar personnelWitness To Surrender, Salik, Brigadier Siddiq, p. 105 during the period of April–November 1971. Some of the Mukti Bahini efforts also demoralized the Pakistani Army to the extent that, by November, they left their bases only if the need arose. The contribution of the Mukti Bahini to the eventual defeat of Pakistan was enormous,Surrender at Dacca: Birth of A Nation, Jacob, Lt. Gen. J. F. R., p. 174 which would not have been as effective without the aid of Operation Jackpot.
Once Indian army reorganized and deployed 3 Infantry coprs to commence operations inside Bangladesh, some of the operation Jackpot formations were built up as combat formations. Foxtrot was designated FJ sector force, a BSF battalion and the 6 Bihar regiment, and was placed under 101 communication zone. Echo Sector became Echo Force, with Mukti Bahini forces, Indian 5/5 Gurkha and 86th BSF battalion, and it operated under the 8 Mountain division.

Bangladesh naval commando operation (August 15, 1971)

Bangladesh is crisscrossed by hundreds of rivers in addition to 300 large navigable canals. The river transport is important because of the poor state of the road network, especially during the Monsoon, when the whole country turns into a morass of mud and many areas are only reachable only through water transport. Gen. Rao Farman, When Pakistan Got Divided, pp. 114–119 The movement and logistics of Pakistan army largely depended on their control of the inland waterways, and of the Sea ports.

Pakistan Naval Preparations

The importance waterways were not lost to Pakistan Eastern Command. After the launch of Operation Searchlight and the successful conclusion of Operation Barisal, General A. O. Mittha (Quarter Master General of Pakistan Army) had recommended the creation of a port operating battalion for Chittagong, in addition to separate River Transport and River Marine Battalion to operate an augmented Cargo and Tanker flotilla. Gen. A. A. K., The Betrayal of East Pakistan, p. 84, ISBN 984-8080-24-4 These steps were not implemented, the Army commandeered civilian water crafts for logistics and posted Army and Razakar personnel to guard various ferries, bridges, ports and other naval installations. Pakistan Navy established a Marine academy in June 1971 to support riverine operations.Pns Qasim
Rear Admiral Mohammad Shariff had only 4 Gunboats (PNS Comilla, Rajshahi, Jessore and Sylhet) and a patrol boat (PNS Balaghat) in East Pakistan, while the navy remodeled 17 civilian ships into gunboats by adding 12.7/20 mm guns, and .30/.50 caliber Browing Machine guns. Siddiq, Witness to Surrender, p. 130, ISBN 984-05-1373-7 These boats joined the fleet by August 1971, while several other boats had been fitted with 40X60 mm Bofors guns and .50 caliber machine guns in Khulna and Chittagong dockyards to serve as patrol boats. Khalilur, Muktijuddhay Nou-Abhijan, p. 66, ISBN 984-465-449-1 A few hundred officers and 2,000 crewmen were posted in East Pakistan in 1971. 300 Bengali seamen were transferred to West Pakistan as a precaution after March 25, 1971, while Special Service Group Navy (SSGN) teams were posted in East Pakistan.

=Mukti Bahini Naval Operations=

Mukti Bahini did not operate a separate naval wing during March–June 1971. River craft were requisitioned as needed. Pakistan Navy and Air Force sank one such craft, MV Ostrich, during Operation Barisal on April 26, while Pakistani gunboats sank 3  boats commanded by Mukti Bahini on May 5, 1971, at Gabura. 244, ISBN 984-437-086-8

New Mukti Bahini initiative: Naval Commandos

The Bangladesh naval commando operation that was called "Operation Jackpot" was precipitated by events in Toulon, a coastal city of southern France. The operation was planned to take on Naval Special Service Group of Pakistan Navy, after it had conducted several other operations. In 1971, there were 11 East Pakistan naval submarine crewmen receiving training there aboard a Pakistani submarine. One commissioned officer (Mosharraf Hassain) and 8 crewmen decided to take control of the submarine and to fight against Pakistan. Their plan was disclosed, however, causing them to flee from death threats made by Pakistan's Naval Intelligence. Out of the 9 crewmen, one was killed by Pakistan Naval Intelligence, but the others managed to travel to the Indian Embassy in Geneva, Switzerland. From Geneva, embassy officials took them to New Delhi on April 9, where they began a program of top secret naval training. 9–15

Mukti Bahini reorganization

At the conclusion of Operation Searchlight and Operation Barisal, the Army and Navy had driven the Mukti Bahini into India, where they entered a period of reorganization during June and July 1971 to train guerrillas, set up networks and safe houses in the occupied territories to run the insurgency and rebuild the conventional forces. The Indian Army divided the country into 6 sectors, while planning to send 2,000–5,000 guerrillas inside Bangladesh every month with 3/4 weeks training to hit all targets of opportunity, while build up the regular force to seize territory in Sylhet,Jacob, Lt. Gen. J. F. R., Surrender at Dacca, Birth of A Nation, pp. 43-44Hasan, Moyeedul, Muldhara 71, pp. 53–55 Indian officials suggested fielding a force of 8,000 guerrillas with regular troops in leadership position with 3 or 4 month training. Gen. J. F. R., Surrender at Dacca, Birth of A Nation, p. 93 The solution was to activate the hitherto inactive Sector No. 10Shafiullah, Maj. Gen. K. M., Bangladesh at War, pp. 162–163Rahman, Md. Khalilur, Muktijuddhay Nou-Abhijan, p. 47 and this Naval commando force was to be trained as per the Indian suggestion, acting as an elite force for attacking riverine and seabourne targets.
Indian Army's initial strategy of sending 2000–5000 guerrillas inside Bangladesh every month since July and hitting the border outpostsIslam, Maj. Rafiqul, A Tale of Millions p. 297 with regular battalions had not yielded expected results for various reasons,Islam, Maj. Rafiqul, A Tale of Millions pp. 274, 292, 297 and Pakistani commanders were confident that they have contained the "Monsoon" offensive of Mukti Bahini. Gen. Rao Farman, When Pakistan Got Divided, p. 100Niazi, Lt. Gen. A. A. K., The Betryal of East Pakistan, p. 96 As the pace of military operations in Bangladesh slacked off, the civilian morale was adversely affected,A Tale of Millions, Islam, Major Rafiqul Bir Uttam, p. 292 which prompted East-Pakistan administrative authorities to claim that the situation had returned to "normal". In response to this declaration, the Mukti Bahini launched 2 operations: 1) Guerrilla attacks in targets in Dhaka by a crack commando group, and 2) the simultaneous mining and damaging of ships in Chittagong, Chandpur, Mongla and Narayanganj on August 15, which became known in Bangladesh and international media as "Operation Jackpot".

Setup and Training

After initial training in Delhi under commander Sharma and DFI chief Brd. Gupta, from April 25 to May 15, the Indian trainers planned for bigger actions. The river transport system was vital for economic activity given the primitive state of the road and railways system of East Pakistan. Indian Commander Bhattachariya in collaboration with top regional commanders established the secret camp, codenamed C2P, in Plassey, West Bengal on May 23Operation Jackpot, Mahmud, Sezan, p. 14 to train volunteers selected from various Mukti Bahini sectors (Bangladesh was divided in 6 operational sectors for Mukti Bahini operations) for this purpose. Initially 300 volunteers were chosen,A Tale of Millions, Islam, Major Rafiqul Bir Uttam, p. 265–68 ultimately 499 commandos were trained in the camp. The course included swimming, survival training, using limpet mines, hand to hand combat and navigation. By August 1971, the first batch of commandos were ready for operation. The Camp Commander at C2P was Commander M. N. Samanth, Training Coordinator was Lt. Commander G. Martis, both from the Indian Navy, while 20 Indian instructors along with the submariners became trainers. Pakistani Intelligence agents scouted the camp in June and July but Indian security measures prevented any harm to the camp and apprehended all infiltrators.

The Operation

The operation was planned in the last week of July, under tight security. Information on river tides, weather and East Pakistan naval infrastructure and deployment was collected. Selected commandos were sent from C2P to forward bases in Tripura and West Bengal, where a final briefing was given to them. The groups reached Chittagong, Chandpur and Narayanganj and the group targeted Mongla. Each commando carried a pair of fins, a knife, a limpet mine, and swimming trunks. Some had compasses, 1 in 3 commandos had sten guns and hand grenades, the group leaders carried a transistor radio. All the groups carried their own equipment to their targets and after entering Bangladesh between August 3 and 9, reached their destinations by August 12, using the local Mukti Bahini network of safehouses. A pair of songs was played in India Radio (Akashbani) at specific times to convey the intended signal for commencing the operations.A Tale of Millions, Islam, Major Rafiqul Bir Uttam, p. 263–65 The first song (Amar putul ajke prothom jabe shoshur bari)Operation Jackpot, Mahmud, Sezan, p. 43 was played on August 13, the second song (Ami tomay joto shuniyechilem gan tar bodole chaini kono dan)Muktijudhdher Rachana Shomogra, Mahmud, Sezan, p. 61 on August 14. The result of this operation was:
The simultaneous attacks on Pakistan naval shipping assets on August 16 destroyed the myth of normalcy in East Pakistan when the news was flashed in the international media. Pakistan Army investigation concluded that no one had imagined Mukti Bahini capable of conducting such an operation. 550, ISBN 984-437-086-8

Pakstani countermeasures

Pakistan Navy had taken measures to safeguard East Pakistan naval assets since March 25, 1971. Pakistan Marine battalion under Captain ZamirNiazi, Lt. Gen. A. A. K., The Betryal of East Pakistan, p. 184 deployed 3 Naval Marine companies and a Naval platoon at Chittagong in November 1971, while the Marine base PNS Haider was established at Chittagong. Two Fast Gunboats were obtained from Royal Saudi Navy, but PNS Sadaqat and PNS Rifaqat were never deployed in East Pakistan. Pakistan Army increased security at bridges, ferries and ports, setting up numerous bunkers and strong points near these installations.
The Naval Special Service Group fought back to protect its naval assets. A small teams of Pakistani Special Service Group Navy (SSGN) and Marines were established that took aggressive counter-measure to eliminate the threat. Naval SSGNs, under Commander David Felix, were ordered to kill Bengali commando leaders (a total failure, 7 Bengali submariners survived the war while one was KIA in October 1971), While the SSGNs were successful in killing a number of Bengali guerrillas, they failed to protect naval assets in East Pakistan waters, which was the main objective of Operation Jackpot.

Assessment

Not all Naval commando missions met with success. Tightened security prevented any operations in Chittagong after the first week of October,Rahman, Md. Khalilur, Muktijuddhay Nou-Abhijan, p. 94 while four attempts to damage the Hardinge Bridge failed. Khalilur, Muktijuddhay Nou-Abhijan, pp. 220–223 Some Commando teams were ambushed and prevented from reaching their objectives. Khalilur, Muktijuddhay Nou-Abhijan, pp. 122, 196-198, 217 Misfortune and miscalculation caused some missions to fail. Khalilur, Muktijuddhay Nou-Abhijan, p. 84, p. 119, p. 201 Security measures prevented any sabotage attempts on the Oil depots at Narayanganj, Bogura, Faridpur and Chittagong, and Mukti Bahini managed to damage the Oil depots at Chittagong and Naryanganj using an Alouette Helicopters and a Twin Otter plane in December 2, 1971.
In total, 515 commandos received training at C2P. Eight commandos were killed, 34 wounded and 15 captured during August–December 1971. Khalilur, Muktijuddhay Nou-Abhijan, pp. 268–270, ISBN 984-465-449-1 Naval commandos managed to sink or damage 126 ships/coasters/ferries during that time span, while one source confirms at least 65 vessels of various types (15 Pakistani ships, 11 coasters, 7 gunboats, 11 barges, 2 tankers and 19 river craft by November 1971). Gen. J. F. R., Surrender at Dacca, p. 91 had been sunk between August–November 1971. At least 100,000 tons of shipping was sunk or crippled, jetties and wharves were disabled and channels blocked, and the commandos kept East Pakistan in a state of siege without having a single vesselRay, Vice Admiral Mihir K., War in the Indian Ocean, pp. 141, 174 The operational capability of Pakistan Navy was reduced as a result of Operation Jackpot.

Operation Hotpants

After The operation of August 16, all commandos returned to India. After this no pre-planned simultaneous operation was launched by the Naval Commandos. Instead, some groups were sent to destroy specific targets, and other commandos benag to hit targets as opportunity presented itself.
Commander M. N. Samant provided the Mukti Bahini boys with 4 gunboats  to form a naval unit in AugustMukul, MR Akthar, Ami Bejoy Dekhechi, p. 36 
In October 1971 Kolkata Port Trust donated 2 patrol crafts (Ajay and Akshay) to Mukti Bahini. The boats underwent a month long refitting at Khidirpur dockyard at the cost of 3.8 million Indian RupeesIslam, Maj. Rafiqul, A Tale of Millions p. 298 to carry 2 Canadian 40X60 mm Bofors Guns and 2 light engines and 8 ground mines, four on each side of the deck in addition to 11 ground mines. Khalilur, Muktijuddhay Nou-Abhijan, p. 227, ISBN 984-465-449-1 Renamed BNS Padma and Palash, the boats were crewed by 44 Indian sailors and 12 Naval commandos, the boats were officered by India Navy personnel. Bangladesh Provisional Government State Minister Captain Kamruzzaman was present when the boats were commissioned by Kolkata Port Trust Chairman Mr. P. K. Sen. Lt. Commander KP Roy and K. Mitra on Indian Navy commanded the boats. The mission for Bangladesh Navy flotilla was:Islam, Maj. Rafiqul, A Tale of Millions, p. 298
Escorted by an Indian Navy Frigate, on November 10 these boats successfully mined the entrance of Mongla port. They also chased the British ship "The City of St. Albans" away from Moingla on November 11, 1971. Rafiqul, A Tale of Millions, p. 303

=Naval Commandos killed in Operation Jackpot=

Operation Jackpot, Mahmud, Sezan, Mukhobondho

=Naval Commandos Who Received Bangladesh 'National Hero Award' Recognition=

Indian Army IV corps operation (November 21, 1971)

The plan of operation for the Indian Army IV corps (8 Mountain Div., 23 Mountain Div., 57 Mountain Div. and "Kilo Force") may have been codenamed "Operation Jackpot". The opposition forces included the Pakistani 14th Infantry division defending Sylhet, Maulaviabazar and Akhaura, the 39th ad hoc division in Comilla, Laksham and Feni and the 97th independent infantry brigade stationed in Chittagong. Indian army had  seized salients in the Eastern border from November 21, 1971. After Pakistan launched air attacks on India on December 3, the Indian army crossed the border into Bangladesh. By the end of the war on December 16, 1971, the Indian army had isolated and surrounded the remnants of the 14th division in Syhlet and Bhairabbazar, the 39th division was cornered in Comilla and Chittagong, with all other areas of Syhlet, Comilla, Noakhali and Chittagong clear of enemy forces. Part of the corps had crossed the Meghna river using the "Meghna Heli Bridge" and using local boats to drive towards Dhaka when the Pakistani army surrendered.





Sources & Further Reading




