[[Color Theory]]

CATEGORIES: Synthpop groups, American electronic music groups

Color Theory is the musical alter ego of American singer-keyboardist-songwriter Brian Hazard. Hazard has released eight studio albums, eight EPs, and one collection of demos to date. His eighth studio album The Sound was released on August 4, 2010.

Biography

Hazard, the sole member of Color Theory, began studying the piano at the relatively young age of thirteen. He took lessons on and off through his high school years, while playing piano in the school jazz band and mallet percussion in the drumline. In 1992, Hazard was awarded a Bachelor of Music degree in Piano Performance from California State University, Long Beach. The following year he enrolled in songwriting and recording classes at Golden West College, and began writing songs for the first Color Theory album, Sketches in Grey.

Recordings

Sketches in Grey was a local success when it was released in 1994, quickly selling out the first pressing. But it wasn't until fledgling label A Different Drum included "Heart Like a Doll" on its first release, Rise! America's Synthpop Underground, that Color Theory was exposed to the small but dedicated modern synthpop scene.
Hazard began performing Color Theory material live after the release of 1997's Tuesday Song, which includes "The Perfect Song", first performed as a proposal to now-wife Michelle. Hazard long considered 1999's Perfect Tears his best work, representing the culmination of the "electronic piano pop" sound he'd worked six years to refine. 2001's Life's Fairytale explored mostly piano-less electronic textures, representing a significant change of course from earlier material. But the biggest change came with 2002's Something Beautiful, a fully acoustic recording featuring legendary drummer Jonathan Moffett, fretless bassist Baba Elefante, a string quartet, flute, harp, and Hazard on piano and vibraphone. Twenty-six weekly demo recordings were posted on the web as part of the "Bad Song of the Week" project, which allowed fans to vote for their favorites and decide which songs would ultimately be included on the album. These demos were released as a limited edition two-disc set entitled Like Clockwork.
2003 brought another sharp directional change with Color Theory presents Depeche Mode, a one-man tribute to Depeche Mode. In addition to eleven Depeche Mode covers and two new instrumental interludes, the album includes "Ponytail Girl", a Color Theory original that was mislabeled and widely circulated on file sharing networks as a Depeche Mode track from their yet to be released Exciter album.  Hazard's voice is said to resemble that of Martin Gore, which has confused Depeche fans.
Five years in the making, 2008's The Thought Chapter contains a Death Cab for Cutie cover and eleven new originals. "If It's My Time to Go" won both a Lennon Award Hazard received over $8,500 in cash and musical equipment in connection with the awards, as well as free CD manufacturing for 2010's The Sound. Color Theory's eighth full-length album features nine new originals and a cover of "Living a Boy's Adventure Tale" by synthpop legends a-ha.
Songs from The Thought Chapter and The Sound have been featured on the MTV shows Styl'd
Hazard released Adjustments Pt. 1 in June of 2012, the first of three EPs featuring five new original songs, plus five remixes of those songs. The best 10-11 originals from the three sets will be released as an album in 2013.

Discography

Studio albums

EPs






