[[Minister affair at the announcement of the Reinfeldt cabinet]]

CATEGORIES: Political scandals in Sweden, 2006 in Sweden

The minister affair at the announcement of the Reinfeldt cabinet in Sweden is a political scandal which started on October 7, 2006 when the Cabinet of Fredrik Reinfeldt, which had been announced on October 6, immediately became affected by media allegations on past errors on the part of several cabinet ministers, in particular Maria Borelius, Cecilia Stegö Chilò and Tobias Billström. The affair centred around the use of domestic workers (nannies and maids) without paying employment (payroll) tax, employer's contribution (

Background

The affair concerns several key pieces of Swedish law, politics and society:

Maria Borelius

Nanny

On October 7, 2006, the day after the Cabinet of Fredrik Reinfeldt was announced two of the ministers, Maria Borelius and Cecilia Stegö Chilò, voluntarily admitted that they had previously employed persons to take care of their children (nannies) without paying the employment (payroll) tax, employer's contribution (). Borelius did not face any judicial inquiry following her admission, since the events occurred more than five years ago, which put it outside of the statute of limitations.
In explanation, Borelius stated that: "I'm a mother of four and I was running my own company. It never would have worked otherwise".Ministers admit nanny tax dodges, The Local, October 7, 2006 

TV licence

On October 11, 2006 it came to light that Borelius had not paid her TV license since her return from the United Kingdom on August 21, 2006 (as resident in the UK, she was of course exempt from TV fees in Sweden even if the couple might be watching TV while staying at the house they kept in Djursholm).  On October 12, 2006 Radiotjänst i Kiruna, a private agency tasked with collecting the license fees, filed criminal charges against Borelius and two other ministers of the Reinfeldt Cabinet, Tobias Billström and Cecilia Stegö Chilò.Ministers reported to police for unpaid TV licences, The Local, October 13, 2006 

Other issues

On October 13, 2006 it was revealed that Borelius is also being investigated by the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority for financial irregularities concerning the sale of shares in the company Active Biotech where Borelius is a member of the board. Under Swedish law such a transaction must be reported within five days.Pressure grows on Swedish trade minister, The Local, October 13, 2006 

Resignation

In the afternoon of October 14, 2006 Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt announced that Maria Borelius had tendered her resignation.Borelius resigns, The Local, October 14, 2006 

Cecilia Stegö Chilò

Nanny

On October 7, 2006, the day after the Cabinet of Fredrik Reinfeldt was announced Cecilia Stegö Chilò voluntarily admitted that she and her husband had previously employed persons to take care of their children without paying the appropriate taxes (Stegö Chilò's announcement coincided with that of Maria Borelius). Stegö Chilò stated: "It's just as well that I say this right away. If you want to remove me because of that, go ahead." Initially Stegö Chilò did not face any criminal or administrative consequences since the events purportedly took place more than five years ago, outside of the statute of limitations. However on October 15, 2006 Per Winborg, head of the Swedish Transport Workers' Union () decided to file a criminal complaint with the Swedish Police Service against Stegö Chilò since it could not be certain that the statute of limitations had passed. On November 16, 2006 the prosecutor in the case decided to drop any charges against Stegö Chilò relating to the matter of untaxed nannys.
On the same day Carina Hägg, a Social Democrat and Member of the Riksdag, announced that she was planning to file a complaint against Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt with the Riksdag Constitutional Committee in order to examine how the Prime Minister recruited his ministers.Kritik och anmälningar hopas, Svenska Dagbladet, October 15, 2006 

TV licence

On October 11, 2006 it came to light that Stegö Chilò and her husband had not paid their TV licence for the last 16 years, withholding more than 16,000 kronor from the public service broadcasters. Her husband registered ownership of a television five days before her appointment as minister. As Minister for Culture Stegö Chilò's responsibilities include oversight of the Swedish public service corporations. However, on October 12, 2006 Radiotjänst i Kiruna, the agency tasked with collecting the licence fees, announced its intentions to file criminal charges against Stegö Chilò, Tobias Billström and Maria Borelius, all ministers in the Reinfeldt Cabinet at the time. Criminal charges were filed on October 13, 2006.

Resignation

On October 16, 2006 Stegö Chilò tendered her resignation to Prime Minister Reinfeldt.Second Swedish minister resigns, The Local, October 16, 2006 

Tobias Billström

On October 11, 2006, less than a week after he took office, it was revealed that Tobias Billström deliberately had neglected to pay his TV licence for ten years, despite owning a television. Billström stated that his neglect initially was based on his political standpoint against Public Service, but that he had come to appreciate public service and that he believed that citizens and especially legislators should follow the law. Billström also expressed his ambition to repay his debt with interest.Fler ministrar betalar inte licens 
However, on October 12, 2006 Radiotjänst i Kiruna, a private agency tasked with collecting the license fees, announced that it would file criminal charges against Billström together with Cecilia Stegö Chilò and Maria Borelius, former ministers in the cabinet of Fredrik Reinfeldt. On October 13, 2006 criminal charges were filed.Ministers reported to police for unpaid TV licences 
Tobias Billström has also admitted using the credit card issued to him by the Swedish parliament for his personal expenses on two occasions. Although he had reimbursed the parliament for these expenses he felt compelled to reveal this because it was wrong in principle. To many in the Swedish public, this admission, though not at all unique, seemed to echo the affair which, about a decade before, had stopped Mona Sahlin from becoming Chairman of the Social Democrat party and Prime Minister. Sahlin had, among other things,  paid for some candy (Toblerone) with a government credit card, although she paid the money back right away and it was never seen as a criminal act.

Andreas Carlgren

On October 12, 2006 Minister for Sustainable Development Andreas Carlgren admitted to have received 130,000 kronor too much from the parliamentary income guarantee. In 1998, when Carlgren was forced to leave the parliament he received compensation despite having other sources of income, which are to be deducted from the parliamentary compensation. Carlgren claims to have rectified the mistake on his own, while others in the Centre Party claim that the minister was caught taking simultaneous payments from the parliamentary authorities and that the mistake had to be pointed out to him. Carlgren has rejected this claim, stating that he is the only one who received his mail and therefore the only one who could have known. Furthermore Carlgren said that "A lot of people have made this same mistake. In my case it amounted to quite a lot of money and we agreed that I should pay it back."Minister admits false income details , The Local, October 12, 2006.

Anders Borg

On October 17, 2006 Anders Borg, Minister for Finance, admitted that he employed a female worker in his home without paying taxes. The young woman told Expressen that she worked for the Borg family as a nanny. Borg on the other hand is insistent that she was just a babysitter, and he doesn't believe he broke any laws.

Radiotjänst police complaint

On October 19, 2006 it was revealed that Christina Jutterström, CEO of the public service broadcaster Sveriges Television, was also involved in the decision to file a police complaint against Maria Borelius, Tobias Billström and Cecilia Stegö Chilò since Jutterström also is chairman of the board of Radiotjänst i Kiruna. Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt commented that he considered it special treatment of persons who are of interest with the media. Lars Lindberg, CEO of Radiotjänst, responded that this case is prejudicial since no one has previously admitted possession of a television retroactively. Eva-Lena Jansson, a Member of Parliament for the Social Democrats, reported the issue to the constitutional committee of the Riksdag since she wanted it to be determined if the Prime Minister's comments were to be considered ministerial interference in the affairs of a government agency (

Timeline






