[[Zaid Shakir]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, Living people, Muslim scholars, Islamic studies scholars, Muslim reformers, American Muslims, African-American Muslims, American motivational speakers, American Sunni Muslims, Converts to Islam from Christianity, American former Christians, African-American former Christians, Converts to Islam, Muslim activists, American University alumni, Rutgers University alumni, People from Berkeley, California, People from New Britain, Connecticut, Writers from Berkeley, California

Zaid Shakir is an American Islamic scholar and writer who is a co-founder with Hamza Yusuf and Hatem Bazian, chairman of the board, and a senior faculty member of Zaytuna College in Berkeley, California, United States. He teaches courses on Arabic, law, history, and Islamic spirituality. He is one of the signatories of A Common Word Between Us and You, an open letter by Islamic scholars to Christian leaders, calling for peace and understanding.

Early life

Born in Berkeley, California and with his formative years in New Britain, Connecticut, he accepted Islam in 1977 while serving in the United States Air Force and shortly after changed his name to Zaid Salim Shakir. A summa cum laude graduate, he obtained a BA in International Relations at American University in Washington, D.C. and later earned his MA in Political Science at Rutgers University. the Tri-State Muslim Education Initiative, and the Connecticut Muslim Coordinating Committee. As Imam of Masjid al-Islam from 1988 to 1994 he spearheaded a community renewal and grassroots anti-drug effort. He also taught political science and Arabic at Southern Connecticut State University. He served as an interfaith council Chaplain at Yale University and developed the Chaplaincy Sensitivity Training for physicians at Yale New Haven Hospital.

Years Abroad

He then left for Syria to pursue his studies in the traditional Islamic Sciences. For seven years in Syria, and briefly in Morocco, he immersed himself in an intense study of Arabic, Islamic law, Quranic studies, and spirituality. In 2001, he was the first American graduate from Syria's Abu Nour University

Recent work in the United States

Zaytuna College
In 2003, as a scholar-in-residence at Zaytuna Institute located in California, Shakir began to teach Arabic, Law, and Islamic spirituality. In 2004, he initiated a pilot seminary program at Zaytuna Institute, which was useful in Zaytuna College's refinement of its Islamic Studies curriculum and its educational philosophy. For four years, students in the pilot program were engaged in the study of contemporary and classical texts. And, in the fall of 2010, he and his colleagues co-founded the Berkeley, California based Zaytuna College, a four-year Muslim liberal arts college, the first of its kind in the United States, dedicated to "educate and prepare morally committed professional, intellectual, and spiritual leaders", who are grounded in the Islamic scholarly tradition and conversant with the cultural currents and critical ideas shaping modern society.
Public Profile
He has translated several classical texts from Arabic. 
He is co-founder and chairman of United For Change since 2009. This effort through modern discourse, is to create awareness of the broadest and most consuming topics within the Muslim community. The aim is to leverage the diversity through cooperation and goodwill and address the obstacles that have proven to be divisive. It began as a result of an eight-day trip with Islamic Relief USA "Turn The Desert Green" He came back from Africa convinced that an issue like malaria couldn't be tackled by one group or individual. Zaid Shakir said, "Seeing the work of Islamic Relief, how they're filling the gaps and empowering the Muslims in sub-Sahara Africa to take charge of their health and their selves, to see how they're building a healthcare infrastructure--it was truly inspiring."
He was a participant at the 9th annual 2010 seminar with The Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Rowan Williams who chaired the Building Bridges Christian-Muslim Seminar on Tradition and Modernity, which brought together leading Muslim and Christian scholars from around the world to explore issues at the heart of the two traditions. Shakir has also been featured on the Washingtonpost.

Views

He stated in a 2009 interview with USA Today, "as a faith community our needs aren't any different than the needs of any other faith community. As Muslims, we need to develop institutions to allow us to perpetuate our values."
He has expressed a hope that the people of the United States convert to Islam, "Every Muslim who is honest would say, I would like to see America become a Muslim country. I think it would help people, and if I didn't believe that, I wouldn't be a Muslim. Because Islam helped me as a person, and it's helped a lot of people in my community.""U.S. Muslim Clerics Seek a Modern Middle Ground" On page 4 of an article by Laurie Goodstein in ''The New York Times June 18, 2006
According to CNN blog This Just In, an article entitled "Today's Intriguing People" states, The New York Times has reported  that Zaid Shakir is one of nine influential Muslim scholars who has appeared in a YouTube video denouncing militant Islam."

Reception

A 200 page report entitled, "The 500 Most Influential Muslims"  edited by noted professors John Esposito and Ibrahim Kalin was published November 20, 2009 by The Royal Islamic Strategic Studies Centre (Jordan) and the Prince Alwaleed Bin-Talal Center for Muslim-Christian Understanding (Georgetown University) describes Shakir as "an influential Islamic scholar".. 
The New York Times describes him as "a leading intellectual light" whilst adding that he has "a history of anti-American rhetoric" that has mellowed over the years. 

Publications

Books authored

Books translated with additions

Books which include his foreword or note

Papers

External links and further reading

Websites

Articles and Interviews






