[[Jonathan Paton]]

CATEGORIES: 1971 births, Living people, United States Army officers, American military personnel of the Iraq War, University of Arizona alumni, Members of the Arizona House of Representatives, Arizona Republicans

Jonathan Paton (born June 10, 1971) is a former Arizona Republican candidate for the U.S. House of Representatives in Arizona's 8th District and an intelligence officer in the U.S. Army Reserve who served in Operation Iraqi Freedom. Paton was first elected to southern Arizona's Legislative District 30 as a member of the Arizona House of Representatives in 2004. He won reelection and began his second term in February 2007.

Early life, education, and early career

Paton was born in Tucson, Arizona. He grew up on the city's East Side. He graduated from Sabino High School in 1989. During his senior year in high school Paton worked at Marie Callender's restaurant as a busboy and saved up the funds to go to Germany as a Rotary exchange student. He returned home and began his studies at the University of Arizona. In the coming years he would spend more years overseas studying in Almaty, Kazakhstan with the Sister Cities Program, Ludwig-Maximillians-Universitaet in Munich as a Rotary Foundation Scholar and in Moscow through a program administered by the University of Arizona. He also interned with the Arizona State Senate in 1995. Paton graduated from the University of Arizona summa cum laude and with honors in German and Russian in 1996. He continued on to the graduate program in German at the University of Arizona.
Paton went on to work for the Southern Arizona Homebuilders Association, representing one of the key industries and job providers in Southern Arizona. In 2001, Paton began a political consulting firm in Tucson called Paton & Associates. He has worked with numerous clients in state and local races as well as on initiative campaigns.

Military service

In 1999 Paton enlisted in the United States Army Reserve. He served in the 5-104th Military Intelligence Battalion at Fort Huachuca, Arizona. He was named "Soldier of the Year" for his battalion, brigade and eventually for the entire 104th Division in 2000. After becoming instructor qualified and being promoted to sergeant, he received his commission as a second lieutenant.
In 2005 after his first year in office, he was called up for active duty for six months in a new Army program called the Basic Officer Leaders Course, which combines infantry training at Fort Benning, Georgia with military intelligence training at Fort Huachuca. He graduated as class leader of the Military Intelligence Officer Basic Course in January 2006. He continues to serve as a captain and a qualified 35D all-source intelligence officer.
In late July 2006, Paton announced he was being voluntarily deployed to Iraq. The announcement received national and international media attention.

Arizona legislature

First elected to the state House in 2004, Paton sponsored a bill that allowed the state to crack down on human smugglers—the first of its kind in the country. He was a key supporter of an extension of state financing for Rio Nuevo, a downtown redevelopment project in Tucson. He was the prime sponsor of a bill eliminating state income taxes for active duty military personnel in Arizona.
In his second term in the House, Paton sponsored legislation that forced the Arizona State Retirement System to divest itself of all funds that included petroleum companies doing business with Iran.azstarnet.php
In 2008, State Senator Tim Bee finished his last term in the legislature representing District 30 due to term limits. In a bid for Bee's State Senate seat in November 2008, Paton defeated Democrat Georgette Valle in the General Election by over 20 points. Incoming Senator President Bob Burns appointed Paton to serve as Chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, a post once held by Tucsonans Elaine Richardson (D) and Patti Noland (R).
Before leaving the Senate to run for U.S. Congress, Paton voted in favor of SB1070, Arizona's immigration law.

Committee assignments

U.S. House campaigns






