[[Ringo Brown]]

CATEGORIES: Neighbours characters, Fictional Australian rules football players, Fictional characters introduced in 2007

Ringo Brown is a fictional character from the Australian soap opera Neighbours, played by Sam Clark. Clark was given the role after he entered and won a Dolly magazine competition. He made his first screen appearance during the episode broadcast on 24 January 2007. Ringo's storylines have included his ongoing battle with an eating disorder, a bus crash, a relationship with an older woman, the collapse of a warehouse roof at an illegal dance party and his on-off relationship with Donna Freedman. In July 2010, it was announced that Clark had decided to leave Neighbours. He filmed his final scenes at the end of the month and Ringo made his last credited appearance on 18 October 2010.

Casting

In 2006, Australian teen magazine, Dolly, held a competition offering two readers a chance to win a three-month contract with Neighbours. Dolly received 7,000 entries for the competition.
In 2009, it was announced that Clark would be taking a three month break from Neighbours to focus on his music career.

Development

Characterisation

In his fictional backstory, Ringo is the youngest in a line of siblings named after The Beatles. As a child, Ringo idolised his older brother George and was distraught when he left home and changed his name to Frazer Yeats (Ben Lawson), leaving Ringo alone with their small-minded parents and elder brother Johnny. Ringo resented his brother for leaving and desperately wanted to become a part of Frazer's cool, new world. When his first episode went to air, Clark described Brown as a "a good-hearted kid, he doesn't want to hurt anyone, and he does the normal things that a 16-year-old kid does". Clark later went on to explain that Ringo has "basically left home and come to live the life his brother is living", he also added that Ringo is a typical boy next door. He is not an academic, but he is clever at reading people. Ten said "he's a good boy at heart, but he isn't averse to bending the rules to score a win. With the world at large he's cocky, cheeky and good-humoured". They added that when he gets a crush on a girl, he is left nervous and is likely to say the wrong thing.

Eating disorder

One of Ringo's biggest storylines saw him develop an eating disorder. A writer for Holy Soap said that this is one of the first times in a soap opera that a male character has been at the centre of such a storyline.

Relationship with Carmella Cammeniti

In 2007, Ringo began a brief relationship with the much older Carmella Cammeniti (Natalie Blair). They share a kiss in a swimming pool during their siblings' pre-wedding celebrations at Lassiters Hotel. Carmella is then forced to tell him that she was never in love with him. Clark said he felt sorry for his character and called the situation "the ultimate embarrassment for him". Ringo then decides to leave town with his mother, Clark said "He just feels so embarrassed and as though he doesn't fit in anymore in the street".

Marriage

Ringo and Donna Freedman (Margot Robbie) marry as part of the 25th anniversary celebrations. Clark was delighted with the storyline stating: "It was really lovely. Their relationship has been on and off over the past couple of years, so it was a nice culmination of that. It's great to see them rock solid now. The wedding was filmed on location and Clark said it was more meaningful than any studio or tiny church. Clark also had the least amount of filming to contribute to the storyline, whilst others characters spent whole days filming. He branded Donna as "the bride from hell" during the preparations. The wedding drew comparisons to the previous wedding of Scott Robinson (Jason Donovan) and Charlene Mitchell (Kylie Minogue).

Departure

In July 2010, Clark announced that he was to leave the show to concentrate on his music career. He added "I've been working on music for a very long time now and it was getting too hard to fit the two together and do them to the level I wanted. I feel as though the decision is right but that doesn't make it any easier". Clark said Ringo's departure from the show was a "decent send-off" and he hoped that Ringo would be a "character who is remembered for years to come". When he was asked if the door was open for his return, Clark said it was up to the script writers.
In October, it was revealed that a "much-loved character" was to die in a drink-driving accident. Ringo was one of two potential fatalities, the other being Stephanie Scully (Carla Bonner). Of this, Clark said " I narrowly, in real life, just missed a motorbike coming at me! It's an exciting way to leave a show." Clark added that as filming on Neighbours is shot out of sequence, this was not his last scene and he left on a "high" as his last scene was a humorous one.

Storylines

Ringo arrives in Ramsay Street to see his brother Frazer and is initially mistaken for an intruder by Zeke Kinski (Matthew Werkmeister). Frazer explains to Ringo that he came to Erinsborough to win the heart of their brother's ex-fiancée, Rosetta Cammeniti. Frazer allows Ringo to stay with him and he enrols at Erinsborough High. Ringo develops a crush on Zeke's sister Rachel (Caitlin Stasey) and turns to Lolly Allen for advice. However, he finds himself helping her out when she admits that her stepmother, Sandy Allen (Catherine Hill), has been abusing her. When Sandy falls into the pool, Ringo rescues her and Rachel is impressed. Ringo then admits that he cannot swim and Rachel decides to teach him. After their first lesson, Ringo and Rachel first kiss and begin dating.
Ringo starts working for Carmella Cammeniti's fruit and vegetable company. Ringo grows close to Carmella as she treats him as an adult and he helps her to overcome her anti-depressant addiction. After finding themselves alone one day, Carmella and Ringo almost kiss, but Carmella backs off. Ringo decides to break up with Rachel and he and Carmella almost kiss again. The night before Frazer and Rosetta's wedding, Ringo decides to go to Lassiter's pool and Carmella joins him. They kiss, but Carmella realises that it is wrong and she leaves. After the wedding, some of the residents are driven back home in a minibus by Toadfish Rebecchi (Ryan Moloney). During the journey, Ringo moves to the back of the bus to talk to Carmella. The minibus is hit by a removal van, causing it to crash. Ringo is trapped in the wreckage and he tells Carmella that he loves her. Carmella tells him that she loves him too. Ringo is rushed to hospital and he suffers a cardiac arrest, causing the doctors to put him into a coma. When he is brought out of the coma, he remembers what Carmella said to him and confronts her. Carmella tells him that she lied and Ringo decides to spend some time at home with his mother, Prue (Penny Cook). 
Ringo becomes very body conscious and starts to lift weights, go running and not eating properly. Pepper Steiger realises that these are the signs of an eating disorder, but when she confronts Ringo, he denies he has a problem. Pepper eventually gets through to him and he begins to eat normally again. Pepper later tells Daniel Fitzgerald (Brett Tucker) and Rosetta about Ringo's problem. When Rosetta catches Ringo using appetite suppressants, she tells Frazer about his condition. After nearly drowning during a swim trial, Ringo is confronted by Daniel and Frazer and refuses counselling. Ringo continues to struggle with his eating disorder and during a swim in the sea, he swims out too far and finds himself unable to get back to shore. He is found unconscious on the beach by Bridget and Steve Parker (Steve Bastoni). While recovering in hospital, Ringo decides to take control of his life and moves in with the Kennedy family. During his 18th birthday party, Ringo tells everyone about his eating disorder. He also says goodbye to Frazer and Rosetta who leave for Italy. 
Ringo begins a relationship with Donna Freedman. When Susan finds some photographs of Donna in Zeke's draw, Ringo believes that they were having an affair and breaks up with Donna. She tells him nothing happened and Ringo learns Zeke had a crush on her. When Bridget dies, Ringo decides that he wants to become a paramedic. When Ringo learns Donna cheated on him with Andrew Robinson (Jordan Smith), he leaves for Sydney to attend a paramedic course. Ringo returns to Erinsborough to support Bridget's husband, Declan, through her birthday and agrees to be friends with Donna. On his first day as a trainee paramedic, Ringo messes up his first job, but later diagnoses Naomi (Kate Bell) with anaphylaxis. Ringo visits Naomi in hospital and they eventually start dating. When Ringo breaks up with Naomi, after discovering that she stole his ID card, she does not take it well and blames Donna. Naomi frames Donna for stealing her hospital records, so Ringo goes to Naomi's house to look for evidence and finds a shrine dedicated to him. After Naomi is arrested, she calls Ringo and begs him to meet her. Ringo ignores the calls and Naomi is admitted to hospital after she is hit by a car. Ringo visits her and she blames him for everything. 
Ringo decides to get a job on a building site, but discovers that Toadie is serving a writ on his boss, Jim Dolan (Scott Parameter) over a previous job. When Donna goes to pick Ringo up from the site, she is crushed by some scaffolding and Ringo helps her to breathe. When Donna gets better, Ringo tells her he loves her and proposes. Donna initially turns him down, but then proposes to him and he accepts. Ringo wins a Green Card to work in the USA and he and Donna bring forward their wedding. Prue arrives in town and is forced to tell Ringo that she has split up with his father. Ringo panics when Donna is late to the wedding, but she soon turns up and they marry. Donna then moves in with Ringo and the Kennedys. On their one month anniversary, Ringo goes out of town to buy Donna's favourite cupcakes. As he is walking back to the car, Stephanie Scully comes round the corner on her bike and hits Ringo. He is taken to the hospital, but dies from his injuries.

In other media

In 2009, Neighbours became the first Australian series to establish Twitter accounts for its characters. The updates are "complementary to the show's on-air storylines". FremantleMedia Enterprises vice-president of licensing Ben Liebmann said, "We thought it was a really great way to continue or allow the audience to engage with the Neighbours world off-screen". The messages are overseen by the Fremantle digital team, which is integrated with the story department of the Neighbours production team.

Reception

For his portrayal of Ringo, Clark received a nomination for Most Popular New Male Talent at the 2008 Logie Awards.
The character has received a mixed response from critics. During Ringo's AFL storyline, critic Larissa Dubecki of Wa Today described Ringo as a "regular nice teenage boy" who was transforming into a "footy hero dickhead".






