[[Diana Wynne Jones]]

CATEGORIES: 1934 births, 2011 deaths, English atheists, English children's writers, English fantasy writers, Guardian Children's Fiction Prize winners, Women science fiction and fantasy writers, World Fantasy Award winning writers, British writers of young adult literature, Alumni of St Anne's College, Oxford, People educated at Friends School Saffron Walden, Deaths from lung cancer, Women short story writers

Diana Wynne Jones (16 August 1934 – 26 March 2011) was an English writer, principally of fantasy novels for children and adults, as well as a small amount of non-fiction. Some of her better-known works are the Chrestomanci series, the Dalemark series; the novels Howl's Moving Castle and Dark Lord of Derkholm; and The Tough Guide to Fantasyland.

Early life and marriage

Jones was born in London, the daughter of Marjorie (née Jackson) and Richard Aneurin Jones, both of whom were educators. When war was announced, shortly after her fifth birthday, she was evacuated to Wales, and thereafter moved several times, including periods in Coniston Water, in York, and back in London. In 1943 her family finally settled in Thaxted, Essex, where her parents worked running an educational conference centre. In the same year she married John Burrow, a scholar of medieval literature, with whom she had three sons, Richard, Michael and Colin. After a brief period in London, in 1957 the couple returned to Oxford, where they stayed until moving to Bristol in 1976.
According to her autobiography, Jones decided she was an atheist when she was a child.(autobiography). The Diana Wynne Jones fansite.

Career

Jones' books range from amusing slapstick situations to sharp social observation, to witty parody of literary forms. Foremost amongst the latter are her Tough Guide to Fantasyland, and its fictional companion-pieces Dark Lord of Derkholm (1998) and Year of the Griffin (2000), which provide a merciless (though not unaffectionate) critique of formulaic sword-and-sorcery epics.
The Harry Potter books are frequently compared to the works of Diana Wynne Jones. Many of her earlier children's books were out of print in recent years, but have now been re-issued for the young audience whose interest in fantasy and reading was spurred by Harry Potter.(item). The Guardian.(item). The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction.
Jones' works are also compared to those of Robin McKinley and Neil Gaiman. She was friends with both McKinley(item). Robin McKinley's blog. and Gaiman, and Jones and Gaiman are both fans of each other's work; she dedicated her novel Hexwood to him after something he said in a conversation that inspired a key part of the plot.(Poem by Neil Gaiman). Deborah Kaplan's Chrestomanci Castle The Diana Wynne Jones Homepage. Gaiman had already dedicated his 1991 four-part comic book mini-series The Books of Magic to "four witches", of whom Jones was one.(item). Neil Gaiman's blog.
For Charmed Life, the first Chrestomanci novel, Jones won the 1978 Guardian Children's Fiction Prize, a once-in-a-lifetime award by The Guardian newspaper that is judged by a panel of children's writers. Three times she was a commended runner-up
The 1986 novel Howl's Moving Castle was inspired by a boy who asked for a story about a moving castle. It was published first by Greenwillow in the U.S., where it was a runner-up for the annual Boston Globe–Horn Book Award in children's fiction. In 2004, Hayao Miyazaki made the Japanese-language animated movie Howl's Moving Castle, which was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature. A version dubbed in English was released in the UK and US in 2005, with the voice of Howl performed by Christian Bale. Next year Jones and the novel won the annual Phoenix Award from the Children's Literature Association, recognising the best children's book published twenty years earlier that did not win a major award (named for mythical bird phoenix to suggest the book's rise from obscurity).
Fire and Hemlock had been the 2005 Phoenix runner-up. It is a novel based on Scottish ballads, and was a Mythopoeic Fantasy finalist in its own time.
Archer's Goon (1984) was a runner-up for that year's Horn Book Award. It was adapted for television in 1992.
Jones' book on clichés in fantasy fiction, The Tough Guide To Fantasyland (nonfiction), has a cult following among writers and critics, despite being difficult to find due to an erratic printing history. It was recently reissued in the UK, and has been reissued in the USA in 2006 by Firebird Books. The Firebird edition has additional material and a completely new design, including a new map.
The British Fantasy Society recognized her significant impact on fantasy with its occasional Karl Edward Wagner Award in 1999.
She received an honorary D. and the World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement in 2007.
Shortly after her death, it was reported that Earwig and the Witch and a collection of Jones' articles would be published later(item). The Official Diana Wynne Jones Website. – as they were in 2011 and 2012.
The story in progress when she became too ill to write was completed by Ursula Jones, The Islands of Chaldea (HarperCollins, 2014).
Interviewed by The Guardian in June 2013, after she finished the Chaldea story, Ursula Jones said that "other things were coming to light ... She left behind a mass of stuff."

Illness and death

Jones was diagnosed with lung cancer in the early summer of 2009.(item). The Guardian. She underwent surgery in July and reported to friends that the procedure had been successful.(item). Neil Gaiman's blog. However, in June 2010 she announced that she would be discontinuing chemotherapy because it only made her feel ill. In mid-2010 she was halfway through a new book with plans for another to follow.(item). Ansible June 2010. She died on 26 March 2011 from the disease. She was survived by her husband, three sons, and five grandchildren.

Works



Notes



Further reading

 | last = Rosenberg (ed.)
 | first = Teya, ''et al.''
 | authorlink =
 | title = Diana Wynne Jones: An Exciting and Exacting Wisdom
 | publisher = Peter Lang
 | year = 2002
 | isbn = 0-8204-5687-X }}
 | last = Mendlesohn
 | first = Farah
 | authorlink = Farah Mendlesohn
 | title = Diana Wynne Jones: Children's Literature and the Fantastic Tradition
 | publisher = Routledge
 | year = 2005
 | isbn = 0-415-97023-7 }}
| last = Butler
| first = Charles
| authorlink = Charles Butler (author)
| title = Four British Fantasists: Place and Culture in the Children's Fantasies of Penelope Lively, Alan Garner, Diana Wynne Jones, and Susan Cooper
| publisher = Scarecrow Press
| year = 2006
| isbn = 0-8108-5242-X}}




