[[Michael I of Romania]]

CATEGORIES: 1921 births, Living people, Kings of Romania, Romanian people of World War II, House of Romania, World War II political leaders, Honorary Knights Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Recipients of the Order of Michael the Brave, 1st class, Chief Commanders of the Legion of Merit, Recipients of the Order of Victory, Recipients of the Order of the White Eagle (Poland), Recipients of the Order of Carol I, Recipients of the Order of the Crown (Romania), Grand Croix of the Légion d'honneur, Grand Crosses of the Order of the Redeemer, Grand Crosses of the Order of George I, Knights of the Order of the Most Holy Annunciation, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown of Italy, Grand Crosses of the Order of the White Lion, Knights of the Order of St John, Romanian Orthodox Christians, People from Sinaia, Pretenders to the Romanian throne, Romanian princes, Members of the Senate of Romania, Honorary members of the Romanian Academy, Orthodox monarchs, Modern child rulers, Rulers deposed as children, Romanian anti-communists

Michael I ( King Michael I announces the severance of all historical and dynastic ties to the House of Hohenzollern, Adevarul, 11 May 2011
A great-great-grandson of Queen Victoria through both of his parents, and a third cousin of Queen Elizabeth II, he is the last surviving monarch from the Interbellum and the oldest of only three surviving heads of state from World War II,World War II—"60 Years After: Former Romanian Monarch Remembers Decision To Switch Sides", RFE/RL, 6 May 2005Oliver North, "Looking for Leadership", Human Events, 14 April 2006Peter Kurth, "Michael of Romania"Craig S. Smith, "Romania's King Without a Throne Outlives Foes and Setbacks", The New York Times, 27 January 2007 the others being the former King Simeon II of Bulgaria and Tenzin Gyatso, 14th Dalai Lama of Tibet.Simeon Saxecoburggotski, Encyclopædia Britannica

Early life

Michael was born in the Foișor Castle or Peleș Castle, Sinaia, Romania, the son of Carol II of Romania (then Crown Prince of Romania) and Princess Elena of Greece. He was born as the grandson of the then-reigning King Ferdinand of Romania. When Carol II eloped with his mistress Elena "Magda" Lupescu and renounced 'temporarily' his rights to the throne in December 1925, Michael was declared the heir apparent. He succeeded to the throne upon Ferdinand's death in July 1927.

Rule

1930s and the Antonescu era

A regency, which included his uncle, Prince Nicolae, Patriarch Miron Cristea, and the country's Chief Justice (Gheorghe Buzdugan, from October 1929 on Constantin Sărățeanu) functioned on behalf of the 6-year-old Michael when he succeeded Ferdinand in 1927. In 1930, Carol II returned to the country at the invitation of politicians dissatisfied with the Regency, and was proclaimed king by the Parliament, designating Michael as Crown Prince with the title "Grand Voievod of Alba-Iulia". In November 1939, Michael joined the Romanian Senate, as the 1938 Constitution guaranteed him a seat there upon reaching the age of eighteen."Ce citeau românii acum 68 de ani?", Ziua, 29 November 2007. In September 1940, the pro-German anti-Bolshevik régime of Prime Minister Marshal Ion Antonescu staged a coup d'état against Carol II, whom the Marshal claimed to be 'anti-German'. Antonescu suspended the Constitution, dissolved the Parliament, and re-installed the 18-year-old Michael as king by popular acclaim. (Although the Constitution was restored in 1944 and the Romanian Parliament in 1946, Michael did not either subsequently take a formal oath or have his reign approved retroactively by Parliament.) Michael was crownedFundamental Rules of the Royal Family of Romania, The Romanian Royal Family website as retrieved on 8 January 2008 with the Steel Crown and anointed King of Romania by the Orthodox Patriarch of Romania, Nicodim Munteanu, in the Patriarchal Cathedral of Bucharest, on the day of his accession, 6 September 1940. "Comí con Hitler, era estirado y frío. Mussolini parecía más humano"

Turning against Nazi Germany

In 1944, World War II was going badly for the Axis powers, but the military dictator Prime Minister Marshal Ion Antonescu was still in control of Romania. By August 1944, the Soviet conquest of Romania had become inevitable, being expected in a few months."Bulgaria – Bulgarian resistance to the Axis alliance," Encyclopædia Britannica On 23 August 1944, Michael joined the pro-Allied politicians, a number of army officers, and armed communist-led civilians in staging a coup against Antonescu, whereas it was recognized in the late 1970s that King Michael ordered his arrest by the Royal Palace Guard. On the same night, the new Prime Minister, Lt. General Constantin Sănătescu—who was appointed by King Michael—gave custody of Antonescu to the communists (in spite of alleged instructions to the contrary by the King), who delivered him to the Soviets on 1 September.ro, Romanian Armed Forces in the Second World War"23 august – radiografia unei lovituri de Palat", paragraph "Predaţi comuniştilor", Dosare Ultrasecrete, Ziua, 19 August 2006 In a radio broadcast to the Romanian nation and army, Michael issued a cease-fire just as the Red Army was penetrating the Moldavian front, proclaimed Romania's loyalty to the Allies, announced the acceptance of the armistice offered by the United Kingdom, the United States, and the USSR, and declared war on Germany. "The Dictatorship Has Ended and along with It All Oppression" – From The Proclamation to The Nation of King Michael I on The Night of 23 August 1944, Curierul Naţional, 7 August 2004 However, this did not avert a rapid Soviet occupation and capture of about 130,000 Romanian soldiers, who were transported to the Soviet Union where many perished in prison camps. 23, Library of Congress Although the country's alliance with the Nazis was ended, the coup sped the Red Army's advance into Romania. The armistice was signed three weeks later on 12 September 1944, on terms the Soviets virtually dictated. Under the terms of the armistice, Romania recognized its defeat by the USSR and was placed under occupation of the Allied forces with the Soviets, as their representative, in control of media, communication, post, and civil administration behind the front. The coup effectively amounted to a "capitulation","Hitler Resorts To 'Puppets' In Romania", Washington Post, 25 August 1944 an "unconditional""King Proclaims Nation's Surrender and Wish to Help Allies", The New York Times, 24 August 1944 "surrender". It has been suggested that the coup may have shortened World War II by six months, thus saving hundreds of thousands of lives.[ref]
 Constantiniu, Florin, O istorie sinceră a poporului român ("An Honest History of the Romanian People"), Ed. Univers Enciclopedic, Bucureşti, 1997, ISBN 973-9243-07-X[/ref]
At the end of the war, King Michael was awarded the highest degree (Chief Commander) of the Legion of Merit by U.S. President Harry S. Truman. Armata Română în Al Doilea Război Mondial. Romanian Army in World War II. Bucharest: "Meridiane" publishing house, 1995, page 196

Reign under communism

In March 1945, political pressures forced King Michael to appoint a pro-Soviet government headed by Petru Groza.  For the next two-plus years Michael functioned again as little more than a figurehead. Between August 1945 and January 1946, during what was later known as the "royal strike," King Michael tried unsuccessfully to oppose the Groza government by refusing to sign its decrees. In response to Soviet, British, and American pressures, "What was done in Romania between 1945 and 1947 it has also been done since 1989", Ziua, 24 August 2000 King Michael eventually gave up his opposition to the communist government and stopped demanding its resignation.
He did not pardon former Marshal Antonescu, who was sentenced to death "for betrayal of the Romanian people for the benefit of Nazi Germany, for the economic and political subjugation of Romania to Germany, for cooperation with the Iron Guard, for murdering his political opponents, for the mass murder of civilians and crimes against peace". Nor did King Michael manage to save such leaders of the opposition as Iuliu Maniu and the Bratianus,—as saying: "Well, if the King decides not to sign the death warrant, I promise that we will uphold his point of view." Princess Ileana was skeptical: "You know quite well (...) that the King will never of his free will sign such an unconstitutional document. If he does, it will be laid at your door, and before the whole nation your government will bear the blame. Surely you do not wish this additional handicap at this moment!"

Forced abdication

In November 1947 King Michael travelled to London for the wedding of his cousins, Princess Elizabeth (later Queen Elizabeth II) and Prince Philip of Greece and Denmark, an occasion during which he met Princess Anne of Bourbon-Parma (his second cousin once removed), who was to become his wife. According to unconfirmed claims by so-called Romanian 'royalists', King Michael did not want to return home, but certain Americans and Britons present at the wedding encouraged him to do so;"Churchill Advised Mihai to Return", The Washington Post, 31 December 1947 Winston Churchill is said to have counselled Michael to return because "above all things, a King must be courageous." According to his own account,Speech By His Majesty Michael I, King of Romania to the Royal United Services Institute for Defence Studies, London, 26 March 1997 King Michael rejected any offers of asylum and decided to return to Romania, contrary to the confidential, strong advice of the British Ambassador to Romania.
Early on the morning of 30 December 1947, Michael was preparing for a New Year's party at Peleș Castle in Sinaia when Groza summoned him back to Bucharest.  Michael returned to Elisabeta Palace in Bucharest to find it surrounded by troops from the Tudor Vladimirescu Division, an army unit completely loyal to the Communists.  Groza and Communist Party boss Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej were waiting for him, and demanded that he sign a pretyped instrument of abdication.  Unable to call in loyal troops due to his telephone lines allegedly being cut and with either Groza or Gheorghiu-Dej (depending on the source) holding a gun on him, Michael signed the document. "Skipped Diary" ("Jurnal pe sarite"), page 57. of his own abdication. On 3 January 1948, Michael was forced to leave the country, followed"2 Princesses Exiled By Romanian Regime", The New York Times, 13 January 1948 over a week later by Princesses Elisabeth and Ileana, who collaborated so closely with the Soviets they became known as the King's "Red Aunts."W. H. Lawrence,"Aunts of Michael May Be Exiled Too", The New York Times, 7 January 1948 He was the last monarch behind the Iron Curtain to lose his throne.
According to Michael's own account, Groza had threatened him at gun point"The Rescue of the Bulgarian Jews", as retrieved on 21 January 2008, Groza threatened to arrest thousands of people and order a bloodbath unless Michael abdicated.
However, according to the autobiography of the former head of the Soviet intelligence agency NKVD, Major General Pavel Sudoplatov, the Deputy Soviet Foreign Commissar Andrey Vyshinsky personally conducted negotiations with King Michael for his abdication, guaranteeing part of a pension to be paid to Michael in Mexico. Schecter, Leona P. Schecter, Special Tasks: The Memoirs of an Unwanted Witness—A Soviet Spymaster. Little, Brown and Company, Boston, 1994, page 232. ISBN 0-316-77352-2 : "Vyshinsky personally conducted negotiations with King Michael of Romania for his abdication, guaranteeing part of his pension in Mexico." According to a few articles in Jurnalul Naţional, "Communism – King Michael I's Abdication", Jurnalul Naţional, 11 December 2006 Michael's abdication was negotiated with the Communist government, which allowed him to leave the country with the goods he requested and by some of the royal retinue.
According to Albanian Communist leader Enver Hoxha's account of his conversations with the Romanian Communist leaders on the monarch's abdication, it was Gheorgiu-Dej, not Groza, who forced Michael's abdication at gunpoint. He was allowed to leave the country accompanied by some of his entourage and, as confirmed also by the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev recounting Gheorghiu-Dej's confessions,Nikita Sergeevich Khrushchev, Sergeĭ Khrushchev.'" with whatever properties he desired, including gold and rubies.The Titoites. The "Naim Frasheri" publishing house, Tirana, 1982, pages 519–522, 572 Hoxha also wrote that pro-Communist troops surrounded the palace to counter army units who were still loyal to the king.
In March 1948, Michael denounced his abdication as illegal, and contended he was still the rightful king of Romania.  According to Time magazine,"Anne & I", Time, 15 March 1948 he would have done so sooner, but for much of early 1948 he had been negotiating with the Communists over properties he'd left in Romania.
There are reportsMiscellaneous, Evenimentul Zilei, 24 March 2005Miscellaneous, Evenimentul Zilei, 14 March 2005The Lia Roberts hope, Evenimentul Zilei, 19 January 2004 "A Prestigious Donation: Madonna with the Infant by Francesco Raibolini, named "Il Francia"", Online Gallery site as of 8 December 2006 made by John Kreuger, the former husband of King Michael's daughter Princess Irina.
In 2005 Romanian Prime Minister Călin Popescu-Tăriceanu "Testimonials of contemporary history – Peles, January–April 1948. The inventorying of the former royal art works (III)," by Radu Bogdan, Ph.D. in history, Magazin istoric, October 1998
According to Ivor Porter's authorized biography, Andrei Pippidi, "The King and The Country", "Revista 22", 8 March 2006 Michael of Romania: The King and The Country (2005), which quotes Queen-Mother Helen's daily diary, the Romanian royals took out paintings belonging to the Romanian Royal Crown on their November 1947 trip to London to the wedding of the future Queen Elizabeth II; two of these paintings, signed by El Greco, were sold in 1976.
According to recently declassified Foreign Office documents, when he left Romania, the exiled king Michael's only assets amounted to 500,000 Swiss francs."Exiled king 'should become pilot'", BBC News, 2 January 2005 Recently declassified Soviet transcripts of talks between Joseph Stalin and the Romanian Prime-Minister Petru Groza ""NATO was more important militarily, but Europe is politically more than we realize now", states H.M. King Michael", Adevărul, 3 May 2005 that the communist government had allowed him to take into exile any financial assets or valuable goods besides four personal automobiles loaded on two train cars.

Life in exile

In January 1948, Michael began using one of his family's ancestral titles, "Prince of Hohenzollern,"Nikita Sergeevich Khrushchev, Sergeĭ Khrushchev. Memoirs of Nikita Khrushchev: Statesman, 1953–1964, Pennsylvania State University Press, 2007, page 947, ISBN 0-271-02935-8 instead of using the title of "King of Romania." After denouncing his abdication as forced and illegal in March 1948, Michael resumed use of the kingly title.
On 10 June 1948 in Athens, Greece, he married Princess Anne of Bourbon-Parma (born Paris, 18 September 1923), his second cousin once removed. They lived first in England"EX-KING MICHAEL OF RUMANIA BECOMES MARKET GARDENER, 1953", British Pathe, as retrieved on 17 October 2009 and later settled in Switzerland. The Communist Romanian authorities illegally stripped him of his Romanian citizenship in 1948. He became a commercial pilot and worked for an aircraft equipment company. He and his wife have five daughters.

Return and rehabilitation

On 25 December 1990—a year after the revolution which overthrew the Communist dictatorship—Michael, accompanied by several members of the royal family, landed at Otopeni airport and entered Romania for the first time in 43 years.  Using a Danish diplomatic passport, Michael was able to obtain a 24-hour visa. He intended to reach Curtea de Argeş Cathedral, pray at the tombs of his royal ancestors and attend the Christmas religious service. However, on their way to Curtea de Argeș, the King and his companions were stopped by a police filter, taken to the airport and forced to leave the country.
In 1992, the Romanian government allowed Michael to return to Romania for Easter celebrations, where he drew large crowds. In Bucharest over a million people turned out to see him.
In 1997, after Iliescu's defeat by Emil Constantinescu, the Romanian government restored Michael's citizenship and again allowed him to visit the country. He now lives partly in Switzerland at Aubonne and partly in Romania, either at Săvârșin Castle in Arad County or in an official residence in Bucharest—the Elisabeta Palace—voted by the Romanian Parliament by a law concerning arrangements for former heads of state.

Later years

Michael cannot be said to have encouraged monarchist agitation in Romania and royalist parties have made little impact in post-communist Romanian politics. He takes the view that the restoration of the monarchy in Romania can only result from a decision by the Romanian people. "If the people want me to come back, of course, I will come back," he said in 1990. "Romanians have had enough suffering imposed on them to have the right to be consulted on their future." King Michael's belief is that there is still a role for, and value in, the monarchy today: "We are trying to make people understand what the Romanian monarchy was, and what it can still do" (for them)."King Mihai I Turns 85", Ziua, 25 October 2006 According to a 2007 opinion poll conducted at the request of the Romanian Royal House, only 14% of Romanians were in favour of the restoration of the monarchy. "Monarchy: desired by only 16% of the population" ("Monarhia, dorită de doar 16% din populaţie"), Cotidianul, 21 September 2008
Michael has undertaken some quasi-diplomatic roles on behalf of post-communist Romania. In 1997 and 2002 he toured Western Europe, lobbying for Romania's admission into NATO and the European Union, and was received by heads of state and government officials.
In December 2003, allegedly to the "stupefaction of the public opinion in Romania","The King and The Jester," Evenimentul Zilei, 18 December 2003 VIP – Advertising, The "VIP" website as of 22 July 2008 VIP. The daily Evenimentul Zilei subsequently complained that 'such an activity was unsuited to a king and that Michael was wasting away his prestige', with the majority of the political analysts 'considering his gesture as a fresh abdication'.
On 10 May 2007, King Michael received the Prague Society for International Cooperation and Global Panel Foundation's 6th Annual Hanno R. Ellenbogen Citizenship Award, previously awarded to Vladimir Ashkenazy, Madeleine Albright, Václav Havel, Lord Robertson, and Miloš Forman."Hanno R. Ellenbogen Citizenship Award",  On 8 April 2008, King Michael and Patriarch Daniel were elected as honorary members of the Romanian Academy. Patriarch Daniel and King Michael have become members of the Romanian Academy, Antena 3, 19 December 2007
Michael participated in the Victory parade in Moscow in 2010 as the only living Supreme Commander-in-Chief of a European State in the Second World War. The name of Michael I is listed on the memorial in the Grand Kremlin Palace as a recipient of the Order of Victory.
In old age, Michael has enjoyed a strong revival in popularity. On 25 October 2011, on the occasion of his 90th birthday, he delivered a speech before the assembled chambers of the Romanian Parliament.  An opinion poll in January 2012 placed him as the most trusted public figure in Romania, far ahead of the political leaders. Retrieved 31 July 2012. Later, in October 2012, celebrating Michael's 91st birthday, a square in Bucharest was renamed after him. Retrieved 25 October 2012.
In a July 2013 survey, 45% of Romanians had a good or very good opinion of Michael, with 6.5% thinking the opposite. The Royal house also enjoyed similar numbers, with 41% having a good or very good opinion of it, and just 6.5% having a poor or very poor one.41% dintre romani ar vota pentru mentinerea republicii, 27,2% ar alege monarhia – INSCOP. Retrieved 2 August 2013.

Changes in House rules

According to the succession provisions of the Romanian kingdom's last democratically approved monarchical constitution of 1923, upon the death of King Michael without sons, the claim to the Crown devolves once again upon the Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen family (see "Line of succession to the former Romanian throne").
However, on 30 December 2007, on the 60th anniversary of his abdication, King Michael signed the Fundamental Rules of the Royal Family of Romania, "Princess Margarita, heiress to the throne of Romania," Evenimentul Zilei, 30 December 2007 by which he designated Princess Margarita as heiress to the throne with the titles of "Crown Princess of Romania" and "Custodian of the Romanian Crown."
This act is considered to be null and void according to some commentators, during the republican form of government and in the absence of approval by the Parliament. "The Actor Duda in The Role of A Lifetime: Prince Consort of Romania," Cotidianul, 3 January 2008 On the same occasion, Michael also asked the Romanian Parliament that, should it consider restoring the monarchy, it should also abolish the salic law of succession.
On 10 May 2011, on a background of lawsuits in Germany brought against his family by his German relatives regarding the former name Hohenzollern-Veringen of his son in law, Radu, and of fears The history of the conflicts between the Royal House of Romania and the Princely House of Hohenzollern, Adevarul, 11 May 2011

Personality and personal interests

Michael has had a reputation for staying silent. He once said to his grandmother, "I have learned not to say what I feel, and to smile at those I most hate."
At age 16, Michael, at that time crown prince, hit a bicyclist while driving a car according to the official Censorship Records, confirmed by the memoirs of the former prime minister Constantin Argetoianu, an accident that apparently resulted in the death of the bicyclist, censored in the press. "King Michael's accident, the secret buried for 75 years", "7 Est" daily, 14 January 2013
Michael was head of the Romanian Boy Scouts in the 1930s. He is passionate about cars, "King Michael air pilot",  website, accessed 27 March 2013 having worked as a commercial flight pilot"Ex-King Michael, in Switzerland where he works for an American aircraft company", Time Life Pictures/Getty Images, 1 January 1957 during his exile.

Ancestry

Family

Michael and Anne have five daughters:

Titles and styles

Honours

Dynastic orders

Romanian honours

Foreign honours and decorations

Other awards








