[[Say No More (Clay Walker album)]]

CATEGORIES: 2001 albums, Giant Records (Warner) albums, Clay Walker albums

Say No More is country music singer Clay Walker's sixth album. It was released March 27, 2001, on Giant Records.  The album reached #129 on the Billboard album charts. The album's two singles were its title track and "If You Ever Feel Like Loving Me Again", both of which were minor Top 40 hits on the Hot Country Songs charts. In addition to these singles, the album features a cover of Ritchie Valens' "La Bamba".

Background

During an interview, Walker stated he had a dream when he recorded Say No More which was "Selling dreams, that's what I want my music to do." He also stated that the album is "Riskier, yet potentially more fulfilling" then some of his other albums. I worked four years learning enough Spanish because I wanted it to be so correct that when a Latino hears it, he doesn't go, 'There's a gringo.'"Burch, Cathalena E. The Arizona Daily Star Walker spices repertoire with salsa (20 April 2001).
In an interview with the Arizona Daily Star Walker said, "There was a serious breakdown and a huge lack of effort to promote this album. Really, this project has gotten lost. It's kind of heartbreaking as an artist, but it's one of those lumps you take on the chin. I have a lot of ambition and a lot of heart and a lot of things to prove to myself, I'm not happy with the level we're at. I feel like we could be higher. . . . It's driven me to be a better artist."Burch, Cathalena E. Arizona Daily Star For country's Clay Walker, album setback is motivator (22 February 2002)
While promoting "A Few Questions", Walker told the Daily News, "I was on Giant my whole career. The last record we did the label folded two weeks after it was released. That stung me, but I'm proud of the music we made and that's the only way I'll look back."Daily News Main Stage - Clay Walker (August 12, 2004) When Giant Records closed in April 2001, president of Warner Bros. Records Jim Ed Norman said, "Our first responsibility is to deal with artists who have records out and focus on them -- Clay, the Wilkinsons and Blake Shelton. We'll jump in, full steam, with those people to determine how we assume responsibility for marketing and promoting their work."Morris, Edward. CMT Giant Records Closes; Artists Will Go to Warner Bros. (April 13, 2001)

Track listing

Critical reception

Michael Paoletta and Ray Waddell of Billboard gave the album a positive review, writing "Say No More is a sonically adventurous album on which Walker offers more pop tendencies than usual, without sacrificing his country pedigree. This is a diverse package that effectively demonstrates Walker's versatility and maturity." Paoletta, Michael, and Ray Waddell. "ALBUMS: COUNTRY." Billboard 113.13 (2001): 20. Academic Search Complete. EBSCO. Web. 14 Apr. 2011.  Mario Tarradell of The Dallas Morning News also gave it a positive rating, calling the album the "most complete and accomplished outing since his solid, self-titled 1993 debut." Tarradell also wrote "The record offers a convincing batch of tunes that showcase his pliable voice, his country and swing roots and his penchant for melody-heavy commercial ballads. He's frequently traded Texas grit for Nashville polish but with Say No More he's combined both to create classy, commercial country.Tarradell, Mario 2001-03-32 The Dallas Morning News
Carole L. Philipps of The Cincinnati Post wrote "Clay Walker, the country boy next door, has put together as pretty a package as has been heard recently from Nashville. He croons his way through elegant love songs, down-home country tunes, juke joint anthems and punctuates the 11-song effort with a stunning cover of the late Richie Valens hit, "La Bamba," sung in well-studied Spanish."Philipps, Carole L. The Cincinnati Post Clay Walker croons country (29 March 2001). Michael D. Clark of the Houston Chronicle gave the album a B rating and wrote "The good news for Walker fans is that the country-pop album formula that has stoked his career hasn't been abandoned. He simply has turned it inside out. Instead of throwing a weeper like This Woman and This Man or Hypnotize the Moon in along with his rodeo swagger, Say No More is built on gut kicks. Overall, though, Say No More finds a light-footed hip-swiveler with a heavy heart and a tear in his eye. Houston Chronicle Sad songs say so much / Country crooner pours out his heart on latest album (8 April 2001).
Brian Mansfield of USA Today gave the album two stars and said, "For Clay Walker, there's a winding road, or some other equally cliched phrase, in every song -- whether it's a deep ocean, a fire burning in his soul, or a woman who takes his breath away. Track after track, the smooth-singing Texan piles it on -- there's an ordinary song about an "unordinary" girl and a slick song about being rough around the edges. That these trite romantic blandishments or the out-of-nowhere cover of La Bamba remain at all listenable speaks volumes for the appealing earnestness of Walker's voice".Mansfield, Brian USA Today Critics spin through year's albums ; Loveless, Crowell are 2 of country music's best; '3' teens are 3 too many (27 December 2001)
BPI Entertainment News Wire gave the album a positive review, writing, "Say No More is a sonically adventurous album on which Walker offers more pop tendencies than usual, without sacrificing his country pedigree. He sings with passion throughout, especially on piano-based ballads like Real the soulful You Deliver Me, and the conversational Could I Ask You Not to Dance. This is a diverse package that effectively demonstrates Walker's versatility and maturity."BPI Entertainment News Wire Album Reviews (26 March 2001) Maria Konicki Dinoia of AllMusic described the album by writing "Say No More is a fine album from an artist who has proved his staying power time and time again." Jerry Sharpe of the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette gave the album a four star rating and wrote, "All told, it's a nice mixture masterfully performed. Consider this a "don't miss" disc for Walker fans."Sharpe, Jerry Pittsburgh Post-Gazette Recordings (15 April 2001) Mike Clark of Country Standard Time gave the album a negative review by writing, "Neither pop nor country, this is easily Walker's least satisfying CD. "Say No More" indeed."Clark, Mike Country Standard Time Clay Walker Say No More
Al Levine of the The Atlanta Constitution gave the album a B rating and wrote, "On this surprising package, Walker not only displays strong pipes, but the song selection is a revelation. He pulls off a strong performance in the hymn "You Deliver Me." "If You Ever Feel Like Lovin' Me Again," is as good as anything semisweet coming out of Nashville these days. "Rough Around the Edges" captures the spirit of every unpolished soul still sorting out life's complexities. Walker is huge in Texas, and he plays to his crowd with "Texas Swing" (you can almost hear George Strait) and "La Bamba," which will never replace the original but is appealing anyway." Levine, Al The Atlanta Constitution OTHER NEW RELEASES Feed Your Machines: WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT NEW RELEASES --- AND WHAT'S ON THE WEB (12 July 2001)  Jolene Downs of About. There isn't a bad song on here. There are traditional songs, powerful ballads, and a little western swing. Something for everyone." Ben Scott of The Oklahoman gave the album a positive review. Scott praised Walker's cover of "La Bamba" by writing "The country crooner gives an impressive delivery in Spanish and tossed in a couple of nice instrumental solos."Scott, Ben The Oklahoman CD Reviews (April 13, 2001) DJ Johnny Sixpack of Slipcue gave the album a negative review and wrote, ""Easy To Hold" and "Texas Swing" are the only tracks on here worth paying attention to. Everything else is way too wimpy and popped-out. A big, big disappointment."Sixpack, Johnny Slipcue Clay Walker "Say No More" (Warner-Nashville, 2001 Editors at The Ottawa Citizen gave the album a rating of three stars and wrote, "Walker's voice, like many of his contemporaries', is a little generic and self-conscious for my taste, and he too often gravitates toward radio-happy numbers whose slickness almost conceals their blandness. And while love may be a many-splendored thing, relationship songs do wear thin. Still, the guy works damn hard at what he does, and the sweat and sincerity give his albums a tough core that's refreshing."Ben Wener, Peter Hum, Richard Todd, Mary Lamey and Patrick, LangstonThe Ottawa Citizen Recordings (April 7, 2001)

Personnel

As listed in liner notes.

Chart performance

Weekly charts




