[[Lacey Schwimmer]]

CATEGORIES: So You Think You Can Dance (United States) contestants, 1988 births, American female dancers, American ballroom dancers, American Latter Day Saints, Living people, Participants in American reality television series, People from Redlands, California

Lacey Schwimmer  is an American competitive ballroom dancer, singer, and the winner of multiple youth championships. She is best known as the fourth place finalist of the third season of So You Think You Can Dance. She is the daughter of noted dancer Buddy Schwimmer, as well as the cousin of Heidi Groskreutz, who placed fourth on the second season of So You Think You Can Dance and younger sister of Benji Schwimmer, the winner of the show's second season. She participated in the seventh season of Dancing with the Stars as a professional dancer paired with Lance Bass of 'N Sync, in the eighth season of the show paired with Jackass star Steve-O and in the ninth season paired with actor and Iron Chef America host Mark Dacascos. Schwimmer returned to Dancing with the Stars for its eleventh season and she was partnered with Disney Channel star, Kyle Massey and in the 12th season, paired with radio host Mike Catherwood. In the thirteenth season, she was paired with transgender activist Chaz Bono. Schwimmer did not return for season 14 of ''Dancing With The Stars'.Exclusive: Why Lacey Schwimmer left Dancing with the Stars
Schwimmer competes in West Coast Swing and International Latin dance styles. She's made television appearances on The Ellen DeGeneres Show, Good Morning America, and Jimmy Kimmel Live!. In 2008 she danced alongside Adam Sandler at the MTV Movie Awards 2008. She then appeared in the video of the song Rainbow, by Elisa"Elisa – Rainbow" Music Video on YouTube with singer songwriter Vinnie Ferra.
She is a part of the iHollywood Dance faculty teaching master classes in the United States and Norway. Schwimmer also has her own line of tube socks as well as a dance wear line designed by Sugar and Bruno Dancewear collection. "Lacey Schwimmer Styles Her Own Line", "Movmnt Magazine'', May 5, 2008
Schwimmer's debut single, "Love Soundz", was released June 21, 2011.com/2011/06/16/world-premiere-dwts-pro-lacey-schwimmer-drops-debut-single-love-soundz-audio/

Early life

Lacey Schwimmer grew up in a Mormon (The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints) household in Redlands, California. Her parents are Laurie Kauffman and notable West Coast Swing dancer Buddy Schwimmer. She is the younger sister of Benji Schwimmer, winner of the second season of So You Think You Can Dance. She is not related to actor David Schwimmer.
Schwimmer has been training and dancing competitively since a young age.  At age seven, she and partner Brian Cordoba danced in the 1995 U.S. Open Swing Dance Championships.com (1995)  At age ten, she and partner Blace Thompson placed 1st in the Young America Division at the 1998 U.S. Open Swing Dance Championships.com (1998) Schwimmer went on to have annual top rankings at the U.S. Open Swing Dance Championships and has won numerous U.S. titles.

Early career

In January 2003, Schwimmer was paired with Jared Murillo, and the two began competing at a junior level. They were upgraded to the youth level in August 2003 and participated in dozens of competitions. They received the U.S. title in the Young Adult Division of the U.S. Open Swing Dance Championships.2004  StreetSwing.DancesPortInfo.
Schwimmer and Murillo have a cameo appearance in The Suite Life of Zack & Cody in the episode "Loosely Ballroom". She is in the background of the scene during which a ballroom competition takes place.

''So You Think You Can Dance

Schwimmer entered the preliminary auditions for So You Think You Can Dance's third season partnered by her brother, Benji Schwimmer, following his win the previous season.
After her selection to the top 20 finalists, Schwimmer was paired with contemporary/hip hop dancer, Kameron Bink. The two danced together for five weeks successfully, with judges praising their chemistry and the ease with which they danced together; they were the only couple never in danger of elimination. As per the show's competitive structure at the time, couples were assigned new partners each week after week five; Schwimmer subsequently partnered with Danny Tidwell, Neil Haskell and Pasha Kovalev before being named to the season's Top 4 Finalist.
Historically, Lacey Schwimmer is among a group of ten dancers to have advanced through their respective seasons to the finales without finishing a single episode in jeopardy of elimination (others so designated include Donyelle Jones, Katee Shean, Jakob Karr, Ashleigh Di Lello, Evan Kasprzak, Kent Boyd, Marko Germar, and champions of seasons 2, 4, and 8 respectively, Benji Schwimmer, Joshua Allen, and Melanie Moore).
Schwimmer joined her fellow season 3 contestants in the So You Think You Can Dance's 2007 dance tour, which began in Albany, New York.Fox Broadcasting Company: So You Think You Can Dance
Lacey assisted her brother Benji in choreographing a West Coast Swing routine for Katee Shean and Joshua Allen during the show's fourth season.
''Note: Results highlighted in red indicate that contestants placed in the bottom dancers or couples, but may not have necessarily been eliminated.''

Later career

Dancing with the Stars

On the morning of August 25, 2008 on Good Morning America Schwimmer was announced as one of the professional dancers on season seven of Dancing with the Stars and was partnered with Lance Bass. TV Guide reported that Schwimmer had endometriosis but was still able to continue on the show as her condition did not require surgery. October 30, 2008. She returned for seasons 8, 9, 11, 12 and 13. During this time, she and professional dancers, Chelsie Hightower and Dmitry Chaplin, are the only former participants from So You Think You Can Dance to perform as regulars on DWTS. However, other SYTYCD alumnis such as Anya Garnis, Iveta Lukosiute, Ryan DiLello and Pasha Kovalev have often done special performances performed during the results show.
On November 25, 2008, Schwimmer and her celebrity partner, Lance Bass, finished in 3rd place. Lacey was on the last DWTS tour with her partner Lance Bass. The tour ended on February 8, 2009. Lacey returned for season eight of DWTS, and she was partnered with reality television star Steve-O. On August 24, 2009 it was announced on GMA that Schwimmer would be partnering Mark Dacascos for season nine  Schwimmer was not paired with a celebrity partner in season ten, but was present in a few results show dances.
In season 11 Schwimmer was partnered with Disney Channel star Kyle Massey. They made it to the finale and were the runners-up to Jennifer Grey and Derek Hough. For season 12, Lacey was partnered with radio personality Mike Catherwood. They were eliminated first on March 29, 2011. For season 13, Schwimmer was partnered with Chaz Bono. They were eliminated on October 25, 2011.

With Lance Bass

Average:24.5

With Steve-O

Average:15.8

With Mark Dacascos

Average:22.1

With Kyle Massey

Average:24.9

With Mike Catherwood

Average:15.0                                                                                                                                                                    

With Chaz Bono

Average:18.8                                                                                                                                                                  

Music career

Schwimmer was featured as a singer on the 2010 single "Red Cup (I Fly Solo)" by Cash Cash.
In 2012, Schwimmer was featured as a singer on the It Boys! single "Burning Up".

Awards






