[[Bedford High School (Pennsylvania)]]

CATEGORIES: High schools in Cumberland, MD-WV-PA, Public high schools in Pennsylvania, Schools in Bedford County, Pennsylvania

Bedford Senior High School is a small public high school located in Bedford, Pennsylvania. It is part of the Bedford Area School District.

Graduation rate

In 2011, the graduation rate was 5%. In 2010, the Pennsylvania Department of Education issued a new, 4 year cohort graduation rate. Bedford Area High School's rate was 50% for 2010.
According to traditional graduation rate calculations:

Academics

In 2011, Bedford Senior High School improved to achieving AYP status. In 2010 the school is in Warning status for AYP due to a 23% decline in Reading on grade level, among low family income students.

Dual enrollment

The high schools offer a Dual Enrollment program. This state program permits high school students to take courses, at local higher education institutions, to earn college credits. Students remain enrolled at their high school. The courses count towards high school graduation requirements and towards earning a college degree. The students continue to have full access to activities and programs at their high school. The college credits are offered at a deeply discounted rate. The state offers a small grant to assist students in costs for tuition, fees and books. Under the Pennsylvania Transfer and Articulation Agreement, many Pennsylvania colleges and universities accept these credits for students who transfer to their institutions. site accessed March 2010. 
For the 2009–10 funding year, the school district received a state grant of $8,786 for the program. August 2009

Graduation Requirements

By law, all Pennsylvania secondary school students must complete a project as a part of their eligibility to graduate from high school. The type of project, its rigor and its expectations are set by the individual school district.
By Pennsylvania School Board regulations,beginning with the graduating class of 2016, students must demonstrate successful completion of secondary level course work in Algebra I, Biology, English Composition, and Literature for which the Keystone Exams serve as the final course exams. Students' Keystone Exam scores shall count for at least one-third of the final course grade.

Courses

Students at BHS have the following coursework  available to them: 

Teacher qualifications

In 2011, the administration reported that 4 teachers were Non‐Highly Qualified Teachers as set by No Child Left Behind. Six teachers had emergency certification.Pennsylvania Department of Education, Professional Qualifications of Teachers - Bedford Senior High School, 2011

Extracurriculars

The district offers a variety of clubs, activities and sports.
By Pennsylvania law, all K-12 students in the district, including those who attend a private nonpublic school, cyber charter school, charter school and those homeschooled, are eligible to participate in the extracurricular programs including all athletics. They must meet the same eligibility rules as the students enrolled in the district's schools.Home-Schooled, Charter School Children Can Participate in School District Extracurricular Activities, Pennsylvania Office of the Governor Press Release, November 10, 2005

Athletics

Bedford High School is a member of the Pennsylvania Interscholastic Athletic Association (District V), and plays in the Laurel Highlands Athletic Conference.






