[[Mary Euphrasia Pelletier]]

CATEGORIES: 1796 births, 1868 deaths, People from Vendée, French Roman Catholic saints, 19th-century Christian female saints

Saint Mary Euphrasia Pelletier (Noirmoutier-en-l'Île, July 31, 1796 – Angers, April 29, 1868), born Rose Virginie Pelletier, was a French Roman Catholic nun, best known as the foundress of the Congregation of Our Lady of Charity of the Good Shepherd.
She was born on an island off the coast of France where her parents had been exiled by the French Revolutionaries. She was christened Rose Virginie Pelletier and at the age of eighteen joined the Order of Our Lady of Charity who cared for girls and women in difficulty. Some of the girls were abandoned by their families or orphaned, some had turned to prostitution in order to survive. The Sisters of Our Lady of Charity provided shelter, food, vocational training and an opportunity for these girls and women to turn their lives around. Mother Mary Euphrasia formed the Congregation of Our Lady of Charity of the Good Shepherd to expand this apostolate to wherever needed.
She died in Angers, France, in 1868 and was canonized by Pope Pius XII in 1940. Her feast day is 24 April. 

Biography

She was born on Noirmoutier a small island off the northwest coast of France, on 31 July 1796, and received in baptism the name of Rose Virginie."Saint Euphrasia Biography", Saint Euphrasia Catholic Church, Granada Hills, CA She was the 8th child of Dr Julian and Anne Pelletier. "St Mary Euphrasia Pelletier – Foundress", Good Shepherd Sisters, Australia and New Zealand Her father died when she was ten years old. In 1810 her mother placed Rose Virginie in a boarding school in Tours. Her mother died in 1813; Rose Virginie did not learn of her mother's death until after the funeral.  
Near the boarding school was the convent of the Order of Our Lady of Charity of the Refuge, a religious Congregation founded by Saint John Eudes to provide care and protection for women and girls who were homeless and at risk of exploitation. Despite her guardian's reservations Rose Virginie was allowed to join the sisters provided that she not make her vows before she turned 21. She made her profession in 1816, taking the name of Mary of Saint Euphrasia. The sisters of the community had been dispersed at one point during the revolution; the majority had been imprisoned. Rose Virginie joined what was a community of elderly weary sisters.O'Shea, Sr. Norma, A Brief Sketch of the Life of Mary Euphrasia, Good Shepherd Sisters, Waterford, Ireland A short time after her profession, she became first mistress of the penitents, and about eight years later was made superioress of the house of Tours. Butler's lives of the saints, Volume 4 by Alban Butler, Paul Burns 1999 ISBN 0-86012-253-0 page 175 She founded a community for women who wanted to have a contemplative life-style and would support, by their ministry of prayer, the different works of the Congregation.

Sisters of the Good Shepherd

The city of Angers asked that Sister Mary Euphrasia establish a Convent of Refuge there. She established a house in an old factory and called it "Bon Pasteur" (Good Shepherd). In 1831 she was appointed as Mother Superior of the House in Angers. The congregation in Tours did not wish to expand to Angers, nor did the house in Nantes. John Eudes had established his houses as separate and autonomous. Mother Mary Euphrasia came to believe that if the work was to grow, that each house should be under the direction of a Generalate. In April 1835, Pope Gregory XVI granted approval of the Mother-House at Angers for the institute known as Congregation of Our Lady of Charity of the Good Shepherd of Angers. Convents that developed for Angers would be part of the institute while those houses that did not attach themselves to the General Administration would remain Refuges. The development of the Generalate made possible the sending of the sisters to wherever they were needed. The institute is directly subject to the Holy See; Cardinal Odescalchi was its first cardinal-protector.
For a long time, Mother Mary Euphrasia Pelletier had to deal with the opposition of the Bishop of Angers, who wished to exercise the authority of Superior General, although the constitutions of the Order did not provide for this. She was accused of ambition, of innovation, and of disobedience. Sometimes she was put in the position of addressing conflicting instructions from Rome and the bishop. Although she had the support of Rome, the local clergy tended to keep their distance from someone who had incurred the bishop's displeasure. According to Sister Norma O'Shea, the bishop's opposition, coupled with the deaths of a number of sisters and longtime supporters, made Sister Mary Euphrasia's last years very lonely.
Mother Mary Euphrasia Pelletier devoted herself to the work entrusted to her. By 1868, she was Superior General of 3,000 religious, in 110 convents, in sixteen provinces. She died of cancer on April 24, 1868. She is buried on the property of the Motherhouse of the Sisters of the Good Shepherd in Angers, France."Sister Mary Euphrasia", Good Shepherd of North America 
By the time of her death in 1868, she had established 110 convents in 35 countries, including North America.Sisters of the Good Shepherd, North America

Canonisation

On 11 December 1897, Pope Leo XIII declared her "Venerable." She was beatified on 30 April 1933 and canonised on
2 May 1940 by Pope Pius XII."St. Mary Euphrasia Pelletier", Good Shepherd Sisters, Philippine Province

Quotations of Saint Mary Euphrasia Pelletier

Legacy

Approximately 5500 Sisters of the Good Shepherd, active and contemplative, serve in 72 countries.








