[[Millvina Dean]]

CATEGORIES: 1912 births, 2009 deaths, British people of World War II, British cartographers, Deaths from pneumonia, Infectious disease deaths in England, People from East Devon (district), People from New Forest (district), People from Southampton, RMS Titanic's crew and passengers, People educated at The Gregg School, RMS Titanic survivors

Elizabeth Gladys Millvina Dean (2 February 1912 – 31 May 2009) was a British civil servant and cartographer, best known for being the last remaining survivor of the sinking of the RMS Titanic, which occurred on 15 April 1912. Retrieved 31 March 2012 At 2 months old, she was also the youngest passenger aboard.

Family

Millvina Dean was born in Branscombe, England, to Bertram Frank Dean (1886-1912) and Georgette Eva Light (1879-1975). She had a brother, Bertram Vere Dean, born 21 May 1910. Millvina Dean never married and had no children. Dean's father died on the Titanic; her mother died on 16 September 1975, aged 96; and her brother Bertram Vere died, age 81, on 14 April 1992, the eightieth anniversary of the sinking.

Titanic voyage

Millvina Dean's parents decided to leave England and emigrate to Wichita, Kansas, where her father had family and his cousin owned a tobacco shop that her father was going to co-own. Her father, however, did not survive, and his body, if recovered, was never identified.

Return to England

At first, Dean's mother wanted to continue on to Kansas to fulfill her husband's wish of a new life in the United States. However, after losing her husband and being left with two small children for whom to care, they returned to England aboard the RMS Adriatic. While aboard the ship, Dean attracted considerable attention. An article in the Daily Mirror dated 12 May 1912 described the ordeal:


Education and careers

Millvina and Bertram Dean were raised mostly on pension funds and educated in Southampton schools, including The Gregg School. It was not until she was eight years old, and her mother was planning to marry again, that Dean was told she had been a passenger on the Titanic.
Dean worked for the British government during the Second World War and later as a purchaser for a local engineering firm. Other careers she held were as a cartographer, a secretary, and an assistant to a tobacconist.

Later years

It was not until Millvina was in her seventies that she became involved in Titanic-related events. Over the years, she participated in numerous conventions, exhibitions, documentaries, television and radio interviews, and personal correspondence. In 1998, Millvina travelled to the United States to participate in a Titanic convention in Springfield, Massachusetts, and another in 1999 in Montreal. She had also been scheduled to appear at a commemoration of the Titanic She also appeared in the History special Titanic's Final Moments: Missing Pieces.
In October 2007, she became the last Titanic survivor following the death of Barbara West Dainton, who died at the age of 96 in England.

Doctor Who

In December 2007, Dean criticized the BBC and its television program Doctor Who for including an episode with a starship "cruise liner" called the Titanic similar in appearance to the historical liner. Speaking from her nursing home, she said: "The Titanic was a tragedy which tore so many families apart. I lost my father and he lies on that wreck. I think it is disrespectful to make entertainment of such a tragedy." A spokeswoman for the show said: "No offence was intended. 'Voyage of the Damned' is set on a spaceship called The Titanic and not a boat."

Ill health and death

In April 2008, Millvina had accepted an invitation to speak in Southampton at an event commemorating the 96th anniversary of the ship's sinking, but ill health resulting from a respiratory infection forced her to cancel.
In December 2008, at the age of 96, Millvina was forced to sell several of her family's possessions to pay for her private medical care following a broken hip. These possessions included a letter sent to her mother from the Titanic Relief Fund, and a suitcase given to her and her mother in New York following the ship's sinking. Their sale raised approximately £32,000. In February 2009, she announced that she would be selling several more items to pay for her increasing medical costs which she said exceeded £3,000 a month.
The 97-year-old Millvina died of pneumonia on the morning of 31 May 2009, 97 years and seven weeks after the Titanic sailed, at a care home in Ashurst, Hampshire.
Millvina was cremated and on 24 October 2009, her ashes were scattered from a launch at the docks in Southampton where the Titanic set sail.

The Millvina Fund

In response to the escalating cost of Millvina's healthcare, The Millvina Fund was set up in April 2009 by the Belfast, British and International Titanic Societies with the exclusive aim of taking care of Dean's nursing home bills. The Fund was given a boost by the Irish author and campaigning journalist, Don Mullan, at the opening of his worldwide Nokia photographic exhibition, "A Thousand Reasons for Living", (featuring a portrait of Millvina Dean) in Dublin on 22 April 2009. He made the edition available at €500 each and then challenged the director and stars of the film Titanic; James Cameron, Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, singer Celine Dion, and the corporations Sony Music, 20th Century Fox and Paramount Pictures to match him euro-for-euro to support Dean with her bills. DiCaprio and Winslet led the way with a joint contribution of US $20,000. Cameron and Dion donated US $10,000 each.



Notes

 
 






