[[Myra McQueen]]

CATEGORIES: Hollyoaks characters, Fictional characters introduced in 2006, McQueen family

Myra McQueen is a fictional character from the British Channel 4 soap opera Hollyoaks, played by Nicole Barber-Lane. She made her debut screen appearance during the episode broadcast on 19 June 2006 and was introduced by series producer Bryan Kirkwood as part of the McQueen family. On 1 August 2013, it was announced that Barber-Lane had quit the serial and Myra made her on-screen departure during the episode broadcast on 5 September 2013. The character was shot by Dr. Browning, but survived and then emigrated so he thought she was dead. On 31 January 2014, Myra made a brief return to the show following the death of Jim McGinn.digitalspy.co.html

Casting and creation

Hollyoaks' executive producer, Lucy Allan said that Myra is not central to storylines as she is not central to the show. She explained that "Myra plays a very important role as the mother in the McQueen household" but that she would find it "abnormal" to run a storyline from Myra's perspective.

Character development

Characterisation

On Myra, a journalist from Hollyoaks' official website said: "Myra McQueen, the mummy bear of Hollyoaks. This formidable matriarch of the village's most fearsome tribe keeps her troublesome brood in line with a mixture of love, understanding and bacon sarnies – all three of which have been in great demand during the McQueens dramatic tenure ... Fiercely protective of her family, Myra's often has to choose between them. ... when push comes to shove Myra will always put her family first".
The character has had numerous failed relationships in her life with the fathers of her children. Barber-Lane described Myra's relationships stating: "She's always fallen for the bad guy, the ones that aren't good for her. They're the ones who give her a challenge along with a bit of fun and excitement. She always believes in true love, though. That's why she constantly gets hurt".

Niall's revenge

Executive producer Bryan Kirkwood announced that a "tall stranger", Niall Rafferty (Barry Sloane), would soon join the serial and "the McQueen family take him into their bosom – Myra's to be precise". He explained that the character is Myra's son who she was forced to give up when she was young. Kirkwood added that the storyline would be "the big storyline" of the year as Niall "wreaks revenge" on the family. During the storyline Myra's children begin to disappear making her "panic" upon the realisation. Barber-Lane told Kris Green of entertainment website Digital Spy that Myra no longer wants to look for her son as "she thinks that she's a bad omen. All the bad things that have happened to her, she believes, happened because she gave her son away. However, by trying to find her son, she's being punished in different ways with her other kids. The Catholic guilt kicks in and she feels that it's all her fault. She decides that if she tries to find her son, she'll take him away from the white picket fence and the lovely life that she's created for him in her head. As far as she's concerned, she thinks that he's in a beautiful home, with a lovely mum and dad that are probably lawyers or doctors. That's why she really believes that she did the right thing giving him up when she was young".
Niall lures Myra to the church she left Niall at when she abandoned him at. Niall "stuns" Myra by grabbing her and showing her the step she abandoned him on as a baby. Myra is "completely confused" by Niall's actions but "it slowly starts to dawn on her, especially when she sees the rest of her family in the church". Barber-Lane explained that Niall decides to play one last game with the family and tells that he is "going to wipe them out". Niall decides that he will ask Myra questions and for every one of his questions that Myra answers correctly she can choose one of her children to live. Barber-Lane added that it is "really traumatic" experience for Myra. Myra answers all but two questions correctly and must choose out of her six children which two can live. Myra is told that if she fails to make a decision all of her children will die. Barber-Lane commented that for "a mother, that's such a ridiculously difficult decision. She does choose, though - that's something that comes back to haunt her". Myra chooses Jacqui and Carmel (Gemma Merna) to die, when John-Paul (James Sutton) and Mercedes (Jennifer Metcalfe) volunteer to die. The church exploded and Tina (Leah Hackett) is killed. Barber-Lane explained that Myra "can't forgive herself" for choosing Jacqui and Carmel to die. She added that the family dynamics changed when Myra made this choice. Barber-Lane said that Jacqui is less responsive to Myra and she became stronger than Myra who is "constantly riddled with guilt". She concluded that Myra now lets her children "get away with a lot more things than they usually would" because of her guilt.

Family

On her time on the serial Myra has often become involved in her family member's storylines. In one storyline Bart McQueen (Johnny Clarke) steals money from Myra. Bart lies about stealing the money when he is accused by Jacqui. This causes tensions between Jacqui and Myra who has "had enough of Jacqui muscling in". On her characters reasons for not believing Jacqui, Barber-Lane explained that "When Myra stopped believing Jacqui, I think it was also partly because Jacqui had hid all the stuff about Theresa (Jorgie Porter) killing Calvin (Ricky Whittle) and it was Myra's way of saying, 'Listen - this is my house, my rules'. Maybe she was wrong, but Bart's 15 so she felt that she couldn't kick him out as he had nowhere else to go, and she just thought that Jacqui should behave herself!" Jacqui is later raped by Gilly Roach (Anthony Quinlan). Barber-Lane explained that there is a "part of Myra that thought, 'You'd never let that happen - how have you let that happen? Have you just changed your mind afterwards?" Mercedes lies she is pregnant to cover up her affair with Carl Costello (Paul Opacic), the father of her fiancé Riley Costello (Rob Norbury). Myra discovers her lies and believes that Mercedes should not tell the truth as Mercedes has "landed on her feet" with Riley. Barber-Lane told Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy that Myra believes Riley will benefit the McQueen family financially and take them out of the poverty they are in. Myra is getting "carried away" with excitement and enthusiasm over how her life could change due to Riley. She said that the most important thing for Myra is what is important for her daughters although "sometimes she may forget that for a moment, but she's always there for her kids".

Storylines

Myra starts a casual relationship with Leo Valentine (Brian Bovell), she then discovers she has caught pubic lice from him. Tina and Russ Owen (Stuart Manning) both catch them after sharing her towel. This causes issues with their respective partners Dom Reilly (John Pickard) and Mercedes until Myra admits she introduced them. Myra spends New Year's Eve 2007 with Leo, they become drunk and engage in sexual activity. Leo's ex-girlfriend, Valerie Holden (Jacqueline Leonard/Samantha Giles) becomes jealous and attempts to ruin their romance. Myra's son, Niall arrives in the village. She gave him up at birth and he lies about his identity. It soon becomes apparent that he is after revenge on the McQueens. Myra disapproves of Tina acting as a surrogate for Jacqui and Tony Hutchinson (Nick Pickard). She begs her not to make the same mistake she made in giving her child away. Niall causes trouble for Myra's family by reporting Myra for benefit fraud, injecting Myra's daughter, Michaela (Hollie-Jay Bowes), with heroin, pushing Tina down the stairs and attacking Myra's mother, Nana McQueen (Diane Langton).
Myra makes a friend in priest Kieron Hobbs (Jake Hendriks), who comes to stay with her. They becomes good friends and Myra is hurt to discover Kieron has a secret relationship with her son, John-Paul McQueen. She asks Kieron to track down Matthew, the son she gave up. Kieron manages to find his adoptive mother and is shocked to learn it is Niall. When he confronts Niall, he drugs him and kills him to stop him from revealing his identity. Niall then kidnaps all of the McQueens and takes them to the church he was abandoned at. He lures Myra to the church and reveals his the truth. He holds them hostage and asks Myra six questions. For each correct answer she gets to choose a child to live. After answering all but two wrong, she is forced to choose daughters Jacqui and Carmel to die while John-Paul and Mercedes volunteer. When help arrives Niall detonates explosives he has rigged the church with. Jacqui refuses to help Myra out of the rubble. Niall saves her after she tells him that she always loved and thought about him. Myra is devastated to discover Tina has died in the explosion and Niall commits suicide. Jacqui cannot forgive her for her actions, but Carmel does.
Myra's niece, Theresa moves in with her. She then develops an unwelcome crush on Mike Barnes (Tony Hirst) and later sleeps with Archie Carpenter (Stephen Beard). When her sister Kathleen McQueen (Alison Burrows) arrives comes to see Theresa, Myra lets her stay for Theresa's sake. Kathleen uses Tina's old credit cards for money, when Myra finds out she forces Theresa to choose between her mum and relatives, Theresa chooses her relatives. Theresa shoots Calvin dead. The rest of the family keep it a secret from Myra, when she eventually discovers the truth she is hurt that no one told her. Myra's cousin Victor agrees to let his son Bart live with Myra, after his wife dies. Myra saves the life of Alistair Longford (Terence Harvey), a rich pensioner. He assumes Cindy Cunningham (Stephanie Waring) has saved him and gives her money. Cindy becomes engaged to him, so Myra and Jacqui blackmail her for money and the role of her wedding planners. The money is later stolen and Jacqui accuses Bart. Myra defends him and Jacqui tells Myra she will move out if she doesn't believe her. She sides with Bart and looses Jacqui.
Myra agrees to let the Savage family live with them after they squat in her home. She becomes close to Dirk Savage (David Kennedy) and the pair have a casual relationship. When Mercedes becomes engaged to footballer Riley she immediately takes a liking to his rich background, to the dismay of his mother Heidi Costello (Kim Tiddy) who Myra feuds with over the wedding. Myra discovers Mercedes' affair with Riley's father, Carl. She keeps the affair secret and helps Mercedes continue to lie when she pretends she is pregnant. When Riley causes Mercedes to fall, Myra lies that Mercedes is having a miscarriage. Mercedes discovers she is really pregnant and Myra joins Mercedes and Michaela in Ibiza for her hen party.
On the day of Mercedes' wedding to Riley, Myra walks Mercedes down the aisle. At the altar, Mercedes confesses after feeling guilty that she had a four-month affair with Riley's father Carl, and that she isn't sure if the baby she is carrying is his or Riley's. Riley doesn't marry Mercedes and ends their relationship, disgusted that she would cheat on him. Mercedes tells everyone that she needs some time to clear her head, and therefore she plans to travel to Dubai on their honeymoon alone. Mercedes is kidnapped by serial killer Silas Blissett (Jeff Rawle). Silas texts Myra pretending to be Mercedes saying she is ok. Myra becomes concerned when Mercedes fails to contact her, but is reassured by Theresa who tells her that Mercedes will call when she is feeling better. Silas is arrested and Mercedes' ring is found amongst the possessions of his victims. Myra is stunned when it is revealed that Silas, who kidnapped Mercedes when she was seven-months pregnant, murdered Heidi. Myra is upset at Mercedes' ordeal. As a result, she begins to show Mercedes how much she loves her by helping her out with her new-born son, Bobby McQueen.
Bart begins growing cannabis for Joel Dexter (Andrew Still). The police discover this and Bart runs away. Realising Bart could have a career if he did not have a criminal record Myra claims the drugs are hers. Myra is sent to prison for 6 months. Mercedes visits Myra who warns her not to do anything stupid when she realises Mercedes could hurt Mitzeee (Rachel Shenton). Myra disowns Mercedes after she uncovers that Mercedes stabbed herself and has been released. Mercedes' ex-lover Paul returns following being released from prison, found innocent of the murder of Lynsey, and reunites with her, later getting engaged.
Paul fakes Myra's medical tests, in order that she might reconcile her relationship with Mercedes, and she becomes under the impression that she is dying. Paul accidentally puts a medical record under Myra's name which states she is pregnant. When Mercedes sees this, she tells Dirk Savage that Myra is pregnant with his baby. Dirk then proposes to Myra, only for Myra to admit that she is terminally ill and not pregnant. Myra later agrees to marry Dirk, and takes out a loan of several thousand pounds for the wedding. Paul later informs her that she has no 'shadow'. Myra decides she wants to sue the hospital, so that she might pay back her loan, but Jim McGinn later tells her that it is not a case worth pursuing. When Jacqui finds out about Myra's debt, the McQueens decide to gather money together, but to little avail. The bailiffs arrive at the McQueens' and strip the house of furniture and other items.  Browning starts to get anonymous text messages from someone claiming to know he murdered Lynsey Nolan. He thinks that Myra has been sending these messages. It is later revealed that it was Jim who was sending the messages, still unknown to Browning. Thinking she had sent them, he attacked her in the florist's where she worked. Myra survived the attack, but she now starts a hate campaign on Dr Browning by throwing fliers around the whole village labelling him a murderer. Browning decides to hire Trevor Royle to kill her. Myra still survives, and now knowing that someone is out to kill her, she decides to flee Chester. Jim arranges a boat to get her away from those trying to kill her. However, as she was waiting at the docks, Browning showed up with a gun, and after a heated argument, Myra was shot and fell into the water. She was presumed dead, until John Paul follows Jim to the airport, where it was revealed she was wearing a bullet proof vest and is alive, however, she must flee so Browning will be locked away for the crime. John Paul promises to keep their encounter a secret and watches on as Myra leaves forever. Myra makes a brief return, reuniting herself with the rest of the McQueens. She reveals that she is now living with Jacqui in Spain and can never return to the village as she would be arrested for faking her death.

Reception

At the 2009 Inside Soap Awards the McQueens won "Best Family".
Kris Green, of Digital Spy, felt that Myra was a "shining star" in the Hollyoaks






