[[Jacques Vergès]]

CATEGORIES: 1925 births, 2013 deaths, People from Ubon Ratchathani Province, French people of Vietnamese descent, French Communist Party politicians, French lawyers, University of Paris alumni, Free French military personnel of World War II, Algerian lawyers, Algerian people of French descent, French Muslims, Converts to Islam from Buddhism, Réunionnais people of French descent, Réunionnais people of Thai descent, Temporary disappearances

Jacques Vergès (5 March 1925 – 15 August 2013) was a lawyer who earned fame continually from the 1950s, first as an anticolonialist communist figure and then for defending a long string of well-known clients, from an anticolonialist Algerian militant, Djamila Bouhired (his future wife) in 1957–1962 to former Khmer Rouge head of state Khieu Samphan in 2008. His clients included both leftwing and rightwing terrorists, war criminals, and militants, including Holocaust denier Roger Garaudy, Nazi war criminal Klaus Barbie (1987), and international terrorist Ilich Ramírez Sánchez a.k.a. Carlos the Jackal (1994). In 2002, Vergès offered to represent former Serbian President Slobodan Milošević, although Milošević declined any legal advice from any party. The media sensationalized Vergès's activities with the sobriquet "the Devil's advocate",The sobriquet The Devil's advocate was used by the European press to describe not only Jacques Vergès but also Giovanni Di Stefano. and he himself contributed to his "notorious" public persona by such acts as titling his autobiography The Brilliant BastardThe French epithet has sometimes been translated as "luminous bastard" and giving provocative replies in interviews. He claimed that when asked if he would have defended Hitler, he replied, "I'd even defend Bush! But only if he agrees to plead guilty."[ref]Event occurs at 01:58:42 - 
I can't stand a man being humiliated, even an enemy. For a lone man to be insulted by a lynch mob. I was asked: "Would you defend Hitler?" "I said I'd even defend Bush! "But only if he agrees to plead guilty."[/ref]

Biography

Born in Ubon Ratchathani, Siam, and brought up on the island of Réunion, Jacques Vergès was a son of Raymond Vergès, a French diplomat, and a Vietnamese mother. In 1942, with his father's encouragement, he sailed to Liverpool to become part of the Free French Forces under Charles de Gaulle, and to participate in the anti-Nazi resistance.[ref]Event occurs at 00:04:04 - 
"For France to disappear was intolerable to me. That's why I enlisted."[/ref] In 1945 he joined the French Communist Party. After the war he went to the University of Paris to study law (while his twin brother Paul Vergès went on to become the leader of the Reunionese Communist Party and a member of the European Parliament).

Algerian independence movement


After returning to France, Vergès became a lawyer and quickly gained fame for his willingness to take controversial cases. During the struggle in Algiers he defended many accused of terrorism by the French government. He was a supporter of the Algerian armed independence struggle against France, comparing it to French armed resistance to the Nazi German occupation in the 1940s.
Vergès became a nationally-known figure following his defence of the anti-French Algerian guerrilla Djamila Bouhired on terrorism charges: she was convicted of blowing up a café and killing eleven people inside it.  This is where he pioneered the rupture strategy, in which he accused the prosecution of the same offenses as the defendants.

Missing years

From 1970 to 1978, Vergès disappeared from public view without explanation. He refused to comment about those years, remarking in an interview with Der Spiegel that "It's highly amusing that no one, in our modern police state, can figure out where I was for almost ten years." He left his wife, Djamila, and cut off all his ties, leaving friends and family to wonder if he had been killed.[ref]Event occurs at 00:50:29 - 
"He was last seen on 24 February 1970, at an anti-colonial rally in Paris. He made a speech and vanished. After three months, Djamila Bouhired and his friends, were sure he was dead."[/ref] His whereabouts during these years have remained a mystery. Many of his close associates of the time assume that he was in Cambodia with the Khmer Rouge, a rumour Pol Pot (Brother #1) and Ieng Sary (Brother #2)[ref]Event occurs at 00:52:56 - 
"The Brilliant Bastard In that book are two passages I remember. It says ... that Jacques Vergès could have been in Cambodia. I remember that Pol Pot wrote in the margin: No."[/ref] both denied. There have also been claims that Vergès was spotted in Paris as well as in Arab countries in the company of Palestinian militant groups.[ref]Event occurs at 00:55:44 - 
"It was in May 1973, ... several politicians ... were meeting at Arafat's HQ. ... Arafat suddenly looked at Hassan Salameh PLO security chief and asked: "Who is this Vergès? What is he?" Abou Hassan Salameh answered literally: "He's an important lawyer who defends the Palestinian cause." Arafat smiled and said: "Keep working with him." My codename was "Pascal". And Vergès? "Mansour"."[/ref]

Defence

After Vergès's return to normal life he resumed his legal practice, defending Georges Ibrahim Abdallah, convicted of terrorism, and Nazi war criminal Klaus Barbie. The thrust of his defence in the latter case was that Barbie was being singled out for prosecution while the French state conveniently ignored other cases that qualified as crimes against humanity.
In 1999 Vergès sued Amnesty International on behalf of the government of Togo. The attorney general observed how this crime recalled the lese majesty crime; the court thus deemed it contrary to the European Convention on Human Rights, thus leading to Verschave's acquittal.
After the US-led coalition forces invaded Iraq in March 2003 and deposed Saddam Hussein, many former leaders in Saddam's regime were arrested. In May 2008, Tariq Aziz assembled a team that included Vergès as well as a French-Lebanese and four Italian lawyers.
In April 2008, former Khmer Rouge head of state Khieu Samphan made his first appearance at Cambodia's genocide tribunal. Vergès represented him, using the defence that, while Samphan has never denied that many people in Cambodia were killed, as head of state he was never directly responsible.
According to The Economist, "history was his first love, and he still dreamed sometimes of deciphering Etruscan or Linear A, unfolding the secrets of mysterious civilisations." Jacques Vergès: Jacques Vergès, defence lawyer, died on 15 August, aged 88 or 89
Vergès died in August 2013 of a heart attack in Paris at the age of 88.france24. Vergès is buried in the Montparnasse Cemetery.leparisien.php

In popular culture





Notes

Footnotes




