[[Chlorophyta]]

CATEGORIES: Green algae, Plant divisions

Chlorophyta is a division of green algae, informally called chlorophytes. The name is used in two very different senses, so care is needed to determine the use by a particular author. In older classification systems, it refers to a highly paraphyletic group of all the green algae within the green plants (Viridiplantae) and thus includes about 7,000 speciesHoek, C. van den, Mann, D.G. and Jahns, H.M. 1995. Algae An Introduction to Phycology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ISBN 0-521-30419-9 of mostly aquatic photosynthetic eukaryotic organisms. Like the land plants (bryophytes and tracheophytes), green algae contain chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b and store food as starch in their plastids.
In newer classifications, it refers to one of the two clades making up the Viridiplantae, which are the chlorophytes and the streptophytes. The streptophytes often have two classes ascribed to them, 
the Charophyceae and the Embryophyceae. In this sense the Chlorophyta includes only about 4,300 species.

Ecology

Species of Chlorophyta (treated as what is now considered one of the two clades of Viridiplantae) are common inhabitants of marine, freshwater and terrestrial environments. 2nd Edition. Benjamin Cummings (Pearson), San Francisco, CA Several species have adapted to specialised and extreme environments, such as deserts, arctic environments, hypersaline habitats, marine deep waters and deep-sea hydrothermal vents. 
 Several  species of Chlorophyta live in symbiosis with a diverse range of eukaryotes, including fungi to form lichens, ciliates, forams, cnidarians and molluscs.
 Some species of Chlorophyta are heterotrophic, either free-living or parasitic.

Classifications

Characteristics like type of zoid, mitosis (karyokynesis), cytokinesis, organization level, life cycle, type of gametes, cell wall polysaccharidesLobban, Christopher S.; Wynne, Michael James, eds. (1981). The Biology of Seaweeds. Botanical Monograph Series 17. University of California Press, p. 88. and more recently genetic data are used for the classification of Chlorophyta.

Leliaert et al. 2012

Simplified phylogeny of the Chlorophyta, according to Leliaert et al. 2012. Note that many algae before classified in Chlorophyta are replaced here in Streptophyta.

Pombert et al. 2005

A possible classification when Chlorophyta refers to one of the two clades of the Viridiplantae is shown below. Biol. Evol. 22(9) 1903–1918. 

Hoek, Mann and Jahns 1995

Classification of the Chlorophyta, treated as all green algae, according to Hoek, Mann and Jahns 1995.

Bold and Wynne 1985

Classification of the Chlorophyta (treated as what has since been considered one of the two clades of the Viridiplantae) according to Bold and Wynne 1985.

Fott 1971

Classification of the Chlorophyta according to Fott 1971. et al. (1995), p. 483.

Smith 1938

Classification of the Chlorophyta according to Smith 1938:



Further reading


