[[Lyonesse]]

CATEGORIES: Arthurian locations, Cornish folklore, Locations in Celtic mythology, Fictional sunken cities, Fictional European countries, Flood myths

Lyonesse is a country in Arthurian legend, particularly in the story of Tristan and Iseult. Said to border Cornwall, it is most notable as the home of the hero Tristan, whose father was king. In later traditions Lyonesse is said to have sunk beneath the waves some time after the Tristan stories take place, making it similar to Ys and other lost lands in medieval Celtic tales, and perhaps connecting it with the Isles of Scilly.

Lyonesse in Arthurian legend

In medieval Arthurian legend, there are no references to the sinking of Lyonesse, for the simple reason that the name originally referred to a still-existing place. Lyonesse is an English alteration of French Léoneis or Léonois (earlier Loönois), a development of Lodonesia, the Latin name for Lothian in Scotland. Continental writers of Arthurian romances were often puzzled by the internal geography of Great Britain; thus it is that the author French Prose Tristan appears to place Léonois contiguous, by land, to Cornwall. In English adaptations of the French tales, Léonois, now "Lyonesse", becomes a kingdom wholly distinct from Lothian, and closely associated with the Cornish region, though its exact geographical location remained unspecified. The name was not attached to Cornish legends of lost coastal lands until the reign of Elizabeth I of England, however.. The name translates into English as "the milky ones", from the constant white water surrounding the reef.
Alfred, Lord Tennyson's Arthurian epic Idylls of the King, describes Lyonesse as the site of the final battle between Arthur and Mordred. One passage in particular references legends of Lyonesse as a land fated to sink beneath the ocean:
Deriving from a false etymology of Lyonesse, the 'City of Lions' was said in some later traditions to be the capital of the legendary kingdom, situated on what is today the Seven Stones reef, some eighteen miles west of Land's End and eight miles north-east of the Isles of Scilly. Redruth: Dyllansow Truran ISBN 1-85022-042-5; p. 2

Analogues in Celtic mythology

The legend of a sunken kingdom appears in both Cornish and Breton mythology. In Christian times it came to be viewed as a sort of Cornish Sodom and Gomorrah, an example of divine wrath provoked by unvirtuous living, although the parallels were limited in that Lyonesse remained in Cornish thought very much a mystical and mythical land, comparable to the role of Tir na nÓg in Irish mythology.
There is a Breton parallel in the tale of the Cité d'Ys, similarly drowned as a result of its debauchery with a single virtuous survivor escaping on a horse, in this case King Gradlon. The Welsh equivalent to Lyonesse and Ker Ys is Cantre'r Gwaelod, a legendary drowned kingdom in Cardigan Bay.
It is often suggested that the tale of Lyonesse represents an extraordinary survival of folk memory of the flooding of the Isles of Scilly and Mount's Bay near Penzance. For example, the Cornish name of St Michael's Mount is Karrek Loos y'n Koos - literally, "the grey rock in the wood". Cornish people around Penzance still get occasional glimpses at extreme low water of a sunken forest in Mount's Bay, where petrified tree stumps become visible. The importance of the maintenance of this memory can be seen in that it came to be associated with the legendary British hero Arthur, although the date of its inundation is actually c.2500 BC.

Lyonesse in modern English literature

Walter de la Mare's "Sunk Lyonesse" (1922) evokes it as a lost world:
In sea-cold Lyonesse,/
When the Sabbath eve shafts down/
On the roofs, walls, belfries/
Of the foundered town,/
The Nereids pluck their lyres/
Where the green translucency beats,/
And with motionless eyes at gaze/
Make ministrely in the streets./ 
And the ocean water stirs/
In salt-worn casement and porch/
Plies the blunt-nosed fish/
With fire in his skull for torch./
And the ringing wires resound;/
And the unearthly lovely weep,/
In lament of the music they make/
In the sullen courts of sleep:/
Whose marble flowers bloom for aye:/
And - lapped by the moon-guiled tide -/
Mock their carver with heart of stone,/
Caged in his stone-ribbed side.
Lyonesse has been used as a setting for many modern fantasy stories, including: 

Lyonesse in Cornish literature

Other uses of Lyonesse

The name Lyonesse has often been applied to transport subjects:
Lyonesse is also the name of one of the three school houses at Cape Cornwall Secondary School.



Notes




