[[Niacin]]

CATEGORIES: Hypolipidemic agents, B vitamins, Nicotinic acids

Niacin (also known as vitamin B3 and nicotinic acid) is an organic compound with the formula  and, depending on the definition used, one of the 20 to 80 essential human nutrients.
Not enough niacin in the diet can cause nausea, skin and mouth lesions, anemia, headaches, and tiredness.  Chronic Niacin deficiency leads to a disease called pellagra.  The lack of niacin may also be observed in pandemic deficiency disease which is caused by a lack of five crucial vitamins:  niacin, vitamin C, thiamin, vitamin D and vitamin A, and is usually found in areas of widespread poverty and malnutrition.
Niacin has been used for over 50 years to increase levels of HDL in the blood and has been found to decrease the risk of cardiovascular events modestly in a number of controlled human trials.
This colorless, water-soluble solid is a derivative of pyridine, with a carboxyl group (COOH) at the 3-position.  Other forms of vitamin B3 include the corresponding amide, nicotinamide ("niacinamide"), where the carboxyl group has been replaced by a carboxamide group (
Niacin cannot be directly converted to nicotinamide, but both compounds are precursors of the coenzymes nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP) in vivo.
Although the two are identical in their vitamin activity, nicotinamide does not have the same pharmacological effects (lipid modifying effects) as niacin. Nicotinamide does not reduce cholesterol or cause flushing. Niacin is involved in both DNA repair, and the production of steroid hormones in the adrenal gland.

Dietary needs

One recommended daily allowance of niacin is 2–12 mg/day for children, 14 mg/day for women, 16 mg/day for men, and 18 mg/day for pregnant or breast-feeding women. Tolerable upper intake levels (UL) for adult men and women is considered to be 35 mg/day by the Dietary Reference Intake system to avoid flushing.
In general, niacin status is tested through urinary biomarkers,

Deficiency

At present, niacin deficiency is sometimes seen in developed countries, and it is usually apparent in conditions of poverty, malnutrition, and chronic alcoholism.  It also tends to occur in areas where people eat maize (corn, the only grain low in digestible niacin) as a staple food.  A special cooking technique called nixtamalization is needed to increase the bioavailability of niacin during maize meal/flour production.
Mild niacin deficiency has been shown to slow metabolism, causing decreased tolerance to cold.
Severe deficiency of niacin in the diet causes the disease pellagra, which is characterized by diarrhea, dermatitis, and dementia, as well as "Casal's necklace" lesions on the lower neck, hyperpigmentation, thickening of the skin, inflammation of the mouth and tongue, digestive disturbances, amnesia, delirium, and eventually death, if left untreated.  Common psychiatric symptoms of niacin deficiency include irritability, poor concentration, anxiety, fatigue, restlessness, apathy, and depression.  Studies have indicated that, in patients with alcoholic pellagra, niacin deficiency may be an important factor influencing both the onset and severity of this condition.  Patients with alcoholism typically experience increased intestinal permeability, leading to negative health outcomes.
Hartnup's disease is a hereditary nutritional disorder resulting in niacin deficiency.  This condition was first identified in the 1950s by the Hartnup family in London.  It is due to a deficit in the intestines and kidneys, making it difficult for the body to break down and absorb dietary tryptophan.  The resulting condition is similar to pellagra, including symptoms of red, scaly rash, and sensitivity to sunlight.  Oral niacin is given as a treatment for this condition in doses ranging from 40–200 mg, with a good prognosis if identified and treated early. Niacin synthesis is also deficient in carcinoid syndrome, because of metabolic diversion of its precursor tryptophan to form serotonin.

Therapeutic effects

In 1955, Altschul and colleagues described niacin as having a lipid lowering property for the first time.
Niacin therapeutic effect is mostly through its binding to G protein coupled receptors, niacin receptor 1 (NIACR1) and niacin receptor 2 (NIACR2), that are highly expressed in adipose tissue, spleen, immune cells and keratinocytes but not in other expected organs such as liver, kidney, heart or intestine.
NIACR1 inhibits cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) production and thus fat breakdown in adipose tissue and free fatty acids available for liver to produce triglycerides and  very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) and consequently low-density lipoprotein (LDL) or "bad" cholesterol. It also inhibits diacylglycerol acyltransferase-2 (important hepatic TG synthesis).
The mechanism behind increasing HDL is not totally understood but it seems to be done in various ways. Niacin increases apolipoprotein A1 levels due to anti catabolic effects resulting in higher reverse cholesterol transport. It also inhibits HDL hepatic uptake, down-regulating production of the cholesterol ester transfer protein (CETP) gene. Finally, it stimulates ABCA1 transporter in monocytes and macrophages and up-regulates peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ results in reverse cholesterol transport.
Improving vascular endothelial function has been reported in few experiments using niacin. In an experiment on type 2 diabetes, nicotinic acid improved endothelial function comparing with control. Daily dose of 1 g niacin shows significant lipid modifying properties and reach the plateau using 2 grams. NIACR1 in immune cells such as monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells is responsible for atherosclerosis effects of niacin by reducing the immune cells' infiltration of vessel wall It also down regulates endothelial adhesion molecules such as vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1) or of chemokines such as monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1) and inflammatory proteins which results in atherosclerotic stabilization and antithrombotic effects. The changes in adhesion molecules and chemokines might be through activation of receptor NIACR1 on immune cells.
Adipokines are the adipocytes' produced mediators. Some adipokines such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a, interleukins and chemokines, have pro-inflammatory effect and some others such as adiponectin have anti-inflammatory effect that regulates inflammatory process, decrease vascular progression and atherosclerosis. Other recently explored therapeutic effect of nicotinic acid are neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory effects, beneficial in animal models of arthritis, chronic renal failure, or sepsis; however, more work is needed in this area.
Following Coronary Drug Project (CDP), one of the first experiments done to study long term clinical lipid-lowering effect of niacin in the 1960s to early 1970's,JAMA. (1975). "Clofibrate and niacin in coronary heart disease." JAMA 231(4)  360-381. many other experiments have been done. Their results, summarized in two meta-analyses, concluded that therapeutic doses of niacin alone or in combination with other lipid-modifying agents such as statin reduce cardiovascular events and atherosclerosis progression significantly.
The ARBITER 6-HALTS study, reported at the 2009 annual meeting of the American Heart Association and in the New England Journal of Medicine  Additionally, a recent meta-analysis covering 11 randomized controlled clinical trials found positive effects of niacin alone or in combination on all cardiovascular events and on atherosclerosis evolution.
By lowering VLDL levels, niacin also increases the level of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) or "good" cholesterol in blood, and therefore it is sometimes prescribed for people with low HDL, who are also at high risk of a heart attack.
However, a 2011 study (AIM-HIGH) was halted early because patients showed no decrease in cardiovascular events, but did experience an increase in the risk of stroke. These patients already had LDL levels well controlled by a statin drug, and the aim of the study was to evaluate extended-release niacin (2000 mg per day) to see if raising HDL levels had an additional positive effect on risk. In this study, it did not have such an effect, and appeared to increase stroke risk. The role of niacin in patients whose LDL is not well-controlled (as in the majority of previous studies with niacin) is still under study and debate. However, it does not seem to offer benefits via raising HDL, in patients already lowering LDL by taking a statin.

Niacin prescriptions

Many preparations of niacin are available over-the-counter as dietary supplements. Immediate release niacin is effective at lowering cholesterol levels, and has minimal hepatotoxic side effects due to its rapid elimination from the body. However, it has the main drawback of causing strong vasodilation side effects with sensations of flushing and skin tingling that can be unpleasant to many patients. Non-prescription extended release niacin, such as Endur-acin, which uses a wax matrix to delay release is available as well. The extended release formulations generally reduce vasodilation and flushing side effects, but increase the risk of hepatotoxicity compared to the immediate release forms.Pharmacokinetics and dose recommendations of Niaspan® in chronic kidney disease and dialysis patientsNiaspan (Niacin) Drug Information: Description, User Reviews, Drug Side Effects, Interactions - Prescribing Information at RxListAbout NIASPAN® (niacin extended-release)
A formulation of laropiprant (Merck & Co., Inc.) and niacin had previously been approved for use in Europe and marketed as Tredaptive. Laropiprant is a prostaglandin D2 binding drug shown to reduce vasodilatation and flushing up to 73%.
Over-the counter niacin dietary supplements generally lack the safety and efficacy data required for FDA regulatory approval. Some "no flush" types, such as inositol hexanicotinate contain convertible niacin compounds, but have little clinical efficacy in reducing cholesterol levels.

Toxicity

Pharmacological doses of niacin (1.5 - 6 g per day) lead to side effects that can include dermatological conditions such as skin flushing and itching, dry skin, and skin rashes including eczema exacerbation and acanthosis nigricans. Some of these symptoms are generally related to niacin's role as the rate limiting cofactor in the histidine decarboxylase enzyme which converts l-histidine into histamine.
Flushing usually lasts for about 15 to 30 minutes, though it can sometimes last up to two hours. It is sometimes accompanied by a prickly or itching sensation, in particular, in areas covered by clothing. Flushing is mediated by prostaglandin E2 and D2 due to GPR109A activation of epidermal Langerhans cells and keratinocytes. Prostaglandin (PGD2) is the primary cause of the flushing reaction, with serotonin appearing to have a secondary role in this reaction.
Hepatotoxicity is another side effect of niacin. This is possibly related to metabolism via amidation resulting in NAD production. The time-release form has a lower therapeutic index for lowering serum lipids relative to this form of toxicity.
Although high doses of niacin may elevate blood sugar, thereby worsening diabetes mellitus, recent studies show the actual effect on blood sugar to be only 5–10%. Patients with diabetes who continued to take anti-diabetes drugs containing niacin did not experience major blood glucose changes. Thus overall, niacin continues to be recommended as a drug for preventing cardiovascular disease in patients with diabetes.
Hyperuricemia is another side effect of taking high-dose niacin, and may exacerbate gout.
Niacin in doses used to lower cholesterol levels has been associated with birth defects in laboratory animals, with possible consequences for infant development in pregnant women.
Niacin, particularly the time-release variety, at extremely high doses can cause acute toxic reactions.

Nicotinamide

Nicotinamide may be obtained from the diet where it is present primarily as NAD+ and NADP+. These are hydrolysed in the intestine and the resulting nicotinamide is absorbed either as such, or following its hydrolysis to nicotinic acid. Nicotinamide is present in nature in only small amounts. In unprepared foods, niacin is present mainly in the form of the cellular pyridine nucleotides NAD and NADP. Enzymatic hydrolysis of the co-enzymes can occur during the course of food preparation. Boiling releases most of the total niacin present in sweet corn as nicotinamide (up to 55 mg/kg).
Nicotinamide may be toxic to the liver at doses exceeding 3 g/day for adults. 

Inositol hexanicotinate

One form of dietary supplement is inositol hexanicotinate (IHN), which is inositol that has been esterified with niacin on all six of inositol's alcohol groups. IHN is usually sold as "flush-free" or "no-flush" niacin in units of 250, 500, or 1000 mg/tablets or capsules. It is sold as an over-the-counter formulation, and often is marketed and labeled as niacin, thus misleading consumers into thinking they are getting the active form of the medication.  While this form of niacin does not cause the flushing associated with the immediate-release products, the evidence that it has lipid-modifying functions is contradictory, at best. As the clinical trials date from the early 1960s (Dorner, Welsh) or the late 1970s (Ziliotto, Kruse, Agusti), it is difficult to assess them by today's standards. Thus, so far there is not enough evidence to recommend IHN to treat dyslipidemia. Furthermore, the American Heart Association and the National Cholesterol Education Program both take the position that only prescription niacin should be used to treat dyslipidemias, and only under the management of a physician. The reason given is that niacin at effective intakes of 1500–3000 mg/day can also potentially have severe adverse effects. Thus liver function tests to monitor liver enzymes are necessary when taking therapeutic doses of niacin, including alkaline phosphatase (ALP), aspartate transaminase (AST), and alanine transaminase (ALT).

Biosynthesis and chemical synthesis

The liver can synthesize niacin from the essential amino acid tryptophan, requiring 60 mg of tryptophan to make one mg of niacin.  The 5-membered aromatic heterocycle of tryptophan is cleaved and rearranged with the alpha amino group of tryptophan into the 6-membered aromatic heterocycle of niacin. Riboflavin, vitamin B6 and iron are required in some of the reactions involved in the conversion of tryptophan to NAD.
Several thousand tons of niacin are manufactured each year, starting from 3-methylpyridine.

Food sources

Niacin is found in variety of foods, including liver, chicken, beef, fish, cereal, peanuts and legumes, and is also synthesized from tryptophan, an essential amino acid found in most forms of protein.
Animal products:
Fruits and vegetables:
Seeds:
Fungi:
Other:


History

Niacin was first described by chemist Hugo Weidel in 1873 in his studies of nicotine. Soon after, in studies conducted in Alabama and Cincinnati, Dr. Tom Spies found that nicotinic acid cured the sufferers of pellagra.Dr. Joseph Goldberger and the war on Pellagra - Office of NIH History
When the biological significance of nicotinic acid was realized, it was thought appropriate to choose a name to dissociate it from nicotine, to avoid the perception that vitamins or niacin-rich food contains nicotine, or that cigarettes contain vitamins. The resulting name 'niacin' was derived from nicotinic acid + vitamin.
Carpenter found in 1951 that niacin in corn is biologically unavailable, and can be released only in very alkaline lime water of pH 11.
This process, known as nixtamalization, was discovered by the prehistoric civilizations of Mesoamerica.
Niacin is referred to as vitamin B3 because it was the third of the B vitamins to be discovered. It has historically been referred to as "vitamin PP", "vitamin P-P" and "PP-factor", that are derived from the term "pellagra-preventive factor".
On April 22, 2014, Pennsylvania State University researchers working with NASA at the Goddard Astrobiology Analytical Laboratory reported finding niacin within eight CM-2 type carbonaceous chondrite meteorites. The meteorite's vitamin B3 levels ranged from 30 to 600 parts per billion, the study reports. Related molecules discovered in the meteorites include pyridine carboxylic acids and pyridine dicarboxylic acids. 






