[[Strengthening Church Members Committee]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 establishments in the United States, Latter Day Saint doctrines, beliefs, and practices, Organizational subdivisions of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Religious organizations established in 1985

The Strengthening Church Members Committee (SCMC) is a committee of general authorities of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) who monitor the publications of church members for possible criticism of local and general leaders of the church.  If criticism is found, the committee may forward information to local church authorities, who may bring charges of apostasy, which can result in excommunication.

Creation

The committee was formed during the administration of church president Ezra Taft Benson,

Discovery

The existence of the committee became known in 1991, when a 1990 church memo from general authority Glenn L. Pace referencing the committee was published by an anti-Mormon ministry.
In response to this public discourse, the LDS Church spokesman Don LeFevre acknowledged the existence of the committee.  LeFevre said that the committee "receives complaints from church members about other members who have made statements that 'conceivably could do harm to the church'", then the committee will "pass the information along to the person's ecclesiastical leader." According to LeFevre, however, "the committee neither makes judgments nor imposes penalties." Discipline is "entirely up to the discretion of the local leaders."

Church response

The existence of the committee became national news. Speaking to the New York Times, LeFevre stated that the committee "provides local church leadership with information designed to help them counsel with members who, however well-meaning, may hinder the progress of the church through public criticism.". The statement indicated that the members were then James E. Faust and Russell M. Nelson of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.
In 1993, apostle Dallin H. Oaks characterized the committee as a "clipping service" that "may have monitored speeches, writings and activities of those suspected of apostasy and passed on material to church officials".Arizona Republic 1993

Activities

According to Eugene England, BYU academic vice-president Stan Albrecht resigned in 1992 partly due to "difficulty carrying out university business because of complaints from BYU religion faculty about other faculty members' writings, made to the Strengthening Church Members Committee".  England had known others affected by SCMC activities, some seeing their files, which in one case contained newspaper clippings about being a Young Democrat in college.
The committee is understood to still be in operation, and was mentioned during the 2004 church discipline of Grant H. Palmer in which it reportedly sent a dossier on Palmer to his stake president.



Notes



 | last= Sophfronia
 | first= Scott Gregory
 | title= Saints Preserve Us: The Mormons are likely to choose another aged, ailing leader, but nevertheless their church is thriving
