[[Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?]]

CATEGORIES: 1998 British television programme debuts, 1990s British television series, 2000s British television series, Quiz shows, Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?, Television series by Sony Pictures Television, 2010s British television series

Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? (sometimes informally known as Millionaire, and abbreviated WWTBAM) is an international television game show franchise of British origin, created in 1998 by David Briggs, Mike Whitehill, and Steven Knight. In its format, currently owned and licensed by Sony Pictures Television, large cash prizes are offered for correctly answering a series of multiple-choice questions of increasing (or, in some cases, random) difficulty. The maximum cash prize (in the original British version) was one million pounds. Most international versions offer a top prize of one million units of the local currency; the actual value of the prize obviously varies widely, depending on the value of the currency.
The original British version of the show debuted on September 4, 1998, and aired on ITV with Chris Tarrant as its host. The show's format is a twist on the game show genre—only one contestant plays at a time (similar to some radio quizzes), and the emphasis is on suspense rather than speed. In most versions there are no time limits to answer the questions, and contestants are given the question before they must decide whether to attempt an answer.
In 2000, a board game based on Millionaire was released by Pressman Toy Corporation. In March 2006, original producer Celador announced that it was seeking to sell the worldwide rights to the show, together with the rest of its British program library, as the first phase of a sell-off of the company's format and production divisions. Millionaire and all of Celador's other programs were ultimately acquired by Dutch company 2waytraffic. Two years later, Sony Pictures Entertainment purchased 2waytraffic for £137.5 million.

History

The format of the show was devised by David Briggs, who, along with Steven Knight and Mike Whitehill, devised a number of the promotional games for Chris Tarrant's breakfast show on Capital FM radio, such as the bong game. The original working title for the show was Cash Mountain. The original British version, hosted by Tarrant, debuted on the ITV network on September 4, 1998.
The game has similarities with the 1950s show The $64,000 Question. In that show, the money won roughly doubled with each question; if a wrong answer was given, the money was lost. Contestants would win a new car as a consolation prize if they had reached the $8,000 question. In 1999-2000, the US version of Millionaire was the first primetime game show since The $64,000 Question to finish first in the season-ending Nielsen ratings.
In the 1990s, the US Millionaire's future executive producer, Michael Davies, attempted to revive the long-lost US game show The $64,000 Question for the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) as The $640,000 Question, before abandoning that effort in favour of adapting Millionaire to America.
The title of the show is derived from a song of the same title, written by Cole Porter for the 1956 film High Society, in which it was sung by Frank Sinatra and Celeste Holm.

Disputed claims of creation

Since the original version launched, several individuals have claimed that they originated the format and that Celador had breached their copyright.
Sponsored by the Daily Mail, Mike Bull, a Southampton-based journalist, took Celador to the High Court in March 2002, claiming authorship of the lifelines. Celador settled out of court with a confidentiality clause.
In 2003 Sydney resident John J. Leonard also claimed to have originated a format substantially similar to that of Millionaire, but without the concept of lifelines. To date, he has been unable to raise the minimum £250,000 required for a non-UK resident to finance legal action against Celador in the High Court. In an effort to finance his case, he wrote and published a book titled Millionaire!!, a detailed account of how he created the show.
In 2004 Alan Melville sued ITV over a similar claim. He claimed that it had used the opening phrase "Who wants to be a millionaire?" from his ideas for a game show based on the lottery, called Millionaires' Row, for which he had sent his documents to Granada Television. ITV counter-claimed, and the parties reached an out-of-court agreement/settlement.
In 2002, John Bachini started a claim against Celador, ITV, and five individuals who claimed that they had created Millionaire. Bachini claimed they had used ideas from his 1982 board game format, a two-page TV format concept known as Millionaire dating from 1990, and the telephone mechanics from another of his concepts, BT Lottery, also dating from 1990. Bachini submitted his documents to Paul Smith, from a sister company of Celador's, in March 1995 and again in January 1996, and to Claudia Rosencrantz of ITV in January 1996. Bachini claimed that they used 90% of his Millionaire format, which contained all of the same procedures as the actual British Millionaire's pilot: twenty questions, three lifelines, two safe havens (£1,000 and £32,000), and even starting from £1.00. Bachini's lifelines were known by different names; he never claimed he coined the phrase phone-a-friend, but Tim Boone and Mike Bull claimed they did. Celador claimed the franchise originated from a format known as The Cash Mountain, a five-page document created by either Jo Sandilands or her husband David Briggs in October 1995. The defendants brought Bachini to a summary hearing. The defendants lost and Bachini won the right to go to trial.  Due to serious illness, Bachini could not continue at trial, so Celador reached an out-of-court settlement with Bachini.Birmingham Sunday Mercury, 28 August 2005

Gameplay rules

Original format

The contestants must first play a preliminary round, called "Fastest Finger First" (or, in the US version, simply "Fastest Finger"), where they are all given a question and four answers from the host and are asked to put those four answers into a particular order; in the first series of the British version and in pre-2003 episodes of the Australian version, the round instead required the contestants to answer one multiple-choice question correctly as quickly as possible. The contestant who does so correctly and in the fastest time goes on to sit in a chair in the center of the set, known as the "Hot Seat," and play for the maximum possible prize (often a million units of the local currency). In the event that two or more contestants are tied for the fastest time, those contestants play another question to break the tie. If no one gets the question right, that question is thrown out and another question is played in the same manner. If any contestants are visually impaired, the host reads the question and four choices all at once, then repeats the choices after the music begins.
Once in the Hot Seat, the contestant is asked increasingly difficult general knowledge questions by the host. Questions are multiple choice: four possible answers are given (labeled A, B, C, and D), and the contestant must choose the correct one. Upon answering a question correctly, the contestant wins a certain amount of money. In most versions, there is no time limit to answer a question; a contestant may (and often does) take as long as they need to ponder an answer. After the first few questions, the host will ask the contestant if that is their "final answer." When a contestant says "final" in conjunction with one of the answers, it is official, and cannot be changed. The first five questions usually omit this rule, unless the contestant has guessed a wrong answer (at which point, the host is hoping the contestant will take the hint), because the questions are generally so easy that requiring a final answer would significantly slow the game down; thus, there are five chances for the contestant to leave with no money if they were to provide a wrong answer before obtaining the first guaranteed amount; going for 1,000 units of currency after winning 500 units is the last point in the game at which a contestant can still leave empty-handed.
Subsequent questions are played for increasingly large sums, roughly doubling at each turn. The first few questions often have some joke answers. Below is the complete sequence of prizes for episodes of the UK version aired between 1998 and 2007:
After viewing a question, the contestant can leave the game with the money already won rather than attempting an answer. If the contestant answers a question incorrectly, then all of their winnings are lost, except that the £1,000 and £32,000 prizes are guaranteed: if a player gets a question wrong above these levels, then the prize drops to the previous guaranteed prize. Answering the £2,000 and £64,000 questions wrong does not reduce the prize money. The prizes are generally non-cumulative; for example, answering the £500 question gives the contestant £500, not the previous £300 plus £500 (i.e. £800).
The game ends when the contestant answers a question incorrectly, decides not to answer a question, or answers all questions correctly. On the UK version, Tarrant usually rips the check for £500,000 apart when a contestant wins the top prize of £1 million.

New formats and variations

Several international versions of Millionaire have recently changed or modified their respective formats. Note that, with the exception of the Hot Seat format, all of the named format variants are not officially called so, and are only named after the significant change (12 question format for only having 12 questions in a game for example) for reference and comparison reasons.

=11-question format=

From 18 April 1999 to summer 2000, the Australian version had 11 questions, and answering the first question correctly would guarantee the contestant A$1,000, no matter what happened thereafter. During this time, the show also used the following money tree:

=Elimination of Fastest Finger First=

When the US Millionaire's syndicated version debuted in 2002, the Fastest Finger round was eliminated for the reduced episode length (30 minutes as opposed to the previous primetime version's length of 60 minutes). Thus, contestants immediately take the Hot Seat, each of them called in after their predecessors' games end. Contestants were required to pass a more conventional game show qualification test at auditions. However, when the US Millionaire show revived its primetime version for specials, it also restored the Fastest Finger round; this was done in 2004 for the Who Wants to Be a Super Millionaire series that raised the top prize to $10,000,000, as well as in August 2009 for an eleven-night special that celebrated the US version's tenth anniversary.
After the US version eliminated its Fastest Finger round, other versions followed suit by eliminating their respective Fastest Finger First rounds. The Australian, New Zealand, and Italian versions eliminated their Fastest Finger First rounds in 2007; the Hungarian version in 2009; the British version in 2010; the Bulgarian, Armenian, Philippine, and Turkish versions in 2011, and the Colombian version in 2013. Also, Fastest Finger First is eliminated in some versions for special events wherein celebrities play for charity (such as the British, Bulgarian, Danish, Dutch, French, Philippine, Polish, and Russian versions).

=12-question format=

On August 13, 2007, it was announced that the UK version was changing its format, reducing the number of questions that a contestant must answer to reach the £1 million jackpot. The prize fund started at £500 rather than £100, and the total number of questions was reduced from 15 to 12. After reaching £1,000, the prize fund increases to £2,000, £5,000, £10,000, £20,000 and £50,000, which is the second safe haven, previously £32,000.
The first set of contestants to face the new rules were comedians Jon Culshaw and John Thomson in a charity special, aired on August 18, 2007. The show returned on Saturday, June 13, 2009 on ITV1 at 7.30pm with a new episode after a long absence since January 31, 2009, and, by that time, the British version of the show had come to suffer its longest drought of winners, not having a top prize winner since Ingram Wilcox in 2006.
The 12-question format was subsequently carried over to a number of international versions, including the Arab version (January 2010), the Bulgarian version (January 2008), the Dutch version (March 2011), the French version (April 2009), the Polish version (January 2008), the Spanish version (2009), and the Turkish version (August 2011).
The first contestant to win the top prize in a 12-question format was Mohammad Hamzeh, on an episode of the Arab version aired on March 23, 2010.

=16-question format=

In 2007, before adopting the "Hot Seat competition" format, the Australian version slightly modified the normal format to add an additional bonus 16th question, worth A$5 million. The Thai version also used this format before switching to the 12-question format.

=Risk format=

In 2007, the German version modified its format, so that contestants would be allowed to choose the option of playing in a variant called the Risikovariante ("Risk Mode"), which includes an extra lifeline called the Zusatzjoker, in which one of the audience can stand up and give an answer to the contestant. However, if the contestant chooses to play this variant, the tenth-question safe haven is forfeited. This means that if the contestant answers any of questions 11–15 incorrectly, they drop all the way to the guaranteed winnings gained by answering question 5 correctly. If the contestant just chooses to the play the Klassische Variante ("Classic/Normal Mode"), they keep the second safe haven but are given only three lifelines. Almost every contestant has since chosen the risk mode, because the fourth lifeline is almost always right, yet there has only been one contestant that has become a millionaire using the risk mode. Germany's three most recent celebrity top prize winners, Oliver Pocher, Thomas Gottschalk, and Barbara Schöneberger, used Risk Mode to win the million.
The risk format was also adopted by the Austrian version (but with Double Dip as additional lifeline; September 2007), the Hungarian version (January 2008—September 2009), the Polish version (March 2010), the Russian version (September 2010), the Swiss version (November 2011), the Venezuelan version (2009, with Audience Speaks as the fourth lifeline), and the Philippine version (2013, with Double Dip as the fourth lifeline).
The Polish version also implements the 12-question format for both modes and contestants are given Switch the Question as the fourth lifeline.
The Russian format gives Double Dip as the fourth lifeline, and contestants are given the ability to place the milestone to any level on the money tree as this wish before beginning gameplay. The "milestone change" is not available if the contestant chooses the normal format.

=Clock format=

In 2008, the US version changed its format so that contestants were required to answer questions within a time limit each of 15 seconds for questions 1–5, 30 seconds for questions 6-10, and 45 seconds for questions 11-14. After each of the 14 questions have been answered correctly, the remaining time after giving an answer was banked for the million-dollar question. The clock for each question began counting down immediately after all of the question was revealed, and was temporarily paused when a lifeline was used. Contestants who exceeded the time limit were forced to walk away with any prize money they had won up to that point. The only exception to this rule is if the Double Dip lifeline was used; if the clock expired before a second final answer was given, the contestant's winnings were reduced to the previous safe haven level.
When the clock format was implemented, the questions were assigned to categories, and the 50/50 and Switch the Question lifelines were replaced with Double Dip and Ask the Expert, Ask The Expert being available after the contestant reached $1000. Later changes included an adjustment to the money tree, the removal of Phone-a-Friend, and allowing the contestant to use Ask the Expert from the start.
For a period in November 2009, the US show also had a one-off event called the Million Dollar Tournament of Ten in response to the show's lack of a top-prize winner since Nancy Christy in 2003. The winner of the tournament was Sam Murray, who became the first person to win the top prize of US$1 Million with the clock format. The US version ended usage of this format in 2010, switching to the shuffle format.
The Japanese version adopted this format beginning on September 15, 2009. However, that version uses the original three lifelines; the time limits are 30 seconds for questions 1–9, 1 minute for questions 10–12, and 3 minutes for questions 13–15; and unused time is not banked.
The UK version also adopted this format on August 3, 2010; however, it uses the 12-question money tree and the original lifelines, and the final 5 questions do not have a time limit. Contestants also receive a fourth lifeline, "Switch the Question" or "Switch," upon completing question 7 in addition to the clock being turned off. However, during the first 7 questions, if the contestant runs out of time on a question, their winnings will drop back down to the last safe haven they passed as if the question had been answered incorrectly, instead of being forced to walk away.
The Indian version also adopted this format upon its return on October 11, 2010. India's new format was similar to the UK version, except that it had a 13-question money tree, the same lifelines originally used in the US clock format version,
Similar clock rules and time limits also exist in the Taiwanese version, the former theme park attraction Play It!, computer and video game adaptations of the show, and the "Hot Seat" format (see below). The former Australian version had no true time limit; however, in 2007, a 60-second shot clock went into effect if the player took too long to answer a question (to prevent the possibility of cheating on a question). If time expired, the contestant was forced to walk away with any money won to that point.

=Hot Seat format=

In 2009, the Norwegian version tried out a new format, essentially involving 6 contestants playing at once, with each taking turns to climb the money tree. The lifelines were removed and replaced with a single "pass" per player that, at any one time, would transfer the onus of answering the question to the next contestant in line, who was unable to re-pass to the next contestant for that question. Also added were time limits on every question, with 15 seconds allocated for the first five questions, 30 for the middle five, and 45 for the last five. In addition, the option of walking away was eliminated, rendering several questions' values pointless, as they cannot be won. Also, if a player fails to give out an answer in the time limit, it is considered an automatic pass. If the question cannot be passed on or if answered incorrectly, that player is eliminated and the highest value on the money tree is removed.
The game ends either when all contestants are eliminated, or when the question for the highest value in the money tree is answered. If this last question is answered correctly, the answering player receives the amount of money. If it is answered incorrectly, or all contestants are eliminated before the final question is reached, the last player to be eliminated receives either nothing, or a smaller prize if the fifth question milestone is reached.
This format was used for the Italian version from December 15, 2008 to March 18, 2009, and has been adopted by the Australian version starting in April 2009, the Danish version starting in October 2009, the Hungarian version starting in September 2009, the Portuguese version starting in July 2010 the Indonesian version starting on September 13, 2010, the Chilean version since January 2011,Canal13.
Starting in 2013, the Colombian version also uses this format exclusively in special celebrity charity episodes.
The first contestant to ever win with this format was Bjørn Lien in the Norwegian version on 19 January 2010.WWTBAM - First Norway Winner 1 Million Kroner author=Fendtionaer on Youtube

=Shuffle format=

Beginning in 2010, the US version ended their usage of the clock format and revised the rules to this new format. The money tree was shortened to 14 questions. For the first 10 questions, the money tree values are randomly shuffled and the exact values for each question are not revealed to the contestant until a final answer is given. If a contestant answers correctly, the value of the question is added to the contestant's bank. If a contestant does not know the answer, that person can walk away with half of the bank during the first ten questions. However, if a contestant answers a question incorrectly prior to the eleventh question (even if it is the first question), the contestant will only receive $1,000 (in effect, any contestant is guaranteed $1,000 simply for participating on the show, eliminating the possibility of leaving with nothing). Once the contestant answers all ten questions correctly, the contestant will receive the accumulated money of all of the questions they answered correctly (up to $68,600) and the contestant proceeds through the money tree as in earlier formats. Contestants are guaranteed only $25,000 in the US version if any of the last four questions are answered incorrectly.
All the lifelines, with the exception of Ask the Audience, have been removed and replaced with a lifeline called Jump the Question. Contestants receive two opportunities to jump any two of the first thirteen questions at the start of the game.
The set was also modified significantly: the Hot Seat was removed, so that the contestant and host stand and possibly walk around throughout the episode; and the traditional monitors facing the contestant and host were also replaced with monitors around the set.

Lifelines

If at any point the contestant is unsure of the answer to a question, he or she can use one or more "lifelines" which provide some form of assistance. After using a lifeline, the contestant can either answer the question, use another lifeline, or walk away and keep the money (although using the Double Dip lifeline removes this final option). With the exception of the 2010 Jump the Question lifeline, each lifeline can only be used once.
In the original format of the show, three lifelines were available to the contestant:
In February 2004, the US version spawned a short-lived spin-off known as Who Wants to Be a Super Millionaire. On this particular version, two new lifelines were introduced, which were only available after a contestant cleared the $100,000 question (the tenth question in this version).
In 2004 the syndicated US version introduced another new lifeline:
In the German version, an additional lifeline exists, which will be given if the player chooses to play the game in Risk Mode:
In 2008, the syndicated US version eliminated the 50/50 and Switch the Question lifelines, revived Double Dip as a replacement for 50/50, and introduced this new lifeline:
The 2009 Tenth Anniversary US prime time series uses the four lifelines from the US version: Double Dip, Ask the Audience, and Phone a Friend were always available—Ask the Expert was available after $1,000 has been won.
In the Hot Seat versions of the show, a new lifeline was introduced to replace all existing lifelines:
For the shuffle format in the syndicated US version, all lifelines, with the exception of Ask the Audience, were removed and replaced with this:
The Philippine version's 2011 season introduced a new lifeline, as well as Switch the Question, to replace Ask the Audience:

"Is that your final answer?"

The Millionaire franchise's catchphrase is "Is that your final answer?" (more commonly said by some versions' hosts as "Final answer?" or simply "Final?"), a question derived from a rule requirement that the players must clearly indicate their choices before being made official (since the nature of the game allows the player to think aloud about the options before committing to an answer). As a side effect, once a final answer has been given, it cannot be changed. Many parodies of the game show capitalised on this phrase.
Players can prevent the host from asking this question by themselves stating "final answer" or some variant.
Another hallmark of the show is using dramatic pauses before the host acknowledges whether or not the answer was correct. Occasionally, on some versions, if it is time to go for a commercial break, the host will take the final answer but not announce if it is correct until after the break.

Music

Father-and-son composer team Keith Strachan and Matthew Strachan wrote the Millionaire franchise's original musical score. Brought in after the initial pilot with a brief instructing them to create music providing mood and tension, they decided to approach the project like a film score with music playing almost throughout the entire show, a unique approach for a game show at the time. After almost completing the task they came up with the idea of taking the pitch up a semi-tone for each subsequent question to increase tension as the game progressed. The music has received numerous ASCAP awards.
When the US version of Millionaire was honoured by GSN on its Gameshow Hall of Fame special, the narrator described the show's original music tracks as "mimicking the sound of a beating heart," and stated that as the contestant works their way up the money ladder, the music is "perfectly in tune with their ever-increasing pulse." Although most international versions of the show still continue to use the Strachan score, in 2010 the US version retired it altogether in favour of a new musical score, with cues composed by Jeff Lippencott and Mark T. Williams.
A soundtrack album was released, featuring most of the musical stages, but not all of them.

Cheating scandal

In April 2003, British Army Major Charles Ingram, his wife Diana and college lecturer Tecwen Whittock were convicted of using fraudulent means to win £1 million on the UK version of the show when Ingram was a contestant on the show in September 2001. The allegation was that when host Chris Tarrant asked a question, Whittock, one of that edition's nine other Fastest Finger First contestants, would cough to guide Ingram to the correct answer. Ingram won the £1 million top prize, but members of the production crew raised suspicions over Whittock's coughing along with the Ingrams' behaviour after the recording, and the police were called in to investigate. The defence claimed that Whittock simply suffered from allergies, but all three were found guilty and given suspended sentences. They maintained their innocence. As a joke, Benylin cough syrup paid to have the first commercial shown during the program's commercial break.

Table of international versions

There have been 81 different versions of Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? since the original UK version debuted on 4 September 1998. Including the UK version, there are 39 versions currently airing and 42 versions that have ended.
Legend:
 Currently airing  
 Ended  
 Future version  

Top prize winners

Out of all contestants that have played the game, few have been able to win the top prize on any international version of the show. The first was John Carpenter, who won the top prize on the US version on 19 November 1999. Carpenter did not use a lifeline until the final question, using his Phone-a-Friend not for help but to call his father to tell him he had won the million.
Other notable top prize winners include Judith Keppel, the first winner of the UK version; Kevin Olmstead from the US version, who won a progressive jackpot of $2.18 million; Martin Flood from the Australian version, who was investigated by the TV company after suspicions that he had cheated, much like Charles Ingram, but was later cleared;  

Lowest scores

The first contestant ever to win nothing was John Davidson from the British version, failing on his fifth question. In March 2007, Dutch contestant Peter Lindhout got his fourth question, worth €250, wrong and went home with €0.
In 2006, a screenshot from the UKGameshows. The image was actually a digitally altered screenshot of real-life contestant Fiona Wheeler on the original UK version answering a different question from a higher tier.
The hoax may have been inspired by an infamous moment from the French version of the show, in which a contestant requested help from the audience on a €3,000 question which asked which celestial body orbits the Earth: the Sun, the Moon, Mars or Venus. The audience provided the answer of "the Sun", and the player ended up leaving with €1,500 as a result. The hoax also borrows elements from other infamous moments of numerous unlucky contestants on the US version, all of whom won nothing after giving a wrong answer to one of the first five questions.

Spin-off

The UK version has been working on a spin-off of the show called 50:50.2waytraffic unveils first Who Wants To Be A Millionaire? spin-off, 2waytraffic.com Such a spin-off has aired in Macedonia, Spain, Italy, Sweden, Greece, Japan  and Egypt.

Who Wants To Be A Millionaire - Play It!

thumb|right|200px Who Wants To Be A Millionaire - Play It! was an attraction at Disney's Hollywood Studios (formerly Disney-MGM Studios) theme park at Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando, Florida and Disney California Adventure Park in Anaheim, California. The attraction was a modified version of the Who Wants to Be a Millionaire television game show in which theme park guests could participate.








