[[BBC World News]]

CATEGORIES: BBC World News, BBC News channels, International BBC television channels, Television channels and stations established in 1991, Television channels in the Netherlands, Television channels in Belgium, Television channels in Flanders, Multilingual news services, 24-hour television news channels in the United Kingdom

BBC World News is the BBC's international news and current affairs television channel. It has the largest audience of any BBC channel. Launched on 11 March 1991 as BBC World Service Television outside Europe, its name was changed to BBC World in 1995 and to BBC World News in 2008. It broadcasts television programming including BBC News bulletins, documentaries, lifestyle programmes and interviews. It employs more correspondents and reporters and has more international bureaux than any other news channel. Unlike the BBC's domestic channels, BBC World News is owned and operated by BBC Global News Ltd, part of the BBC's commercial group of companies and is funded by subscription and advertising revenues, and not by the United Kingdom television licence. It is not owned by BBC Worldwide.

History

The channel originally launched as BBC World Service Television, though unlike BBC World Service radio which has always been government funded, the British government refused to extend the Foreign Office grant-in-aid. It was launched on 11 March 1991, after two weeks of real-time pilots, initially as a half-hour bulletin once a day at 19:00 GMT. The programme editor was Johan "John" Ramsland from World Service Radio News with John Exelby from domestic BBC TV News as his managing editor. The original picture editing team consisted of Bob Scholes, Peter Hodge and Mike Casey.
On Thursday, 26 January 1995 at 19:00 GMT, BBC World Service Television was split into 2-television stations:
Since 1995, the service has gone through several branding changes. From 1995 to 1997, the channel used relatively few graphics to display the name of the channel, with the  studio modelled on that used for BBC News in the United Kingdom.
As part of a major BBC corporate redesign (which included a new logo for the corporation on 4 October 1997) the channel received its first main refresh on 9 November 1997, the day BBC News 24 was launched. Various fictional flags with some real ones were used. The idents were computer generated and developed by the Lambie-Nairn design agency.
Another large relaunch for BBC World took place on 3 April 2000,BBC World Unveils A New Look And A New Schedule | Scoop News which brought it in line with the BBC's UK news channel which was relaunched in 1999.  The new uniform look was made up of red and cream designed by Lambie-Nairn, with music based on a style described as 'drums and beeps' composed by David Lowe, a departure from the general orchestral versions of other news programmes.
In 2003 a second makeover, using the same 'drums and beeps' style music but new graphics took place, although on a much smaller scale to that of 1999. The music was changed slightly while the main colour scheme became black and red, with studios using frosted glass, white and red colours. Later in 2004, the channel's slogan became Putting News First, replacing Demand a Broader View.
The channel's present name was introduced on 21 April 2008 as part of a £550,000 rebranding of the BBC's news output and visual identity. BBC World News later moved to the renovated former studio of BBC News 24 (now BBC News). New graphics were produced by the Lambie-Nairn design agency and music reworked by David Lowe.

Move to Broadcasting House

BBC World News relocated to Broadcasting House from its previous home at BBC Television Centre on 14 January 2013. This is a part of the move of BBC News and other audio and vision departments of the BBC into one building in Central London. Broadcasting House was refurbished at a cost of £1 billion with a new newsroom and several state-of-the-art news television studios being built.

Broadcasting

Live news output originates from studios B and C in Broadcasting House with some recorded programming from Broadcasting House studio A and the BBC Millbank studio. The BBC World News newsroom is now part of the new consolidated BBC Newsroom in Broadcasting House along with BBC World Service and UK domestic News services.
Previously, the channel was broadcast in 4:3, with the news output fitted into a 14:9 frame for both digital and analogue broadcasting, resulting in black bands at the top and bottom of the screen. On 13 January 2009 at 09:57 GMT, BBC World News switched its broadcast to 16:9 format, initially in Europe on Astra 1L satellite, and Eutelsat Hot Bird 6 satellite to other broadcast feeds in the Asian region from 20 January 2009.

High-definition

As a result of the move to Broadcasting House, BBC World News gained high-definition studios and equipment to be able to broadcast in high-definition. On 5 August, BBC World News will be offered as a High Definition (HD) feed across the Middle East when it launches its international HD channel on Arabsat. Arabsat will be the BBC's first distribution partner in the Middle East to offer the award-winning news channel in HD.

Worldwide

BBC World News claims to be watched by a weekly audience of 74 million in over 200 countries and territories worldwide. BBC World News is most commonly watched as a free-to-air (FTA) channel. The channel is available in Europe and many parts of the world via satellite (FTA) or cable platforms.
In the United States of America, the channel is available through various providers such as Cablevision, Comcast, Time Warner Cable, Verizon, AT&T U-verse, and others.

Online

In mid-2012, Livestation made BBC World News available as part of a subscription package with Sky International, Al Jazeera English, and EuroNews. As of 3 January 2013, the channel is no longer be available in the United States via the website.
Worldwide, the station is available free of charge and without geographical limitations through the free Readon Player software.  There are usually at least two links to the feed and quality tends to be pretty good.  It can be found using the channel search feature or in the United Kingdom and News & Information sections.
In Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates, it is additionally available as a subscription mobile phone service, having also been available as a terrestrial channel.
More recently, ad-supported mobile phone apps have been providing free access. TVGO Live TV provides a very clear and stable stream to Android devices; LiveTV also carries a stream but tends to suffer from stability issues in both the stream and the app itself.

United Kingdom

The channel is not officially available as a stand-alone, full-time channel in the United Kingdom because it carries and is funded by advertising (BBC's domestic channels are funded by a television licence fee which households and establishments that want to watch television programmes as they are being broadcast must pay), although it can be easily received due to its 'free-to-air' status on many European satellite systems, including Astra and Hot Bird.
However, some BBC World News programmes are available to UK audiences. There is a simulcast of the 05:00 UK edition of BBC World News on BBC One and the BBC News channel, followed by an edition of World Business Report. This programme was previously branded as The World Today.  While international audiences see advertisements during the break, UK viewers see domestic headlines.  This simulcast is in addition to overnight simulcasts of the top of the hour from 01.00 to 05.00 UK time on both BBC World News and BBC News channel and are simply branded as BBC News (except for Newsday which simulcasts 01.00 UK time weekdays), even if they are produced by BBC World News. The 11:30 UK edition of BBC World News is shown on BBC Two Mon-Fri but not on Wednesdays when Parliament is sitting. This forms BBC News at 11 on BBC Two, which is made up of half an hour of BBC News and then half an hour of BBC World News. This can also happen during big news events and the News Channel presenter will join the BBC World News presenter in Studio C as it used by both channels. This was done for example for coverage of events such as the Glasgow Helicopter Crash, Election of Pope Francis and Boston Marathon Bombings. Previously GMT was shown at 12:30 on the channel. On weekdays, BBC World News also produces a version of World News Today at 19:00 UK time. The first half-hour of this programme can be seen in the UK on BBC Four. The edition of the programme replaced The World, which had been broadcast as a simulcast on the channel between 2002 and 2007.

Programming

Live news programmes:
Other live programmes:
Pre-recorded programmes include:

World News Bulletins

Half-hour BBC World News bulletins are made available to Public Broadcasting Service member stations in the United States through Los Angeles' KCET, a non-commercial independent public television station separate from PBS since the beginning of 2011 due to a rights fee dispute. 80 to 90% of Americans are able to receive them, though broadcast times vary between different localities, with it airing on several PBS stations in markets such as New York City and Washington DC.
On PBS stations, BBC World News does not appear with commercials (the breaks are replaced with news stories) but omits the Met Office international weather forecast at the end, replacing it with underwriting announcements. The PBS airings are tape-delayed on some stations.
BBC America airs a 3-hour block of BBC World News coverage from 05:00 to 08:00 on weekdays. Met Office forecasts are removed, and is broadcast with advertisements. Another BBC World News programme, the hour-long BBC World News America, aired on BBC America at 19:00 Eastern Time. A second broadcast at 22:00 Eastern Time ended in 2010 when BBC America introduced a second feed for the western time zones of the US on 18 February 2011, it was announced that BBC World News America would be discontinued on BBC America and would instead be airing only on BBC World and local PBS stations in the United States as a 30-minute program.'BBC World News America' Shifts To BBC World News Multichannel News, 18 February 2011
BBC World News bulletins also appear on Hong Kong TVB English Channel instead of NBC Nightly News with Brian Williams on WNBC-4 New York City by NBC News at 07:30 until 08:00 Hong Kong Time, News Hour on CCTV News at 12:00 until 13:00 Hong Kong Time and News at 7:30 at 19:30 until 20:00 Hong Kong Time in Hong Kong and MediaCorp TV Channel 5 (HD) / MediaCorp TV HD5 instead of News 5 Tonight at 21:30 until 22:00 Singapore Standard Time which MediaCorp News Channel NewsAsia instead of Channel News Asia at 7 at 19:00 until 20:00 Singapore Standard Time in Singapore goes to travellers on the Singapore Mass Rapid Transit and Hong Kong Mass Transit Railway rail service from City Hall-Raffles Place-Marina Bay to Chinatown-Orchard-Changi International Airport and Chek Lap Kok International Airport-Hong Kong to Causeway Bay-Kowloon-Disneyland Resort-Sunny Bay ware also treated to a specially recorded BBC World News bulletin—introduced with a namecheck of "Welcome to BBC World News onboard the Singapore Mass Rapid Transit and Hong Kong Mass Transit Railway"—during the fifteen-minute journey. This short bulletin was updated twice a day, and was shown in both classes on LCD televisions throughout the train. A similar programme from Cable News Network (CNN) is now shown instead.
Travellers on the Heathrow Express rail service from London Paddington to London Heathrow Airport ware also treated to a specially recorded BBC World News bulletin—introduced with a namecheck of "Welcome to BBC World News onboard the Heathrow Express"—during the fifteen-minute journey. This short bulletin was updated twice a day, and was shown in both classes on LCD televisions throughout the train. A similar programme from Sky News is now shown instead.
Many airlines from across the world also play pre-recorded extracts of the BBC World News, have text headlines from it or have a full bulletin available on the in-flight entertainment systems. Airlines with BBC World News include Emirates Airlines, Malaysia Airlines, Singapore Airlines, Cathay Pacific, Qatar Airways, Etihad Airways, Qantas, Air Macau and American Airlines. Travellers can watch the bulletins on Channel 1 shortly after take-off on British Airways flights from the United Kingdom. Air France also broadcasts the full bulletin instead of France 2 News, on flights operated from Kuala Lumpur, Toronto-Lester Bowles Pearson, Sngapore-Changi, London-Heathrow, Hong Kong-Chek Lap Kok, Sydney, Macau, Los Angeles, San Francisco and New York-John Fitzgerald Kennedy.

Presenters

For details see List of BBC newsreaders and reporters

News presenters

Relief Presenters

Alice Baxter, Gavin Grey, Deborah Mackenzie, Rajesh Mirchandani, Adam Parsons	

Business presenters

Business presenters include Tanya Beckett, Sally Bundock, Sara Coburn, Sally Eden, Juliette Foster, Aaron Heslehurst, Jamie Robertson, Michelle Fleury, Rico Hizon and Sharanjit Leyl.

Sport presenters

Sports presenters include Mike Bushell, Reshmin Chowdhury, Karthi Gnanasegaram, Matt Gooderick, Amelia Harris, Celina Hinchcliffe, Sanjeev Shetty, Sarah Stirk and Sue Thearle.

Weather presenters

Weather presenters include: Darren Bett, Daniel Corbett, Alex Deakin, Chris Fawkes, Peter Gibbs, John Hammond, Sarah Keith-Lucas, Simon King, Louise Lear, Nick Miller, Susan Powell, Nina Ridge, Tomasz Schafernaker, Matt Taylor, Laura Tobin, Helen Willetts and Jay Wynne.

Former presenters

Presenters who have previously appeared on the channel include Samira Ahmed, Lindsey Brancher, Tony Campion, Jonathan Charles, Peter Coe, Stephen Cole, Dharshini David, Maya Even, Adrian Finighan, Karen Bowerman, Juliet Dunlop, James Dagwell, Sean Fletcher, Liz George, Jake Lynch, Donald MacCormick, Anita McNaught, Keshini Navaratnam, Liz Pike, Richard Quest, Owen Thomas, Amanda Davies, and Barbara Meredith.

Presentation

BBC World News is, for the most part, the same channel all over the world; the commercials are intended to be the only differences. However, there are some regional programming variations. For example, a number of programmes are made exclusively for regional viewings, such as Indian feeds, and The Record Europe, which is only broadcast in Europe.
On most feeds of BBC World News, when there are no commercials being inserted by the cable or satellite provider similar to other channels, the break filler shows promotions for upcoming programmes on the channel. During BBC News, a news story that has not been promoted airs during what would be the commercial break. This is the case on the broadband versions of BBC World News, and on versions of BBC World News aired in the United States on Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) stations. However, there are some global commercials and sponsorships which air throughout the network.
On 11 September 2007, the break filler was redesigned and now more closely resembles previous versions. The promotional videos now fill the entire screen and are interspersed with news and market updates, schedules, and other information. There is also no longer a unifying music composition. Instead, each 20-second promotional video uses music selected from a handful of themes, which have some unifying musical characteristics. The information screens, such as the 10-second plug for the website or YouTube channel, and the 15-second weather/time/coming up screens each feature their own theme. The colour theme was updated following the relaunch of the channel in April 2008.
Since its inception, and more so since its extensive association with the BBC News channel, the countdown to the hourly news bulletin has been a feature of the channel's presentation, accompanied by music composed by David Lowe. The current style of countdown features reporters and technical staff in many different locations working to bring news stories to air.

Awards

BBC World News was named Best International News Channel at the Association for International Broadcasting Awards in November 2006.

Other stations






