[[Illinois Central College]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures in Peoria, Illinois, Buildings and structures in Tazewell County, Illinois, Community colleges in Illinois, East Peoria, Illinois, Educational institutions established in 1967, Education in Peoria, Illinois, Education in Tazewell County, Illinois, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, Pekin, Illinois

Illinois Central College, often called ICC, is a large Illinois community college with its largest campus in East Peoria, Illinois, off U.S. Route 24 near U.S. Route 150/Illinois State Route 116 (North Main Street), and the McClugage Bridge.  Its district, Illinois Community College District 514, is a 


Academic facilities

ICC offers 69 transferable Associate in Arts and Sciences programs, 84 Associate in Applied Science programs, and 104 occupational Certificate programs.  More than 3,300 classes are offered each semester, and the average class size is 14. which accredits most of the colleges and universities in the western United States.
ICC has three campuses:
The East Peoria Campus is home to the Performing Arts Center, the David R. Leitch Career and Counseling Center, the Lee Morgan School of Industrial Technology, the Caterpillar Dealer Service Technology Program, and the General Motors Automotive Service Educational program.  Illinois Central College's web curriculum is recognized by as a WOW Professional Academy.WOW Web Professional Academy Directory
Illinois Central College has libraries at three locations: the Thomas K. Thomas Building in downtown Peoria; in Cedar Hall at the North Campus; and in the Edwards Library and Administration Building in East Peoria Illinois (located near the health center, Cafe Breve, and the commons). The library faculty at the East Peoria campus run an associate degree program for future library technical assistants. This program has an agreement with the University of Maine at Augusta that makes it possible to quickly complete both the two-year degree and an online baccalaureate degree for those wishing to get a senior posting or go on to graduate school. ICC has agreements with the OSF and Methodist Colleges of Nursing and with Illinois State University's Mennonite College of Nursing where students can earn an associate and then a bachelor's in nursing; it also has an LPN-RN program, an LPN program, a medical technician program, and a CNA program. ICC recently
In remarks during a Tuesday, April 8, 2014 news conference in the student lounge, Illinois Governor Pat Quinn and ICC President Dr. John Erwin announced $2.6 million in state funding to build a Sustainability Center, which will house the college's truck driver training, architecture program, HVAC program, and programs relating to sustainable development and green technology. The Governor also used the conference to announce an increase in the state's MAP funds (monetary awards program, or financial aid). 

Campus life

ICC has more than 40 official student clubs and organizations.
The Harbinger is the student newspaper and is distributed six times per year at no charge.  Newspaper work can be arranged as academic credit or as an extra-curricular activity.  The ICC ARTS Journal, featuring student writing and artwork, is published annually.
There is an apartment complex, named Woodview Commons, on the ICC campus.  The property, which includes a common room, an outdoor pool, and laundry facilities, is owned by a limited liability company subsidiary of the Illinois Central College Educational Foundation, and managed by the Texas company Century Campus Housing Management Corporation.

Sports

ICC is a member of the National Junior College Athletic Association and participates in intercollegiate NJCAA basketball (Division II), cross country (I), soccer (I), men's baseball (II), men's golf (II), women's fast-pitch softball (II), and women's volleyball (II).  Intercollegiate participation is only open to full-time students with a 2.0 grade point average.
Intramural sports include basketball, bowling, flag football, tennis, and volleyball.
There is a golf course and a tennis court on campus, as well as the Lorene Ramsey Gymnasium and Fitness Center, which was drastically expanded from 2009 to 2011.

Championship teams

The six-time national champion women's basketball program is well known.  Lorene Ramsey's 33 years coaching the team brought them 887 wins to 197 losses (.818), and five NJCAA Women's Basketball Championship titles in Division II: 1992, 1993, 1998, 1999, and 2003.
The ICC softball team has also been national champions twice: 1982, and 1998 as NJCAA Division I.
In Fall 2009, the Illinois Central College Women's Volleyball team won the NJCAA Division II National Championship.NJCAA | Sports | Women's Volleyball | National Championship

Alumni

Board of trustees

An elected Board of Trustees is responsible for the overall governance of the College.  Trustees are elected for different six-year terms by public election across District 514.
In addition to the elected trustees, there is a Student Trustee, as required by a 1974 amendment to the Public Community College Act.  Student Trustees are elected by campus referendum, for a single term from April 15 to April 14.  Student Trustees have the right to make and second board motions, and to attend closed sessions to which the general public is not privy.  A Student Trustee's vote is advisory and non-binding.








