[[Lisa Bufano]]

CATEGORIES: American female dancers, American amputees, Artists from Bridgeport, Connecticut, Tufts University alumni, 1972 births, 2013 deaths, Suicides in California, Quadruple amputees, Deaths from fire in the United States, Suicides by self-immolation

Lisa Bufano (1972 – October 1, 2013) was a disabled American interdisciplinary performance artist whose work incorporated elements of doll-making, fabric work, animation, and dance.org; accessed February 15, 2014.

Early life

Born to Louis A. Bufano and Elizabeth "Betty" Bufano in 1972 in Bridgeport, Connecticut, Lisa was graduated from Tufts University in 2003, and later from the School of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston (SMFA).

Career

After losing her lower legs and all of the entirety of her fingers and thumbs, Bufano began her performance and dancing career when a professor at the University of Linz doing research on the lives of amputees discovered her web page and offered her a stipend to perform in Vienna. Kennedy Center for the Performing ArtsPhoenix Dance in a program honoring fellow amputee and dancer Homer Avila
Her dance work typically incorporated a variety of prosthetics and propsFive Open Mouths
Bufano listed among her influences medical drawings, historical wax models and  dolls, and optical toys; flip dolls and paper dolls; the structural aspects of Japanese jointed dolls, Hans Bellmer's doll work, Louise Bourgeois' cell installations, and the animation of Jan Švankmajer and the Quay Brothers. One of her main projects was a white muslin dress which turned into a squid, for which she sewed thousands of detailed suckers. "She loved sewing sculptures made of fabric," her brother remarked in a remembrance. "She had a thing for the creepy-cute, the exotic, the bizarre. Things that were dark but also beautiful." artery.org, December 24, 2013.
She explained her aesthetic and political goals when she claimed that: Despite my own terror and discomfort in being watched (or, maybe, because of it), I am finding that being in front of viewers as a performer with deformity can produce a magnetic tension that could be developed into strength. I attempt to channel this tension by exaggerating the mode of physical difference (for example, presenting myself on stilts)." 
She likewise explained during her time at the School of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston:  My eye has always been drawn to abnormal forms... It's just that now my tool is my body. I'm still animating a form, but it's my own form... I'm not an astounding dancer... But being a performer with a deformity, I find that there's a gut response in audiences, an attraction/repulsion aspect to it that can be compelling. I just hope that there's a balance between that gut response and the substance of a performance." 
Originally based in Boston, Massachusetts, she has had an artist residency at the Contemporary Artists Center, North Adams, and also in Boise, Idaho,Bufano tenure in Boise, Idaho after which she relocated to San Francisco, California in December 2012. She was a Franklin Furnace Fund recipient.

Death

Lisa Bufano committed suicide October 1, 2013 in San Francisco; no suicide note was found. Her brother reflected on the explicable nature of her death two months later: 
 I'm surrounded by speculation about why Lisa took her own life. Facebook, friends, family members, and her fans would all like to know. They want it to make sense to them. They want to feel okay. Ultimately they want her back.
 But I am having great difficulty with all of this. Lisa didn't like other people projecting their idea of who she was on her. We'll never understand why. It will never make sense.
I believe she lived her entire life and that her life was many lives. I don't believe it was cut-off short. Her mission was completed and she must have understood that fact when she departed from this world. She was alone with her dog in her home in the middle of the night.wbur.






