[[Edward Teller]]

CATEGORIES: Edward Teller, 1908 births, 2003 deaths, American agnostics, American inventors, American nuclear physicists, American people of Hungarian-Jewish descent, Enrico Fermi Award recipients, George Washington University faculty, Hungarian agnostics, Hungarian emigrants to the United States, Hungarian inventors, Hungarian Jews, Hungarian nuclear physicists, International Academy of Quantum Molecular Science members, Jewish agnostics, Jewish American scientists, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology alumni, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory staff, Manhattan Project people, Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences, National Medal of Science laureates, Nuclear proliferation, People from Budapest, People who emigrated to escape Nazism, Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients, Theoretical physicists, University of California, Berkeley faculty, University of Chicago faculty, University of Göttingen faculty, University of Leipzig alumni

Edward Teller ( which is a standard starting point for the applications of the Monte Carlo method to statistical mechanics.
Teller emigrated to the United States in the 1930s, and was an early member of the Manhattan Project charged with developing the first atomic bombs. During this time he made a serious push to develop the first fusion-based weapons as well, but these were deferred until after World War II. After his controversial testimony in the security clearance hearing of his former Los Alamos colleague J. Robert Oppenheimer, Teller was ostracized by much of the scientific community. He continued to find support from the U.S. government and military research establishment, particularly for his advocacy for nuclear energy development, a strong nuclear arsenal, and a vigorous nuclear testing program. He was a co-founder of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), and was both its director and associate director for many years.
In his later years, Teller became especially known for his advocacy of controversial technological solutions to both military and civilian problems, including a plan to excavate an artificial harbor in Alaska using thermonuclear explosive in what was called Project Chariot. He was a vigorous advocate of Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative. Throughout his life, Teller was known both for his scientific ability and his difficult interpersonal relations and volatile personality, and is considered one of the inspirations for the character Dr. Strangelove in the 1964 movie of the same name.

Early life and education

Teller was born in Budapest, Hungary (then Austria-Hungary), into a Jewish family, in the year 1908. His parents were Ilona (née Deutsch), a pianist, and Max Teller, an attorney. He became very interested in numbers, and would calculate in his head large numbers, such as the number of seconds in a year. YouTube
He left Hungary in 1926 (partly due to the numerus clausus rule under Horthy's regime). The political climate and revolutions in Hungary during his youth instilled a lingering animosity for both Communism and Fascism in Teller.[ref]

