[[Pompeii in popular culture]]

CATEGORIES: Pompeii in popular culture

The ancient Roman city of Pompeii has been frequently featured in literature and popular culture since its modern rediscovery.

Books

Pompeii served as the background for the historic novels The Last Days of Pompeii (1834) by Edward Bulwer-Lytton (since adapted for film and TV), Arria Marcella (1852) by Théophile Gautier, The Taras Report on Pompeii (1975) by Alan Lloyd as well as appearing in Shadows in Bronze (1990) and other novels in the Marcus Didius Falco series.
Book I of the Cambridge Latin Course teaches Latin while telling the story of a Pompeii resident, Lucius Caecilius Iucundus, from the reign of Nero to that of Vespasian. The book ends when Mount Vesuvius erupts, where Caecilius and his household are killed. The books have a cult following and students have been known to go to Pompeii just to track down Caecilius's house.Classics at RGSW
Louis Untermeyer wrote the short story, "The Dog of Pompeii", which centered on a blind orphan boy and his dog during the last days before Vesuvius erupted.
A number of titles in The Roman Mysteries series of children's historical novels by Caroline Lawrence are set in Pompeii.
The 2003 bestseller novel Pompeii by Robert Harris tells the story of a (fictional) aquarius of the real life Aqua Augusta named Marcus Attilius. The story itself also features a Pliny the Younger reference to the Estate of Julia Felix, as well as also including the Piscina Mirabalis in Misenum, Pliny the Elder, and his nephew Gaius Pliny.

Visual art

Art Exhibitions

Film

There have been several movies based on Edward Bulwer-Lytton's 1834 book, The Last Days of Pompeii: 
Productions using Pompeii as a story backdrop include:

TV

Pompeii is featured in many television biographies and documentaries.
It is also featured in ABC's television series called Roman Mysteries.

Fiction

Documentaries

Music

In 1769, the famous musical composer, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, visited the Temple of Isis, which had been recently unearthed. His visit and the memories of the site inspired him 20 years later in his composition of The Magic Flute.
Giovanni Pacini in 1825 composed his opera L'ultimo giorno di Pompei, noted for its special effects portraying the eruption of Vesuvius.
In October 1971, the band Pink Floyd performed at the vacant 2,000-year-old amphitheater in Pompeii, to an audience composed of film crew including camera operators. This performance, including some exterior shots of the ruins, was released as part of a movie entitled "Pink Floyd: Live at Pompeii".
The Siouxsie and The Banshees single "Cities in Dust" (1985) was also inspired by the destruction of Pompeii.
Last Days of Pompeii is the 1991 rock opera by alternative rock band Nova Mob.
"Pompeii am Götterdämmerung" is the name of a song by the band The Flaming Lips on their album At War with the Mystics. The song narrates the tale of a couple who, in reaction to their families' rejection of their love, commit suicide together by simultaneously jumping into a volcano.
"Pompeii" is the title of a song written by Seattle-based progressive rock band Gatsbys American Dream.  It is the second track of their 2005 release, "Volcano" - based loosely around the story of Pompeii.
A musical track of the same name is also produced by E.S. Posthumus and has been used in films like Planet of the Apes and many others, under the Unearthed album. This music is said to be the favorite among the listeners who have the mentioned album due to the dramatic and imposing tempo.
Canadian band The Tragically Hip's lead singer Gordon Downie refers to a dying family member as "the rock-plug of Vesuvius" in the song Toronto #4.
"Pompeii" is also the title of a song by indie-rock trio Sleater-Kinney off of their fifth album, All Hands on the Bad One.
The city of Pompeii is mentioned in the band, The Mars Volta's song, Cicatriz ESP.
Pompeii is a post-rock band from Austin, Texas USA.
"This Was Pompeii" is the name of a song by Dar Williams about the city.
Pompeii is a composition by the band E.S.Posthumus
There is a popular band from Kentucky named "We Are Pompeii".
Composer Frank Ticheli wrote a song entitled "Vesuvius" which depicts the last days of Pompeii
The Decemberists from Portland, Oregon have a song entitled "Cocoon" which is about the victims of Vesuvius who were encased in volcanic ash.
Screamworks: Love in Theory and Practice, the seventh studio album by the Finnish rock band HIM, features a song entitled "Like St. Valentine" in which one line reads "Like the couple from Pompeii, our drama's put on display".
"American Pompeii" is the eighth track on the Anthrax album Stomp 442.
Polish singer, songwriter, poet and author, Jacek Kaczmarski wrote a two songs about Pompeii. Pompeja from 1978, depicts last moments of Pompeii and later excavations of it, but allegorically song also refers to Polish cities like Warsaw or Gdańsk, and talk about ignorance of warning signs and voices in times of crisis.kaczmarski.pl/tworczosc/zapowiedzi/pompeja. Second one, Pompeja Lupanar (or just Pompeja II) from 1980, talks about live of various peoples in Pompeii before Vesuvius eruption.kaczmarski.pl/tworczosc/zapowiedzi/pompeja.php
In 2013, British band Bastille released a single named "Pompeii" with lyrics that referenced the destruction of the city. It reached number two on the UK Singles Chart.

Other






