[[The Haunted World of El Superbeasto]]

CATEGORIES: 2009 films, English-language films, American animated films, American fantasy-comedy films, American sex comedy films, Animated comedy films, Animated duos, Lucha libre, Films directed by Rob Zombie

The Haunted World of El Superbeasto is a 2009 animated exploitation musical horror comedy film based on the comic book series created by Rob Zombie. It follows the character of El Superbeasto and his sidekick sister, Suzi-X, voiced by Sheri Moon Zombie. The film was given a straight to DVD release in September 12, 2009.

Plot

The film follows the adventures of El Superbeasto (Tom Papa), a suave, yet violent exploitation film actor/director and former masked wrestler, and his sultry "sidekick" and sister, the super-agent Suzi-X (Sheri Moon Zombie), as they prevent the evil Dr. Satan (Paul Giamatti) from taking over the world by marrying the foul-mouthed stripper Velvet Von Black (Rosario Dawson) with the mark of the devil on her backside. The adventure, set in the mythic world of Monsterland, also features Murray the Robot (Brian Posehn), Suzi-X's sidekick and vehicle, based on the robot featured in the 1939 serial The Phantom Creeps starring Bela Lugosi.THE HAUNTED WORLD OF EL SUPERBEASTO (DVD REVIEW)
Director Rob Zombie also references several other films. Tom Papa, writer and the voice of the titular character, incorporated his style of humor to his character. Throughout the film, El Superbeasto often makes observations in unusual moments, like Papa does in his stand-ups.

Cast

Production

Work began on The Haunted World of El Superbeasto in 2006 and a release date was later scheduled for May 2007, but the film was completed in 2009. In an interview conducted on July 20, 2007 by shocktillyoudrop." During that time, the film was still being animated, however, Zombie then began work on Halloween. He informed the animators that he had "to walk away because I can't split my time between two things". Zombie noted that work on The Haunted World of El Superbeasto "started when I was on Rejects and it's now just sitting on a shelf waiting for me to finish Halloween".
In a November 2007 interview with Bloody Disgusting, Zombie announced that the film was "almost finished". He went on to say that, although he was then on tour until February, "we will finally finish the music on Superbeasto and it'll be done" afterwards.
Rob Zombie had the following to say in a September 28, 2008 posting on the official El Superbeasto Myspace page: "We're down to the end! 3 long years in the making and worth every second. By Halloween this thing will be in the can completely DONE!"
According to a blog post on October 29, 2008, Defamer Magazine was privy to a "sneak peek" at scenes from The Haunted World of El Superbeasto, about which they said "it's good to know that if WALL-E falls short on its quest for Oscar gold, we now have another animated contender."
In an October 29, 2008, Blender Magazine interview, Rob Zombie stated that, "I've been working on Superbeasto for three years, and I'm actually in the last weeks of it — I'm mixing the sound this week. I'm not sure of the release date yet, but that'll be out probably early 2009. It's a full-length adult animated comedy."
IGN's March 20, 2009 exclusive interview with Rob Zombie revealed that "Haunted World of El Superbeasto was finished, but its release had been delayed because of ownership and legal issues within the company that made the movie, Starz Media." In that same interview, Rob Zombie described the film as "Awesome... And it's awesome, but I don't have a release date yet. It's like an R-rated adult/monster/sex comedy. There's nothing really like it that I can think of. People always say like Ralph Bakshi's stuff, but..." A majority of the songs in the film are performed by the comedy duo Hard 'n Phirm.

Reception

El Superbeasto received mixed to negative reviews. While there's no approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes by critics, the audience rating is currently at 48%.






