[[Christopher Soghoian]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 births, Living people, People associated with computer security, American bloggers, American computer scientists, Johns Hopkins University alumni, James Madison University alumni, Indiana University alumni, Berkman Fellows, American people of Armenian descent

Christopher Soghoian is a Washington, DC based privacy researcher and activist. He first gained notoriety in 2006 as the creator of a website that generated fake airline boarding passes. Since that incident, he has continued to engage in high-profile activism related to privacy and computer security. He is currently the principal technologist and a senior policy analyst with the speech, privacy and technology project at the American Civil Liberties Union.
Between 2009 and 2010, he worked for the US Federal Trade Commission as the first ever in-house technical advisor to the Division of Privacy and Identity Protection. While at the FTC, he assisted with investigations of Facebook, Twitter, MySpace and Netflix.

Education

Soghoian, who holds British and US nationality,Brown, David. FBI foils student's air scam site The Times November 3, 2006 received a B.S. from James Madison University (Computer Science; 2002), a Masters from Johns Hopkins University (Security Informatics; 2005), and a PhD from Indiana University (Informatics; 2012). His dissertation focused on the role that third party internet and telecommunications service providers play in facilitating law enforcement surveillance of their customers.
He is currently a Visiting Fellow at Yale Law School's Information Society Project and a Fellow at the Center for Applied Cybersecurity Research at Indiana University. He was an Open Society Foundations Fellow between 2011 and 2012 and was a Student Fellow at the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University between 2008 and 2009.

Boarding pass security

On October 26, 2006, Soghoian created a website that allowed visitors to generate fake boarding passes for Northwest Airlines. While users could change the boarding document to have any name, flight number or city that they wished, the generator defaulted to creating a document for Osama Bin Laden.
Soghoian claimed that his motivation for the website was to focus national attention on the ease with which a passenger could evade the no-fly lists.
and security expert Bruce Schneier. Soghoian received media attention for posting a program on his website to enable the automatic production of modified boarding passes.
On October 27, 2006, Democratic Congressman Edward Markey called for Soghoian's arrest.
At 2 am on October 28, 2006, his home was raided by agents of the FBI to seize computers and other materials.

Consumer privacy research and activism

In May 2011, Soghoian was approached by public relations firm Burson-Marsteller and asked to write an anti-Google op-ed, criticizing the company for privacy issues associated with its social search product. Soghoian refused, and instead published the email conversation. A subsequent investigation by journalists revealed that the PR firm, which had refused to identify its client to Soghoian, had been retained by Facebook.
In May 2011, Soghoian filed a complaint with the FTC, in which he claimed that online backup service Dropbox was deceiving its customers about the security of its services. Soon after Soghoian first publicly voiced his concerns, Dropbox updated its terms of service and privacy policy to make it clear that the company does not in fact encrypt user data with a key only known to the user, and that the company can disclose users' private data if forced to by law enforcement agencies.
Soghoian is one of the three co-creators of the Do Not Track mechanism, along with security researchers Sid Stamm and Dan Kaminsky. In July 2009, Soghoian and Stamm created a prototype add-on for the Firefox web browser, implementing support for a new Do Not Track header.
In June 2009, Soghoian published an open letter and subsequently for other products, including search (for signed in users).

Government surveillance research and activism


In December 2009, Soghoian released an audio recording he made at a closed-door surveillance industry conference. In the recording, an executive from Sprint Nextel revealed that the company had created a special website through which law enforcement agents can obtain GPS information on subscribers and that the website had been used to process 8 million requests during the previous year. That recording was subsequently cited by Alex Kozinski, Chief Judge of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in U.S. v. Pineda-Moreno, in support of his view that "1984 may have come a bit later than predicted, but it's here at last."
In December 2009, Soghoian released a letter written by lawyers for Yahoo!, objecting to the release of documents detailing how much the company charges for government requested surveillance activities. In the letter, Yahoo!'s attorneys argued that: "The pricing information, if disclosed, would be used to 'shame' Yahoo! and other companies – and to 'shock' their customers. Therefore, release of Yahoo!'s information is reasonably likely to lead to impairment of its reputation for protection of user privacy and security, which is a competitive disadvantage for technology companies."

Notes






