[[George Wood (New Zealand politician)]]

CATEGORIES: Companions of the New Zealand Order of Merit, Living people, 1946 births, Mayors of North Shore City, People from the Auckland Region, Auckland Councillors

George Sydney Wood, CNZM, (born 5 August 1946 in Birkenhead, New Zealand) is a former Mayor of North Shore City, New Zealand's fourth largest city. He was the first North Shore Mayor to be elected for a third term since the city was formed in 1989. Andrew Williams replaced him as Mayor in the 2007 New Zealand local body elections.
Wood was appointed a Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit (CNZM) for services to local body affairs in the New Year Honours 2008.  He was elected to the new Auckland (SuperCity) council in the October 2010 election as a North Shore ward councillor.elections2010.co.nz
George is a member of the Citizens and Ratepayers teamNorth Shore 1 on the Auckland Council.  He has been appointed to a number of committees and is chairman of the Community Safety Forum and deputy chairman of the Accountability and Performance and Emergency Management committees.Ward councillors

Personal life

Wood was born in Birkenhead of the North Shore, in Auckland. He was educated at Birkdale Primary, Northcote Intermediate and Northcote College. His father Oliver Wood operated a trucking business.Fisher, Muriel and Hilder, Wenman. (1969). Birkenhead: the kauri suburb, Birkenhead: Birkenhead Borough Counci

Police career

Wood originally worked for the New Zealand Police, primarily as a crime investigations manager. As a Police investigator, he worked on many inquiries and served at various times in Auckland, Rotorua and Palmerston North. In his final years of service (1995–98), he was the manager of Police services within North Shore City.
A graduate of the Royal New Zealand Air Force Command and Staff College   and the Australian Institute of Police Management SydneyAustralian Institute of Police Management from where he gained a Graduate Certificate in Applied Management.
He is the recipient of a New Zealand Police long service and good conduct medal awarded in 1980.

Political career

Mayor of North Shore City

In October 1998 Wood was elected mayor of North Shore City following a fiercely contested election. Wood was able to bring together a new style of council administration with only three standing committees and all councillors members of these committees.Local Governance Statement, 11 November 2008 
During his term as mayor Wood was most successful in melding the council together and pushed through major reforms in relation to: Sewerage (waste water) infrastructure improvements, revamping the strategic plan and long term funding programme for North Shore City and developing and building the Northern Busway Project.stuff.co.nz/249425/Auckland-busway-a-revolution
Wood stood as an independent mayoralty candidate in the 2007 North Shore City elections but was defeated by Andrew Williams.
In the period since the October 2007 election Wood has worked behind the scenes on a number of projects mainly relating to transport. He is particularly vocal over the need to upgrade or replace the Auckland Harbour Bridge.

Election to 1st Auckland Council

George joined the Citizens and Ratepayers Association (C&R)Citizens & Ratepayers and was elected to the new Auckland Council to represent the North Shore ward.  He topped the poll for this ward
In his inaugural speech to the Auckland Council George Wood made particular reference to the need to address the recommendations of the Royal Commission report.  He made a strong plea to the new council to become actively involved in pursuing improved social conditions and try to ensure that less young people end up in prison.

Controversy

In April 2007, Wood acceded to pressure from Chinese officials not to attend an international cultural show by Divine Performing Arts, which contained scenes depicting the oppression of people who practice the Falun Gong spiritual system.
Wood was planning to attend the show with his wife, but after a phone call from the Chinese Consular General's office he backed out, and was quoted as saying:
 I don't want to get involved in internal People's Republic of China politics but I also want to maintain a reasonable relationship with the People's Republic of China. They said that show was involved in Falun Gong, they indicated Falun Gong, and I don't know what the true impact of that is, but it obviously has some concerns for them.
I had indicated that I probably would go to the show, but I'm not going to cause an international kerfuffle by going to something that I don't know anything about. I don't know anything about the Falun Gong or whatever it means. I am a mayor of a city not an international diplomat and I haven't really got the time to analyse the thing out. 
A journalist who did attend a Falun Gong show in Auckland reported being harried and felt he was "used."  He left the performance at the interval.The gospel truth: Falun Gong | Facebook

Chairman of the Auckland Mayoral Forum

Following the 2001 local government elections Wood was elected to the position of chairman of the Auckland Mayoral Forum. In this role Wood pushed through a major joint programme between the Government and Auckland councils for transport funding.
The New Zealand Government were most desirous of achieving better governance for the Auckland region.

Auckland local government reform

Wood was one of four mayors who asked Prime Minister Helen Clark to reform the Auckland region's local government in September 2006. Subsequently the Royal Commission on Auckland Governance was formed to enquire into the future of local government cross the Auckland region.
Wood submitted to the Commission with Wyn Hoadley.
Wood and Hoadley called for one Auckland council across the region with a mayor elected at large, 13 elected and 5 appointed specialist councillors and 13 boroughs to replace the existing councils and community boards.  They also recommended that an Environmental Protection Agency be appointed.
The high level of debt that the seven territorial councils and the Auckland Regional Council will bring to the new council, along with the negativity by existing councils, is a major concern to Wood.
Wood is concerned as to how the report of the Royal Commissioners on Auckland GovernanceRoyal Commission – Report: Executive Summary Part 1 will be implemented. He believes it should be a report delivered on a broad front and not implemented in a piecemeal manner.

Auckland Council

George is now the chairman of the Auckland Council's Regional Strategy and Policy committee.  This is a committee of the whole of council meaning that it consists of the mayor, 20 councillors and two representative of the Independent Maori Statutory Board.Auckland council political structure 2013/2016
Elected to the Auckland Council in October 2010 George Wood has been appointed chairman of the Community Safety Forum Chairman of Community Safety Forum, Auckland Council and Deputy Chairman of the Accountability and Performance committee Deputy Chairman of the Accountability and Performance committee. along with membership of other council committees.
The preparation of the Auckland Plan, a spatial plan for the future development of the Auckland Region over the next 40 years, has been a major interest for George Wood The Auckland Plan
George Wood has been a critic of the Auckland Council's draft Unitary Plan Unitary Plan unrest on the North Shore.  Locations like Milford and Browns Bay have resisted the idea of higher residential buildings than what was proposed in the plan.  This is despite plaintiff pleas from Mayor Len Brown Front page North Shore Times 23 April 2013

Graffiti Plan for Auckland Council

A major revamp of the graffiti control and removal plan across the Auckland Region has been undertaken under the direction of the Community Safety Forum chaired by George Wood. The Auckland Council Graffiti Strategy document has brought a number of organisations under one umbrella. 






