[[South Korean presidential election, 2007]]

CATEGORIES: Presidential elections in South Korea, 2007 elections in Asia, 2007 in South Korea, Lee Myung-bak

The 17th  South Korean presidential election took place on 19 December 2007. Lee defeated United New Democratic Party candidate Chung Dong-young and independent candidate Lee Hoi-chang by the largest margin since direct elections were reintroduced in 1987. It also marked the first time a president-elect in Korea was under investigation by a prosecutor. Retrieved December 20, 2007. Voter turnout was 63.0%, an all-time low according to the National Election Commission.

Official candidates

Timeline

This list of dates are the major events managed by the NEC (National Election Commission).Timeline (detailed) of 2007 presidential election (Korean), the NEC, 2007 

Liberal primaries

On this election, there were three liberal parties contested.

UNDP primary

Chung Dong-young was elected as the official candidate of the party on October 14, 2007.

Creative Korea Party primary

Democrats primary

Lee In-je was elected as the official presidential candidate of the party.

Conservative (GNP) primary

GNP primary consisted of opinion polling and popular vote (only party member could participate). The official result was announced on August 20, 2007, at 07:20 GMT, naming Lee Myung-bak the presidential candidate from the Hannara party. Because Lee Myung-bak won the race with slight margin, there was controversy regarding the method primary election used(opinion poll). However, Park Geun-hye conceded her lost to Lee Myung-bak. Park Geun-hye declared her presidential candidacy in 2012 presidential election and won the primary.
1997 and 2002 presidential candidate for GNP, Lee Hoi-chang had announced his candidacy on November 7, 2007 as an independent, not joining GNP primary.

Progressive (DLP) primary

Voting method

Candidates

=1st round=

The official results of the first round, as announced on September 9, 2007, at 07:30 GMT, were:
No candidate received a majority of the votes, so a second round of the presidential primary was scheduled from September 10 to September 15.

=Final (2nd) round=

As a result, the official presidential candidate of Democratic Labour Party: Kwon Young-ghil.

Exit polls

The Exit poll was announced at 18:00 on election day. (As voting time was over) 
It expected Lee Myung-bak's absolute majority.Lee Myung-bak cruises to landslide victory The Korea Herald, 17 December 2007

Final result

Other Information

On April 7, 2011, a National Intelligence Service agent was guilty of investigating Lee Myung-bak's secret real estate-related information before the election.
According to Wikileaks, Yoo Chong-ha (유종하), the former co-chairman of Lee Myung-bak's presidential election campaign, requested to then American ambassador to South Korea, Alexander Vershbow, to delay the extraction of the main individual of the BBK embezzlement scandal, Christopher Kim (Kim Kyung-joon), to Korea on the request to prevent spreading controversies related to Lee Myung-bak's involvement in the BBK embezzlement scandal during the election season.






