[[Gears (software)]]

CATEGORIES: Discontinued Google software, Mozilla add-ons

Gears, formerly Google Gears, Gears is free and open source software.
In late November 2009, numerous online news sources reported that Google was going to migrate to Web Storage rather than use Gears in the future. A Google spokesman later clarified that Google would, however, continue to support Gears so as not to break sites using it.

Components

There are several major API components to Gears:

Version history

Support

Several web applications from a variety of companies have used Gears at some point, including Google (Gmail, YouTube, Docs, Reader, Picasa for mobile, Calendar, Wave), MySpace (Mail Search), Zoho (Writer, Mail), Remember The Milk, and Buxfer. WordPress 2.6 added support for Gears, to speed up the administrative interface and reduce server hits.
Gears can be enabled on sites where it is otherwise unsupported, by using a Greasemonkey user script one of the Gears engineers has created.
Gears is supported on Google Chrome and Internet Explorer 6 and Internet Explorer 8 on Windows XP, Vista and Seven, Internet Explorer Mobile 4.01 and later on Windows Mobile, Safari 3.1.1 and later on Mac OS X 10.4 and later (though not with Safari 4 on Mac OS X 10.6 Snow Leopard; with no sign of a fix anytime soon), and Firefox 1.5 and later on multiple platforms. There is only limited 64 bit support from third parties.
Gears does not support attachment files with sizes greater than 2 GB under Mac OS X Leopard or Snow Leopard currently due to a bug in the Blob handling code.
On May 29, 2008, Opera Software ASA announced that Opera Mobile 9.5 would support Gears.
The technology preview release of the browser was published on February 20, 2009.
It is currently available for touch-screen devices on Windows Mobile 5 & 6 only. Gears is not built into browsers other than Google Chrome and must be downloaded separately.
The Ruby on Rails framework supports interfaces to Gears without needing to understand the Google Gears API.

End of life

On February 19, 2010, the Gears team at Google announced that the development of Google Gears had stopped, as they are working on bringing all of the Gears capabilities into web standards like HTML5. Although development of new features has ceased, Google is planning to continue supporting Gears until they have developed a "simple, comprehensive" method for users' data to be migrated to HTML5 features. Google Gears was removed from the Google Chrome stable on June 7, 2011.








