[[Jamie Lenman]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, Living people

Jamie Edward Lenman (born 9 November 1982) is an English musician and illustrator best known as the lead singer and guitar player in the British alternative rock trio Reuben, which he fronted between 1998 and 2008.  He was a founding member of the band along with bassist Jon Pearce and was also the main songwriter for the band.
Lenman has been in and out of bands since his early teenage years, including several alongside Jon Pearce. Lenman and Pearce eventually formed the band Angel with drummer and producer Jason Wilson (Stakeout Studios). After a demo release and prior to their Pilot (Reuben EP), the band changed drummers and renamed themselves Reuben, shortened from the title of their track 'Words from Reuben'.
Reuben went on indefinite hiatus in June 2008 due to a "culmination of different pressures".
From 2004 to 2008, Lenman played drums in the band Caretaker. Lenman has also performed as a guest vocalist on albums by Frank Turner, Sucioperro, Sean Genockey and Left Side Brain. Lenman and band mate Guy Davis collaborated with yourcodenameis:milo on Milo's Print Is Dead project.
Lenman has directed many music videos for bands including Reuben, Sucioperro

Solo career

Lenman revealed on 23 September 2013 that he will release a double album on 4 November 2013, titled 'Muscle Memory' through Xtra Mile Recordings, the record label who worked with Reuben. His first solo album covers two distinct styles, with disc one described as 'brutal riffs and intense vocals', while the second will feature a variety of different melody led styles of music, including big band, jazz and folk.

Personal life

Lenman has been open in interviews and lyrics about his personal life. He has a long-standing friendship with folk-rock singer Frank Turner, another artist working with Xtra Mile. In 2010, Lenman posted a video covering one of Turner's songs, as "Frank" had done the same with one of his. The 2013 7" vinyl release of single 'Fizzy Blood' also features a track by Turner's hard-rock side-project Mongol Horde.
Lenman has also talked about his wife, who is a burlesque dancer.

Discography

Other projects






