[[Gaetano Donizetti]]

CATEGORIES: 1797 births, 1848 deaths, Compositions by Gaetano Donizetti, Italian composers, Opera composers, People from Bergamo, People with bipolar disorder, Romantic composers

Domenico Gaetano Maria Donizetti (; born 29 November 1797 – died 8 April 1848) was an Italian composer from Bergamo, Lombardy.
Although Donizetti did not come from a musical background, at an early age, he was taken under the wing of composer Simon MayrAllitt 1991, p. 9 who had set up the Lezioni Caritatevoli and had enrolled him by means of a full scholarship. There he received detailed training in the arts of fugue and counterpoint, and it was from there that Mayr was instrumental in obtaining a place for the young man at the Bologna Academy. In Bologna, at the age of 19,Osborne 1994, p. 139 he wrote his first one-act opera, the comedy Il Pigmalione, although it does not appear to have been performed during his lifetime. 13
Through his life, Donizetti wrote about 70 operas, but an offer in 1822 from Domenico Barbaja, the impresario of the Teatro San Carlo in Naples, which followed the composer's ninth opera, led to his move to that city and the composition of 28 operas, the premieres of all of which were given at that house or in one of the city's smaller houses including the Teatro Nuovo or the Teatro del Fondo.  This continued—with some periods of discord—until the production of Caterina Cornaro in January 1844. 1 In all, Naples presented 51 of Donizetti's operas.
During this early period, success came primarily with the comic operas, the serious ones failing to attract significant audiences. 50—51 However, the situation changed with the appearance in 1830 of the opera seria, Anna Bolena which was the first to make a major impact on the Italian and international opera scene and, at the same time, to shift the balance for the composer away from success with only comedic operas. However, even after 1830, his best-known works did also include comedies such as L'elisir d'amore (1832) and Don Pasquale (1843). But significant historical dramas did appear and became successful, sometimes outside Naples before reaching that city. Most significantly, they included Lucia di Lammermoor (the first to have a libretto written by Salvadore Cammarano) in 1835, in addition to "one of his most successful Neapolitan operas",Black 1982, p. 52 Roberto Devereux in 1837.  Up to that point, all of his operas had been set to Italian libretti.
However, accepting an offer from the Paris Opéra for two new operas, he moved to Paris in October 1838, and began to set his operas to French texts. These included the first, a French version of the unperformed Poliuto which became Les martyrs in April 1840. The attraction of moving to Paris was more than for receiving larger fees and prestige; Donizetti's chafing against the censorial limitations which existed in Italy resulted in much greater freedom in Paris to choose subject matter. 225 Two  new operas, written to French texts, were given in Paris.  They were La fille du régiment (the first specifically composed to be performed in French), in addition to La favorite''.
By 1845 severe illness caused him to be moved back to Bergamo, where he died in 1848.
Along with Gioachino Rossini and Vincenzo Bellini, he was a leading composer of bel canto opera during the first fifty years of the Nineteenth Century.

Early life and musical education in Bergamo and Bologna

The youngest of three sons, Donizetti was born in 1797 in Bergamo's Borgo Canale quarter located just outside the city walls. His family was very poor and had no tradition of music, his father Andrea being the caretaker of the town pawnshop. Simone Mayr, a German composer of internationally successful operas,  had become maestro di cappella at Bergamo's principal church in 1802. He founded the Lezioni Caritatevoli school in Bergamo in 1805 for the purpose of providing musical training, including classes in literature, beyond what choirboys ordinarily received up until the time that their voices broke. In 1807, Andrea Donizetti attempted to enroll both his sons, but the elder, Giuseppe (then 18), was considered too old. Gaetano (then 9) was accepted. 5—6
While not especially successful as a choirboy during the first three trial months of 1807, there being some concern about a diffetto di gola (throat defect), Mayr was soon reporting that Gaetano "surpasses all the others in musical progress". 6 Mayr was able to persuade the authorities that the young boy's talents were worthy of keeping him in the school, and he remained there for nine years, until 1815.
However, as Donizetti scholar William Ashbrook notes, in 1809 he was threatened with having to leave because his voice was changing. In 1810 he applied for and was accepted by the local art school, the Academia Carrara, but it is not known whether he attended classes. Then, in 1811, Mayr once again intervened. Having written both libretto and music for a "pasticcio-farsa", Il piccolo compositore di musica, as the final concert of the academic year, he cast five young students, among them his young pupil Donizetti as "the little composer". As Ashbrook notes, this "was nothing less than Mayr's argument that Donizetti be allowed to continue his musical studies". 8—9 The piece was performed on 13 September 1811 and included the composer character stating the following:
In reply to the chiding which, in the drama, comes from the other four characters in the piece because of the "little composer" 's boasts, the "composer" responds with:
The performance also included a waltz which Donizetti played and for which he received credit in the libretto. 9In singing this piece, all five young men were given opportunities to show off their musical knowledge.
The following two years were somewhat precarious for the young Donizetti: the 16-year-old created quite a reputation for what he did do—which is regularly to fail to attend classes—and also for what he did instead—making something of a spectacle of himself in the town. 9—11
However, in spite of all this, Mayr not only persuaded Gaetano's parents to allow him to continue studies, but also secured funding from the Congregazione di Carità in Bergamo for two years of scholarships. In addition, he provided the young musician with letters of recommendation to both the publisher Giovanni Ricordi as well as to the Marchese Francesco Sampieri in Bologna (who would find him suitable lodging) and where, at the Liceo Musicale, he was given the opportunity to study musical structure under the renowned Padre Stanislao Mattei.
In Bologna, he would justify the faith which Mayr had placed in him. In 1816 he wrote what Allitt describes as "his initial exercises in operatic style",Allitt 1991, pp. 9—11 the opera Il pigmalione, as well as composing portions of Olympiade and L'ira d'Achille in 1817, these two being no more than "suggesting the work of a student". Encouraged by Mayr to return to Bergamo in 1817, he began his "quartet years" as well as composing piano pieces and, most likely, being a performing member of quartets where he would have also heard music of other composers.  In addition, he began seeking employment.

Career as an opera composer

After extending his time in Bologna for as long as he could, he was forced to return to Bergamo since no other prospects appeared. Various small opportunities came his way and, at the same time, he made the acquaintance of several of the singers appearing during the 1817—1818 Carnival season.  Among them was the soprano Giuseppina Ronzi de Begnis and her husband Giuseppe. 19
A coincidental meeting around April 1818 with an old school friend, Bartolomeo Merelli (who was to go to a distinguished career), led to an offer to compose the music from a libretto which became Enrico di Borgogna.  Without a commission from any opera house, Donizetti decided to write the opera first and then try to find a company to accept it. He was able to do so when Paolo Zancla, the impresario in Venice of the Teatro San Lucca (an early theatre from 1629, then later the Teatro Goldoni) accepted it.  Thus Enrico was presented on 14 November 1818, but with little success, the audience appearing to be more interested in the re-decorating of the opera house rather than the music. 
After some minor compositions under the commission of Paolo Zancla, Donizetti wrote his ninth opera, Zoraida di Granata. This work impressed Domenico Barbaia, the prominent theatre manager who was the Intendant of the Teatro San Carlo in Naples. Donizetti was offered a contract to compose for that house and, also writing for Rome and Milan, he achieved some popular success in the 1820s, although critics were often unimpressed. It was not until 1830 that he became well known internationally, when his Anna Bolena was premiered in Milan, and this brought him instant fame throughout Europe.

L'elisir d'amore, a comedy produced in 1832, came soon after, and is deemed to be one of the masterpieces of 19th-century opera buffa (as is his Don Pasquale, written for Paris in 1843). Shortly after L'elisir d'amore, Donizetti composed Lucia di Lammermoor, based on The Bride of Lammermoor, the novel by Sir Walter Scott. This became his most famous opera, and one of the high points of the bel canto tradition, reaching a stature similar to that of Bellini's Norma.
After the success of Lucrezia Borgia in 1833, his reputation was  consolidated and Donizetti followed the paths of both Rossini and Bellini by visiting Paris, where his Marin Faliero was presented at the Théâtre-Italien in 1835 but suffered by comparison with Bellini's I puritani which appeared at the same time. 
