[[My Yahoo!]]

CATEGORIES: Yahoo!, News aggregators, Web portals

My Yahoo! is online software that enables users to combine personalized Yahoo! features, content feeds and information onto a single page. iGoogle is similar to My Yahoo. On the 19th of September, 2013 a tablet oriented redesigned version of My Yahoo was launched.  On the 31st of January, 2014, this new version was rolled out to all users.    
As of the week of March 3rd, 2014 Yahoo users are being informed that the localized versions of My Yahoo are being discontinued and users must log-on to the US edition (my.com) where most of the users' settings and applications will be migrated to so they can continue using My Yahoo after March 24th, 2014. 
While the appearance, layout and content of the main Yahoo homepage is standard, My Yahoo offers a more customizable experience.

Applications of MyYahoo

A user's MyYahoo page allows them to access almost everything they need on one page. They never need to go to another website and open up another browser to get information. There are many applications and programs that allow users to access their social networking pages, the daily Lottery numbers, and much more.

Personalized News Pages

MyYahoo's ultimate purpose is to have its users personalize their pages to their own interests.
The most common news sources that users choose to be shown on their personalized pages are: Associated Press, Reuters, Agence France-Presse, Fox News, ABC News, NPR, USA Today, CNN, CBC News, Seven News, and BBC News.

Comparison to other personalized homepages

MyYahoo and iGoogle are very similar. iGoogle for the longest time was MyYahoo's biggest competitor. On October 14, 2011, Google announced that with its new focus on Google+, iGoogle will be disabled on November 1, 2013. The mobile version retired on July 31, 2012.  MyYahoo regained a lot of its users back that they previously lost to iGoogle.
Another competitor to My Yahoo! is Netvibes, based in Paris, France. The site features many of the same features, and is generally more customizable than My Yahoo.

Features

Reliability is an essential component to a website's success. The best websites will go down or become slow from time to time, but Yahoo will go down far less than a more specialized and less popular site.

Criticism

MyYahoo cannot mix different feeds into one consolidated feed. A person can add ESPN, Fox Sports, and Yahoo Sports as separate feeds, but cannot create a single feed that contains all three. Also, tabs after the first tab only have two columns. One of those columns has a big advertisement that takes away a lot of space, leaving only one column.
Since the redesign of My Yahoo! in September 2013, many users have complained of numerous issues they have encountered. These include 1) font size is too large and cannot be changed, 2) applications are less configurable, 3) the weather app does not remember the chosen location (uses auto-locate instead), 4) column resizing is no longer allowed, and 5) the forced inclusion of a large Yahoo search bar near the header.






