[[Klondike (solitaire)]]

CATEGORIES: Klondike-like solitaire card games, Single-deck solitaire card games, Anglo-American playing card games, French deck card games, Card game video games, GNOME Games, Mobile games, Computer games that use GTK+

Klondike is a patience game (solitaire card game).  Many people refer to Klondike as patience or solitaire, it being one of the better known of the family of patience games.

Rules

Taking a shuffled standard 52-card deck of playing cards (without Jokers), one upturned card is dealt on the left of the playing area, then six downturned cards (from left to right). On top of the downturned cards, an upturned card is dealt on the left-most downturned pile, and downturned cards on the rest until all piles have an upturned card. The piles should look like the figure to the right.
The four foundations (light rectangles in the upper right of the figure) are built up by suit from Ace (low in this game) to King, and the tableau piles can be built down by alternate colors, and partial or complete piles can be moved if they are built down by alternate colors also. Any empty piles can be filled with a King or a pile of cards with a King. The aim of the game is to build up a stack of cards starting with 2 and ending with King, all of the same suit. Once this is accomplished, the goal is to move this to a foundation, where the player has previously placed the Ace of that suit. Once the player has done this, they will  have "finished" that suit, the goal being, of course, to finish all suits, at which time the player would have won.
There are different ways of dealing the remainder of the deck:

Odds of winning

For a standard game of Klondike of the forms Draw 3, Re-Deal Infinite, and Win 52, the number of possible hands is over 7,000 trillion. About 79% of the games are theoretically winnable, If one allows cards from the foundation to be moved back to the tableau, then between 82 and 91.5% are theoretically winnable.engr.edu/~afern/papers/solitaire. Another recent study has found the Draw 3, Re-Deal Infinite to have a 83.6% win rate after 1000 random games were solved by a computer solver.com/ShootMe/Klondike-Solver/blob/master/Statistics. The number of games a player can probabilistically expect to win is at least 43%.  In addition, some games are "unplayable" in which no cards can be moved to the foundations even at the start of the game; these occur in only 0.025% of hands dealt.
The four types of hands are won games, theoretically winnable lost games (the player made a selection that resulted in a lost game, but could not know what the correct selection was because the relevant cards were hidden), unwinnable games (there is no selection that leads to a winning result), and unplayable games.
There is a modified version of the game called "Thoughtful Solitaire", in which the identity of all 52 cards is known.  Because the only difference between the two games (Klondike and Thoughtful) is the knowledge of card location, all Thoughtful games with solutions will also have solutions in Klondike. Similarly, all dead-ends in Thoughtful will be dead ends in Klondike.  However, the theoretical odds of winning a standard game of non-Thoughtful Klondike are currently not known exactly. It has been said that the inability for theoreticians to precisely calculate these odds is "one of the embarrassments of applied probability".
One brute force attempt, based on a computer program playing 100 million (or slightly greater than 0.00000001%) of possible games predicts 8.7% win by clearing the table to the aces pile.  However imperfect the algorithm is, it correctly predicted other results accurately (In about 1 in 241 games all black or all red cards were dealt. 1 x 25/51 x 24/50 x 23/49 x 22/48 x 21/47 x 20/46 x 19/45 =0.004152 or 1 in 240.8 deals)

Scoring

Standard Scoring in the Windows Solitaire game is determined as follows:Highest Score in Windows Solitaire, Microsoft Help and Support, KB101766.
Moving cards directly from the Waste stack to a Foundation awards 10 points.  However, if the card is first moved to a Tableau, and then to a Foundation, then an extra 5 points are received for a total of 15.  Thus in order to receive a maximum score, no cards should be moved directly from the Waste to Foundation.
Time can also play a factor in Windows Solitaire, if the Timed game option is selected.  For every 10 seconds of play, 2 points are taken away.  Bonus points are calculated with the formula of 700,000 / (seconds to finish) if the game takes more than 30 seconds. If the game takes less than 30 seconds, no bonus points are awarded.

Variations

Single 52-card deck

Below are some variations of the game of Klondike:

Tarot deck

The game can be played with a Tarot-style 78-card deck (such as a Tarot Nouveau).  There are two ways of doing this.  Each has 9 increasing tableau stacks.

Computerized versions



Notes




