[[Group sex]]

CATEGORIES: Group sex, Free sex, Group processes, Sexual fidelity, Sexuality and society, Articles with inconsistent citation formats

Group sex is sexual behavior involving more than two participants.  Group sex can occur amongst people of all sexual orientations and genders.  Group sex also occurs in non-human animals such as bonobo apes and chimpanzees.
Group sex most commonly takes place in a private sex party or semi-public swinger gathering, but may also take place at massage parlors or brothels or, in some jurisdictions, at purpose-built locations such as sex clubs. In places where non-monogamous sex is taboo or illegal, group sex may take place in private or clandestine locations including homes, hotel rooms, or private clubs.
Fantasies of group sex are extremely common among both men and women, and group sex is a subgenre in pornographic films.

Terms

In principle, any sexual behaviour performed by more than two people can be referred to as group sex, but various terms are used to describe particular acts or combinations of people.  Many swingers argue that non-swingers have conflated the terms because of lack of understanding and that there are distinct differences among the terms with specific meanings as to number, intent, sexual orientation, and familiarity of the persons involved.

Prevalence

Fantasies of group sex are extremely common among both men and women. In major studies, between 54–88% of people fantasize about watching others have sex, 40–42% fantasize about being watched by others, and between 39–72% fantasize about bondage. Many forms of sexual behavior were reported by Kinsey's subjects, but the official Kinsey Reports web site does not mention threesomes or group sex in the summary of Kinsey's findings.

Types of sex party

A sex party is a gathering at which sexual activity takes place. Sex parties may be organized to enable people to engage in casual sexual activity or for swinging couples or people interested in group sex to meet, but any gathering where sexual activity is anticipated can be called a sex party.
Sex parties, under various names, have been a common focus of moral panics fed by media reports claiming that such parties are prevalent, or growing in prevalence, especially among teenagers.
There are number of types of sex parties:

Swinger party/gathering

A swinger party or partner-swapping party is a gathering at which individuals or couples in a committed relationship can engage in sexual activities with others as a recreational or social activity. Swinging can take place in various contexts, ranging from a spontaneous sexual activity at an informal social gathering of friends to a regular social gathering in a sex club (or swinger club) or residence.
Swinger parties may involve various group sex activities.  Partners can engage in penetrative sex, known as "full swap," or choose to "soft swap" in which they engage only in non-penetrative sex. New swinging couples often choose a soft swap before they are comfortable with a full swap, although many couples stay soft swap for personal reasons. "Soft swinging" is when a couple engages in sexual activities with only each other while other couples perform sex acts in the immediate vicinity.

Key party

A key party is a form of swinger party, in which male partners place their car and house keys into a common bowl or bag on arriving. At the end of the evening the female partners would randomly select keys from the bowl and leave with that key's owner.

Rainbow party

A rainbow party is an urban legend spread from the early 2000s. At these events, allegedly increasingly popular among adolescents, females wearing various shades of lipstick take turns fellating males in sequence, leaving multiple colours on their penises. "Are These Parties for Real?". The New York Times. Retrieved August 27, 2009. Rainbow parties were covered on The Oprah Winfrey Show in 2003, and became the subject of a juvenile novel called Rainbow Party. On May 27, 2010 the television program The Doctors discussed the topic with dozens of teens, parents, and professionals. However, sex researchers and adolescent health care professionals have found no evidence for the existence of rainbow parties, and as such attribute the spread of the stories to a moral panic.

Orgy

An orgy is a gathering where guests freely engage in open and unrestrained sexual activity or group sex; and a bunga bunga orgy is an orgy in which participants have sex underwater, such as in a swimming pool or a hot tub.thedailybeast.com/blogs-and-stories/2010-11-07/silvio-berlusconis-bunga-bunga-parties/ Berlusconi's "Bunga Bunga Orgies"—Daily Beast 7 November 2010

Health

As with all sexual activity, the relative risks of group sex depend on the specific activities engaged in, although having a large number of sexual partners increases one's risk of exposure to sexually transmitted infections (STIs).
From the mid-1980s there was lobbying against gay bathhouses blaming them for the spread of STIs, in particular HIV, and this forced their closure in some jurisdictions, particularly in the United States.  In other countries, fears about the spread of STIs have prompted the closing of bathhouses—with their private rooms—in favour of sex clubs, in which all sexual activity takes place in the open, and can be observed by monitors whose job it is to enforce safer sex practices.
Proponents point out that venues where group sex takes place often provide condoms, dental dams, latex gloves, lubricants and other items for safer sex. Bathhouses in particular are a major source of safer sex information—they provide pamphlets and post safer sex posters prominently (often on the walls of each room as well as in the common areas), provide free condoms and lubricants, and often require patrons to affirm that they will only have safer sex on the premises.[ref]
 

In the media

Sensational media reports about the prevalence of sex parties, especially among young people, appear with some regularity. In the early 1950s, for example, it was alleged that teenage girls, mainly throughout the Southern and Midwestern United States were forming "non-virgin clubs," in which they organized and held sex orgies with reports of couples being paired off by drawing numbers from a hat. These claims were investigated and debunked.
Several stories of this type arose in the US in 2003. In New York, rumors began that teens had been taking days off from school to attend "hooky parties" while their parents were at work. One school even suspended a group of girls for allegedly skipping school to attend such a party. They were refused the right to return to school until each had submitted to a medical examination for sexually transmitted diseases and pregnancy and school officials were allowed to examine the results. The New York Civil Liberties Union filed a federal lawsuit against the school"NYCLU Sues New York School Officials for Forcing Teen-Age Girls to Undergo Intrusive Medical Exams" (July 8, 2003). aclu. Retrieved February 2, 2007. on behalf of the girls and won a settlement which included monetary damages and a change in the school district's policy.org/case/doe-and-roe-v-reid
Similar stories concerning teenagers using gel bracelets as coupons or signals for sex also arose at the time, with similar lack of corroborating evidence. "Sex Bracelets". snopes. Retrieved December 22, 2005.



Notes





 | last=Weinberg
 | first=Martin S.
 | coauthors = Williams, Colin J.
 | title=Gay Baths and the Social Organization of Impersonal Sex
 | journal=Social Problems
 | volume=23
 | issue=2
 |  pages=124–136
 |date=December 1975
 | doi=10.1525/sp.1975.23.2.03a00020
 | ref=harv
 | jstor=799651
 }}

