[[Han Ye-seul]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, Living people, South Korean female singers, South Korean film actors, South Korean female models, People who lost United States citizenship

Han Ye-seul (born 18 September 1981) is a Korean actress, singer and model.

Biography

Han was born as Kim Ye-Seul-Yi, while her English name is Leslie Kim.

Naturalization

Han renounced her U.S. citizenship in 2004 for South Korean citizenship to establish herself there as a Korean actress.

Debut

Han debuted as a model after winning a super model competition in 2001. 
She appeared in a variety of commercials in Korea ranging from health drinks to beauty products to Venus women's apparel to Pizza Hut TV spots, Samsung ads and commercials for Motorola phones. She is also the voice for the character Susan Murphy in the Korean-language version of the DreamWorks Animation film Monsters vs. Aliens (2009). She appeared in Rain's music video for "Love Song". 
On December 18, 2013, Han has signed an exclusive contract with her new management agency SB Entertainment, which is a subsidiary of its parent company Verdi Media.
Actress Han Ye Seul Finds New Home with Agency SB Entertainment

Personal life

She was involved in a dispute with Korea Broadcasting System (KBS) for failing to show up to the filming of Myung Wol the Spy on 14 August 2011. At a meeting on the 15th, Kim agreed to return to filming on August 16.
She returned to Korea on the 18th, bringing her mother back with her for support. She was reported to have given a press conference at the airport apologizing on her sudden absence citing difficulties and hardships she had. She remarked that she firmly believes what she did was right despite criticism from the public and other media sources which pointed out her unexpected sudden absence from shooting.
On November 25, 2013, her agency and YG Entertainment's reps both confirmed that she and 1TYM's Teddy are dating.YG's Composer Teddy and Han Ye Seul Confirmed to be Dating!

Filmography

TV Drama

Film

Music Videos

Awards






