[[Manchester Metropolitan University]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures in Manchester, Education in Manchester, Manchester Metropolitan University, Educational institutions established in 1970, 1970 establishments in England, University Alliance

Manchester Metropolitan University (MMU) is a British university located in North West England. Its headquarters and central campus are in the city of Manchester, and there are additional facilities in the county of Cheshire. The university has its roots in the Manchester Mechanics' Institution (1824) and the Manchester School of Design (1838).  It is the fifth largest university in the United Kingdom in terms of student numbers.
Teaching quality inspections place the university within the top twenty in the UK, according to The Complete University Guide. Teaching standards have also been described as 'among the highest in the country' by the Quality Assurance Agency.  The university is ranked fourth of the new universities in attracting research funds from the Higher Education Funding Council for England.
The university is an accredited member of the Association of MBAs, a member of the University Alliance, the Association of Commonwealth Universities, the North West Universities Association and the European University Association.  The university is home to the Manchester School of Art, the Manchester School of Theatre and, in conjunction with the University of Manchester, the Manchester School of Architecture.

History

The university developed from mergers of various colleges with various specialisms, including Technology, Art and Design, i.e. Manchester Mechanics' Institution (1824) and Manchester School of Design (1838). Later, Schools of Commerce (founded 1889), Education (f. 1878) and Domestic Science (f. 1880) were added along with colleges at Didsbury, Crewe, Alsager and the former Domestic and Trades College (f. 1911), latterly Hollings College.  The painter L. S. Lowry attended Manchester School of Art in the years after the First World War where he was taught by the noted impressionist Adolphe Valette. It became Manchester Polytechnic in 1970. On 1 January 1977, the polytechnic merged with the Didsbury College of Education and Hollings College, and on 1 January 1983 with City of Manchester College of Higher Education. In 1987 the institution became a founding member of the Northern Consortium. Having previously been a local authority institution, the polytechnic became a corporate body on 1 April 1989, as allowed by the terms of the Education Reform Act 1988.
It was granted university status as "Manchester Metropolitan University" by the Privy Council on 15 September 1992 under the provisions of the Further and Higher Education Act, 1992. The university absorbed Crewe and Alsager College of Higher Education on 1 October 1992 and the Manchester School of Physiotherapy in 2003.

Campuses

The university was located on seven sites, five in Manchester (All Saints, Aytoun, Didsbury, Elizabeth Gaskell, and Hollings) and two in Cheshire (Alsager and Crewe), and is rationalising its estate and reducing the number of sites to two. The university has moved the work of the Alsager campus to Crewe and rebranded it MMU Cheshire. The Aytoun campus closed in 2012 when a new Business School opened on the All Saints Campus. Since 2011, the university has been engaged in a £350 million investment programme involving the largest physical change to its estate since its foundation. The two remaining campuses should provide improvements in the student experience, greater efficiency and further engagement with the local community.

All Saints Campus

All Saints campus is the university's main campus and home to the Faculty of Humanities, Languages and Social Science with the Geoffrey Manton Building accommodating the English, History and Economic History, Information and Communications, Politics and Philosophy, and Sociology departments. The Languages and Economics departments are housed in the Mabel Tylecote Building. The Manchester Law School is in the Sandra Burslem building which opened in 2003.
The John Dalton Building, on Chester Street is the home of the Faculty of Science and Engineering. the Institute for Biomedical Research into Human Movement and Health.
The Manchester School of Art on the All Saints Campus is composed of four departments: The Manchester School of Architecture (operated jointly with the University of Manchester Faculty of Humanities); Department of Art; Department of Design; Department of Media.
New premises costing £75 million for the Faculty of Business and Law have been built on All Saints Campus and the Business School re-located to this building from the Aytoun Campus in 2012. Green credentials are an integral part of the building's design which incorporates solar panels and heat pumps to power the building and a rain water recycling scheme.
The university library, renamed the Sir Kenneth Green Library, is on the All Saints campus. It houses a number of special collections mainly relating to the fine and applied arts, like the Laura Seddon Greeting Card Collection, a collection of 32,000 Victorian and Edwardian greeting cards. It was planned as a single central library in 1972 but after the mergers with the Didsbury College of Education and Hollings College it became a central library and administrative centre for seven library sites. From 1975 a catalogue was produced with the aid of the Birmingham Libraries Co-operative Mechanisation Project. Manchester: Manchester Polytechnic; pp. 34–36 From 1992 the library was part of the Consortium of Academic Libraries in Manchester (CALIM) which was extended in 2002 to become NoWAL, the North West Academic Libraries.NoWAL

Hollings

The Hollings Faculty offers the largest concentration of undergraduate and postgraduate programmes in food, clothing, and hospitality studies and related fields in the UK with over 3500 full-time, part-time and sandwich programme students. Hollings Faculty is in Fallowfield, three miles south of Manchester city centre close to halls of residence.

Elizabeth Gaskell and Didsbury

The Faculty of Health, Psychology & Social Care currently operates from the Elizabeth Gaskell and Didsbury campuses. Health-related and psychology programmes are based at the Elizabeth Gaskell Campus in Rusholme, whilst social work and social change programmes are based in Didsbury. The name commemorates novelist Elizabeth Gaskell who lived in Plymouth Grove.
The training college was founded in 1880 and by the 1950s was the Manchester College of Housecraft. In 1929 the following courses were available at the Municipal Training College of Domestic Economy: combined domestic subjects (for a Teaching Diploma), 3rd year courses for holders of diplomas, professional courses for those intending to work as housekeepers, matrons, etc., post-scholastic courses for girls in household management and in needlework, and various short courses. Manchester: George Falkner & Sons, 1929; p. 95

MMU Cheshire

The Faculty of Education is based on two campuses, Didsbury in Manchester and MMU Cheshire at Crewe in Cheshire.

Birley Fields

From 2012 the University will be investing £120 million in a highly environmentally sustainable development situated on the Birley Fields site in Hulme, Manchester. The plan is to relocate the Faculties of Education and Health and build student residences that can house approximately 1,200 students, car parking and facilities for community use.

Organisation

Governance

In common with most universities in the United Kingdom, Manchester Metropolitan University is headed formally by the Chancellor, currently Dianne Thompson CBE but led by the Vice-Chancellor, currently Professor John Brooks. There are two deputy Vice-Chancellors.
The University's Board of Governors is responsible for determining the educational character and mission of the University. It also falls to the Board of Governors to ensure that the University's resources are used in line with the University's Article of Government. It also safeguards the University's assets and approves the annual estimates of income and expenditure.
The Board of Governors is responsible for broad policy but the Vice-Chancellor, along with the Executive and Directorate, is responsible for overall management, policy implementation, organisation, operations and direction of the University.

University structure

The University is organised into eight faculties:
The Manchester Metropolitan School of Theatre is a drama school, which trains students to become professional actors. The course offered is a BA (Hons) in Acting. The school is a member of Drama UK, which means the course is a nationally acclaimed programme. Students who complete the course successfully are eligible for full Equity status. The school has links with many local theatres and television companies, such as Granada and the BBC. Graduates from the school of theatre include Amanda Burton, Steve Coogan, Richard Griffiths, Graham Fellows, Julie Walters and Burn Gorman.
In the session 2010/11, the University had over 35,000 students. The University employs 4,400 staff, comprising almost 1,500 full-time teaching staff, 700 part-time teaching staff and 2,200 support staff.

Finances

In the financial year ended 31 July 2011, Manchester Metropolitan University had a total income of £248,028,000 (2009/10 - £243,606,000) and a total expenditure of £213,103,000 (2009/10 - £220,221,000). The University's collects £106,857,000 from tuition fees and education contracts (2009/10 - £101,640,000) and attracts £4,992,000 in research grants and contracts (2009/10 - £4,414,000). Income from other sources totalled £31,371,000 (2009/10 - 30,524,000).

Academic profile

Reputation and rankings

Professor Ian A. Parker was suspended after he queried a lack of transparency in recruiting human resources. ""Cause célèbre scholar queried Met managers: A psychology professor suspended after criticising university managers is to face a disciplinary hearing for alleged gross misconduct'' ".

Admissions

UCAS statistics show that the University received 58,752 applications in 2011 and granted places to 9,083 students.  
Its student population stands at 35,165 
The University admits undergraduate students who have achieved a broad range of UCAS tariff points. Unistats breaks down the University's admissions with 5% being admitted with 119 points, 20% being admitted with 120-159 points, 30% being admitted with 160-199 points, 20% being admitted with 200-239 points, 15% being admitted with 240-279 points, 5% being admitted with 280-319 points, 5% being admitted with 320-359 points. 
Government statistics also show 5% of students gaining a First Class Honours degree, 35% gaining a 2:1, 55% gaining a 2:2 and 5% gaining a 3rd or a pass.

Research

MMU has eight research institutes:

Students' Union

The students' union has buildings on the All Saints, Crewe and Alsager campuses. The Students' Union MMUnion exists to represent all members at the Manchester Metropolitan University and students on accredited external courses. MMUnion is controlled by the Union Officers Group formed of seven students and graduates of the university, elected by the students to control the Union on their behalf. A shop especially designed to cater to the university students has also been set up inside the Student Union office.

International partnerships

The university has developed international relationships with the following institutions: American Hotel Academy, Brasov, Romania, University of Nicosia, Cyprus, University of Economics, Prague, Aalborg University, Denmark, Blaise Pascal University, Clermont-Ferrand, École Supérieure de Commerce de Montpellier, Montpellier and University of Savoy, France. In Germany, Hochschule Bochum, Bochum and Viadrina European University, Frankfurt (Oder). In Italy, University of Padua, Padova. In Lithuania, ISM University of Management and Economics, Vilnius. In Spain, Pablo de Olavide University, Seville, University of Murcia and University of Seville. In the Netherlands, Radboud University Nijmegen and in Australia, Deakin University, Geelong, Melbourne, Warrnambool, Victoria, Flinders University, Adelaide, University of Technology, Sydney, University of Newcastle, Sydney. Hong Kong Baptist University and , Bridgewater State University, Buffalo State College, East Carolina University, Louisiana State University, Texas Tech University and University of North Carolina.

Notable alumni

This partial list of alumni of Manchester Metropolitan University includes some who attended institutions which became part of present-day MMU.






