[[The Illustrated Man]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 short story collections, Science fiction short story collections, Fantasy short story collections, Short story collections by Ray Bradbury, Doubleday (publisher) books

The Illustrated Man is a 1951 book of eighteen science fiction short stories by Ray Bradbury that explores the nature of mankind. A recurring theme throughout the eighteen stories is the conflict of the cold mechanics of technology and the psychology of people.
The unrelated stories are tied together by the frame device of "the Illustrated Man", a vagrant with a tattooed body whom the unnamed narrator meets. The man's tattoos, allegedly created by a time-traveling woman, are animated and each tell a different tale. All but one of the stories had been published previously elsewhere, although Bradbury revised some of the texts for the book's publication.
The concept of the Illustrated Man would later be reused by Bradbury as an antagonistic character in Something Wicked This Way Comes, the tattoos coming to represent the souls of sinful victims of a mysterious carnival.
The book was made into a 1969 film starring Rod Steiger and Claire Bloom. It was adapted by Howard B. Kreitsek from the stories "The Veldt", "The Long Rain", and "The Last Night of the World".  It was directed by Jack Smight.
A number of the stories, including "The Veldt", "The Fox and the Forest" (as "To the Future"), "Marionettes, Inc.", and "Zero Hour" were dramatized for the 1955-57 radio series X Minus One. "The Veldt", "The Concrete Mixer", "The Long Rain", "Zero Hour", and "Marionettes Inc." were adapted for the TV series The Ray Bradbury Theater.

Story summaries

 
 
Other versions

The British edition, first published in 1952 by Hart-Davis omits "The Rocket Man", "The Fire Balloons", "The Exiles" and "The Concrete Mixer", and adds "Usher II" from The Martian Chronicles and "The Playground".
Editions published by Avon Books in 1997 and William Morrow in 2001 omit "The Fire Balloons" and add "The Illustrated Man" to the end of the book.

Reception

Boucher and McComas gave The Illustrated Man a mixed review, faulting the framing story as "markedly ineffective" and the story selection for seeming "less than wisely chosen." However, they found the better stories "provide a feast from the finest traditions in imaginative fiction""Recommended Reading," F&SF, August 1951, p. 84 and later named it among the year's top books."Recommended Reading," F&SF, April 1952, p. 96 Villiers Gerson, reviewing the volume for Astounding Science Fiction, praised it as "a book which demonstrates that its author is one of the most literate and spellbinding writers in science fiction today.""Book Reviews", Astounding Science Fiction, July 1951, p.155 In The New York Times, Gerson also praised the book for its "three-dimensional people with whom it is easy to sympathize, to hate, and to admire.""Realm of the Spacemen," The New York Times Book Review, February 4, 1951

Adaptations to other media

1969 film

A film adaptation of The Illustrated Man was released in 1969.  It was directed by Jack Smight and starred Rod Steiger, Claire Bloom, and others, including Don Dubbins. The film contains adaptations of "The Veldt", "The Long Rain", "The Last Night of the World" and expands the prologue and epilogue with intermittent scenes and flashbacks of how the illustrations came to be. A short documentary, The Making of The Illustrated Man, details the process the filmmakers used to cover Steiger's body in mock tattoos and shows actors and filmmakers preparing for the movie.

2008 album

A musical adaptation by Samuel Otten was released as a musical expression of the stories to go along with the reading.

Influence on Dark Star, 1974

Bradbury's "Kaleidoscope" inspired the 1974 science fiction movie Dark Star, which ends in a similar final scene.

Influence on To the Dark Side of the Moon, 2010

A theater adaptation of "Kaleidoscope", with influence from music by Pink Floyd was used to produce "To the Dark Side of the Moon", in reference to the Pink Floyd album by the same name. This adaptation was produced by Stern-Theater, a Swiss-based theater company. The script was written by Daniel Rohr and was first shown at the Theater Rigiblick in Zurich, Switzerland on February 6, 2010. The music includes creative use of a string quartet and a piano.

Future film

Director Zack Snyder is attached to direct, at least in part, a film adaptation of three stories from The Illustrated Man: "The Illustrated Man", "Veldt", and "Concrete Mixer".  Screenwriter Alex Tse is writing the screenplay.

The Visitors television series

The Visitors is an upcoming American television series based on the short story "Zero Hour".

References in popular culture



Footnotes

Bibliography




