[[Weasel]]

CATEGORIES: Weasels, Fauna of Southeast Asia, Japanese legendary creatures, Mammals of Asia, Mammals of Europe, Mammals of North America, Yōkai

Weasels 
Weasels vary in length from  long.  Weasels have a reputation for cleverness, quickness and guile.
Weasels feed on small mammals, and have from time to time been considered vermin, since some species took poultry from farms, or rabbits from commercial warrens. They can be found all across the world except for Antarctica, Australia, and neighbouring islands.

Terminology

The English word "weasel" was originally applied to one species of the genus, the European form of the least weasel (Mustela nivalis). This usage is retained in British English, where the name is also extended to cover several other small species of the genus. However, in technical discourse and in American usage, the term "weasel" can refer to any member of the genus, or to the genus as a whole. Of the 17 extant species currently classified in the genus Mustela, ten have "weasel" in their common names. Among those that do not are the stoat, the polecats, the ferret, and the European mink. (The superficially similar American mink is now regarded as belonging in another genus, Neovison.)

Species

The following information is according to the Integrated Taxonomic Information System.
1 Europe and northern Asia division excludes China.
The extinct "sea mink" was commonly included in this genus as Mustela macrodon, but in 1999 was moved to the genus Neovison.

Cultural meanings

Weasels have been assigned a variety of different cultural meanings. In Greek culture, a weasel near the house is a sign of bad luck, even evil, "especially if there is in the household a girl about to be married", since the animal (based on its Greek etymology) was thought to be an unhappy bride who was transformed into a weasel
In North America, native Americans deemed the weasel to be a bad sign; crossing its path meant a "speedy death".
In early modern Mecklenburg, Germany, amulets from weasels were deemed to have strong magic; the period between August 15 and September 8 was specifically designated for the killing of weasels. In Montagne Noire (France), Ruthenia (Eastern Europe), and in the early medieval culture of the Wends, weasels were not meant to be killed.

Japanese folklore

In Japan, ", and it was an omen for one's home to decline or flourish. It is said that when people chase after this sound, the sound stops.村上健司編著 『妖怪事典』 毎日新聞社、2000年、36頁。ISBN 978-4-6203-1428-0。
They are also said to shapeshift like the fox (kitsune) or tanuki, and the nyūdō-bōzu told about in legends in the Tōhoku region and the Chūbu region are considered weasels in disguise, and they are also said to shapeshift into ōnyūdō and little monks.
In the collection of depictions, the Gazu Hyakki Yagyō by Sekien Toriyama, they were depicted under the title 鼬, but they were read not as "itachi" but rather as "ten",高田衛監修 稲田篤信・田中直日編 『鳥山石燕 画図百鬼夜行』 国書刊行会、1992年、50頁。ISBN 978-4-336-03386-4。 and "ten" were considered to be weasels that have reached one hundred years of age and became yōkai that possessed supernatural powers.少年社・中村友紀夫・武田えり子編 『妖怪の本 異界の闇に蠢く百鬼夜行の伝説』 学習研究社〈New sight mook〉、1999年、123頁。ISBN 978-4-05-602048-9。 Another theory is that when weasels reach several hundred years of age, they become mujina.草野巧 『幻想動物事典』 新紀元社、1997年、30頁。ISBN 978-4-88317-283-2。

=Kamaitachi=

Kamaitachi are a phenomenon where when one is not doing anything, suddenly one would get injured as if one's skin was cut by a scythe.
In the past this was thought to be "the deed of an invisible yōkai weasel". However, this has been established as a physiological phenomenon that dried skin that receives a shock would tear off.
Also, there is the theory that "kamaitachi" are derived from "", and therefore were not originally related to weasels at all.

In popular culture

In Kenneth Grahame's classic children's book of 1908, The Wind in the Willows, a pack of armed weasels overrun Toad Hall, and have to be ejected by Badger, Mole, Ratty and Toad.
Weasels Ripped My Flesh is the title of a 1970 album by Frank Zappa, with artwork by Neon Park parodying a 1950s razor advertisement.

Footnotes






