[[Bikram Yoga]]

CATEGORIES: Yoga styles, Yoga schools, Companies based in Los Angeles, California, Yoga Studios

Bikram Yoga is a system of yoga that Bikram Choudhury synthesized from traditional hatha yoga techniques Bikram certified teachers taught a standardized dialogue to run the class, but are encouraged to develop their teaching skills the longer they teach. This results in varying deliveries and distinct teaching styles.

Bikram Choudhury

Bikram Choudhury, founder of the Bikram Yoga system, is also the founder of the Yoga College of India. Born in Calcutta in 1946, Bikram began practicing yoga at age four. He practiced yoga 4–6 hours every day. At the age of thirteen, he won the National India Yoga Championship. He was undefeated for the following three years and retired as the undisputed All-India National Yoga Champion. Bikram later devised the 26 postures sequence and founded Bikram's Yoga College of India. He has also written books and sings."Bikram Choudhury," last modified 2010, accessed April 4, 2012, 
In 2006, he had 1,650 yoga studios around the world (up from 1,200 the previous year).

Notable practitioners

Notable practitioners of Bikram Yoga include Dan Hardy, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Kobe Bryant, David Beckham, Lady Gaga, Ashton Kutcher, Robbie Williams, Andy Murray,Anastasia Stephens, "What HOT yoga can do for you", Daily Mail, 27 September 2008.  Accessed 30 April 2012. Charles Barkley, Jennifer Farley, Lacey Turner, Madonna, Elton Brand, Ian Somerhalder, Nina Dobrev, Pippa Middleton, Daniel Craig, Brooke Shields, Sarah Palin, Lea Michele, Kiran Chetry, Jesse Williams, Benedict Cumberbatch,Erin Walsh,  Accessed 26 January 2013. Richard Armitage.,Oliver Franklin, "Richard Armitage on The Hobbit, beard grooming and dwarf workouts", GQ British, 14 December 2012.  Accessed 23 December 2012. Juliet Simms,Juliet's Twitter feed contains multiple references to her hot yoga uses 

Health Benefits

According to a section in Benjamin Lorr's recent book, Hell-Bent, increased room temperature correlates with improved physical performance of the body.  Specifically, blood vessels dilate and tissue expands improving blood flow and distribution of oxygen throughout the body.  This creates an overall sense of well-being.  Additionally, other athletes have adopted the heat as a part of their training routine similar to the way some athletes practice at mile high altitudes to improve their ability to absorb oxygen.Peters, Jan. "Taking the Heat", Dance Magazine, October 2010 Vol. 84 Issue 10, p22-22
Common suggested benefits may include weight loss, enhanced strength, increased flexibility, improved posture, mental clarity, a balanced blood pressure and proper metabolism, improved ability to concentrate. Other suggested benefits include the flushing of toxins and impurities from the body through hard work and sweat,"About Bikram Yoga", Bikram Yoga. Retrieved on 21 October 2013. and Bikram claims specific poses can help clean out the veins and arteries."Tuladandasana", Bikram Yoga. Retrieved on 21 October 2013.

Releasing Toxins Through Sweat

A study published in 2012 found that certain toxins are released through sweat.   The study concluded that "induced perspiration may be useful to facilitate elimination of some potentially toxic phthalate compounds including DEHP and MEHP. Sweat analysis may be helpful in establishing the existence of accrued DEHP in the human body."

Controversy

Safety

Excessive sweating can result in dehydration, but can be prevented by simply drinking water.
Also, there is a risk of hyperthermia, which is overheating of the body. Symptoms include nausea, dizziness, or fainting, which can lead to a heat stroke. Simple hydration and resting during class reduces this risk.
Various conditions such multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, and some cardiac complications can cause unique sensitivity to heat.  Those struggling with these conditions are encouraged to check with their doctor before beginning hot yoga. Additionally, those who take medications for depression, nervousness, or insomnia may also wish to check with a doctor to determine if the heat will feel exacerbated by their medication.

Competition

Another controversial component of Bikram Yoga pertains to the prevalence of Yoga Asana Championships, regionally and nationally. While practitioners of other forms of yoga maintain that competition contradicts the idea of peace and unity, Bikram contends, "Competition is the foundation for all democratic societies. For without 'Competition', there is no democracy."Official website
In India, where yoga originated, yoga competitions have been around for over a century.

Legal issues

In the United States, Choudhury has claimed, and been aggressive in enforcing, broad copyrights in most aspects of the practice, teaching, and business of the system. While these claims are not definitively resolved (i.e., by any judicial ruling on the merits), Choudhury has extracted legal settlements from a number of yoga teachers and studios.
On December 17, 2012, U.S. District Court Judge Otis Wright ruled that Bikram Choudhury does not have copyright protection for the sequence of 26 yoga postures and two breathing exercises commonly known as "Bikram Yoga." The ruling, in favor of Evolation Yoga LLC and its founders Mark Drost and Zefea Samson, meant that non-Bikram studios are allowed to offer hot yoga classes utilizing that same 26-posture sequence—a legal right Choudhury actively and vigorously contested for several years.''Bloomberg "Yoga, AstraZeneca, Intel, UN: Intellectual Property" 
In Bikram's Beginning Yoga Class (First Edition), Choudhury claims he conducted medical studies at the Tokyo University Medical School validating the medical benefits of his 26 postures. During one of the lawsuits, defendants demanded copies of the "medical" studies and Choudhury claimed he could not find them.  In Bikram's Beginning Yoga Class (Second Edition), Choudhury removed all references to medical studies.Bikram's Beginning Yoga Class (Second Edition)
Two lawsuits accusing Bikram Choudhury of rape were filed in May 2013, in which a Jane Doe alleges sexual battery, false imprisonment, discrimination, harassment, and other counts in addition to the rape allegation. It describes a cult-like atmosphere where Bikram's followers help him find young women to assault. "Other persons in defendant Bikram Choudhury's inner circle, were aware of defendant Bikram Choudhury's pattern and practice of causing, inducing or persuading young women to enroll in teacher training classes to become yoga instructors only so he can sexually assault and/or rape them," the lawsuit claims.yogajournal.html
The suits paint a cult-like atmosphere at the training camps. Trainees were allegedly told that Choudhury is on the same level as Jesus Christ or the Buddha, that Bikram yoga can cure cancer and that practitioners will be able to live to 100 years old. Trainees were bullied and humiliated as well as praised, the suits say, and Choudhury allegedly gave lectures in which he disparaged gays, Americans and made ethnic slurs. Jane Doe 2 claims that Choudhury recruits volunteers from overseas who are "so in fear of defendant Bikram Choudhury's wrath that they will travel to the US and risk violating immigration laws in order to serve him. Once in the US these volunteers work for little or zero pay. "Their duties include grooming him, massaging him, making his tea, bringing him food and being forced to submit to sexual assaults and rapes against their will," the suit alleges.rawstory.com/rs/2013/05/14/millionaire-yoga-guru-bikram-choudhury-accused-of-rape-and-human-trafficking/
Minakshi "Micki"Jafa-Bodden served as Head of Legal and International Affairs from Spring 2011 to March 13, 2013 when she claims she was "abruptly and unlawfully terminated" according to the court documents filed on July 12, 2013 in the Superior Court of California, Los Angeles. But perhaps the more serious matters lie within the 2 years that Jafa-Bodden worked closely with Bikram, during which she claims she was victim and witness to Bikram's "severe, ongoing, pervasive and offensive conduct" especially to women, as well as homosexuals, African Americans and basically every other minority. The complaint is the fourth sex-based discrimination/sexual harassment/rape related suit filed this year against Bikram Choudhury. Bikram teacher Sarah Baughn filed a sexual harassment suit in March (just before Jafa-Bodden was fired), and two other unnamed women filed similar suits accusing Bikram of sexual harassment, intimidation and rape in May.com/news/lawsuit-asana/bikrams-former-head-of-legal-files-extremely-disturbing-complaint-involving-sexual-harassment-discrimination/

The 26 Asanas (postures)

The following are the 26 postures of Bikram Yoga. These are taught in the Beginning Bikram Yoga Class. The sequence is taught by people who have been trained and certified by Bikram Choudhury.




