[[Hildegard Knef]]

CATEGORIES: 1925 births, 2002 deaths, People from Ulm, People from the Free People's State of Württemberg, German film actresses, German musical theatre actresses, German stage actresses, German female singers, German women writers, German autobiographers, Writers from Baden-Württemberg, Officers Crosses of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany, People with poliomyelitis, Breast cancer survivors, Deaths from emphysema

Hildegard Frieda Albertine Knef (December 28, 1925February 1, 2002) was a German actress, singer, and writer. She was billed in some English language films as Hildegard Neff or Hildegarde Neff.

Early years

Hildegard Knef was born in Ulm.  She began studying acting at the age of 14, in 1940. She appeared in several films before the fall of the Third Reich, but most were released only afterward.
She left school when she was 17 to become an apprentice animator with Universum Film AG. After she had a successful screen test, she went to the State Film School at Babelsberg, Berlin, where she studied acting, ballet and elocution. Josef Goebbels, who was Hitler's propaganda minister, wrote to her and ask to meet her, but Knef's friends wanted her to stay away from him.  
During the Battle of Berlin, Knef dressed as a soldier in order to stay with her lover Ewald von Demandowsky, and joined him in the defence of Schmargendorf. Retrieved January 10, 2013
Her two best known film roles were "Susanne Wallner" in Wolfgang Staudte's film Die Mörder sind unter uns (The Murderers Are Among Us), produced in 1946 by the East German state film company, and the first film released after the Second World War in East Germany; and "Marina" in Die Sünderin (The Sinner), in which she performed a brief nude scene, the first in German film history, which caused a scandal in 1950. Retrieved March 5, 2012  
She performed in many films. In 1948, she received the award for best actress from the Locarno Film Festival because of her role in the movie Film Without a Title. Her successful career as a singer started in the 1960s once her film career wasn't going very well. She wrote some songs by herself. She performed in television shows such as in episodes of Scarecrow and Mrs. King, and in a 2000 documentary in which she was playing by herself Marlene Dietrich: Her Own Song.  
In the 1960s, she appeared in a number of such low-budget films as The Lost Continent. 
She appeared in the 1975 screen adaptation of the Hans Fallada novel, Every Man Dies Alone directed by Alfred Vohrer,Biographie Carl Raddatz Film Museum Potsdam. Retrieved March 5, 2012  released in English as Everyone Dies Alone in 1976,"Everyone Dies Alone" Internet Movie Database. Retrieved March 5, 2012 and for which she won an award for best actress at the International Film Festival in Carlsbad,Karlovy Vary International Film Festival, 1976 Internet Movie Database. Retrieved March 5, 2012Hildegard Knef chronology: 1970-1979 Hildegard Knef fan website. Retrieved March 5, 2012 then Czechoslovakia.

United States

David O. Selznick invited her to Hollywood, but she refused to agree to the conditions of the contract which reportedly included changing her name to Gilda Christian and pretending to be Austrian rather than German.hildegardknef.htm
Years later, Knef's first husband, an American named Kurt Hirsch, encouraged her to try again for success in the U.S. She changed her name from Knef to Neff. But she was only offered a supporting role in the Hemingway adaptation of The Snows of Kilimanjaro in 1952. Knef became a leading lady in films of Germany, France and Britain.  But finally, in 1955 Knef was offered an important role in America in the musical Silk Stockings by Cole Porter. Knef had acted in at least 30 films in the United States and Europe, but her triumph was in New York when she performed in that film. She performed an unemotional Soviet commissar called "Ninotchka" . The New York Times' drama critic, Brooks Atkinson qualified Cole Porter's film as one of his best films and considered that Knef's stage transformation as a corrupted commissar was a very masterful performance.  Knef played the role of "Ninotchka" from 1954 to 1956. She sang Cole Porter tunes in her 675 performances. 

Chanteuse

She began her singing career in The United States on Broadway.  
In the 1960s and 1970s, she enjoyed considerable success as a singer of German chansons, which she often co-wrote. The song she is mostly remembered for is "Für mich soll's rote Rosen regnen" ("Red roses are to rain for me"). She is also known for her version of the song "Ich hab noch einen Koffer in Berlin" ("I still have a suitcase in Berlin") and "Mackie Messer" ("Mack the knife").

Publications

She published several books. Her autobiography Der geschenkte Gaul - Bericht aus einem Leben (The Gift Horse - Report on a Life, 1970) was a candid recount of her life in Germany during and after World War II, and reportedly became the best-selling German book in the post-war years. Her second book Das Urteil (The Verdict, 1975) was a moderate success, and dealt with her struggle with breast cancer. Knef not only achieved international best- seller status, her books also received incredible amount of praises from critics because her autobiographies were "better-than-average celebrity's." Arthur Cooper of Newsweek claimed that the way in which Knef accounted in The Gift Horse: Report on a Life her childhood and difficult life being an actress and singer while Hitler's Berlin and after the war in Europe and America,  was "a bitterly honest book and a very good one."   The book is not considered a book of "Hollywood-Broadway gossip. The book doesn't try to persuade the public depicting a made up celebrity's adventures. It seems a book that tells the real life of Knef. It refers to her struggles as a German woman who grew up in Berlin under the Nazis.       
She launched 23 original albums which counted for 320 different songs. She wrote by herself 130 of the lyrics. 
During her career, she performed in over 50 films.  Nineteen of her films were produced in different countries other than Germany; They were produced in The United States, Britain, France, Italy, Austria and Spain.  

Family

She was married three times. Her first marriage was in 1947 with Hirsch Kurt. He was an U.S. information officer. But they got divorced in 1952. She married for the second time with the actor and record producer David Cameron in June 30, 1962. Knef had a daughter with him. They named her Christina Antonia. She attended to public schools in German.  
Knef's parents were Hans Theodor and Friede Augustine Knef. Her father, who was a decorated World War I veteran, died when she was only six months. Then her mother moved to Berlin and worked in a factory.

Death

It was in Berlin where Knef died after she moved again there after the German reunification. The Associate Press reported that she died of lung infection. Knef smoked a lot for most of her life and suffered from emphysema.

Selected filmography






