[[Shawn Fanning]]

CATEGORIES: 1980 births, Businesspeople from Massachusetts, American computer programmers, File sharing, Living people, Northeastern University alumni, People from Brockton, Massachusetts, Virtual communities, People from Harwich, Massachusetts, People from Hull, Massachusetts

Shawn Fanning (born November 22, 1980) is an American computer programmer, serial entrepreneur, and angel investor. He  developed Napster, one of the first popular peer-to-peer ("P2P") file sharing platforms, in 1998. The popularity of Napster was widespread and Fanning was featured on the cover of Time magazine.
The site in its initial free P2P incarnation was shut down in 2001 after the company's unsuccessful appeal of court orders arising from its encouraging the illegal sharing of copyrighted material. A paid subscription version of the site followed, and was purchased by Rhapsody on December 1, 2011.  Following his involvement with Napster, he joined, and invested in, a number of early-stage technology startup companies.

Early life

Fanning was born in Brockton, Massachusetts, the son of Coleen Fanning and Joe Rando.fundinguniverse. During his time in high school and after he graduated, he spent most of his time at his uncle's oceanside Internet business called Chess. He spent summers with his uncle in Hull, sleeping on his couch, and spent much of his time experimenting and programming computers in his free time, which eventually led to his development of Napster. During his childhood and adolescence, Shawn had lived in tough, blue-collar, urban towns like Rockland, Massachusetts and Brockton, Massachusetts before moving to the more quiet and small oceanside town of Harwich.
After graduation, Fanning attended Northeastern University on scholarship. Fanning quickly learned that he already knew all of the material being taught to him in classes and was even placed in higher classes he was not qualified to be in. Even then, Fanning became frustrated because he had already learned all the material being taught to him by professors and tutors and eventually dropped out of Northeastern in 1999. During this time at Northeastern, Shawn had begun the developmental stages of Napster and word had spread fast at Northeastern of his invention. Fanning dropped out of college to dedicate his full-time to the Napster program.

Computer career

Napster

On June 1, 1999, Fanning released a preliminary beta program of Napster and soon, hundreds of college students at Northeastern were up and trading music furiously. Soon after he uploaded the beta program of Napster, Shawn moved his company from his headquarters in Hull, Massachusetts to a more spacious location in San Mateo, California and hired additional workers to improve on the Napster Program.

Snocap

In 2002, Fanning was named to the MIT Technology Review TR100 as one of the top 100 innovators in the world under the age of 35.

Rupture

The Rupture project was announced in late 2006 with seed funding, and CrunchBase notes the date Shawn officially became CEO of Rupture was October 2, 2007.
In December 2006, Fanning developed Rupture, a social networking tool designed to handle the task of publishing gamers' individual profiles to a communal space and facilitating communication between World of Warcraft players. Rupture was later acquired by Electronic Arts for $15 million.

Path

A few months after Fanning was laid off from Electronic Arts, he started a new company called Path. In January 2010, Dave Morin announced he was leaving Facebook, where he was a Senior Platform Manager, to join Fanning and become CEO at Path.

In popular culture

In 2000, Fanning appeared as a presenter at the MTV Video Music Awards. He appeared wearing a Metallica T-shirt with For Whom the Bell Tolls playing in the background, and when asked where he got it, stated, "a friend of mine shared it with me." Lars Ulrich's reaction was shown as feigned boredom."Lars Ulrich". YouTube. June 18, 2007
In October 2000, Fanning was featured on the cover of Time magazine. October 2, 2000
In 2003, Fanning had a cameo appearance, playing himself, in the 2003 film The Italian Job. In the film, Seth Green's character accused Fanning of stealing Napster from him while he was taking a nap in their Northeastern University dorm room. Although other characters see this as mere bragging, a scene shows Fanning in fact creeping over Green's sleeping body.
In early 2008, Fanning appeared in a Volkswagen commercial directed by Roman Coppola, in which he poked fun at his file-sharing past.Boards Screening Room
Fanning and his site Napster were the subject of Alex Winter's documentary Downloaded in 2013.






