[[Nazi-Maruttash]]

CATEGORIES: Babylonian kings, 13th-century BC rulers, Kassite kings

Nazi-Maruttaš, typically inscribed Na-zi-Ma-ru-ut-ta-aš or mNa-zi-Múru-taš, Maruttaš (a Kassite god synonymous with Ninurta) protects him, was a Kassite king of Babylon ca. 1307–1282 BC (short chronology) and self-proclaimed šar kiššati, or "King of the World," according to the votive inscription pictured. He was the 23rd of the dynasty, the son and successor of Kurigalzu II, and reigned for twenty six years.

Conflict with Assyria

Nazi-Maruttaš faced a growing threat from the ascendancy of Assyria under Arik-den-ili and his successor Adad-Nīrāri I. The containment of Assyria was conducted through a strategy of flank-attacks supported by his agents, eastern hillmen such as the Gutians, in a protracted war, avoiding a full frontal assault. Under Arik-den-ili, he seems to have had the upper hand, because Adad-Nīrāri, who styles himself "King of the Universe", later recountsIn the Epic of Adad-Nārāri, tablet VAT 9820 line 12: hi-ib-lat um-ma-ni MAN KUR ka.-.i-i a-bi ul ul-te-.èr. that "my father could not rectify the calamities inflicted by the army of the king of the Kassite land" in a contemporary Assyrian epic.
He is mentioned in the Synchronistic ChronicleSynchronistic Chronicle (ABC 21) tablet C, column 1, lines 24 to 31. as having fought a battle with Adad-Nīrāri's forces at "Kār-Ištar of Ugarsallu". However, the Assyrians won a complete victory over the Babylonians in this battle, plundering their camp and seizing the royal standards, thereby acquiring territory from them and causing the Assyro-Babylonian boundary to be adjusted southward. The conflict is fondly remembered in the Tukulti-Ninurta Epic,Tukulti-Ninurta Epic, extant in fragments BM 98496, BM 98730, BM 98731, BM 121033. in its recounting of past Assyro-Babylonian conflicts, column 4, line 34.

Other conflicts

There is evidence of a successful attack on Elam, because textsRation lists Ni 6932 Šagarakti-Šuriaš year 9 and Ni 7050 Kaštiliašu IV accession year. of this period concerning ration lists and foreign prisoners of war, mentions Nazi-Maruttaš in sections concerning Elamites.
A fragment of a tabletK 11536 published in MSKH I as U.2.26, p. 282. relates that "Marduk caused all the lands bow down at his feet". A treasury listCBS 14180. catalogues more than 125 precious artifacts and their move from Dūr-Kurigalzu and Nippur to Ardi-Bêlit during his 5th year, possibly for safe keeping.

Building works

He is known to have made at least three Kudurru boundary stones, although the one picturedKudurru Sb. 21, a later stone copy of clay original. is a later stone copy made during the reign of Marduk-apla-iddina I to replace the clay original (narū ša haṣbi) which was crushed by a falling temple wall.
A shrine to Gula was uncovered in 1946 in an eroded building with a pavement of much damaged kiln-baked bricks, some inscribed for Nazi-Maruttaš. This was located in the palace area at the Kassite capital, Dūr-Kurigalzu. He was also active in building as far south as Uruk, the cella of the Eḫiliana of Nanâ, as attested to by a later inscription by Esarhaddon. Other cities formerly abandoned such as Larsa, Ur, Adab, and Isin show evidence of revival in his reign.
There are nearly 400 economic texts dated to years up to the twenty fourth of his reign, detailing things as mundane as the receipt of barley and malt,

The Hemerology for Nazi-Maruttaš

A single standard hemerology, or uttuku, was collated during his time. Its colophon reads, "Dies fas according to the seven apkallī? originals from Sippar, Nippur, Babylon, Ur, Larsa, Uruk and Eridu. The scholars excerpted, selected, and gave to Nazi-Maruttaš, king of the world." Five extant examplesKAR 147, KAR 177 (=VAT 9663), etc. have been found, including a bilingual copy in Dur-Kurigalzu, another found in the house of LÚ.GAL "cultic singers" in Aššur and a third in the house of Kiṣir-Aššur, exorcist of the temple of Aššur during the reign of Aššurbanipal.
Lambert has argued that Ludlul bēl nēmeqi was composed during his reign based upon the identification of the protagonist Šubši-mašrâ-Šakkan with that of a character in a fragment of an epic of the Kassite times,K 9952 W G Lambert BWL pl. 12 pp 296f., BM 35322, Sp. II,893. and to the governor, or lúgar kur, of Ur during his 16th regnal year. Nazi-Maruttaš' name appears on the reverse of a literary text fragment known as KAR 116[ref]KAR 116, 
tablet VAT 11245 r. 10.[/ref] which Lambert identified as belonging to this work.
The prominent physician, or asû, from Nippur, Rabâ-ša-Marduk, began his lengthy, well-attested career during  Nazi-Maruttaš' reign.





Inscriptions




