[[Guto Puw]]

CATEGORIES: 20th-century classical composers, 21st-century classical composers, Welsh-speaking people, Welsh composers, Academics of Bangor University, Alumni of Bangor University, 1971 births, Living people

Guto Pryderi Puw (born 1971)  is a Welsh composer, university lecturer and conductor.  He is considered to be one of the most promising Welsh composers of his generation and a key figure in current Welsh music. Puw's music has been broadcast on BBC Radio 3 and been featured on television programmes for the BBC and S4C. He has twice been awarded the Composer's Medal at the National Eisteddfod.
Puw's works include pieces for unusual combinations of instruments, such as a tuba quartet or a trio consisting of harp, cello and double-bass, as well as more traditional forces such as solo baritone and piano, choir or orchestra. He was associated with the BBC National Orchestra of Wales as its Resident Composer, the first holder of this title, from 2006 to 2009. Puw wrote an Oboe concerto as part of this association, and his latest composition for the orchestra was premiered at the 2007 Proms. Puw's own Welsh identity is a recurrent theme in his music: some of his pieces set Welsh-language poetry to music and one of his pieces, Reservoirs, is written about the flooding of Welsh valleys to provide water for England.

Biography

Born in Parc (a village in Gwynedd near Bala),
Puw has received commissions from (amongst others) BBC Radio 3, the Welsh baritone Jeremy Huw Williams, the Bangor New Music Festival and the North Wales International Music Festival.  He was appointed the first Resident Composer with BBC National Orchestra of Wales (BBC NOW) in 2006 and held this position until 2009. During this time, Puw wrote a concerto for oboe premiered in 2006) and an orchestral piece, ... onyt agoraf y drws ..., which was first performed at the 2007 Proms.

Music

Welsh links

Puw's music is rooted in the language and literature of Wales, with a particular affinity to the poetry of R. S. Thomas. has also been performed by the Duke Quartet at the 1998 Bath International Music Festival and the 1999 Huddersfield Contemporary Music Festival.

Orchestral works

Puw's oboe concerto was commissioned by BBC NOW and was premiered by them at  The concerto won Puw the 2007 BBC Radio 3 Listeners Award at the British Composer Awards.
His orchestral piece Reservoirs was inspired by a 1968 poem by R. S. Thomas about the drowning of Welsh valleys such as Tryweryn (a few miles from where Puw grew up) and Clywedog to provide water for England.
As part of his association with BBC NOW, Puw was commissioned by the BBC to compose for the 2007 Proms.  His orchestral piece,  ("... unless I open the door ...") was premiered on 9 August 2007, conducted by David Atherton.  They then feast in Penfro for eight years in a hall with three doors, and only remember the dreadful events that happened in Ireland when the third door opens.  Each of the three doors in Penfro was represented by an instrument in a box in the Royal Albert Hall.

Other works

Unusual instrumentation and unusual performance techniques, including elements of improvisation, are also important features of his work. In 1998 he composed X-ist, a piece for IST (the Improvising String Trio, consisting of harp, cello and double-bass).  It was described by reviewers as a "frighteningly frantic" and "challenging" piece. has two contrasting sub-sections, a and b, arranged in the form a-b-a-a-a-b-a-b to match the Welsh poetic measure of the same name, with the strings playing calmly in the "a" sections, and saxophone and keyboard (gradually joined by the other instruments) playing in a more lively manner in the "b" sections. The musicians and the dancer are required to react to each other's contributions in each section to create a "multi-media" experience.
Visages, his 1999 piece for 2 tubas and 2 euphoniums, was described as "astringent, often whimsical but well written for these instruments".  His 2005 composition for the Bangor New Music Festival, Stereo Type, was written for amplified typewriters and tape.  It was premiered by UWB School of Music students in the Deiniol Shopping Centre, Bangor, on 5 March 2005.

List of compositions

A list of Puw's major compositions.

Awards and nominations






