[[Sonam Kapoor]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 births, Indian actresses, Indian film actresses, Living people, Actresses in Hindi cinema, People from Mumbai, Punjabi people, Sindhi people, University of Mumbai alumni, Alumni of the University of East London, Actresses from Mumbai

Sonam Kapoor (
Kapoor began a career in film by assisting director Sanjay Leela Bhansali on his 2005 drama film Black. She made her acting debut in 2007 with Bhansali's romance film Saawariya opposite Ranbir Kapoor. Though unsuccessful at the box office, Kapoor's performance earned her a nomination for the Filmfare Best Female Debut Award. She subsequently featured in the offbeat drama Delhi-6 (2009) and had her first commercial success with the romantic comedy I Hate Luv Storys (2010). Kapoor then played a leading role in the drama Raanjhanaa (2013) and appeared in a brief role in the highly successful biographical sports film Bhaag Milkha Bhaag (2013).
Alongside her acting career, Kapoor supports numerous charities and causes and is a prominent celebrity endorser for brands and products. Kapoor has also garnered international recognition as a spokesperson for the French beauty brand L'Oréal.

Early life

Kapoor was born in the suburb of Chembur, Mumbai on 9 June 1985. She is also the first cousin of actor, Arjun Kapoor, Anushala Kapoor and cousin of actor Ranveer Singh on her mother's side.
She attended the Arya Vidya Mandir school in Juhu and then enrolled in the United World College of South East Asia, a boarding school in Singapore, to do her International Baccalaureate. She studied theatre and arts in Singapore for 2 years. She also studied Political Science and Economics from University of East London. She speaks English, Hindi, Urdu, Punjabi and Marathi and is a well trained classical dancer.

Career

2004–08: Early work and film debut

Before starting her career off as an actress, Sonam and Ranbir Kapoor worked as assistant directors under Sanjay Leela Bhansali in 2004, and assisted him during the making of his film, Black which was released in early 2005.
She made her acting debut alongside newcomer, Ranbir Kapoor in Bhansali's Saawariya (2007), which failed to do well at the box office, Sonam had no release in 2008, although, was nominated for the Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut, though lost out to actress Deepika Padukone for Om Shanti Om, which, coincidentally was released alongside Saawariya.

2009–12: Breakthrough and professional setbacks

In 2009, Kapoor appeared in Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra's Delhi-6, opposite Abhishek Bachchan. The film flopped at the box office and received mixed critical reviews, but her performance was praised and she received recognition from within and outside the film industry. Critic Rajeev Masand commented, "Sonam Kapoor is the revelation in Delhi 6. She's a firecracker, instinctive and uninhibited in what isn't even a conventional female lead".
In 2010, she appeared in Punit Malhotra's I Hate Luv Storys opposite Imran Khan. The film went on to become her first box office success, collecting over 
She next appeared in the romantic comedy, Aisha, opposite Abhay Deol, which was a decent success at the box office, as it was declared an "average" grosser.
Sonam's first release in 2011, Thank You was a critical failure, although the film was a moderate success at the box office, as its collections surpassed the 
Her first release of 2012 is Players, a remake of The Italian Job, alongside Abhishek Bachchan, Bipasha Basu and Neil Nitin Mukesh. The film received mixed to negative reviews and didn't do well at the box office. Her performance received mainly mixed reviews from top critics. Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama stated that, "It's an image transformation for Sonam in Players. She has never done a full-on glamorous role before and Players should change the perception. However, the rawness, as an actor, shows in a variety of scenes." Later that year, Kapoor made her second appearance at the Cannes Film Festival.

2013–present: Success and recent work

Kapoor made her third appearance at the Cannes Film Festival in May 2013, representing not only L'Oréal, but also some Indian brands (dress by Huemn and jewellery by Suhani Pittie). Her first release of 2013, Raanjhanaa, opened to a positive critical reception
Kapoor's portrayal of Zoya Haider, a headstrong but emotional middle class girl, earned her a positive critical reception, with Komal Nahta saying that "Sonam Kapoor looks very pretty and plays Zoya beautifully. The character of Zoya has tremendous range and Sonam does full justice to it. Her transition is amazing."  For her performance in the film, Kapoor has been nominated for "Best Actress" at several award ceremonies, including the prestigious Filmfare Award for Best Actress.
Her next appearance was for the biographical sports film Bhaag Milkha Bhaag opposite Farhan Akhtar and Meesha Shafi, where she played the small role of Akhtar's initial love interest. The film opened to tremendous critical acclaim and was termed as a major box office success.
Kapoor's first release of 2014 was Yash Raj Film's romantic  comedy Bewakoofiyaan, opposite Ayushmann Khurrana and Rishi Kapoor. Kapoor received generally positive reviews for her performance. Critic Subhash K. Jha wrote, "Sonam as the girl torn between an autocratic dad and unreasonable lover is so in-character you wonder whether the role and its fetish for designer labels were written specially for her".nowrunning.htm A review published in Hindustan Times stated, "Sonam Kapoor gets into the skin of her character very well. Her performances are more in control now, compared to her previous films such as  Aisha and Players".hindustantimes.aspx
As of March 2014, Kapoor has four projects in development. She is currently filming with Pakistani actor Fawad Afzal Khan for Rhea Kapoor's Khoobsurat, a remake of the 1980 film of the same name. She is currently attending acting workshops for the film, along with the rest of the cast.bollywoodhungama.deccanchronicle.com/article/entertainment/bollywood/sonam-kapoor-joins-acting-classes-for-dolly-ki-doli/ Kapoor has also been confirmed as the female lead in Sooraj R. Barjatya's Prem Ratan Dhan Payo opposite Salman Khan.dnaindia.ndtv.deccanherald.html Slated for a Diwali 2015 release, shooting for the film is expected to begin in June 2014.intoday.html Kapoor has also confirmed her presence in the film adaptation of Anuja Chauhan's novel, Battle For Bittora, which is expected to begin filming in late 2014.dnaindia.com/entertainment/report-battle-for-bittora-has-an-interesting-love-story-sonam-kapoor-1967038

Other work

Philanthropy

In 2009, Kapoor participated in the International Indian Film Academy Awards, also known as "IIFA" charity fashion show.
In 2012, Kapoor asked for fans to donate to the Ogaan Cancer Foundation for her birthday. They also collaborated to create an awareness for breast cancer.

Endorsements

Kapoor says she only endorses in the brands she believes in. Kapoor has endorsed brands such as Electrolux, Spice Mobile, Cera, Lux, Colgate Visible White, Signature and Mont Blanc.

In the media

Public image

Due to her being from a film background, Kapoor has always been in the media spotlight since a young age. Her debut alongside Ranbir Kapoor was also heavily hyped due to the stated reason. Kapoor is known for having a "outspoken" and "bold" personality, as perceived from various media interactions, how she presents herself in public and her choice of films. Kapoor also tops in best-dressed lists, and constantly attracts media attention for what she wears at events and film promotions. Apart from being considered as a "fashionista", she has also been tagged as a "youth icon" by the India media.firstpost.html

Personal life

Kapoor has also stated that her closest friends in the industry are actors Kareena Kapoor, Asin Thottumkal, Jacqueline Fernandez, Imran Khan and Dhanush, and fashion designer Shehla Khan.

Filmography

Awards and nominations

Other honours








