[[Oli Ahmed]]

CATEGORIES: Bangladeshi Muslims, Liberal Democratic Party (Bangladesh) politicians, Bangladesh Nationalist Party politicians, Recipients of the Bir Bikrom (Bangladesh), Living people, 1939 births

Colonel (retd.) Dr Oli Ahmad Bir Bikram  is a senior Bangladeshi statesman. He is the President of Liberal Democratic Party (Bangladesh).
As a young captain, Oli Ahmad was the first Bengali Military officer to revolt against the Pakistan army on 25 March 1971 (reference Operation Searchlight, content 5.2.1, paragraph 4). He was the first officer to be awarded Bir Bikram for his bravery during the Bangladesh Liberation War. He fought under Major Ziaur Rahman in Sector No. 1.  Oli Ahmad is highly regarded as one of the key founding members of Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP). 
During the turbulent period 1994-96 he was under immense pressure to become the Prime Minister of Bangladesh from both within his party and from the opposition, however, he never gave into temptation. 
On 26 October 2006, on protest against corruption, misrule and nepotism-  Oli and several other senior leaders of BNP defected to form Liberal Democratic Party - LDP. Unlike most other national leaders of Bangladesh, Oli Ahmad has an outstanding record of service to the nation, shining with true patriotism, dedication, sincerity & honesty. He has been elected as a Parliament Member six times.

Early Life & Education

Oli Ahmad was born on 13 March 1939 in the 'Kutub' family of Chandanaish, Chittagong. His Father's name is Late Amanat Safa & Mother is Late Badrunnesa. He passed S.S.C. in 1957 from Gasbaria N G High School at Chandanaish and obtained BA degree in 1964 from National College, Karachi, Pakistan. Despite the time constraints and immense workload as a national leader, Oli Ahmad obtained PhD. degree from Oxford Brookes University, UK on 22 September 2003 for his thesis titled "Revolution, Military Personnel and the War of Liberation in Bangladesh". It took him 7 years of hard work and research, quite an exemplary achievement considering he was 64 yrs old at the time.

Army Life & War of Liberation 1971

While studying Law he joined Pakistan Military Academy and was commissioned in 1965. He was posted to 4 East Bengal Regiment in 1967 and thereafter to 8 East Bengal Regiment on 24 September 1970. During the turbulent period of early 1971 Capt. Oli Ahmad along with Lt. Col. M. R. Chowdhury and Maj. Ziaur Rahman planned their actions & prepared for a Pakistan Military crackdown. On 25 March 1971, at midnight Capt. Oli Ahmad was the first officer to revolt against Pakistan occupational Army, after hearing that the Pakistan Army had started a massacre at Dhaka. He immediately organised 8 E Bengal to fight against them under the leadership of Major Ziaur Rahman, Second-in-Command of the battalion. Capt. Oli Ahmad was the first Quarter Master of the Regiment located at Sholoshahar, Chittagong. (reference Operation Searchlight, content 5.2.1, paragraph 4) 
Capt. Oli established Combined Headquarters at Fultala of Boalkhali, Chittagong on 27 March 1971 for Army, BDR, Police, Ansars and Freedom Fighters. He was given the responsibility to organize and co-ordinate the battles at greater Chittagong area. He deployed troops at Sitakunda, Chittagong University area, Chittagong port area, Chittagong Court building area, Medical College area, Chokbazar, Cox's Bazar and Kalurghat Radio Station area under the leadership of various officers and on instructions from Major Zia. In fact they laid the foundation of the War of Liberation in Bangladesh and today's modern Armed Forces. He inspired Ziaur Rahman to declare Independence of Bangladesh from Kalurghat Radio Station on 27 March 1971.
Subsequently, Capt. Oli was appointed Sub-Sector Commander of Chittagong area in April 1971. He was given the responsibility to fight and defend the area from Feni River to Karerhat of Chittagong and was the first sub-sector commander of liberation forces. He fought gallantly in the famous battles of Kalurghat, Mirsarai, Mastannagar, Karerhat, Tolatali, Haku, Chikanchara under Chittagong District, Ramgar under Khagrachari District and Belunia under Noakhali District. 
In recognition of his bravery, he was conferred with the gallantry award "Bir Bikram" in September 1971. He was the first officer to be awarded "Bir Bikram" during the liberation war. In July 1971, he was appointed first Brigade Major of the famous 'Z-Force. The first and only Bangladeshi officer appointed as Brigade Major during the war. 
He was promoted to the rank of Major in October 1972. He served as the Second-in-Command of 19 East Bengal, 9 East Bengal, 10 East Bengal and 6 East Bengal Regiment. For his outstanding service record, late President Ziaur Rahman, BU, Psc and Lt. Gen. Mir Showkat Ali, BU, Psc graded Maj. Oli Ahmad on his Annual Confidential Report as an "outstanding" officer several times and many a times in the following manner. "This officer will be an asset to Bangladesh Army".
He was promoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel in September 1975. He commanded and raised 24 East Bengal Regiment at Saidpur. Thereafter he was posted to Army Headquarters as a General Staff Officer-1 (Operation). His subsequent postings were to the Office of the Chief of Army Staff and DCMLA and later to the Office of the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces, CMLA and President of the People's Republic of Bangladesh. He was promoted to the rank of colonel in January 1980. He played an important role for controlling nineteen coup-d'etats that took place during the period from 1975 to 1977 and made great contribution in restoring peace and stability in the country. A long associate and as a trusted friend of President Ziaur Rahman, he organized a political party by remaining behind the scene. Later on the party was renamed as BNP on his advice.

Political Career (1975-2006)

Oli Ahmad was in military service, however, behind the scene he was actively involved with politcis from 1975 onwards. He was deligated the responsibility of forming a political platform for the then CMLA (Chief Marshall Law Administrator) Lt. Gen. Ziaur Rahman. Working closely togather they laid the foundations for Bangladesh Nationalist Party - BNP. Oli Ahmad resigned from service in January 1980 to start his political career. He worked hard to organise BNP throughout the country and was one of the founders of the party, although formally he joined Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) in February 1980. 
Oli Ahmad was elected as a Member of Parliament for the first time in March 1980 (Chittagong-13), second time on 27 February 1991 (Chittagong-13), third time on 15 February 1996 (Chittagong-13 & Chittagong-14), fourth time on 12 June 1996 (Chittagong-13 & Chittagong-14), fifth time on 1 October 2001 (Chittagong-13) and sixth time on 29 December 2008 (Chittagong-13).
Dr. Oli Ahmad was appointed as State Minister in charge of Ministry of Youth Development in February 1982 where he continued till Martial Law was imposed by Lt. Gen. H. M. Ershad.
Most of the senior leaders of BNP joined military dictator Lt. Gen. H. M. Ershad in 1982 after Martial Law. But Dr. Oli Ahmad could not be purchased or coerced into submission. He was the most trusted friend of Begum Zia and Zia's family. He maintained his principle throughout his political career and was imprisoned twice for political protest during the autocratic rule of Ershad. 
Dr. Oli Ahmad has consistently upheld his moral stance all throughout his political career. He has never surrendered before any pressure or to any body's unfair demands. He helped Begum Khaleda Zia to gain control of BNP after the death of President Ziaur Rahman on 30 May 1981. In this period he established himself as one of the leading political figures in BNP. Dr. Oli Ahmad was inducted into the Standing Committee in 1984, highest policy-making body of Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP). He also played an important role in reorganizing the BNP and maintaining unity among the rank and file (especially after the desertion of most of the senior leaders of the party) which paved the way for the BNP to win the Parliamentary Election in 1991. 
Dr. Oli Ahmad was appointed as Cabinet Minister on 20 March 1991 and given the portfolio of the Ministry of Communications and held the same portfolio till March 1996. He brought new reforms in Bangladesh Railway, BRTC, BRTA and road construction. Some of the organisations were on the verge of financial bankruptcy (with tremendous pressure and objections from international donor agencies about the performance of the Ministry of Communication). However, at the end of his tenure these organisations were not only made profitable and efficient but also their services expanded. As an administrator, Dr. Oli Ahmad has always displayed visionary and pragmatic ideas. As the Minister for Communications he laid the foundation of modern road network and constructed many big bridges throughout the country (including arranging funds & starting construction work of Jamuna Multipurpose Bridge - 60% work was completed during his tenure). 
He was sworn in and given the portfolio of the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Food and Ministry of Water Development Resources in the new cabinet formed in the last week of February 1996. Later, he was given responsibility for the Ministry for Energy, Gas and Mineral Resources where he continued till the resignation of BNP government on 30 March 1996. During this short period he improved the performance of Power Development Board and increased their production capacity by 130 MW.
He was in charge of relief, rehabilitation and disaster management for Chittagong and Chittagong Hill-tracts immediately after the devastating cyclone and tidal waves of 29 April 1991. The first ten days were the most crucial period for rehabilitation and bringing normalcy in the affected coastal areas and Chittagong town. Despite the fact that all communication networks, public services and amenities were disrupted, with no food supply and drinking water readily available. Approximately One Hundred Twenty Five Thousand  (125,000) died and no-one was available to bury the bodies. He deployed Ansars and village defence party for the burial. On the night of 30 April he physically guarded Chittagong port & railway stores till the arrival of army and police contingent with his security guards. He worked day & night to restore normal life along with all Govt. and semi-Govt. officials posted at Chittagong. He involved all M.P.'s, Chairman's, other elected representatives and eloquent people of the society for distribution of relief and rehabilitation of the affected people. He controlled the situation and brought almost normalcy within 7 days. Thereafter a few Ministers and officials were sent from Dhaka to help in the distribution of relief materials in different Upazilas and Thanas. His works were greatly appreciated at home and abroad. Foreign help came only after restoring normalcy in the affected areas.
He was given the responsibility to resolve Chakma refugee and Armed Cadre-Shanti Bahini Problem. He explained the position of Bangladesh government regarding Chakma rebels of Chittagong hill tracts and sought the cooperation of Indian Government for the repatriation of Chakma refugees staying at Tripura.
Dr. Oli Ahmad started visiting nooks and corners of Chittagong Hill Tract along with other members of the committee, exchanged views with people of different strata of life, members of Shanti Bahini, convincing the latter to give up arms and lead a peaceful life. He visited Tripura (India) from 31 January to 2 February 1995 in connection with repatriation of Chakma refugees and met the Governor of Tripura. He visited different refugee camps and convinced them to return to their homeland. He concluded a successful agreement with the Government of India and arranged the repatriation of Chakma refugees. After the successful agreement about 10 thousand Chakma refugees came back to Chittagong Hill Tract. He laid the foundation for repatriation and brought peace for the people of Hill Tract. The process was completed during the rule of Awami League through another agreement with Shanti Bahini leaders. 
During the turbulent period 1994-96 he was under immense pressure to become the Prime Minister of Bangladesh from both within his party and from the opposition, however, he never gave into temptation. He was able to convince the then PM Begum Khaleda Zia to establish caretaker government system, under which elections would be held in a fair and free manner.

Political Career (2006-till date)

He played an important role in creating public awareness against corruption, extortion, use of illegal weapons and extremism of some of the Ministers, MP's and some political big wigs of his own party BNP and other political parties from 2001 to 2006. Subsequently he resigned from BNP in protest. Since 1991 he worked relentlessly for bringing reforms in the political system, accountability in the governing system and society. Throughout his career he has retained an untarnished record of honesty and integrity. He formed a new political party LDP to reflect his ideals and vision for a corruption-free nation where the citizens will be able to claim their rightfull share and justice.
Liberal Democratic Party was formed on October 26, 2006 by former President of Bangladesh Dr. A. Q. M. Badruddoza Chowdhury, Dr. Oli Ahmad Bir Bikram, and 24 other former Members of Parliament and ministers from the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP). Senior Presidium members of LDP were also unhappy over some allegations of financial corruption with election nominations process and being forced to accept the son of party President Dr Badruddoza Chowdhury as a Presidium member. Soon after the rift forced Dr. B. Chowdhury to find his own way with his followers back to Bikalpa Dhara again. Thereafter, Dr. Oli Ahmad was elected as President and Former Speaker Sheikh Razzak Ali as Executive President of the party. 
During the army backed caretaker government regime of 2007-2008 most of the senior politicians were either in jail (on corruption & various other charges) or escaped abroad or voluntarily resigned from politics to avoid prosecution. As a testimonial to his honesty & integrity, Dr. Oli Ahmad was the only senior statesman of Bangladesh who did not have to face any such disgraceful situation at the time. He also had the courage to point out and challenge any misdeeds and mistakes of the then government.
From its inception LDP was a strong ally of the Grand Alliance. However, after grand alliance leader Sheikh Hasina Wajed back tracked on her earlier promises on the number of Parliamentary seats to be shared, LDP came out of the grand alliance and contested the 2008 elections on their own. In the absence of main opposition, the Four Party Alliance, LDP effectively became the voice of opposition in Parliament. Often Dr. Oli Ahmad would have to carry out the responsibilities of opposition leader - including delivering speech with the Prime Minister on conclusion of each parliamentary session, including budget sessions. 
With the misrule of Grand Alliance it became very difficult for Dr. Oli Ahmad BB to continue his support of the government, however, when caretaker government system was abolished it became impossible to be a bystander. In keeping with his nature of protesting any misdeed, Dr. Oli Ahmad BB has lent support to the major opposition in their demands for holding free and fair elections under caretaker government. Currently the LDP under leadership of Dr. Oli Ahmad BB has joined the 18 Party Alliance to revive democracy in Bangladesh.
Consequently the AL government has taken various oppressive measures against him & his party to muffle their voice. He was removed as the Chairman of Parliamentary Standing Committee for Ministry of Planning. Despite Oli Ahmad being the elected representative from Chittagong-13 constituency, all development work in that area were to be supervised by a selected female MP from another constituency. 7 litigations were initiated against him, including charges brought under explosive substance act and causing arson in a KPI area. He was not given bail in one such fabricated case and was sent to jail for 16 days. A life threatening attack was carried out on him by AL hooligans also. Furthermore, many cases were lodged against leaders, activists and supporters of LDP. Hundreds of them were jailed in such politically motivated cases.

Imprisonment and Facing Life Threatening Situations

While serving as an officer in Pakistan Army he revolted on the fateful night of 25 March 1971. The punishment for armed rebellion would have meant either facing a firing squad or the gallows if he was ever captured by the occupying forces. He has fought bravely in the front line of many combat situations during this period, facing life threatening situations several times. 
Also during the turbulent period of 1975-1980, due to his close association with the then President Ziaur Rahman, he had to face 19 coup d'états. On occasions even the PGR (Presidential Guard Regiment) would be missing and Oli Ahmad alone had to guard the President & his family personally with only an automatic weapon.
During the autocratic regime of 1982-1990, many attempts were made to arrest, torture and coerce him into submission. Often, he would have to go into hiding to evade these army raids in his residence. In this period, Oli Ahmad BB was imprisoned twice for political protest. He was also injured in an improvised explosive (cocktail grenade) attack during a political procession. 
He faced a sniper attack during the election campaign of 2001. Three rounds were shot at him, but he was unharmed. In a separate incident, armed hooligans of AL carried out an attack on him during an electoral campaign meeting. Approximately 40 rounds were fired at him from a distance. 
In 2006 after formation of LDP an assassination attempt was carried out unsuccessfully at his place of residence. Residence of many seniors leaders of LDP were burnt to the ground by miscreants.
Due to him withdrawing his support from Grand Alliance and joining the 18 Party Alliance in demand for free & fair election under Caretaker Government system, various litigations have been initiated against him as an oppressive measure. His armed protection provided by SB (Superior Branch of Police) since 1991 was taken away by the government. While appearing in Chittagong Metropolitan Magistrates court in a politically motivated case, his life was threatened in 2011, when an armed mob carried out a violent attack. Lawyers and supporters who formed a human shield to protect Dr. Oli, were grievously injured. At the age of 73, he was again imprisoned in 2012 for not compromising in his moral and political stance

Outstanding Achievements & Awards

Oli Ahmad was included in "Statesmen's Who's Who" in 1992 for his outstanding leadership quality, which till date is a unique feature for the politicians of the country. Dr. Ahmad's name also appears in "Asia Pacific Who's Who" published in 2009 - Vol. IX from New Delhi, India for his outstanding leadership quality.
Other than holding various important ministry portfolois, Ahmad served as President/Convenor and member of 27 Cabinet and Parliamentary Standing Committees (composed exclusively of Ministers and MPs). Associated with 28 organizations, associations and professional societies, established 19 educational and welfare institutions and received 13 awards for his gallant services.
Dr. Oli Ahmad was conferred with the following awards in recognition of his services, social work and contribution in education sector:

Experiences in Various Capacity

Oli Ahmad was/is associated with the following Cabinets, Parliamentary, and other Committees in different capacities
Oli Ahmad is/was associated with the following Organizations, Associations and Professional Societies:

Social Welfare Activities

Oli Ahmad is the Founder of following Educational and Welfare Institutions: 
Oli Ahmad took initiative in upgrading the following private Colleges into Government Colleges:

Publications

Oli Ahmad resonates his political ideals, his future plan and dream for the country, present prevailing condition of the country & the initial stages of the Revolution and the Liberation war in his books 
A. "My Struggle, My Politics" - September 2001; 
B. "Revolution, Military Personnel and the War of Liberation in Bangladesh"- 2003;
C. "My Ideal"; (Amar Adarsha) - March 2004;
D. "My Politics" (Amar Rajniti)- 2007.
E. "Rastrabiplab, Shamarik Bahinir Shadashabrinda Abong Bangladesher Muktijodda" - February 2008
F. "Ja Dekhechi Ja Bolechi Ja Hoyeche" - April 2008
G. Battles That I Fought and Interviews of Liberation War Heroes - November 2009
H. "Ashoni Sangket- Din Bodal Na Hat Badal" (Foreboding of a thunder-crash, - Change of Day or Change of Hand) - 2009
I.  Revolution, Military Personnel and the War of Liberation in Bangladesh. Missing Link of History: 26 March - 17 April 1971. 
J.  Battles that I fought and interviews of War Heroes. by Oli Ahmad. LAP LAMBERT Academic Publishing (2010-10-25) - ISBN 978-3-8433-6000-5

Private Life

As a member of the Presidential entourage, Minister and MP, Dr. Oli Ahmad visited numerous countries. These include Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, China, City of Vatican, Cuba, Czech Republic, Egypt, France, Germany, Greece, Holland, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar (Burma), Nepal, Netherlands, North Korea, Oman, Pakistan, Poland, Qatar, Rumania, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, UAE, UK, USA, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Taiwan and Tanzania. 
He performed the Holy Umrah more than thirty times besides performing the Holy Hajj (3 times). 
He used to play football, volleyball, and lawn tennis in his days in the army. Over the past decade, he proved himself to be a prominent amateur golfer of Bangladesh with innumerable trophies to his credit.
Dr. Oli Ahmad and Mumtaz Begum are blessed with two sons, two daughters & ten grand children. Mumtaz Begum was also elected as a Member of Parliament on 12 June 1996 & continued till June 2001.
[ref]
Revolution Military Personnel & The War of Liberation in Bangladesh By DR Col. Oli Ahmad Bir Bikram This senior leader quits BNP (Bangladesh's ruling party) alleging corruption, International Herald Tribune, October 26, 2006.[/ref]Oli form new political party, The Daily New Nation, October 27, 2006.





Operation Searchlight, (Wikipedia Article) content 5.2.1, paragraph 4
Bir Bikram, (Wikipedia Article) content 2.1, Bangladesh Army
1. "Statesmen's Who's Who" - book published in 1992
2. "Asia Pacific Who's Who" published in 2009 - Vol. IX from New Delhi, India 
Following books written by Dr. Oli Ahmad Bir Bikram-
A. "My Struggle, My Politics" - September 2001; 
B. "Revolution, Military Personnel and the War of Liberation in Bangladesh"- 2003 - ISBN 984-70116-0023-9
C. "My Ideal"; (Amar Adarsha) - March 2004;
D. "My Politics" (Amar Rajniti)- 2007.
E. "Rastrabiplab, Shamarik Bahinir Shadashabrinda Abong Bangladesher Muktijodda" - February 2008
F. "Ja Dekhechi Ja Bolechi Ja Hoyeche" - April 2008
G. Battles That I Fought and Interviews of Liberation War Heroes - November 2009
H. "Ashoni Sangket- Din Bodal Na Hat Badal" (Foreboding of a thunder-crash, - Change of Day or Change of Hand) - 2009
I.  Revolution, Military Personnel and the War of Liberation in Bangladesh. Missing Link of History: 26 March - 17 April 1971. 
J.  Battles that I fought and interviews of War Heroes. by Oli Ahmad. LAP LAMBERT Academic Publishing (2010-10-25) - ISBN 978-3-8433-6000-5




