[[Fnord]]

CATEGORIES: Computing terminology, Conspiracy, Discordianism, Neologisms, Placeholder names

Fnord is a word used in newsgroup and hacker culture to indicate that someone is being ironic, humorous or surreal. (1996) The New Hacker's Dictionary. MIT Press, p. 196. ISBN 9780262680929 Often placed at the end of a statement in brackets (fnord) to make the ironic purpose clear, it is a label that may be applied to any random or surreal sentence, coercive subtext, or anything jarringly out of context (intentionally or not). It is sometimes used as a metasyntactic variable in programming., Dawson, T. & Purdy G. (2005) Linux Network Administrator's Guide. O'Reilly, p. 64. ISBN 9780596005481 It appears in the SubGenius recruitment film Arise! and has been used in the SubGenius newsgroup alt. The word was coined in 1965 by Kerry Thornley and Greg Hill in the Principia Discordia and it was popularized following its use in The Illuminatus! Trilogy, 1975.

Origins

The word was coined as a nonsensical term with religious undertones in the Discordian religious text Principia Discordia (1965) by Kerry Thornley and Greg Hill, but was popularized by The Illuminatus! Trilogy (1975) of satirical conspiracy fiction novels by Robert Shea and Robert Anton Wilson. 'Suddenly I saw Hagbard's eyes burning into me and heard his voice: ``Your heart will remain calm. Your adrenalin gland will remain calm. Calm, all-over calm. You will not panic. you will look at the fnord and see it. You will not evade it or black it out. You will stay calm and face it. And further back, way back: my first-grade teacher writing FNORD on the blackboard, while a wheel with a spiral design turned and turned on his desk, turned and turned, and his voice droned on, IF YOU DON'T SEE THE FNORD IT CAN'T EAT YOU, DON'T SEE THE FNORD, DON'T SEE THE FNORD . . .' The term, and Illuminatus!'' itself, was popularised in the United Kingdom by the anarchic theatre director Ken Campbell and his Jungian Science Fiction Theatre of Liverpool's production of it as a cycle of plays.
In these novels, the interjection "fnord" is given hypnotic power over the unenlightened. Under the Illuminati program, children in grade school are taught to be unable to consciously see the word "fnord". For the rest of their lives, every appearance of the word subconsciously generates a feeling of uneasiness and confusion, and prevents rational consideration of the subject. This results in a perpetual low-grade state of fear in the populace. The government acts on the premise that a fearful populace keeps them in power.
In the Shea/Wilson construct, fnords are scattered liberally in the text of newspapers and magazines, causing fear and anxiety in those following current events. However, there are no fnords in the advertisements, encouraging a consumerist society. It is implied in the books that fnord is not the actual word used for this task, but merely a substitute, since most readers would be unable to see the actual word.
To "see the fnords" means to be unaffected by the supposed hypnotic power of the word or, more loosely, of other fighting words. The term may also be used to refer to the experience of becoming aware of a phenomenon's ubiquity after first observing it. The phrase "I have seen the fnords" was graffitied on a British railway bridge (known locally as "Anarchy Bridge") between Earlsdon and Coventry city centre throughout the 1980s and 1990s, until the bridge was upgraded. The bridge and the phrase were mentioned in the novel A Touch of Love by Jonathan Coe.

Ironic, humorous or surreal use

The word is sometimes appended to statements intended to be understood ironically, humorously, or as surreal.

Use in computing

The lack of a clear definition of the word, and its popularity among certain groups on the internet, allowed it to be appropriated as a placeholder word (a metasyntactic variable) in computer programming,





Further reading




