[[Human skin color]]

CATEGORIES: Skin physiology, Human appearance, Human genetics, Skin pigmentation

Human skin color ranges in variety from the darkest brown to the lightest pinkish-white hues. Human skin pigmentation is the result of natural selection. Skin pigmentation in human beings evolved to primarily regulate the amount of ultraviolet radiation penetrating the skin, controlling its biochemical effects.
The actual skin color of different humans is affected by many substances, although the single most important substance determining human skin color is the pigment melanin. Melanin is produced within the skin in cells called melanocytes and it is the main determinant of the skin color of darker-skinned humans. The skin color of people with light skin is determined mainly by the bluish-white connective tissue under the dermis and by the haemoglobin circulating in the veins of the dermis. The red color underlying the skin becomes more visible, especially in the face, when, as consequence of physical exercise or the stimulation of the nervous system (anger, fear), arterioles dilate.
There is a direct correlation between the geographic distribution of UV radiation (UVR) and the distribution of indigenous skin pigmentation around the world. Areas that highlight higher amounts of UVR reflect darker-skinned populations, generally located nearer towards the equator. Areas that are far from the tropics and closer to the poles have lower concentration of UVR, which is reflected in lighter-skinned populations.
In addition, it has been observed that adult human females are considerably lighter in skin pigmentation than males. Females need more calcium during pregnancy and lactation. The body synthesizes vitamin D from sunlight, which helps it absorb calcium. Females evolved to have lighter skin so their bodies absorb more calcium. 
The social significance of differences in skin color has varied across cultures and over time, as demonstrated with regard to social status and discrimination.

Melanin and genes

Melanin is produced by cells called melanocytes in a process called melanogenesis. Melanin is made within small membrane–bound packages called melanosomes. As they become full of melanin, they move into the slender arms of melanocytes, from where they are transferred to the keratinocytes. Under normal conditions, melanosomes cover the upper part of the keratinocytes and protect them from genetic damage. One melanocyte supplies melanin to thirty-six keranocytes according to signals from the keranocytes. They also regulate melanin production and replication of melanocytes. the lips, nipples, glans of the penis, and vagina.metacyc.org/META/NEW-IMAGE?type=COMPOUND&object=CPD-12380
Both the amount and type of melanin produced is controlled by a number of genes that operate under incomplete dominance. One copy of each of the various genes is inherited from each parent. Each gene can come in several alleles, resulting in the great variety of human skin tones. Melanin controls the amount of ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun that penetrates the skin by absorption. While UV radiation can assist in the production of vitamin D, excessive exposure to UV can damage health.

Genetics of skin color variation

The understanding of the genetic underlyings behind human skin color variation is still incomplete, however genetic studies have discovered a number of genes that affect human skin colour in specific populations, and have shown that this happens independently of other physical features such as eye and hair colour. Different populations have different allele frequencies of these genes and it is the combination of these allele variations that bring about the complex, continuous variation in skin coloration we can observe today in modern humans. Population and admixture studies suggest a 3-way model for the evolution of human skin colour, with dark skin evolving in early hominids in sub-Saharan Africa and light skin evolving separately in Europe and East Asia after modern humans had expanded out of Africa.

Dark skin

All modern humans share a common ancestor who lived around 200,000 years ago in sub-Saharan Africa.

Light skin

For the most part, the evolution of light skin has followed different genetic paths in European and East Asian populations. Two genes however, KITLG and ASIP, have mutations that were associated with lighter skin that have high frequencies in both European and East Asian populations and have estimated origin dates after humans spread out of Africa but before the divergence of the European and Asian lineages around 30,000 years ago. Two subsequent genome-wide association studies found no significant correlation between these genes and skin color, and suggest that the earlier findings may have been the result of incorrect correction methods and small panel sizes of the earlier studies, or that the genes have an effect too small to be detected by the larger studies.

=Europe=

A number of genes have been positively associated with the skin pigmentation difference between European and non-European populations. Mutations in SLC24A5 and SLC45A2 are believed to account for the bulk of this variation and show very strong signs of selection. A variation in TYR has also been identified as a contributor.
Research indicates the selection for the light-skin alleles of these genes in Europeans is comparatively recent, having occurred later than 20,000 years ago and perhaps as recently as 12,000 to 6,000 years ago. "a suggestion made 30 years ago by Stanford University geneticist L. Luca Cavalli-Sforza ... that the early immigrants to Europe ... survived on ready-made sources of vitamin D in their diet. But when farming spread in the past 6000 years, he argued, Europeans had fewer sources of vitamin D in their food and needed to absorb more sunlight to produce the vitamin in their skin." This scenario found support in a 2014 analysis of mesolithic (7,000 years old) hunter-gatherer DNA from La Braña, Spain, which showed the version of these genes corresponding to dark skin color., Derived immune and ancestral pigmentation alleles in a 7,000-year-old Mesolithic European Nature (2014) doi:10.1038/nature12960. "The La Braña individual carries ancestral alleles in several skin pigmentation genes, suggesting that the light skin of modern Europeans was not yet ubiquitous in Mesolithic time"

=East Asia=

A number of genes known to affect skin colour have alleles that show signs of positive selection in East Asian populations. Of these only OCA2 has been directly related to skin colour measurements, while DCT, MC1R and ATTRN are marked as candidate genes for future study.

Tanning response

Tanning response in humans is controlled by a variety of genes. MC1R variants Arg151Sys (rs1805007Reference SNP(refSNP) Cluster Report: rs1805007. Ncbi.nih.), Arg160Trp (rs1805008Reference SNP(refSNP) Cluster Report: rs1805008. Ncbi.nih.), Asp294Sys (rs1805009Reference SNP(refSNP) Cluster Report: rs1805009. Ncbi.nih.), Val60Leu (rs1805005Reference SNP(refSNP) Cluster Report: rs1805005. Ncbi.nih.) and Val92Met (rs2228479Reference SNP(refSNP) Cluster Report: rs2228479. Ncbi.nih.) have been associated with reduced tanning response in European and/or East Asian populations. These alleles show no signs of positive selection and only occur in relatively small numbers, reaching a peak in Europe with around 28% of the population having at least one allele of one of the variations.

Albinism

Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a lack of pigment in the eyes, skin and sometimes hair that occurs in a very small fraction of the population. The four known types of OCA are caused by mutations in the TYR, OCA2, TYRP1, and SLC45A2 genes.ALBINISM, OCULOCUTANEOUS, TYPE IA; OCA1A, Johns Hopkins University

Evolution of skin color

Loss of body hair in Hominini species is assumed to be related to the emergence of bipedalism some 5 to 7 million years ago. Silk, How Humans Evolved, 6th edition, W. W. Norton & Company, London, 2012. Bipedal hominin body hair may have disappeared gradually to allow better heat dissipation through sweating
