[[Raven paradox]]

CATEGORIES: Paradoxes

The raven paradox, also known as Hempel's paradox or Hempel's ravens, is a paradox arising from the question of what constitutes evidence for a statement. Observing objects that are neither black nor ravens may formally increase the likelihood that all ravens are blackeven though, intuitively, these observations are unrelated.
This problem was proposed by the logician Carl Gustav Hempel in the 1940s to illustrate a contradiction between inductive logic and intuition. A related issue is the problem of induction and the gap between inductive and deductive reasoning.stanford.edu/entries/hempel/

The paradox

Hempel describes the paradox in terms of the hypothesis: LINK
In strict logical terms, via contraposition, this statement is equivalent to:
It should be clear that in all circumstances where (2) is true, (1) is also true; and likewise, in all circumstances where (2) is false (i.e. if a world is imagined in which something that was not black, yet was a raven, existed), (1) is also false.  This establishes logical equivalence.
Given a general statement such as all ravens are black, a form of the same statement that refers to a specific observable instance of the general class would typically be considered to constitute evidence for that general statement.  For example,
is evidence supporting the hypothesis that all ravens are black.
The paradox arises when this same process is applied to statement (2).  On sighting a green apple, one can observe:
By the same reasoning, this statement is evidence that (2) everything that is not black is not a raven.  But since (as above) this statement is logically equivalent to (1) all ravens are black, it follows that the sight of a green apple is evidence supporting the notion that all ravens are black.  This conclusion seems paradoxical, because it implies that information has been gained about ravens by looking at an apple.

Proposed resolutions

Nicod's criterion says that only observations of ravens should affect one's view as to whether all ravens are black. Observing more instances of black ravens should support the view, observing white or coloured ravens should contradict it, and observations of non-ravens should not have any influence. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Hempel's equivalence condition states that when a proposition, X, provides evidence in favor of another proposition Y, then X also provides evidence in favor of any proposition which is logically equivalent to Y. LINK
With normal real world expectations, the set of ravens is finite.  The set of non black things is either non finite or beyond human enumeration.  In order to confirm the statement 'All ravens are black.', it would be necessary to observe all ravens.  This is possible.  In order to confirm the statement 'All non black things are non ravens.', it would be necessary to examine all non black things.  This is not possible.  Observing a black raven could be considered a finite amount of confirmatory evidence, but observing a non black non raven would be an infinitesimal amount of evidence. 
The paradox shows that Nicod's criterion and Hempel's equivalence condition are not mutually consistent. A resolution to the paradox must reject at least one out of:
A satisfactory resolution should also explain why there naively appears to be a paradox. Solutions which accept the paradoxical conclusion can do this by presenting a proposition which we intuitively know to be false but which is easily confused with (PC), while solutions which reject (EC) or (NC) should present a proposition which we intuitively know to be true but which is easily confused with (EC) or (NC).

Accepting non-ravens as relevant

Although this conclusion of the paradox seems counter-intuitive, some approaches accept that observations of (coloured) non-ravens can in fact constitute valid evidence in support for hypotheses about (the universal blackness of) ravens.

=Hempel's resolution=

Hempel himself accepted the paradoxical conclusion, arguing that the reason the result appears paradoxical is because we possess prior information without which the observation of a non-black non-raven would indeed provide evidence that all ravens are black.
He illustrates this with the example of the generalization "All sodium salts burn yellow", and asks us to consider the observation which occurs when somebody holds a piece of pure ice in a colorless flame which does not turn yellow:

=Standard Bayesian solution=

One of the most popular proposed resolutions is to accept the conclusion that the observation of a green apple provides evidence that all ravens are black but to argue that the amount of confirmation provided is very small, due to the large discrepancy between the number of ravens and the number of non-black objects. According to this resolution, the conclusion appears paradoxical because we intuitively estimate the amount of evidence provided by the observation of a green apple to be zero, when it is in fact non-zero but extremely small.
I J Good's presentation of this argument in 1960Good, IJ (1960) The Paradox of Confirmation, The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 11, No. 42, 145-149 JSTOR is perhaps the best known, and variations of the argument have been popular ever since,Fitelson, B and Hawthorne, J (2006) How Bayesian Confirmation Theory Handles the Paradox of the Ravens, in Probability in Science, Chicago: Open Court LINK although it had been presented in 1958Alexander, HG (1958) The Paradoxes of Confirmation, The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 9, No. 35, P. 227 JSTOR and early forms of the argument appeared as early as 1940. JSTOR LINK
Good's argument involves calculating the weight of evidence provided by the observation of a black raven or a white shoe in favor of the hypothesis that all the ravens in a collection of objects are black. The weight of evidence is the logarithm of the Bayes factor, which in this case is simply the factor by which the odds of the hypothesis changes when the observation is made. The argument goes as follows:
Many of the proponents of this resolution and variants of it have been advocates of Bayesian probability, and it is now commonly called the Bayesian Solution, although, as ChiharaChihara, (1987) Some Problems for Bayesian Confirmation Theory, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 38, No. 4 LINK
observes, "there is no such thing as the Bayesian solution. There are many different 'solutions' that Bayesians have put forward using Bayesian techniques." Noteworthy approaches using Bayesian techniques include Earman,Earman, 1992 Bayes or Bust? A Critical Examination of Bayesian Confirmation Theory, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. Eells,Eells, 1982 Rational Decision and Causality. New York: Cambridge University Press Gibson,Gibson, 1969 On Ravens and Relevance and a Likelihood Solution of the Paradox of Confirmation, LINK Hosiasson-Lindenbaum,Hosiasson-Lindenbaum 1940 Howson and Urbach,Howson, Urbach, 1993 Scientific Reasoning: The Bayesian Approach, Open Court Publishing Company Mackie,Mackie, 1963 The Paradox of Confirmation, Brit. J. Phil. Sci. Vol. 13, No. 52, p. 265 LINK and Hintikka,Hintikka J. 1969, Inductive Independence and the Paradoxes of Confirmation LINK who claims that his approach is "more Bayesian than the so-called 'Bayesian solution' of the same paradox." Bayesian approaches which make use of Carnap's theory of inductive inference include Humburg,Humburg 1986, The solution of Hempel's raven paradox in Rudolf Carnap's system of inductive logic, Erkenntnis, Vol. 24, No. 1, pp Maher,Maher 1999 and Fitelson et al.

=Carnap approach=

MaherMaher, 1999 accepts the paradoxical conclusion, and refines it:
{{Quote|A non-raven (of whatever color) confirms that all ravens are black because
Using this Carnapian approach, Maher identifies a proposition which we intuitively (and correctly) know to be false, but which we easily confuse with the paradoxical conclusion. The proposition in question is the proposition that observing non-ravens tells us about the color of ravens. While this is intuitively false and is also false according to Carnap's theory of induction, observing non-ravens (according to that same theory) causes us to reduce our estimate of the total number of ravens, and thereby reduces the estimated number of possible counterexamples to the rule that all ravens are black.
Hence, from the Bayesian-Carnapian point of view, the observation of a non-raven does not tell us anything about the color of ravens, but it tells us about the prevalence of ravens, and supports "All ravens are black" by reducing our estimate of the number of ravens which might not be black.

=Role of background knowledge=

Much of the discussion of the paradox in general and the Bayesian approach in particular has centred on the relevance of background knowledge. Surprisingly, Maher shows that, for a large class of possible configurations of background knowledge, the observation of a non-black non-raven provides exactly the same amount of confirmation as the observation of a black raven. The configurations of background knowledge which he considers are those which are provided by a sample proposition, namely a proposition which is a conjunction of atomic propositions, each of which ascribes a single predicate to a single individual, with no two atomic propositions involving the same individual. Thus, a proposition of the form "A is a black raven and B is a white shoe" can be considered a sample proposition by taking "black raven" and "white shoe" to be predicates.
Maher's proof appears to contradict the result of the Bayesian argument, which was that the observation of a non-black non-raven provides much less evidence than the observation of a black raven. The reason is that the background knowledge which Good and others use can not be expressed in the form of a sample proposition - in particular, variants of the standard Bayesian approach often suppose (as Good did in the argument quoted above) that the total numbers of ravens, non-black objects and/or the total number of objects, are known quantities. Maher comments that, "The reason we think there are more non-black things than ravens is because that has been true of the things we have observed to date. Evidence of this kind can be represented by a sample proposition. But ... given any sample proposition as background evidence, a non-black non-raven confirms A just as strongly as a black raven does ... Thus my analysis suggests that this response to the paradox the Standard Bayesian one cannot be correct."
is sufficient for the observation of a non-black non-raven to provide less evidence than the observation of a black raven. Here, a line over a proposition indicates the logical negation of that proposition.
Fitelson et al. explain that:
The authors point out that their analysis is completely consistent with the supposition that a non-black non-raven provides an extremely small amount of evidence although they do not attempt to prove it; they merely calculate the difference between the amount of evidence that a black raven provides and the amount of evidence that a non-black non-raven provides.

Disputing the induction from positive instances

Some approaches for resolving the paradox focus on the inductive step. They dispute whether observation of a particular instance (such as one black raven) is the kind of evidence that necessarily increases confidence in the general hypothesis (such as that ravens are always black).

=The red herring=

Good gives an example of background knowledge with respect to which the observation of a black raven decreases the probability that all ravens are black:
Good concludes that the white shoe is a "red herring": Sometimes even a black raven can constitute evidence against the hypothesis that all ravens are black, so the fact that the observation of a white shoe can support it is not surprising and not worth attention. Nicod's criterion is false, according to Good, and so the paradoxical conclusion does not follow.
Hempel rejected this as a solution to the paradox, insisting that the proposition 'c is a raven and is black' must be considered "by itself and without reference to any other information", and pointing out that it "... was emphasized in section 5.2(b) of my article in Mind ... that the very appearance of paradoxicality in cases like that of the white shoe results in part from a failure to observe this maxim."Hempel 1967, The White Shoe - No Red Herring, The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 18, No. 3, p. 239 JSTOR
The question which then arises is whether the paradox is to be understood in the context of absolutely no background information (as Hempel suggests), or in the context of the background information which we actually possess regarding ravens and black objects, or with regard to all possible configurations of background information.
Good had shown that, for some configurations of background knowledge, Nicod's criterion is false (provided that we are willing to equate "inductively support" with "increase the probability of" - see below). The possibility remained that, with respect to our actual configuration of knowledge, which is very different from Good's example, Nicod's criterion might still be true and so we could still reach the paradoxical conclusion. Hempel, on the other hand, insists that it is our background knowledge itself which is the red herring, and that we should consider induction with respect to a condition of perfect ignorance.

=Good's baby=

In his proposed resolution, Maher implicitly made use of the fact that the proposition "All ravens are black" is highly probable when it is highly probable that there are no ravens. Good had used this fact before to respond to Hempel's insistence that Nicod's criterion was to be understood to hold in the absence of background information:
This, according to Good, is as close as one can reasonably expect to get to a condition of perfect ignorance, and it appears that Nicod's condition is still false. Maher made Good's argument more precise by using Carnap's theory of induction to formalize the notion that if there is one raven, then it is likely that there are many. LINK
Maher's argument considers a universe of exactly two objects, each of which is very unlikely to be a raven (a one in a thousand chance) and reasonably unlikely to be black (a one in ten chance). Using Carnap's formula for induction, he finds that the probability that all ravens are black decreases from 0.9985 to 0.8995 when it is discovered that one of the two objects is a black raven.
Maher concludes that not only is the paradoxical conclusion true, but
that Nicod's criterion is false in the absence of background knowledge
(except for the knowledge that the number of objects in the universe
is two and that ravens are less likely than black things).

=Distinguished predicates=

Quine argued that the solution to the paradox lies in the recognition that certain predicates, which he called natural kinds, have a distinguished status with respect to induction. This can be illustrated with Nelson Goodman's example of the predicate grue. An object is grue if it is blue before (say) 2015 and green afterwards. Clearly, we expect objects which were blue before 2015 to remain blue afterwards, but we do not expect the objects which were found to be grue before 2015 to be blue after 2015, since after 2015 they would be green. Quine's explanation is that "blue" is a natural kind; a privileged predicate which can be used for induction, while "grue" is not a natural kind and using induction with it leads to error.
This suggests a resolution to the paradox - Nicod's criterion is true for natural kinds, such as "blue" and "black", but is false for artificially contrived predicates, such as "grue" or "non-raven". The paradox arises, according to this resolution, because we implicitly interpret Nicod's criterion as applying to all predicates when in fact it only applies to natural kinds.
Another approach which favours specific predicates over others was taken by Hintikka. Arguments concerning relative frequencies, he contends, cannot always account for the perceived irrelevance of evidence consisting of observations of objects of type A for the purposes of learning about objects of type not-A.
His argument can be illustrated by rephrasing the paradox using predicates other than "raven" and "black". For example, "All men
are tall" is equivalent to "All short people are women", and so observing that a randomly selected person is a short woman should provide evidence that all men are tall. Despite the fact that we lack background knowledge to indicate that there are dramatically fewer men than short people, we still find ourselves inclined to reject the conclusion. Hintikka's example is: "... a generalization like 'no material bodies are infinitely divisible' seems to be completely unaffected by questions concerning immaterial entities, independently of what one thinks of the relative frequencies of material and immaterial entities in one's universe of discourse."
His solution is to introduce an order into the set of predicates. When the logical system is equipped with this order, it is possible to restrict the scope of a generalization such as "All ravens are black" so that it applies to ravens only and not to non-black things, since the order privileges ravens over non-black things. As he puts it:

Rejections of Hempel's equivalence condition

Some approaches for the resolution of the paradox reject Hempel's equivalence condition. That is, they may not consider evidence supporting the statement all non-black objects are non-ravens to necessarily support logically-equivalent statements such as  all ravens are black.

=Selective confirmation=

Scheffler and GoodmanScheffler I, Goodman NJ, Selective Confirmation and the Ravens, Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 69, No. 3, 1972 JSTOR took an approach to the paradox which incorporates
Karl Popper's view that scientific hypotheses are never really confirmed,
only falsified.
The approach begins by noting that the observation of a black raven does not prove that "All ravens are black" but it falsifies the contrary hypothesis, "No ravens are black". A non-black non-raven, on the other hand, is consistent with both "All ravens are black" and with "No ravens are black". As the authors put it:
Selective confirmation violates the equivalence condition since a black raven selectively confirms "All ravens are black" but not "All non-black things are non-ravens".

==Probabilistic or non-probabilistic induction==

Scheffler and Goodman's concept of selective confirmation is an example of an interpretation of "provides evidence in favor of," which does not coincide with "increase the probability of". This must be a general feature of all resolutions which reject the equivalence condition, since logically equivalent propositions must always have the same probability.
It is impossible for the observation of a black raven to increase the probability of the proposition "All ravens are black" without causing exactly the same change to the probability that "All non-black things are non-ravens". If an observation inductively supports the former but not the latter, then "inductively support" must refer to something other than changes in the probabilities of propositions. A possible loophole is to interpret "All" as "Nearly all" - "Nearly all ravens are black" is not equivalent to "Nearly all non-black things are non-ravens", and these propositions can have very different probabilities.
First, consider the splitting:Popper, K. Realism and the Aim of Science, Routlege, 1992, p. 325
Second, the splitting:Popper K, Miller D, (1983) A Proof of the Impossibility of Inductive Probability, Nature, Vol. 302, p. 687 LINK

=The orthodox approach=

The orthodox Neyman-Pearson theory of hypothesis testing considers how to decide whether to accept or reject a hypothesis, rather than what probability to assign to the hypothesis. From this point of view, the hypothesis that "All ravens are black" is not accepted gradually, as its probability increases towards one when more and more observations are made, but is accepted in a single action as the result of evaluating the data which has already been collected. As Neyman and Pearson put it:
According to this approach, it is not necessary to assign any value to the probability of a hypothesis, although one must certainly take into account the probability of the data given the hypothesis, or given a competing hypothesis, when deciding whether to accept or to reject. The acceptance or rejection of a hypothesis carries with it the risk of error.
This contrasts with the Bayesian approach, which requires that the hypothesis be assigned a prior probability, which is revised in the light of the observed data to obtain the final probability of the hypothesis. Within the Bayesian framework there is no risk of error since hypotheses are not accepted or rejected; instead they are assigned probabilities.
An analysis of the paradox from the orthodox point of view has been performed, and leads to, among other insights, a rejection of the equivalence condition:

=Rejecting material implication=

The following propositions all imply one another: "Every object is either black or not a raven", "Every Raven is black", and "Every non-black object is a non-raven." They are therefore, by definition, logically equivalent. However, the three propositions have different domains: the first proposition says something about "Every object", while the second says something about "Every raven".
The first proposition is the only one whose domain of quantification is unrestricted ("all objects"), so this is the only one which can be expressed in first order logic. It is logically equivalent to:
and also to
To say that all ravens are black in the absence of any ravens is an empty statement.  It refers to nothing.  All ravens are white is equally relevant and true, if this statement is considered to have any truth or relevance.
In this system, when contraposition occurs, the modality of the conditional involved
changes from the indicative ("If that piece of butter has been heated to 32 C then it has melted") to the counterfactual ("If that piece of butter had been heated to 32 C then it would have melted"). According to this argument,
this removes the alleged equivalence which is necessary to conclude that yellow cows can inform us about ravens:

=Differing results of accepting the hypotheses=

Several commentators have observed that the propositions "All ravens are black" and "All non-black things are non-ravens" suggest different procedures for testing the hypotheses. E.g. Good writes:Good (1960)
More recently, it has been suggested that "All ravens are black" and "All non-black things are non-ravens" can have different effects when accepted. LINK The argument considers situations in which the total numbers or prevalences of ravens and black objects are unknown, but estimated. When the hypothesis "All ravens are black" is accepted,
according to the argument, the estimated number of black objects increases, while the
estimated number of ravens does not change.
It can be illustrated by considering the situation of two people who have identical information regarding ravens and black objects, and who have identical estimates of the
numbers of ravens and black objects. For concreteness, suppose that there are 100 objects
overall, and, according to the information available to the people involved, each object is just as likely to be a non-raven as it is to be a raven, and just as likely to be black as it is to be non-black:
of ravens is 50; the estimated number of black things is 50; the estimated
number of black ravens is 25, and the estimated number of non-black ravens
(counterexamples to the hypotheses) is 25.
One of the people performs a statistical test (e.g. a Neyman-Pearson test or the comparison of the accumulated weight of evidence to a threshold) of the hypothesis that "All ravens are black", while the other tests the hypothesis that "All non-black objects
are non-ravens". For simplicity, suppose that the evidence used for the test has nothing to do with the collection of 100 objects dealt with here. If the first person accepts the hypothesis that "All ravens are black" then, according to the argument, about 50 objects whose colors were previously in doubt (the ravens) are now thought to be black, while nothing different is thought about the remaining objects (the non-ravens).  Consequently, he should estimate the number of black ravens at 50, the number of black non-ravens at 25 and the number of non-black non-ravens at 25. By specifying these changes, this argument explicitly restricts the domain of "All ravens are black" to ravens.
On the other hand, if the second person accepts the hypothesis that "All non-black objects are non-ravens", then the approximately 50 non-black objects about which it was uncertain whether each was a raven, will be thought to be non-ravens. At the same time, nothing different will be thought about the approximately 50 remaining objects (the black objects). Consequently, he should estimate the number of black ravens at 25, the number of black non-ravens at 25 and the number of non-black non-ravens at 50. According to this argument, since the two people disagree about their estimates after they have accepted the different hypotheses, accepting "All ravens are black" is not equivalent to accepting "All non-black things are non-ravens"; accepting the former means estimating more things to be black, while accepting the latter involves estimating more things to be non-ravens. Correspondingly, the argument goes, the former requires as evidence ravens which turn out to be black and the latter requires non-black things which turn out to be non-ravens.O'Flanagan (2008)

=Existential presuppositions=

A modified logic can take account of existential presuppositions using the presuppositional operator, '*'. For example,
can denote "All ravens are black" while indicating that it is ravens and not non-black objects which are presupposed to exist in this example.



Notes






