[[Drought]]

CATEGORIES: Basic meteorological concepts and phenomena, Civil defense, Climatology, Droughts, Hydrology, Natural disasters, Water and the environment, Weather hazards

Drought  is an extended period when a region notes a deficiency in its water supply whether surface or underground water. A drought can last for months or years, or may be declared after as few as 15 days. Generally, this occurs when a region receives consistently below average precipitation. It can have a substantial impact on the ecosystem and agriculture of the affected region. Although droughts can persist for several years, even a short, intense drought can cause significant damageLiving With Drought and harm to the local economy.  Prolonged drought has caused cause mass migrations and humanitarian crises.
Many plant species, such as cacti, have adaptations such as reduced leaf area and waxy cuticles to enhance their ability to tolerate drought. Some others survive dry periods as buried seeds. Semi-permanent drought produces arid biomes such as deserts and grasslands.A. 2007. Plants and Vegetation: Origins, Processes, Consequences. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 666 p.  Most arid ecosystems have inherently low productivity.

Consequences

Periods of droughts can have significant environmental, agricultural, health, economic and social consequences. The effect varies according to vulnerability. For example, subsistence farmers are more likely to migrate during drought because they do not have alternative food sources. Areas with populations that depend on  as a major food source are more vulnerable to famine.
Drought can also reduce water quality, because lower water flows reduce dilution of pollutants and increase contamination of remaining water sources. Common consequences of drought include:

Globally

Drought is a normal, recurring feature of the climate in most parts of the world. It is among the earliest documented climatic events, present in the Epic of Gilgamesh and tied to the biblical story of Joseph's arrival in and the later Exodus from Ancient Egypt.Drought pushed ancient African immigration 
Modern people can effectively mitigate much of the impact of drought through irrigation and crop rotation. Failure to develop adequate drought mitigation strategies carries a grave human cost in the modern era, exacerbated by ever-increasing population densities.

Examples

Well-known historical droughts include:
The Darfur conflict in Sudan, also affecting Chad, was fueled by decades of drought; combination of drought, desertification and overpopulation are among the causes of the Darfur conflict, because the Arab Baggara nomads searching for water have to take their livestock further south, to land mainly occupied by non-Arab farming people.Looking to water to find peace in Darfur
Approximately 2.4 billion people live in the drainage basin of the Himalayan rivers. Drought in India affecting the Ganges is of particular concern, as it provides drinking water and agricultural irrigation for more than 500 million people.Glaciers Are Melting Faster Than Expected, UN ReportsWater shortage worst in decades, official says, Los Angeles Times
In 2005, parts of the Amazon basin experienced the worst drought in 100 years.Amazon rainforest 'could become a desert' , The Independent, July 23, 2006. Retrieved September 28, 2006. Retrieved September 28, 2006. Scientists at the Brazilian National Institute of Amazonian Research argue in the article that this drought response, coupled with the effects of deforestation on regional climate, are pushing the rainforest towards a "tipping point" where it would irreversibly start to die. It concludes that the rainforest is on the brink of being turned into savanna or desert, with catastrophic consequences for the world's climate. According to the WWF, the combination of climate change and deforestation increases the drying effect of dead trees that fuels forest fires. Retrieved September 28, 2006.
By far the largest part of Australia is desert or semi-arid lands commonly known as the outback. A 2005 study by Australian and American researchers investigated the desertification of the interior, and suggested that one explanation was related to human settlers who arrived about 50,000 years ago. Regular burning by these settlers could have prevented monsoons from reaching interior Australia.Australian rivers 'face disaster', BBC News Australia could experience more severe droughts and they could become more frequent in the future, a government-commissioned report said on July 6, 2008.Metropolis strives to meet its thirst, BBC News  The long Australian Millennial drought broke in 2010.
Recurring droughts leading to desertification in East Africa have created grave ecological catastrophes, prompting food shortages in 1984-1985, 2006 and 2011. Time. January 18, 2012. though these figures and the extent of the crisis are disputed. In February 2012, the UN announced that the crisis was over due to a scaling up of relief efforts and a bumper harvest.U.N. Says Famine in Somalia Is Over, but Risks Remain Aid agencies subsequently shifted their emphasis to recovery efforts, including digging irrigation canals and distributing plant seeds.
In 2012, a severe drought struck the western Sahel. The Methodist Relief & Development Fund (MRDF) reported that more than 10 million people in the region were at risk of famine due to a month long heat wave that was hovering over Niger, Mali, Mauritania and Burkina Faso. A fund of about £20,000 was distributed to the drought-hit countries.ekklesia.co.uk/node/12566

Causes

Generally, rainfall is related to the amount and dew point (determined by air temperature) of water vapour carried by regional atmosphere, combined with the upward forcing of the air mass containing that water vapour. If these combined factors do not support precipitation volumes sufficient to reach the surface, the result is a drought. This can be triggered by high level of reflected sunlight, (high albedo), and above average prevalence of high pressure systems, winds carrying continental, rather than oceanic air masses (i.e. reduced water content), and ridges of high pressure areas from behaviors which prevent or restrict the developing of thunderstorm activity or rainfall over one certain region. Oceanic and atmospheric weather cycles such as the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) make drought a regular recurring feature of the Americas along the Midwest and Australia. Guns, Germs, and Steel author Jared Diamond sees the stark impact of the multi-year ENSO cycles on Australian weather patterns as a key reason that Australian aborigines remained a hunter-gatherer society rather than adopting agriculture.
Human activity can directly trigger exacerbating factors such as over farming, excessive irrigation,A biblical tragedy as Sea of Galilee faces drought Belfast Telegraph deforestation, and erosion adversely impact the ability of the land to capture and hold water.Record rise in wheat price prompts UN official to warn that surge in food prices may trigger social unrest in developing countriesFuel costs, drought influence price increaseNigerian Scholar Links Drought, Climate Change to Conflict Africa Oct, 2005 Overall, global warming will result in increased world rainfall. Paradoxically, some proposed solutions to global warming that focus on more active techniques, solar radiation management through the use of a space sunshade for one, may also carry with them increased chances of drought.Sunshade' for global warming could cause drought 2 August 2007 New Scientist, Catherine Brahic

Types

As a drought persists, the conditions surrounding it gradually worsen and its impact on the local population gradually increases. People tend to define droughts in three main ways:NOAA factsheet, retrieved April 10, 2007

Protection and relief

Strategies for drought protection, mitigation or relief include:

Dry areas

File:Huntington Desert Garden Cactus (etc).
File:Fields outside benambra.
File:ShrinkingLakeChad-1973-1997-EO. The lake has shrunk by 95% since the 1960s.Disappearing Lakes, Shrinking SeasShrinking African Lake Offers Lesson on Finite Resources
File:Sheep on a drought-affected paddock.








