[[Blackstone Library]]

CATEGORIES: Library buildings completed in 1904, Buildings and structures in Chicago, Illinois, Public libraries in Chicago, Illinois, Solon Spencer Beman buildings, Works Progress Administration in Illinois

T. B. Blackstone Memorial Library is a building that is part of the Chicago Public Library System and is named after Timothy Blackstone.  The building was designed by Chicago architect Solon S. Beman.  It is now known as the Chicago Public Library - Blackstone Branch and commonly referred to as Blackstone Library, or Blackstone Branch and sometimes Blackstone for short.  The Concord Granite building's two-year construction started in 1902, and it was dedicated on January 8, 1904. Blackstone Library marks the beginning of the Chicago Branch Library System as the first dedicated branch in the system.  Blackstone is also the only branch of the 79-branch Chicago Public Library branch system that was constructed using private funding.  
The building is located in Chicago's  Kenwood  community area in Cook County, Illinois, United States and serves the Hyde Park, Kenwood, and Oakland community areas.  The branch celebrated its 100th anniversary of service in 2004. Today, the library has bronze and mahogony furnishings and has themed paintings on the rotunda ceiling.  The library is equipped with custom-designed furniture and makes public Wi-Fi access available to its patrons.

History

The library was dedicated to the memory of Timothy Beach Blackstone, President of the Chicago and Alton Railroad from 1864 to 1899,
Although the Blackstones lived downtown, they maintained numerous close friendships in the affluent Hyde Park neighborhood, which then included what is now called the Kenwood community area. Prior to the donation of the Blackstone Library, the Chicago Public Library System had been renting reading room spaces around the city and had been seeking stand alone branches.  On January 8, 1904, Isabella Blackstone handed the keys and deed to the Timothy B. Blackstone Library to the city's Library Board members.  Blackstone Library became the first branch library in the Chicago Public Library System.  The building retains a Lake Park Avenue address although the neighboring section of Lake Park was moved about a half a block east several decades ago.
At least three renovations have occurred, which have expanded, renovated and updated the library.  From 1938–1939 the new children's room annex, a Works Progress Administration project, was added at a cost of $68,400 ($  From 1977–1980 a major restorative renovation occurred.  Blackstone was rededicated on November 18, 1980, in recognition of completion of the three years of work.  There was also a 2004 renovation for the centennial.
Blackstone donated a larger James Blackstone Memorial Library  (1891, opened 1893), in his father's memory to Branford, Connecticut, Blackstone's birthplace.  In addition to the James Blackstone Library in Branford, there is a library named "Blackstone Library" in Blackstone, MA. The architect for both the Branford and Chicago libraries was Solon S. Beman.

Service

As one of the 79 Chicago Public Library branch libraries, Blackstone Library serves the Hyde Park, Kenwood, and Oakland community areas.  These communities include 17 elementary schools and 4 high schools. The 2000 census service area population was 50,084.
In 2003, the "Friends of Blackstone Branch Library" was formed, making the Blackstone Branch one of approximately 34 branches to have such a support group.  The volunteer support group attempts to "serve as an advisory council for Chicago's first branch library, promote use and improvement of the library, and provide volunteer and fundraising services for Blackstone".
The Blackstone Library participates in most Chicago Public Library programs and partnerships, including Great Kids Museum Passport Program, the Monthly Adult Book Club Discussion as well as many annual events and activities.

Design

The building was designed by the architect Solon S. Beman and modeled after Beman's Merchant Tailors Building, the domed temple facing the lagoon in the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition,AIA Guide to Chicago, 2nd edition, Alice Sinkevitch, ed., 2004, Harcourt Books Inc., pg. 426. ISBN 0-15-602908-1 and the Erechtheum at the Athenian Acropolis. Greek Mythology teaches that Demeter, the goddess, bestowed agriculture and civilization upon the world during Erechtheus's reign. The library's rotunda murals have thematic titles: "Labor", "Literature", "Art" and "Science".
The following is a summary of the building's features: Tiffany style dome; Marble column and walls in the rotunda and foyer; 4 overhead rotunda murals painted by Oliver Dennett Grover, mural painter for the World Columbian Exposition;  thick granite walls; and ionic columns.
The building's adult reading room is equipped with mahogany furniture specifically designed for the space.  It also contains matching built-in shelving and custom-made bronze lamps.  The circulation desk area has two-tiered bronze-trimmed book stacks.  The mezzanine floor is composed of glass blocks.

Related structures and ways

Although parts of South Blackstone Avenue south of 53rd Street accommodate two-way traffic, near the library it is a northbound street that accommodates one-way traffic running north along the 1436 east block and ending immediately to the west of (behind) the Blackstone Library at 4900 south (see Kenwood map in external links below and picture to the right).  The street was also named after Timothy Blackstone well after the library was built. 12, Loyola University Press, 1988, ISBN 0-8294-0597-6  The Blackstone Library does not bear a Blackstone Avenue address, despite its proximity. Blackstone Hotel and adjacent Blackstone Theatre (now the Merle Reskin Theatre) would also be named after Timothy Blackstone, whose mansion had stood on their site.

Photo gallery

Image:20061030 Blackstone Library Childrens Annex Plaque.JPG|Children's Annex Plaque
Image:20061030 Blackstone Library Childrens Annex Rear Door.JPG|Children's Annex Door
Image:20061030 Original Tile Flooring.JPG|Original Tile Flooring

Notes




