[[Philip Pullman]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, Academics of Oxford Brookes University, Alumni of Exeter College, Oxford, British Book Award winners, British humanists, Astrid Lindgren Memorial Award winners, Carnegie Medal in Literature winners, Commanders of the Order of the British Empire, English agnostics, English atheists, Atheism activists, English children's writers, English fantasy writers, English novelists, Fellows of the Royal Society of Literature, Guardian Children's Fiction Prize winners, Living people, People associated with Bangor University, People from Norwich, 20th-century British novelists, 21st-century British novelists, Critics of religions, British secularists

Philip Pullman CBE, FRSL (born 19 October 1946) is a British writer. He is the author of several best-selling books, most notably the fantasy trilogy His Dark Materials and the fictionalised biography of Jesus, The Good Man Jesus and the Scoundrel Christ. In 2008, The Times named Pullman one of the "50 greatest British writers since 1945"."The 50 greatest British writers since 1945". The Times. 5 January 2008. Retrieved on 2010-02-05.
Northern Lights, the first book of the His Dark Materials trilogy, won the 1995 Carnegie Medal from the Library Association, recognising the year's outstanding English-language children's book.[ref]
(Carnegie Winner 1995). Living Archive: Celebrating the Carnegie and Greenaway Winners. CILIP. Retrieved 2012-07-09.[/ref]
For the 70th anniversary of the Medal it was named one of the top ten winning works by a panel, composing the ballot for a public election of the all-time favourite.[ref]
"70 Years Celebration: Anniversary Top Tens". The CILIP Carnegie & Kate Greenaway Children's Book Awards. CILIP. Retrieved 2012-07-09.[/ref] 
Northern Lights won the public vote from that shortlist and was thus named the all-time "Carnegie of Carnegies" on 21 June 2007. It has been adapted as a film under its U.S. title, The Golden Compass.

Life and career

Philip Pullman was born in Norwich, England, the son of Audrey Evelyn Pullman (née Merrifield) and Royal Air Force pilot Alfred Outram Pullman. The family travelled with his father's job, including to Southern Rhodesia, though the majority of his formative years was spent in Llanbedr in Ardudwy, north Wales.
His father was killed in a plane crash in 1953 when Pullman was seven, being posthumously awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross (DFC). Pullman said at the beginning of a 2008 exchange that to him as a boy, his father "was a hero, steeped in glamour, killed in action defending his country" and had been "training pilots, I think." Pullman was then presented with a report from The London Gazette of 1954 "which carried the official RAF news of the day and said that the medal was given for 'gallant and distinguished service' during the Mau Mau uprising. 'The main task of the Harvards squadron of planes led by his father has been bombing and machine-gunning Mau Mau and their hideouts in densely wooded and difficult country.' This included 'diving steeply into the gorges of various rivers, often in conditions of low cloud and driving rain.' Testing conditions, yes, but not much opposition from the enemy, the journalist in the exchange continued. Very few of the Mau Mau had guns that could land a blow on an aircraft." Pullman responded to this new information, writing "my father probably doesn't come out of this with very much credit, judged by the standards of modern liberal progressive thought" and accepted the new information as "a serious challenge to his childhood memory."Moreton, Cole, "Philip Pullman: His dark materials: The death and absence of his father has informed so much of the fiction written by this highly acclaimed author over the years, but he has never known – or wanted to know – the truth about what really happened. Until now...", The Independent, 25 May 2008. Retrieved 2010-10-21.
His mother remarried and, with a move to Australia, came Pullman's discovery of comic books including Superman and Batman, a medium which he continues to espouse. From 1957 he was educated at Ysgol Ardudwy in Harlech, Gwynedd, and spent time in Norfolk with his grandfather, a clergyman. Around this time Pullman discovered John Milton's Paradise Lost, which would become a major influence for His Dark Materials.Philip Pullman: How Wales inspired his life and work
From 1963, Pullman attended Exeter College, Oxford, receiving a Third class BA in 1968. In an interview with the Oxford Student  he stated that he "did not really enjoy the English course" and that "I thought I was doing quite well until I came out with my third class degree and then I realised that I wasn't — it was the year they stopped giving fourth class degrees otherwise I'd have got one of those".
Pullman married Judith Speller in 1970 and began teaching children aged 9 to 13 at Bishop Kirk Middle School in Summertown, North Oxford and writing school plays. His first published work was The Haunted Storm, which joint-won the New English Library's Young Writer's Award in 1972. He nevertheless refuses to discuss it. Galatea, an adult fantasy-fiction novel, followed in 1978, but it was his school plays which inspired his first children's book, Count Karlstein, in 1982. He stopped teaching around the publication of The Ruby in the Smoke (1986), his second children's book, whose Victorian setting is indicative of Pullman's interest in that era.
Pullman taught part-time at Westminster College, Oxford, between 1988 and 1996, continuing to write children's stories. He began His Dark Materials in about 1993. Volume I, Northern Lights was published in 1995 (entitled The Golden Compass in the U.S., 1996). Pullman won both the annual Carnegie Medal and the Guardian Children's Fiction Prize, a similar award that authors may not win twice."Guardian children's fiction prize relaunched: Entry details and list of past winners". theguardian 12 March 2001. Retrieved 2012-08-02.
Pullman has been writing full-time since 1996, and continues to deliver talks and writes occasionally for The Guardian. He was awarded a CBE in the New Year's Honours list in 2004. He also co-judged the Christopher Tower Poetry Prize (awarded by Oxford University) in 2005 with Gillian Clarke. Pullman also began lecturing at a seminar in English at his alma mater, Exeter College, Oxford, in 2004,Acclaimed Author Philip Pullman to Visit UCE Birmingham. uce.ac.uk. 6 May 2004Undergraduate Life. exeter.ox.ac.Report to St James's 2004. blakesociety.
In 2005 Pullman won the biggest prize in children's literature, the annual Astrid Lindgren Memorial Award from the Swedish Arts Council, recognising his career contribution to "children's and young adult literature in the broadest sense". According to the presentation, "Pullman radically injects new life into fantasy by introducing a variety of alternative worlds and by allowing good and evil to become ambiguous." In every genre, "he combines storytelling and psychological insight of the highest order."[ref]
"2005: Philip Pullman: Maintaining an Optimistic Belief in the Child". The Astrid Lindgren Memorial Award. Retrieved 2012-08-13.[/ref]
He was one of five finalists for the biennial, international Hans Christian Andersen Medal in 2006 and he was the British nominee again in 2012.
In 2008, he started working on The Book of Dust, a sequel to his completed His Dark Materials trilogy, and "The Adventures of John Blake", a story for the British children's comic The DFC, with artist John Aggs.Philip Pullman writes comic strip, The Times, 11 May 2008Deep stuff, The Guardian, 24 May 2008Pullman's page at the DFC website, The DFC
On 23 November 2007, Pullman was made an honorary professor at Bangor University.bbc.co.stm. BBC News (2007-11-23). Retrieved on 2012-01-02. In June 2008, he became a Fellow supporting the MA in Creative Writing at Oxford Brookes University. In October 2009, he became a patron of the Palestine Festival of Literature. He is also a patron of the Shakespeare Schools Festival, a charity that enables school children across the UK to perform Shakespeare in professional theatres
Pullman has a strong commitment to traditional British civil liberties and is noted for his criticism of growing state authority and government encroachment into everyday life. In February 2009, he was the keynote speaker at the Convention on Modern Liberty in LondonThe Convention on Modern Liberty. Modernliberty. Retrieved on 2012-01-02. and wrote an extended piece in The Times condemning the Labour government for its attacks on basic civil rights. Later, he and other authors threatened to stop visiting schools in protest at new laws requiring them to be vetted to work with youngsters—though officials claimed that the laws had been misinterpreted. BBC News (2009-07-16). Retrieved on 2012-01-02.
On 24 June 2009, Pullman was awarded the degree of D. Litt. (Doctor of Letters), honoris causa, by the University of Oxford at the Encænia ceremony in the Sheldonian Theatre. Ox.ac.uk. Retrieved on 2012-01-02.
In 2012, during a break from writing The Book Of Dust, companion novel to the Dark Material Trilogy series, Pullman was asked by Penguin Classics to curate 50 of Grimms' classic fairytales, from their compendium of over 200 stories. "They are not all of the same quality," said Pullman, "Some are easily much better than others. And some are obvious classics. You can't do a selected Grimms' without Rumpelstiltskin, Cinderella and so on."Philip Pullman turns to Grimm task
Beginning in August 2013, Pullman was elected President of the Society of Authors - the "ultimate honour" awarded by the British writers body, and a position first held by Alfred, Lord Tennyson.

His Dark Materials

His Dark Materials is a trilogy consisting of Northern Lights (titled The Golden Compass in North America), The Subtle Knife and The Amber Spyglass. Northern Lights won the Carnegie Medal for children's fiction in the UK in 1995. The Amber Spyglass was awarded both 2001 Whitbread Prize for best children's book and the Whitbread Book of the Year prize in January 2002, the first children's book to receive that award. The series won popular acclaim in late 2003, taking third place in the BBC's Big Read poll. Pullman later wrote two companion pieces to the trilogy, entitled Lyra's Oxford, and Once Upon a Time in the North. A third companion piece Pullman refers to as the "green book" will expand upon his character Will. He has plans for one more, the as-yet-unpublished The Book of Dust. This book is not a continuation of the trilogy but will include characters and events from His Dark Materials.
Pullman has narrated unabridged audiobooks of the three main novels in His Dark Materials. While Pullman is the narrator, the other parts are read by different actors, including Jo Wyatt, Steven Webb, Peter England, Stephen Thorne and Douglas Blackwell.
In a discussion on fantasy as escapism, Pullman admitted he never reads fantasy as 'it's not satisfying.' He then went on to argue that he sees His Dark Materials as 'stark realism,' not fantasy.

Perspective on religion

Pullman is a supporter of the British Humanist Association and an Honorary Associate of the National Secular Society. New Yorker journalist Laura Miller has described Pullman as one of England's most outspoken atheists.
Literary critic Alan Jacobs (of Wheaton College) said that in His Dark Materials Pullman replaced the theist world-view of John Milton's Paradise Lost with a Rousseauist one.
Writing in the Catholic Herald in 1999, Leonie Caldecott cited Pullman's work as an example of fiction "far more worthy of the bonfire than Harry Potter" on the grounds that "by co-opting Catholic terminology and playing with Judaeo-Christian theological concepts, Pullman is effectively removing, among a mass audience of a highly impressionable age, some of the building blocks for future evangelisation".
Peter Hitchens has also argued that Pullman actively pursues an anti-Christian agenda, citing an interview in which Pullman is quoted as saying: "I'm trying to undermine the basis of Christian belief." However, he was more critical of 'The Good Man Jesus and the Scoundrel Christ', accusing Pullman of being a "Protestant atheist" for supporting the teachings of Christ but being critical of organised religion.nytimes.html?nl=books&emc=booksupdateema3&_r=0 nytimes.com July 2010 Retrieved on 2013-10-21
Pullman has, however, found support from some other Christians, most notably from Rowan Williams, the former Archbishop of Canterbury (spiritual head of the Anglican church), who argues that Pullman's attacks focus on the constraints and dangers of dogmatism and the use of religion to oppress, not on Christianity itself.
Williams has also recommended the His Dark Materials series of books for inclusion and discussion in Religious Education classes, and stated that "To see large school-parties in the audience of the Pullman plays at the National Theatre is vastly encouraging".
Pullman has singled out certain elements of Christianity for criticism, as in the following: "I suppose technically, you'd have to put me down as an agnostic. But if there is a God, and he is as the Christians describe him, then he deserves to be put down and rebelled against".

Screen adaptations

Selected works

These are some of Pullman's books.

Non-series books

Sally Lockhart

The New-Cut Gang

His Dark Materials

=Companion books=

Plays

Non-fiction

Comics



Notes



Further reading




