[[Kevin James (broadcaster)]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, Living people, American talk radio hosts, American political pundits, University of Houston alumni, University of Oklahoma alumni, Gay politicians, LGBT politicians from the United States, LGBT broadcasters, California Republicans, Los Angeles mayoral candidates, 2013

Kevin Lee James (born 1963), was a candidate in the 2013 Los Angeles mayoral election and a former Assistant U.S. Attorney for Southern California.  Prior to the Mayoral campaign, James was an American radio host and political commentator, focused on local and national politics. The program aired on KRLA AM 870 in Los Angeles between 12 a.m. and 3 a.m. on weekdays. Since 2007, Kevin James has focused almost exclusively on local, non-partisan issues that affect residents in Los Angeles. He has been credited

Early life

James earned an undergraduate degree from the University of Oklahoma where he was a President's Leadership Scholar and attended the University of Houston Law Center.

Career

Assistant U.S. Attorney

James worked for three years as an Assistant U.S. Attorney, prosecuting federal crimes. During his tenure as assistant U.S. Attorney, James received the Director's Award for Superior Performance. He also worked for more than 20 years in private practice, representing entertainment industry clients.

Talk show host

After several years as a guest and substitute host for talk radio programs in Los Angeles, James worked as the morning drive host on KTOK AM 1000 in Oklahoma City in 2004. In 2005, James became the host of Red Eye Radio, an overnight (1 a.m. to 5 a.m.) call-in program on KABC (AM) 790 in Los Angeles."Kevin James Named New Host of Talkradio 790 KABC's Red Eye Radio", KABC March 3, 2005 press release He focused on both local and national issues. Over Memorial Day Weekend 2007, James began hosting The Kevin James Show on KRLA AM 870 in Los Angeles.
James also appears as a guest commentator on television news programs. He was a regular on Court TV's now-cancelled Catherine Crier Live and has appeared numerous times on Hardball with Chris Matthews.msnbc.com/id/21134540/vp/24357858#24357858 In this MSNBC video, host Chris Matthews ends the segment by stating that James won the debate regarding the negative political impact of Barack Obama's affiliation with Rev. Jeremiah Wright
In 2010 James announced a neighborhood council tour in which he would visit over 45 neighborhood councils all across Los Angeles, taking their issues of concern directly to the airwaves. Since 2010 James has been supportive and involved with LA Clean Sweep, a non-partisan grassroots citywide coalition of community groups and activists working for change at City Hall in Los Angeles.

May 2008 Hardball appearance

James achieved notoriety for a May 15, 2008, guest spot on the MSNBC television program Hardball with Chris Matthews, in which James supported an apparent comparison by President George W. Bush of Democratic primary presidential candidate Barack Obama to American Senator William Borah of Idaho, who was serving at the time of Hitler's invasion of Poland.Video Clip Appearance from MSNBC
Earlier that day, President George W. Bush, addressing the Israeli Knesset, had said:
"Some seem to believe that we should negotiate with the terrorists and radicals, as if some ingenious argument will persuade them they have been wrong all along. We have heard this foolish delusion before. As Nazi tanks crossed into Poland in 1939, an American senator declared: 'Lord, if I could only have talked to Hitler, all this might have been avoided.' We have an obligation to call this what it is -- the false comfort of appeasement, which has been repeatedly discredited by history."
"Some people suggest if the United States would just break ties with Israel, all our problems in the Middle East would go away. This is a tired argument that buys into the propaganda of the enemies of peace, and America utterly rejects it." White House Transcript, May 15, 2008
On the show, James said, "Well, I don't know who he was talking about for sure, Chris, but if he wasn't talking about Barack Obama, he should have been talking about Barack Obama, I hope he was talking about Barack Obama."  The other guest, Air America Radio president and Democratic politician Mark J. Green, denounced Bush's comparison.
In the interview, host Chris Matthews asked James what he thought British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain did wrong in 1938-1939 in the lead-up to Hitler invading Poland. When James failed to give an answer more specific than "he was an appeaser," and pointed out that it was President Bush who made the reference to history, not James himself, Matthews repeated the same questions, eventually stating that Chamberlain's appeasement came in the form of giving away half of Czechoslovakia, rather than merely talking to Hitler. After this back and forth went on for a few minutes, James stated that if you are going to negotiate with your enemies, you have to negotiate from strength. A clearly frustrated Matthews ended the segment by saying,  "You trying to defend something, you don't know what you're talking about. If you don't understand 'appeasement' then don't use the word. It's giving away things to the enemy. Not talking to the enemy." 
James appeared on the January 12, 2009, episode of The Daily Show, the American late night satirical news show, as a direct result of his Hardball appearance.

2013 Mayoral Run

James was a candidate for the 2013 Los Angeles mayoral election.  James's campaign focused on fiscal accountability and transparency, including delegating power to the neighborhood councils and reducing business taxation.






