[[Chaudhary Charan Singh University]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in Uttar Pradesh, Education in Meerut, Chaudhary Charan Singh University

Chaudhary Charan Singh University (CCS University;  It was later renamed to its current name after Chaudhary Charan Singh, former Prime minister of India. The university celebrated its silver jubilee in 1991.

History

Chaudhary Charan Singh University (formerly, Meerut University) was established in 1965, to cater to the needs of higher education in western Uttar Pradesh. The University celebrated its silver jubilee in 1991. Presently, it is one of the premier educational institutions of the country encompassing a vast, beautiful and pollution-free campus which sprawls over 222 acres of land having vast playgrounds and experimental fields, botanical garden, rose garden with life-size statue of the late Prime Minister Ch. Charan Singh, Gymnasium, Indoor Stadium, well equipped Library, Hostels for both girls and boys, Administrative Block, Spacious Auditorium, Guest House, Community Center, Medical Center, Residential Quarters for faculty members and employees, Canteen, Bank and Post office. The teaching department belonging to different faculties, are housed in spacious buildings and have well-equipped laboratories and advanced facilities. The University also has a separate engineering college, which is currently offering courses leading to B. degree in several different branches of engineering.
Initially, the M.D. programmes were started in 1969 taking credit of becoming first University in the country to introduce M. programme. In 1973, Post Graduate level courses were also introduced with the modernized syllabi. Since then, the University has been progressing at a steady rate. During the VIII five years plan, introduction of self-financed courses keeping in pace with the changing demands of the society and also for human resources development, were planned. Now, there are five faculties with 22 UGC sponsored and 35 selffinanced/job oriented courses being run in the campus.
Under the able leadership of the Vice Chancellor, a renowned innovative technologist and an established committed academic administrator, the university is offering a large number of new and innovative post-graduate, under-graduate, diploma, advanced diploma and postgraduate diploma courses under self-financed scheme in areas of Agricultural Sciences, Humanities, Social Sciences, Journalism, Mass Communication and Multimedia Techniques, Earth Sciences, Teacher and Physical Education, Fine Arts, Legal Studies, Applied Sciences, Home Science, Business Studies, Geographical Information System (GIS) and Remote Censoring.
A distinct feature of the academic program is the semester system and continuous evolution of the students through quizzes, tests and seminars. The academic program exposes the students to practical aspects through computer labs, seminars, group discussions and lectures of experts invited from other institutions. The recognition of the university is due to the efforts of well-qualified and committed faculty members who have been providing quality education to postgraduate, M. and Ph.D. students. The University has also made a mark in the field of sports, and our students are second to none in their achievements.
The University has always been proud of its alumni who are occupying high positions of great responsibilities and distinction in educational and research institutions in India and abroad as well as administrative positions in the industries, defense and civil services. The success of the students of the university in NET, GATE, ARS, GRE and other examinations such as civil and administrative services etc. speak of the standard and quality of education provided by the university. The research activities in the various departments of the university are supported by grants in the form of research projects sanctioned by UGC, DBT, DST, ICAR, AICTE, UPSTC, CSIR and other funding agencies of the central and state governments. Chaudhary Charan Singh University (formerly, Meerut University) was established in 1966, to cater to the needs of higher education in western Uttar Pradesh. The University celebrated its silver jubilee in 1991. Presently, it is one of the premier educational institutions of the country encompassing a vast, beautiful and pollution-free campus which sprawls over 222 acres of land having vast playgrounds and experimental fields, botanical garden, rose garden with life-size statue of the late Prime Minister Ch. Charan Singh, Gymnasium, Indoor Stadium, well equipped Library, Hostels for both girls and boys, Administrative Block, Spacious Auditorium, Guest House, Community Center, Medical Center, Residential Quarters for faculty members and employees, Canteen, Bank and Post office. The teaching department belonging to different faculties, are housed in spacious buildings and have well-equipped laboratories and advanced facilities. The University also has a separate engineering college, which is currently offering courses leading to B. degree in several different branches of engineering

Affiliated colleges

Chaudhary Charan Singh University has many degree colleges affiliated to it. They fall in two divisions: Saharanpur and Meerut with nine districts including Saharanpur, Meerut, Muzaffarnagar, Shamli, Gautam Budh Nagar, Bagpat, Hapur, Bulandshahr and Ghaziabad.

Campus

This is one of the premier educational institutions of the country encompassing a vast, beautiful and pollution-free campus which sprawls over 222 acres of land having vast playgrounds and experimental fields, botanical garden, rose garden with life-size statue of the late Prime Minister Ch. Charan Singh, Gymnasium, Indoor Stadium, well equipped Library, Hostels for both girls and boys, Administrative Block, Spacious Auditorium, Guest House, Community Center, Medical Center, Residential.Tech. degree in several different branches of engineering.

Library

Ch. Charan Singh University (Formerly Meerut University) Library was established in 1968 to serve the academic community of the university in particular and this region of the state in general. With the introduction of teaching of M. And research programmes in 1969, the library was temporarily moved in L.L.R.M Medical College Campus. A few buildings were built in 1970 at the university campus and the library was housed in room No. 106 on the ground floor of the Institute of Advanced Studies. The designing of the library building was planned in consultation with the renowned architect and library experts. Construction of the library was started in 1970 and it was formally declared open by the first Chancellor, Dr Gopal Reddy on 11th January 1972. The shoebox type library building is designed on modular pattern. Its countless louvers, gentle ramps and full-length glass panels on all sides add to its beauty. It provides 2655.38 sq. meters of floor area spread over four floors. The Library is now known as Raja Mahendra Pratap Library.
Healthcare Centre=== 	
The university has a Health Centre (Medical Dispensary) located near the Guest House of the University. It is open from 8 P.M. to 3 P.M. on all days except Mondays, Second Saturdays and University holidays. A medical officer is available for consultation. In addition, a pharmacist is also available during working hours. Plans are afoot to appoint another pharmacist and a part time lady doctor. The health centre also has an ambulance to meet emergencies.

Auditorium

The university has an auditorium with a capacity of more than a 1000 seats. The auditorium is well equipped with light and sound systems for cultural functions, etc.

Student Canteen

To cater the need of the students, the university has a spacious student's canteen that has the necessary infrastructure.

Internet Facilities

The university has created a local area network which is connected to INTERNET through a leased line. All the departments are connected through this local area network. The computer laboratories of different department are also having internet browsing facility. All departments of the university can make use of Internet facilities by paying fee prescribed from time to time. It is expected to made available different scientific & academic journals through e-consortium managed by INFLIBHET. 

University Computer Centre

Ever since its establishment in the year 1990, as a central facility, the Computer Centre is extending all need-based computational facilities to the students, research scholars and faculty members of the university campus departments. It offers Computer Science courses to the students of various departments established under the auspicies of the University Grants Commission. It has also started rendering services to the university administration like university pre-examination data processing, declaration of results, printing of mark-sheets, preparation of salary statements, prepration of provident fund statements, etc.
Presently the centre has two servers, 35 Pentium IV, 37 Pentium III and one 386 computer systems. It has three high speed line printers (600 lpm and 1500 lpm). Proposals are in the pipe-line to have additional 30 Pentium III nodes on net-working. Since the present Vice-Chancelor is taking keen interest to establish this centre as a nodal centre to meet all requirements of the university administration, students and faculty members of the campus departments, the centre is planning to spread awareness regarding the uses and applications of computers by providing training to all concerned.
Electricity and Civil Supplies Department=== 
The University has well-equipped electrical department catering to the needs of the administrative block, teaching departments and the residences of the staff of the university. We have a rare distinction of providing 24 x 7 supply and electrical maintenance facility to all the departments, hostels and offices in the campus from three power sub-station located in the university. We attend the complaints, provide generator back-up and take care of requirements of departments and sections of the university as well as residential quarters 24 hours/ 365 day a year. The university has got round-the-clock running water supply throughout the campus. Even with limited number of permanent staff, we have been able to provide trouble free services in the university. The University Engineer Mr. Vikas Tyagi is taking care of the changing requirements of infrastructure creation, Maintenance, Renovation and upkeep of the existing facilities.

Placement Cell

The University has established a separate Placement Cell with the purpose of providing essential information and guidance to the students of the Campus for their employment opportunity. The Placement Cell functions as a center for career counseling and employment bureau. The State Government has also established an employment bureau in the University Campus that is situated in the ground floor of the Central Library. Prof. Rakesh Kumar is the Coordinator of Placement Cell.

Women's Cell

The University has a full-fledged Women Cell in the Campus that has been performing the role of providing help and guidance to the female students of the Campus besides listening to their complaints. Prof. Suraksha Pal is the Coordinator of the Women's Cell.

Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes Cell

The University Campus has got a substantially large numbers of students belonging to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes Category. Therefore, we have established an Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes Cell to guide the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes Students for their scholarships, fellowships, govt. schemes and the provisions for their benefit. Prof. J.K. Pundir is the Coordinator of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes Cell.

Dhan Singh Kotwal Community Centre

The University Campus has a well-maintained Community Center Established for the purpose of providing a platform for the community interaction of the University fraternity. The Center has got sufficient furniture and other facilities in the Center along with two big halls and tow well-furnished bedrooms. Most of the teachers and employees of the University make of the Community Center for their family ceremonies.

Guest House

The University has a well-maintained and fully furnished guest house in the Campus premises. The Guest House has 17 rooms with all facilities and four special suits to cater to the heeds of the visiting faculty members, subject experts, examiners and other guests. Dr. Ashok Kumar Chaubey is the Incharge of the Guest House.

Programs

The academic programme exposes the students to practical aspects through seminars, group discussions and lectures of experts invited from other institutions. The University has excellent facilities for a number of indoor and outdoor games. It is very well known in the country for its achievements in sports and games, and has produced a number of players of national and international level It organizes athletic meets and inter-collegiate sports activities like, volleyball, basketball, hockey, etc.
Organizational Set-Up of Chaudhary Charan Singh University, Meerut== 
All Councils and Committees are done under the directions of Vice Chancellor as well as presided under him with Registrar as the Secretary of all authorities except Finance Committee and Faculties Departments.
Administrative Set-Up of Chaudhary Charan Singh University, Meerut== 

Hostels

Hostel accommodation cannot be claimed as a matter of right. The university has seven hostels (three for boys and two for girls and onr for sports), which provide excellent hostel accommodation for a limited number of bonafide full-time students of the university departments who pay the required fees regularly. Three boys hostels have a total accommodation of 200 (114+50+36) rooms while the girls hostel has an accommodation of 186 rooms. While in the hostel, the students are responsible for the up keep of rooms, furnishing and fixtures. The university authorities may ask any inmate to vacate the hostel, if he/she is found indulged in any activity unbecoming of a student. 
Admission to the hostels are made against the available vacant seats. Hostel seats are allotted by the Wardens of the hostels according to University Hostel Rules and U.P. Government reservation rules for SC/ST/OBC students.
In order to regulate community living in the hostel, certain rules have been framed for guidance of the students, as given below.
1. The hostel will have to be vacated by the inmates during summer vacations for at least 15 days for repairs, etc. The dates will be      notified by the wardens.
2. Under no circumstance a student will be allowed to stay in the hostel after prescribed time.
3. A hosteller will be given admission to a new course of study only after he/she vacates the room in his/her possession and produces     before the admission committee a certificate to this effect issued by the warden.
4. The students studying for diploma and certificate courses in Russian language and other such courses will not be provided hostel      accommodation.
5. M. students will vacate the hostel on completion of their project work.
6. Students are supposed to conduct themselves with extremely good manners in and outside the hostels. Payments of hostel fees and     dues, proper use of hostel facilities, common rooms and regulation regarding hostel visiting hours are some of the important points to     be strictly adhered to by the hostellers.
There are 9 hostels in the University:-
Faculties in University==	
Ch.Phil. program was started during 1960's in the Institute of Advance studies in various subjects of Arts, Education, Science and Agriculture. It is also one of the few basic Universities where a separate full -fledged Agriculture Faculty was established. The objective of the University is to offer higher education to match International standards in all possible basic and applied aspects. The University has five faculties- Agriculture, Arts, Education, Science and Technology in campus. Technology is the latest addition and includes various courses on technology. The various Departments under each faculty offer postgraduate (M.A/M.Sc./M.Sc.Ed/M.B.A) and research (M. and Ph.D.) courses in conventional UGC-aided courses as well as self-financed career-oriented courses. The general in take of students at M.A/M.Sc. level is 20.

Alumni






