[[Ares I-X]]

CATEGORIES: Constellation program missions

Ares I-X was the first stage prototype and design concept demonstrator in the Ares I program, a launch system for human spaceflight developed by the United States space agency, NASA.  Ares I-X was successfully launched on October 28, 2009.
The Ares I-X vehicle used in the test flight was similar in shape, mass, and size to the planned configuration of later Ares I vehicles, but had largely dissimilar internal hardware consisting of only one powered stage.  Ares I vehicles were intended to launch Orion crew exploration vehicles.  Along with the Ares V launch system and the Altair lunar lander, Ares I and Orion were part of NASA's Constellation Program, which was developing the spacecraft for U.S. human spaceflight after the Space Shuttle fleet was retired.

Test objectives

thumb|right|Two minutes after launch, the Ares I-X's expended Solid Rocket Booster (SRB) first stage was detached from the unpowered Upper Stage Simulator (USS); both landed in the Atlantic Ocean at different locations, as planned. Ares I-X was the first test flight of a launch vehicle like the Ares I. The test flight objectives included:.
The flight also had several secondary objectives, including:
The Ares I-X flight profile closely approximated the flight conditions that Ares I will experience through Mach 4.5, at an altitude of about 130,000 feet (39,600 m) and through a maximum dynamic pressure ("Max Q") of approximately 800 pounds per square foot (38 kPa).
The Ares I-X flight profile resembled the uncrewed Saturn I flights of the 1960s, which tested the Saturn propulsion concept.
By flying the vehicle through first stage separation, the test flight also verified the performance and dynamics of the Ares I solid rocket booster in a "single stick" arrangement, which is different from the solid rocket booster's current "double-booster" configuration alongside the external tank on the space shuttle.

Description

The Ares I–X vehicle consisted of a functional four-segment solid rocket booster (SRB) stage, a fifth segment mass simulator, an upper stage simulator (USS), which was similar in shape and heavier than the actual upper stage, as well as a simulated Orion crew module (CM) and launch abort system (LAS). Since the actual upper stage hardware could not be produced in time for the flight test, the upper stage mass simulator allowed the booster to fly approximately the same trajectory through the first stage of flight. The USS and the CM/LAS mass simulators launched by the Ares I-X were not recovered and fell into the Atlantic Ocean. The first stage, including the fifth segment mass simulator, was recovered to retrieve flight data recorders and reusable equipment.

First stage

The four-segment solid rocket motor and aft skirt for Ares I-X was drawn directly from the Space Shuttle inventory. The motor was manufactured by ATK Launch Services of Promontory, Utah. The new forward structures were manufactured by Major Tool & Machine of Indianapolis, Indiana. The first stage element was managed by Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. Modifications to the solid rocket booster include:
For the Ares I-X flight test, the frustum and forward skirt extension were made of aluminum. The forward skirt and fifth segment simulator were made of steel.

Upper stage simulator

The upper stage simulator (USS) was manufactured by NASA personnel at Glenn Research Center in Cleveland. Because of transportation limitations (bridge heights on highways and rivers), the simulator was built out of eleven steel segments 9.5 feet (2.9 m) tall by 18 feet (5.5 m) wide. The USS simulated the shape, mass, and center of gravity characteristics of Ares I from the interstage to the top of the service module of the Orion Crew exploration vehicle. The centers of mass for the liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen tanks were simulated through the use of steel ballast plates.
The USS included a variety of temperature, vibration, thermal, and acoustic sensors to collect the primary data needed to meet the mission objectives. It also housed the Fault Tolerant Inertial Navigation Unit (FTINU), which controlled the vehicle's flight and primary avionics functions. For stability, the FTINU was mounted on the underside of the lower ballast plates. Ground operations personnel accessed the FTINU through a crew hatch on the side of the interstage segment, which also housed the roll control system. Each USS segment included a ladder and ring-shaped platform to allow access to the sensors and cabling for the developmental flight instrumentation. The stairs and platforms were necessary because Launch Complex 39B is not tall enough to provide crew access to the upper parts of Ares I-X.

Roll control system

The active roll control system (RoCS) was needed because the flight test vehicle had a tendency to roll around its axis of forward motion. The RoCS for Ares I-X consisted of two modules containing engines originally used on now-decommissioned Peacekeeper missiles. The RoCS performed two primary functions:
The RoCS modules, placed on opposite sides of the outer skin of the Upper Stage Simulator, used hypergolic monomethyl hydrazine (MMH) and nitrogen tetroxide (NTO) for propellants and each included two nozzles, which fired tangential to the skin and at right angles to the roll axis in order to provide a controlling roll torque. The propellants were loaded into the modules at Kennedy Space Center's Hypergol Maintenance Facility (HMF) and transported on the ground for installation into the USS in the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) prior to rollout to Launch Complex 39B.
The RoCS modules were designed and constructed to fit into the Interstage segment of the USS by Teledyne Brown Engineering in Huntsville, Alabama.

Crew Module / Launch Abort System Simulator (CM/LAS Simulator)

At the top of the Ares I-X flight test vehicle was a combined Orion crew module and launch abort system simulator, resembling the structural and aerodynamic characteristics of Ares I. The full-scale crew module (CM) is approximately 16 feet (5 m) in diameter and 7 feet (2.1 m) tall, while the launch abort system (LAS) is 46 feet (14 m) long.
The CM/LAS simulator was built with high fidelity to ensure that its hardware components accurately reflect the shape and physical properties of the models used in computer analyses and wind tunnel tests. This precision enables NASA to compare CM/LAS flight performance with preflight predictions with high confidence. The CM/LAS simulator also helps verify analysis tools and techniques needed to further develop Ares I.
Ares I-X flight data were collected with sensors throughout the vehicle, including approximately 150 sensors in the CM/LAS simulator that recorded thermal, aerodynamic, acoustic, vibration and other data. Data were transmitted to the ground via telemetry and also stored in the First Stage Avionics Module (FSAM), located in the empty fifth segment.
Aerodynamic data collected from sensors in the CM/LAS contribute to measurements of vehicle acceleration and angle of attack. How the tip of the rocket slices through the atmosphere is important because that determines the flow of air over the entire vehicle.
The CM/LAS splashed down in the ocean along with the upper stage simulator (USS) after the boost phase of the mission.
This simulator was designed and built by a government-industry team at Langley Research Center in Virginia. It was flown to Kennedy Space Center by C-5 transport and was the last piece of hardware stacked onto the rocket in the Vehicle Assembly Building.

Avionics

Ares I-X used avionics hardware from the Atlas V Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV) to control its flight. This hardware included the Fault Tolerant Inertial Navigation Unit (FTINU) and Redundant Rate Gyro Units (RRGUs), and cable harnesses. The first stage was controlled primarily by heritage hardware from existing Space Shuttle systems. A new electronics box, the Ascent Thrust Vector Controller (ATVC), acted as a translation tool to communicate commands from the Atlas-based flight computer to the solid rocket booster's thrust vector control system. The ATVC was the only new avionics box for the flight. All other components were existing or off-the-shelf units. Ares I-X also  employed 720 thermal, acceleration, acoustic, and vibration sensors as part of its developmental flight instrumentation (DFI) to collect the data necessary for the mission. Some of this data was transmitted real-time via telemetry while the rest was stored in electronics boxes located in the First Stage Avionics Module (FSAM), located inside the hollow first stage fifth segment.
The ground-based portion of the mission's avionics included a ground control, command, and communications (GC3) unit, which was installed on Mobile Launcher Platform No. 1 (MLP-1) for launch at Launch Complex 39B at Kennedy Space Center. The GC3 unit enabled the flight control system to interface with computers on the ground. The flight test vehicle flew autonomously and was controlled by the FTINU, located on the underside of the lower ballast plates of the upper stage simulator (USS).
The avionics were developed by Lockheed-Martin of Denver, Colorado, a subcontractor to Jacobs Engineering of Huntsville, Alabama, and is managed by Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama.

Commemorative payload

Three shoebox-size packages were affixed inside the fifth segment simulator of the first stage to carry:
|url=
|title=NASA's Ares I-X to fly on historic hardware with commemorative payload
|date=October 26, 2009
|publisher=collectSPACE.com
|author=Robert Z. Pearlman}}[/ref]

Processing

Ground operations

Ground operations include activities such as vehicle stacking, integration, rollout, and liftoff, while ground systems include vehicle interfaces and lightning protection. Several new procedures and hardware items were developed for Ares I-X, including:
Ground operations and ground systems were handled by United Space Alliance and NASA personnel at Kennedy Space Center.

Systems engineering and integration

The Ares I-X Systems Engineering & Integration (SE&I) Office, managed by the NASA Langley Research Center, was responsible for integrating the vehicle's parts into a complete rocket and making sure they work together as a system to meet flight test objectives. SE&I was responsible for ensuring all components functioned collectively to satisfy primary and secondary mission objectives.  Detailed management of system interfaces, mission level requirements, validation plans, and flight instrumentation management were key SE&I contributions. SE&I provided the structural, thermal and aerodynamic analyses for the overall system to allow the components to be designed and built. SE&I also managed the mass of the vehicle and developed the trajectory and the guidance, navigation, and control algorithms used for vehicle flight.
To complete these tasks, wind tunnel testing and computational fluid dynamics (CFD) were used to investigate forces acting on the vehicle in various phases of flight, including lift-off, ascent, stage separation and descent.  Once the basic design was understood SE&I provided structural analyses for the system to assure the rocket would behave properly once it was integrated.
Schedule development, management and control was provided by ATK Schedule Analysts permanently located at the NASA Langley Research Center working through the TEAMS contract agreement between ATK and NASA Langley.

Flight test

October 27, 2009 (Launch attempt 1)

Ares I-X had been scheduled for launch on October 27, 2009, the 48th anniversary of the first Saturn I launch.  The launch on the 27th was delayed due to weather (including upper-level winds) and other last-minute concerns,

October 28, 2009 (Launch)

Ares I-X launched on October 28, 2009 at 11:30 EDT (15:30 UTC) from Kennedy Space Center LC-39B, successfully completing a brief test flight.  The vehicle's first stage ignited at T-0 seconds and Ares I-X lifted off from Launch Complex 39B..
The launch accomplished all primary test objectives,.

=Thrust oscillation=

Prior to the flight there had been some concern among NASA scientists and among Ares critics and skeptics that the thrust oscillation would prove too violent for human astronauts to safely ride an Ares rocket. NASA Watch revealed that the first stage Solid Rocket Booster of the Ares I could create high vibrations during the first few minutes of ascent. The vibrations are caused by sudden acceleration pulses due to thrust oscillations inside the first stage. NASA admitted that this problem is very severe, rating it four out of five on a risk scale. NASA was very confident it could solve the problem, referring to a long history of successful problem solving. According to NASA, analysis of the data and telemetry from the Ares I-X flight showed that vibrations from thrust oscillation were within the normal range for a Space Shuttle flight.com, November 10, 2009

=Pad damage=

Approximately two hours after launch of Ares I-X, safing crews entering pad LC-39B reported a small cloud of residual nitrogen tetroxide leaking from an obsolete shuttle oxidizer line at the 
Due to the Pad Avoidance Maneuver performed by Ares I-X, shortly after liftoff, the Fixed Service Structure at LC-39B received significantly more direct rocket exhaust than occurs during a normal Space Shuttle launch. The resulting damage has been reported as "substantial," with both pad elevators rendered inoperable, all communication lines between the pad and launch control destroyed and all outdoor megaphones melted. The vehicle-facing portions of the Fixed Service Structure appear to have suffered extreme heat damage and scorching, as do the hinge columns supporting the Rotating Service Structure.  This damage was anticipated, as NASA intends to remove the FSS and launch future Ares flights from a "clean pad".

=Parachute malfunction=

Initial press reports indicate that the first stage parachute system experienced a malfunction, however, NASA has yet to officially comment on whether the parachute system performed as expected. According to reports, the pilot and drogue parachutes, intended to slow and stabilize the booster stage into a vertical descent performed normally. Upon separation of the forward skirt extension, it has been reported that two of the three main parachutes deployed normally, partially inflating, while the third streamed, unopened. The streaming parachute is believed to have snagged one of the two partially inflated canopies, deflating it.
According to NASA, partial parachute failures were not uncommon in Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Boosters, from which the Ares I-X is derived. Eleven partial parachute failures occurred on Space Shuttle SRBs, including on STS-128. NASA will use that data to make sure the parachutes deploy successfully on future Ares launches.

=First stage damage=

The first stage was found floating upright, as is typical of expended Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Boosters.  However, recovery divers noted buckling of the lower portion. Reports also note an apparent fracture of the booster's forward segment casing and a fractured bracket that held an actuator, part of the SRM's nozzle vectoring system. A NASA memo states that engineers believe that the lower segment buckled when the first stage landed at a much higher speed than designed as a result of one of three main parachutes failing to deploy, as well as the failure of a second main parachute to remain deployed. It is unclear, at this point, what caused the apparent casing fracture and broken bracket, and NASA has not commented on this damage.

=Upper Stage Simulator flat spin=

The unpowered Upper Stage Simulator (USS), which was not meant to be retrieved, impacted further out into the Atlantic Ocean.
The USS was not a precise match to the characteristics of a real Ares I upper stage, and was not intended to test the upper stage's independent performance. The fact that the upper stage was not powered, and separated at a lower altitude than the real upper stage will on the final Ares I, contributed to the spin.






