[[Sean Kingston]]

CATEGORIES: 1990 births, American people of Jamaican descent, Jamaican people of American descent, American rappers of Jamaican descent, American emigrants to Jamaica, American male singers, American pop singers, American reggae musicians, Epic Records artists, American hip hop singers, Jamaican male singers, Jamaican pop singers, Jamaican rappers, People from Kingston, Jamaica, People from Saint Ann Parish, Rappers from Miami, Florida, Reggae fusion artists, Living people

Kisean Anderson (born February 3, 1990), better known by his stage name Sean Kingston, is a Jamaican-American rapper, singer and songwriter. He pursued a music career and debuted in 2007 with the album Sean Kingston.

Early life and education

Kingston was born on February 3, 1990, in Miami, Florida, and moved to Kingston, Jamaica, when he was six. He attended high school in Ocho Rios.

Career

2007–08: Sean Kingston

Sean Kingston was discovered on Myspace by Tommy Rotem at Beluga Heights, and signed to the label in a partnership deal with Sony. In an interview with HitQuarters label head and producer J.R. Rotem described this process with regards to Kingston:
 "Sean Kingston was a rapper when we found him and it was a development process to get him more melodic. At Beluga we essentially refine the talent so that it's more of a marketable product." 
In a venture between Epic Records and Koch Records, Kingston recorded and released the single "Beautiful Girls" in May 2007. Since Sean is a Jamaican singer, he got his stage name "Kingston" from the capital of Jamaica called Kingston, Jamaica.

2009–10: Tomorrow

The album Tomorrow was released on September 22, 2009. Big-name producers involved in the album included former Fugee Wyclef Jean; RedOne (of recent Lady Gaga fame); plus Sean's original mentor, J. R. Rotem. Additionally, five promotional digital singles were released leading up to the album.
Kingston co-wrote Jason Derülo's "Whatcha Say". He also found the R&B-reggae singer Iyaz on
MySpace and signed him to his record label. Kingston and DJ Khaled are being featured on Bow Wow's new single "For My Hood", from the upcoming movie, The Lottery Ticket. Jackson and Naturi Naughton of "Lottery Ticket"

2010–present: Back 2 Life, King Of Kingz "Lee Strike" and other projects

According to Sean Kingston, he is already working on his next album. The lead single was confirmed to be "Dumb Love". The song's chorus samples 1957's, Come Go With Me by the Del Vikings. The song is also featured in an episode of The Suite Life on Deck which Kingston guest starred on. The album will also feature T-Pain, Nicki Minaj, Kanye West, Flo Rida, Soulja Boy, Wyclef Jean, Cher Lloyd, Akon and Dr. Dre. The second single from the album is "Letting Go (Dutty Love)", which features a verse from Nicki Minaj. It was released on iTunes August 3, while the third is "Dumb Love" and was released on iTunes September 8. Sean Kingston's new song "She Moves" samples Irena Cara's "What a Feeling" from the film Flashdance''. This has not been release as a single. A fourth single "Party All Night (Sleep All Day)" was released on December 21, 2010. The song leaked online in December 2010. The music video has already been shot. The video was released on December 23, 2010. Sean said this would be the song of the new year.
Kingston represented the continent of America to sing the Official Theme Song of the Singapore 2010 Youth Olympic Games, "Everyone". He collaborated with four other international artists representing their continent, South African Jody Williams representing Africa, Singaporean Tabitha Nauser (Asia), Briton Steve Appleton (Europe), and Australian Jessica Mauboy representing Oceania. Retrieved June 4, 2010. However, Kingston was unable to attend the Singapore Youth Olympics 2010 opening ceremony due to passport mix ups. Retrieved August 17, 2010. Sean was invited to be featured with Cash Money Records/former So So Def member Bow Wow on his single "For My Hood". He performed it with him and DJ Khaled on BET's television program 106 & Park the day after release.
Sean released his first mixtape, King of Kingz, on February 3, 2011, as a free download only. The mixtape includes guest appearances by Akon, Flo Rida, Soulja Boy, Justin Bieber, B.o.B and Tory Lanez.
Kingston will release a mixtape with pop star Justin Bieber, called Our World. It will feature about 12–14 songs and includes their versions of songs like "Pretty Boy Swag" and "Billionaire". The mixtape is finished and Kingston showed his fans a preview on uStream on August 19, 2010. The release date is yet to be confirmed. Kingston also went on to perform on first leg of Bieber's tour. On April 25, 2011, Kingston performed at Cross Roads Hotel in front of 2,000 people in Lilongwe, Malawi. Kingston was recently in Zimbabwe performing there and is scheduled to perform in Ghana in June 2011. He performed a street concert on April 29, 2011, at Utah State University. Street concert will welcome Sean Kingston. usustatesman.
Kingston has announced that his new album will be called Back 2 Life. He also said in an interview with MTV that he would be completely re-doing the album and that the previous singles will not be on it. According to Sean's Twitter the first single off the album will be released the first week in May 2012. Sean linked up with T.I. on set of the video for "Back 2 Life", the street single off his upcoming album of the same name. The two shot the video in Los Angeles with comedian Mike Epps. In November 2012, Kingston performed in the Dubai Caribbean Carnival at Downtown Dubai with Jason Derülo and Bow Wow. Kingston is expected to play in Philadelphia at the University of the Sciences on April 5, 2013, and at the University of New England on April 27, 2013. He is a big fan of K-Tina. Kingston is also confirmed to perform at "Dayton 2 Daytona" at the University of Dayton. On April 13, 2013 iTunes put up the preorder of Back 2 Life. Its cover art and track listing as well as a release date of September 10, 2013 

Personal life

Activism

Kingston filmed a public service announcement with Do Something to encourage teens to become active in their communities by forming a Do Something club. In 2010, he appeared with one of his dogs in an ad for PETA, encouraging people not to chain their dogs outside."Sean Kingston: Chill With Your Dogs," ABS-CBNnews.

Jet skiing accident

On May 29, 2011, Kingston was involved in a jet skiing accident in Miami Beach, Florida. He was with a female passenger, who was severely injured when their jet ski struck the bridge connecting Palm Island with the MacArthur Causeway at approximately 6 pm. Kingston was taken to Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami, where he was placed on the standard medical/surgical care unit, but had to be transferred to the intensive care unit.com He suffered a fractured wrist and broken jaw along with water in the lungs, but he later made a full recovery.

Discography

Awards/nominations






