[[Eutypella parasitica]]

CATEGORIES: Xylariales, Plant pathogens and diseases, Fungi described in 1938

Eutypella'' canker''' is a plant disease caused by the fungal pathogen Eutypella parasitica'. This disease is capable of infecting many species of maple trees and produces a large, distinguishable canker on the main trunk of the tree. Infection and spread of the disease is accomplished with the release of ascospores from perithecia. Therefore, the best way to manage the Eutypella canker is to remove trees that have been infected. If infected, it can decrease the quality of wood cut for lumber and can thus have a negative economic impact.

Hosts and symptoms

Eutypella canker infects many species of maple trees, most prevalently the sugar maple (Acer saccharum). Others commonly affected are the red maple (Acer rubrum), box elder (Acer negundo), striped maple (Acer pensylvanicum), Norway maple (Acer platanoides), sycamore maple (Acer pseudoplatanus), silver maple (Acer saccharinum), and black maple (Acer nigrum).
Symptoms are similar to all species of maple and include a canker forming most commonly 

Disease cycle

Eutypella parasitica is characterized as an ascomycete fungus that produces fruiting bodies called perithecia. Once they are produced they can be visible with very close observation in the center of the canker, which can give it a speckled, gritty appearance.

Environment

The main factors that contribute to the release of the ascospores are moisture and temperature. For the most part, as long as temperatures are above freezing spores can be released, but they are most likely to be released at moderate temperatures of 

Management

The best way to lower infection is to control the probability of infection in the trees. Trees that are infected need to be cut down and removed optimally on a dry day, as do seedlings and saplings that are also found to be infected. This is done to eliminate the source of the inoculum that can infect other trees. If a tree has cankered branches, the infected branches need to be cut off close to the trunk without damaging the trunk. Cutting the branches flush to the trunk gets rid of the infected branches and also reduces the risk of infection since the tree can heal from this wound more easily. To ensure that the disease is eliminated and not going to spread elsewhere the removed branches and trees should be burned.

Importance

Maple trees with Eutypella canker have a reduction in quality due to the deformity of the trunk. Therefore, if used for lumber products the cankered area will be wasted wood. This disease can then cause reduced economical value of lumber in areas of high infection. Also, aesthetics of the tree is diminished due to the symptoms of the pathogen. Although it can decrease the quality of the tree, the incidence is usually quite low. Infection rates are typically 2%–10% in a particular stand, but it has been recorded to infect over 20%.

Further reading






