[[KFC]]

CATEGORIES: KFC, Companies based in Louisville, Kentucky, Restaurants established in 1952, Fast-food chains of the United States, Kentucky cuisine, Laurel County, Kentucky, Salt Lake County, Utah, 1952 establishments in the United States



KFC (the name was originally an initialism for Kentucky Fried Chicken) is a fast food restaurant chain that specializes in fried chicken and is headquartered in Louisville, Kentucky, in the United States. It is the world's second largest restaurant chain (as measured by sales) after McDonald's, with 18,875 outlets in 118 countries and territories . The company is a subsidiary of Yum! Brands, a restaurant company that also owns the Pizza Hut and Taco Bell chains.
KFC was founded by Harland Sanders, an entrepreneur who began selling fried chicken from his roadside restaurant in Corbin, Kentucky, during the Great Depression. Sanders identified the potential of the restaurant franchising concept, and the first "Kentucky Fried Chicken" franchise opened in Utah in 1952. KFC popularized chicken in the fast food industry, diversifying the market by challenging the established dominance of the hamburger. By branding himself as "Colonel Sanders," Harland became a prominent figure of American cultural history, and his image remains widely used in KFC advertising. However, the company's rapid expansion saw it overwhelm the ageing Sanders, and in 1964 he sold the company to a group of investors led by John Y. Brown, Jr. and Jack C. Massey.
KFC was one of the first fast food chains to expand internationally, opening outlets in the United Kingdom, Mexico, and Jamaica by the mid-1960s. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, KFC experienced mixed fortunes domestically, as it went through a series of changes in corporate ownership with little or no experience in the restaurant business. In the early 1970s, KFC was sold to the spirits distributor Heublein, who were taken over by the R.J. Reynolds food and tobacco conglomerate, who sold the chain to PepsiCo. The chain continued to expand overseas however, and in 1987 KFC became the first Western restaurant chain to open in China. The chain has since expanded rapidly in China, which is now the company's single largest market. PepsiCo spun off its restaurants division  as Tricon Global Restaurants, which later changed its name to Yum! Brands.
KFC's original product is pressure fried chicken pieces, seasoned with Sanders' recipe of 11 herbs and spices. The constituents of the recipe represent a notable trade secret. Larger portions of fried chicken are served in a cardboard "bucket," which has become a well known feature of the chain since it was first introduced by franchisee Pete Harman in 1957. Since the early 1990s, KFC has expanded its menu to offer other chicken products such as chicken fillet burgers and wraps, as well as salads and side dishes, such as French fries and coleslaw, desserts, and soft drinks, the latter often supplied by PepsiCo. KFC is known for the slogan "finger lickin' good," which has since been replaced by "Nobody does chicken like KFC" and "So good."

History

Harland Sanders was born in 1890 and raised on a farm outside Henryville, Indiana.
Sanders was unhappy with the 35 minutes it took to prepare his chicken in an iron frying pan, but he refused to deep fry the chicken, which he believed lowered the quality of the product. Sanders bought one, and modified it into a pressure fryer, which he then used to fry chicken. The new method reduced production time to be comparable with deep frying, while, in the opinion of Sanders, retaining the quality of pan-fried chicken.
In July 1940, Sanders finalised what came to be known as his "Original Recipe" of 11 herbs and spices.
The Sanders Court & Café generally served travelers, so when the route planned in 1955 for Interstate 75 bypassed Corbin, Sanders sold his properties and traveled the US to franchise his chicken recipe to restaurant owners.
Don Anderson, a sign painter hired by Harman, coined the name "Kentucky Fried Chicken." For Harman, the addition of KFC was a way of differentiating his restaurant from competitors; a product from Kentucky was exotic, and evoked imagery of Southern hospitality. Harman trademarked the phrase "It's finger lickin' good," which eventually become the company-wide slogan. He also introduced the "bucket meal" in 1957 (14 pieces of chicken, five bread rolls and a pint of gravy in a cardboard bucket). Serving their signature meal in a paper bucket was to become an iconic feature of the company.
By 1963 there were 600 KFC restaurants, making the company the largest fast food operation in the United States. KFC popularized chicken in the fast food industry, diversifying the market by challenging the established dominance of the hamburger.
In 1964, Sanders sold the company to a group of investors led by John Y. Brown Jr. and Jack C. Massey for US$2 million (around US$15 million in 2013). The contract included a lifetime salary for Sanders and the agreement that he would be the company's quality controller and trademark. The chain had reached 3,000 outlets in 48 different countries by 1970.
In 1982, Heublein was acquired by R. J. Reynolds, the tobacco giant. In July 1986, Reynolds sold KFC to PepsiCo for $850 million (around US$1.8 billion in 2013). PepsiCo made the chain a part of its restaurants division alongside Pizza Hut and Taco Bell. The Chinese market was entered in November 1987, with an outlet in Beijing.
In 1991, the KFC name was officially adopted, although it was already widely known by that initialism. Kyle Craig, president of KFC US, admitted the change was an attempt to distance the chain from the unhealthy connotations of "fried".

Operations

KFC is a subsidiary of Yum! Brands, one of the largest restaurant companies in the world. KFC had sales of $23 billion in 2013.
By December 2013, there were 18,875 KFC outlets in 118 countries and territories around the world.
Most restaurants are furnished with images of the company founder, Colonel Harland Sanders. As well as dine-in and take-out, many stand-alone KFC outlets offer a drive-through option.
As chairman and CEO of Yum!, David C. Novak ultimately has foremost responsibility for KFC operations. Sam Su is chairman and CEO of Yum!'s Chinese operations, and Muktesh Pant is the CEO of KFC. Richard T. Carucci is president of Yum!, and Roger Eaton is the COO of Yum! and the president of KFC.

China

KFC is the largest restaurant chain in China, with 4,563 outlets. KFC became the first Western fast food company in China after its first outlet opened in Qianmen, Beijing, in November 1987.
Local food items include rice congee and tree fungus salad, with an average of 50 different menu items per store.
In December 2012, the chain faced allegations that some of its suppliers injected antiviral drugs and growth hormones into poultry in ways that violated food safety regulations.

United States

KFC sales in the United States in 2013 were estimated at $4.22 billion by Technomic.
The basic model for KFC in the United States, not necessarily duplicated elsewhere, is a focus on low prices, a limited menu (29 items on average) and an emphasis on takeout. A "very strong percentage" of sales come from African American customers.
Initially, Sanders and KFC used hydrogenated vegetable oil for frying, but in the 1980s the company began to switch to cheaper oils such as palm or soybean. By April 2007, the chain had switched to trans fat-free soybean oil in all of its US outlets.
In 2008, Novak credited low US sales as being the result of a lack of new ideas and menu items.
KFC was described in 2012 by Bloomberg Businessweek as a "muscular player" in developing regions, specifically Africa, China and India, while noting its falling market share in the US to rivals such as Chick-fil-A and Popeyes. Some analysts speculated that KFC would begin spinning off its ailing US operations. That year, the company began divesting control of company-owned US restaurants to franchised operations, with the intention of reducing overall company ownership from 35 percent to 5 percent.

Japan

Japan is the third-largest market for KFC after China and the United States with 1,200 outlets.
KFC Japan was originally formed as a joint venture between the American parent and the Japanese Mitsubishi Corporation. The American parent wanted suburban locations, whereas Mitsubishi had argued for city centre locations, as the car had not been widely adopted in Japan at that time. Two more locations were opened in Osaka, but the stores struggled, and after less than a year operations had lost JP¥ 100 million. As a result of this failure, Mitsubishi's original plan for urban locations was pursued.
The first new strategy store opened in Kobe in 1972, an upmarket residential area with a large Western expatriate community. The new strategy was a success, and by December 1973, 100 outlets had been opened. In December 1974, KFC Japan began to promote fried chicken as a Christmas meal. Eating KFC as a Christmas time meal has since become a widely practised custom in Japan.
In August 1990, KFC Japan was listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.

United Kingdom

As of December 2013, there were 784 KFC outlets in the United Kingdom. About 70 percent of outlets are run by franchisees, with the remainder company owned. The company employs 24,000 people. Around 400 sites are drive-through outlets. Average outlet turnover is between £1 and £1.5 million.
Annual sales amount to 60,000 metric tonnes of chicken, 60 percent of which is purchased from the four largest suppliers in the UK, including Faccenda Group and delivered fresh to outlets at least three times a week. The remaining 40 percent is sourced from companies in Europe, Thailand (including Charoen Pokphand Foods) and Brazil. All of the Original Recipe chicken is sourced within the UK.
England had the first overseas branch of KFC which opened in Preston in the North West in May 1965, and was the first American fast food restaurant chain in the country, pre-dating the arrival of McDonald's, Burger King and Pizza Hut by almost a decade. The first London branch opened in North Finchley in November 1968.
In 2006, the company stopped pre-salting its fries and removed trans fats from its products. In 2012 palm oil was replaced by rapeseed oil in the fryers. Between 2004 and 2014, KFC UK increased its offering of "portable" foods: burgers, wraps and salads. During that period, sales rose from around £500 million to almost £1 billion. In 2012 KFC UK invested £9 million to install ovens in all of its outlets, so that it could offer griddled chicken. In 2013, KFC rolled out Lavazza coffee across all of its UK outlets.

Australia & New Zealand

There are over 600 KFC outlets in Australia, and around 100 in New Zealand. KFC was the first American style fast food chain to open in both countries. In 2013, KFC reported an annual turnover of almost AU$2 billion for its Australia and New Zealand operations.
Yum! directly operates 160 KFC outlets in Australia. KFC's major poultry suppliers in Australia are Inghams, Steggles and Turi Foods.
The first Australian KFC was opened in 1968 in Guildford, a suburb of Sydney. Between 1970 and 1971, 75 outlets were opened. This had a major impact on Australian chicken production, which increased by 38 percent during the period. By 1995 there were 452 outlets, and the company employed 12,000 staff. That year, Australia produced 35 percent of KFC's international earnings.
The first KFC opened in New Zealand in 1971 at Royal Oak, a suburb of Auckland. By 1980 there were 37 outlets. In 1989, PepsiCo acquired the 50 percent stake in KFC New Zealand that it did not already own from the local Goodman Fielder conglomerate. In 1991 New Zealand turnover topped NZ$100 million for the first time.

India

In December 2013, there were 299 KFC outlets in India. As well as the standard KFC offerings, the chain sells a chickpea burger and hot wings with chilli lemon sprinkles.
The first Indian KFC was a two-storey outlet on the fashionable Brigade Road in Bangalore in June 1995. According to journalist Michael White, the company could not have chosen a "more difficult venue for its maiden entrée into the country."
KFC began to expand outside of Bangalore in 2004,

Indonesia

In Indonesia KFC is the largest Western restaurant chain, with 466 outlets as of December 2013. The master franchisee is PT Fastfood Indonesia.
The first outlet opened in Jakarta in 1979. Salim Group, Indonesia's largest conglomerate, became a major shareholder in 1990, which provided the company with funds for major expansion. Its master franchisee, PT Fastfood Indonesia, was publicly listed on the Indonesian Stock Exchange in 1993.

Developing markets

KFC continues to grow in Asia. In Malaysia there were 579 outlets as of December 2013.
KFC first entered the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) market in the early 1970s. There are over 500 outlets in the MENA region. It purchases most of its poultry from Sadia of Brazil.
In 2012, KFC operated 577 restaurants across 36 countries in the Caribbean and Latin America region.
The company hopes to expand its African operations, where it is already the regional leader among US fast food chains. The company is slowly expanding across the African continent, opening 70 outlets, but progress has been hampered by sourcing issues, such as a lack of quality suppliers.

Products

KFC's core product offering is pressure fried on-the-bone chicken pieces seasoned with the "Original Recipe". The product is typically available in either two or three piece individual servings, or in a family size cardboard bucket, typically holding between 6 and 16 chicken pieces. Poultry is divided into 9 different cuts (2 drumsticks, 2 thighs, 2 wings, 1 keel, and a backbone based breast cut divided into 2 pieces. Following this, the chicken is left to stand for 5 minutes in order for it to sufficiently cool before it is placed in the warming oven. It is KFC policy to discard chicken if it has not been sold within 90 minutes, in order to ensure freshness. The frying oil varies regionally, and versions used include sunflower, soybean, rapeseed and palm oil. A KFC executive stated that the taste of the chicken will vary between regions depending on the oil variety used, and whether the chicken has been corn-fed or wheat-fed.
As well as its core chicken on the bone offering, KFC's major products include chicken burgers (including the Zinger and the Tower burgers); wraps ("Twisters" and "Boxmasters"); and a variety of finger foods, including crispy chicken strips and hot wings.
KFC adapts its menu internationally to suit regional tastes, and there are over three hundred KFC menu items worldwide. Some locations, such as the UK and the US, sell grilled chicken.
A number of territories, such as Japan, Jamaica, Trinidad, Barbados, Ecuador and Singapore sell fried seafood products under the "Colonel's Catch" banner.
Value menu items are sold under the "Streetwise" name in locations such as Canada.
McCormick & Company is KFC's largest supplier of sauces, seasonings and marinades, and is a long-term partner in new product development.
Due to the company's previous relationship with PepsiCo, most territories supply PepsiCo products, but exceptional territories include South Africa, the Philippines, Turkey, Romania, Greece and Barbados, which stock drinks supplied by The Coca-Cola Company, and Aruba, which stocks RC Cola from the Cott Corporation.
Launched in 2009, the Krusher/Krushem range of frozen beverages containing "real bits" such as Kit Kat, Oreo and strawberry shortcake, is available in over 2,000 outlets.
In 2012, the "KFC am" breakfast menu began to be rolled out internationally, including such items as pancakes, waffles and porridge, as well as fried chicken.

11 herbs and spices

Sanders' Original Recipe of "11 herbs and spices" is one of the most famous trade secrets in the catering industry.
A copy of the recipe, signed by Sanders, is held inside a safe inside a vault in KFC's Louisville headquarters, along with eleven vials containing the herbs and spices.

Equipment

KFC initially used stove-top covered cooking pots to fry its chicken. The Hartzog model had no oil filtration system, meaning that filtering had to be done manually, and the pressure fryers occasionally exploded. In 1969, an engineer called Winston Shelton developed the "Collectramatic 519" pressure fryer that would self-filter the oil, and used precision timers and temperature controls. Fred Jeffries, then vice president of purchasing at KFC, claimed that the invention helped fuel the company's rapid expansion and success: "There's no way it could have grown like it did without the Collectramatic. Stores were doing about $200,000 a year in sales on average with the pots but they could never have done the $900,000 a year it became without Win's fryer."
Although a number of franchisees bought the Collectramatic, which had the support of Colonel Sanders from 1970 onwards, John Y. Brown had already signed an exclusive contract to only use the L S Hartzog fryer. Brown warned franchisees that they were in violation of their contract if they used the Collectramatic. Brown held his ground on the issue until he learned that his father, John Y. Brown, Sr., who was a KFC franchisee himself, was also using the Collectramatic. The issue was eventually resolved after Heublein purchased KFC and acquired Hartzog in order to invalidate the contract. The Collectramatic thus became the official pressure fryer for KFC from 1972 onwards.
Winston previously supplied KFC with holding cabinets, but since 2010, these have been supplied by Henny Penny.

Advertising

Colonel Sanders

Colonel Sanders was a key component of KFC advertising until his death in 1980. Despite his death, Sanders remains a key symbol of the company; an "international symbol of hospitality."
Modern renditions of the Colonel are sometimes used in post 1980 advertising. In 1994, Henderson Forsythe portrayed the Colonel in a television campaign entitled "The Colonel's Way." From 1998 to 2001 an animated version of the Colonel voiced by Randy Quaid was used for television advertisements.
The ubiquity of Sanders has not prevented KFC from introducing a mascot aimed at children. "Chicky," a young animated chicken, was first introduced in Thailand in the 1990s, and has since been rolled out across a number of markets worldwide, mostly in Asia and South America.

Slogans

Early official slogans included "North America's Hospitality Dish" (from 1956) and "We fix Sunday dinner seven nights a week" from 1957 until 1967.
The "finger lickin' good" slogan was used from 1956, and went on to become one of the best-known slogans of the twentieth century. The trademark expired in the US in 2006, and was replaced in that market with "Follow your taste" until 2010. In 2011, the "finger lickin' good" slogan was dropped in favor of "So good," to be rolled out worldwide. A Yum! executive said that the new slogan was more holistic, applying to staff and service, as well as food.
"Nobody does chicken like KFC" was first introduced by KFC Australia in 1998, and has continued to be used by the company in some markets.

Logos

The first KFC logo was introduced in 1952 and featured a "Kentucky Fried Chicken" typeface and a logo of the Colonel.
Landor redesigned the logo in 1997, with a new image of the Colonel. The new Colonel image was more thinly lined, less cartoonish and a more realistic representation of Sanders. In 2006, the Colonel logo was updated by Tesser of San Francisco, replacing his white suit with an apron, bolder colors and a better defined visage. According to Gregg Dedrick, president of KFC's US division, the change, "communicates to customers the realness of Colonel Sanders and the fact that he was a chef."

Television

=United States=

Advertising played a key role at KFC after it was sold by Sanders, and the company began to advertise on US television with a budget of US$4 million in 1966. In order to fund nationwide advertising campaigns, the Kentucky Fried Chicken Advertising Co-Op was established, giving franchisees ten votes and the company three when deciding on budgets and campaigns.
In 1969, KFC hired its first national advertising agency, Leo Burnett. A notable Burnett campaign in 1972 was the "Get a bucket of chicken, have a barrel of fun" jingle, performed by Barry Manilow.
By 1976 KFC was one of the largest advertisers in the US.
From 1991 to 1994, the television campaign focused on the fictional town of Lake Edna. The campaign was replaced by one with the tagline, "Everybody needs a little KFC," which Novak credited with helping to boost sales at the company.
BBDO took over the KFC US account in December 2000. Its first campaign, featuring Jason Alexander, debuted on television in July 2001.

=International=

In 1994, Ogilvy & Mather became KFC's international agency of record. In 2003, the "Soul Food" campaign was launched, aiming to capture the young urban market with 1960s and 70s African-American music. By 2005, this believed to have been a failure, and KFC UK's marketing director left the company amid speculation that the US head office was unhappy with the campaign. Marketing subsequently moved towards a more family-orientated line.

Promotional tie-ins and corporate sponsorships

In 2013, WPP's BrandZ valued the brand at US$10 billion.
In 1994, KFC embarked upon its first US nationwide promotional tie in, with the Looney Tunes franchise. Customers could buy a Looney Tunes character 3D mug for $1.99 with each $14.99 Mega Meal that was purchased.
KFC in the US featured a Matchbox promotion in Spring 1995.
Between November 1998 and January 2000, KFC US teamed with Nintendo, Game Freak and 4 Kids Entertainment in a Pokémon tie-in.
Since 2010, KFC has sponsored the KFC Yum! Center in Louisville. In Australia, KFC has sponsored the Big Bash League Twenty20 cricket tournament and Twenty20 international matches since 2003.

Controversies and criticism

Since the turn of the 21st century, fast food has been criticised for its animal welfare record, its links to obesity and its environmental impact.
In 2006, Greenpeace accused KFC Europe of sourcing the soya bean for its chicken feed from Cargill, which had been accused of clearing large swathes of the Amazon rainforest in order to grow the crop.
In May 2012, Greenpeace accused KFC of sourcing paper pulp for its food packaging from Indonesian rainforest wood. APP said such fiber can be found in recycled paper, or: "It can also come from tree residues that are cleared, after a forest area has become degraded, logged-over or burned, as part of a sustainable development plan. APP has strict policies and practices in place to ensure that only residues from legal plantation development on degraded or logged-over forest areas and sustainable wood fiber enters the production supply chain." KFC said: "From a global perspective, 60 percent of the paper products that Yum! (our parent company) sources are from sustainable sources. Our suppliers are working towards making it 100 percent."
In December 2012, the chain was criticised in China when it was discovered that a number of KFC suppliers had been using growth hormones and an excessive amount of antibiotics on its poultry in ways that violated Chinese law.








