[[Violet (color)]]

CATEGORIES: Optical spectrum, Rainbow, Shades of violet

|}
Violet is a bright bluish purple color that takes its name from the violet flower.   On the traditional color wheel used by painters, it is located between blue and purple. Violet is at the higher end of the visible spectrum, with a wavelength  between approximately 380-450 nanometers. Light with a shorter wavelength than violet but longer than X-rays and gamma rays is called ultraviolet, and is not visible to the human eye.
According to surveys in Europe and the United States, violet is the color most commonly associated with the extravagant, the individualist, ambiguity, the unconventional, and the artificial. 160–176)

Etymology

From the Middle English and old French violette, and from the Latin viola, the names of the violet flower.  The first recorded use of violet as a color name in English was in 1370. In Arabic language Violet color is called Nile and the dye Nilege made from Viola flower (of the violet color) which was dominant on the shores of the Nile River, giving the Nile color as the name of the Nile river. the Violet shade of Blue is called Nili in Contemporary Arabic.

Variations

Purpleflower Violet .JPG|The Violet flower
Améthystre sceptre2.jpg|Amethyst stone
Royal Botanical Gardens Lilac Celebration.JPG|Lilac flowers
Vaucluse lavanda.jpg|Lavender fields in the Vaucluse, in Provence
Wilde Malve.   This is a flower of the Malvaceae family.
Chasublepurple.jpg|An Anglican priest in a violet chasuble

Violet and purple

In the traditional color wheel used by painters, violet and purple are both placed between red and blue. Purple occupies the space closer to red, between crimson and violet.  Violet is closer to blue, and usually less intense and bright than purple.
From the point of view of optics, violet is a real color: it occupies its own place at the end of the visible spectrum, and was one of the seven spectral colors of the spectrum first described by Isaac Newton in 1672.
In the additive color system,  used to create colors on a computer screen or on a color television,  violet is simulated by purple, by combining blue light at high intensity with a less intense red light on a black screen. The range of purples is created by combining blue and red light of any intensities; the chromaticities formed this way line along the "line of purples".
While the scientific definition is clear, the cultural definitions are more varied. The color called purple by the French, pourpre, contains more red and half the amount of blue of the color called purple in the United States and the U.K..  In German, this more reddish color is sometimes called Purpurrot ("purple-red") to avoid confusion. 

Image:Color icon violet v2.svg|The color violet
File:Color icon purple.svg|the color purple
File:Boutet 1708 color circles.
File:Blason Sablon (Quartier de Metz). French and German purple contains more red and less blue than American or British purple.

In history and art

Prehistory and antiquity

Violet is one of the oldest colors used by man.  Traces of very dark violet, made by grinding the mineral manganese,  mixed with water or animal fat and then brushed on the cave wall or applied with the fingers,  are found in the prehistoric cave art in Pech Merle, in France, dating back about twenty-five thousand years. It has also been found in the cave of Altamira and Lascaux. 84 It was sometimes used an alternative to black charcoal.  Sticks of manganese, used for drawing,  have been found at sites occupied by Neanderthal man in France and Israel.   From the grinding tools at various sites, it appears it may also have been used to color the  body and to decorate animal skins.  The mineral hematite, a  red iron oxide,  was also ground to produce a dark red-violet pigment by the artists of the paleolithic and neolithic periods.
Berries of the genus  rubus, such as blackberries, were a common source of dyes in antiquity.  The ancient Egyptians made a kind of violet dye by combining the juice of the mulberry with crushed green grapes. The Roman historian Pliny the Elder reported that the Gauls used a violet dye made from bilberry to color the clothing of slaves.  These dyes made a satisfactory purple, but it faded quickly in sunlight  and when washed. 146–148

Tyrian purple – the color of the emperors

The most famous color of the ancient world was Tyrian purple, produced in Phoenicia, on the coast of modern day Lebanon, in the cities of Tyre and Sidon.  it was made from two sea snails, the murex and the purpura.   The process of making the dye was very delicate;  the shells were first cracked, and the snails were soaked in a basin to allow them decompose, which made a horrible smell; then a tiny gland was removed and the juice extracted from the gland. The juice was placed in the sunlight, where it went through an extraordinary transformation;  in the light it turned from milk white to yellow green, then to green, then to violet, then to a deep red violet-purple. The process had to be stopped at the exactly right moment, and then it was used to dye either wool or silk a magnificent and lasting color.   Traces of the dye industry, including mountains of snail shells, dating back to 1500 BC, have been found at Ougarit and other sites in Lebanon. 135 
The process was extremely labor-intensive and expensive.  When the German chemist Paul Friedander tried to recreate Tyrian purple in 2008, he needed twelve thousand mollusks to create 1.4 ounces of dye,  enough to color a handkerchief.   In the year 2000 a gram of Tyrian purple made from ten thousand mollusks according to the original formula, cost two thousand euro. 163Phillip Ball (2001), Bright Earth, Art, and the Invention of Colour, p. 291  
The actual color of Tyrian purple seems to have varied from a reddish to a bluish purple.   According to the Roman writer Vitruvius, (1st century BC), the murex coming from northern waters, probably murex brandaris,  produced a more bluish color than those of the south, probably murex trunculus.   The most valued shades were said to be those closer to the color of dried blood, as seen in the mosaics of the robes of the Emperor Justinian in Ravenna.  The chemical composition of the dye from the murex is close to that of the dye from indigo, a slightly reddish blue, and indigo was sometimes used to make a counterfeit Tyrian purple, a crime which was severely punished.  What seems to have mattered about Tyrian purple was not its color, but its lustre,  richness,  its resistance to weather and light, and most of all its high price. 148–150.   
Tyrian purple became the color of kings, nobles, priests and magistrates all around the Mediterranean. In the Iliad of Homer,  the belt of Ajax is purple, and the tails of the horses of Trojan warriors are dipped in purple. In the Odyssey, the blankets on the wedding bed of Odysseus are purple. In the poems of Sappho (6th century BC) she celebrates the skill of the dyers of the Greek kingdom of Lydia who made purple footwear, and in the play of Aeschylus (525–456 BC), Queen Clytemnestra welcomes back her husband Agamemnon by decorating the palace with purple carpets.    In the Bible, it was described the color worn by the priests of Yahweh.  In 950 BC, King Solomon was reported to have brought artisans from Tyre  to provide purple fabrics to decorate the Temple of Jerusalem. 136
In the Roman Republic,  the togas of all citizens were bordered with a purple stripe. During a triumph, the general being honored wore an entirely purple toga bordered in gold.  The commander of the army wore a purple cloak, called a paludamentum.  During the Roman Empire, purple was reserved for the Emperors.  The Emperor Caligula had a the King of Mauritania assassinated  for wearing a purple mantle better than his own. Nero made it punishable by death for anyone else to wear the color.  Later, the rulers of the Byzantine Empire continued the use of purple as the imperial color, for diplomatic gifts, and for imperial documents and the pages of the Bible.  But with the gradual Arab conquest of the empire, the sources of the dye were cut off, and by the 9th century the technique of making the dye was largely forgotten. 137–38  

File:Justinian.jpg|Byzantine Emperor Justinian I wearing Tyrian purple, 6th-century mosaic at Basilica of San Vitale, Ravenna, Italy
File:Haustellum brandaris 000.jpg|Tyrian purple was made from a sea snail called murex
File:Fig18j.JPG|Dye bath of Tyrian purple

The Middle Ages and the Renaissance

Violet and purple retained their status of the color of Emperors and princes of the church throughout the long rule the Byzantine Empire.   The Emperor Charlemagne was crowned wearing a mantle of Tyrian purple from Byzantium.   Bishops of the Byzantine church wore white robes with stripes of purple, while government officials wore squares of purple fabric to show their rank.   However, after the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Turks in 1453,  the color began to lose its imperial  status.  The great dye works of Constantinople were destroyed, and gradually scarlet, made with dye from the cochineal insect.  began to be adopted as the royal color in Europe.  In 1464, Pope Paul II decreed that cardinals should wear scarlet, rather than purple, since scarlet was considered a finer color.  Bishops and archbishops, of a lower status than cardinals, were assigned the color purple,  but not the rich Tyrian purple.  They wore clothe of a mix of the less expensive indigo  blue overlaid with scarlet from cochineal. 165.
While violet  was worn less frequently by Medieval and Renaissance kings and princes, it was worn by the professors of many of Europe's new universities.  Their robes were modeled after those of the clergy,  and they often square violet caps and violet robes, or black robes with violet trim.
Violet also played an important part in the religious paintings of the Renaissance.  Angels and the Virgin Mary were often portrayed wearing violet robes. The 17th-century Florentine painter Cennino Cennini advised artists: "If you wish to make a pretty violet color, take fine lac (red lake) and ultramarine blue, in equal parts."  For fresco painters, he advised a less-expensive version, made of a mixture of blue indigo and red hematite. 52

File:Karl den store krons av leo III. The bishops wear purple robes, the cardinals wear scarlet, and the Pope wears white. 
File:Giotto di Bondone 086.jpg|Madonna and child by Giotto (1266–1320)
File:The Wilton Diptych (Right).jpg|The Wilton Diptych (1395), painted for King Richard II
File:Rafael - Ressurreição de Cristo (detalhe - anjo).jpg|A violet-clad angel from the Resurrection of Christ by Raphael (1483–1520)

18th and 19th centuries

In the 18th century, violet was a color worn by royalty, aristocrats and the wealthy, and by both men and women.  Good-quality violet fabric  was expensive, and beyond the reach of ordinary people.
Many painters of the 19th century experimented with the uses of the color violet to capture the subtle effects of light.  Eugène Delacroix (1798–1863)  made use of violet in the sky and shadows of many of his works, such as his painting of a tiger.
A new synthetic pigment, cobalt violet (cobalt phosphate), appeared in the second half of the 19th century, broadening the palette of artists.  Cobalt violet was used by Paul Signac (1863–1935), Claude Monet (1840–1926), and Georges Seurat (1859–1891). 52–53
Vincent van Gogh (1853–1890) was an avid student of color theory.  He used violet in many of his paintings of the  1880s, including his paintings of irises and the swirling and mysterious skies of his starry night paintings, and often combined it with it complementary color, yellow.  In his painting of his bedroom in Arles (1888), he used several sets of complementary colors;  violet and yellow, red and green, and orange and blue.  In a letter about the painting to his brother Theo, he wrote, "The color here......  The floor is of red tiles. The wood of the bed and the chairs are fresh butter yellow, the sheet and the pillows light lemon green. The bedspread bright scarlet. The window green. The bed table orange. The bowl blue.  The doors lilac...." John Gage (2006), La Couleur dans l'art, p. 50–51.  Citing Letter 554 from Van Gogh to Theo. (translation of excerpt by D.R. Siefkin)
In 1856, a young British chemist named William Henry Perkin was trying to make a synthetic quinine. His experiments produced instead an unexpected residue, which turned out to be the first synthetic aniline dye, a deep violet color called mauveine, or abbreviated simply to mauve (the dye being named after the lighter color of the mallow mauve flower).   Used to dye clothes, it became extremely fashionable among the nobility and upper classes in Europe, particularly after Queen Victoria wore a silk gown dyed with mauveine to the Royal Exhibition of 1862.   Prior to Perkin's discovery,  mauve was a color which only the aristocracy and rich could afford to wear.  Perkin developed an industrial process, built a factory, and produced the dye by the ton, so almost anyone could wear mauve.  It was the first of a series of modern industrial dyes which completely transformed both the chemical industry and fashion.

File:Charles de Bourbon, futur Carlos III.
File:Rokotov ekaterina. (State Hermitage Museum).
File:Eugène Delacroix - Tigre.
File:Arthur Hughes - April Love - Google Art Project. This is April Love (1856).
File:Whistler James Nocturne Trafalgar Square Chelsea Snow 1876.jpg|Nocturne: Trafalgar Square Chelsea Snow (1876)
