[[List of tallest buildings in Minneapolis]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of tallest buildings in the United States by city, Skyscrapers in Minneapolis, Minnesota, Buildings and structures in Minnesota, Lists of buildings and structures in Minnesota

Minneapolis, the largest city in the U.S. state of Minnesota, is home to 245 completed high-rises,
The history of skyscrapers in the city began with the construction of the Lumber Exchange Building, now also known as the Edison Building, in 1886; this structure, rising 
Minneapolis entered into another high-rise construction boom in 2000, and has since seen the completion of six buildings rising over , there were nine high-rise buildings under construction or proposed for construction in Minneapolis.

Tallest buildings

This list ranks Minneapolis skyscrapers that stand at least  tall, based on standard height measurement. This includes spires and architectural details but does not include antenna masts. The "Year" column indicates the year in which a building was completed.

Tallest buildings by pinnacle height

This list ranks Minneapolis skyscrapers based on their pinnacle height, which includes radio masts and antennas. As architectural features and spires can be regarded as subjective, some skyscraper enthusiasts prefer this method of measurement. Standard architectural height measurement, which excludes antennas in building height, is included for comparative purposes. 

Tallest under construction or proposed

This lists skyscrapers that are under construction or proposed in Minneapolis and planned to be at least  tall, but are not yet completed structures. A floor count of 20 stories is used as the cutoff for buildings whose heights have not yet been released by their developers. 
 Table entries with dashes (—) indicate that information regarding building heights or dates of completion has not yet been released.

Timeline of tallest buildings

This lists buildings that once held the title of tallest building in Minneapolis.



Notes






