[[Hippopotamus]]

CATEGORIES: Hippopotamuses, Animals described in 1758, Mammals of Africa, Megafauna of Africa, Fauna of East Africa, Fauna of West Africa, Herbivorous animals, Articles containing video clips



The hippopotamus (Hippopotamus amphibius), or hippo, from the ancient Greek for "river horse" (.
Hippos are recognizable by their barrel-shaped torsos, enormous mouths and teeth, nearly hairless bodies, stubby legs and tremendous size. They are the third-largest type of land mammal by weight (between 1½ and 3 tonnes): the only heavier species on average are the white and Indian rhinoceroses, typically 1½ to 3½ tonnes, and the elephants, typically weighing 3 to 9 tonnes. The hippopotamus is one of the largest quadrupeds and, despite its stocky shape and short legs, it can easily outrun a human. Hippos have been clocked at  over short distances. The hippopotamus is one of the most aggressive creatures in the world and, as such, ranks among the most dangerous animals in Africa.  Nevertheless, they are still threatened by habitat loss and poaching for their meat and ivory canine teeth.
The hippopotamus is semiaquatic, inhabiting rivers, lakes and mangrove swamps, where territorial bulls preside over a stretch of river and groups of five to 30 females and young. During the day, they remain cool by staying in the water or mud; reproduction and childbirth both occur in water. They emerge at dusk to graze on grasses. While hippopotamuses rest near each other in the water, grazing is a solitary activity and hippos are not territorial on land.

Etymology

The word "hippopotamus" is derived from the ancient Greek  "hippos" can be used as a short plural. Hippopotamuses are gregarious, living in groups of up to 30 animals. A group is called a pod, herd, dale, or bloat.
In Africa, the hippo is known by various names, including seekoei (Afrikaans), mvuvu (Venda), kubu (Lozi) and mvubu (Xhosa, Siswati and Zulu) in the south;

Taxonomy and origins

Classification

The hippopotamus is the type genus of the family Hippopotamidae. The pygmy hippopotamus belongs to a different genus in Hippopotamidae, either Choeropsis or Hexaprotodon. Hippopotamidae are sometimes known as hippopotamids. Sometimes, the subfamily Hippopotaminae is used. Further, some taxonomists group hippopotamuses and anthracotheres in the superfamily Anthracotheroidea. Hippopotamidae are classified along with other even-toed ungulates in the order Artiodactyla. Other artiodactyls include camels, cattle, deer and pigs, although hippopotamuses are not closely related to these groups.
Five subspecies of hippos have been described based on morphological differences in their skulls and geographical differences:
The suggested subspecies were never widely used or validated by field biologists; the described morphological differences were small enough that they could have resulted from simple variation in nonrepresentative samples.

Evolution

Until 1909, naturalists grouped hippos with pigs, based on molar patterns. Several lines of evidence, first from blood proteins, then from molecular systematics and DNA

The most recent theory of the origins of Hippopotamidae suggests that hippos and whales shared a common semiaquatic ancestor that branched off from other artiodactyls around , with the protowhale Pakicetus and other early whale ancestors collectively known as Archaeoceti, which eventually underwent aquatic adaptation into the completely aquatic cetaceans. The other branch became the anthracotheres, a large family of four-legged beasts, the earliest of which in the late Eocene would have resembled skinny hippopotamuses with comparatively small and narrow heads. All branches of the anthracotheres, except that which evolved into Hippopotamidae, became extinct during the Pliocene without leaving any descendants.
A rough evolutionary lineage can be traced from Eocene and Oligocene species: Anthracotherium and Elomeryx to the Miocene species Merycopotamus and Libycosaurus and the very latest anthracotheres in the Pliocene.
While the fossil record of hippos is still poorly understood, the two modern genera, Hippopotamus and Choeropsis (sometimes Hexaprotodon), may have diverged as far back as . Taxonomists disagree whether or not the modern pygmy hippopotamus is a member of Hexaprotodon – an apparently paraphyletic genus also embracing many extinct Asian hippopotamuses that is more closely related to Hippopotamus, or Choeropsis – an older and basal genus.

Extinct species

Three species of Malagasy hippopotamus became extinct during the Holocene on Madagascar, one of them within the past 1,000 years. The Malagasy hippos were smaller than the modern hippopotamus, likely through the process of insular dwarfism.
Two species of hippopotamus, the European hippopotamus (H. antiquus) and H. gorgops, ranged throughout continental Europe and the British Isles. Both species became extinct before the last glaciation. Ancestors of European hippos found their way to many islands of the Mediterranean during the Pleistocene.

Description

Hippopotamuses are among the largest living mammals; only elephants and some rhinoceroses and whales are heavier. They are considered megafauna, but unlike all other African megafauna, they have adapted for a semiaquatic life in freshwater lakes and rivers. (1984) Simon & Schuster's Guide to Mammals. Simon & Schuster, Touchstone Books. ISBN 978-0-671-42805-1
The eyes, ears, and nostrils of hippos are placed high on the roof of their skulls. This allows these organs to remain above the surface while the rest of the body submerges.
The hippo's jaw is powered by a large masseter and a well-developed digastric; the latter loops up behind the former to the hyoid.
Unlike most other semiaquatic animals, the hippopotamus has very little hair.
A hippo's lifespan is typically 40–50 years.

Distribution

Hippopotamus amphibius was widespread in North Africa and Europe during the Eemian the animal could still be found along the Damietta branch after the Arab Conquest in 639. Hippos are still found in the rivers and lakes of the northern Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya, north through to Ethiopia, Somalia and Sudan, west to Gambia, and south to South Africa. They inhabit both savanna and forest areas.

Conservation status

Genetic evidence suggests that common hippos in Africa experienced a marked population expansion during or after the Pleistocene epoch, attributed to an increase in water bodies at the end of the era. These findings have important conservation implications as hippo populations across the continent are currently threatened by loss of access to fresh water. Hippos are also subject to unregulated hunting and poaching. In May 2006, the hippopotamus was identified as a vulnerable species on the IUCN Red List drawn up by the World Conservation Union (IUCN), with an estimated population of between 125,000 and 150,000 hippos, a decline of between 7% and 20% since the IUCN's 1996 study. Zambia (40,000) and Tanzania (20,000–30,000) possess the largest populations. Database entry includes a range map and justification for why this species is vulnerable.
The hippo population declined most dramatically in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 

Invasive potential

In the late 1980s, Pablo Escobar kept four hippos in a private menagerie at his residence in Hacienda Napoles, 100 km east of Medellín, Colombia, after buying them in New Orleans. They were deemed too difficult to seize and move after Escobar's fall, and hence left on the untended estate. By 2007, the animals had multiplied to 16 and had taken to roaming the area for food in the nearby Magdalena River. As of early 2014, 40 hippos have been reported to exist in Puerto Triunfo, Antioquia from the original 4 Escobar had.elespectador.com/opinion/editorial/hipopotamos-bravos-articulo-487824

Behavior

With the exception of eating, most of hippopotamuses' lives – from childbirth, fighting with other hippos, to reproduction – occurs in the water. Hippos leave the water at dusk and travel inland, sometimes up to 
Hippo defecation creates allochthonous deposits of organic matter along the river beds. These deposits have an unclear ecological function.
Adult hippos move at speeds up to 

Social life

Studying the interaction of male and female hippopotamuses has long been complicated because hippos are not sexually dimorphic; thus females and young males are almost indistinguishable in the field.
Hippopotamuses are territorial only in water, where a bull presides over a small stretch of river, on average 
Hippopotamuses appear to communicate vocally, through grunts and bellows, and they may practice echolocation, but the purpose of these vocalizations is currently unknown. Hippos have the unique ability to hold their heads partially above the water and send out a cry that travels through both water and air; individuals respond above and under water.

Reproduction

Female hippos reach sexual maturity at five to six years of age and have a gestation period of eight months. A study of endocrine systems revealed that female hippopotamuses may begin puberty as early as three or four years of age. After becoming pregnant, a female hippopotamus will typically not begin ovulation again for 17 months.
Mating occurs in the water, with the female submerged for most of the encounter,

Aggression

Hippopotamuses are by nature very aggressive animals. Hippos involved in attacks on other animals are often either mature bulls, which tend to be very territorial and indiscriminately ill-tempered, or females, which are quite protective of their young calves. Living on the African continent, hippopotamus coexist with a variety of formidable predators.  Nile crocodiles, lions and spotted hyenas are known to prey on young hippos. (June 2008). In the News. Duke University. Retrieved 2009-9-04.
To mark territory, hippos spin their tails while defecating to distribute their excrement over a greater area. News.com (October 28, 2010). Retrieved on 2012-05-12. "Yawning" serves as a threat display. When in combat, male hippos use their incisors to block each other's attacks, and their canines to inflict damage.

Hippos and humans

The earliest evidence of human interaction with hippos comes from butchery cut marks on hippo bones at Bouri Formation dated around 160,000 years ago. The ancient Egyptians recognized the hippo as a ferocious denizen of the Nile.
The hippopotamus was also known to the Greeks and Romans. The Greek historian Herodotus described the hippopotamus in The Histories (written circa 440 BC) and the Roman Historian Pliny the Elder wrote about the hippopotamus in his encyclopedia Naturalis Historia (written circa 77 AD).
Zulu warriors preferred to be as brave as a hippopotamus, since even lions were not considered to match its courage. "In 1888, Captain Baden-Powell was part of a column searching for the Zulu chief Dinizulu, who was leading the Usutu people in revolt against the British colonists. The column was joined by John Dunn, a white Zulu chief, who led an impi (army) of 2,000 Zulu warriors to join the British." Ingonyama – he is a lion!. Scouting.za. Retrieved on 2011-03-29.
The words of the Zulu anthem sounded like this:
"Een-gonyama Gonyama! Invooboo! Yah-bo! Yah-bo! Invooboo!
"John Dunn was at the head of his impi. Powell asked him to translate the Zulu anthem his men had been singing. Dunn laughed and replied: 'He is a lion. Yes, he is better than a lion – he is a hippopotamus.' " 
Hippopotamus meat was commonly eaten by the Europeans in South Africa during the 19th Century, and in 1910 the US government made a serious effort to farm the hippopotamus for its meat in Louisiana (as well as control the invasive water hyacinth); but the project was abandoned as the "hippo bill" (H.R. 23621) fell short of passing.

Hippos in zoos

Hippopotamuses have long been popular zoo animals. The first zoo hippo in modern history was Obaysch, which arrived at the London Zoo on May 25, 1850, where he attracted up to 10,000 visitors a day and inspired a popular song, the "Hippopotamus Polka".
Like many zoo animals, hippos were traditionally displayed in concrete exhibits. In the case of hippos, they usually had a pool of water and patch of grass. In the 1980s, zoo designers increasingly designed exhibits that reflected the animals' native habitats. The best known of these, the Toledo Zoo Hippoquarium, features a 360,000 gallon pool for hippos.

Cultural depictions

A red hippo represented the Ancient Egyptian god Set; the thigh is the "phallic leg of Set" symbolic of virility. Set's consort Tawaret was also seen as part hippo
Hippos have been the subjects of various African folktales. According to a San story; when the Creator assigned each animal its place in nature, the hippos wanted to live in the water, but were refused out of fear that they might eat all the fish. After begging and pleading, the hippos were finally allowed to live in the water on the conditions that they would eat grass instead of fish and would fling their dung so that it can be inspected for fish bones. In a Ndebele tale, the hippo originally had long, beautiful hair, but was set on fire by a jealous hare and had to jump into a nearby pool. The hippo lost most of his hair and was too embarrassed to leave the water.
Ever since Obaysch inspired the "Hippopotamus Polka", hippos have been popular animals in Western culture for their rotund appearance that many consider comical. Stories of hippos such as Huberta, which became a celebrity in South Africa in the 1930s for trekking across the country;
Hippos have also been popular cartoon characters, where their rotund frames are used for humorous effect. The Disney film Fantasia featured a ballerina hippopotamus dancing to the opera La Gioconda. Other cartoon hippos have included Hanna-Barbera's Peter Potamus, the book and TV series George and Martha, Flavio and Marita on the Animaniacs, Pat of the French duo Pat et Stanley, The Backyardigan's Tasha, and Gloria and Moto-Moto from the Madagascar franchise.
The hippopotamus characters "Happy Hippos" were created in 1988 by the French designer Andre Roche Andre Roche at Kindest Illustrations. Retrieved on 14 August 2008. based in Munich, to be hidden in the "Kinder Surprise egg" of the Italian chocolate company Ferrero SpA. The Nintendo Company published Game Boy adventures of them in 2001 and 2007. In the game of chess, the hippopotamus lends its name to the Hippopotamus Defense, an opening system, which is generally considered weak.C.






