[[University of California, Los Angeles]]

CATEGORIES: University of California, Los Angeles, Association of American Universities, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities, Educational institutions established in 1919, Schools accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, Universities and colleges in Los Angeles, California, University of California, Westwood, Los Angeles

The University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) is a public research university located in the Westwood neighborhood of Los Angeles, California, United States. Founded in 1919, it is the third-oldest campus of the University of California system. The university has been labeled one of the Public Ivies, a publicly funded university considered as providing a quality of education comparable to those of the Ivy League.
The university is organized into five undergraduate colleges, seven professional schools, and four professional health science schools. The undergraduate colleges are the College of Letters and Science; Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science (HSSEAS); School of the Arts and Architecture; School of Theater, Film, and Television; and School of Nursing. Fifteen Nobel laureates, one Fields Medalist,
UCLA student-athletes compete intercollegiately as the Bruins in the Pacific-12 Conference. The Bruins have won 125 national championships, including 110 NCAA team championships.

History

In March 1881, after heavy lobbying by Los Angeles residents, the California State Legislature authorized the creation of a southern branch of the California State Normal School (which later became San Jose State University) in downtown Los Angeles to train teachers for the growing population of Southern California. The State Normal School at Los Angeles opened on August 29, 1882, on what is now the site of the Central Library of the Los Angeles Public Library system. The new facility included an elementary school where teachers-in-training could practice their teaching technique on children. That elementary school is related to the present day version, UCLA Lab School. In 1887, the school became known as the Los Angeles State Normal School.
In 1914,  the school moved to a new campus on Vermont Avenue (now the site of Los Angeles City College) in East Hollywood. In 1917, UC Regent Edward Augustus Dickson, the only regent representing the Southland at the time, and Ernest Carroll Moore, Director of the Normal School, began working together to lobby the State Legislature to enable the school to become the second University of California campus, after UC Berkeley. They met resistance from UC Berkeley alumni, Northern California members of the state legislature, and Benjamin Ide Wheeler, President of the University of California from 1899 to 1919, who were all vigorously opposed to the idea of a southern campus.  However, David Prescott Barrows, the new President of the University of California, did not share Wheeler's objections. On May 23, 1919, the Southern Californians' efforts were rewarded when Governor William D. Stephens signed Assembly Bill 626 into law, which merged the Los Angeles Normal School with the University of California as the Southern Branch of the University of California.  The same legislation added its general undergraduate program, the College of Letters and Science. The Southern Branch campus opened on September 15 of that year, offering two-year undergraduate programs to 250 Letters and Science students and 1,250 students in the Teachers College, under Moore's continued direction.
Under University of California President William Wallace Campbell, enrollment at the Southern Branch expanded so rapidly that by the mid-1920s the institution was outgrowing the 25 acre Vermont Avenue location. The Regents conducted a search for a new location and announced their selection of the so-called "Beverly Site"—just west of Beverly Hills—on March 21, 1925 edging out the panoramic hills of the still-empty Palos Verdes Peninsula.  After the athletic teams entered the Pacific Coast conference in 1926, the Southern Branch student council adopted the nickname "Bruins," a name offered by the student council at UC Berkeley. In 1927, the Regents renamed the Southern Branch the "University of California at Los Angeles" (the word "at" was officially replaced by a comma in 1958, in line with other UC campuses).  In the same year, the state broke ground in Westwood on land sold for $1 million, less than one-third its value, by real estate developers Edwin and Harold Janss, for whom the Janss Steps are named.
The original four buildings were the College Library, Royce Hall, the Physics-Biology Building, and the Chemistry Building (now Powell Library, Royce Hall, the Humanities Building, and Haines Hall, respectively), arrayed around a quadrangular courtyard on the 400 acre (1.6 km²) campus. The first undergraduate classes on the new campus were held in 1929 with 5,500 students. In 1933, after further lobbying by alumni, faculty, administration and community leaders, UCLA was permitted to award the master's degree, and in 1936, the doctorate, against continued resistance from UC Berkeley.
A timeline of the history can be found on its website,

Maturity as a university

UCLA was formally elevated to co-equal status with UC Berkeley in 1951, when Raymond B. Allen was named as its first chancellor.  Previously, the school's chief executive had been the provost. The appointment of Franklin David Murphy to the position of Chancellor in 1960 helped to spark an era of tremendous growth of facilities and faculty honors. By the end of the decade, UCLA had achieved distinction in a wide range of subjects. This era also secured UCLA's position as a proper university in its own right and not simply a branch of the UC system. This change is exemplified by an incident involving Chancellor Murphy, which was described by him later on:
 "I picked up the telephone and called in from somewhere, and the phone operator said, 'University of California.' And I said, 'Is this Berkeley?' She said, 'No.' I said, 'Well, who have I gotten to?' 'UCLA.' I said, 'Why didn't you say UCLA?' 'Oh,' she said, 'we're instructed to say University of California.' So the next morning I went to the office and wrote a memo; I said, 'Will you please instruct the operators, as of noon today, when they answer the phone to say, "UCLA."' And they said, 'You know they won't like it at Berkeley.' And I said, 'Well, let's just see. There are a few things maybe we can do around here without getting their permission.'"  
In 2006, the university completed Campaign UCLA, which collected over $3.05 billion and is the second most successful fundraising campaign among public universities.
On January 26, 2011, Meyer and Renee Luskin donated $100 million to UCLA.

Campus

When UCLA opened its new campus in 1929, it had four buildings: Royce Hall and Haines Hall on the north, and Powell Library and Kinsey Hall (now the Humanities Building) on the south. The Janss Steps were the original 87-step entrance to the university that lead directly to the quad of these four buildings. Today, the campus includes 163 buildings across 419 acres (1.7 km²) in the western part of Los Angeles, north of the Westwood shopping district and just south of Sunset Boulevard. In terms of acreage, it is the second smallest of the ten UC campuses. The campus is close but not adjacent to the 405 San Diego Freeway.
The campus includes sculpture gardens, fountains, museums, and a mix of architectural styles. It is located in the residential area of Westwood and bordered by Bel-Air to the north, Beverly Hills to the east, and Brentwood to the west. The campus is informally divided into North Campus and South Campus, which are both on the eastern half of the university's land. North Campus is the original campus core; its buildings are more old-fashioned in appearance and clad in imported Italian brick. North Campus is home to the arts, humanities, social sciences, law, and business programs and is centered around ficus and sycamore-lined Dickson Court, also known as the "Sunken Garden." South Campus is home to the physical sciences, life sciences, engineering, psychology, mathematical sciences, health-related fields, and the UCLA Medical Center.
Ackerman Union, the John Wooden Center, the Arthur Ashe Health and Wellness Center, the Student Activities Center, Kerckhoff Hall, the J.D. Morgan Center, the James West Alumni Center, and Pauley Pavilion stand at the center of the campus, bordering Wilson Plaza. The campus is bisected by Bruin Walk, a heavily traveled pathway from the residential hill to the main campus. At the intersection of Bruin Walk and Westwood Boulevard is Bruin Plaza, featuring an outdoor performing arts stage and a bronze statue of the Bruin bear.

Architecture

The first campus buildings were designed by the local firm Allison & Allison. The Romanesque Revival style of these first four structures remained the predominant building style on campus until the 1950s, when architect Welton Becket was hired to supervise the expansion of the campus over the next two decades. Becket greatly streamlined the
general appearance of the campus, adding several rows of minimalist, slab–shaped brick buildings to the southern half of the campus, the largest of these being the UCLA Medical Center.
The tallest building on campus is named after African-American alumnus Ralph Bunche, who received the 1950 Nobel Peace Prize for negotiating an armistice agreement between the Jews and Arabs in Israel. A bust of him, on the entrance to Bunche Hall, overlooks the Franklin D. Murphy Sculpture Garden. He was the first individual of non-European background and the first UCLA alumnus to be honored with the Prize.
The Hannah Carter Japanese Garden is located a mile from campus, in the community of Bel Air. The garden was designed by landscape architect Nagao Sakurai of Tokyo and garden designer Kazuo Nakamura of Kyoto in 1959. After the garden was damaged by heavy rains in 1969, UCLA Professor of Art and Campus Architect Koichi Kawana took on the task of its reconstruction.

Filming

With a location near Hollywood, UCLA has attracted filming for decades. Much of the 1985 film Gotcha! was shot at UCLA, as well as John Singleton's Higher Learning (1995). Legally Blonde (2001), Old School (2003), The Nutty Professor (1995), Erin Brockovich (2000), How High (2001), National Lampoon's Van Wilder (2002), American Pie 2 (2001), and Bring It On Again (2004) were all mainly shot at the university campus or locale. In January 2009, the Bollywood movie My Name is Khan was shot at UCLA. Some of the exterior shots of the fictional UC Sunnydale in Buffy the Vampire Slayer, and ABC Family original series Greek were also filmed at UCLA. In response to the major demand for filming, UCLA instated a policy on filming and professional photography at the campus.
"UCLA is located in Los Angeles, the same place as the American motion picture industry," said UCLA visiting professor of film and television Jonathan Kuntz. "So we're convenient for (almost) all of the movie companies, TV production companies, commercial companies and so on. We're right where the action is."

Transportation and parking

The campus maintains 24,000 parking spaces and operates an award-winning sustainable transportation program.

Academics

Healthcare

The David Geffen School of Medicine, along with the School of Nursing, School of Dentistry, and Jonathan and Karin Fielding School of Public Health, constitute the professional schools of health science. The California NanoSystems Institute is another project that was created out of a partnership with UCSB to pioneer innovations in the field of nanotechnology.
The Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center is a part of the larger UCLA Health System, which also operates a hospital in Santa Monica and twelve primary care clinics throughout Los Angeles County. In addition, the UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine uses two Los Angeles County public hospitals as teaching hospitals—Harbor-UCLA Medical Center and Olive View-UCLA Medical Center—as well as the largest private nonprofit hospital on the west coast, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center.
In 1981, the UCLA Medical Center made history when an assistant professor named Michael Gottlieb first diagnosed an unknown affliction later to be called AIDS. UCLA medical researchers also pioneered the use of PET scanning to study brain function. The signaling cascade of nitric oxide, one of the most important molecules in cardiopulmonary physiology was discovered in part by the medical school's Professor of Pharmacology Louis J. Ignarro. For this, he was awarded the 1998 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine along with two other researchers – Robert F. Furchgott of the SUNY Health Science Center and Ferid Murad of the University of Texas Medical School at Houston.
In the 2013 edition of U.S. News and World Report, UCLA Medical Center was ranked "Best in the West", as well as one of the top five hospitals in the United States. In 13 of the 15 medical specialty areas examined, UCLA Medical Center ranked in the top 20.

Rankings

=Global rankings=

In 2013–2014, UCLA ranked 12th in academics and 8th for reputation in the Times Higher Education World University Rankings.

=National rankings=

The 2014 annual ranking by U.S. News & World Report ranked UCLA second among public universities (tied with UVA) and 23rd among national universities.

=Graduate and professional schools=

UCLA's oldest operating unit, the Graduate School of Education and Information Studies (GSEIS), was ranked 11th among American graduate schools of education in the 2015 edition of U.S. News & World Report's "America's Best Graduate Schools".

=Departmental rankings=

Departmental rankings included Clinical Psychology #1,

Library system

UCLA's library system has over nine million books and 70,000 serials spread over twelve libraries and eleven other archives, reading rooms, and research centers. It is the nation's 12th largest library in number of volumes.
The first library, University Library (presently Powell Library), was founded in 1884. In 1910, Elizabeth Fargo became the university's first librarian. Lawrence Powell became librarian in 1944, and began a series of system overhauls and modifications, and in 1959, he was named Dean of the School of Library Service.

Medical school admissions

According to the Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC), UCLA supplies the most undergraduate applicants to U.S. medical schools among all American universities. In 2012, UCLA supplied 823 medical school applicants, followed by the University of Michigan with 812 medical school applicants, then UC Berkeley with 768 medical school applicants.
Among first-time medical school applicants who received their Bachelor's degree from UCLA in 2012, 59% were admitted to at least one U.S. medical school.

Admissions

Undergraduate

 
 Freshman statistics
Excluding deferred applications or other unique situations.

UCLA is rated "Most Selective" by U.S. News & World Report. 
Just over 3,000 transfer students entered UCLA in Fall 2011, with 92.4% from the California Community Colleges System. Over the past 15 years over 45,000 transfer students have entered UCLA. One-third of baccalaureate degrees are awarded to students who entered UCLA as transfer students. One of the major debates is over the decreased admission of African-Americans and Latinos, especially since the passage of Proposition 209, prohibiting racial or sexual discrimination at public institutions, in 1996.
Admitted freshman applicants for Fall 2013 had an average weighted GPA of 4.40 (3.88 unweighted), an average combined SAT score of 2033 (666 for Critical Reading, 689 for Mathematics, and 679 for Writing) and an average ACT Composite score of 30.
Admitted freshman applicants to the Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science (HSSEAS) for Fall 2013 had an average weighted GPA of 4.44, an average combined SAT score of 2150 (680 for Critical Reading, 760 for Mathematics, and 710 for Writing) and an average SAT Mathematics II score of 790.

Graduate

For Fall 2010, the David Geffen School of Medicine admitted 3.9% of its applicants.  For Fall 2013, the School of Law admitted 28%.
The average Dental Admissions Test (DAT) scores for admitted students in the class of 2016 were 22 in both the academic and perceptual ability sections.  In 1949 the Regents of the University of California authorized the School of Nursing as one of the professional schools of the UCLA Center for the Health Sciences. The Graduate School of Nursing is ranked by U.S. News and World Report as one of the top graduate nursing schools in the country, and currently has an acceptance rate of 3.9%. The school offers professional degrees in Nurse Practitioner, Clinical Nurse Specialist, and Ph.D. in Nursing.

Crime

In 2012, UCLA was rated the most dangerous college campus in the US by Business Insider with 921 property crimes, and 49 violent crimes (recorded in the year 2011). Business Insider (2012-11-20). Retrieved on 2013-07-14. UCLA's director of media relations issued a response to this rank stating crime reports are taken both on and off campus, including the multiple Los Angeles County locations of UCLA medical centers and clinics, suggesting data might be inflated. Newsroom.edu. Retrieved on 2013-07-14. Other media outlets, such as the Los Angeles Times,'Dangerous UCLA' and other problematic rankings - Los Angeles Times. Latimes. Retrieved on 2013-07-14. LAist,Why UCLA Is Not The "Most Dangerous" College In America. LAist (2012-11-24). Retrieved on 2013-07-14. and LA WeeklyRomero, Dennis. (2012-11-27) Business Insider Refuses To Retract Ridiculous Claim That UCLA Is Top School For Crime - Los Angeles - News - The Informer. Blogs.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-14. disputed the ranking.

Economic impact

The University has a significant impact in the Los Angeles economy. It is the fourth largest employer in the county (after Los Angeles County, the Los Angeles Unified School District and the federal government) and the seventh largest in the region. Compiled by the LA Almanac, Source: California Employment Development Department, The Los Angeles Business Journal, and Almanac research

Trademarks and licensing

The UCLA trademark "is the exclusive property of the Regents of the University of California", As such, the ASUCLA also has a share in the profits.
Due to UCLA's academic and athletic prestige, as well as the name being associated with popular images of Southern California lifestyle, apparel with UCLA logos and insignia sells not just in the United States, but as an overseas clothing and accessories brand. High demand for UCLA apparel has inspired the licensing of its trademark to UCLA brand stores throughout Europe, Middle East and Asia. Since 1980, 15 UCLA stores have opened in South Korea, and 49 are currently open in China. The newest store was opened in the Middle East in Kuwait. UCLA makes $400,000 in royalties every year through its international licensing program.

Athletics

The school's sports teams are called the Bruins, with colors True Blue and gold. The Bruins participate in NCAA Division I-A as part of the Pacific-12 Conference. Two notable sports facilities serve as home venues for UCLA sports. The Bruin men's football team plays home games at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena; the team won a national title in 1954. The basketball and volleyball teams, and the women's gymnastics team play at Pauley Pavilion on campus. The school also sponsors cross country, soccer, women's rowing, golf, tennis, water polo, and women's softball.
The mascots are Joe and Josephine Bruin, and the fight songs are Sons of Westwood and Mighty Bruins. The alma mater is Hail to the Hills of Westwood.
When Henry "Red" Sanders came to UCLA to coach football in 1949, the uniforms were redesigned. Sanders added a gold loop on the shoulders—the UCLA Stripe. The navy blue was changed to a lighter shade of blue. Sanders figured that the baby blue would look better on the field and in film. He dubbed the baby blue uniform "Powder Keg Blue," a powder blue with an explosive kick. This would also differentiate UCLA from all other UC teams, as all UC campuses' official colors are blue and gold.
UCLA is competitive in all major Division I-A sports and has won 125 national championships, including 110 NCAA championships, more than any other university. Most recently, UCLA's baseball team defeated Mississippi State to win its first NCAA National Championship. UCLA's softball program is also outstanding. Women's softball won their NCAA-leading 11th National Championship, on June 8, 2010. The women's water polo team is also dominant, with a record 7 NCAA championships. Notably, the team helped UCLA become the first school to win 100 NCAA championships overall when they won their fifth on May 13, 2007.
Among these championships, some of the more notable victories are in men's basketball. Under legendary coach John Wooden, UCLA men's basketball teams won 10 NCAA championships, including a record seven consecutive, in 1964, 1965, 1967, 1968, 1969, 1970, 1971, 1972, 1973, and 1975, and an 11th was added under then-coach Jim Harrick in 1995 (through 2008, the most consecutive by any other team is two). From 1971 to 1974, UCLA men's basketball won an unprecedented 88 consecutive games.
UCLA has also shown dominance in men's volleyball, with 19 national championships. All 19 teams were led by former coach Al Scates, which ties him with John McDonnell of the University of Arkansas as NCAA leader for national championships in a single sport.
UCLA has medaled in every Olympic Games they have participated in.
Former UCLA basketball player and current Utah Jazz player Earl Watson commented, "Eleven national championships, the best coach (Wooden) to coach the game says a lot. I take offense to those who act like UCLA is just another school compared with Duke. Duke is a great school in the east, but UCLA is worldwide."

Rivalries

UCLA shares a traditional sports rivalry with the nearby University of Southern California. Under legendary coach John Wooden, UCLA became a dominating power in men's basketball, and has won 11 NCAA championships, against USC's zero. In football, UCLA has one national champion team and 16 conference titles, compared to USC's 11 national championships and 37 conference championships. In the Bruins' second straight win over their in-state, in-city rival, UCLA's football team beat USC in a 35-14 victory on USC's home turf.com/articles/1870666-ucla-vs-usc-live-score-and-highlights
The schools share a rivalry in many other sports. In men's volleyball, UCLA won 19 NCAA Men's Volleyball Championships against USC's four. UCLA also dominates the all-time series vs. USC in men's volleyball (86–34).
The origin is unclear, but the rivalry most likely started when football Hall of Fame coach Red Sanders led UCLA to dominance in the 1950s. USC, having won four national championships prior to UCLA's first and only title in 1954 diverted some attention from then-rival University of Notre Dame, and the new cross-town rivalry began.
Presently, UCLA has the most NCAA championships, winning a combined 110 team championships in men's and women's sports, with Stanford University coming in second with 103, followed by USC with 95.ncaa.pdf

Student life

The campus' location in Los Angeles makes excursions to local museums, theaters, or other entertainment venues relatively convenient. UCLA offers classical orchestras, intramural sports, and over 800 student organizations. UCLA is also home to more than 68 national and local Greek-letter organizations, which collectively constitute the largest membership-based and multi-faceted community on campus. Fraternity and sorority members represent 15% of the student population. Greeklife.edu. Retrieved on 2013-07-14. Phrateres, a non-exclusive social-service club for women was founded here in 1924 by the Dean of Women, Helen Matthewson Laughlin. Between 1924 and 1967, 23 chapters of Phrateres were installed in schools across North America. The Student Alumni Association (SAA), a student-run branch under the UCLA Alumni Association, is responsible for conducting UCLA's oldest and greatest traditions, such as Blue and Gold Week, Senior Send-off, Spring Sing, and Dinners for 12 Strangers. UCLA also operates a waterfront facility known as the UCLA Marina Aquatic Center in Marina del Rey, where students and staff participate in dinghy sailing, surfing, windsurfing, rowing, and kayaking.
UCLA has an active a cappella student population, with a variety of student organizations across campus.  The university is often regarded as the pioneer in the West Coast collegiate contemporary a cappella tradition with its first group, Awaken A Cappella, founded in 1992.  The all-male group on campus, Bruin Harmony, has enjoyed a successful career since its inception in 2006, portraying a collegiate a cappella group in The Social Network (2010), while the Scattertones have achieved a great deal of success in the International Championship of Collegiate A Cappella, finishing in second-place in 2011. Other a cappella groups on campus include Signature, Random Voices, Medleys, Youthphonics, Deviant Voices, Awechords and Cadenza. YOUTHphonics is UCLA's only nonprofit service-oriented a cappella group focused on youth.
There are also a variety of cultural organizations on campus, such as Nikkei Student Union (NSU), Japanese Student Association (JSA),Ucla Jsa. Studentgroups.edu. Retrieved on 2013-07-14. Association of Chinese Americans (ACA), Chinese Students Association (CSA), Taiwanese American Union (TAU), Hong Kong Student Society (HKSS), Hanoolim Korean Cultural Awareness Group, Samahang Pilipino, Vietnamese Student Union (VSU), Thai Smakom, and Chinese Cultural Dance Club (CCDC), each with its focuses on sharing culture and history. Many of these organizations have an annual "culture night" that usually constitutes drama, traditional dance, modern dance, etc., which raises awareness of culture and history to the campus and community.

Traditions

The university has many traditions and annual events involving students, community, or the city. The school hosts events that usually require participation from more than just the student body, and competitions can occasionally involve celebrity judges and performers.
UCLA's official charity is Unicamp, founded in 1934. It is a week-long summer camp for under-served children from the greater Los Angeles area, with UCLA volunteer counselors. Because Unicamp is a non-profit organization, student volunteers from UCLA also fundraise money throughout the year to allow these children to attend summer camp.
To introduce new students to clubs and activities, UCLA begins the fall quarter with True Bruin Welcome. The week includes the Day of Service for all freshmen, the Enormous Activities Fair, the Sports Fair, and other events. At the end of move-in and the beginning of True Bruin Welcome, UCLA holds Bruin Bash. Hosted by the USAC Campus Events Commission and USAC Cultural Affairs Commission, Bruin Bash includes a concert, dance, and movie. Past performers include Thrice and Common (2005), Xzibit and Rooney (2006), T.I. (2007), The Cool Kids, Estelle, Hellogoodbye (2008), LMFAO and Clipse (2009), Ying Yang Twins, Travis McCoy and The Cataracs (2010). Bruin Bash was created as a replacement for Black Sunday, a large-scale day of partying including all fraternities, in North Westwood Village, where the majority of off-campus students reside adjacent to campus.
Dance Marathon is an annual event organized by the Pediatric AIDS Coalition, previously held in Ackerman Grand Ballroom and since 2014 Pauley Pavilion, where thousands of students raise money and dance for 26 hours to support the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation, Project Kindle, and the UCLA AIDS Institute. Dancers are required to fundraise a minimum amount of $250 before the event. Dancers are not allowed to sit (except to use the restroom) during the marathon, literally taking a stand against pediatric AIDS, and symbolizing the suffering of affected children around the world. In 2013, Dance Marathon at UCLA raised a record-breaking $475,422.57. Since 2002, the Marathon has raised over $3.5 million.
UCLA students also participate in "Midnight Yell" during finals week, a tradition where every night at midnight (starting on that week's Sunday), students yell as loudly as possible for a few minutes, giving a chance to take a short break from studying and to release some stress.
The quarterly Undie Run takes place during the Wednesday evening of Finals Week, when students run through the campus in their underwear or in skimpy costumes. The run first began in Fall of 2001 when a student, Eric Whitehead, wearing what he described as "really short shorts" walked around singing and playing a guitar to protest the police restrictions on the Midnight Yell. As attendance increased, committees in charge of organizing the event deemed it necessary to employ the UC Police during the event, to ward off vandalism and dangerous activity. In 2007, the route was changed again to begin at Strathmore Avenue instead of Landfair Avenue. The Undie Run concept has since spread to other college campuses around the United States, including the University of Texas at Austin, Arizona State University, and Syracuse University.
The Alumni Association sponsors several events, usually large extravaganzas involving huge amounts of coordination. An example of this is the 60-year old Spring Sing, organized by the Student Alumni Association (SAA). Spring Sing is UCLA's oldest tradition—it is an annual gala of student talent, which is held at either UCLA's Pauley Pavilion or the outdoor Los Angeles Tennis Center.  The committee bestows the George and Ira Gershwin Lifetime Achievement Award each year to a major contributor to the music industry. Past recipients have included Stevie Wonder, Frank Sinatra, Ella Fitzgerald, James Taylor, Ray Charles, Natalie Cole, Quincy Jones, The week before the USC rivalry football game, there is a "Beat 'SC Bonfire and Rally." The bonfire did not take place in 2006 due to fire hazard issues. Nonetheless, UCLA won the football game, upsetting the #2 ranked Trojans. This led many to believe that dispelling of the tradition led to the victory.
The USAC Cultural Affairs Commission hosts the JazzReggae Festival, a two-day concert on Memorial Day weekend that attracts more than 20,000 attendees.  The JazzReggae Festival is the largest, entirely student produced and run event of its kind on the West Coast.
Sigma Eta Pi and Bruin Entrepreneurs organize an annual hackathon called LA Hacks, a weekend-long programming competition where students from around the nation come to build technology products. LA Hacks established itself as the largest hackathon in the nation when over 1500 students participated in April 11–13, 2014 (source, LA Times). LA Hacks also holds the record for the most funds raised via corporate sponsorships with $250,000 raised. Some of the tech world's most prominent people have given talks and judged projects at LA Hacks, including Evan Spiegel, Founder and CEO of Snapchat, Alexis Ohanian, Co-Founder of Reddit, Baiju Bhatt, Co-Founder of Robinhood, Sam Altman, President of Y Combinator, Chris De Wolfe - Founder of Myspace, and Tomer Kagan, Co-Founder and CEO of Quixey).

Student government

The Associated Students UCLA (ASUCLA) is the official entity encompassing student government and student-led enterprises at UCLA. ASUCLA has four major components: the Undergraduate Students Association, the Graduate Students Association, Student Media, and services & enterprises. However, in common practice, the term ASUCLA is often more narrowly used to refer to the services and enterprises component. This includes the Student Store, Bookstore, Food Services, Student Union, etc. These commercial enterprises serving the UCLA campus community generate approximately $90 million in annual revenues, making it financially the largest student government operation in the world. As a nonprofit corporation, the financial goal of ASUCLA is not to maximize return or "profit" but to provide quality services and programs to the campus community at reasonable prices. ASUCLA is governed by a student-majority Board of Directors. The Undergraduate Students Association and Graduate Students Association each appoint three members plus one alternate. In addition to the student members, there are representatives appointed by the administration, the academic senate, and the alumni association. The "services and enterprises" portion of ASUCLA is run by a professional executive director who oversees some 300 staff and 2,000 student employees.
The Graduate Students Association is the governing body for approximately 13,000 graduate and professional students at UCLA.
"USAC" is an acronym for Undergraduate Students Association Council, the governing body of the Undergraduate Students Association (USA) whose membership comprises every UCLA undergraduate student.  The student body currently has two major political slates, Students First! (established in 1981) and Bruins United (established in 2006).
USAC's thirteen student officers and commissioners are elected by members of the Undergraduate Students Association at an annual election held during Spring Quarter. In addition to its thirteen elected members, USAC includes appointed representatives of the Administration, the Alumni, and the Faculty, as well as two ex-officio members, the ASUCLA Executive Director and a student Finance Committee Chairperson who is appointed by the USA President and approved by USAC. All members of USAC may participate fully in Council deliberations, but only the thirteen elected student members have a vote.
The thirteen elected positions include: USAC President, Internal Vice President, External Vice President, General Representative (3), Academic Affairs Commissioner, Cultural Affairs Commissioner, Facilities Commissioner, Campus Events Commissioner, Student Welfare Commissioner, Community Service Commissioner, and Financial Supports Commissioner.
The USAC President appoints more than seventy undergraduates to administrative committees and the Academic Affairs Commissioner Appoints approximately 25 undergraduates to Academic Senate Committees. Students have an opportunity to serve on the ASUCLA Board of Directors and the Communications Board, as well as on other significant committees. Through their participation on these campus-wide committees, UCLA undergraduates have had input into the decision making process at a high level.
USAC's programs offers additional services to the campus and surrounding communities and provide an opportunity for students to participate in. For example, each year approximately 40,000 students, faculty and staff attend programs of the Campus Events Commission, including a low-cost film program, a speakers program which presents leading figures from a wide range of disciplines, and performances by dozens of entertainers. Two to three thousand UCLA undergraduates participate annually in the more than twenty voluntary outreach programs run by the Community Service Commission. A large corps of undergraduate volunteers also participate in programs run by the Student Welfare Commission, such as AIDS Awareness, Substance Abuse Awareness, Blood Drives and CPR/First Aid Training.
Student Media UCLA is the home of UCLA's student-run media, including the campus newspaper, magazines, and radio and television stations.

Media publications

Most student media publications distributed on-campus are governed by the ASUCLA Communications Board. The Daily Bruin is UCLA's most prominent student publication. Founded in 1919 under the name Cub Californian, it has since then developed into Los Angeles' third-most circulated newspaper. It has won over 20 national awards in the last five years, and is regularly commended for layout and content. In 2006, the Society of Professional Journalists awarded it Best All-Around Daily Newspaper in the national Mark of Excellence Awards.

Housing

UCLA provides housing to over 10,000 undergraduate and 2,900 graduate students.
Most undergraduate students are housed in 14 complexes on the western side of campus, referred to by students as "The Hill." Students can live in halls, plazas, suites, or university apartments, which vary in pricing and privacy. Housing plans also offer students access to dining facilities, which have been ranked by the Princeton Review as some of the best in the nation. Dining halls are located in De Neve, Rieber, Covel, and Hedrick Halls. In winter 2012, a dining hall called The Feast at Rieber opened to students. The newest dining hall (as of Winter Quarter 2014) is Bruin Plate, located in the Carnesale Commons (commonly referred to as Sproul Plaza).dining.edu/housing_site/dining/ResidentialRestaurantsMap. Residential cafes include Bruin Cafe, Rendezvous, and Cafe 1919 which formerly housed a cafe known as Puzzles. UCLA currently offers three years guaranteed housing to its incoming freshmen, and one year to incoming transfer students. There are four type of housing available for students, residential halls, deluxe residential halls, residential plazas, and residential suites. Available on the hill are study rooms, basketball courts, tennis courts, and Sunset Recreational Center which includes three swimming pools.
Graduate students are housed in one of five apartment complexes. One, Weyburn Terrace, is located just southwest of the campus in Westwood Village. The other four are roughly five miles south of UCLA in Palms and Mar Vista. They too vary in pricing and privacy.
According to the Daily Bruin, 1,525 beds, 10 faculty in-residence apartments and a 750-seat dining hall will be built on the Northwest Housing Infill Project on the Hill by 2013. The buildings are tentatively titled De Neve Gardenia Way, De Neve Holly Ridge, Sproul Cove, and Sproul Landing.
Students who are involved in Greek life have the option to also live in Greek housing while at UCLA. Sorority houses are located east of campus on Hilgard Avenue, and the Fraternity houses are located west of campus throughout Westwood Village. A student usually lives with 50+ students in Greek housing.

Hospitality

Hospitality constituents of the university include departments not directly related to student life or administration. The Hospitality department manages the UCLA Guest House, a full-service, on-campus hotel. The 61-room Guest House services those visiting the university for campus-related activities.

Chabad House

The UCLA Chabad House is a community center for Jewish students operated by the Orthodox Jewish Chabad movement. Established in 1969, it was the first Chabad House at a university.The Rebbe's Army: Inside the World of Chabad-Lubavitch, Sue Fishkoff, Random House, 2009 In 1980, three students died in a fire in the original building of the UCLA Chabad House. The present building was erected in their memory. The building, completed in 1984, was the first of many Chabad houses worldwide designed as architectural reproductions of the residence of the Lubavitcher Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson at 770 Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn, New York.

Faculty and alumni

Fifteen Nobel laureates are associated with UCLA: eight professors
Two other faculty members winning the Nobel Prize were Bertrand Russell and Al Gore, who had a short stay at UCLA.
The alumni Nobel laureates include Richard Heck, Chemistry, 2010;
Geography professor Jared Diamond won the 1998 Pulitzer Prize for his book Guns, Germs, and Steel. Two UCLA history professors have each won 2008 Pulitzer Prizes for general nonfiction and history. Saul Friedländer, professor of history and noted scholar of the Nazi Holocaust, won the prize for general nonfiction for his 2006 book, The Years of Extermination: Nazi Germany and the Jews, 1939–1945, and Professor Emeritus Daniel Walker Howe won for his 2007 book, What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America, 1815–1848.
A number of UCLA alumni are notable politicians. In the U.S. House of Representatives, Henry Waxman ('61, '64) represents California's 30th congressional district and is Chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee. UCLA boasts two Mayors of Los Angeles: Tom Bradley (1937-1940), the city's only African-American mayor, and Antonio Villaraigosa ('77), who served as mayor from 2005 to 2013.
Laurence Fink (BA '74, MBA '76) is chairman and CEO of the world's largest money-management firm BlackRock.
Michael Morhaime (BA '90), Allen Adham (BA '90) and Frank Pearce (BA '90) are the founders of Blizzard Entertainment, one of the world's largest video game developers.
Tom Anderson is a co-founder of the social networking website Myspace.
Computer scientist Vint Cerf ('70, '72) is Vice President and Chief Internet Evangelist at Google and the person most widely considered the "father of the Internet." Henry Samueli ('75) is co-founder of Broadcom Corporation and owner of the Anaheim Ducks.
UCLA alumni have also achieved prominence in the arts and entertainment. Composer John Williams is laureate conductor at the Boston Pops Orchestra and Academy Award-winning composer of the Star Wars film score. Martin Sherwin ('71) was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for American Prometheus: The Triumph and Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer. Actors Ben Stiller, Tim Robbins, James Franco, George Takei, Sean Astin, Holland Roden and Milo Ventimiglia are also UCLA alumni. Popular music artists Sara Bareilles, The Doors, Linkin Park, and Maroon 5 all attended UCLA. Giada De Laurentiis is a program host at Food Network and former chef at Spago. Greg Graffin, lead singer of punk rock band Bad Religion, earned a master's degree in Geology at UCLA, and currently teaches a course on evolution there. Magazine.edu. Retrieved on 2013-07-14. Carol Burnett was the winner of the Mark Twain Prize for American Humor in 2013 (also winner of  Emmys, a Peabody and a Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2005).
Carlos Bocanegra is the captain of the USA soccer team. Meb Keflezighi ('98) is the winner of the 2014 Boston Marathon.
UCLA also boasts an excellent military background, with hundreds of alumni moving beyond their undergraduate careers to serve their nation. Carlton Skinner was a U.S. Navy Commander who racially integrated the service at the end of World War II on the USS Sea Cloud. He was also the first civilian governor of Guam. Francis B. Wai is, to date, the only Chinese-American and the first Asian-American to be awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor for his actions in World War II. UCLA also lost an alumnus in early 2007 when Second Lieutenant Mark Daily was killed in Mosul, Iraq after his HMMWV was hit by an IED. Lieutenant Daily's service is marked by a plaque located on the northern face of the Student Activities Center (SAC), where the ROTC halls are currently located.
UCLA's faculty and alumni have won a number of awards including:

UCLA Medal

The highest honor given by UCLA to individuals for "extraordinary accomplishment" is the UCLA Medal, which was established in 1979. More than 140 outstanding receipents have received the award over the years.The UCLA Medal, UCLA, 2014 They include:






