[[Miha Zupan]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, Living people, BC Spartak Saint Petersburg players, Centers (basketball), Deaf sportspeople, Greek Basket League players, KK Union Olimpija players, People from Kranj, Power forwards (basketball), Slovenian basketball players, Trikala B.C. players, Türk Telekom B.K. players

Miha Zupan (born September 13, 1982), is a Slovenian professional basketball player who currently plays for Uşak Sportif of the Turkish Basketball League.  He plays among hearing players at the highest level in Europe, despite being deaf since birth. He is a 2.05 m (6 ft 8¾ in) power forward who can also play center when needed.

Early years

Zupan spent most of his childhood in a special school for the deaf, eventually learning to speak. An unspecified type of hearing aid would later give him enough hearing to understand speech. He did not learn to play basketball until age 14, instead playing football and volleyball. After his first basketball coach spotted him in a schoolyard, he took to the game quickly, soon joining Slovenia's national basketball team for the deaf, which twice made the finals of the European championships with Zupan as its star. At age 17, he signed his first contract with a regular professional team, KD Slovan of Ljubljana. During his teenage years, he grew 20 cm (8 inches) in an 18-month period, leading to knee problems that sidelined him for several months early in his pro career.

Professional career

At Slovan, he developed into a promising big man, soon making the (regular) Slovenia junior and under-20 national teams. He played in the Slovenian League All-Star Game in 2004 and 2006, earning MVP honors in the 2004 game and also winning the slam dunk contest associated with the 2004 game. He continued to play for the Slovenia national deaf team, leading them to the 2004 European championship.
In the 2005-06 season with Slovan, he averaged 11.5 points and 4.4 rebounds in Slovenian League play. His statistics in the Adriatic League were arguably more impressive, considering that he played only 23 minutes per game in that competition; he averaged 13.2 points and 3.9 rebounds and also shot 47.3% from three-point range.
Zupan signed with Union Olimpija, also of Ljubljana, in the 2006 offseason, fulfilling what he called one of his lifelong dreams. He also barely missed out on a trip to the 2006 FIBA World Championship, becoming the last player cut from the Slovenia squad. His chance to play for Olimpija in the Euroleague was on hold for several months because his transfer became the subject of litigation between them and Slovan. He had, apparently inadvertently, failed to revoke his contract with Slovan before signing with Olimpija. Olimpija had registered him at the start of the 2006-07 season, and he played six fixtures in the Adriatic League before Slovan contested the registration. (Note the absence of Zupan from the Olimpija team listing.)
The legal battle raged until late February 2007, when Olimpija and Slovan reached a settlement. After Olimpija paid an undisclosed fee to Slovan, they finally registered him officially on March 1. The settlement proved timely for Olimpija, as they had seen six players leave the team during the season, and had two other players out with injury. While Zupan was unable to play during the 2006-07 Euroleague, as Olimpija had been eliminated by the time of the settlement, he arrived in time for the late rounds of the Adriatic League and for the second stage of the Slovenian domestic league.
On October 24, 2007, Zupan finally became the first deaf player in the Euroleague,
In the August of 2009, he joined the Greek League club Trikala 2000.gr Ο MIHA ZUPAN ΣΤΟΝ ΑΣ ΤΡΙΚΑΛΑ. 
In the July of 2010 he signed a two-year deal with Spartak SPB in Russia.Miha Zupan inks with Spartak SPB
In the August of 2012, he signed a one-year contract with Turk Telekom.Turk Telekom Ankara inks PF Miha Zupan



Notes and references




