[[Jim Pyne]]

CATEGORIES: 1971 births, Living people, All-American college football players, American football offensive linemen, Cleveland Browns players, Detroit Lions players, New Orleans Saints players, Philadelphia Eagles players, Tampa Bay Buccaneers players, Virginia Tech Hokies football players

James M. Pyne (born November 23, 1971) is a former American college and professional football player who was an offensive lineman in the National Football League (NFL) for nine seasons.  He played college football for Virginia Tech, and earned All-American honors.  Drafted late in the seventh round of the 1994 NFL Draft, Pyne became a reliable starter for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, Detroit Lions, Cleveland Browns and Philadelphia Eagles of the NFL.

Early years

Pyne was born in Milford, Massachusetts.  Retrieved February 10, 2012.  He attended Milford High School and Choate Rosemary Hall in Wallingford, Connecticut,databaseFootball.  Retrieved February 10, 2012. and played high school football for the Milford Scarlet Hawks and the Choate Wild Boars.

College career

Pyne attended Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, and played for the Virginia Tech Hokies football team from 1990 to 1993.  As a senior in 1993, he was selected as a unanimous All-American, becoming Virginia Tech's first player ever to do so,  He was a finalist for both the Lombardi Award and the Outland Trophy.  Virginia Tech retired his number (#73); it is one of only four football numbers retired by the school in over 100 years of football.  He was named to the Big East Conferences All-time team at the turn of the century.  The offensive line meeting room at Virginia Tech has been named in his honor.  He has been inducted to Virginia Tech's Sports Hall of Fame.

Professional career

The Tampa Bay Buccaneers selected Pyne in seventh round (200th pick overall) in the 1994 NFL Draft,Pro Football Hall of Fame, Draft History, 1994 National Football League Draft.  Retrieved February 10, 2012. and he played four of his nine professional seasons with the Buccaneers as a left guard, starting in 38 of his 42 appearances from 1995 to 1997.com, Players, Jim Pyne.  Retrieved February 10, 2012.

Personal

Pyne's father, George Pyne III, played for the Boston Patriots of the American Football League in 1965.  Pyne's grandfather, George Pyne II, played for the Providence Steam Roller of the NFL in 1931.  The Pynes became the only family to play three generations of professional football.  They have since been joined by the Matthews family (Clay Matthews, Sr., Clay Matthews, Jr., and Clay Matthews III).  He has been inducted into three halls of fame: Virginia Tech, Milford High School (Ma.), and Choate Rosemary Hall (Wallingford, CT).






