[[M. J. P. Rohilkhand University]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 1975, Universities and colleges in Uttar Pradesh, Education in Bareilly

Mahatma Jyotiba Phule Rohilkhand University (MJP Rohilkhand University) (Hindi:  महात्मा ज्योतिबा फुले रुहेलखण्ड विश्वविद्यालय) is a public (UP State Government University) university in Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh, India. More than 215 colleges are affiliated to the university and approximately three lakh students enroll every year for examinations. The university has taken an overall perspective of development plan. The university headquarters is in Bareilly with territorial jurisdiction extending over the districts of Bareilly, Moradabad, Rampur, Bijnore, Jyotibaphule Nagar, Budaun, Pilibhit, Shahjahanpur, Noida and Sitapur. The administrative block is situated on the outskirts of Bareilly city along Pilibhit bypass road.

History

MJP Rohilkhand University was established in 1975 as an affiliating university. It was carved out of the then Agra University as there was a dire need to establish a separate English Medium university. Its status was upgraded to affiliating-cum-residential university in 1985 when four teaching departments were established in the campus. In 1987 three more departments were added. In August 1997, the university was renamed as Mahatma Jyotiba Phule Rohilkhand University in the name of social reformer Mahatma Jyotiba Phule. It has, over the period, emerged as a pioneering institution in the state of Uttar Pradesh.

Infrastructure

The university campus is spread over . The campus has an administrative building; faculty buildings; central library; multipurpose hall; four hostels for boys and girls; staff quarters for the vice-chancellor and other officers, faculty members and non-teaching staff; guest houses; a sports complex; a medical center and a temple. National Service Scheme(NSS)is an initiative taken up by university students to take part in service of humanity. It makes them aware of their social obligation. Camps are organized. A large number of students participate in the NSS camps organized annually.

Faculty & Department

Faculty Of Engineering & Technology
Faculty Of Advanced Social Science
Faculty Of Applied Science
Faculty Of Management Studies
Faculty Of Education & Allied Sciences
Faculty Of Legal Studies

Achievements and Placements

The senior faculty members of Humanities, Science and Technology run research projects funded by agencies. 49 projects, funded by UGC, AICTE, Department of Science and Technology, CST, ICAR, ICHR, MIF, have been completed. Teachers of the affiliated college are also engaged in research projects funded by the above agencies.
Engineering students pass-out from university are working with Government of India, State governments of India ministries, Organisations like ISRO, DRDO, Indian Railways, and Public Sector Undertaking like NTPC, BHEL, ONGC, Delhi Metro, GAIL, HAL, SAIL, MTNL, HPCL, DVC, AAI, BEL, National Aluminium Company, PowerGrid Corporation of India, IFFCO, IOCL, National Fertilizers, Coal India, KRIBHCO,UPPCL,SJVNL, Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited, Public sector banks in India and reputed MNCs companies like Intel, RIL, Infosys, TCS, Wipro, HCL, IBM, Oracle Corporation, HP, Cadence, ST Microelectronics, Nokia, Siemens, Tata Motors,Deutsche Bank, ICICI Bank, RBS and many more. A number of students are pursuing their post graduate and doctoral degrees from Indian Institutes of Technology and leading universities of USA, UK, Europe. They are working outside the country in USA, UK, Italy, Europe, Israel, New Zealand, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Singapore. Although due to location the campus recruitment is low, still alumni have made their place into by giving commendable competition to students from all over the country in off-campus drives.

List of colleges

M.J.P. Rohilkhand University was formed in the year 1975 as a University with the status to bring colleges under its jurisdiction. But, later in the year 1985, it was upgraded as residential-cum-affiliating university and during this year four teaching departments were established by the university in its campus. Two years later in the year 1987, two more departments were formed. In the year 1997, the name of the university was changed to Mahatma Jyotiba Phule Rohilkhand University. Later, new faculties like education & allied sciences, applied sciences, management and engineering & technology were included by the university in addition to the already existing faculties of education. Presently, the university is offering courses under the faculties of law, dental sciences, commerce, arts, agriculture and advanced social sciences. The list of colleges and institutions affiliated to the university is given below:








