[[Douglas A. Zembiec]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 births, 2007 deaths, American military personnel killed in the Iraq War, American sport wrestlers, Burials at Arlington National Cemetery, La Cueva High School alumni, Recipients of the Bronze Star Medal, Recipients of the Purple Heart medal, Recipients of the Silver Star, United States Marine Corps officers, United States Naval Academy alumni

Major Douglas Alexander Zembiec (April 14, 1973 – May 11, 2007), the "Lion of Fallujah" and also referred to as the "Unapologetic Warrior" was an officer in the United States Marine Corps who was killed in action while serving in Operation Iraqi Freedom.[ref]
 [/ref]  He is best known for his actions during Operation Vigilant Resolve, which were detailed in the book No True Glory: A Front-line Account of the Battle of Fallujah by Bing West and for an article that ran in the Wall Street Journal following his death.

Biography

Early life

Doug Zembiec was born on April 14, 1973 in Kealakekua, Hawaii.  He attended La Cueva High School in Albuquerque, New Mexico where he was a New Mexico State high school wrestling champion in 1990 and 1991.  As a wrestler, Doug was the first time New Mexico State Champion in any sport and the first repeat winner at La Cueva High School.  He was undefeated in competition his senior year.
He attended the United States Naval Academy where he was a collegiate wrestler compiling a 95–21–1 record and finishing as a two-time NCAA All-American. His fellow wrestlers sometimes referred to him as "The Snake" for his anaconda-like grip.  Doug was well known amongst his contemporaries throughout his athletic and professional life for his exceptional physical fitness.  His coach, Reginald Wicks, referred to him as "the best-conditioned athlete I've ever been around." Zembiec graduated from the Academy on May 31, 1995; then served in the U.S. Marine Corps from 1995 until killed in action in 2007 — serving combat tours in Kosovo, Afghanistan, and Iraq.

Military career

Upon graduation from the Naval Academy, Zembiec was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant in the United States Marine Corps. After finishing The Basic School, and the Infantry Officer's Course, he was assigned to First Battalion, Sixth Marine Regiment as a rifle platoon commander, which was effective starting April 1996.  After successfully passing the Force Reconnaissance indoctrination in June 1997, he was transferred to 2nd Force Reconnaissance Company, at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina.  He served for two and a half years as a platoon commander, eight months as an interim company commander, and one month as an operations officer.
Zembiec's Force Reconnaissance platoon was among the first special operations forces to enter Kosovo during Operation Joint Guardian in June 1999.
In September 2000, he was transferred to the Amphibious Reconnaissance School (ARS) located in Ft. Story, Virginia and served as the Assistant Officer-In-Charge (XO) for two years.
In 2001, Zembiec competed in the Armed Forces Eco-Challenge as team captain of Team Force Recon Rolls Royce.
From ARS, Zembiec was selected to attend the Marine Corps' Expeditionary Warfare School in Quantico, Virginia graduating in May 2003.  Following the Expeditionary Warfare School he took command of Company E, 2nd Battalion, 1st Marine Regiment, 1st Marine Division in July 2003.
He was named the "Lion of Fallujah" as a result of his heroic actions leading Echo Company 2/1 during Operation Vigilant Resolve in 2004.  As a rifle company commander, he led 168 Marines and sailors in the first conventional ground assault into Fallujah, Iraq.  He was awarded a Silver Star, Bronze Star with Combat Distinguishing Device and two Purple Hearts due to wounds incurred in action.
He turned over command of Echo Company in November 2004 and served as an assistant operations officer at the Marine Corps' First Special Operations Training Group (1st SOTG) where he ran the urban patrolling/ Military Operations in Urban Terrain (MOUT) and tank-infantry training packages for the 13th Marine Expeditionary Unit in preparation for an upcoming deployment to Iraq.  Zembiec transferred from 1st SOTG to the Regional Support Element, Headquarters, Marine Corps on June 10, 2005.  His promotion to Major was effective on July 1, 2005.

Death

He was serving his fourth combat tour in Iraq when he was killed by small arms fire while leading a raid in Baghdad on May 11, 2007.  Zembiec was leading a unit of Iraqi forces he had helped train. Reports from fellow servicemen that were present in the dark Baghdad alley where he was killed indicate that he'd warned his troops to get down before doing so himself and was hit by enemy fire.  The initial radio report indicated "five wounded and one martyred" with Major Zembiec having been killed and his men saved by his warning.  On May 16, 2007, a funeral mass was held at the Naval Academy Chapel and later that day he was interred at Arlington National Cemetery, Grave Number 8621, Section Number 60. Zembiec is buried only a few yards away from his Naval Academy classmate, Major Megan McClung. McClung was the first female Marine Corps officer killed in combat during the Iraq War, and first female graduate in the history of the Naval Academy to be killed in action.
In July 2007,  Secretary of Defense Robert Gates publicly lost his composure showing a rare glimpse of emotion from senior political leadership while discussing Major Zembiec during a speech.
Major Zembiec was also prominently featured in a high profile Wall Street Journal column in September 2007.  In November 2007, Zembiec's high school Alma Mater, La Cueva High School, inducted him as the charter member of their Hall of Fame and named the wrestling room in his honor.  The NCAA announced that Zembiec would be awarded the 2008 NCAA Award of Valor. In January 2008, General David Petraeus, Commanding General Multi-National Force – Iraq (MNF-I) dedicated the Helipad at Camp Victory located at Baghdad International Airport in Zembiec's name.  He referred to Zembiec as a "a true charter member of the brotherhood of the close fight.""  Douglas Zembiec is survived by his parents, Mr. and Mrs. Don Zembiec, brother, and his wife and daughter, Pamela and Fallyn.
On May 11, 2009, a petition was presented to the Secretary of the Navy to have the next Arleigh Burke class destroyer to be commissioned named after Zembiec.
The swimming pool located at the Marine Corps' Henderson Hall is named in honor of Major Zembiec.
By order of the Commandant of the Marine Corps, the Douglas A. Zembiec Award for Outstanding Leadership in Special Operations was created on April 11th, 2011 to annually "recognize the Marine officer who best exemplifies outstanding leadership as a Team Leader in the Marine Corps Special Operations Community."

Quotes

Major Zembiec left many volumes of personal writings behind, some of which were shared at his funeral.  The final words of the eulogy, delivered by his friend Eric L. Kapitulik, have evolved into a new credo for many members of the USMC and USMIL communities at large, amounting to what Kapitulik said was a summary of Zembiec himself.

Kapitulik said the creed came from the man who knew Zembiec the longest, as indicated by the Major's written description: "Principles my father taught me."
Other quotes:

Awards

Zembiec's military decorations include:







|title=Operation Homecoming: Iraq, Afghanistan, and the Home Front, in the Words of U.S. Troops and Their Families
|isbn= 1-4000-6562-3}}


