[[Catherine Deveny]]

CATEGORIES: 1968 births, Living people, Australian atheists, Australian women comedians, Australian columnists, Australian television writers

Catherine Deveny (born 1968) is an Australian comedy writer and stand-up comedian who was a regular columnist in The Age newspaper between 2001 and 2010. She has performed on Australian television networks, in Australian comedy venues and on Australian radio. Deveny has been described as "a serial pest and professional pain in the arse".

Career

Television

Deveny's television work has included:

Writer

Deveny has written for events such as the Logie Awards and the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) Music Awards, and co-wrote the 2005 Australian Film Institute (AFI) Awards with Russell Crowe.
From 2001 to 2010, Deveny was a regular columnist for The Age newspaper, published in Victoria, Australia. In March 2009 Deveney conducted a one-woman strike as a protest against the newspaper
In a radio interview following her sacking, Deveny claimed that her employers did not understand the nature of new media and how it is used. On 18 March 2009, during an ABC 774 radio interview between Jon Faine and the editor of The Age Paul Ramadge, angry supporters ambushed the show calling for Deveny's return as a regular columnist;
In June 2012, after Ramadge resigned following the announcement of a company restructure, Deveny wrote the following comment on Twitter: "I wish him arse cancer."
Deveny is the author of Rank and Smelly (1997), Babies, Bellies and Blundstones (1999), Our New Baby (2005) and The Happiness Show (2012). Deveny's newspaper column writing has been published by Black Inc. in several collections: It's Not My Fault They Print Them (2007) and Say When (2008) and Free To A Good Home (2009).

Live performance

The 2009 Festival of Dangerous Ideas, held at the Sydney Opera House, featured Deveny in a live debate with Cardinal George Pell, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Sydney. In April of the same year, Deveny returned to stand-up comedy in the Melbourne International Comedy Festival with the show Mother of The Year.
Deveny appeared with Daniel Burt at the Butterfly Club venue in "An Evening Of Insight And Filth"—due to a high level of popularity, the show was extended by six shows. Deveny then appeared with Richard Dawkins, Peter Singer, Phillip Adams and PZ Myersat at the 2010 Global Atheist Convention in Melbourne, Australia. Also in 2010, Deveny appeared in a one-woman show, entitled God Is Bullshit, That's The Good News, as part of the 2010 Melbourne Comedy Festival.
Deveny has also regularly acted as a substitute broadcaster on Australian radio station 774 ABC Melbourne.

Twitter comments controversy

In April 2010 Deveny caused controversy by posting comments on Twitter, such as "Anzac Day. Men only enlisted to fight for the money, for the adventure or because they were racist." and "An Australian Flag in your front yard tells everyone you're only a couple of Bundy and Cokes away from lynching a wog, slope or Arab."
In May 2010 a similar controversy arose when Deveny posted a number of Twitter comments during the Logies Awards ceremony. Deveny's comments caused controversy as they were in relation to public figures, such as Bindi Irwin ("I do so hope Bindi Irwin gets laid"); Rove McManus and wife Tasma Walton ("Rove and Tasma look so cute ... hope she doesn't die, too"—Rove's first wife Belinda Emmett died after being diagnosed with breast cancer).

Personal life

Deveny is a self-proclaimed atheist

Selected writings






