[[John A. Wise]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American scientists, 1939 births, University of Minnesota alumni, Oregon State University alumni, People associated with direct selling

John A. Wise, PhD (1939–2011), was an American scientist and writer in the field of nutrition.  He was honored in 2010 with the Lifetime Achievement Award by the Council for Responsible Nutrition, an industry association dedicated to responsible business practices in the nutrition industry.  He retired in 2010 as the Chief Science Officer for Natural Alternatives International, a global nutrional products manufacturer based in San Marcos, California USA.  Earlier in his career, he was the Vice-president of Research and Development for United Sciences of America, Inc. (USAI) until 1986.   USAI was a multi-level marketing company in Dallas, Texas which went bankrupt after controversial marketing practices were revealed.  As the company's Science officer, Wise was not normally involved in the company's business practices.

Biography

Wise graduated with a B.S. in Preventative Medicine and a B.A. in Zoology from the University of Washington in 1963, as well as an M.S. in Microbiology from the University of Minnesota in 1967. He received his Ph.D. in Microbiology from Oregon State University in 1970.

United Sciences of America

From 1982 to 1986, Wise was Executive Vice President of Research and Development for the nutritional supplement company United Sciences of America, Inc. (USAI) and was responsible for formulating the company's products.

Natural Alternatives International

In 1987, Dr. Wise joined Natural Alternatives International (NAI) as the Director of Science and Technology. He was appointed Vice President of Research and Development in 1992 and served as Chief Scientific Officer from 2002 until June 2007, at which time he retired as an officer, being retained by the company as a consultant. As Chief Scientific Officer, Wise was paid an annual salary in excess of $200,000. 
NAI manufactures a nutritional supplement known as Juice Plus+ for National Safety Associates. Several of the research articles published on Juice Plus were co-authored by Wise. R, Wise JA. (2003). "Effect of supplemental phytonutrients on impairment of the flow-mediated brachial artery vasoactivity after a single high-fat meal" (pdf). J Am Coll Cardiol 41 (10): 1744-9.






