[[IJustine]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 births, American Internet celebrities, IPhone, Living people, People from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Video bloggers, YouTube celebrities

Justine Ezarik ( or one of the web's most popular lifecasters.
Ezarik is known for her "300-page iPhone bill", which followed the first month of service after the introduction of the iPhone in 2007.  The viral video earned her international attention.

Early life

The daughter of a coal miner and physical education teacher, Justine Ezarik grew up in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Her parents are Michelle and Steve Ezarik.
Ezarik and her younger sister Breanne, who was three grades behind her, were honor students at Bentworth High School, where Justine was a member of the class of 2002. Upon graduation from high school, Justine earned the annual scholarship from the Washington Chapter of the International Association of Administrative Professionals.

Early career

After graduating from the Pittsburgh Technical Institute in 2004, Ezarik landed several jobs in graphic design and video editing before starting her own business. In December 2006, she was named one of five finalists in the "Yahoo! Talent Show", a Yahoo! sponsored competition for best online videos.
She played a photojournalist covering a bank robbery in downtown Pittsburgh on the television series The Kill Point from Spike TV, which starred John Leguizamo and Donnie Wahlberg, filmed in May 2007. In 2007, she was an occasional co-host and panel member on MacBreak and MacBreak Weekly with Leo Laporte.
Ezarik appeared live on the Internet through the use of a wireless webcam and microphone on her own iJustine  lifecasting channel on Justin Kan's Justin.  She was never paid for any of this volunteer work on Kan's channel as a beta-tester.
Her reality-video blog was the first one launched on Justin.tv.
At first Ezarik was considering producing a video series for the technology audience because they had been the most captive audience for online video series.  She stated that she did not intend to broadcast what she considers private moments, noting "That shouldn't be a problem. I am going to try as much as I can to do 24/7."
When the iPhone debuted in June 2007, Ezarik covered the device's debut at the Mall of America in Bloomington, Minnesota a suburb south of Minneapolis, Minnesota. She had been invited by Technology Evangelist to film her Internet TV show at the mall instead of covering its debut at the Shadyside Apple store as she had originally planned.
She covered the July 22, 2007, "The Kill Point" series premiere party live on her lifecast video stream.

300-page iPhone bill

In August 2007, she created the "300-page iPhone bill" Video and uploaded it to the video sharing site YouTube, where the video quickly became an Internet meme. She also uploaded it to some other video sharing sites. Stories of unexpected billing issues began to circulate in blogs and the technical press after the Apple iPhone's heavily advertised and anticipated release, but this video clip brought the voluminous bills to the attention of the mass media. Ten days after its initial posting, the video had been viewed more than 2 million times on the Internet, and had received international news coverage.

Viral video career and Internet celebrity status

Ezarik was also featured in the August 28, 2007, weekly installment of Kevin Sites' People of the Web series on Yahoo! News along with Justin Kan, the creator of Justin.TV. Sites called her "the star of this network so far," and said "she has model good looks and easy cyber savvyness that attracts both technophiles and casual users alike." The final cut of the interview video included footage from the live web cast of the interview that showed Ezarik's webcam viewpoint. When Sites asked her to turn off her lifecasting equipment later in the interview, he noted that "at once the conversation seemed more relaxed and natural," and she discussed the difficulty of having people watching and publicly judging her all day.
In early September 2007, she was featured as the lead story on the Yahoo! homepage, which boosted her ratings up to as high as 4000 viewers at any given moment. As of late September 2007, she was living in Pittsburgh and held a position as spokesperson for Pittsburgh Councilman Bill Peduto.  She also landed a job with Xtrain, which was a firm that specializes in new media expert training. Although her father remained supportive, her friends were beginning to tire of the intrusive nature of her activities by the end of 2007. In October 2007, she was described as one of the web's most popular lifecasters in Tribune Company affiliates such as the Chicago Tribune.
By April 2008, Ezarik had largely reduced her lifecasting productions to a less frequent basis. She had resumed pursuit of her web designer and video editor career and was living in Carnegie. Her new equipment by Nokia enabled her to lifecast and produce streaming video live without a computer connection.  She continued to make weekly appearances on her own iJustine website at www.tv. In late 2008, she relocated her base of operation from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania to Los Angeles, California.
Ezarik posted a video about wanting to order a cheeseburger on YouTube.  It got 600,000 views in its first week.  Ezarik has come to view iJustine as a character.  As a result, she does not curse or drink on any videos she releases.  By January 2009 she reduced her lifecasting a few hours a week, and by April 2009 her lifecast channel fell silent. At the time, she believed that her fanbase was predominately between the ages of 11 and 18.
In October 2008, she became the host of an online, twice weekly music and lifestyle program produced by PluggedIn.
In 2008 she made residence in Los Angeles.
Ezarik was also hired to appear in three commercials for a national TV ad campaign for Mozy, an award-winning online backup and recovery system. The article notes that Ezarik does her work with a $400 Canon Powershot digital camera and a $12 green rug from Ikea to create her green screen.
On March 1, 2010, the 2010 Streamy Awards nominations included Ezarik in the Best Vlogger category.
In November 2013, iJustine hosted a social media lounge for the HALO Awards.

Acting career

On November 4, 2009, she appeared as AJ, a 16 year-old crime victim, in a Season 11 episode of Law & Order: Special Victims Unit  titled "Users". She has hosted E! News and NBC.

Filmography

Awards and nominations








