[[Gregory S. Martin]]

CATEGORIES: United States Air Force generals, United States Air Force Academy alumni, Recipients of the Legion of Merit, Recipients of the Distinguished Flying Cross (United States), Recipients of the Order of Valour, Recipients of the Decoration of Merit (Netherlands), Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur, Recipients of the Cross of Merit of the Minister of Defence of the Czech Republic, Recipients of the Air Medal, Recipients of the NATO Meritorious Service Medal, Recipients of the Order of the Sword (United States), American military personnel of the Vietnam War, 1948 births, Living people, Central Michigan University alumni, Recipients of the Defense Superior Service Medal, Recipients of the Defense Distinguished Service Medal, Recipients of the Air Force Distinguished Service Medal

General Gregory S. Martin (born April 24, 1948) Air Force general and Commander, Air Force Materiel Command at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio. Martin was a command pilot with more than 4,600 flying hours in various aircraft, including the F-4, F-15, C-20 and C-21. Upon retirement in 2005, Martin took a position consulting for Northrop Grumman and also served on an Air Force panel studying stealth aircraft technology, among other Pentagon and private industry roles.

Military career

Martin was born in Fort Myer, Virginia in 1948, and graduated from the Landon School, Bethesda, Maryland, in 1966. After graduating from the United States Air Force Academy in 1970, where he was a 1969 National Collegiate Parachuting champion, he went on to fly 161 combat missions in South East Asia, and then went on to train other pilots. In 1977, he received Master's degree in business management from Central Michigan University. With this experience, he was tapped to command the 67th Tactical Fighter Squadron, then the 479th Tactical Fighter Training Wing, then the 33rd and 1st Fighter Wings.  While earning several awards and decorations, among them the Distinguished Service Medal,  he went on to serve as Vice Director of the Joint Staff's Force Structure and Resources Directorate, Director of Operational Requirements for the U.S. Air Force, and Principal Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Acquisition. Before finally commanding Air Materiel Command, Martin served as the Commander of U.S. Air Forces in Europe and Allied Air Forces Northern Europe.
In 2004, Martin was nominated to succeed Admiral Thomas B. Fargo as combatant commander of U.S. Pacific Command, the first non-Navy nominee for this prestigious post. However,  he suffered collateral damage from the Darleen Druyun procurement scandal.  During his October 6 confirmation hearing for the Pacific command post before the Senate Armed Services Committee, Senator John McCain asked how Druyun's deceit had gone unnoticed.  Martin, who had worked closely with Druyun in 1998-99 while he held the position of Principal Deputy in acquisition said in response "I'm not an expert in contracting,"  and "I saw nothing that she was doing that was inappropriate or in any way illegal, and if I had, I would have immediately raised a Red Flag!."Gregg K. Kakesako General pulls plug on Camp Smith job Honolulu Star-Bulletin  7 October 2004  McCain replied, "Now I question whether you have the quality to command"." Committee Chairman John W. Warner supported McCain, and Martin withdrew his name the same day and returned to his duties as the Commander of the Air Force Materiel Command until his scheduled retirement in August 2005. Seven months later, Senator McCain completed his review of the e-mails and there were no indications that General Martin had any knowledge of Ms. Druyun's improprieties.  Prior to this setback, Martin had been considered the likely successor to Air Force Chief of Staff John P. Jumper.

Post-military career

Martin retired from the Air Force on September 1, 2005.  He is currently a chair of the National Academies Air Force Studies Board, has served as an unaligned advisor to John Edwards' presidential campaign,Edwards Campaign Announces Military Advisory Group JohnEdwards 08 is on the advisory board of a consultancy firm The Four Star Group,Martin bio, Four Star website. Retrieved 2010-12-27. is board memberDilanian, Ken, Tom Vanden Brook and Ray Locker,"Colo. firm employs most retired officers from mentor program", USA Today, updated 12/29/2009 8:34 PM. Retrieved 2010-12-27. and retired chairman of the Durango Group,Board page, Durango website. Retrieved 2010-12-27. and has served in other Pentagon capacities and been a consultant to "many defense sector firms." 
In 2010, the Boston Globe reported on the Northrop Grumman approach to Martin at his retirement in 2005 and the call "a few weeks later from the National Academies Air Force Studies Board, asking him to join a top-secret Air Force panel studying the future of stealth aircraft technology." Northrop Grumman is the manufacturer of the B-2 stealth bomber. Martin accepted the job offer and agreed to the Air Force Studies Board request. The article examined the claim that such dual retirement roles for Martin and other generals and admirals is "ethical and beneficial for America's defense." Martin asserted that for this study, the National Academies reached out to all of the major US Aerospace Defense companies to ensure that the study included not only Defense and Academic specialists, but that the latest development experts with regard to propulsion and aerodynamic to contribute to this landmark study. Seth Bonder, a fellow Pentagon panel member from the National Academy of Engineering, though, had not been made aware of the general's industry role during the two-year study and "said disclosure of potential conflicts would be desirable."Bender, Bryan, "From the Pentagon to the private sector: In large numbers, and with few rules, retiring generals are taking lucrative defense-firm jobs",  Boston Globe, December 26, 2010. Retrieved 2010-12-27.  General Martin's disclosures were completed and accepted without objection.

Education

Assignments

Flight information

Major awards and decorations

Other achievements

Effective dates of promotion




