[[Rising Sun Flag]]

CATEGORIES: Flags of Japan, Military of the Empire of Japan, Ensigns, National symbols of Japan, Maritime flags

The  where it is considered to be associated with Japanese militarism and imperialism.

Design

The design is similar to the flag of Japan in that it has a red circle close to the middle signifying the sun, the difference being the addition of extra sun rays (16 for the ensign) exemplifying the name of Japan as "The Land of the Rising Sun". The Imperial Japanese Army first adopted the Rising Sun Flag in 1870. The Imperial Japanese Army and the Imperial Japanese Navy both had a version of the flag; the naval ensign was off-set, with the red sun closer to the lanyard side, while the army's version (which was part of the regimental colors) was centered. It was adopted in 1889. The flag was used in overseas actions from the Meiji period to World War II. When Japan was defeated in August 1945 and the Imperial Army and Navy were dissolved, the flag fell into disuse. However with the re-establishment of a Self-Defense Force the flag was re-adopted in 1954. The flag with 16 rays is today the ensign of the Maritime Self-Defense Force while the Ground Self-Defense Force uses an 8-ray version.

Present-day perception

The flag is considered offensive in countries with a strong anti-Japanese sentiment, specifically in China and South Korea, flown by fishermen.

Examples of the Rising Sun design in use

File:Hataya-Sumoto,Hyogo 洲本市の旗屋 大漁旗 DSCF4072.JPG| Tairyō-ki
File:Flag of the Asahi Shinbun Company.
File:Asahi Gold.jpg|Asahi Gold Beer
File:HotTunaLiveinJapan2.jpg|Album cover of Hot Tuna's Live in Japan

United States Military

File:Flact sasebo insig.
File:Patch of Strike Fighter Squadron 94.
File:Emblem of US Army Aviation Battalion Japan.
File:Mural of 13th Aircraft Maintenance Unit.
File:VFA-192insignia.

Similar flags

File:Flag of Tibet.svg| Flag of Tibet
File:Flag of the Air Force of the Russian Federation.svg| Flag of Russian Air Force
File:Flag of Donetsk Oblast.svg| Flag of Donetsk Oblast, Ukraine
File:Flag of Macedonia.svg|Flag of the Republic of Macedonia
File:Karen National Liberation Army flag.svg| Flag of the Karen National Liberation Army
File:Flag_of_Arizona.svg| Flag of Arizona
File:Unification Church symbol.svg|Korean Unification Church Flag






