[[Jubilee Hills]]

CATEGORIES: Neighbourhoods of Hyderabad, India, Hills of Andhra Pradesh

Jubilee Hills is a suburban neighbourhood in west Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh. It is one of the most expensive residential locations in India with prime land prices fetching up to Rs. 200,000 (USD 4,000) per square yard. A  tract of land in the city was sold for nearly Rs. 3,340,000,000 (USD 66,800,000) in 2005. Rental prices on Road Numbers 36 and 37 range from 100-200 rupees per square foot, among the top commercial rental locales in India.cushwake.pdf
This suburb is sandwiched between the wealthy commercial district of Banjara Hills and is located within two kilometers of the IT central hub of HITEC City. The natural terrain is mostly rocky and settlements here are of relatively new construction.
To its south-east is the KBR National Park, the erstwhile Chiran palace, which is one of the urban national parks in India covering an area of 1.58 km².

History

The idea of Jubilee Hills came about in 1963. In 1967 I.A.S officer and Padma Shri award winner, Challagalla Narasimham was asked to become the President and "help proper development of the colony". He was thought to be the best person for officer, since he had planned and developed several colonies in Madras. At that point in time Jubilee Hills is not what it is today. It was a hilly terrain and resembled a jungle. Mr. C Narasimham's family happens to be the first family to have built and occupied the house in Jubilee Hills, making them the first residents. By 1980, 350 houses were built in the area.

Commercial area

Jubilee Hills is home to Film Nagar and some of its renowned studios such as Ramanaidu Studios, Padmalaya Studios and Annapurna Studios are located here. It is also home to most of the Telugu movie industry's actors, business tycoons, and leading politicians. The headquarters of Spire Films is also located in Jubilee Hills.
Jubilee Hills is the political heart of Hyderabad. Telugu Desam Party's Headquarters is on the LV Prasad Marg in Jubilee Hills and former Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu is also a resident of the area. The Praja Rajyam party headquarters was located on Road Number 45 before its merger with the Congress party. The Telangana Rashtra Samithi also has recently built its headquarters here. Large scale political rallies are witnessed in the area from time to time.
Jubilee Hills is home to several brand stores, offices, start-ups and Beauty centers. Although primarily considered an elite residential area, there has been a recent commercial boom in Jubilee Hills. Leading brands such as Park Avenue, Mercedes, Skoda, Volkswagen, Porsche, Jaguar, Levi's Jeans, Pepe Jeans, Woodland, The Project, Celio, Converse, Nike, Puma, Reebok, United Colors of Benetton, Pantaloons, Style Zone, Annapurna Jewelers, Rolex, Croma Electronics are located here. Botiques by leading designers are also located here. Entertainment in the area is provided by various places like SVM@36 where a gaming and bowling alley area is located. Its also home to various cafe's like Tessta Rossa, Vacs, Cafe Latte, Barista and Coffee Day. Corporate headquarters and offices of Companies such as Seaways, Spire Films, Gateway Media, Radha Real Estate, Lanco Global Systems, Pricewaterhouse Coopers, ICICI & HDFC Banks are located in the area. A 150 suite 4-star Hotel has been constructed on a  site on Commercial Road Number 37 as part of a 30-year government lease. A 120 room luxury boutique hotel, Blue Lotus is coming up on Road Number 36.

Healthcare and education

The Apollo Health city encompassing Apollo Hospital, Apollo Cancer institute, Apollo PET Scan and other Apollo Subsidiaries located in Jubilee Hills is a major multi-specialty hospital in the state and one of the leading hospitals in emergency care in India. L V Prasad Eye Institute, a leading eye hospital and Indo-American Cancer Institute are located here. The nationally recognized Dr. Mohan's Diabetes Specialities Centre on Road Number 10. The Indian Heart Association, a non-profit organization focused on expanding South Asian cardiac health awareness, and the Hyderabad Blue Cross, an animal welfare association, are headquartered in Jubilee Hills.
Five of the schools in the city are in the area — P. Odul Reddy Public School (commonly known as PORPS), Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan's Public School, Jubilee Hills Public School, as well as Sreenidhi, Oakridge, and Orchids Schools in the posh commercial Road Number 37. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Open University is a distant education university of higher education located here. The regional office of the Central Silk Board is in Prashasan Nagar locality in Jubilee Hills. The neighbourhood is a base to a number of small IT start-ups and BPOs. The region has experienced a real estate boom in recent years and is the costliest area to live in Andhra Pradesh.

Temples, mosques and other places of worship

The Sita Ramaswamy Temple and the Peddamma Gudi temples are the most popular in the area, the latter being a fairly new temple.

Media

Jubilee Hills is home to large media houses. Media houses like  TV-9, T News, Mahaa TV, V6, CVR News etc. are located in Jubilee Hills and Kavuri Hills. It has become a media hub, with a majority of the leading Telugu media houses headquartered here.

Beauty and gyms

Jubilee Hills has some leading beauty parlors serving the highly affluent urban class residing here. Leading parlors in this area are: Pinks and Bloos, Ayur, Lakme beauty parlor, Bubbles, Mirrors, Blush and Manea. Some of these parlors are unisex while others have an option for both Men and Women.
Jubilee Hills also has some gyms such as 360 Degree Fitness, BodynSoul, Latitudes and Helios. All of these gyms are air-conditioned, with state-of-the-art equipment and excellent trainers. There is also a beautiful clay tennis court adjacent to the Madhapur bus stop, at the junction of Jubilee Hills and Kavuri Hills. The fees for the court are nominal and it is open early morning and evenings after 6:00 pm. There is also a well stocked sports and handicraft showroom on Road Number 36.
Spas such as Blu, Koya health etc. are located.

Recreation

The KBR National Park and a man-made pond - Lotus Pond are used by walkers and joggers. Also there are a couple of significant natural tanks in the area - Durgam Cheruvu and Hakimpet Kunta. The former is a major attraction to visitors where boating, trekking and an open-air disco operate. The nationally renowned State Gallery of Fine Arts is located to the north west or region in the back of Road Number 37. Places for recreation in the region include the Jubilee Hills International Club, the Film Nagar Club and the Hyderabad Gymkhana.
Peddamma Temple near Jubilee Hills Check Post is a Hindu temple visited by devotees during the local Bonalu festival.

Transport

APSRTC connects Jubilee hills to other parts of Hyderabad. The closest MMTS Train station is at HITEC City. Three Hyderabad Metro Rail blue line stations are coming up at Road # 5, Check Post and close to the Peddamma Temple.

Lotus Pond

Image:View of Lotus Pond.JPG|View of the Lotus Pond
Image:Sitting Place- Lotus Pond.JPG|Sitting Place- Lotus Pond
File:Lotus Pond.jpg|Lotus Pond on a Serene September morning






