[[Norway Airlines]]

CATEGORIES: Defunct airlines of Norway, Airlines established in 1987, Airlines disestablished in 1992, 1987 establishments in Norway, 1992 disestablishments in Norway

Norway Airlines A/S was a Norwegian airline which operated between 1988 and 1992. Focusing on charter, the airline operated two Boeing 737-300 aircraft from 1988 to 1992, after which it operated two McDonnell Douglas MD-80 aircraft, one MD-83 and one MD-87. The airline flew a single scheduled route, between Oslo Airport, Fornebu and London Gatwick Airport, at first on contract with Air Europe and from 1991 at its own expense. At its peak, Norway Airlines had 196 employees. The company struggled financially and lost more than 100 million Norwegian krone (NOK) before terminating operations, having never  made a profit.
The airline was established by Trøndelag-based investors on 2 April 1987, having been originally intended to operate charter flights to the Mediterranean area. Ansett Australia was an early investor, but soon sold out. The company suffered with its main contractor, Sun Tours, going bankrupt in 1988, after which the airline moved to the British charter market. Air Europe's holding company bought a third of Norway Airlines in October 1989; this allowed the Norwegian company to start flying Air Europe's route between Oslo and Gatwick as a wet lease operation, in addition to several international destinations from London. Air Europe went bankrupt in March 1991, causing Norway Airlines to temporarily halt operations.
Sterling Airways came in as a new strategic minority owner, and the two airlines started an alliance along with Transwede. Their key goal was to secure concessions to fly between the Scandinavian capital cities of Oslo, Stockholm and Copenhagen, but no permission was ever granted. Instead Norway Airlines started its own service between Oslo and London. Operations ceased on 14 October 1992 after the board had filed for bankruptcy.

History

Establishment

Norway Airlines was established on 2 April 1987
The share capital was expanded to NOK 20 million in September 1987. The airline's second 737-300, City of Stavanger, was delivered the same month, but was leased to Monarch Airlines. About sixty percent of the company's initial business was flying on contract with Sun Tours.
Gedde-Dahl was replaced by Kristian Åreskjold in March 1988. The company lost NOK 15 million in 1987 and budgeted with a deficit of NOK 13 million the following year. To cover the losses, the airline issued a private placement for NOK 12 million and a public issue of NOK 18 million. The airline retained only a single aircraft in operation until late 1989 and the staff of 50 to 60 employees was too much for the revenue form a single aircraft to cover. The airline planned to acquire a third aircraft in 1990 and budgeted with a profit of NOK 7 million in 1989 and NOK 32 million in 1990.

Air Europe

The airline was by September again in need of new capital. The contracts with Britannia ended on 1 November. While there was a high demand for 737-300 aircraft, aviation regulations hindered Norway Airlines from wet leaseing the aircraft (with full crew) and limited them to dry leaseing (without crew), which jeopardized the jobs of 86 employees.
Air Europe announced on 6 December 1988 that they would start a scheduled service between Oslo-Fornebu and London-Gatwick and intended to offer cheaper flights than the incumbents Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS) and British Airways. The London routes had after a year achieved a twenty-percent market share. Norway Airlines had by July 1990 lost an accumulated NOK 75 million and new shares worth NOK 40 million were issued to finance continued operations.
Norway Airlines applied in 1990 for permission to operate a charter route from Oslo to Penang, Malaysia, using a Boeing 757. The application was dismissed by the Ministry of Transport and Communications to protect SAS' route from Copenhagen to Singapore.
The airline reached a non-public settlement with Thor Tjøntveit on 10 September regarding the latter's right to purchase one of Norway Airline's aircraft.
Air Europe fell under financial distress in 1991 and terminated all its Gatwick operations on 8 March. This resulted in Norway Airlines having to ground both its aircraft. Before operations could commence, the two creditors of the aircraft, Fokus Bank and Christiania Bank, had to refinance the two holding companies. As the aircraft remained grounded when the military contract started on 1 April, Norway Airlines had to lease aircraft externally to operate the charters.

Nordic cooperation

Denmark's Sterling Airways bought ILG's share of Norway Airlines in mid July. The airlines announced a partnership, which also included Transwede. The Wallenberg-controlled NRT owned a 48-percent stake in Sterling and 66 percent of Transwede—the remaining third owned by Sterling. The three airlines applied for concessions to operate on the capital triangle between Oslo, Copenhagen and Stockholm. SAS held a monopoly on these routes and the airlines intended to capture the leisure market between the capital regions.
In September 1991, the government changed the policy for the military's procurement of air transport from 1 April 1992. This involved that the transport of 200,000 people annually would be transferred to scheduled services, resulting in Norway Airlines losing the opportunity to extend its engagement with the military.
Norway Airlines lost NOK 32 to 33 million in 1991.
Foreign airlines were  from 1 April 1992 permitted to fly passengers between the Scandinavian capitals, and both TAP Portugal and Delta Air Lines started flying passengers as extensions to their existing routes. This was negotiated as part of bilateral agreements and intra-Scandinavian agreements continued to hinder Norway Airlines from flying any of the routes.
Norway Airline's board voted on 14 October 1992 to file for bankruptcy,

Organization

When established, the company was based at Tananger in Sola outside Stavanger and had its main operative base at Stavanger Airport, Sola. The head office was later moved to Fornebu in Bærum outside Oslo, and the main base moved to Oslo Airport, Fornebu. At its peak the company had 196 employees, of which 144 were based in Norway. At the time of bankruptcy, the company had 120 employees, of which 78 were flight staff. Air Europe's CEO Rod Lynch stated that Air Europe, and in extension Norway Airlines, had forty percent lower operating costs than Lufthansa and twenty percent lower than British Airways. Lynch emphasized the lack of trade unions as a key to holding costs down. Air Europe claimed a thirty-four percent market share on passengers between Oslo and London.
Norway Airlines had a single-class service on their route and in their marketing claimed that they offered "business class service to everyone". Norway Airlines pioneered smoke-free flights from Norway.

Destinations

Norway Airlines only operated a single scheduled service, between Oslo and London. The route was flown nine times per week, two round trips per day on Thursdays, Fridays and Sundays, and one round trip per day on Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays. The route saw an average 60,000 to 70,000 passengers per year.

Fleet

Norway Airlines operated the following aircraft:





