[[Waris Ahluwalia]]

CATEGORIES: 1975 births, American male film actors, American male television actors, American jewelry designers, American people of Punjabi descent, American Sikhs, Indian emigrants to the United States, Living people

Waris Ahluwalia (born 1974 in Amritsar, Punjab) is an Indian American designer and actor based in New York City. His company, House of Waris, has collaborated with a number of other designers and artists throughout the years. House of Waris came into being after the owners of Maxfield's in Los Angeles noticed Ahluwalia's elaborate diamond rings and placed an order, which sold out.

Early life

Ahluwalia was born in Amritsar, Punjab, India, and moved to New York at the age of five.

Career

Designer

House of Waris, founded by Ahluwalia, is strongly influenced by the romance and history of ancient kingdoms.
Ahluwalia, who is now based in New York City, travels frequently to Rome and Rajasthan, working with craftsmen in each city, from goldsmiths to diamond setters who once made the crests for royal families.
In October 2010, House of Waris opened a pop up tea room under the High Line (New York City).
In February 2011, Ahluwalia held his first New York Fashion Week presentation at the Museum of Arts & Design, launching a line of scarves made in India: block printed, hand dyed, silk screened, made of the finest cashmere and silks.

=Collaborations/special projects=

Using House of Waris as a platform for collaborations, Waris has worked with A.P.C., Forevermark of the De Beers Group of Companies, and Tilda Swinton for Pringle of Scotland.
In response to the attacks in Mumbai in November 2008, Ahluwalia, along with Mortimer Singer and Tina Bhojwani, created To India, with Love, a book aiming to raise funds, spirits, and awareness for the victims of the attacks.
In 2012, Ahluwalia contributed to the summer issue of The Paris Review, writing an essay on art featuring the work of Walton Ford and Ryan McGinley.
As a part of his role as Global Ambassador for Starwood's Luxury Collection Hotels & Resorts, Ahluwalia wrote and produced the original short film, "HERE: a Film" by Luca Guadagnino. The film's team included Tilda Swinton (co-writer), Heidi Bivens (stylist), Jason Schwartzman (music) and Agyness Deyn (actress).
In 2013, House of Waris launched a line for Valentines Day, called 'Boo', referring to it as a term of endearment. To promote the line, Ahluwalia commissioned 9 artists and filmmakers to make short films titled "You're my Boo." The list of artists included Phillip Andelman, Casey Neistat, Brett Stabler, Ben Watts, and Hailey Gates; as well as John Forté, Mick Rock, Matthew Frost.
Ahluwalia has also collaborated with Illesteva Eyewear on a line of sunglasses that launched April 2013. 
In 2013, Ahluwalia was featured in a Gap "Make Love" campaign ad that has gotten attention from consumers and the media alike.

Actor

Ahluwalia's first film was The Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou (2004) by Wes Anderson, as Vikram Ray, with a cast that included Bill Murray, Owen Wilson, Angelica Huston, and Cate Blanchett.

Filmography

Film

Television






