[[Pharmaceutical industry in Bangladesh]]

CATEGORIES: Pharmaceutical companies of Bangladesh

The pharmaceutical industry in Bangladesh is one of the most developed hi-tech sectors within the country's economy. In 2000, there were 210 licensed allopathic drug-manufacturing units in the country, out of which only 173 were in active production; others were either closed down on their own or suspended by the licensing authority for drugs due to non compliance to good manufacturing practices or drug laws. The industry manufactured about 5,600 brands of medicines in different dosage forms. There were, however, 1,495 wholesale drug license holders and about 37,700 retail drug license holders in Bangladesh.
Square Pharmaceuticals has retained the top position with its local sales figure reaching Tk 10.70 billion in 2012 in the country's Tk 55.0 billion pharmaceutical market followed by Incepta Pharmaceuticals.  Incepta Pharma, established in 1999, stood at Tk 4.52 billion in 2009.  Beximco Pharma's position in the country's top 10 pharmaceutical companies was the third in terms of sales. Its total sales were Tk 4.2 billion in 2009.  Fourth position took by the ACME Laboratories and its sales were Tk 2.64 billion in 2009.  Opsonin Pharma Ltd., established in 1956, ranked the fifth by local sales worth Tk 2.61 billion in 2009.52 billion.  Reneta Pharma sales were nearly Tk 2.50 billion in 2009 and took the seventh position.  Eight position took by the Advance Chemical Industries (ACI) with local sales worth Tk 2.46 billion.  The sales of Aristopharma products were Tk 2.23 billion and Drug International's were Tk 2.13 billion.  Sanofi-Aventis ranked the top among the multinational pharmaceutical companies followed by GlaxoSmithKline.  Sandoz took the third position.thefinancialexpress-bd.php?news_id=92556
Sales of Square Pharmaceuticals, the market leader, were Tk 1,270 crore in 2010,Beximco grew faster than other companies at a staggering 33 percent in 2010 with Tk 523 crore sales. Eskayef logged Tk 426 crore in sales and the growth rate was 27 percent, the third highest pace in the 2010. Zenith Pharmaceuticals, established in 1952, Zenith Pharmaceuticals Ltd is one of the sturdiest growing Pharmaceutical Company committed to produce medicine strictly under GMP compliance and extended its services to all the valued Customers. The company complies with GMP at its plant, where validation and documentation ensures the position in accordance to international standard.
Bangladesh Pharmaceutical Industry exports active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) and a wide range of pharmaceutical products covering all major therapeutic classes and dosage forms to 79 countries. Beside regular forms like; Tablets, Capsules & Syrups, Bangladesh is also exporting high-tech specialized products like HFA Inhalers, CFC Inhalers, Suppositories, Nasal Sprays, Injectables, IV Infusions, etc. are also being exported from Bangladesh, and have been well accepted by the Medical Practitioners, Chemists, Patients and the Regulatory Bodies of all the importing nations. The packaging and the presentation of the products of Bangladesh are comparable to any international standard and have been accepted by them.

Regulatory authorities

Two organizations regulate drugs and pharmacies in Bangladesh, one governmental, The Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) and one semi-government, the Pharmacy Council of Bangladesh(PCB). DGDA is the drug regulatory authority of Bangladesh, which is under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. DGDA regulates all activities related to import and export of raw materials, packaging materials, production, sale, pricing, licensing, registration, etc. of all kinds of medicine including those of Ayurvedic, Unani, Herbal and Homoeopathic systems.Pharmacy Council of Bangladesh control pharmacy practice in Bangladesh. 
The Bangladesh Pharmaceutical Society is affiliated with international organizations International Pharmaceutical Federation and Commonwealth Pharmaceutical Association. The National Drug Policy (2005) states that the WHO's current Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) should be strictly followed and that manufacturing units will be regularly inspected by the DDA. Other key features of regulation are restrictions on imported drugs (where these are produced by four or more local firms); a ban on the production in Bangladesh of around 1,700 drugs which are considered non-essential or harmful; and strict price controls, affecting some 117 principal medicines.Article Novartis Bangladesh Pharmaceutical Marketplace




