[[Planet Earth (Prince album)]]

CATEGORIES: 2007 albums, Prince (musician) albums, Albums produced by Prince (musician), NPG Records albums, Columbia Records albums

Planet Earth is the twenty-ninth studio album by American musician Prince, first released July 15, 2007 in the UK as a free covermount with The Mail on Sunday national newspaper. This was followed by the album's worldwide distribution. It features contributions from his newest protegée Bria Valente and former New Power Generation members Marva King, Sonny T, and Michael Bland, as well as Sheila E. and former Revolution members Wendy & Lisa. The album debuted at number 3 on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart, selling 96,000 in its first week.

Release and promotion

On June 27, 2007, "Future Baby Mama" was leaked to the Internet via an American online radio station. The first single, "Guitar", was distributed in partnership with Verizon Wireless. During the week of September 3, 2007, Prince flew to Prague, and then Spain to film a music video for "Somewhere Here on Earth". The clip was released but it has only been played on the TV channel BET.
Initially, Prince came to an agreement with Columbia Records to distribute the record worldwide. Prince and Columbia had previously teamed up for the release of his Musicology album in 2004.
Giving away albums for free was not new for Prince. In 2004, he gave free copies of Musicology to all concert goers during the tour of the same name.

Singles

"Chelsea Rodgers" is the second single from Planet Earth, and was released worldwide on August 6, 2007. The B-side is album track "Mr. Goodnight". A video was made using footage of the band's performance at London Fashion Week. It premièred on October 28, 2007.
"Somewhere Here on Earth" is the third single from the album. On the week of 3 September 2007, Prince flew to Prague, and then Spain to film a music video for the song. The full music video premiered on the BET Channel on February 12, 2008.

Reception

The album debuted on the U.S. Billboard 200 at number three with 96,000 units sold in its first week.  This is less than half of both Musicology and 3121. As of October 2007, the album has sold about 298,000 copies in America, with almost no promotion, with the exception of the Verizon Wireless ad for "Guitar". Although not released as a single, "Future Baby Mama" gathered radio airplay on American R&B radio and charted within the top 40 of Billboard's Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs. The song won Prince a Grammy Award for Best Male R&B Vocal Performance at the 2008 Grammy Awards.
Planet Earth received generally positive reviews from most music critics, based on an aggregate score of 65/100 from Metacritic. In his consumer guide for MSN Music, Robert Christgau gave the album a three-star honorable mention (

Track listing

All songs written and produced by Prince.

Release history






