[[Metropolitan Museum of Art]]

CATEGORIES: Metropolitan Museum of Art, African art museums in the United States, Art museums established in 1872, Art museums in New York City, Asian art museums in New York, Cultural infrastructure completed in 1880, Buildings and structures on the National Register of Historic Places in Manhattan, Central Park, Egyptological collections in the United States, Fashion museums in the United States, Fifth Avenue (Manhattan), Institutions accredited by the American Alliance of Museums, Modern art museums in the United States, Museums in Manhattan, Museums of Ancient Greece, Museums of Ancient Rome, Museums of Ancient Near East, Musical instrument museums in the United States, Museums of American art, National Historic Landmarks in New York City, Orden de las Artes y las Letras de España recipients, Richard Morris Hunt buildings, Rockefeller family, Textile museums in the United States, 1872 establishments in New York, Armour collections

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, located in New York City, is the largest art museum in the United States, and one of the ten largest in the world, with the most significant art collections. The main building, located on the eastern edge of Central Park along Manhattan's Museum Mile,  is by area one of the world's largest art galleries.  There is also a much smaller second location at "The Cloisters" in Upper Manhattan that features medieval art.
Represented in the permanent collection are works of art from classical antiquity and Ancient Egypt, paintings and sculptures from nearly all the European masters, and an extensive collection of American and modern art. The Met also maintains extensive holdings of African, Asian, Oceanic, Byzantine, and Islamic art.  The museum is also home to encyclopedic collections of musical instruments, costumes and accessories, and antique weapons and armor from around the world. Several notable interiors, ranging from 1st-century Rome through modern American design, are permanently installed in the Met's galleries.
The Metropolitan Museum of Art was founded in 1870 by a group of American citizens. The founders included businessmen and financiers, as well as leading artists and thinkers of the day, who wanted to open a museum to bring art and art education to the American people.
As of 2012, the Met occupies about 

Collections

The Met's permanent collection is cared for and exhibited by seventeen separate curatorial departments, each with a specialized staff of curators and scholars, as well as four dedicated conservation departments and a department of scientific research.
Represented in the permanent collection are works of art from classical antiquity and Ancient Egypt, paintings and sculptures from nearly all the European masters, and an extensive collection of American and modern art. The Met also maintains extensive holdings of African, Asian, Oceanic, Byzantine and Islamic art.
In addition to its permanent exhibitions, the Met organizes and hosts large traveling shows throughout the year.
The director of the museum is Thomas P. Campbell, a long-time curator, who replaced Philippe de Montebello following his retirement at the end of 2008.

Ancient Near Eastern art

Beginning in the late 19th century, the Met started to acquire ancient art and artifacts from the Near East. From a few cuneiform tablets and seals, the Met's collection of Near Eastern art has grown to more than 7,000

Arms and armor

The Met's Department of Arms and Armor is one of the museum's most popular collections. are many pieces made for and used by kings and princes, including armor belonging to Henry VIII of England, Henry II of France and Ferdinand I of Germany.

Arts of Africa, Oceania, and the Americas

Though the Met first acquired a group of Peruvian antiquities in 1882, the museum did not begin a concerted effort to collect works from Africa, Oceania, and the Americas until 1969, when American businessman and philanthropist Nelson A. Rockefeller donated his more than 3,000-piece collection to the museum. Today, the Met's collection contains more than 11,000 The range of materials represented in the Africa, Oceania, and Americas collection is undoubtedly the widest of any department at the Met, including everything from precious metals to porcupine quills.

Asian art

The Met's Asian department holds a collection of Asian art, of more than 35,000 pieces, that is arguably the most comprehensive in the US. The collection dates back almost to the founding of the museum: many of the philanthropists who made the earliest gifts to the museum included Asian art in their collections. Today, an entire wing of the museum is dedicated to the Asian collection, and spans 4,000 years of Asian art. Every Asian civilization is represented in the Met's Asian department, and the pieces on display include every type of decorative art, from painting and printmaking to sculpture and metalworking. The department is well known for its comprehensive collection of Chinese calligraphy and painting, as well as for its Nepalese and Tibetan works. However, not only "art" and ritual objects are represented in the collection; many of the best-known pieces are functional objects. The Asian wing also contains a complete Ming Dynasty-style garden court, modeled on a courtyard in the Garden of the Master of the Fishing Nets in Suzhou.

The Costume Institute

The Museum of Costume Art was founded by Aline Bernstein and Irene Lewisohn.
Exhibits displayed over the past decade in the Costume Institute include:
Rock Style, in 1999, representing the style of more than 40 rock musicians, including Madonna, David Bowie, and The Beatles; Extreme Beauty: The Body Transformed, in 2001, which exposes the transforming ideas of physical beauty over time and the bodily contortion necessary to accommodate such ideals and fashion; The Chanel Exhibit, displayed in 2005, acknowledging the skilled work of designer Coco Chanel as one of the leading fashion names in history; 
Superheroes: Fashion and Fantasy, exhibited in 2008, suggesting the metaphorical vision of superheroes as ultimate fashion icons; 
the 2010 exhibit on the American Woman: Fashioning a National Identity, which exposes the revolutionary styles of the American woman from the years 1890 to 1940, and how such styles reflect the political and social sentiments of the time. The theme of the 2011 event was "Alexander McQueen: Savage Beauty".
Each of these exhibits explores fashion as a mirror of cultural values and offers a glimpse into historical styles, emphasizing their evolution into today's own fashion world.
On January 14, 2014, the Met named the Costume Institute complex after Anna Wintour.

Drawings and prints

Though other departments contain significant numbers of drawings and prints, the Drawings and Prints department specifically concentrates on North American pieces and western European works produced after the Middle Ages. The first Old Master drawings, comprising 670 sheets, were presented as a single group in 1880 by Cornelius Vanderbilt II and in effect launched the department, though it was not formally constituted as a department until later. Other early donors to the department include Junius Spencer Morgan II who presented a broad range of material, but mainly dated from the sixteenth century, including 2 woodblocks and many prints by Albrecht Dürer in 1919. Currently, the Drawings and Prints collection contains more than 17,000 drawings, 1.5 million prints, and twelve thousand illustrated books. The great masters of European painting, who produced many more sketches and drawings than actual paintings, are extensively represented in the Drawing and Prints collection. The department's holdings contain major drawings by Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, and Rembrandt, as well as prints and etchings by Van Dyck, Dürer, and Degas among many others.

Egyptian art

Though the majority of the Met's initial holdings of Egyptian art came from private collections, items uncovered during the museum's own archeological excavations, carried out between 1906 and 1941, constitute almost half of the current collection. More than 26,000 separate pieces of Egyptian art from the Paleolithic era through the Roman era constitute the Met's Egyptian collection, and almost all of them are on display in the museum's massive wing of 40 Egyptian galleries. Among the most valuable pieces in the Met's Egyptian collection are 13 wooden models (of the total 24 models found together, 12 models and 1 offering bearer figure is at the Met, while the remaining 10 models and 1 offering bearer figure are in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo), discovered in a  tomb in the Southern Asasif in western Thebes in 1920. These models depict, in unparalleled detail, a cross-section of Egyptian life in the early Middle Kingdom: boats, gardens, and scenes of daily life are represented in miniature. William the Faience Hippopotamus is a miniature shown at right.
However, the popular centerpiece of the Egyptian Art department continues to be the Temple of Dendur. Dismantled by the Egyptian government to save it from rising waters caused by the building of the Aswan High Dam, the large sandstone temple was given to the United States in 1965 and assembled in the Met's Sackler Wing in 1978. Situated in a large room, partially surrounded by a reflecting pool and illuminated by a wall of windows opening onto Central Park, the Temple of Dendur is one of the Met's most enduring attractions.
The oldest items at the Met, a set of Archeulian flints from Deir el-Bahri which date from the Lower Paleolithic period (between 300,000 - 75,000 BC), are part of the Egyptian collection.

European paintings

The Met's collection of European paintings numbers around 1,700 pieces,

European sculpture and decorative arts

The European Sculpture and Decorative Arts collection is one of the largest departments at the Met, holding in excess of 50,000 separate pieces from the 15th through the early 20th centuries. Though the collection is particularly concentrated in Renaissance sculpture—much of which can be seen in situ surrounded by contemporary furnishings and decoration—it also contains comprehensive holdings of furniture, jewelry, glass and ceramic pieces, tapestries, textiles, and timepieces and mathematical instruments. In addition to its outstanding collections of English and French furniture, visitors can enter dozens of completely furnished period rooms, transplanted in their entirety into the Met's galleries. The collection even includes an entire 16th-century patio from the Spanish castle of Vélez Blanco, reconstructed in a two-story gallery, and the intarsia studiolo from the ducal palace at Gubbio. Sculptural highlights of the sprawling department include Bernini's Bacchanal, a cast of Rodin's The Burghers of Calais, and several unique pieces by Houdon, including his Bust of Voltaire and his famous portrait of his daughter Sabine.

The American Wing

The Museum's collection of American art, returned to view in new galleries on January 16, 2012. The new installation provides visitors with the history of American art from the 18th through the early 20th century. The new galleries encompasses 30,000 square feet for the display of the Museum's collection.The New American Wing

Greek and Roman art

The Met's collection of Greek and Roman art contains more than 17,000

Islamic art

The Met's collection of Islamic art is not confined strictly to religious art, though a significant number of the objects in the Islamic collection were originally created for religious use or as decorative elements in mosques. Much of the 12,000 strong collection consists of secular items, including ceramics and textiles, from Islamic cultures ranging from Spain to North Africa to Central Asia. The Islamic Art department's collection of miniature paintings from Iran and Mughal India are a highlight of the collection. Calligraphy both religious and secular is well represented in the Islamic Art department, from the official decrees of Suleiman the Magnificent to a number of Qur'an manuscripts reflecting different periods and styles of calligraphy. The Islamic Arts galleries had been undergoing refurbishment since 2001 and were reopened on November 1, 2011 as the New Galleries for the Art of the Arab Lands, Turkey, Iran, Central Asia, and Later South Asia. Until that time, a narrow selection of items from the collection had been on temporary display throughout the museum. As with many other departments at the Met, the Islamic Art galleries contain many interior pieces, including the entire reconstructed Nur Al-Din Room from an early 18th-century house in Damascus. However, the museum has confirmed to the New York Post that it has withdrawn from public display all  paintings depicting Muhammad and may not rehang those that were displayed in the Islamic gallery before the renovation.'Jihad' jitters at Met - Mohammed art gone by Isabel Vincent, 10 January 2010.

Robert Lehman Collection

On the passing of banker Robert Lehman in 1969, his Foundation donated 2,600 works of art to the museum. Housed in the "Robert Lehman Wing," the museum refers to the collection as "one of the most extraordinary private art collections ever assembled in the United States".Thomas Hoving. Making the Mummies Dance. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1993. Unlike other departments at the Met, the Robert Lehman collection does not concentrate on a specific style or period of art; rather, it reflects Lehman's personal interests. Lehman the collector concentrated heavily on paintings of the Italian Renaissance, particularly the Sienese school. Paintings in the collection include masterpieces by Botticelli and Domenico Veneziano, as well as works by a significant number of Spanish painters, El Greco and Goya among them. Lehman's collection of drawings by the Old Masters, featuring works by Rembrandt and Dürer, is particularly valuable for its breadth and quality. New York Times, February 18, 2000 Princeton University Press has documented the massive collection in a multi-volume book series published as The Robert Lehman Collection Catalogues.

Medieval art and the Cloisters

The Met's collection of medieval art consists of a comprehensive range of Western art from the 4th through the early 16th centuries, as well as Byzantine and pre-medieval European antiquities not included in the Ancient Greek and Roman collection. Like the Islamic collection, the Medieval collection contains a broad range of two- and three-dimensional art, with religious objects heavily represented. In total, the Medieval Art department's permanent collection numbers about 11,000 separate objects, divided between the main museum building on Fifth Avenue and The Cloisters.

=Main building=

The medieval collection in the main Metropolitan building, centered on the first-floor medieval gallery, contains about six thousand separate objects. While a great deal of European medieval art is on display in these galleries, most of the European pieces are concentrated at the Cloisters (see below). However, this allows the main galleries to display much of the Met's Byzantine art side-by-side with European pieces. The main gallery is host to a wide range of tapestries and church and funerary statuary, while side galleries display smaller works of precious metals and ivory, including reliquary pieces and secular items. The main gallery, with its high arched ceiling, also serves double duty as the annual site of the Met's elaborately decorated Christmas tree.

=The Cloisters museum and gardens=

The Cloisters was a principal project of John D. Rockefeller, Jr., who was a major benefactor of the Met. Located in Fort Tryon Park and completed in 1938, it is a separate building dedicated solely to medieval art. The Cloisters collection was originally that of a separate museum, assembled by George Grey Barnard and acquired in toto by Rockefeller in 1925 as a gift to the Met.
The Cloisters are so named on account of the five medieval French cloisters whose salvaged structures were incorporated into the modern building, and the five thousand objects at the Cloisters are strictly limited to medieval European works. The collection exhibited here features many items of outstanding beauty and historical importance; among these are the Belles Heures of Jean de France, Duc de Berry illustrated by the Limbourg Brothers in 1409, the Romanesque altar cross known as the "Cloisters Cross" or "Bury Cross," and the seven heroically detailed tapestries depicting the Hunt of the Unicorn.

Modern and contemporary art

With some 13,000 artworks, primarily by European and American artists, the modern art collection occupies , of gallery space and contains many iconic modern works. Cornerstones of the collection include Picasso's portrait of Gertrude Stein, Jasper Johns's White Flag, Jackson Pollock's Autumn Rhythm (Number 30), and Max Beckmann's triptych Beginning. Certain artists are represented in remarkable depth, for a museum whose focus is not exclusively on modern art: for example, the collection contains forty paintings by Paul Klee, spanning his entire career. Due to the Met's long history, "contemporary" paintings acquired in years past have often migrated to other collections at the museum, particularly to the American and European Paintings departments.
In April 2013, it was reported that the Museum was to receive a collection worth $1billion dollars from cosmetics tycoon Leonard Lauder. The collection of Cubist art includes work by Pablo Picasso, Georges Braque and Juan Gris and will go on display in 2014.

Musical instruments

The Met's collection of musical instruments, with about 5,000 examples of musical instruments from all over the world, is virtually unique among major museums. The collection began in 1889 with a donation of several hundred instruments by Lucy W. Drexel, but the department's current focus came through donations over the following years by Mary Elizabeth Adams, wife of John Crosby Brown. Instruments were (and continue to be) included in the collection not only on aesthetic grounds, but also insofar as they embodied technical and social aspects of their cultures of origin. The modern Musical Instruments collection is encyclopedic in scope; every continent is represented at virtually every stage of its musical life. Highlights of the department's collection include several Stradivari violins, a collection of Asian instruments made from precious metals, and the oldest surviving piano, a 1720 model by Bartolomeo Cristofori. Many of the instruments in the collection are playable, and the department encourages their use by holding concerts and demonstrations by guest musicians.

Photographs

The Met's collection of photographs, numbering more than 25,000 in total, is centered on five major collections plus additional acquisitions by the museum. Alfred Stieglitz, a famous photographer himself, donated the first major collection of photographs to the museum, which included a comprehensive survey of Photo-Secessionist works, a rich set of master prints by Edward Steichen, and an outstanding collection of Stieglitz's photographs from his own studio. The Met supplemented Stieglitz's gift with the 8,500-piece Gilman Paper Company Collection, the Rubel Collection, and the Ford Motor Company Collection, which respectively provided the collection with early French and American photography, early British photography, and post-WWI American and European photography. The museum also acquired Walker Evans's personal collection of photographs, a particular coup considering the high demand for his works. The department of photography was founded in 1992. Though the department gained a permanent gallery in 1997, not all of the department's holdings are on display at any given time, due to the sensitive materials represented in the photography collection. However, the Photographs department has produced some of the best-received temporary exhibits in the Met's recent past, including a Diane Arbus retrospective and an extensive show devoted to spirit photography. In 2007, the museum designated a gallery exclusively for the exhibition of photographs made after 1960.

Libraries

Each Department maintains a library, most of which is requestable online through the libraries' catalog.org/portal/category/met-libraries/
There are two libraries that can be accessed without appointment:

Thomas J. Watson Library

The Thomas J. Watson Library is the central library of The Metropolitan Museum of Art, and supports the research activities of the Museum staff and researchers.  Watson Library's collection contains approximately 900,000 volumes, including monographs and exhibition catalogs; over 11,000 periodical titles; and more than 125,000 auction and sale catalogs.org/portal/collections/ The Library includes a reference collection, auction and sale catalogs, a rare book collection, manuscript items, and vertical file collections. The Library is accessible to anyone 18 years of age or older simply by registering online and providing a valid photo ID. 

Nolen Library

The Nolen Library is open to the general public. The collection of some 8,000 items, arranged in open shelves, includes books, picture books, DVDs and videos. The Nolen Library includes a children's reading room and materials for teachers. 

Special exhibitions

The museum regularly hosts notable special exhibitions, often focusing on the works of one artist that have been loaned out from a variety of other museums and sources for the duration of the exhibition.  These exhibitions are part of the attraction that draw people both within and outside Manhattan to explore the Met.  Such exhibitions include displays especially designed for the Costume Institute, paintings from artists from across the world, works of art related to specific art movements, and collections of historical artifacts.  Exhibitions are commonly located within their specific departments, ranging from American Decorative Arts, Arms and Armor, Drawings and Prints, Egyptian Art, Medieval Art, Musical Instruments, and Photographs.  Typical exhibitions run for months at a time and are open to the general public.  Each exhibition provides insight into the world of art as a transformative, cultural experience and often includes a historical analysis to demonstrate the profound impact that art has on society and its dramatic transformation over the years.

Early History

The New York State Legislature granted the Metropolitan Museum of Art an Act of Incorporation on April 13, 1870 "for the purpose of establishing and maintaining in said City a Museum and Library of Art, of encouraging and developing the Study of the Fine Arts, and the application of Art to manufacture and natural life, of advancing the general knowledge of kindred subjects, and to that end of furnishing popular instruction and recreations". Van Nostrand, New York, 1876. "Metropolitan Museum of Art" page 101.
The museum first opened on February 20, 1872, housed in a building located at 681 Fifth Avenue in New York City. John Taylor Johnston, a railroad executive whose personal art collection seeded the museum, served as its first president, and the publisher George Palmer Putnam came on board as its founding superintendent. The artist Eastman Johnson acted as co-founder of the museum. 
Various other industrialists of the age served as co-founders, including Howard Potter. The former Civil War officer, Luigi Palma di Cesnola, was named as its first director.C. Tomkins. Merchants and Masterpieces: The Story of the Metropolitan Museum of Art--Second Ed., New York, Henry Holt, 1996, pp.49-57. He served from 1879 to 1904. Under their guidance, the Met's holdings, initially consisting of a Roman stone sarcophagus and 174 mostly European paintings, quickly outgrew the available space. In 1873, occasioned by the Met's purchase of the Cesnola Collection of Cypriot antiquities, the museum decamped from Fifth Avenue and took up residence at the Mrs. Nicholas Cruger Mansion also known as the Douglas Mansion (James Renwick, 1853–54, demolished) at 128 West 14th Street. However, these new accommodations proved temporary, as the growing collection required more space than the mansion could provide.

Architecture

After negotiations with the City of New York in 1871, the Met was granted the land between the East Park Drive, Fifth Avenue, and the 79th and 85th Street Transverse Roads in Central Park. A red-brick and stone "mausoleum" was designed by American architect Calvert Vaux and his collaborator Jacob Wrey Mould. Vaux's ambitious building was not well received; the building's High Victorian Gothic style being already dated prior to completion, and the president of the Met termed the project "a mistake." Within 20 years, a new architectural plan engulfing the Vaux building was already being executed. Since that time, many additions have been made including the distinctive Beaux-Arts Fifth Avenue facade, Great Hall, and Grand Stairway.  These were designed by architect and Met trustee Richard Morris Hunt, but completed by his son, Richard Howland Hunt in 1902 after his father's death.
The wings that completed the Fifth Avenue facade in the 1910s were designed by the firm of McKim, Mead & White.  The modernistic glass sides and rear of the museum are the work of Roche-Dinkeloo. Kevin Roche has been the architect for the master plan and expansion of the museum for the past 42 years. He is responsible for designing all of its new wings and renovations including but not limited to the American Wing, Greek and Roman Court, and recently opened Islamic Wing.The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin (Summer 1995)
As of 2010, the Met measures almost  of floor space, more than 20 times the size of the original 1880 building.  The museum building is an accretion of over 20 structures, most of which are not visible from the exterior.  The City of New York owns the museum building and contributes utilities, heat, and some of the cost of guardianship.

Roof Garden

The Iris and B. Gerald Cantor Roof Garden is located on the roof towards the southwestern corner of the museum.  It offers views of Central Park and the Manhattan skyline, and features an annual summertime single artist sculpture exhibition.  The Garden's cafe and bar is a popular museum spot during the mild-weathered months, especially on Friday and Saturday evenings when large crowds can lead to long lines at the elevators.

Selections from the permanent collection of paintings

File:Jan van Eyck - Diptych - WGA07587. 1430–40
File:Workshop of Rogier van der Weyden - Polyptych with the Nativity, mid-15th century, Metropolitan Museum of Art. 1450
File:Uccello Portrait of a Lady MET. 1450, Florence
Image:Pieter Bruegel the Elder- The Corn Harvest (August).JPG|Pieter Bruegel the Elder, The Harvesters, 1565
File:Caravaggio - I Musici.jpg|Caravaggio, The Musicians, 1595
File:El Greco View of Toledo.jpg|El Greco, View of Toledo, 1596
File:El Greco, The Vision of Saint John (1608-1614).jpg|El Greco, The Opening of the Fifth Seal 1608–1614
File:Retrato de Juan Pareja, by Diego Velázquez.jpg|Diego Velázquez, Portrait of Juan de Pareja, 1650
File:Rembrandt Harmensz. van Rijn 013.jpg|Rembrandt, Aristotle Contemplating the Bust of Homer, 1653
File:Vermeer - Woman with a Lute near a window.jpg|Johannes Vermeer, Woman with a Lute, 1662
File:David - The Death of Socrates.jpg|Jacques-Louis David, The Death of Socrates, 1787
Image:Villers Young Woman Drawing.jpg|Marie-Denise Villers, Young Woman Drawing, 1801
File:Francisco de Goya y Lucientes 046.jpg|Francisco Goya, Majas on a Balcony, 1835
File:Joseph Mallord William Turner - The Grand Canal, Venice - WGA23173.M.W. Turner, The Grand Canal, 1835
File:Cole Thomas The Oxbow (The Connecticut River near Northampton 1836).jpg|Thomas Cole, The Oxbow, 1836
Image:George Caleb Bingham 001. 1845
File:Eugène Delacroix - Christ Endormi pendant la Tempête.jpg|Eugène Delacroix, Christ Asleep during the Tempest, 1853
Image:Rosa bonheur horse fair 1835 55.jpg|Rosa Bonheur, The Horse Fair, 1853-1855
File:Édouard Manet - Le Christ mort et les anges.jpg|Édouard Manet, The Dead Christ with Angels, 1864
File:Edgar Degas - Chasse de danse.jpg|Edgar Degas, The Dance Class, 1872
File:Edouard Manet Boating.jpg|Édouard Manet, Boating 1874
File:Pierre-Auguste Renoir 094. Charpentier and Her Children, 1878
File:JoanOfArcLarge.jpeg|Jules Bastien-Lepage, Jeanne d'Arc (Joan of Arc), 1879
File:Sargent MadameX.jpeg|John Singer Sargent, Portrait of Madame X, 1884
File:Van Gogh Self-Portrait with Straw Hat 1887-Metropolitan.jpg|Vincent van Gogh, Self-Portrait with Straw Hat, 1887
File:1889 Vincent van Gogh Zypressen anagoria.JPG|Vincent van Gogh, Cypresses,1889
File:Paul Cézanne, 1888-90, Madame Cézanne (Hortense Fiquet, 1850–1922) in a Red Dress, oil on canvas, 116.5 x 89.5 cm, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.5 x 89.5 cm
File:Paul Cézanne 082.jpg|Paul Cézanne, ''The Card Players, 1890-1892
File:1891 Monet The four trees anagoria.JPG|Claude Monet, The Four Trees, (Four Poplars on the Banks of the Epte River near Giverny), 1891
Image:Paul Gauguin 044.jpg|Paul Gauguin, The Midday Nap, 1894
File:Winslow Homer 004.jpg|Winslow Homer, The Gulf Stream, 1899
File:The Houses of Parliament (Effect of Fog).JPG|Claude Monet, The Houses of Parliament (Effect of Fog), 1903–1904
File:GertrudeStein.JPG|Pablo Picasso, Portrait of Gertrude Stein, 1906
Image:Young Sailor II.jpg|Henri Matisse, The Young Sailor II, 1906
Image:Rousseau theRepastOfTheLion. 1907
File:Pablo Picasso, 1911, Still Life with a Bottle of Rum, oil on canvas, 61.3 x 50.5 cm, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.3 x 50.5 cm
File:1919 Modigliani Jeanne Hebuterne anagoria.JPG|Amedeo Modigliani, Jeanne Hebuterne, 1919
File:Wassily Kandinsky, Improvisation 27, Garden of Love II, 1912. Exhibited at the 1913 Armory Show. Exhibited at the 1913 Armory Show
File:Arthur Dove, Cow, 1914, pastel on canvas, 45.1 x 54.6 cm, Metropolitan Museum of Art.1 x 54.6 cm
File:NY Met demuth figure 5 gold.JPG|Charles Demuth, I Saw the Figure 5 in Gold, 1928

Governance

The collections are owned by a private corporation of fellows and benefactors which totals about 950 persons.  The museum is governed by a board of trustees of 41 elected members, several officials of the City of New York, and persons honored as trustees by the museum.  The 2009-10 operating budget was $221 million.  The museum's endowment is $2–3 billion and provides much of the income for operations while admissions account for only 15%.  Although the museum recommends an admission price of $25, visitors can pay what they wish to enter. This 1970 agreement between the museum and the city of New York requires visitors to pay at least a nominal amount; a penny is acceptable.
The Met is reported to have the best credit rating by far of all major museums in the United States. This was last affirmed by Moody's in 2009, even after the agency assumed "a 30% reduction from investment losses and endowment spending" in the context of the late-2000s financial crisis. The museum fundraised $138 million in 2008 and hosted almost 5 million visitors.

Acquisitions and deaccessioning

The Metropolitan Museum of Art spent $39 million to acquire art for the fiscal year ending in June 2012. At the same time, the museum is required to list in its annual report the total cash proceeds from art sales each year and to itemize any deaccessioned objects valued at more than $50,000 each. It must also sell those pieces at auction and provide advance public notice of a work's being sold if it has been on view in the last ten years. These rules were imposed by the New York State Attorney General in 1972.
During the 1970s, under the directorship of Thomas Hoving, the Met revised its deaccessioning policy. Under the new policy, the Met set its sights on acquiring "world-class" pieces, regularly funding the purchases by selling mid- to high-value items from its collection. Though the Met had always sold duplicate or minor items from its collection to fund the acquisition of new pieces, the Met's new policy was significantly more aggressive and wide-ranging than before, and allowed the deaccessioning of items with higher values which would normally have precluded their sale. The new policy provoked a great deal of criticism (in particular, from the New York Times) but had its intended effect.
Many of the items then purchased with funds generated by the more liberal deaccessioning policy are now considered the "stars" of the Met's collection, including Diego Velázquez's Juan de Pareja and the Euphronios krater depicting the death of Sarpedon (which has since been repatriated to the Republic of Italy). In the years since the Met began its new deaccessioning policy, other museums have begun to emulate it with aggressive deaccessioning programs of their own.

Controversies

The book Rogues' Gallery by the journalist Michael Gross was published in May, 2009 focusing on the personalities behind the museum, showcasing their personal peccadilloes, charting the relationship between the public and private behavior and ambitions of its trustees and benefactors and their cultural philanthropy. A museum spokesman condemned the book as "misleading" and "insensitive","Michael Gross Gets Lots of Dirty Looks But Little Buzz for Rogues' Gallery," Reid Pillifant, The New York Observer, May 19, 2009.  and the museum bookstore declined to sell it."Secrets, Phonies Animate Lively Met Museum History: Interview," Manuela Holterhoff, Bloomberg. Amy Finnerty, New York Times Book Review, June 28, 2009. 
The museum has been criticized for withdrawing images of Muhammad from public display."Cartoonist Lars Vilks Attacked for Showing Prophet Mohammed in Gay Film," Patrik Jonsson, The Christian Science Monitor, May 12, 2010. 





Bibliography




