[[Local Langlands conjectures]]

CATEGORIES: Zeta and L-functions, Number theory, Representation theory of Lie groups, Automorphic forms, Conjectures, Class field theory, Langlands program

In mathematics, the local Langlands conjectures, introduced by ,  are part of the Langlands program. They describe a correspondence between representations of the Weil group of a local field and representations of algebraic groups over the local field, generalizing local class field theory from abelian Galois groups to non-abelian Galois groups.

Local Langlands conjectures for GL1

The local Langlands conjectures for GL1(K) follow from (and are essentially equivalent to)   local class field theory. More precisely the Artin map gives an isomorphism from the group  GL1(K)= K* to the abelianization of the Weil group. In particular irreducible smooth representations of GL1(K) are 1-dimensional as the group is abelian, so can be identified with homomorphisms of the Weil group to GL1(C). This gives the Langlands correspondence between  homomorphisms of the Weil group to GL1(C) and 
irreducible smooth representations of GL1(K).

Representations of the Weil group

Representations of the Weil group do not quite correspond to irreducible smooth representations of general linear groups. To get a bijection, one has to slightly modify the notion of a representation of the Weil group, to something called a Weil–Deligne representation. This consists of a representation of the Weil group on a vector space V together with a nilpotent endomorphism N of V such that wNw−1=||w||N, or equivalently a representation of the Weil–Deligne group. In addition the representation of the Weil group should have an open kernel, and should be (Frobenius) semisimple. 
For every Frobenius semisimple complex n-dimensional Weil–Deligne representations ρ of  the Weil group of F there is an L-function L(s,ρ) and a local ε-factor ε(s,ρ,ψ)  (depending on a character ψ of F).

Representations of GLn(F)

The representations of GLn(F) appearing in the local Langlands correspondence are smooth irreducible complex representations. 
Smooth irreducible representations are automatically admissible.
The Bernstein–Zelevinsky classification reduces the classification of irreducible smooth representations to cuspidal representations. 
For every irreducible admissible complex representation π there is an L-function L(s,π) and a local ε-factor ε(s,π,ψ)  (depending on a character ψ of F). More generally, if there are two irreducible admissible representations π and π' of general linear groups there are local Rankin–Selberg convolution L-functions L(s,π×π') and ε-factors ε(s,π×π',ψ).
 described the irreducible admissible representations of general linear groups over local fields.

Local Langlands conjectures for GL2

The local Langlands conjecture for GL2 of a local field says that there is a (unique) bijection π from 2-dimensional semisimple Deligne representations of the Weil group to irreducible smooth representations of GL2(F) that preserves L-functions, ε-factors, and commutes with twisting by characters of F*. 
), and claimed incorrectly that the classification for even residue characteristic differs only insignifictanly from the odd residue characteristic case. 
 pointed out that when the residue field has characteristic 2, there are some extra exceptional 2-dimensional representations of the Weil group whose image in PGL2(C) is of tetrahedral or octahedral type. (For global Langlands conjectures, 2-dimensional representations can also be of icosahedral type, but this cannot happen in the local case as the Galois groups are solvable.)
 proved the local Langlands conjectures  for the general linear group GL2(K) over the 2-adic numbers, and over local fields containing a cube root of unity.
 proved the local Langlands conjectures  for the general linear group GL2(K) over all local fields.
 gave  expositions of the proof.

Local Langlands conjectures for GLn

The local Langlands conjectures for general linear groups state that there are unique bijections π ↔ ρπ from equivalence classes of irreducible admissible representations π of GLn(F) to equivalence classes of continuous Frobenius semisimple complex n-dimensional Weil–Deligne representations ρπ of  the Weil group of F, that preserve L-functions and ε-factors of pairs of representations, and coincide with the Artin map for 1-dimensional representations. In other words,
 gave an exposition of their work. 
 gave  expositions of their work.

Local Langlands conjectures for other groups

 discuss the Langlands conjectures for more general groups. As of 2011, the Langlands conjectures for arbitrary reductive groups G are not as precise as the ones for general linear groups, and it is unclear what the correct way of stating them should be.  Roughly speaking, admissible representations of a reductive group are grouped into disjoint finite sets called L-packets, which should correspond to some classes of homomorphisms, called L-parameters, from the Weil–Deligne group to the L-group of G.
 to deduce it for the symplectic group Sp(4).



| last=Gan
| first=Wee Teck
| last2=Takeda
| first2=Shuichiro
| year=2011
| doi=10.4007/annals.2011.173.3.12
| arxiv=0706.0952v1
}}




