[[Paul Raynor]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 births, Living people, Sportspeople from Nottingham, English footballers, Association football midfielders, Nottingham Forest F.C. players, Bristol Rovers F.C. players, Huddersfield Town F.C. players, Swansea City A.F.C. players, Wrexham F.C. players, Cambridge United F.C. players, Preston North End F.C. players, Leyton Orient F.C. players, Kettering Town F.C. players, Ilkeston Town F.C. players, Boston United F.C. players, King's Lynn F.C. players, Hednesford Town F.C. players, Gainsborough Trinity F.C. players, Crawley Town F.C. players, The Football League players, Jia League footballers, Football Conference players, English football managers, British expatriates in China, Hednesford Town F.C. managers, Expatriate footballers in China, Ossett Albion A.F.C. players

Paul James Raynor (born 29 April 1966 in Nottingham) is an English former professional footballer who played as a midfielder.
He played in the Football League for Nottingham Forest, Bristol Rovers, 
Huddersfield Town, 
Swansea City, Wrexham, 
Cambridge United, 
Preston North End (where he briefly played alongside a young David Beckham), and 
Leyton Orient. 
He has also played a year in the Chinese Jia-A League for Guangdong Hongyuan.
After leaving Leyton Orient, Raynor moved into non-league football with clubs including Kettering Town, Ilkeston Town, Boston United, 
King's Lynn, Hednesford Town, where he spent a few months as player-manager, 
Gainsborough Trinity, 
Ossett Albion, and then King's Lynn again, to be released at the end of the 2002–03 season, only to rejoin for the next.
Raynor has coached at clubs Sheffield United and Boston United, where he was assistant manager for a time to Steve Evans. where he occasionally appeared as a player in the Conference. He now is assistant manager and first team coach at Rotherham United in the season 12–13 he achieved promotion with them alongside Steve Evans. He is known for being the one on the sidelines issuing instruction to the player, and also for his eccentric celebration (as well as Steve Evans) and protesting against decisions by the officials.






