[[Pseudanthium]]

CATEGORIES: Plant morphology

thumb|right|200px|Sunflower (Helianthus annuus) pseudanthiumA pseudanthium (Greek for "false flower") or flower head is a special type of inflorescence, The real flowers (the florets) are generally small and often greatly reduced, but the pseudanthium itself can sometimes be quite large (as in the heads of some varieties of sunflower). 
Pseudanthia are characteristic of the daisy and sunflower family (Asteraceae), whose flowers are differentiated into ray and disk flowers, unique to this family. The disk flowers in the center of the pseudanthium are actinomorphic and the corolla is fused into a tube. Flowers on the periphery are zygomorphic and the corolla has one large lobe (the so-called "petals" of a daisy are individual ray flowers, for example). Either ray or disk flowers may be absent in some plants: Senecio vulgaris lacks ray flowers The pseudanthium has a whorl of bracts below the flowers, forming an involucre.
In all cases, a pseudanthium (inflorescence) is superficially indistinguishable from a flower, but closer inspection of its anatomy will reveal that it is composed of multiple flowers. Thus, the pseudanthium represents an evolutionary convergence of the inflorescence to a reduced reproductive unit that may function in pollination like a single flower, at least in plants that are animal pollinated.

Related terms

Head 
This is an equivalent term for flower head and pseudanthium when used in the botanical sense.
Capitulum (plural capitula) 
Capitulum can be used as an exact synonym for pseudanthium and flower head;
Calathid (plural calathids or calathidia) 
This is a very rarely used term. It was defined in the 1966 book, The genera of flowering plants (Angiospermae), as a specific term for a flower head of a plant in the asteraceae family. However on-line botanical glossaries do not define it and Google Scholar does not link to any significant usage of the term in a botanical sense.

Plant families

Pseudanthia occur in the following plant families:
In some families it is not yet clear whether the 'flower' represents a pseudanthium, because the anatomical work has not been done (or is still ambiguous due to considerable evolutionary reduction). Possible pseudanthia of this type may occur in the following families:

Gallery

Image:Hoofdje. Note bracts surrounding the flowers, which would be absent on a capitulum.
Image:Bellis perennis white (aka).jpg|Flower head of a common daisy (Bellis perennis)
Image:Flower head.jpg|Flowers open in succession in head of a sunflower (Helianthus annuus), with ray florets forming the 'petals'
Image:Hieracium 2007-1.
Image:EricameriaNauseosa 8691. 




