[[Cassandra Clare]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 births, 21st century American novelists, American fantasy writers, American short story writers, American women novelists, Fan fiction writers, Living people, American Jews, Women short story writers

Judith Rumelt (born July 27, 1973), better known by her pen name Cassandra Clare, is an American author of young adult fiction, most known for her bestselling series ''The Mortal Instruments.

Personal life

Clare was born Judith Rumelt, to American parents, in Tehran (Iran). Her parents are Elizabeth and Richard Rumelt, who are a business school professor and author.
As a child, Clare traveled frequently, spending time in Switzerland, England, and France. She returned to Los Angeles for high school, and from then on split her time between California and New York, where she worked at various entertainment magazines and tabloids, including The Hollywood Reporter.
While living in Los Angeles Clare began writing fan fiction using the name Cassandra Claire. The Draco Trilogy based on Harry Potter and The Very Secret Diaries based on The Lord of the Rings were popular. However, she deleted her fan fiction from the Internet shortly before her first novel, The City of Bones, was published under the name Cassandra Clare.
She is also friends with author Holly Black, and their books occasionally overlap, Clare mentioning characters from Black's novels and vice versa, such as Val and Luis from Black's Valiant.
Clare is also credited by her publisher with creating the "City of Fallen Angels treatment" where a tangible "letter" from one character to another is attached to the back of physical copies of a book. The goal is to spur print book sales.
She currently resides in Amherst, Massachusetts, with her husband, Joshua Lewis, and three cats.

The Mortal Instruments series

In 2004, Clare started working on her first-published novel, City of Bones, inspired by the urban landscape of Manhattan. City of Bones was released by Simon & Schuster in 2007.
City of Bones, a contemporary fantasy story revolving around characters Clary Fray, Jace Wayland, and Simon Lewis, became a New York Times bestseller upon its release. City of Ashes and City of Glass (Mortal Instruments) completed the trilogy. In 2009, a fourth installment, City of Fallen Angels, was announced. It was published on April 5, 2011.
Clare has stated that City of Fallen Angels is actually the start of a second Mortal Instruments cycle, which will include two other books named City of Lost Souls and City of Heavenly Fire. She said this new cycle is going to be centered on the same characters as in the first cycle, as well as a few new characters we will meet in the new books.
In 2009, Clare also announced a new series of prequels called The Infernal Devices set in the same universe as The Mortal Instruments, but in the Victorian era. This series is planned to consist of three books: Clockwork Angel, published on August 31, 2010, Clockwork Prince, published on December 6, 2011, and Clockwork Princess, published on March 19, 2013.
The Mortal Instruments was made into a film, The Mortal Instruments: City of Bones (2013), by Unique Features and Constantin Film. Lily Collins played Clary Fray and Jamie Campbell Bower played Jace Wayland.

Awards

City of Bones

City of Ashes

Bibliography

The Mortal Instruments

City of Fallen Angels, City of Lost Souls, and City of Heavenly Fire were originally a sequel trilogy of The Mortal Instruments.
A companion book, The Shadowhunter's Codex, was published in 2013.

The Infernal Devices

The Dark Artifices

The Bane Chronicles

Magisterium Series

This series is co-written with Holly Black.

Short fiction

Fan fiction (writing as Cassandra Claire)






