[[Murrah High School]]

CATEGORIES: Public high schools in Mississippi, Schools in Jackson, Mississippi

Murrah High School is a public high school located in Jackson, Mississippi, USA. The school is a part of the Jackson Public School District.

Demographics

There are a total of 1,600 students enrolled at Murrah High School. The racial makeup of the school is 93.52% African American, 0.59% Asian, 0.44% Hispanic, 0.15% Native American, and 5.30% White.

History

William Belton Murrah (1852 - 1925) was an American bishop in the Methodist Episcopal Church South elected in 1910. Born in Pickensville, Alabama, he was educated at Southern University (now Birmingham-Southern College) in Greensboro, Alabama, and at Centenary College in Jackson, Louisiana. In 1897 Murrah received his LLD from Wofford College in South Carolina. Prior to his election to the Episcopacy, he served from 1890 to 1910 as the first President of Millsaps College in Jackson. Murrah High School and Murrah Hall at Millsaps College were both named after him.

Special programs

Base Pair program

JPS is a partner with the University of Mississippi Medical Center (UMC) in the Base Pair research mentorship program funded by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. The primary focus for Base Pair is to utilize the physical resources and intellectual capital of UMC to enable the pursuit of excellence in science education within a local public school environment. The program matches high school students with UMC faculty members for in-depth experiences in the sciences.jackson.k12.ms.aspx?url=/page/basepair
Base Pair has consistently emphasized three objectives:
That program, funded since 1992 and continuing through 2007, has brought approximately $1.3 million for science education enhancement into the district. Base Pair-trained high school students are authors on more than five dozen published scientific papers or abstracts. Twenty-five Base Pair graduates are currently in post-baccalaureate academic programs, including 12 in M.D., M.D./Ph.D., Ph.D. (science) or Masters degree in science training. Six of these are currently enrolled in a program at the University of Mississippi Medical Center. Visit the UMC Base Pair Web site at 

SOAR

The Student Oriented Academic Research (SOAR) program is a companion to the Base Pair program at Murrah High School. SOAR was developed to implement advanced science research activities for JPS students outside of the UMC zone. In this program, students are enrolled in Biology II during their junior year and other advanced life science courses during their senior year. The SOAR program supports advanced biomedical and forensic science laboratory research by students at each high school site.


Forensics

Murrah's Speech and Debate Team, coached by Micah Everson, has produced many successful competitors. Most recently, junior Public Forum debaters Porter and Rucker qualified to compete at the 2011 National Forensic League Tournament, along with only two other Public Forum teams from the entire state of Mississippi.

Academic and Performing Arts Complex (APAC)

The Academic and Performing Arts Complex (APAC) is open to students in grades 4-12 who are academic achievers and/or who show aptitude for one or more of the visual or performing arts. There is an application process held each year for entrance into the programs for the following school year.Academic and Performing Arts Complex (APAC)Secondary Curriculum GuideAPAC Secondary Curriculum

=APAC English=

In APAC English courses for grades 9-10, students actively engage in the integrated language strands of reading, writing, speaking, and listening. Students continue developing their command of Standard English in speaking and writing. Students study content that is a grade level ahead of the on-level curriculum, including reading multiple novels, doing research, and writing frequent critical analysis of literature across genres. The Creative Writing elective further creative writing and essay writing skills in persuasion, exposition, and narrative.

=APAC Math=

In APAC Math courses for high school, students move into higher level math courses that prepare them for college and math based careers.  Students use skills, textbooks and materials that are ahead of the on-level curriculum, sometimes math based careers.  Students use skills, textbooks and materials that are ahead of the on-level curriculum, sometimes adding problems taken from PSAT, ACT, SAT, and college textbooks. Emphasis is placed on problem solving and on application of concepts to real life problems.

Health Related Professions (HRP)

Murrah High School offers the only health-related professions program in the state of Mississippi for grades 9-12. The HRP program is an innovative cooperative setting opportunity designed to prepare students in the 21st century and beyond. Its mission is to provide historically under-represented and under-served students with a quality education that will allow them to become articulate in spoken word, masterful in writing, analytical in thought and prepared to enter and complete post-secondary studies in a chosen health career. Students who take health-related professions program at Murrah take a rigorously challenging curriculum that is science-oriented,complemently by advanced math and technology courses. In addition to the academic curriculum, numerous opportunities to narrow-health career choices are provided to students with field trips, mentors from the medical fields, internships, and university partnerships.jackson.k12.ms.aspx?url=/page/hrp

Jackson Public School Rezoning

In 2012, JPS rezoned for several schools including former Bailey Magnet High School to turn it into Bailey APAC Middle School. Bailey Magnet students moved to Callaway High School, Lanier and Murrah high schools. Students who were in the HRP program moved to Murrah as well. The rezoning impacted 3,900 students in other schools around the school district. APAC, which was originally in Murrah, which some of the APAC students moved to Forest Hill High School, moved all APAC students to Murrah once again.

Alumni

Antonio Gibson - football

Feeder Patterns

The following schools feed into Murrah High School.








