[[Seven Second Summits]]

CATEGORIES: Seven Second Summits, Seven Summits, Peak bagging

The Seven Second Summits are the second highest mountains of each of the seven continents. All of these mountain peaks are separate peaks rather than a sub-peak of the continents' high point.
Austrian mountaineer Christian Stangl became the first person to successfully climb the "Second Seven Summits".8000ers.html
Stangl climbed all possible candidates for the Second Seven Summits quest (K2, Mt. Tyree, Dych Tau, Dufourspitze, Sumantri, Ngga Pulu, Puncak Trikora, Puncak Mandala and Mt. Townsend) to exclude any errors and to satisfy all geographers. He finished the quest at January 15th 2013 and was certified by Guinness World Records September 17th 2013. Later he completed also the Challenge for the Triple Seven Summits.at: Three records for Austrian Alpinist Christian Stangl (english) climbing.com: Stangl Completes Triple Seven Summits by Dougald MacDonald, Climbing (USA)  8/28/13
The Second Seven Summits are known as a much harder challenge than the traditional  Seven Summits. 

Seven Second Summits definitions

The definition of continent is a matter of some dispute among mountaineers seeking to complete this challenge.
The main ridge of the Greater Caucasus range is generally considered to form the boundary between Europe and Asia. In that case, Mount Elbrus () would be Europe's highest mountain.
The Australian continent is defined as comprising the mainland of Australia and proximate islands on the same continental shelf, including Tasmania and New Guinea.  In the convention of the seven continents, one of the continents is the region of Australasia, which includes for example the mountainous islands of New Zealand. For both the geological and conventional continent, New Guinea's Carstensz Pyramid () as its highest summit.

The Bass and Messner list

The Second Seven Summits list follows the Seven Summits list created by Richard Bass , who chose the highest mountain of mainland Australia, Mount Kosciuszko (2,228 m), to represent the Australian continent's highest summit. Reinhold Messner proposed another list (the Messner or Carstensz list) replacing Mount Kosciuszko with Western New Guinea's Carstensz Pyramid, which is part of Indonesia (4,884 m).
Following the Bass list, Mount Townsend is the second highest summit (2,209 m) in Australia. According to the Messner list, Puncak Mandala  (4,760 m) on New Guinea is the second highest of the Australian continent.com, and gunungbagging.2-2.6 km) these are usually not regarded as separate mountains. Heights of mountain peaks in West Papua are poorly established, and Puncak Trikora has been listed as the second highest summit on the island, but SRTM-data do support a higher elevation for Mandala.
Both lists count Mount Elbrus as the highest peak in Europe. This makes Dykh-Tau (5,205 m), located in Russia, the second highest summit in Europe. Those who consider Mont Blanc to be the highest mountain in Europe would consider Monte Rosa (4,634 m), located in  Switzerland, to be the second highest summit.

Difficulty versus Seven Summits

Alpinism author Jon Krakauer wrote in Into Thin Air  that it would be a bigger challenge to climb the second-highest peak of each continent instead of the highest.
In Asia K2 (8,611 m) demands greater technical climbing skills than Everest (8,848 m), while altitude-related factors such as the thinness of the atmosphere, high winds and low temperatures remain much the same.
The summit of Mount Kenya (5,199 m) is a rock climb, while Mount Kilimanjaro (5,895 m) can be ascended without any technical difficulty.
In North America, some sources consider Mount Logan a more difficult climb than Denali, although the climbing and outdoor recreation website Summitpost considers Logan no more difficult than Denali, because it is neither technical nor steep.summitpost.html.
In South America Ojos del Salado involves a short scramble while Aconcagua is just a walk.John Biggar: The Andes - A Guide for Climbers, ISBN 0-9536087-2-7
In Europe Dykh-Tau is a considerably harder climb than Mount Elbrus.Bender: Classic Climbs of the Caucasus
In Australasia, the continent's Second Summit on the Bass list, Mount Townsend, is more challenging than Mount Kosciuszko, but still just a walk-up. Puncak Mandala, however, is extremely challenging with respect to the approach route, which is arguably the more significant problem in climbing the New Guinea peaks. There have been perhaps only two successful approaches (and climbs) reported.Puncak Mandala at the gunung bagging website
In Antarctica, Mount Vinson presents little difficulty beyond normal challenges of Antarctica (the guiding company Adventure Peaks rates the ascent at PD/AD on the Alpine scale), but Mount Tyree requires technical climbing and it has been climbed by a total of ten people since its discovery.








