[[Singapore Sling (band)]]

CATEGORIES: Musical groups established in 2000, Icelandic alternative rock groups, Neo-psychedelia groups

Singapore Sling is an Icelandic neo-psychedelia band from Reykjavík. The band have released five studio albums to date.

Features

The track "Curse, Curse, Curse" was used in the 2004 TV documentary series Long Way Round. Virgin released the soundtrack CD in 2004.
It was also used in the Edda Award winning short film Smáfuglar (2008).

Background

Despite the band's frontman Henrik Bjornsson's job as a bartender, the band's name does not come from the Singapore Sling cocktail but from a 1990 film, Singapore Sling, by the Greek director Nikos Nikolaidis.
In a June 2003 interview with VRT Radio 1, Henrik Bjornsson said,
 We had a first gig. It was booked and we didn't have a name and I had been looking for a film called Singapore Sling for a long time. I couldn't find it anywhere. It sounded cool, so that became the name of the band. It's some kind of dark, perverse Greek film from 1990. I haven't found it yet, so if you know someone who has it, please let me know. I hope it's good. A dark perverse noir film and a guy who has sex with a corpse. And he's called Singapore Sling. 
Singapore Sling was formed in spring 2000 in Reykjavík, Iceland, by Henrik Bjornsson (singer, songwriter, guitarist) and Einar Kristjánsson (lead guitarist). Bjornsson had some 8-track demos and wanted to create a band. 
One of these demos was "Overdrive", which surfaced online on the Iceland Airwaves 2001 official website, and later became "Overdriver", the opening track on their first studio album.
The band evolved to a sextet with changing line-ups performing at Iceland Airwaves, Reykjavík's main music festival, before obtaining a record deal with a local label, Hitt Records, in 2002. The line-up was Björnsson on vocals, guitar and keyboards, Kristjánsson on lead guitar, Þorgeir Guðmundsson on bass guitar, Helgi Örn Pétursson on guitar and keyboards, Bjarni Jóhannsson on drums and Sigurður Magnús Finnsson, aka Siggi Shaker, on tambourine and maracas.
Singapore Sling released its first album, The Curse of Singapore Sling, in August 2002. Following the release, the band performed at the Iceland Airwaves 2002 music festival.
The album was licensed by the New York independent record label Stinky Records for a North American release in 2003. "Why this record is being released in America is because a guy came here on a festival and then he let some people hear it in America," explained Bjornsson. Kristjansson added, "The whole idea of the Airwaves Festival is like a festival for Icelandic bands to export or be spotted. Iceland is so isolated and they have this festival. Icelandair sponsors it and they give flights and stuff like that to journalists and label people so they can come and see us. The whole festival is sponsored by Icelandair and the government to get Icelandic music to be heard outside of Iceland." The band toured the United States and Canada in summer 2003.
Although their home label Edda left the music business and shut its branch Hitt Records, Singapore Sling released its second record, Life Is Killing My Rock 'N' Roll, in Iceland through Sheptone Records, a vinyl record store where Einar worked, and in the United States with an American support slot on a tour.
Sheptone Records released the band's third album, Taste the Blood of Singapore Sling, in 2005. Although it was distributed in Denmark by the Reykjavik and Copenhagen based independent label 12 Tónar, it has not yet been licensed for the United States by Stinky Records.
Singapore Sling appeared in Screaming Masterpiece, a 2005 documentary film about the Icelandic music scene.
In 2006, the German label Play Loud! Music released a 2-disc compilation album, Silver Monk Time, as a tribute to The Monks. Singapore Sling provided a cover version of the track "I Hate You". All songs were especially recorded for this project between September 2005 and May 2006 and were mastered at Faust Studio by Hans-Joachim Irmler from the band Faust.
In 2007, the German label 8mm Muzik bought the rights for a European release and managed the European Record Release Tour to support the release of The Curse, the Life, the Blood, a best-of compilation with four tracks from each of the two first albums and two tracks from the third album, especially dedicated to the European market. European venues were located in Germany, France, Benelux, Denmark, Austria, Italy and Czech Republic.
The band's fourth album, Perversity, Desperation and Death, was released in 2009. This was followed by the band's fifth, Singapore Sling Must Be Destroyed, in October 2010, which was released through Outlier Records. The band's sixth album, Never Forever, was released in 2011.

Discography

Personnel

The line-up has changed from its original incarnation, and since May 2005 the members are:






