[[Gogte Institute of Technology]]

CATEGORIES: Engineering colleges in Karnataka, Education in Belgaum

K.L.S. Gogte Institute of Technology (Kannada: ಗೋಗಟೆ ಇನ್ಸ್ಟಿಟ್ಯೂಟ್ ಆಫ್ ಟೆಕ್ನಾಲಜಿ ಬೆಳಗಾವಿ  Hindi: गोगटे प्रौद्योगिकी संस्थान बेलगाम) is an engineering college affiliated to Visvesvaraya Technological University. The college campus is situated at Belgaum-Goa Highway also known as Khanapur Road. It was established in 1979 to meet the growing demand for technically trained manpower for industrial growth of the country. 

Technical departments

Department of Civil Engineering

HOD- Dr. G. S. Manjunath.
Started in 1979, the department offers a 4 year Bachelor Degree Course in Civil Engineering and a Masters Degree Programme with Structural Engineering specialization. The department offers materials testing facilities and technical consultancy services.

Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering

HOD Dr D B Kulkarni
The department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering started in 1979. The department conducts a four year Bachelor of Engineering in Electrical and Electronics Engineering degree course affiliated to Visweshwariah Technological University, Belgaum.

Department of Mechanical Engineering

Head of the Department Dr.S.L Gombi (2013–present).
Infrastructure / Facilities:
Over the decades, the department has successfully established various labs and infrastructural facilities. Some of them are:
    CAD/CAM Lab
    MTL Lab
    Design Lab
    Heat Transfer Lab
    Instrumentation Lab
    I.C. Engines Lab
    FMS Lab, etc.
Department Library
Mechancial Dept. at GIT has one of the best collections of books related to various branches supervised by librarian . Students and staff can access these books for their regular reference apart from the books available from main library. Library also has a set of computers and printers for regular use by staff and students>
Some of the salient features of the department library are :
DEPARTMENT OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING, DEPARTMENT LIBRARY INFORMATION
Total No. of Books : 2756
Total No. of Titles : 752
Project Reports : 635  ( UG )
Project Reports : 26 ( PG )
No. of E – Books available @ Main Library ( GIT ) :
Mechanical / I.P  : McGraw Hill Digital Library     : 140
Journals  ( Includes E-Journals ) :
National : 1700
International : 3562

Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering

Started in 1979, the department offers a BE in Electronics and Communication Engineering, MSc (by research) and PhD, affiliated to VTU, Belgaum. The department has a student strength of 366 for undergraduate and 7 PhD candidates.

Department of Computer Science and Engineering

The department was started in 1986. The department has an intake of 120 students. 
The department has sprawling and active student bodies such as Computer Society of India (conducts Genesys and other annual technical events) and Association of Computer Engineers (ACE), which is the institute's premier and most active student body. Events ranging from technical to cultural to casual are regularly organised by ACE mostly on a weekly-basis. Student bodies in the department ensure full technical and behavioral development of students.

Department of Information Science

Department of Information Science and Engineering was started in 2000 and is headed by Sri. S.F.

Department of Industrial and Production Engineering

The Industrial and Production Engineering course, an offshoot of Mechanical Engineering, was started at Gogte Institute of Technology Belgaum in 1984. The course content of this branch covers Manufacturing technology, Industrial Engineering and Management and CAD/CAM, Robotics and Computer applications. 

Department of Architecture

The architecture course was started in 1998. The department offers a Bachelor Degree in Architecture approved by Council of Architecture, New Delhi. The department offers consultancy services.

Department of MCA (Master of Computer Applications)

The Department of Master of Computer Applications was started in 1999. The department imparts the postgraduate degree in computer applications. The department has eleven faculty members. The faculty and student members have memberships in professional societies such as ISTE, CSI.

Non-technical departments

Department of Chemistry

The department started in 1979 to teach Chemistry to undergraduate engineering students. The department is recognised as a Research centre and offers a PhD programme affiliated to Visweswaraya Technological University, Belgaum. The department supplies consultancy and testing facilities to industry.  

Department of Physics

Started in 1979. 

Department of Mathematics

The Department of Mathematics started in 1979. There are seven faculty members, all holding postgraduate degrees, three of whom hold a PhD qualification. The department was recognized as a research centre by VTU in 2005 to pursue research towards PhD degree in Mathematics. The faculty is engaged in research in areas such as spectral graph theory, distances and domination theory and have published research papers in Indian and foreign journals and presented papers at national and international conferences and seminars.  Many of the faculty are members of professional societies such as ISTE, KMA, VTUMTF, ADMA.  

Management Departments

Department of MBA

The Department of MBA which is affiliated to Visvesvaraya Technological University was started in September 2007. The present intake in 60 students. The MBA program comprises four semesters (two years) with specializations in Marketing, Finance, Human Resources, Information Systems, Production and International business. The admission process generally starts after April and students are required to appear for the entrance tests. The Institute's MBA is recognized by AICTE and Government of Karnataka.

Centres of Campus

GIT Computer Centre

The Computer Centre caters to the computing needs of the faculty members and the students for their research and teaching. It has a user base of about 2500 with about 600 active users at any moment. The Centre has servers like IBM Netfinity, IBM AS 400, Dec Alpha DS10, Compaq Proliant. The Centre also has about 240 Linux and Windows 2000/XP PCs, and 40 engineering Graphics workstations. All the computers in the centre are connected through a 10/100 Mbit/s network. Computer Centre supports an institute-wide 100 Mbit/s fiber optic network that connects all the academic departments, central library, and administrative departments to the Computer Centre. Internet and e-mail services are provided to all the users through a dedicated 2 Mbit/s Internet link. Users can use the computing resources of the institute from their residences by dialing through. Computer Centre operates 12 hours a day.
Facilities: Linux Applications Lab, Windows Applications Lab, Programming and Applications Lab. with On-Line Based Training Facility, CAD/CAM Applications Lab, DOS Based Application Lab, VLSI and Design Applications Lab, Internet Applications & Browsing Centre, Network Applications Lab, DataBase Applications Laboratory, e-GITNET Server Room, Stores/Maintenance Cell.

New Computer Center

A new state of the art computer center building is under construction within the campus. The new center will cater all collage needs

Center of foreign studies

The driving force to promote global education and international collaborations.
Objective of the Centre for Foreign studies :
   - Guide and promote further education for the students to foreign universities of international repute.
   - Promote faculty exchange program.
   - Undertake training assignments in the colleges and universities in India and abroad.
   - Train the students in international travel procedures, etiquette and customs.
   - Collaborate with foreign universities and institutes for higher studies and certification courses.
   - Conduct tutorials in foreign languages.
   - To organize international alumni meet.
   - To generate and attract international funds to develop technical education and research in GIT and India.

Student chapters

IEEE-GIT

Linux User Group

The group's activities are mostly organizing guest lectures on Linux-based technologies. They host their own website on GIT server.

Computer Society of India

KLS GIT's Student Branch for CSI (Computer Society of India) was founded on the 1st of April, 2007. From then on, CSI-GIT has constantly grown and has provided a platform for the students to exhibit and explore their talents in both academics as well as co-curricular for the overall development of the students. CSI-GIT has been the proud recipient of the "BEST STUDENT CHAPTER AWARD" in Region V for the years 2009-10 and 2011-12.
In the year 2009, the inception of the flagship event of CSI-GIT, GENESYS v1.o "Manifestation of Grandeur", ensued a legacy of events that promised to redefine exuberance and offer the students an opportunity to explore and hone their talents.
Count of Student Members at CSI-GIT

College fests

Student amenities

Digital Library

A Digital Library with an excellent infrastructure has been set up at the Library and Information Center building of Gogte Institute of Technology campus.  This has been a classic setup designed by our Computer Center with latest Computers on Wireless LAN in accordance with IEEE 802.11B.  The D-Link make Access Points and Wireless LAN Cards have been used.
Primary objective has been to promote a Research oriented attitude in students and to help the Faculty members in their Research Activities.
This facility would support the students both of Under Graduate and Post Graduate levels, to a greater extent, in their project assignments.  The available internet bandwidth will be used to access various net based libraries available on World Wide Web.
    Access to Net based libraries and e-books
    Access to various National and International Journals of different disciplines through e-Subscription.
    Access to various CDs shared on the set up.
    Enable the users take the hard copy or soft copy back-ups of papers / articles.
The library has been the part of GIT's Intranet with Internet connectivity of 10 Mbit/s. e-Access is available to more than 35 lakhs records of Books, Periodicals, Articles, etc. and more than 20,000 National and International Journals.  This has been possible as GIT has been a member of BITES (Govt. of Karnataka), DELNET-AICTE and INDEST-AICTE Scheme, a programme promoted by Government of India.  The faculty and students can browse through the ocean of Information and also order for the hard copies of the articles too.
'''
BITES (Board for IT Education Standards)'''
Gogte Institute of Technology has become a member of BITES (Board for IT Education Standards) an autonomous non-profit society set up by the Government of Karnataka, IT Industry and Academia.  BITES is offering membership to Engineering Colleges, Corporates, Students, Faculty and IT Professionals under five categories.
As part of BITES Knowledge Management Initiative, BITES has created an Electronic Library (Digital Library – access through web) facility for engineering colleges. E-brary, comprehensive collection of more than 20,000 books, case studies and reports.  This collection known as academic collection covering the following subjects:
    Business, Economics and Management
    Electronics, Computer Science and Networking
    Life and Physical Sciences including Bio-technology
    Humanities
    Social and Behavioral Sciences
    Education and career advancement like interview handling and presentation skills.
BITES is also providing an excellent collection focused on manufacturing and engineering (Society for Manufacturing Engineering – SME) which has hand books, titles on Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Industrial Production and Journals.
Benefits of BITES E-brary
With BITES one can have multiple access licenses that is, each student can access it independent of the other. Faculty, PG Students and research scholars can access the titles any where any time on a 24x7 basis, which means that an extended library with multiple copies.
Apart from this GIT is also a member of All India Council for Technical Education – IEEE E- Journal that is, IEL Online.  This provides quality journals available to approved institution at affordable cost for the benefit of students and faculty.  The access is available on an annual subscription basis. It provides access to more than 50,000 technical papers from the various journals, magazines and conference publications, covering a wide range of information in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Telecommunications, Computing, Power, Control, Radar, Circuits, Materials, Bio-Engineering, IT and much more fulfilling the journal requirements of almost 70% of the students and faculty.
A Digital Library with an excellent infrastructure has been set up at the Library and Information Center building of Gogte Institute of Technology campus.  This has been a classic setup designed by our Computer Center with latest Computers on Wireless LAN in accordance with IEEE 802.11B.  The D-Link make Access Points and Wireless LAN Cards have been used.
Objectives / Goals
Primary objective has been to promote a Research oriented attitude in students and to help the Faculty members in their Research Activities.
This facility would support the students both of Under Graduate and Post Graduate levels, to a greater extent, in their project assignments.  The available internet bandwidth will be used to access various net based libraries available on World Wide Web.
The Goals are:
    Access to Net based libraries and e-books
    Access to various National and International Journals of different disciplines through e-Subscription.
    Access to various CDs shared on the set up.
    Enable the users take the hard copy or soft copy back-ups of papers / articles.
The library has been the part of GIT's Intranet with Internet connectivity of 10 Mbit/s. e-Access is available to more than 35 lakhs records of Books, Periodicals, Articles, etc. and more than 20,000 National and International Journals.  This has been possible as GIT has been a member of BITES (Govt. of Karnataka), DELNET-AICTE and INDEST-AICTE Scheme, a programme promoted by Government of India.  The faculty and students can browse through the ocean of Information and also order for the hard copies of the articles too.
BITES (Board for IT Education Standards)
Gogte Institute of Technology has become a member of BITES (Board for IT Education Standards) an autonomous non-profit society set up by the Government of Karnataka, IT Industry and Academia.  BITES is offering membership to Engineering Colleges, Corporates, Students, Faculty and IT Professionals under five categories.
As part of BITES Knowledge Management Initiative, BITES has created an Electronic Library (Digital Library – access through web) facility for engineering colleges. E-brary, comprehensive collection of more than 20,000 books, case studies and reports.  This collection known as academic collection covering the following subjects:
    Business, Economics and Management
    Electronics, Computer Science and Networking
    Life and Physical Sciences including Bio-technology
    Humanities
    Social and Behavioral Sciences
    Education and career advancement like interview handling and presentation skills.
BITES is also providing an excellent collection focused on manufacturing and engineering (Society for Manufacturing Engineering – SME) which has hand books, titles on Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Industrial Production and Journals.
Benefits of BITES E-brary
With BITES one can have multiple access licenses that is, each student can access it independent of the other. Faculty, PG Students and research scholars can access the titles any where any time on a 24x7 basis, which means that an extended library with multiple copies.
Apart from this GIT is also a member of All India Council for Technical Education – IEEE E- Journal that is, IEL Online.  This provides quality journals available to approved institution at affordable cost for the benefit of students and faculty.  The access is available on an annual subscription basis. It provides access to more than 50,000 technical papers from the various journals, magazines and conference publications, covering a wide range of information in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Telecommunications, Computing, Power, Control, Radar, Circuits, Materials, Bio-Engineering, IT and much more fulfilling the journal requirements of almost 70% of the students and faculty.

Playground

There is a playground which has a 400 metre athletic track, a cricket ground, a football ground and a basketball court.

Auditorium

A spacious auditorium is housed in the campus with a seating capacity of 400+

Others

• Karnataka Bank and ATM 
• Multi facility Gym with Table Tennis, Carrom etc. facilities
• Girls and Boys Hostels

National and international alumni chapters

GIT Alumni Chapter - Dubai
GIT Alumni Chapter - New Delhi

Notable alumni

Certified as IBM center of excellence
, India., Batch of 1988, Electrical Engg.




