[[History of Portugal]]

CATEGORIES: History of Portugal, Portuguese history timelines

The history of Portugal, a European and an Atlantic nation, dates back to the Early Middle Ages. In the 15th and 16th centuries, it ascended to the status of a world power during Europe's "Age of Discovery" as it built up a vast empire including possessions in South America, Africa, Asia and Australasia (Oceania). Over the following two centuries, Portugal kept most of its colonies but gradually lost much of its wealth and status as the Dutch, English and French took an increasing share of the spice and slave trades (the economic basis of its empire), by surrounding or conquering the widely scattered Portuguese trading posts and territories, leaving it with ever fewer resources to defend its overseas interests.
Signs of military decline began with two disastrous battles: the Battle of Alcácer Quibir in Morocco in 1578 and Spain's abortive attempt to conquer England in 1588 - Portugal was then in a dynastic union with Spain, and contributed ships to the Spanish invasion fleet. The country was further weakened by the destruction of much of its capital city in a 1755 earthquake, occupation during the Napoleonic Wars and the loss of its largest colony, Brazil, in 1822. From the middle of the 19th century to the late 1950s, nearly two-million Portuguese left Europe to live in Brazil and the United States (U.S.).
In 1910, there was a revolution that deposed the monarchy. Amid corruption, repression of the church, and the near bankruptcy of the state, a military coup in 1926 installed a dictatorship that remained until another coup in 1974. The new government instituted sweeping democratic reforms and granted independence to all of Portugal's African colonies in 1975.
Portugal is a founding member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). It entered the European Community (now the European Union) in 1986.

Etymology

Portugal's name derives from the Roman name Portus Cale. Cale was the name of an early settlement located at the mouth of the Douro River, which flows into the Atlantic Ocean in the north of what is now Portugal. Around 200 BC, the Romans took the Iberian Peninsula from the Carthaginians during the Second Punic War, and in the process conquered Cale and renamed it Portus Cale (Port of Cale). During the Middle Ages, the region around Portus Cale became known by the Suevi and Visigoths as Portucale.
The name Portucale evolved into Portugale during the 7th and 8th centuries, and by the 9th century, that term was used extensively to refer to the region between the rivers Douro and Minho, the Minho flowing along what would become the northern border between Portugal and Spain. By the 11th and 12th century, Portugale was already referred to as Portugal.
The etymology of the name Cale is mysterious, as is the identity of the town's founders. Some historians
In any case, the Portu part of the name Portucale became Porto, the modern name for the city located on the site of the ancient city of Cale at the mouth of the Douro River. And Port became the name in English of the wine from the Douro Valley region around Porto. The name Cale is today reflected in Gaia (Vila Nova de Gaia), a city on the left bank of the river.

Early history

Prehistory

The region of present-day Portugal was inhabited by Neanderthals and then by Homo sapiens, who roamed the border-less region of the northern Iberian peninsula.11
Early in the first millennium BC, several waves of Celts invaded Portugal from central Europe and inter-married with the local populations, forming different ethnic groups, with many tribes.  In the southern part the country, some small, semi-permanent commercial coastal settlements were also founded by Phoenicians-Carthaginians.

Ancient history

Numerous pre-Roman peoples of the Iberian Peninsula inhabited the territory when the Roman invasion occurred in the 3rd century BC. The Romanization of Hispania took several centuries, and the provinces that covered today's Portugal were Lusitania in the south and Gallaecia in the north.
Numerous Roman sites are scattered around present-day Portugal, some urban remains are quite large, like Conimbriga and Mirobriga. Several works of engineering, such as baths, temples, bridges, roads, circus, theatres and layman's homes are preserved throughout the country. Coins, some of which coined in Portuguese land, sarcophagus and ceramics are numerous.
Following the fall of Rome, the Suebic Kingdom of Galicia and the Visigothic Kingdom controlled the territory between the 5th and 7th centuries.

Romanization

Romanization began with the Roman arrival to the Iberian Peninsula, in 218 BCE, during the Second Punic War against Carthage. The Romans sought to conquer Lusitania, accounting for much of modern-day Portugal, south of the Douro river and Spanish Estremadura, with its capital at Emerita Augusta (Mérida).infopedia.pt/$romanizacao-da-peninsula-iberica
Mining was the primary determinant interest in the region: one of the strategic objectives of Rome was to cut the connection of Carthage with the Iberian copper mines, tin, gold and silver.
The Romans intensely exploited the Aljustrel mines (Vipasca) and Santo Domingo, in the Iberian Pyrite Belt that extends to Seville.portugalromano.com/category/tema-exploracao-mineira/
While the South was relatively easily occupied by the Romans, the engagement with the north was hardly attained, due to the resistance of the Celts, the Lusitanians, led by Viriathus from Serra da Estrela, whereof he managed to antagonize Roman expansion for years. Viriathus, as an expert in guerrilla tactics, waged a relentless war against the Romans, defeating several and successive Roman generals, until he was killed in 140 BCE to treason.
The conquest of the Iberian peninsula was full two centuries after the arrival, when the Romans defeated the Cantabrian wars in the time of Emperor Augustus (19 BCE). In 74 CE Vespasian granted the Latin right to most municipalities of Lusitania. In 212 CE, the Constitutio Antoniniana gave Roman citizenship to all subjects (free) empire and, at the end of the century, the emperor Diocletian founded Galicia, which included modern-day northern Portugal.
Apart from mining, the Romans developed agriculture, one of the best agricultural land in the empire. In today's Alentejo vines and cereals were cultivated, and in the coastal line of the region, fishing was full-blown for the manufacture of Garum in Algarve and the coast of Lisbon, in Póvoa de Varzim, in Matosinhos and Troia, which was exported by Roman trade routes for the whole empire. Business transactions were facilitated by coinage and construction of an extensive road network, bridges and aqueducts, like bridge of Trajano in Aquae Flaviae (now Chaves).portugalromano.com/
The Romans founded numerous cities, such as Olisipo (in Lisbon), Bracara Augusta (in Braga), Aeminium (in Coimbra), Pax Julia (in Beja), and left an important cultural legacy in what is now Portugal: Vulgar Latin became the dominant language of the region, the basis of Portuguese and from the third century Christianity spread throughout Lusitania.

The Germanic Invasion

