[[Mountain Vista Governor's School]]

CATEGORIES: Magnet schools in Virginia, Public high schools in Virginia, Education in Clarke County, Virginia, Education in Culpeper County, Virginia, Schools in Fauquier County, Virginia, Schools in Frederick County, Virginia, Education in Rappahannock County, Virginia, Education in Warren County, Virginia, Education in Winchester, Virginia, Educational institutions established in 2006

 
Mountain Vista Governor's School for Science, Math & Technology (commonly Mountain Vista or MVGS) is one of Virginia's 18 state-initiated governor's schools,Virginia's Academic Year Governor's Schools serving primarily 11th and 12th graders. The school is composed of two campuses, one each in Middletown, Virginia, USA and Warrenton, Virginia, USA. Admission is determined via an application process.Prospective Students

History

Planning for Mountain Vista began in 2003; its participating counties were the last in the state not covered by an existing academic-year governor's school.  The participating school systems surveyed parents and students within their respective counties to gauge interest. A plan for implementation was created and put into motion;  A committee was formed, and approval was sought from the Virginia Department of Education.Board of Education Agenda January 11, 2006  
The funding for MVGS (a total of $190,544) was first approved in the 2006-2008 Biennial Budget passed by the Virginia House of Delegates.Report from the House of Delegates  
On January 11, the estimated portion of the school budget that the participating counties had to pay was approximately $216,527; it was divided among each of the counties.Winchester Public School Board HighlightsFauquier County Finance Committee Meeting Each jurisdiction was made responsible for the funding for each slot at the governor's school allocated to them.
In May 2006, Dr. Rosanne Williamson, principal of Brumfield Elementary School in Fauquier County, was named director of Mountain Vista.  She assumed the post on July 1.
On January 15, 2011,  students from both campuses travelled with their teachers to Richmond, where they participated in the 2011 Volvo Construction Challenge. The Middletown team of four students placed second in the Transportation Infrastructure challenge.

Admission

Each participating county has a local committee that decides who attends from that county.  Students interested must complete an application and submit transcripts and two written essays.

Participating localities

The number of slots at the governor's school allocated to each jurisdiction, as of September 14, 2006:
Currently Fauquier County Students also have the ability to apply for one of 2 slots to Thomas Jefferson High School for Science and Technology.  They will retain that right until the Fauquier County School board decides to relinquish those slots.An Advanced Curriculum Without a Long Commute

Facilities

The Mountain Vista Governor's School program does not have a classroom facility of its own.  Instead, students travel to Lord Fairfax Community College to take courses offered by the program, then the students return to their home schools and maintain eligibility for sports and extracurricular activities there. The area served by Mountain Vista is too large for a single location to which busing all students would be practical; LFCC was chosen because it has a campus on each end of the area covered by Mountain Vista.LFCC - Distance Learning
In addition, all Mountain Vista students are given laptops by their respective county for use year round. During the 06-07 and 07-08 school years, the school used the Blackboard Academic Suite of e-Education software designed to allow the students to submit and retrieve notes and assignments on snow days or other missed days of school, and to provide virtual office hours for instructors. Frederick County Public Schools provided the means of sharing their purchased BAS with MVGS. However, during the 2008-09 school year, Frederick County switched to the ANGEL Learning Management System, causing Mountain Vista to change to ANGEL along with it. MVGS also used a private discussion board for communication between staff and students. Then, in the 2011-2012 school year, MVGS decided to change from ANGEL to Google sites due to technical issues with ANGEL. Google groups were created as classes and Google mail sent out homework quickly and efficiently.

Academics

The Mountain Vista curriculum was designed to be a college level mathematics and science program providing a solid basis for doing research and making connections between disciplines.  Most of the courses have homework assignments assigned during the summer and due on the first day of class making learning a year round activity.
The courses offered are:
Starting in the 2012-2013 school year, the follow courses will also be offered:
The school once offered Precalculus, but this course was discontinued as participating school divisions elected to require all first year MVGS students to be prepared to enter Calculus as originally intended by the designers of MVGS. 
Along with in class work, classes include projects that allow for hands on problem solving and collaboration with other students like a water balloon launch competition.Safety glasses on; prepare to learn

Graduates

The first class graduated in 2007. Almost half of the students will attend Virginia's top 3 schools (University of Virginia, College of William and Mary, and Virginia Polytechnic Institute) according to US News and World Report with one-third of students attending UVA.   Other notable colleges that alumni have attended include University of Pennsylvania, Columbia University, Dartmouth College, Duke University, University of Notre Dame, United States Air Force Academy, United States Coast Guard Academy, and the United States Naval Academy.  Top Liberal arts collegesAmerica's Best Colleges 2007: Liberal Arts Colleges are also represented with students going to Pomona College and Harvey Mudd College.  Top acceptances for the Class of 2011 have included Yale University, Johns Hopkins University, Washington University in St. Louis, Vanderbilt University, University of California, Berkeley, Tufts University, and Purdue University.
Most of the remainder are going to other local universities like  Virginia Commonwealth University, the University of Mary Washington, and George Mason University
As of 2011, the first alumni of Mountain Vista Governor's School will be matriculating to Graduate and Professional schools in the fall.  Examples of where Mountain Vista alumni have ended up includes the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for particle physics and Harvard Medical School.








