[[Hermes e Renato]]

CATEGORIES: Comedy troupes

Hermes e Renato (Hermes and Renato) is a Brazilian comedy troup, they started in 2000 and still continue. They have a show on MTV Brasil. They cited "Os Trapalhoes" as one of their biggest influences.
From 2000 to 2005 they have a comedy sketch show. In 2006 they produced a "Soap Opera" called O Proxeneta, a history about a businessman called Franco Faraco who owned a toilet company who was hit by a car driven by a Man with Black Boots and gets into a coma. The show was more about the people who knew Faraco. Later in the same year they've done another Soap called Sinha Boça who tells the history of one of the most loved character of the sketches show, he is an ordinary guy who goes to college and gets arrested because his rival incriminates him.
In 2007 they started a new show: Tela Class, in which they redub old trash and B-movies, creating a new script under it, always using loads of curse words and sarcasm... one of the episodes even got censured by MTV Brazil, due to its raw humor...
Now (2008) they've returned to the sketches, doing a Matrix parody in which their sketches are made only in their head on computer program.  

Most Popular Characters

Massacration: A Parody of heavy metal bands, the lead vocalist cut off his testicles to able to sing in a higher pitch. They also sacrifice animals for the devil, the comedians of the show really play the instruments, they also recorded a CD.
Hermes and Renato: They are characters that dress 70's clothes and live in Rio de Janeiro, the main characters of the show (however not the most popular ones) and say an extremely high amount of curse words
Boça: Boça is an innocent nerd with a big nose and a heart of gold. He loves making lame jokes and lives with his Grandmother, Voh Lurdes. He is a member and founder of the "Associação dos Mini-gameiros" (Mini-Gamers Association, in Portuguese).  He speaks with a very heavy São Paulo accent and uses local slang. His favorite drink is chocolate milk which his grandma prepares to him every morning. He had a brief career as a top model, but it went down-hill when he got addicted to cafezinho (coffee), he also worked as a carpenter, MTV vj, office-boy and as a big black person. He once almost broke the wrists of a guy that punched him in the stomach after robbing him. Famous quotes include: "Poooorra meu, pulta mundo injusto, meu!" (Dammit! What an unfair world!", "Fiquei cabreeeiro" (I got pissed off!), "Po mina, a gente podia ta transando meu!" (Hey babe, we could be making love now!). He loves the Free Willy movie series, which he considers a "darn smart whale", he's also a big fan of Kenny-G.
Joselito: He's the kind of guy that wants to do anything to have his fun, including (and most of the times) hurting the people around him, both physically and emotionally (but the character is not limited to that, he also kills pets, crippled fingers in a barbecue, etc) 
Gil Brother "Away" de Petrópolis (Gil Brother "Away" from Petrópolis): not exactly a character, but one of the most beloved characters, he's a tiny man with dreadlocks who has an extremely funny face, his success is attributed on the way he curses, and the words he uses, his main characters are:
Professor Gilmar (teacher Gilmar): a lawyer who now works in the university Boça studies, Gilmar is very successful with the ladies and a respected lawyer in the ADEBRA (Associacao de Adevogados Do Brasil), and a great dancer.
Away de Petrópolis: this character makes commentaries on the Drops Away News about many subjects as Pedophilism, Taxes, Piercings, Anabolic steroid, etc.
Coração Melão: Another parody, but this time to the Brazilian Axe groups.'''
Gozo Clown A Parody of Bozo Clown. The parody is generally about ridiculed sexual themes. The name Gozo in Portuguese is a pejorative synonym for sperm.

Most Popular Sketchs

 Area 51 A reference to that tragedy shows like "Americas's amazing videos" with false depoiments and videos.
Jaqueass A parody to the Jackass show.
Documento Trololó A parody to the shows with "60 minutes" stile, with subjects like, addictions, sadomasochism, etc.
 Sinha Boça It's a parody from a soap opera from Brazil, called "Sinha Moça". In this parody you can find Teacher Gilmar, and Boça, that has a big trouble with his Grandmother in jail, and he is caught trying to steal the "GOLDPENCIL" from his university. Then Teacher Gilmar decided to help him. Teacher Gilmar has a lot of great sentences that he says during the parody as: " Criado à Ovomaltino(Created drinking Ovomaltino)", " Criado a leite com pêra(Milk n' Pear mix)."

New program

Their last season is a parody of "Matrix", in which some guys have a plug in their necks. And using the excuse of getting plugged their sketches begin, like the away kitchen, a culinary program using disgusting ingredients, with the exception of one program in which Away makes the famous milk n' pear mix.

Retrospect

As a celebration of the anniversary of the show, they released a retrospect named "10 Anos de Hermes e Renato" (Hermes and Renato Ten Years), in which they presented the best of their program since the most primordial times.

Return to TV

The program returned to the air in April 25, the news was told by the presenter Marcos Mion (formerly of MTV in which is currently in the program called "Legendários" in Record), the program returned to areas such as the program of replacing the programa called "Comédia Ao Vivo" (formerly known as "Comédia MTV") because the comedian (and formerly of MTV) Marcelo Adnet have signed a contract with Rede Globo which is currently making a comedy series called "O Dentista Mascarado".

