[[Carlos Valderrama]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, Living people, Colombian footballers, FIFA 100, Unión Magdalena footballers, Deportivo Cali footballers, Millonarios Fútbol Club footballers, Montpellier HSC players, Colombian expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in France, Expatriate footballers in Spain, Expatriate soccer players in the United States, Real Valladolid footballers, Independiente Medellín footballers, Junior F.C. footballers, La Liga footballers, Tampa Bay Mutiny players, Major League Soccer players, Major League Soccer MVPs, Miami Fusion F.C. players, Colorado Rapids players, Colombia international footballers, 1990 FIFA World Cup players, 1994 FIFA World Cup players, 1998 FIFA World Cup players, People from Santa Marta, FIFA Century Club, 1987 Copa América players, 1989 Copa América players, 1991 Copa América players, 1993 Copa América players, 1995 Copa América players, Ligue 1 players, South American Footballer of the Year winners, Major League Soccer All-Stars

Carlos Alberto Valderrama Palacio (;Colombian Spanish pronunciation. born September 2, 1961 in Santa Marta, Colombia), also known as El Pibe ("The Kid") is a former Colombian football player. His mass of blond afro hair, coupled with his flamboyant technique on the ball, made him one of Colombia's most recognizable footballers, and arguably, one of the most recognizable footballers around the globe historically.
Valderrama was well known during his time in Major League Soccer. Perhaps one of the most noticeable foreign players to ever grace MLS, he played a huge role in the uprising of the league itself during the 1990s; most noticeably by becoming a pioneer that inspired a wave of Colombian (as well as general foreign) footballers to play their talents in the league causing a huge influence of increasing both the popularity and strength of the league itself. To this day, he is an icon as one of the most decorated playmakers to ever play in the MLS.fifa.html
Valderrama was a member of the Colombia national football team in the 1990s. Between 1985 and 1998 he represented Colombia in 111 full internationals and scored 11 times, making him the most capped player in the country's history. Valderrama was known for the accuracy of his passing and assisting, his tactical brain which allowed him to have a strong presence without the necessity of running as much as it would be expected, his exquisite technique on the ball, and his ability to provide assists that were very immaculate.fifa.html In 2004, Valderrama was included in the FIFA 100, a list of "greatest living footballers" chosen by Pelé to celebrate the 100th anniversary of FIFA.

Career

Valderrama began his career at Unión Magdalena of the Colombian First Division in 1981. He also played for Millonarios and Deportivo Cali before joining Montpellier of the French First Division in 1988. He then went on to play for Independiente Medellín and then Atlético Junior, for whom he won the Colombian championship in 1993 and 1995. In 1996, he went to the US to play for the Tampa Bay Mutiny (1996–97, 2000–01), Miami Fusion (1998–99), and Colorado Rapids (2001–02). While a member of the Mutiny, the team would sell Carlos Valderrama wigs at Tampa Stadium. In Major League Soccer, Valderrama scored relatively few goals (16) for a midfielder, but is the league's second all-time leader in assists (114) after Steve Ralston (121), a former teammate. In 2005, he was named to the MLS All-Time Best XI. He was also named one of the top players of the 20th century by Pelé in 1999.FIFA 100
As a player, Valderrama was known for his excellent field vision and elegance on the ball. He captained Colombia's national football team to victory in the 1994 Fifa World Cup CONMEBOL qualifiers. He always wore the number 10 jersey, and was a complete free kick specialist.

MLS career

Valderrama began his Major League Soccer career with the Tampa Bay Mutiny in the league's inaugural year of 1996, and won its first Most Valuable Player award. In 2000 Valderrama recorded the only 20+ assist season in MLS history—ending the season with 26—a record that remains intact today, and which MLS itself suggested was an "unbreakable" record in a 2012 article.mlssoccer.

Retirement as player

In February 2004, Valderrama ended his 22-year career in a tribute match at the Metropolitan stadium of Barranquilla, with some of the most important football players of South America, such as Diego Maradona, Enzo Francescoli and José Luis Chilavert.
Valderrama has since become assistant manager of Atlético Junior. On November 1, 2007, Valderrama accused a referee of corruption by waving cash in the face of Oscar Julian Ruiz when the official awarded a penalty to América de Cali. Junior lost the match 4–1, which ended the club's hopes of playoff qualification.com. Retrieved 10 July 2008.

Playing Style

Valderrama was well known for being a specialist towards the traditional number '10' playmaking role throughout his career.fifa.html This also involved free kicks, whether supporting his teammates, or attempt on goal. His creativity made him very influential, to the point where he became a known legend throughout South America, and eventually throughout the world of football.fifa.html
Aside from his passing talents, Valderrama held very precise ball-control and dribbling abilities that was supported by quick reactions, and his disciplined mindset. This allowed him to perform impressive plays that have been highlighted throughout his career.youtube.youtube.youtube.
One of his most impressive moments, was during the 1990 FIFA World Cup last group stage match against Germany. In a game where Colombia needed at least a draw to survive into the next round, Pierre Littbarski scored what appeared to be the winning goal in the 88th minute. However, within the last seconds of extra time, Valderrama made a crucial pass to Freddy Rincon who equalized immediately and saved Colombia into the next round.youtube.com/watch?v=ami5tGXM0VU

Personal life

Valderrama is married and has three children. Valderrama was the only Colombian to feature in FIFA's 125 Top Living Football Players list in March 2004. He is currently a coach for a football soccer academy in Clearwater, Florida.

Honours

Club

Individual

Other recognition

Valderrama appeared on the cover of International Superstar Soccer Pro 98. In the Nintendo 64 version, he is referred to by his nickname, El Pibe. A 22-foot bronze statue of Valderrama, created by Colombian artist Amilkar Ariza, was erected outside Estadio Eduardo Santos in Valderrama's birthplace of Santa Marta in 2006.

Statistics






