[[Bernard Faÿ]]

CATEGORIES: 1893 births, 1978 deaths, Writers from Paris, Anti-Masonry, French historians, French collaborators with Nazi Germany, Harvard University alumni

Bernard Faÿ (3 April 1893, Paris – 31 December 1978, Tours) was a French historian of Franco-American relations,Fay, Bibliographie critique des ouvrages francais relatifs aux Etats-Unis (1770-1800) (1925) and L'Esprit revolutionnaire en France et aux Etas-Unis à la fin du XVIIIe siècle (1925). and an anti-Masonic polemicist who believed in a worldwide Jewish-Freemason conspiracy. He knew the United States at first hand, having studied at Harvard, and translated into French an excerpt of Gertrude Stein's The Making of AmericansFay was reported as saying that the three people of first-rate importance he had met were Pablo Picasso, Gertrude Stein, and André Gide ("Gertrude Stein Articulates at Last", The New York Times, 3 September 1933 and wrote his view of the United States as it was at the beginning of Franklin D. Roosevelt's administration. He also published studies of Benjamin FranklinFay, Franklin, the Apostle of Modern Times (1929). and George Washington. Faÿ was a friend of Gertrude Stein and of the American composer Virgil Thomson, who owed to Fay his access to French intellectual circles, for Faÿ knew most of the people in musical and literary Paris. the Beginnings". He was active in attacking and imprisoning Freemasons during the Vichy regime, 1940-44. He was convicted and sentenced to life in prison. He escaped after 5 years and became a school teacher in Switzerland and the U.S.

Life

At the beginning of the Second World War Fay was a professor at the Collège de France. During the occupation he replaced Julien Cain as general administrator of the Bibliothèque Nationale and director of the anti-Masonic service of the Vichy Government. During his tenure of this office, his secretary Gueydan de Roussel was in charge of preparing the card indexes containing 60,000 names drawn from archives seized from Freemason and other secret societies, which Marshal Philippe Pétain was convinced were at the heart of all France's troubles;Fay also served as an adviser to Pétain. Historia Thématique: "Aux heures sombres de Vichy". lists of names of Freemasons were released to the official gazette of the Vichy government for publication, and many Catholic papers copied these lists in order to induce public opprobrium. Fay edited and published during the four years of the occupation a monthly review  Les Documents maçonniques ("Masonic Documents"), which published historical studies of Freemasonry together with essays on the role of Freemasonry in society and frank anti-Masonic propaganda.
During Fay's tenure with the Vichy regime, 989 Freemasons were sent to concentration camps, where 549 were shot. In addition, about 3,000 lost their jobs. All Freemasons were required by law to declare themselves to authorities. 13, 2013
In 1943 Fay produced the film Forces Occultes, directed by Jean Mamy, which depicts a worldwide Jewish-Freemason conspiracy.
Despite his anti-Semitism, Faÿ, who was suspected to be a Gestapo agent for much of the occupation, protected Gertrude Stein and Alice B. Toklas. Following the liberation, Stein wrote a letter on Faÿ's behalf when he was tried as a collaborator. LIV No. 16 (Oct. 25, 2007), pp. 4-5. In 1946 a French court condemned him to dégradation nationale and forced labor for life, but he managed to escape to Switzerland in 1951,

Works

History and literary history

Pseudonyms

Bernard Faÿ used the pen name Elphège du Croquet de l'EsqSource BnF for the work:

Translations

Works in english

Articles

Notes

Further reading




