[[Clozapine]]

CATEGORIES: Atypical antipsychotics, Piperazines, Dibenzodiazepines, Organochlorides, Dopamine antagonists, Dopamine agonists, Serotonin antagonists

Clozapine is an atypical antipsychotic medication used in the treatment of schizophrenia, and is also sometimes used off-label for the treatment of bipolar disorder. The first of the atypical antipsychotics to be developed, it was first introduced in Europe in 1971, but was voluntarily withdrawn by the manufacturer in 1975 after it was shown to cause agranulocytosis, a condition involving a dangerous decrease in the number of white blood cells, that led to death in some patients.  In 1989 after studies demonstrated that it was effective in treating treatment-resistant schizophrenia  In 2002 the FDA approved clozapine for reducing the risk of suicidal behavior for patients with schizophrenia.
Clozapine is usually used only in patients that have not responded to other anti-psychotic treatments due to its danger of causing agranulocytosis as well as the costs of having to have blood tests continually during treatment.  It is, however, one of the very effective anti-psychotic treatment choices. though those relationships have not been confirmed. Additionally, it also often causes less serious side effects such as hypersalivation and weight gain. 
It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines, a list of the most important medication needed in a basic health system.

Medical uses

Clozapine is an atypical antipsychotic drug primarily prescribed to patients who are unresponsive to or intolerant of conventional  and other atypical neuroleptics. April 2007. It is used principally in treating treatment-resistant schizophrenia, 
There has been one case report of successful use of clozapine in isolated increase in creatine kinase (in absence of neuroleptic malignant syndrome) in a patient with schizophrenia where other atypical antipsychotics were not successful. A. Mohandas, N. Talwar, A. James Langdon Hospital, Devon Partnership NHS Trust, Dawlish, UK
[/ref]
There are a number of case reports in the literature that indicate that the atypical antipsychotic medication clozapine can be an effective treatment for the psychosis associated with schizophrenia, while at the same time helping to improve the physical symptoms associated with Parkinson's, such as the tremor and dyskinesia. Unlike typical antipsychotics, such as haloperidol, and some atypical antipsychotics, such as risperidone, clozapine is relatively unique in its lack of producing Parkinsonian-like symptoms, even at high doses. This is in part because clozapine binds relatively weakly to the D2 dopamine receptor compared to most other antipsychotics.
Clozapine is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of behavior problems in older adults with dementia.

Adverse effects

Clozapine may cause side effects; most are minor, although some are serious and potentially fatal. Common side effects include extreme constipation, bed-wetting, night-time drooling, muscle stiffness, sedation, tremors, orthostatic hypotension, hyperglycemia, and weight gain. The risk of developing extrapyramidal symptoms such as tardive dyskinesia is below that of typical antipsychotics; this may be due to clozapine's anticholinergic effects. Extrapyramidal symptoms may subside somewhat after a person switches from another antipsychotic to clozapine.
Clozapine also carries five black box warnings, including warnings for agranulocytosis, CNS depression, leukopenia, neutropenia, seizure disorder, bone marrow suppression, dementia, hypotension, myocarditis, orthostatic hypotension (with or without syncope) and seizures.clinicalpharmacology-ip.aspx?cpnum=142&sec=monadve  Lowering of the seizure threshold may be dose related and slow initial titration of dose may decrease the risk for precipitating seizures.  Slow titration of dosing may also decrease the risk for orthostatic hypotension and other adverse cardiovascular side effects.
Many male patients have experienced cessation of ejaculation during orgasm as a side effect of clozapine, though this is not documented in official drug guides.

Agranulocytosis

Clozapine carries a black box warning for drug-induced agranulocytosis.  Without monitoring, agranulocytosis occurs in about 1% of patients who take clozapine during the first few months of treatment; Free full text with registration
It has been suggested that coadministration of clozapine with an antioxidant such as vitamin C can reduce the risk of agranulocytosis.

Cardiac toxicity

A more recently identified and sometimes fatal side effect is that of myocarditis, which usually develops within the first month of commencement.

Gastrointestinal hypomotility

Another underrecognized and potentially life-threatening side effect spectrum is gastrointestinal hypomotility, which may manifest as severe constipation, fecal impaction, paralytic ileus, bowel obstruction, acute megacolon, ischemia or necrosis. Monitoring of bowel function is recommended, as untreated cases are occasionally fatal.

Hypersalivation

While clozapine is a muscarinic antagonist at the M1, M2, M3, and M5 receptors, clozapine is a full agonist at the M4 subset. Because M4 is highly expressed in the salivary gland, its M4 agonist activity is thought to be responsible for the hypersalivation.medscape.com/viewarticle/409612_2

Central nervous system

CNS side effects include drowsiness, vertigo, headache, tremor, syncope, sleep disturbances, nightmares, restlessness, akinesia, agitation, seizures, rigidity, akathisia, confusion, fatigue, insomnia, hyperkinesia, weakness, lethargy, ataxia, slurred speech, depression, myoclonic jerks, and anxiety. Rarely seen are delusions, hallucinations, delirium, amnesia, libido increase or decrease, paranoia and irritability, abnormal EEG, worsening of psychosis, paresthesia, status epilepticus, and obsessive compulsive symptoms. Similar to other antipsychotics clozapine rarely has been known to cause neuroleptic malignant syndrome.com / Clozapine side effects

Urinary incontinence

Clozapine is linked to urinary incontinence

Withdrawal effects

Abrupt withdrawal may lead to cholinergic rebound effects, severe movement disorders as well as severe psychotic decompensation. It has been recommended that patients, families, and caregivers are aware of the symptoms and risks of abrupt withdrawal of clozapine. When discontinuing clozapine, gradual dose reduction is recommended to reduce the intensity of withdrawal effects.

Weight gain and diabetes

In addition to hyperglycemia, significant weight gain is frequently experienced by patients treated with clozapine.
Research has indicated that clozapine may cause a deficiency of selenium.

Interactions

Fluvoxamine inhibits the metabolism of clozapine leading to significantly increased blood levels of clozapine.

Chemistry

Clozapine is a dibenzodiazepine, that is structurally related to loxapine. It is slightly soluble in water, soluble in acetone, and very soluble in chloroform. Its solubility in water is 188.9 mg/L (25 °C). The manufacturer Novartis claims a solubility of   | last = Novartis Pharmaceuticals
  | authorlink = Novartis
  | title = Prescribing Information
  | url=
  |format=PDF| accessdate = 2007-06-29
  | date = April 2006
  | publisher = Novartis Pharmaceuticals
  | pages = 36     }} 
[/ref]
Dibenzo-1,4-diazepines, such as Clozapine may be synthesised by various methods including the Bischler–Napieralski reaction and intramolecular condensation in the presence of a dehydrating agent as depicted below: 
Several patents have been granted.S.A.A. Wander,  (1961)

Mechanism of action

Clozapine is classified as an atypical antipsychotic drug because its profile of binding to serotonergic as well as dopamine receptors.
Clozapine is also a partial antagonist 
A direct interaction of clozapine with the GABAB receptor has been shown.
Clozapine induces the release of glutamate and D-serine, an agonist at the glycine site of the NMDA receptor, from astrocytes,
Binding Affinity (Ki nM) towards cloned human receptors unless otherwise specifiedRoth, BL; Driscol, J. "PDSP Ki Database". Psychoactive Drug Screening Program (PDSP). University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and the United States National Institute of Mental Health. Retrieved 2013-10-10 from 

Pharmacokinetics

The absorption of clozapine is almost complete, but the oral bioavailability is only 60 to 70% due to first-pass metabolism. The time to peak concentration after oral dosing is about 2.5 hours, and food does not appear to affect the bioavailability of clozapine.
The elimination half-life of clozapine is about 14 hours at steady state conditions (varying with daily dose).
Clozapine is extensively metabolized in the liver, via the cytochrome P450 system, to polar metabolites suitable for elimination in the urine and feces. The major metabolite, norclozapine (desmethyl-clozapine), is pharmacologically active. The cytochrome P450 isoenzyme 1A2 is primarily responsible for clozapine metabolism, but 2C, 2D6, 2E1 and 3A3/4 appear to play roles as well.  Agents that induce (e.g., cigarette smoke) or inhibit (e.g., theophylline, ciprofloxacin, fluvoxamine) CYP1A2 may increase or decrease, respectively, the metabolism of clozapine. For example, the induction of metabolism caused by smoking means that smokers require up to double the dose of clozapine compared with non-smokers to achieve an equivalent plasma concentration.
Clozapine and norclozapine plasma levels may also be monitored, though they show a significant degree of variation and are higher in women and increase with age. Monitoring of plasma levels of clozapine and norclozapine has been shown to be useful in assessment of compliance, metabolic status, prevention of toxicity, and in dose optimization.

History

Clozapine was developed by Sandoz in 1961, and trials took place in 1972, when it was released in Switzerland and Austria as Leponex. Two years later it was released in West Germany, and Finland in 1975. Early testing was performed in the United States around the same time. In 2005 FDA approved criteria to allow reduced blood monitoring frequency.accessdata.gov/drugsatfda_docs/appletter/2005/019758s054ltr.pdf

Marketing

In 2005 three pharmaceutical companies marketed this drug: Novartis Pharmaceuticals (manufacturer), Mylan Laboratories and Ivax Pharmaceuticals (market generic clozapine). The drug is manufactured by Sun Pharmaceuticals in India.





Additional reading




