[[Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 2006, Universities and colleges in Suzhou, Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University faculty, Architecture schools, Architecture schools in China, Architecture schools in England, Jiaotong University, University of Liverpool, Russell Group, Suzhou Industrial Park, Engineering universities and colleges in China, Business schools in China

Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University (Chinese: 西交利物浦大学, Pinyin: Xī'ān Jiāotōng Lìwùpǔ Dàxúe, short: XJTLU) is a young, independent university based in Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.

History

On September 28, 2004, Xi'an Jiaotong University and the University of Liverpool signed a cooperative agreement to set up XJTLU. Construction started in August 2005 and the university was officially inaugurated on May 29 of 2006.Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University Officially Inaugurated
More than 160 undergraduates enrolled in the first year. This number has increased over the last six years to a total of 7,000 students on campus and a further 2,000 at the University of Liverpool (fall 2013).
XJTLU's first batch of students graduated in August 2010. 97% of them continued their studies overseas for a master's degree or a doctorate and 10% of those went to study in the world's top ten universities (based on the University Ranking Chart by The Times, 2010). By January 2011, XJTLU headed the list of Top 10 Sino-Foreign Cooperative universities in China.Press release of the University of Liverpool: xjtlu-named-most-influential-sino-foreign-institutionXJTLU Designated "the Most Influential China-foreign Cooperative Academy"

Funding

The SIPEDI (Education District Investigation) is a government company that has funded much of XJTLUs development and continues to play a large role in its success. One of its main aims being to develop educated and creative people, SIPEDI has realized the importance of XJTLU in establishing a well taught and well cultured group of students, which will have a carry on affect to the companies and organizations in Suzhou. SIPEDI has already spent around 130billionRMB on XJTLU, mainly on funding facilities such as buildings and laboratories. It is committed to the success of XJTLU and so the budget support is ongoing, without limit. The GDP of SIP is very high, with large income coming from taxes, which allows it to afford such high funding.

Context

A number of British Universities have set up satellite campuses and joint ventures in China, including the University of Nottingham Ningbo, China (UNNC), which is an overseas campus of the University of Nottingham, situated in the city of Ningbo in the coastal province of Zhejiang, and the DUFE—Surrey International Institute, an academic partnership institution between University of Surrey and Dongbei University of Finance and Economics (DUFE) in Dalian, China.  
In 2010-11, China was the third most popular destination for UK TNE students, after Malaysia and Singapore: and there are almost 36,000 UK TNE students in China. As a highly trusted expert in international higher education quality assurance, QAA is determined to protect the interests of all students working towards a UK HE qualification - wherever in the world they are studying.Review of Transnational Education in mainland China 2012 The Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education (QAA), 2012
American Universities have also sought a presence in China. New York University Shanghai (NYU Shanghai) is the third degree-granting campus established by New York University, after New York City and Abu Dhabi, established in 2012 in partnership with East China Normal University of Shanghai.
However, such strategies have proven controversial. A 2007 report, edited by Anna Fazackerley, cautioned British universities that they must acquire a more thorough understanding of Chinese higher education policy if they were to succeed in building successful strategic alliances over the long-term. An Agora Discussion Paper Edited by Anna Fazackerley, 2007

Campus

Location

The campus is situated in Suzhou Industrial Park, 12 km east from the historic center of Suzhou, and 90 km west of Shanghai. With 2,500 years of rich history and culture, Suzhou sustained an average annual economic growth-rate of more than 15 per cent since the beginning of China's "reform and opening up" period, its local GDP ranked as the fourth largest in China, just after Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou. Suzhou Industrial Park is the location for more than 2100 international companies, more than 100 of which are Fortune 500 companies, including Siemens, L'Oréal and Nokia. Suzhou Industrial Park is home to nearly ten thousand expatriate workers from more than 20 countries. Situated in the heart of the complex, Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University forms part of that international community.

North Campus

To become a research-led, international university, Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University aims to develop distinctive and stimulating surroundings for learning, teaching and research. The Campus has been developed in two phases. The first phase focused on the North Campus, which has been completed in fall 2013. Campus Plan and Academic Buildings were designed by the American architecture firm Perkins+Will.Yating Su: Management and Information Centre, XJTLU, Suzhou

South Campus

The second development phase focuses on the South Campus, where building started in summer 2013A groundbreaking ceremony was held in Suzhou today and is scheduled to be completed by 2016.

Higher Education Town

The university is part of the Suzhou Dushu Lake Higher Education Town (HET), which is constantly expanding and expects to have a student population of 100,000 by 2014. In addition to its own campus, XJTLU has access to the common space shared by all universities in the HET. It contains facilities including libraries, entertainment venues, a sports centre and accommodation. Such facilities include:

Organization

In August 2008 Professor Xi Youmin, a renowned scholar in management, was appointed as the Executive President of Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University and Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the University of Liverpool.

The Language Centre

All Chinese students study English for their first two years at XJTLU. International students can study Chinese. Consequently the Language Centre (LC) plays a key role in the Universities educational approach. The LC is not a department in the university, but a teaching centre and is not responsible for awarding degrees. The majority of the LC tutors have MA degrees in English teaching. The modules are different from other Chinese universities where students follow a national curriculum. The curriculum at the LC is created by the tutors and approved by XJTLU's Learning and Teaching Committee and the University of Liverpool. XJTLU students follow a British degree programme, therefore English for Academic Purposes (EAP) forms the core of the modules and assessments.

Academic profile

Faculty

The University now has nearly 400 academic staff from 40 countries.qaa.ac.pdf saved Nov. 8th, 2013
XJTLUs faculty rank is estimated to be around 12th in China. All academic staff must have a PhD from a well-known and well respected university in the relevant research field.

Degree Programmes

=Undergraduate=

=Postgraduate=

Research

Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University (XJTLU) aims to bring together the best practice from two leading universities, Xi'an Jiaotong University (XJTU) in China and the University of Liverpool (UoL) in the United Kingdom. XJTLU aspires to be a leading research-led university which combines a strong international profile with an unswerving commitment to the economic and social development of the area of China in which it is located. Although still at an early stage in its development, XJTLU has set a clear course to become a leader in learning, teaching and research.
At the core of its research strategy, XJTLU will concentrate on: developing research programmes; setting up a research infrastructure; strengthening research activities; nurturing a spirit of enterprise; facilitating the generation of intellectual property; and promoting knowledge transfer.

Student Life

There is a wide range of student groups on offer including mental health, sports and fitness, military training and student committees.

International Community

The university's vision is for international students to comprise 10% (approximately 1,000) of the total amount of students. To achieve this goal, XJTLU focuses on employing international lecturers, professors and doctors. Suggestions from students are taken on board and the universities different internal teams work consistently to research and implement successful methods and ideas. XJTLU has approximately 130 LC (Language Centre) staff workers.
The university has standards and rules in place to ensure the university stays true to its international appeal and foundations. For example, they require that any poster or wall advertisement be both in English and Chinese equally and encourage all staff meetings to be in English.
A programme called 'Intercom' began in 2010, formed by a group of international students who wanted to encourage and develop an International Community at XJTLU. Intercom provides an environment in which International students can come together in a social setting and work together to break down the social and cultural barriers which prevent the establishment of a thriving multicultural community. Although a fairly new society, Intercom has already hosted many successful events which have included the 'Dare to be Dirty' Sports Day and the 'Intercom Welcome Party' 2011–12.

Sports and Fitness

The sports clubs include table tennis, karate, snooker, badminton, basketball, swimming and football. XJTLU also provides advice and support for students that wish to set up their own sports clubs.

The Buddy Club

The Buddy Club is a programme designed to help new students settle at university and into life in Suzhou. It has been in existence for two years and is officially supported by the Students Affairs Office. This helps to improve the organization and quality of its events and continuous running through funding and good planning.
One of the buddy programmes most popular functions is called "live@suzhou". Designed specifically for non-local students, it provides a variety of ways to spend free time in Suzhou, such as day trips, special events, restaurants, bars, sports events and many other activities available in Suzhou. The programme has regular updates sent to the students by email or by social networking sites, such as Facebook, Twitter and renren.Buddy Programme

Noted people






