[[Jonathan Faulknor the elder]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing, 1795 deaths, Royal Navy admirals, Royal Navy personnel of the Seven Years' War, Royal Navy personnel of the American Revolutionary War, Royal Navy personnel of the French Revolutionary Wars

Jonathan Faulknor (fl. 1744 – 24 June 1795) was an officer of the Royal Navy who served during the Seven Years' War, the American War of Independence, and the French Revolutionary Wars, in a career which spanned fifty years.
The son of a distinguished naval officer, Jonathan Faulknor continued the family tradition and forged a career in the navy. He was made an officer prior to the Seven Years' War and commanded his first ships before it ended. His service was punctuated by periods without command of a ship, and times as captain of guardships. Nevertheless he was able to impress his superiors with his services, including his cool handling of a crisis when his ship ran aground off Cork. He was back in command of ships during the American War of Independence, and was flag captain to Admiral Keppel at the battle of Ushant in 1778. He captained several other ships during the war, relieving Gibraltar in 1782 with Howe and seeing action at the Battle of Cape Spartel.
Promoted to flag rank after the war, he rose to be admiral of the blue before his death in 1795, during the French Revolutionary Wars, having only once hoisted his flag, during the period of the Spanish Armament in 1791.

Family and early life

Jonathan Faulknor was born into a substantial naval dynasty of the 18th century. His grandfather, William Faulknor, had commanded ships during the War of the Spanish Succession, while his father, Samuel Faulknor, had commanded 
Faulknor took Mercury out to the West Indies and remained with her until 1762. He then appears to have spent some time without a ship, for he is not recorded as commanding another vessel until 1767, when he took command of the 74-gun  Superb was the Portsmouth guardship at this time, and Faulknor commanded her during Moore's time as Commander-in-Chief, Portsmouth. She carried out some other duties however, including being sent out to the Mediterranean to convey troops stationed at Minorca back to Britain. While entering the harbour at Cork, she ran aground through the ignorance of her pilot. Faulknor's cool demeanour after the accident was widely praised, and Superb was safely re-floated and taken into a dockyard for repairs. Superb was paid off in 1770, and Faulknor was again without a ship.

American War of Independence

The outbreak of the American War of Independence brought further opportunities for Faulknor, and he commissioned the 74-gun   
He took command of the 98-gun 

Flag rank and later life

Faulknor was promoted to rear-admiral of the white on 24 September 1787, beginning a steady progression through the flag ranks according to his seniority. He became rear-admiral of the red on 21 September 1790, and in 1791 hoisted his flag on the 98-gun 

Notes

a. 

Citations




