[[High production volume chemicals]]

CATEGORIES: Chemical industry, Chemical substances, Chemical compounds, Hazardous materials, International trade, Toxicology, Ecology

High production volume chemicals, also referred to as HPV chemicals, are produced or imported into the United States in quantities of 1 million pounds or about 500 tonnes per year. In OECD countries, HPV chemicals are defined as being produced at levels greater than 1,000 tonnes per producer/importer per year in at least one member country/region. A list of HPV chemicals serves as an overall priority list, from which chemicals are selected to gather data for a screening information dataset (SID), for testing and for initial hazard assessment.

History

OECD countries  including EU

In 1987, member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development decided to investigate existing chemicals. In 1991, they agreed to begin the project by focusing on HPV chemicals, where production volume was used as a surrogate for data on occupational, consumer, and environmental exposure.(OECD Council Acts, 1991). Each country agreed to "sponsor" a proportion of the HPV chemicals to be assessed. Countries also agreed on a minimum set of required information, the SID. Initial risk assessments using the SID and detailed exposure data were conducted in OECD's High Production Volume Chemicals Programme for screening purposes and to identify any need for further work.
During the late 1990s, OECD member countries began to assess chemical categories and to use quantitative structure–activity relationship (QSAR) results to create OECD guidance documents, as well as a computerized QSAR toolbox. In 1998, the global chemical industry organized in the International Council of Chemical Associations (ICCA) initiative, offered to join OECD' efforts. The ICCA promised to sponsor about 1000 substances by 2013 from the OECD's HPV chemicals list "to establish as priorities for investigation", based on "presumed wide dispersive use, production in two or more global regions or similarity to another chemical, which met either of these criteria". OECD in turn agreed to refocus and to "increase transparency, efficiency and productivity and allow longer-term planning for governments and industry". The OECD refocus was on initial hazard assessments of HPV chemicals only, and no longer extensive exposure information gathering and evaluation. Hence, detailed exposure assessments within national (or regional) programmes and priority setting activities were postponed as post-SID work.

United States

On October 9, 1998, EPA's administrator Carol Browner sent letters to the CEOs of more than 900 chemical companies that manufacture HPV chemicals, asking them to participate in EPA's voluntary testing initiative, the so called "HPV Challenge Program". The Environmental Defense, American Petroleum Institute, and American Chemistry Council joined in the effort.

HPV chemical lists

The OECD list of HPV chemicals keeps changing. A 2004 list of 143 pages contained 4,842 entries.
The EPA has published an online list of HPV chemicals since 2010. The list is not numerated and without footnotes.

Regulatory context

United States

The 1976 Toxic Substances Control Act requires the EPA to "compile, keep current, and publish a list of each chemical substance that is manufactured or processed in the United States". In 1998, the EPA reported  the most heavily used HPV chemicals in commerce were largely untested: 43% of 2,800 HPV chemicals had no basic toxicity data or screening level data at all, 50% had incomplete screening data, and only 7% of the HPV chemicals had a complete set of screening level toxicity data. However, screening level data, even if they indicated a problem, were not sufficient to restrict the use of a compound. 1998. Chemical Hazard Data Availability Study. What do we really know about the safety of high production volume chemicals? EPA's 1998 baseline of hazard information that is readily available to the public. Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics. April 1998 As of April 2010, about 84,000 chemicals were on the TSCA inventory, per a GAO report.

Europe

The Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management (SAICM) is a policy for achieving safe production and use of chemicals worldwide by 2020, developed with stakeholders from more than 140 countries, signed by 100 governments, adopted by the UNEP Governing Council in February 2006. The Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals  proposal and the European Chemicals Agency will help the EU to fulfill objectives of SAICM. The Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) aims to control production, use, trade, disposal and release of twelve POPs; the European Community has proposed five additional chemicals. The convention bans deliberate production and use of POPs and the development of new POPs, and aims at minimizing releases of unintentionally produced POPs. The convention has so far been ratified by the European Community, 18 Member States and the two accession countries.

Toxicity data

In 1982, U.S. manufacturers, processors, and importers of 75 chemicals that the International Agency for Research on Cancer had found to cause cancers in animals, but the carcinogenicity of which in humans was uncertain, were surveyed. Only in 13 of the 75 chemicals had epidemiologic studies on human health been completed or were in progress. Eighteen of the 75 were HPV chemicals and only for eight HPV chemicals had epidemiologic studies been completed or were in progress. (The largest number of chemicals (19) were drugs, and none of them had been epidemiologically studied. Seven chemicals that had been studied were used as pesticides.)

In 1999, the European Union (EU) published a study about how many EU-HPV chemicals were "publicly available" in a comprehensive chemical data base called IUCLID: Only 14% of the EU-HPV chemicals had data at the level of the base-set, 65% had less than base-set, and 21% had no data available. The authors concluded, this indicated "more data were publicly available than most previous studies" had shown.
In 2004, one of the partners in EPA's HPV challenge program assessed 532 up to then unsponsored chemicals, whether they were "orphaned" or not, and found:
Since 2009, the EPA required companies to perform toxicity testing on 34 chemicals. In 2011, the EPA announced, but as of 2013 had yet to finalize, plans to require testing for 23 additional chemicals, so altogether 57 chemicals. The EPA has prioritized 83 chemicals for risk assessment, and initiated seven assessments in 2012, with plans to start 18 additional assessments in 2013 and 2014.








