[[Los Angeles Fashion Week]]

CATEGORIES: Fashion events in the United States, Events in Los Angeles, California, Annual events in California

Los Angeles Fashion Week takes place each March (for fall collections) and October (for spring collections) in locations throughout the Los Angeles area. Various producers hold events during L.A. Fashion Week, including Style Fashion Week, Project Ethos, Los Angeles Fashion Council, CONCEPT, and Africa Fashion Week Los Angeles.latimes.latimes.com/2013/oct/14/image/la-ig-lafw-20131013

History

Los Angeles Fashion Week started in the middle of the 20th century with "press week" and the invitation of fashion journalists to see collections from, and in, Southern California.go.com/kabc/story?section=news/local/los_angeles&id=7051773
Since the late 1990s, Los Angeles Fashion Week has been represented and coordinated by a loose consortium of L.A. fashion designers, journalists, and marketers interested in its success. Among the longest running Fashion Week exhibitions since that time was Gen Art, which last showed in Los Angeles in 2010.com/2010/02/gen-art-is-back-out-front/
In 2002, IMG's fashion division, which produces Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week in New York, made its first foray west, with Mercedes-Benz Shows LA in downtown Los Angeles at The Standard hotel. Simultaneously, Davis Factor and Dean Factor produced Smashbox Fashion Week Los Angeles at Smashbox Studios in Culver City. Dozens of designers showed their collections to journalists, celebrities, family and friends at these two centralized venues, while others still chose to show their collections in unique off site venues such as nightclubs, private estates, train stations, churches and lofts. In 2003, IMG and Smashbox united under one banner to streamline services and venues, choosing the Factor-owned Smashbox Studios Culver City location over downtown Los Angeles venues. The relationship between IMG and Smashbox Studios lasted for five years, with the October 2008 shows marking their final presentation together.latimes.com/2008/sep/07/image/ig-lafashionweek7
In October 2005, the now-defunct LA Fashion Awards debuted to celebrate and honor the very best of California fashion.lafashionawards. A nominating committee of more than forty of LA's top fashion journalists, merchandisers, stylists, designers and marketplace experts participate in the selection process. Among past winners are educator Rosemary Brantley; retailers Ron Herman, Fred Segal, Cameron Silver and Christos Garkinos; designers Trina Turk, Monique Lhuillier and Max Azria; fashion innovators Nony Tochterman of Petro Zillia, Rozae Nichols and Juan Carlos Obando; journalist Rose Apodaca; stylist Arianne Phillips; web publisher DailyCandy; event producer Gen Art; brands American Apparel, Volcom, J Brand, Bebe, Guess; and the television show Project Runway. The program is produced by LA Fashion Awards, LLC, which was co-founded by fashion industry veterans Jennifer Uner and Mary Hill with the support of several visionary sponsors and the endorsement of local fashion industry non-profit organizations California Fashion Association, Fashion Group International of Los Angeles, Fashion Business Incorporated, the Fashion District BID, and also the Los Angeles County Economic Development Corporation and WTCA. The Awards were placed on hiatus in October 2008 after sponsorship support was put on hold in the wake of the financial market meltdown that September. This annual program is expected to return in 2009.
In February 2007, artist Peter Gurnz, developer Gary Warfel, and downtown resident Brady Westwater - all members of the Downtown Los Angeles Neighborhood Council (DLANC) - created an alternative Fashion Week venue in Downtown Los Angeles, for the first time since IMG moved their production to Smashbox Studios in 2003. It was produced by a local arts organization, BOXeight, founded by artist/designer Peter Gurnz. In Spring 2007, after just 6 weeks of preparation, BOXeight Fashion Week had its first show at the Los Angeles Theater.  In Fall 2007, it moved to Vibiana LA, the newly restored Cathedral of Saint Vibiana. In 2008, it moved again, this time eastward to BOXeight's headquarters on the fringe of downtown's warehouse district, which added further patina to its independent street credibility.latimes.com/2008/sep/07/image/ig-lafashionweek7
With the help of various economic and industry forces, the success and notoriety of L.A. Fashion Week continues to rise. In October 2007, City of Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa recognized the contributions of the fashion industry with a compelling speech at the opening of the LA Fashion Awards and visited the Designers & Agents trade show and the wholesale showrooms at the Cooper Design Space, New Mart and California Market Center. Early in 2008, the mayor's office briefly formed a committee to better harness and organize the energies of the loose consortium that has worked diligently to improve the reputation of Los Angeles as a fashion capital and the bottom lines of the businesses operating there. In October 2012, Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa attended Style Fashion Week at the Vibiana Cathedral.

Events

LA Fashion Week is known for the diversity of its various productions.latimes.com/2013/oct/19/image/la-ig-los-angeles-fashion-week-20131019
Main attractions of L.A. Fashion Week include CONCEPT, Africa Fashion Week Los Angeles, Project Ethos, The Los Angeles Fashion Council, Men's Fashion Week and Style Fashion Week.latimes.A. LIVE.latimes.story#axzz2jX9CejMn Style Fashion Week was supported by Los Angeles Councilman Curren D. Price, Jr.lasplash.php The Los Angeles Fashion Council was recognized by Los Angeles Eric Mayor Garcetti.net/LAFW/la-fashion-council-supported-by-mayor-garcetti/

Los Angeles Fashion District

The L.A. Fashion District is a business improvement district (BID), funded by over 700 property owners. The Fashion District spans 90 blocks and is the hub of the apparel industry on the West Coast of the United States. 2008 also marked the beginning of "Belle Du Jour" (The Look of LA), an annual fashion show contributing toward the common goal of showcasing talented LA based fashion designers.

LA Fashion Week Organization

LAFW.






