[[InAlienable]]

CATEGORIES: 2008 horror films, 2008 films, English-language films, American science fiction horror films, 2000s science fiction films

InAlienable is a 2008 science fiction film with horror and comic elements, written and produced by Walter Koenig, and directed by Robert Dyke. It was the first collaboration of Koenig and Dyke since their 1989 production of Moontrap.

Plot

Dr. Eric Norris remains wracked with guilt after a terrible tragedy that cost him his family, and when he learns that an alien parasite is not only growing inside him but shares his DNA, he develops a fiercely paternal bond with the creature. The alien "might regenerate into a surrogate son to replace his own child who was lost years earlier." Koenig plays the antagonist, a scientific research institute administrator who dislikes Norris because he had been mutually in love with Norris's wife, who died; he blames Norris for his own now bleak life and enjoys insulting him. Norris, new love interest Amanda, and attorney Howard Ellis must defend the new child, Benjamin, from being imprisoned by government forces or, worse, destroyed. The courtroom trial covers such issues as habeas corpus and miscegenation.
At first horrified by the growth within him, Eric Norris comes to love the child that he "gives birth to" and names Benjamin. When a court trial begins to take Benjamin away from him, all sorts of arguments are raised about the real meaning of the word "alien." A disturbed man, Emil (Andrew Koenig, Walter Koenig's son), brings a gun into the courtroom and shoots Benjamin, to the loss of all concerned.
Koenig said that "the story really involves that relationship between the human being and the alien. At first, it's assumed that the alien is a parasite growing in a host, but because it has some of the human DNA, it's significantly more than that. Even though it comes from another world, it's a part of our world. Really, it's a love story."

Production

The screenplay was written by Walter Koenig of the original Star Trek series. He told Starburst magazine that he was watching the 2000 World Series with friends, one of whom had appeared in The Blob. "We proceeded to have other conversations along the way about making a film that, at least initially, began the same way as The Blob, with something landing from outer space. And I really took it from there."
It took Koenig a decade to bring the film to fruition. He initially wrote the lead role for himself, but reevaluated his view "that the audience would buy me as a romantic interest", and offered it to Battlestar Galactica's Richard Hatch."
Hatch talked about why he accepted the role: "It was very character-driven. It was about
people and relationships. It wasn't just about some monster or strange creature; it was
about human beings having to deal with very morally conflicted situations. I wasn't
choosing InAlienable because it was a science-fiction piece, although I love science
fiction. I was choosing it, as I choose any movie that I go watch, because it was about
something meaningful. It was about real people having to struggle with issues that all of
us have to face in our lives."
Marina Sirtis of Star Trek: The Next Generation and other familiar actors from sci-fi franchises were also willing to participate. Koenig's wife, son and daughter had roles on screen.
It was shot on location in Southern California. It is the first feature film made by Renegade Studios, and was released over the internet on a pay-per-view basis."InAlienable" Set for Release, PRWeb,com, November 12, 2007
The film's debut public screening was cut short by Koenig, as the visual quality on the screen at Conglomeration! 2008 was not up to his standards.  Cited at Trek Today, April 24, 2008

Cast

Release

This direct-to-DVD film made its debut on the Internet on a pay-per-view basis; it premiered online on December 15, 2008 with a nominal $2.99 fee charged for watching it.

Cultural allusions

Reception

The film received mixed reviews. Review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes' summary, taken from Jason Buchanan of Rovi, declared: "A thought-provoking sci-fi drama headed up by a stellar cast, InAlienable tells the tale of a successful researcher who gives birth to an extraterrestrial child, and wages a passionate fight to defend his offspring from society and government scientists."
The website Brutal As Hell wrote that the movie is "a film cheesier than a Kraft dairy farm and far more likable than it has any right to be," while faulting it for being "preachy, corny and overlong, with a shameless heart-string yanking climax."






