[[Taylor Mays]]

CATEGORIES: 1988 births, Living people, All-American college football players, American football defensive backs, American football safeties, Jews in the African diaspora, People from Seattle, Washington, USC Trojans football players, Jewish American sportspeople, U.S. Army All-American Bowl football players, San Francisco 49ers players, Cincinnati Bengals players

Taylor Mays (born February 7, 1988) is an American football safety for the Cincinnati Bengals of the National Football League (NFL).  He played college football for the University of Southern California (USC), and was a three-time All-American.  Mays was chosen in the second round of the 2010 NFL Draft by the San Francisco 49ers.

Early life

Mays was born in Seattle, Washington, the son of Stafford Mays, a former NFL defensive lineman, and Laurie Mays (née Black), a Nordstrom executive.  He is African-American and Jewish
His father played defensive tackle for the University of Washington in the late 1970s, and was later drafted in the ninth round of the 1980 NFL Draft by the then-St. Louis Cardinals and later played for the Minnesota Vikings from 1987 to 1988.
From a young age, Mays always had a deep desire to play football; his father recalls Mays, at age 14, doing homework with his football helmet on.

High school career

Mays attended O'Dea High School, a Catholic boy's high school located in Seattle, Washington's First Hill neighborhood. Before playing football, Mays joined the track team to work on his speed. As a sophomore at O'Dea in 2004, Mays won both the 100-meter and 200-meter dash titles in the 3A State championships in the spring of 2004 before leaving track behind after his junior year to dedicate his last year in high school to prepare for football at the next level.
As a junior in 2004, he posted 124 tackles, 5 interceptions and 75 deflections, catching 25 passes for  and 3 touchdowns. Mays played for the West Team in the 2006 U.S. Army All-American Bowl game alongside future USC teammates Mitch Mustain and Stafon Johnson. He posted three tackles in the game.
On May 21, 2005, Mays participated in the 2005 Palo Alto Nike, Inc. Training Camp. Listed at 6'3", 218-pounds, Mays ran a 4.59 in the 
While considering offers from UCLA, Washington and Miami, Mays elected to commit to the University of Southern California after being recruited by defensive back coaches Rocky Seto and Greg Burns.  Mays was expected to attend Washington in the footsteps of his father, but didn't want to fall under his father's shadow and decided to build his own legacy while citing Pete Carroll's enthusiasm and coaching style as a major factor in his decision, officially committing on August 14, 2005.
He participated in the 2006 U.S. Army All-American Bowl.

College career

Mays received an athletic scholarship to attend the University of Southern California, where he played for head coach Pete Carroll's USC Trojans football team from 2006 to 2009.

2006 season

Mays got the start at free safety his freshman year after Josh Pinkard went down with a season-ending injury in their first game against Arkansas. His first college career interception came in week 5 against Washington State. Throughout the year he was a solid safety recording 62 tackles in only 12 starts and an ended the year leading his team in interceptions with 3. In 2006, Mays became the third player in Trojan history to be named the Pac-10's Co-Freshman of The Year while also earning Second-team All-American, 1st-team Freshman All-American and Defensive Freshman of the Year honors from Sporting News magazine.
Mays surprised a lot of people throughout the nation when it was stated by Pete Carroll that the 6'3", 230-pound freshman was the fastest player on a top-tier team built with some of the speediest players in the nation. dash, .01 seconds slower than the record set at the 2008 NFL Combine by Tennessee Titans running back Chris Johnson. Mays also stated that he models his game after former USC safety and Pro Football Hall of Fame safety Ronnie Lott and the late Washington Redskins safety Sean Taylor: "He's been my favorite player. I look up to (former USC safety) Ronnie Lott, too. That's what's special being in this program, living up to the safeties here."
Mays switched from No. 29 to No. 2 after his freshman season for former Florida State player Deion Sanders and former Michigan player Charles Woodson who both wore the number while playing defensive back in college.

2007 season

After Josh Pinkard was re-positioned to cornerback, Mays returned as the team's starting safety alongside All-Pac-10 strong safety Kevin Ellison, whom he credits as his mentor. His most impressive game of the season came during week 10 against California, where he posted tackles (10) and deflected 3 passes which helped hold one of the best offenses in the nation 14 points below its average in the 24–17 win. He also had a career-high 12 tackles in week 8 against the Oregon.
Mays finished third on the team with 65 total tackles, 6 pass deflections, 1 forced fumble, and 1 interception in 13 games in 2007. He earned Third-team All-American honors from the Associated Press, First-team All-American honors from Sporting News, and All-Pac-10 honorable mention.
After the 2007 season, Mays was listed by ESPN The Magazine in an article titled "Workout Warriors", honoring college football's most physically talented players. According to the article, in the USC spring practices in 2008, Mays posted unbelievable numbers:  Measured at 6' 3", 226-pounds with 6% body fat, Mays ran an electronically-timed 4.32 40-yard dash, threw up 225-pounds 23 times during the bench press, and recorded a 41" vertical jump and an 11' 4" standing broad jump. When he arrived at USC, Mays weighed 215-pounds, posted a 35" vertical and 10' standing broad jump. Mays was listed at the No. 2 spot behind Texas defensive end Brian Orakpo. Retrieved June 9, 2008.

2008 season

Before the start of the 2008 season, Mays was honored with a 2008 Preseason All-American selection and was on the early watch list for both the Bronko Nagurski Trophy, awarded to the best defensive player in the nation, and the Lott Trophy. Mays stated in a Los Angeles Times interview on November 10 that he would decide whether or not to forfeit his senior year at USC to enter the 2009 NFL Draft after the 2008 post season, saying that a big factor in his decision would come from his father and head coach Pete Carroll Mays entered 2008 as one of the nation's top safety prospects in the nation.
The USC defense turned in the second-best defense in the nation and some argued one of the best college has ever seen. Through the air, the USC defense held opposing offenses to only 6 touchdowns while collecting 19 interceptions as the best pass defense in the nation with Mays being a key factor in their success. Through regular season play, Mays collected 53 total tackles and 8 pass deflections. The Trojans would go on to face Penn State in the 2009 Rose Bowl where the defense shut down one of the most explosive offenses in the country in the 38–24 win. A memorable play in the game by Taylor Mays was a devastating helmet-to-helmet hit on wide receiver Jordan Norwood which momentarily knocked Norwood out of the game and incidentally his teammate Kevin Thomas as well.
Mays ended his junior season as a finalist for the Jim Thorpe Award after being beaten out by Ohio State cornerback Malcolm Jenkins. He finished 3rd in the running, coming in behind Jenkins and Tennessee safety Eric Berry. He earned First-team All-American honors from several sources such as Sporting News, Walter Camp Football and the Associated Press as well as Second-Team All-American honors by Rivals.
On January 13, two days before the deadline for college players to declare for the Draft, Mays announced that he would return to USC for his last year. Mays was regarded as unanimous first-round pick in the 2009 NFL Draft but opted to return to continue to develop and to complete his education at Southern California, citing the importance of graduating to himself and his parents as well as giving his last shot at leading USC to the BCS National Championship. Retrieved January 13, 2009.

2009 season

In a Lindy's Football article, Mays stated that he wanted to play a different role in the defensive secondary that would call him to be more involved in the action. "I want to be closer to the action. People who know football know what my role on the defense is, but I'd like to be more involved this season," Mays said. The usual duties of a free safety in Pete Carroll's defense calls for him to be a center fielder preventing plays being made deep downfield, keeping him from doing much else in the box. Carroll said he agreed to tweak Mays' duties for the 2009 season, Mays' last at USC. In his last season with the Trojans, one ending with the roughest record (8–4) of his 4-year tenure at USC, he tallied a career-high 96 total tackles for the season while adding another interception to his career total.
In October, he was named a midseason All-American by The Sporting News.  Mays was named First-team All-Pac 10 for the second year in a row and was named First-team All-America for the third consecutive season.

Professional career

2010 NFL Draft

Frequently drawing comparisons to Adrian Wilson for his size

Mays was drafted in the 2nd round with the 49th-overall pick by the San Francisco 49ers in the 2010 NFL Draft.

San Francisco 49ers

In a post-draft interview, San Francisco 49ers executive Trent Baalke insisted that, despite the addition of Mays, current veteran strong safety Michael Lewis would be the starter for the 2010 season. On July 30, 2010, Mays signed a four-year contract with the 49ers.
After spending the entirety of the first three games on special teams, coach Mike Singletary benched then-starting strong safety Lewis in favor of Reggie Smith and Mays who split time at the spot in the team's Week 4 match-up against the Atlanta Falcons. While garnering a team-high 11 tackles in the game, Mays' most outstanding play of the game was a special teams touchdown made off of a deflected punt. After the game, Mays was named the indefinite starter at strong safety alongside free safety.

Cincinnati Bengals

On August 22, 2011, Mays was traded to the Cincinnati Bengals for a seventh round pick in the 2013 NFL draft.
On March 11, 2014 the Cincinnati Bengals resigned Mays.

Honors

On June 26, 2011, he was inducted into the Southern California Jewish Sports Hall of Fame.

Personal

The Mays family lives in the Magnolia neighborhood of Seattle.








