[[Turtle Bay Resort]]

CATEGORIES: Hotels in Hawaii, Resorts in Hawaii, Buildings and structures in Honolulu County, Hawaii, Visitor attractions in Honolulu County, Hawaii

The Turtle Bay Resort is the major hotel on the North Shore of Oahu island in Hawaii.

Description

The resort is about a 50-minute drive from Honolulu, between Kahuku, Hawaii to the east and Kawela Bay, Hawaii to the west.
The resort owns .
The hotel opened in May 1972 as Del Webb's Kuilima Resort Hotel and Country Club.
In the Hawaiian language kui lima means "joining hands".
It was built by casino developer Del Webb (1899–1974) to be the first casino on the island; a gaming initiative was on the ballot in the mid-1970s but it did not pass.
It was renamed "Turtle Bay Golf and Tennis Resort"—early advertisements had to include a guide to pronunciation.
A potential development deal with Starwood Hotels fell through in July 2007.
Although much expansion had been approved in 1985, local opposition had developed against the plans.
Governor Linda Lingle suggested the state buy the property in 2008.
Two offers were made by the state in August and November 2008 that would have included surrounding open space, but they were not accepted.
After a threat of foreclosure of investor Oaktree Capital Management from Credit Suisse, a new consortium of investors took over the resort in February 2010.

After four years of court battles, the Hawaii Supreme Court ruled in July 2010 that a Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement must be filed for new development. The Resort, represented by Replay Resorts, released its Draft Supplemental Impact Statement on November 23, 2012 with the Public Comment Period extended until January 18, 2013.turtlebayseis.com

Activities

The resort is several miles away from surf spots including Waimea Bay, the Banzai Pipeline, and Sunset Beach.
The two golf coures are named after designers Arnold Palmer and George Fazio.
The Palmer Course was the site of the Turtle Bay Championship, a PGA Champions Tour Event held from 2001 through 2008, and the Fazio Course has hosted the LPGA Tour's Hawaiian Open.
The runways of the World War II era Kahuku Army Airfield have been absorbed into the fairways of the golf courses.
The James Campbell National Wildlife Refuge preserves a small pond adjacent to a golf course.
Films and TV shows have been filmed on or near the Turtle Bay Resort. The hotel has been the setting for episodes of Hawaii 5-0, Magnum P.I., Full House, Cougar Town and the short-lived Fox TV series North Shore. The resort featured as the setting for the reunion-movie Baywatch: Hawaiian Wedding and for the 2008 film Forgetting Sarah Marshall.
Preserving the undeveloped setting for film locations was one reason given by opponents to the expansion. The Hills cast have filmed at the Turtle Bay resort in Season 5.turtlebayresortblog.com/2009/04/the-hills/






