[[Hiram Sanford Stevens]]

CATEGORIES: 1832 births, 1893 deaths, Delegates to the United States House of Representatives from Arizona Territory, Members of the Arizona Territorial Legislature, People from Weston, Vermont, Suicides by firearm in Arizona, United States Army soldiers, American military personnel of the Indian Wars, Arizona pioneers

Hiram Sanford Stevens (March 20, 1832 – March 22, 1893) was an American businessman and politician. He served two terms as Arizona Territory's delegate in the United States House of Representatives and three times in the Arizona Territorial Legislature.

Background

Stevens was born in Weston, Vermont on March 20, 1832.
Following his discharge, Stevens proceeded to Tucson with only a brief stop along the San Pedro River.
Following the outbreak of the American Civil War, Stevens left Tucson for a time. He returned to the town in 1864 and was appointed one of Tucson's "councillors" by Governor Goodwin on May 11.
From 1866 till 1872 Stevens was a post trader for Fort Buchanan and Fort Crittenden.

Political career

His success in business prompted Stevens to take an interest in politics. Toward this end he served as Tucson city treasurer, Pima County tax assessor, and was a member of the Pima County Board of Supervisors on multiple occasions.
The session even met in a building owned by Stevens.
In 1874, Richard Cunningham McCormick decided not to run for reelection as Arizona Territory's delegate in the United States House of Representatives.
Rumors of a possible special session of the U.S. Congress being called prompted Stevens to leave for Washington D. C. on March 3, 1875. The special session never materialized and Stevens kept himself busy in Washington looking after his business concerns. After the 44th United States Congress convened in December, the new territorial delegate introduced a series of legislative proposals.
Stevens announced he would seek a second term on June 21, 1876. His opponents were Granville H. Oury and William H. Hardy. Curtis Coe Bean announced his intention to run but withdrew to look after his business interests.
The 45th United States Congress saw Stevens introduce several new proposals. In addition to a series of appropriation requests, the delegate asked for a modification to the amount of land allocated for army use at Fort Lowell.
June 7, 1878 saw Stevens announce his plans to run for a third term.

After office

Business activities occupied Stevens' time after he left office. The early 1880s saw him purchase a ranch near Sahuarita and become part owner in the largest general store in Tucson. He additionally became a moneylender, charging the prevailing rate of 2%/month.
Stevens died from a self-inflicted gunshot wound on March 22, 1893.

Legacy

According to David Leighton, historian for the Arizona Daily Star newspaper, Stevens Avenue, just north of downtown Tucson, was named in 1899, in his honor.

Footnotes






