[[Steve Prescott]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 births, 2013 deaths, England national rugby league team players, English people of Irish descent, English rugby league players, Hull F.C. players, Ireland national rugby league team players, Lancashire rugby league team players, Members of the Order of the British Empire, Rugby league fullbacks, St Helens RLFC players, Wakefield Trinity Wildcats players, Deaths from stomach cancer, Cancer deaths in England

Stephen Prescott MBE (26 December 1973 – 9 November 2013) was an international rugby league footballer. Prescott was born in St Helens, and started his professional career with his hometown club, who signed him in 1992. He made his debut for St Helens a year later, and soon established himself as the club's first choice fullback. In 1996, Prescott helped Saints win the league championship and Challenge Cup for the first time in two decades. He went on to win a second consecutive Challenge Cup with the club in 1997, but was sold to Hull Sharks at the end of the season.
After spending two years at Hull, Prescott joined Wakefield Trinity Wildcats, but rejoined Hull a year later after being released by Wakefield due to the club's financial difficulties.
Prescott made his senior international debut in 1996, playing both games for England in their European Championship victory. He later changed his international allegiance to Ireland, who he represented at the 2000 Rugby League World Cup. He also made one appearance for Lancashire in 2003, but suffered a serious knee injury while playing for the team, which ultimately ended his playing career.
In 2006, Prescott was diagnosed with a rare form of stomach cancer and was given months to live. He set up the Steve Prescott Foundation in 2007, and went on to organise a series of money-raising initiatives. He raised almost half a million pounds for charity through the foundation, and was awarded an MBE in 2009 for his efforts. After a long battle with the disease, he died in 2013, aged 39.
In October 2013 a small group of people started a campaign to get the highest honor in English Rugby League the Man of Steel Award to be renamed after Steve. On 5th of March 2014 the RFL announced that the Man of Steel award will be renamed after Steve and is now known as the Steve Prescott Man of Steel Award

Early life

Steve Prescott was born in St Helens on 26 December 1973. He attended De La Salle High School, He was playing for local amateur side Nutgrove before signing for St Helens in 1992.

Club career

Although he was initially deemed too small to make the grade by Saints, Prescott secured his future at the club with some impressive performances for the reserve team. He made his debut for the first team in September 1993 against Leigh, and scored his first try later that year against Hull.
Although there were still concerns about his size, In 1995–96, he played for Saints in the Regal Trophy final, losing the match 16–25 against Wigan. Prescott won his first silverware during the inaugural Super League season in 1996, scoring four tries against Sheffield Eagles in the penultimate game of the season as the club went on to secure its first league championship since 1975. He also played for Saints at fullback in the 1996 Challenge Cup Final, scoring two tries in the first seventeen minutes and helping his team to a 40–32 victory against Bradford Bulls. The following season, he was part of the team that won the 1997 Challenge Cup, once again defeating Bradford Bulls in the final. In November 1997, after failing to agree a new contract with Saints, he was signed by newly promoted Hull Sharks, along with Alan Hunte and Simon Booth, for a combined transfer fee of £350,000.
In February 1998, Prescott debuted for Hull in the Challenge Cup against Whitehaven, and scored his first try for the club in the next round against Ellenborough Rangers. In April 1998, he scored two tries against Sheffield Eagles in his first Super League game for the club, and became the club's regular goal kicker later that year. In the 1999 season, Prescott missed two months of the season through injury due to a dislocated elbow. With Hull struggling near the bottom of the table, and the club being unable to afford his wages, Prescott confirmed he was likely to leave when his contract expired in the winter. Hull won their final game for the season against Sheffield, with Prescott kicking six goals, and finished in 13th place – one position above bottom club Huddersfield Giants due to a superior goal difference.
Prescott signed for Wakefield Trinity Wildcats in 2000, scoring 3 tries in 25 games, but his contract was terminated after one season to ease the club's financial problems. He subsequently rejoined Hull.
At the start of the 2003 season, Prescott scored a hat trick in the opening Super League fixture against former club Wakefield. On 26 June 2003, two weeks after signing a new contract with Hull,

Representative career

Prescott made his representative debut in November 1994, playing at fullback for Great Britain's under-21 side against Australia, who were touring Great Britain and France. Despite Great Britain's heavy 54–10 defeat, Prescott was one of the players singled out for praise, having scored all of the team's points (one try and three goals). He made a second appearance for the under-21's later that year in a 17–16 loss against France.
In 1996, Prescott played both games for England in the European Championship, including a man of the match performance against France, scoring two tries and kicking seven goals in the 73–6 win, a then-record margin of victory for England.
In 1998, Prescott changed his international allegiance to Ireland, qualifying under the grandparent rule. He represented Ireland at the 2000 Rugby League World Cup, playing in all four of their games before being knocked out by England in the quarter-final. Prescott scored one try (in the opening game against Samoa) and kicked 17 goals during the tournament.
Prescott also made one appearance for Lancashire against Yorkshire in July 2003 at Odsal Stadium. He suffered a broken kneecap during the game, which was initially expected to keep him out of action for two months. In June 2004, after failing to fully recover from the injury, Prescott announced his retirement at the age of 30.

Personal life

In September 2006, Prescott was diagnosed with pseudomyxoma peritonei, a rare form of cancer, and was told that he would not see his two children grow up; he was given months to live. He underwent an emergency operation in Basingstoke Hospital and a tumour was removed from his stomach. In February 2007, a charity boxing event, featuring a bout between Stuart Fielden and Lee Radford, helped raise more than £50,000 in aid of Prescott.

Steve Prescott Foundation

In August 2007, Prescott set up the Steve Prescott Foundation, which aimed to raise funds for two organisations: Christie Hospital, a leading cancer treatment centre in Europe, and Try Assist, the Rugby Football League's benevolent fund. In order to raise funds, Prescott went to organise a number of charity boxing tournaments and rugby league games, with a number of Prescott's former team-mates taking part. He also took part in a series of challenges, including running in the London Marathon and cycling from Land's End to John O'Groats while completing the National Three Peaks Challenge en route.
He was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in the 2010 New Year Honours for services to rugby league and charity.
Shortly after Prescott's death in 2013, the foundation had raised almost £500,000.

Death and legacy

Steve Prescott died on 9 November 2013,BBC Sport, "Rugby League star Steve Prescott dies of stomach cancer, aged 39", 9 November 2013. Retrieved 9 November 2013 more than seven years after his diagnosis with cancer. In February 2014, it was confirmed that Prescott's former clubs, St Helens and Hull, would compete annually for the "Steve Prescott Cup" in tribute to the player.

Honours

Club
International
Individual
March 2014 the Man of Steel award was named after him and will be given to the best player each season of the English Super League

Statistics






