[[Australian ska]]

CATEGORIES: Australian styles of music

The Australian ska scene has existed since the mid-1980s, when it started enjoying the same sort of interest as it did in the United Kingdom, following the success of UK 2 Tone bands such as The Specials, The Beat and Madness.

Beginnings

The first Australian ska band was Adelaide-based band The Jumpers, which formed in 1979. Other early Australian ska bands included: Sydney bands Allniters, The Hangovers and Itchy Feet (led by vocalist Tim Freedman, who went on to form the commercially successful band The Whitlams) and Melbourne bands Strange Tenants and  No Nonsense. The Allniters and Strange Tenants were the most high-profile Australian ska bands of this era.
The first Ska bands in Australia, included 'The Letters', formed in Melbourne in 1979, featuring founder member of 'Strange Tennants' John Holmes - and Melbourne band, 'Noisy Neighbours'.  Both bands played in most main independent venues in Melbourne, and often together.
In 1987, the Newcastle-based band The Pork Hunts appeared on the scene, soon changing their name to The Porkers.theporkers.html They spent more than 20 years touring and recording many albums, the most recent of which, This is The Porkers, was released in 2007. More recent notable bands include: Mad Not Madness, Area 7, the Bedlam Beggars, Backy Skank, Los Capitanes, General Pants and the Privates, Sounds Like Chicken, The Prophets of Impending Doom, The Seen, Loin Groin, Skamen, Trojan Horns, Blowhard, Dr. Raju, Addiction 64,  Suspect 7, The Lyrical Madmen, Foghorn Leghorn, The Resignators, Rubix Cuba, Dr. Octopus, CatchCry, Rad Rockets Are GO!, The Accelerators, The My Tys and The Mouldy Lovers.
The Bedlam Beggars (1994-2002) supported many overseas ska and punk bands that toured down under.
There are regular ska and radio shows on the independent Brisbane radio station 4ZzZ.

Melbourne Ska Scene

1980s

In November 1981, the Strange Tenants  The main venues in the early 1980s Melbourne ska scene were the Aberdeen Hotel (an old hotel in Fitzroy later to be renamed the Loaded Dog), the Bat Cave (a small mod-oriented venue in Richmond), the Greyhound Hotel (Richmond) and The Chevron Hotel.  A pivotal figure in the Melbourne ska scene was 'Aunty' Carol Baxter who, in the early days, managed both Strange Tenants and No Nonsense and booked and promoted all the bands at the Aberdeen Hotel.

1990s

In the mid-1990s, the Melbourne ska scene was mostly dormant. The few gigs were from bands such as Loin Groin, Slyboots and Area 7. However, towards the end of the decade the momentum started to build on the back of the oi-punk resurgence. New bands started appearing, such as 

2000s

The momentum continued with additional bands springing up, like Hectic, Skazz, 99% Fat, Trojan Horns, Redsand Shuffle, Mr Coffee, User Friendly and The Incredible Dead Goons. Gigs were regular and well attended. Most of the musicians and audience were born from 1980–1985 and although the scene developed into a size which could exist in its own right, there was still crossover with the local punk scene. The most popular bands in this time were Commissioner Gordon, 99% Fat and Area 7 (although by this stage Area 7 had become a "national band" with strong airplay on Triple M, so they were partly isolated from the "local scene").
On the first Thursday of every month, the "Ska Bar" was held at The Arthouse in North Melbourne. From 1999 to 2004 this institution was the foundation for the scene, and its end in 2004 was reflective of a scene in decline. Every year, the Melbourne International Skafest was held at the Corner Hotel, an event which eventually morphed into the annual gig for the Melbourne Ska Orchestra with an international guest. Venues where ska gigs were commonly held were The Arthouse, The Tote, The Punters Club, The Corner Hotel, 9th Ward and The Evelyn. The biggest venue booked by a local ska band was the Hifi Bar for the launch of Commissioner Gordon's album which was supported by Sforzando and H-Block 101. The scene was also supported by a weekly radio show called Skankin' Downunder on the community radio station called Plenty Valley FM.
Ska bands from interstate made appearances at local shows, including The Porkers (Sydney), The Seen (Adelaide), The Lyrical Madmen (Sydney) and Wiseacre (Brisbane). Many international ska bands played shows in Melbourne during this era, such as The Mighty Mighty Bosstones, Reel Big Fish (who have toured many times), Blukilla, Less Than Jake, Goldfinger, The Special Beat, The Skatellites and Bad Manners.
In 2003, at St Kilda's Gershwin Room, the Melbourne Ska Orchestra was born. It is assembled from members of many Australian ska and reggae bands, and is fronted by Nicky Bomba. The band has played at several major festivals including Bluesfest Byron Bay 2011, 2012, 2103.
Around 2004 when many of the bands of the past 5 years began breaking up, it seemed the scene would continue to prosper due to the healthy number of new bands appearing- such as The Ska Vendors, The Knockabouts, Sounds Like Chicken, Payoff, The Beefeaters, The Moonhops, The Vaginals, The Resignators, The Gaskats (SA), Houston's Dilemma(SA) and Son of Dad(SA). However, audiences were shrinking so the scene went into decline, with gigs only held occasionally. However, the annual Ska Nation weekend of events was started and Commissioner Gordon played annual re-union gigs.

2010s

For a while, most of the ska shows featured bands playing a retro style (e.g. 2 Tone, 1980s). However, there are still some bands looking to develop a unique style. As of 2011, bands known to still be active include Chris Duke and the Royals (Sydney), The Ska Vendors, Loonee Tunes, The Kujo Kings, Johnny Longshot (Melbourne), Live@Subs, Area-7 (Melbourne), The Resignators (Melbourne), The Bennies (Melbourne) (although many of their songs would not be considered ska), The Operators, Menage A Ska, Admiral Ackbars Dishonourable Discharge and Fistful of Trojans (Adelaide).
Blue Juice on PBS often plays pre-1980 ska/rocksteady songs. 88.3 Southern FM has a current all wave ska show on every Friday from 6pm till 7pm called 'Ska'd for life'.
In September 2011 & September 2012 The Bennies toured Japan.
In January 2013, Strange Tenants embarked on a tour to Brisbane and Sydney. They supported Melbourne Ska at the Forum in Melbourne on Sat 4 May as part of Melbourne Ska Album Launch tour.






