[[Pepsi Max (North America)]]

CATEGORIES: PepsiCo soft drinks, Cola brands, Products introduced in 2007

Pepsi Max (known as Diet Pepsi Max until early 2009), is a zero-calorie, sugar-free, carbohydrate-free, ginseng-infused cola sweetened with aspartame, marketed by PepsiCo. It has nearly twice the caffeine of Pepsi's other cola beverages. "Diet Pepsi Max: You Snooze, You Lose", Adweek, June 26, 2007. Accessed July 9, 2007. "A cross between a cola and an energy drink, it contains twice the caffeine of regular Diet Pepsi and a touch of ginseng for the je ne sais quoi." Pepsi used airtime during Super Bowl XLII to advertise the beverage; the commercial featured the song "What is Love" by Haddaway, and showed people sleeping in inappropriate places and at inappropriate times, while bobbing their heads to the rhythm of the song. Pepsi Max's current slogan in the US is "Maximum taste. Zero calories.". In July 2010 Pepsi Max had a commercial remake from the 1995 diner commercial. The commercial includes the song "Why Can't We Be Friends?" by War. In 2011, Snoop Dogg was featured in an ad campaign around the time of the Super Bowl XLV.

Product information

Pepsi Max contains 69 milligrams of caffeine per 355ml (12 fl oz). Diet Pepsi contains 36 milligrams of caffeine per 355ml (12 fl oz). Accessed July 13, 2007.

History

Diet Pepsi Max was introduced in the United States on June 1, 2007 and in Canada in March, 2008.  "Diet" was dropped from the name in early 2009.

Marketing

Pepsi Max competes in the energy drink market.  Compared with other common energy drinks, Pepsi Max gives the consumer a relatively low dose of caffeine.  Pepsi Max provides 5.75 mg caffeine per 30ml, while Red Bull provides 9.64 mg/30ml, AMP Energy provides 8.93 mg/30ml, Monster Energy provides 10 mg/30ml and Cocaine (drink) provides 33.14 mg/30ml.  
The product is marketed as an 'Invigorating Cola' implying it is meant to compete in the energy drink market. 
Also, there was a featured commercial of a spoof on the Dallas Cowboys offensive coordinator yawning, when calling a play, thus, causing Tony Romo to be sacked, he was then replaced by Cowboys' owner Jerry Jones who gives him a Diet Pepsi Max.  The scene then cuts away to the words "WAKE UP PEOPLE" while a voiceover shouts the slogan.
Although technically a competitor in the energy drink market, Pepsi Max commercials present the beverage as an alternative to Diet Pepsi.  
After the 2009 Super Bowl commercial aired, another, more recent campaign (including television and radio advertisements) has emphasized that the product is intended to be a men's diet cola.  In one commercial, entitled "I'm Good," men are shown in various dangerous and painful situations, and after each brief sequence, the "injured" actor states, "I'm good!"  The take-away message is that men can handle anything, except for the taste of the average diet cola.  Pepsi Max is intended to be the diet cola that men will enjoy.  Another commercial entitled "Ingredients" shows men in various situations listing fictitious ingredients that essentially make Pepsi Max seem "tough."  The fictitious ingredients include pepper spray (as a sweetener), scorpion venom, crushed Viking bones, and the saliva of a rabid wolverine.  The actors also state that the can is made from the hull of a nuclear submarine, and subsequently crush the cans in their bare hands, stating, "I just crushed the hull of a nuclear submarine."   This commercial ends with "Maximum Taste, No Sugar, and Maybe Scorpion Venom.  Pepsi Max, the First Diet Cola for Men," signaling a definitively different message than the one used in the "WAKE UP PEOPLE" advertisements.  These more recent commercials have portrayed Pepsi Max consumers as unremarkable, average, and heavy men, explicitly identifying the target market.
In early 2010 Pepsi released a limited edition called "Pepsi Max Cease Fire". It is Diet Pepsi Lime in the Pepsi Max formula, and is being cross-promoted with Doritos Burn flavors.  In July 2010, Pepsi Max was once again redesigned, this time to match its global branding.  In the process, Pepsi Max began using the medium-sized "smile".  The "Max" typeface was changed to appear similar to what is used worldwide, and a distorted blue background borders the Pepsi globe.
Richard Speight, Jr. is the "Pepsi Max" delivery guy for all commercials the last two years, with ads featuring major baseball and football stars, and also with Snoop Dogg and 4-time NASCAR Sprint Cup Series champion Jeff Gordon, who worked with Pepsi Max in 2013 to create Pepsi MAX & Jeff Gordon Present: Test Drive,
Coca Cola produces Pepsi Max's primary competing product, Coke Zero, another zero calorie soda.

Ingredient list

Carbonated Water,  Caramel Color, Phosphoric acid, Aspartame, Potassium Benzoate, Caffeine, Natural flavor, Acesulfame potassium, Citric acid, Calcium disodium EDTA, Panax ginseng extract.








