[[Under 19 Bundesliga]]

CATEGORIES: Youth football in Germany, 2003 establishments in Germany, Bundesliga

The Under 19 Bundesliga (German: A-Junioren Bundesliga) is the highest level in German Under 19 football. It was created in 2003 and is divided in three divisions (Nord/Nordost, West und Süd/Südwest) with 14 teams each. The winner of each divisions and the second-placed team from the Süd/Südwest division join the play-offs for the German U19 champions. 
The forerunner of the Under 19 Bundesliga was the A-Jugend-Regionalliga. In the summer of 2003 the divisions North and Northeast as well as South and Southwest were merged, the division West was simply renamed. The intent was to make youth football more competitive.

History

The league was formed in 2003, when the five U 19 Regionalligas merged to form the three Bundesligas as follows:
The Regionalligas itself had only been formed in 1996, to replace an even more regionalised system with separate leagues for every regional football association.Rund um die A-Junioren-Meisterschaft  publisher: Hamburger Abendblatt, published: 30 August 2003, accessed: 27 November 2008
In 2007, the German Football Association followed this example reorganised the under 17 Regionalligas in the same fashion, forming the Under 17 Bundesliga.

Mode

The clubs in each of the three divisions play a home-and-away round whereby there is no inter-league play. Every club plays therefore 26 regular season games. The bottom three teams in each division are relegated to the next level below, in turn, the best three teams from the region are promoted.
The winner of each league plus the runners-up of the South/Southwest region play in the finals round for the German Under 19 championship. The semi-finals are played in a home-and-away format. If the two semi-final teams playing each other are level on points and goals after the second game, there will be a penalty shoot-out. No extra time will be played.
The two semi-final winners reach the final, which is held at the location of the winner of the predetermined semi-final A, unless the teams stadium does not comply with DFB requirement, in which case an alternative venue will be determined. In the final, which is one game only, in case of a draw after normal time, a 20-minute extra time will be played. If the game is still a draw, a penalty shoot-out will determine the winner.

Geography

The three Bundesligas are not geographically balanced, North/Northeast covers a large area while West a rather small one, but in population termes, the arrangement is much more level. The three leagues cover the following states:

League pyramid

Below the three Bundesligas, a number of second tier leagues exist which teams are promoted from and relegated to. The league system operates as follows for the 2008–09 season.DFB Jugendordnung – § 19 – Aufstieg in die Junioren-Bundesligen  DFB website – Promotion to the Bundesligas, accessed: 27 November 2008

Under 19 Bundesliga North/Northeast

The league has two second divisions as the tier below, these being:
The league champions are directly promoted while the two runners-ups play each other for a third promotion spot

Under 19 Bundesliga South/Southwest

The league has four second divisions as the tier below, these being:
The winners of the Oberliga Baden-Württemberg and Bayernliga are directly promoted. A third promoted team is determined between the winners of the Hessenliga and the Regionalliga Southwest.

Under 19 Bundesliga West

The league has three second divisions as the tier below, these being:
The three league champions are directly promoted.

Levels of youth football

German football recognises seven levels of junior football, determined by age and labeled with letters, whereby A is the oldest. In the A level, mixed teams of male and females are not permitted while in B and C mixed teams are allowed if the parents or guardians of the children permit it. Below the C level, mixed teams are generally permitted without restrictions.DFB Jugendordnung – § 5 – Altersklasseneinteilung  DFB website – rules & regulations of German youth football, accessed: 27 November 2008
1 (commonly known as Bambini)

Division champions

Championship winners

The German under 19 football championship begun in 1969.kicker Almanach 1990  publisher: kicker, published: 1989, accessed: 27 November 2008

Pre-Bundesliga era

Bundesliga era

Winners & Finalists

As of 2012, this is the standing in the all-time winners list:

Clubs & league finishes

The clubs and their league finishes in the Under 19 Bundesliga since 2003–04. Also shown are the final placing of the qualifying season 2002–03 and the Regionalliga or region, in color, the clubs qualified from:

North/Northeast

South/Southwest

West

Key



Sources




