[[Sardarilal Mathradas Nanda]]

CATEGORIES: 1915 births, 2009 deaths, Recipients of the Padma Vibhushan, Chiefs of Naval Staff (India), Indian Navy admirals, Indian military personnel of the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, Indian military personnel from Punjab, India, Admirals of the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, Recipients of the Param Vishisht Seva Medal

Sardarilal Mathradas Nanda (10 October 1915 – 11 May 2009) was an Indian Navy admiral who served as the 8th Chief of the Naval Staff from 1 March 1970 until 28 February 1973.

Early life

Nanda was born on October 10, 1915 in Punjab. He was raised on Manora Island at the entrance to the Port of Karachi. He was the eldest of seven children. Prior to joining the navy, Nanda had worked for the Karachi Port Trust.

Naval career

Nanda enlisted into the Royal Indian Navy Volunteer Reserve during World War II on 11 October 1941. He stayed in the Navy despite rapid, large-scale demobilization at the end of the war. After independence in 1947, he opted to join the Indian Navy. In 1948, he was appointed First Lieutenant on board  under the command of Captain H.N.S Brown, with then Lieutenant Commander Ram Dass Katari as his Executive Officer.
From 1949 to 1951, he served as the Director of Personnel Services. In 1951, he took command of the R class destroyer,  from the UK, Nanda supported the acquisition of equipment from the Soviet Union.
The 1962 Sino-Indian War was largely fought over the Himalayas and the Navy did not have a major role. During the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965, the Navy was ordered to stay within Indian waters. When the Pakistani Navy bombarded Dwarka, Nanda recognized the need to raise the Navy's profile and capabilities.

Chief of Naval Staff

In March 1970, Admiral Nanda took command as the 8th Chief of the Naval Staff of the Indian Navy. He was determined to change the mindset of the service from defence to attack. He got the opportunity to demonstrate this capability the following year during the war with Pakistan. Nanda was instrumental in framing India's Naval strategy during the war. He feigned a defensive deployment southeast towards the Andaman Islands, instead moving his Eastern fleet northwards into the Bay of Bengal and enforcing a naval blockade against East Pakistan.
His strategy against West Pakistan was to strike hard against Pakistan's main port of Karachi. He is recognized as the mastermind behind Operation Trident and Operation Python. The missile boats then closed in on Karachi port at night and attacked naval targets as well as the oil tank farm at Keamari. Operation Trident was successfully executed on 4 December 1971, sinking the Pakistani Navy destroyer PNS Khaibar, minesweeper PNS Muhafiz, an ammunition carrying ship MV Venus Challenger and irreparably damaging another destroyer PNS Shah Jahan as well as destroying numerous oil storage tanks. Operation Python was again successfully carried out on 8 December 1971.
On the Eastern front, Nanda made the decision to deploy the aircraft carrier INS Vikrant into the shallower waters of the Gulf of Bengal off Dhaka, to prevent the risk of a submarine attack. When concerns were raised about Vikrant's boilers being cracked, he took personal responsibility for the risk of a boiler explosion and catapult failure on the carrier. His gambit paid off, as Vikrant was able to successfully enforce the blockade of East Pakistan without any such damage to the carrier. The success of the naval blockades on two fronts is considered one of the primary factors in India's overwhelming victory during the war. Admiral Nanda retired from the Indian Navy in 1973.

Awards

Admiral Nanda was revered in the Indian Navy for his bold decision-making and for frequently defeating bureaucracy in his quest to improve the living conditions of his sailors and their families. For his heroism at sea, he was at times called India's Nelson.
He was awarded the Ati Vishisht Seva Medal in 1961 and the Param Vishisht Seva Medal in 1966. He was awarded the Padma Vibhushan in 1972.gov.php

Later life

Following his retirement, Nanda took an executive role with Crown Corporation, an arms trading firm headed by his son Suresh Nanda, which specialized in supply of imported weapons to the Indian Armed Forces.
Nanda's reputation was tarnished by the involvement of his family in several high profile controversies, two of which involved allegations of corruption and payment of bribes to Indian government officials for facilitating arms sales. A third case was an attempt at a cover-up by his son and grandson in a hit-and-run drunk driving accident, in which three policemen and three other individuals were killed at a police checkpoint by a speeding BMW driven by his grandson Sanjeev Nanda.

Controversies

[/ref] As of 2007, the case was in appeal in a higher court after Sanjeev Nanda was acquitted in a lower court after allegations of bribery of the sole-surviving witness, who changed his testimony in court to say that he was no longer sure what hit them, and that it could have been a truck.

Death

Admiral Nanda died in New Delhi on 11 May 2009 at the age of 93. His funeral was marked with full military honours, but not as well attended as his naval career mandated due to the involvement of his family in controversial cases.




