[[Junípero Serra High School (Gardena, California)]]

CATEGORIES: High schools in Los Angeles County, California, Roman Catholic secondary schools in Los Angeles County, California, Educational institutions established in 1950, 1950 establishments in California

Junípero Serra High School is a private, Roman Catholic high school in Gardena, California, a suburban city located 14 miles southwest from downtown Los Angeles. Honored as a State School of the Year, Serra is operated by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Los Angeles.

Background

Junípero Serra High School was founded by James Francis Cardinal McIntyre in 1950. The school has played a very important role in the life of the community, graduating over four thousand students.
The current administration and faculty are predominately lay women and men. Their dedication to the Catholic philosophy of education and values of the Gospel serves as an example for today's youth.
In addition to Gardena, the school also serves Carson, Compton, Hawthorne, Inglewood, Lawndale, Lennox, Los Angeles, Manhattan Beach, and Torrance. The student body brings with it a diverse cultural and ethnic background which continues to enrich the traditions begun in 1950.

Philosophy

In the tradition of Padre Serra, Serra High School provides a Catholic and college preparatory education for our students with varied curricular and extracurricular programs. With the support of faculty, parents, alumni, the advisory board and the community, students from diverse cultural, economic and religious backgrounds work together to create a true Christian spirit.
This tradition, based on the Gospel of Jesus Christ, educates the whole person, emphasizing the importance of developing the individual spiritually, academically, socially, and physically. This emphasis instills the self-motivation for success in life now and in the future.

Academics

Serra High School is recognized for the diversity of its academic programs and student accomplishmentsl. In 2010, U.S. Congresswoman Maxine Waters (D-CA)  presented school administrators with a framed copy of a statement she filed in the Congressional Record that honors Serra for its academic and athletic achievements. In 2011, Serra won its second consecutive national championship in the Catholic Math League, outscoring 29 top high schools from around the country.

Demographics

As of 1992 the school White, Latino, and African-American students. "Japanese Students Sample Life at U.S. Schools : Education: The visit to Junipero Serra High School was a cultural awakening for guests and hosts alike." Los Angeles Times. November 20, 1992.

Athletics

CIF and State Championships

Serra athletic programs have earned numerous California state and CIF-Southern Section titles. In the spring of 2013 the boys track & field team set a record with 148 team points en route to winning their 20th CIF title, twelfth out of the last fourteen. After narrowly missing the title in 2010 and 2012, the boys track & field team finished a historic season by capturing the CIF State Championship. The team finished with several individual champions, making it their team second CIF State Championship. In the Spring of 2012 the girls won the (California) CIF State Track & Field Championship and their 4th consecutive CIF-Southern Section title. Serra has also placed five top 20 records in California State High School Track & Field history in the 4x100 meter relay according to DyestatCal and ESPN,
Since 1980, the school has won numerous state and CIF Championships, in addition to dozens of league titles:

School of the Year

In the 2009–2010 academic year, the Serra Cavaliers, who compete in the California Interscholastic Federation (CIF), became the first school in California history to win state football and basketball titles in the same academic year.  For this achievement, Serra was named "2009–2010 State School of the Year" by Cal-Hi Sports.  Based on school enrollment, Serra is the smallest school to ever receive this honor and the first State School of the Year recipient from the South Bay region of Los Angeles in 44 years.

Notable alumni

Notable faculty






