[[Military Institute of Science and Technology]]

CATEGORIES: Public universities of Bangladesh, Universities in Bangladesh, Public_engineering_universities_of_Bangladesh

Military Institute of Science and Technology () commonly known as MIST is an advanced engineering institution of Bangladesh. It is the pioneer institution of Bangladesh Armed Forces for engineering education. Currently it is under the affiliation of Bangladesh University of Professionals (BUP), a university governed by the Armed Forces of Bangladesh.

History

MIST came into existence on 19 April 1998. Academic programs were launched on 31 January 1999 with the maiden batch of Civil Engineering (CE). Though the pioneer batches comprised only military students (session 2001–2002), civil students (both male and female) were admitted to various disciplines from the session 2002–2003. At present most of the students are civil.
Campus== 
MIST is located at Mirpur Cantonment, on the northwest edge of Dhaka City. Students' hall and teachers' quarters are at the last end of the campus. The academic buildings of MIST are on  of land. This area is confined with officers' mess, four tower building (one is completed, known as Tower Building-1 and a second one is in under construction), cafeteria, library,two vast fields for the civil students, medical center, physical center and administrative buildings. Halls for students and teachers are situated outside the campus. Recently more land was issued for the campus for residential accommodation.

Aim of MIST

The aim of MIST is to conduct undergraduate and post graduate courses on various disciplines of engineering.

Objectives

Code of conduct

During their stay in MIST all students are required to abide by the existing rules, regulations and code of conduct. Students are strictly forbidden to form or be members of any student organization or political party, club, society etc, other than those set up by MIST authority in order to enhance students' physical, intellectual, moral and ethical development.

Student's Dress

Civil students are to wear dress with displayed identity card as per 'Dress Code' prescribed by MIST authority. Military students put on uniform as per Dress Regulation of respective services.

Affiliation

All academic programs of MIST are affiliated with the Bangladesh University of Professionals (BUP). BUP was established as the 30th public university of Bangladesh on 5 Jun 2008. Ten colleges/academies/institutions are affiliated to BUP including National Defence College (NDC), Armed Forces Medical College (AFMC), etc. All examinations are conducted as per the schedule approved by the same university. BUP also approves the results and awards certificates to the qualified students.

Procedure of admission

The undergraduate admission process at MIST has several steps. First, students are screened based on their grade point average (GPA) in HSC or equivalent examinations. Every year, 2,000–2,500 candidates are short-listed from approximately 10,000 applicants to sit for the admission test. in its six departments.
Foreign students may be admitted against a reserved quota of 3% of overall vacancies available (6% of civil seats). Vacancies will be offered to countries through Armed Forces Division (AFD), Prime Minister's Office, of the Government of Bangladesh.
Admission to a Master's program requires a Bachelor's degree in engineering from a recognized institution.

Academics

Departments

Academic activities are undertaken by seven departments. Six departments offer undergraduate programs. CE department offers post graduate program. Six departments are :

Undergraduate Acceptance

Undergraduate Programs leading to B.Sc. Engineering degrees in the following disciplines:

Post Graduate Acceptance

Post graduate courses are M. (Masters of Science in Engineering) & M. Engg (Masters of Engineering). M. Engg are offered for:

Diploma Courses

Laboratory Facilities

Each department is equipped with modern lab facilities. The various laboratories available under each dept are given below:

CE Dept

CSE Dept

EECE Dept

ME Dept

AE Dept

NAME Dept

Science & Humanities Dept

Central Library

MIST library has resourceful collection of 58,242 book (as of 2012), 1,200 CD-ROMs, and a good number of magazines, periodicals, journals and articles from home and abroad. The library gives access to online journals through INASP-PERI. The central library uses KOHA(open source software) as a part of Integrated Library Management System. In addition to that each dept has its own library enriched with adequate text and reference books. There is also a cyber center for Internet browsing.

MIST Journals & Magazines

Halls Of Residence

MIST has dorms for male and female students. Hostel administration is performed by the provost, one of the senior teachers from the six departments. The hall organizes many creative works and tournaments.

Osmany Hall

Osmany Hall is named after the Bangabir General M.A.G. Osmany, the Commander-in-chief of Bangladesh forces during Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971. Osmany Hall is an 8 storeyed building with female and male wings, each wing having a capacity of 260 students. There are 20 staff for each wing. Osmany Hall is known for the security of the students compared to the other hall in the country. Students get various modern facilities such as 24 hour electricity, internet service, gym, games and sports facilities.

Teacher's Quarters

MIST has two Teacher's Quarters for the permanent teachers with families. They are:

Facilities & Services

Medical Support

Civil students are provided with medical support by MIST medical centre. MIST Medical centre provides required medicine and other necessary support as prescribed by the Medical Officer. Civil student can be sent to Azmol Hospital (Mirpur 10), 3 km away from MIST for further treatment.

Fitness Center

Fitness Center provides ample opportunity for the students to keep their body and mind fit.

Cyber Cafe

Cyber cafe provides internet browsing facilities to students and faculties.

Sports & Recreation

MIST has got adequate facilities for both indoor and outdoor games including table tennis, badminton, football, and cricket. Students can also enjoy a wide variety of athletic pursuits. Besides, picnics, cultural competition, celebration of national days are also arranged regularly in befitting manner.

Cultural Programs

To break the monotony of study different cultural programs are arranged at regular intervals.

Cafeteria

Cafeteria provides an inexpensive meal with different types of cuisine on offer.

Students Organizations

Achievements






