[[Felbridge]]

CATEGORIES: Tandridge, Civil parishes in Surrey

Felbridge is a village and civil parish in the Tandridge district of Surrey with a playing field and Felbridge Nurseries within its focal area, narrowly in West Sussex.  Felbridge village forms a contiguous settlement with East Grinstead and had 829 homes and households at the time of the 2011 Census. Domewood is part of Felbridge civil parish, which was created in 1953.

History

Early history

Until shortly after 1911, the area was part of the parish of Horne.1911 Map of Tandridge Hundred No reference appears to a separate settlement being here in the Domesday Book of 1086.The Domesday Map website with Domesday Book entries

Post Reformation

James son of Edward Evelyn succeeded to the manors of Hedgecourt (and smaller carucate of Covelingeley) in the parish of Horne and the estate of Felbridge in 1751. Julia Evelyn Medley, his granddaughter by his first wife, who had married Charles Jenkinson, 3rd Earl of Liverpool held this estate, after James's Evelyn wife's death, as late as 1841. By 1911, whereabouts it lost much of its land, amid the economic change and social reforms of the age it became the property of the Sayer family.

Geography

Felbridge is centred  ESE of Surrey's county town, Guildford.  The east of the village is often referred to as Felcourt.
Hedgecourt lake is immediately northwest of the village centre in the heart of the civil parish, approximately  in size.
Elevations range between 115m AOB towards the south of the eastern boundary, fields adjoining Chartham Wood and similarly 102m AOB along West Park Road by the Effingham Park Hotel in the southwest, to 53m AOB along Felbridge Water between Felcourt and Newchapel, in the northeast of the parish, a tributary of the River Eden.
The soil part of a wide 

Localities

Domewood

Domewood is a western neighbourhood surrounded on two of its four sides by copses; it faces, across its southern boundary road, Snow Hill (B2037) the Effingham Park Hotel and Golf Course, see Landmarks; and Snow Hill, a similarly semi-wooded neighbourhood interspersed with farms which is part of an area administered by Worth, West Sussex. Separating Domewood from the village centre are Hedgecourt Lake and small surrounding copses.

Wire Mill lake and inn

Wire Mill forms a separate area which is focussed on and around a short lane, Wire Mill Lane, which ends with the Wire Mill Inn, Toad Hall and Mill End House all overlooking a small weir which releases the water from the Wire Mill Lake.

Landmarks

Felbridge County Primary School

This listed building marks a tapering triangular intersection between the village centre's longest streets, Copthorne Road and Crawley Down road that several times forms the West Sussex boundary. The school opened on 4 November 1783 and was substantially enlarged in 1934.

Effingham Park Hotel and Golf Course

This large, complex, building with part-rounded restaurant in a compact 9 hole golf course forms the southwest outcrop of the parish. 

St John the Divine parish church

In the centre of the village is the Church of England parish church of St John the Divine,

Whittington College

This emergency and sheltered housing consisting of 56 homes, mainly two bedroom bungalows but also large apartments. All have fitted kitchens, central heating, attractive sitting rooms and outside seating areas. Whittington College sits in  acres of attractive parkland with an orchard, lake and woodland walks. This is offered to eligible members of the public, although originally was solely connected to one of the Livery Companies of the City of London, the Mercers' Company.Whittington College - Housing from the Mercers Company for Single Women and Married Couples

Transport

Road

Copthorne Road runs through the centre of the village and links onto the A22 near East Grinstead which is about  to the southeast.

Rail

Felbridge's nearest railway stations are on the Oxted Line. East Grinstead railway station is  southeast of the main road through the village centre; and north of Wire Mill Lake and the Eden Brook, more than thirty homes are nearer to Lingfield railway station to the northeast, which is two stations closer to London.

Demography and housing

The area of the parish is .  At the United Kingdom Census 2011 its population had risen from 2,039 (ten years before) to 2,096. Greater than the national and local averages, 52.5% of the population described their health as very good.
The civil parish was created in 1953, so the 1951 figure is that of the historic, undivided parish of Horne.Vision of Britain The University of Portsmouth and others
The average level of accommodation in the region composed of detached houses was 28%, the average that was apartments was 22.6%.  
The proportion of households in the civil parish who owned their home outright compares to the regional average of 35.1%.  The proportion who owned their home with a loan compares to the regional average of 32.5%.  The remaining % is made up of rented dwellings (plus a negligible % of households living rent-free).






