[[Friends of the Earth]]

CATEGORIES: Friends of the Earth, Climate change organizations, Anti-nuclear organizations, Organizations established in 1971, Environmental organizations

Friends of the Earth International (FoEI) is an international network of environmental organizations in 74 countries.[ref]
  
</ref>
Friends of the Earth was founded in 1969 as an anti nuclear group by Robert O Anderson
Their first employee was Amory Lovins, who kicked off FOE in the UK. It became an international network in 1971 with a meeting of representatives from the U.S., Sweden, the UK and France.
FoEI is assisted by a small secretariat (based in Amsterdam, Netherlands) which provides support for the network and its agreed major campaigns. The executive committee of elected representatives from national groups set policy and oversee the work of the secretariat. In 2010 Nigerian activist Nnimmo Bassey was elected to serve as chair of Friends of the Earth International.

Campaign issues

Friends of the Earth considers environmental issues in their social, political and human rights contexts. Their campaigns stretch beyond the traditional arena of the conservation movement and seek to address the economic and development aspects of sustainability. Originally based largely in North America and Europe, its membership is now heavily weighted toward groups in the developing world.
The current campaign priorities of Friends of the Earth internationally are:FoEI Campaigns
The campaign priorities are set at the bi-annual general meeting of Friends of the Earth International.
In addition to the priority campaign areas Friends of the Earth International has a number of other campaign areas which are active internationally. They include:
All FoE International campaigns incorporate elements of three core themes which are:

Friends of the Earth groups

The Friends of the Earth organizations in each country are themselves many-tiered networks reaching from individual activists up to the national pressure group which campaigns for environmentally progressive and sustainable policies. The groups and activists at all levels also carry out educational and research activities.
Friends of the Earth groups are required to act independently of party political, religious or other influences; be open, democratic and non-discriminatory in their internal structures; and be willing to cooperate with other organizations who are working for the same goals.FOEI Membership Criteria
The national groups work on the main issues affecting their own country and choose to participate in the international campaigns of FoEI which are relevant to them. In turn, the local campaigners can work on local, national and/or international campaigns.

Structure of the network

The member organization in a particular country may name itself Friends of the Earth or an equivalent translated phrase in the national language, e.g., Friends of the Earth (US), Friends of the Earth (EWNI) (England Wales and Northern Ireland), Amigos de la Tierra (Spain and Argentina). However, roughly half of the member groups work under their own names, sometimes reflecting an independent origin and subsequent accession to the network, such as ERA (FOE Nigeria) and WALHI (FOE Indonesia).
Friends of the Earth International (FoEI) is supported by a secretariat based in Amsterdam, and an executive committee known as ExCom.FoEI Structure At the same general meeting, overall policies and priority activities are agreed.
In addition to work which is coordinated at the FoEI level, national member groups are free to carry out their own campaigns and to work bi- or multi-laterally as they see fit, as long as this does not go against agreed policy at the international level.

Publications

The Meat Atlas is an annual report on the methods and impact of industrial animal agriculture. The publication consists of 27 short essays and visualises facts about the production and consumption of meat with the help of graphs. The Meat Atlas is jointly published by Friends of the Earth and Heinrich Böll Foundation.Meat Atlas, Friends of the Earth, download Meat Atlas as pdf

Climate change

Notable supporters

Support for The Big Ask

Among those present at the launch of Friends of the Earth (EWNI)'s climate change campaign The Big Ask were: Jude Law,Radiohead's Thom Yorke to guest-edit Observer Magazine published March 20, 2008. Edith Bowman, Sian Lloyd, Ross Burden, David Cameron, David Miliband, Thom Yorke, Stephen Merchant, Michael Eavis, and Emily Eavis.Friends of the Earth report of The Big Ask launch

Member organizations

Video clips




