[[Leprosy]]

CATEGORIES: Leprosy, Bacterium-related cutaneous conditions, Bacterial diseases, Neglected diseases, Tropical diseases

Leprosy, also known as Hansen's disease (HD), is a chronic infection caused by the bacteria Mycobacterium leprae and Mycobacterium lepromatosis. Symptoms that develop include granulomas of the nerves, respiratory tract, skin, and eyes. This may result in a lack of ability to feel pain and thus loss of parts of extremities due to repeated injuries. Weakness and poor eyesight may also be present.
There are two main types of disease based on the number of bacteria present: paucibacillary and multibacillary. The two types are differentiated by the number of poorly pigmented numb skin patches present, with paucibacillary having five or fewer and multibacillary having more than five. The diagnosis is confirmed by finding acid-fast bacilli in a biopsy of the skin or via detecting the DNA by polymerase chain reaction. It occurs more commonly among those living in poverty and is believed to be transmitted by respiratory droplets. It is not very contagious.
Leprosy is curable with treatment. Treatment for paucibacillary leprosy is with the medications dapsone and rifampicin for 6 months. Treatment for multibacillary leprosy consists of rifampicin, dapsone, and clofazimine for 12 months. These treatments are provided for free by the World Health Organization. A number of other antibiotics may also be used. Globally in 2012 the number of cases of leprosy was 180,000, having decreased a great deal since the 1960s. Most new cases occur in 16 countries, with India accounting for more than half. In the past 20 years, 16 million people worldwide have been cured of leprosy.
Leprosy has affected humanity for thousands of years. The disease takes its name from the Latin word Lepra, which means "scaly", while the term "Hansen's disease" is named after the physician Gerhard Armauer Hansen.

Signs and symptoms

Leprosy is primarily a granulomatous disease of the peripheral nerves and mucosa of the upper respiratory tract; skin lesions are the primary external sign.

Cause

Mycobacterium leprae

Mycobacterium leprae and Mycobacterium lepromatosis are the causative agents of leprosy. M. lepromatosis is a relatively newly identified mycobacterium isolated from a fatal case of diffuse lepromatous leprosy in 2008.
An intracellular, acid-fast bacterium, M. leprae is aerobic and rod-shaped, and is surrounded by the waxy cell membrane coating characteristic of the Mycobacterium genus.
Due to extensive loss of genes necessary for independent growth, M. leprae and M. lepromatosis are obligate pathogens, and unculturable in the laboratory, a factor that leads to difficulty in definitively identifying the organism under a strict interpretation of Koch's postulates. The use of non-culture-based techniques such as molecular genetics has allowed for alternative establishment of causation.
While the causative organisms have to date been impossible to culture in vitro, it has been possible to grow them in animals.
Naturally occurring infection also has been reported in non-human primates including the African chimpanzee, sooty mangabey, and cynomolgus macaque, as well as in
armadillos.

Genetics

Several genes have been associated with a susceptibility to leprosy. It is believed that around 95% of people are naturally immune.

Risk factors

At highest risk are those living in areas with polluted water and poor diet or people suffering from diseases that compromise immune function.
There appears to be little interaction between HIV and the risk of leprosy.

Transmission

Although the mode of transmission of leprosy remains uncertain, many think that M. leprae is usually spread from person to person in nasal droplets. Studies have shown that leprosy can be transmitted to humans by armadillos. Leprosy is not known to be either sexually transmitted or highly infectious after treatment. Approximately 95% of people are naturally immune and sufferers are no longer infectious after as little as two weeks of treatment.

Pathophysiology

The precise mechanism of transmission of leprosy is unknown; however, both prolonged close contact and transmission by nasal droplet are thought to be implicated.  In addition to humans, leprosy has been observed in the nine-banded armadillo, (which, it has recently been confirmed, is among the primary sources of new cases of leprosy in the population of North America), and three species of non-human primates. This is mostly because the body is naturally immune to the bacteria, and those persons that do become infected experience severe allergic reactions to the disease. However, the role of genetic factors is not entirely clear in determining this clinical expression. In addition, malnutrition and prolonged exposure to infected persons may play a role in development of the overt disease.
The most widely held belief is that the disease is transmitted by contact between infected persons and healthy persons.
Two exit routes of M. leprae from the human body often described are the skin and the nasal mucosa, although their relative importance is not clear. Lepromatous cases show large numbers of organisms deep in the dermis, but whether they reach the skin surface in sufficient numbers is doubtful. Although there are reports of acid-fast bacilli being found in the desquamating epithelium (sloughing of superficial layer of skin) of the skin, Weddell et al. had reported in 1963 that they could not find any acid-fast bacilli in the epidermis, even after examining a very large number of specimens from patients and contacts.
The importance of the nasal mucosa was recognized as early as 1898 by Schäffer, in particular that of the ulcerated mucosa.
The entry route of M. leprae into the human body is also not definitively known: The skin and the upper respiratory tract are most likely. While older research dealt with the skin route, recent research has increasingly favored the respiratory route. Rees and McDougall succeeded in the experimental transmission of leprosy through aerosols containing M. leprae in immune-suppressed mice, suggesting a similar possibility in humans. In summary, entry through the respiratory route appears the most probable route, although other routes, particularly broken skin, cannot be ruled out.
In leprosy, both the reference points for measuring the incubation period and the times of infection and onset of disease are difficult to define, the former because of the lack of adequate immunological tools and the latter because of the disease's slow onset. Even so, several investigators have attempted to measure the incubation period for leprosy. The minimum incubation period reported is as short as a few weeks and this is based on the very occasional occurrence of leprosy among young infants. The maximum incubation period reported is as long as 30 years, or over, as observed among war veterans known to have been exposed for short periods in endemic areas but otherwise living in non-endemic areas. It is generally agreed that the average incubation period is between three and five years.

Diagnosis

Diagnosis in the U.S. is often delayed because healthcare providers are unaware of leprosy and its symptoms. Early diagnosis and treatment prevents nerve involvement, the hallmark of leprosy, and the disability it causes.U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration. (n.d.). National Hansen's disease (leprosy) program Retrieved from 
There are many kinds of leprosy but there are common symptoms, including: runny nose; dry scalp; eye problems; skin lesions; muscle weakness; reddish skin; smooth shiny diffuse thickening of facial skin, ear, and hand; loss of sensation in fingers and toes; thickening of peripheral nerves; and flat nose due to destruction of nasal cartilage. There is also phonation and resonation of sound during speech. Often there is atrophy of the testes and impotency.

Classification

There are several different approaches for classifying leprosy; however, parallels exist.
There is a difference in immune response to the tuberculoid and lepromatous forms.
Leprosy may also be divided into the following types:
This disease may also occur with only neural involvement, without skin lesions. This disease is also known as Hansen's disease.
The first symptom of leprosy which is most obvious is excess eye fluid.

Prevention

Medications can decrease the risk of those living with people with leprosy from acquiring the disease and likely those with whom people with leprosy come into contact outside the home. There are however concerns of resistance, cost, and disclosure of a person's infection status when doing follow up of contacts, thus the WHO however recommends that people who live in the same household be examined for leprosy and only be treated if symptoms are present.
The Bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG) vaccine offers a variable amount of protection against leprosy in addition to tuberculosis. Development of a more effective vaccine is ongoing as of 2011.

Treatment

A number of leprostatic agents are available for treatment. For paucibacillary (PB or tuberculoid) cases treatment with daily dapsone and monthly rifampicin for six months is recommended. While for multibacillary (MB or lepromatous) cases treatment with daily dapsone and clofazimine along with monthly rifampicin for twelve months is recommended.
MDT remains highly effective, and people are no longer infectious after the first monthly dose. It is safe and easy to use under field conditions due to its presentation in calendar blister packs. Relapse rates remain low, and there is no known resistance to the combined drugs.

Epidemiology

