[[Arktika 2007]]

CATEGORIES: Russian Arctic expeditions, 2007 in Russia, Foreign relations of Russia, 2007 in science

Arktika 2007 () was a 2007 expedition in which Russia performed the first ever crewed descent to the ocean bottom at the North Pole, as part of research related to the 2001 Russian territorial claim, one of many territorial claims in the Arctic,The Battle for the Next Energy Frontier: The Russian Polar Expedition and the Future of Arctic Hydrocarbons, by Shamil Yenikeyeff and Timothy Fenton Krysiek, Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, August 2007 made possible, in part, because of Arctic shrinkage.  As well as dropping a titanium tube containing the Russian flag, the submersibles collected specimens of Arctic flora and fauna and apparently recorded video of the dives. The "North Pole-35" (abbreviated as "NP-35") manned drifting ice station was established.
On January 10, 2008 three of expedition members who performed the descent to the ocean bottom at the North Pole, Anatoly Sagalevich, Yevgeny Chernyaev and Artur Chilingarov were awarded titles Hero of the Russian Federation "for courage and heroism showed in extremal conditions and successful completion of High-Latitude Arctic Deep-Water Expedition."Президент России | Указ «О награждении государственными наградами Российской Федерации»

Program

The expedition, part of the Russian program for the 2007–2008 International Polar Year, used the Akademik Fedorov research ship, with both MIR submersibles on board and the nuclear icebreaker Rossiya (Russia) led it through the Arctic ice. The ships had two Mi-8 helicopters and geological probe devices, and Il-18 aircraft with gravimetric devices. Its aim was to investigate the structure and evolution of the Earth's crust in the Arctic regions neighbouring Eurasia, such as the regions of Mendeleev Ridge, Alpha Ridge and Lomonosov Ridge, to discover whether they are linked with the Siberian shelf. Applications table at the website of the Russian International Polar Year programIPY ACTIVITIES - Russian plans for Arctic Ocean Activities in summer 2007 (map) at AARI

Expedition

The base ship Akademik Fedorov left Saint Petersburg on July 10, 2007 for the expedition. Off Baltiysk, it took aboard the two MIR Deep Submergence Vehicles manufactured by the Finnish company Rauma Oceanics  from Akademik Mstislav Keldysh    

First stage: high-latitude deep-water Arctic expedition

=Test descent=

On July 29 the Akademik Fedorov approached a large ice-hole, surrounded by thick ice at MIR vehicles submerged in high latitudes of the Arctic. CNN

=North Pole descent=

Descents were carried out on August 2, 2007 in both MIR Deep Submergence Vehicles. The MIR-1's crew consisted of pilot Anatoly Sagalevich (researcher of the Oceanology Institute), Russian polar explorer Arthur Chilingarov and businessman Vladimir Gruzdev. The MIR-2's crew comprised pilot Yevgeny Chernyaev of Russia, Australian adventurer Mike McDowell, and Swede Frederik Paulsen Jr., head of Ferring Pharmaceuticals). Russia submarines successfully end 1st travel to Arctic floor, ITAR-TASS, August 2, 2007 
MIR-1 began its dive at 9:28 Moscow Time and at 12:08 reached the seabed 4,261 metres (14,061 feet) below the North Pole. MIR-2 began its dive at 9:47 and at 12:35 reached the seabed 4,302 metres (14,196 feet) down. At 12:35 the bathyscaphes were 500 metres (1,650 feet) apart and MIR-1 moved near MIR-2. At 13:46 both submersibles began to ascend, with MIR-1 surfacing at 18:08 and MIR-2 at 19:15. Unique Arctic Experiment by Russian Scientists Ended 
On the seabed, 4,261 metres below the Polar ice, MIR-1 planted a one metre tall titanium Russian flag, made at Kaliningrad's "Fakel" 'design bureau.' Arctic Triumph of Chilingarov Expedition at the website of United Russia Soil and water samples of the seabed were taken during the mission.
Interestingly, according to the USS Nautilus measurements, the sea depth at the North Pole in 1958 was only 4,087 m (13,410 ft)

=Controversy over TV images=

Russian state broadcaster Rossiya had enhanced footage of the Arktika expedition with sequences taken by MIR submersibles for the 1997 film Titanic, as an illustration of the submarines in action, in which the Finnish-built bathyscaphes had explored the wrecked liner on the Atlantic seabed.Retrieved on 2007-08-12. The same images were rebroadcast by Reuters, which mistook them as actual footage of part of the expedition.
A Finnish 13-year-old, Waltteri Seretin, of Kemi,  north of Helsinki, had recognized the submersibles used in the voyage to the bottom of the sea as appearing in sequences director James Cameron's Oscar-winning drama. Retrieved on 2007-08-12. International news agency Reuters had on August 10 admitted it had wrongly captioned video it took from Russia's Rossiya Television and which it had disseminated worldwide, London's Guardian reported.Retrieved on 2007-09-19. ''Reuters has admitted that it took the images from Russian state television channel RTR and wrongly captioned them as file footage originating from the Arctic.
RTR had also used the footage to illustrate stories about the North Pole expedition, but it is thought as library footage, and it never claimed it was actually of the flag-planting.'[/ref] 
The agency, the daily reported, had admitted: it had "mistakenly identified this file footage as originating from the Arctic, and not the North Atlantic where the footage was shot. This footage was taken during the search for the Titanic and copyright is held by Rossiya."''Revealed: why those Russian submarine heroics might have looked a little familiar , The Guardian, London, August 11. Rossiya had refused to comment on its 'polar' images.

=Finish of the first stage=

On its way back to Franz Josef Land to collect marine biologists, the Akademik Fedorov on August 4 met the French Tara expedition. The ship's MI-8 helicopter landed near the yacht, which had been drifting for eleven months, Rossiya's Vesti reported. The Russian expedition, led by Arthur Chilingarov, had supplied the Tara expedition with food Russian polar explorers supplied fruit to the crew of the French yacht Tara's schooner Agnès B had set out a year earlier to drift with the Arctic ice for two years, measuring the retreat of the Polar ice cap, its log shows. The Russians had asked to 'visit...retrieved on 2007-08-12. 'A group of a dozen officials and journalists' brought 'gifts of fresh fruit and vegetables and a few bottles of wine... The French expedition had 9 tonnes of food and was growing its own — '....... Corn salad grows very well', even at those latitudes but '...Retrieved on 2007-08-12.
The first stage of the Arktika 2007 expedition ended on August 7, 2007, when both MIR submersibles were transferred from Akademik Fedorov aboard Akademik Mstislav Keldysh, met in Nagurskaya Bay, which is situated in the Cambridge Channel of Franz Josef Land. 2007/08 International Polar Year News Bulletin (issue 5—6, July—August 2007)

Second stage: sailing eastwards

Akademik Fedorov then sailed towards the "Ice Base", a group of nine polar explorers led by A.A. Sailing through the northern part of the Kara Sea Akademik Fedorov reached the northern part of Laptev Sea, then returned, passed by Schmidt Island and sailed southwards towards Shokalsky Strait of Severnaya Zemlya. 26 oceanographic stations were carried out and Mi-8 flights were performed from the research vessel to Schmidt Island for ornithology research and to north-eastern islands of Franz Joseph Land for glaciology, geology and ornithology research. Ornithology research was also conducted on Severnaya Zemlya islands. In particular, a significant part of the ivory gull range was observed and six new colonies of these birds found.News Release by AARI for August 20, 2007
By August 17 Akademik Fedorov passed Shokalsky Strait and six days later collected the "Ice Base". Akademik Fedorov skirted them around from the north, carrying out oceanographic stations and a Mi-8 flight to Bennett Island was performed for geology probe and pollution probe.News Release by AARI for August 29, 2007
On September 5 Akademik Fedorov met nuclear icebreaker Russia and started a search for an ice floe suitable for "NP-35" manned drifting ice station establishment, beginning the third stage of "Arktika 2007" expedition.News Release by AARI for September 6, 2007

Third stage: drifting ice station "NP-35" establishment

The search for appropriate ice floe for the establishment of the "North Pole-35" (abbreviated as "NP-35") manned drifting ice station lasted until September 18, when one with an area of 16 square kilometers was found. Some 300 tons of cargo was disembarked from the vessel to ensure long functioning of the station. "NP-35" started operations on September 21, 2007 at the point , when flags of Russia and Saint Petersburg were raised there. 22 scientists, led by A.A. The station is believed to work for a year, drifting towards the Fram Strait.September 21, 2007 Press-Release by AARI
On September 22 Akademik Fedorov left for Murmansk and reached its home port, Saint Petersburg, on October 3, finishing the high latitude Arctic expedition Arktika 2007. Arthur Chilingarov sent a government telegram to congratulate expedition members on behalf of State Duma.Government Telegram from Arthur Chilingarov

Reactions

There was concern in the other four countries  bordering the Arctic
Former Canadian Foreign Minister Peter MacKay said: "This isn't the 15th century. You can't go around the world and just plant flags and say 'We're claiming this territory'." Russia plants flag under N Pole. BBC News. United States Department of State spokesman Tom Casey stated that planting the flag "doesn't have any legal standing or effect on this claim."Russian claim over North Pole sparks cold war 
In reply, the Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov told reporters: "The aim of this expedition is not to stake Russia's claim but to show that our shelf reaches to the North Pole."Russia plants flag on Arctic floor. CNN News. He also confirmed that Arctic territory issues "can be tackled solely on the basis of international law, the International Convention on the Law of the Sea and in the framework of the mechanisms that have in accordance with it been created for determining the borders of states which have a continental shelf." In another interview Sergey Lavrov said: "I was amazed by my Canadian counterpart's statement that we are planting flags around. We're not throwing flags around. We just do what other discoverers did. The purpose of the expedition is not to stake whatever rights of Russia, but to prove that our shelf extends to the North Pole. By the way on the Moon it was the same".Cold War Goes North - Kommersant Moscow
Lindsay Parson, (head of the Law of the Sea Group at Southampton's National Oceanography Centre in the UK) stated that Denmark (via Greenland) and Canada would have equally good chances of claiming the territory on these grounds — which both nations have stated they will do — as the Lomonosov Ridge extends from Russia across the Arctic to Greenland and northern Canada. Danish science minister Helge Sander told reporters: "The preliminary investigations done so far are very promising. There are things suggesting that Denmark could be given the North Pole."Denmark joins race to claim North Pole, Sunday Telegraph, London, 12 August 2007.

Analysis of expedition results

In mid-September 2007, Russia's Natural Resources Ministry issued a statement:








