[[Productores de Música de España]]

CATEGORIES: Music organizations, Music industry associations

Spanish Music Producers (Spanish: Productores de Música de España, shortened as Promusicae, sometimes stylised PROMUSICAE) is a trade group representing the Spanish recording industry. It is the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry group for Spain.

History

Promusicae born in the 1958s as representative of the IFPI in Spain under the name of the Spanish Group of the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry () (Promusicae, which is also a pun with the Latin expression "pro musicae", which means "for / in favor of the music").
Since April 30, 2003, Antonio Guisasola is the president of Promusicae, replacing Carlos Grande.

Charts

The charts are calculated once every week on Sundays. They are based on retail music sales within Spain for the week from the preceding Saturday to the Friday prior to calculation. The new charts are usually uploaded to the Promusicae website on Sunday night Spanish continental time.
Promusicae provides the following charts:

Certifications

Certifications have existed in Spain since the mid-1970s. During this period, both singles and albums had to sell 100,000 copies to qualify for a Gold disk, the only certification awarded at the time.
Promusicae is currently in charge of certifying records in Spain. It certifies Gold and Platinum recordings based on the shipment of albums and the sales of digital downloads.

Albums

Until November 01, 2005, the certification-levels for albums in Spain were 50,000 for Gold and 100,000 for Platinum. The current levels; however, are 20,000 for Gold and 40,000 for Platinum.
Note that in the table below are the certification-levels, when the program of Gold and Platinum is operated under Promusicae.

Singles

In January 2008, due to a decline in Physical singles, Promusicae replaced the charts of the physical singles with two separate Top 20 charts, one for Digital downloads and the other for Original Tones (similar to Ringtones). The change was reflected to the certifications as well, and allowed each single title to receive two separate types of certification awards.
Note that in the table below are the certification-levels, when the program of Gold and Platinum is operated under Promusicae.
Note that in the table below are the certification-levels, when the program of Gold and Platinum is operated under Promusicae.

Music DVDs

Note that in the table below are the certification-levels, when the program of Gold and Platinum is operated under Promusicae.

Piracy

As a member of IFPI, one of the main missions of Promusicae is lobbying for tougher intellectual property laws and stopping music copyright violations. 
Promusicae has monitored P2P networks gathering data about its users downloading music. In April 2005, Promusicae claimed that they were monitoring the Kazaa P2P network and they had sent "messages" containing warnings and legal threats to more than 10.000 users
In June 2008, Promusicae sued Pablo Soto, developer of Manolito P2P, Blubster and Piolet. Promusicae claimed that Pablo Soto was engaging in unfair competition and demanded 13 million euros in damages.
Promusicae is one of the founders of La Coalición de Creadores e Industrias de Contenidos, a group of companies whose mission is changing Spanish law to be able to prosecute file-sharing.

List of number-one hits








