[[François Boucher]]

CATEGORIES: 1703 births, 1770 deaths, Artists from Paris, 18th-century French painters, Rococo painters, Prix de Rome for painting, Ballet designers, Tapestry artists

François Boucher () (29 September 1703 – 30 May 1770)  was a French painter in the Rococo style. Boucher is known for his idyllic and voluptuous paintings on classical themes, decorative allegories, and pastoral scenes. He was perhaps the most celebrated decorative artist of the 18th century. He also painted several portraits of his patroness, Madame de Pompadour.

Life

A native of Paris, Boucher was the son of a minor painter Nicolas Boucher, who gave him his first artistic training. At the age of seventeen, a painting by Boucher was admired by the painter François Lemoyne.  Lemoyne later appointed Boucher as his apprentice, but after only three months, he went to work for the engraver Jean-François Cars."François Boucher", Oxford Art Online  In 1720, he won the elite Grand Prix de Rome for painting, but did not take up the consequential opportunity to study in Italy until five years later, due to financial problems at the Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture. On his return from studying in Italy he was admitted to the refounded Académie de peinture et de sculpture on 24 November 1731. (1993) Painting and sculpture in France 1700-1789. New Haven: Yale University Press, p. 164. ISBN 0300064942 His morceau du reception (reception piece) was his Rinaldo and Armida of 1734.
Boucher became a faculty member in 1734 and his career accelerated from this point as he was promoted Professor then Rector of the Academy, becoming head of the Royal Gobelins Manufactory in 1755 and finally Premier Peintre du Roi (First Painter of the King) in 1765.
He died on 30 May 1770 in his native Paris. His name, along with that of his patron Madame de Pompadour, had become synonymous with the French Rococo style, leading the Goncourt brothers to write: "Boucher is one of those men who represent the taste of a century, who express, personify and embody it."
Boucher is famous for saying that nature is "trop verte et mal éclairée" (too green and badly lit). p. 86 (citing a letter to Nicolas Lancret).
The neoclassical painter Jacques-Louis David began his painting instruction under Boucher.

Painting

Reflecting inspiration gained from such artists as Peter Paul Rubens and Antoine Watteau, Boucher's early works celebrate the idyllic and tranquil portrayal of nature and landscape with great elan. However, his art typically forgoes traditional rural innocence to portray scenes with a definitive style of eroticism as his mythological scenes are passionate and intimately amorous rather than traditionally epic. Marquise de Pompadour (mistress of King Louis XV), whose name became synonymous with Rococo art, was a great admirer of his work.
Boucher's paintings such as The Breakfast (1739), a familial scene, show how he was as a master of the genre scene, where he regularly used his own wife and children as models. These intimate family scenes are contrasting to the licentious style seen in his Odalisque portraits. The dark-haired version of the Odalisque portraits prompted claims by the art critic Denis Diderot that Boucher was "prostituting his own wife", and the Blonde Odalisque was a portrait that illustrated the extramarital relationships of the King. Boucher gained lasting notoriety through such private commissions for wealthy collectors and, after Diderot expressed his disapproval, his reputation came under increasing critical attack during the last years of his career.

Theatrical and tapestry designs

Along with his painting, Boucher also designed theater costumes and sets, and the ardent intrigues of the comic operas of Charles Simon Favart closely paralleled his own style of painting. Tapestry design was also a concern. For the Beauvais tapestry workshops he first designed a series of Fêtes italiennes ("Italian festivals") in 1736, which proved to be very successful and often rewoven over the years, and then, commissioned in 1737, a suite of the story of Cupid and Psyche. Hiesinger, "The Sources of François Boucher's 'Psyche' Tapestries" Philadelphia Museum of Art Bulletin 72 No. 314 (November 1976), pp. 7-23. During two decades' involvement with the Beauvais tapestry workshops Boucher produced designs for six series of hangings in all. Only his appointment in 1755 as director of the rival Gobelins terminated the association. He was also called upon for designs for court festivities organized by that section of the King's household called the Menus-Plaisirs du Roi and for the opera and for royal châteaux Versailles, Fontainebleau and Choisy. His designs for all of the aforementioned augmented his earlier reputation, resulting in many engravings from his work and even reproduction of his designs on porcelain and biscuit-ware at the Vincennes and Sèvres factories.

Gallery

Image:François Boucher 003.jpg|Self-portrait in the Studio, 1720, Louvre
File:François Boucher - 'Putti with Birds'. 1730-1733, Honolulu Museum of Art
Image:Boucher renaud et armide louvre.jpg|Rinaldo and Armida, 1734
Image:Boucher Diane sortant du bain Louvre 2712.jpg|Diana Leaving the Bath 1742
File:François Boucher 032.jpg|Venus and Amor 1751
Image:The Toilet of Venus, by François Boucher.
File:François Boucher 007.jpg|The Bridge, 1751, Louvre
File:Boucher Marquise de Pompadour 1756.jpg|Madame de Pompadour, 1756, Alte Pinakothek
File:Saint Pierre tentant de marcher sur les eaux by François Boucher.jpg|Saint Peter Attempting to Walk on Water, 1766, Cathédrale Saint-Louis, Versailles
File:François Boucher - Dreaming Shepherdess - WGA02914.jpg|Dreaming Shepherdess 
File:François Boucher Autumn Pastoral.jpg|Autumn Pastoral
File:Boucher Vulcan Presenting Venus with Arms for Aeneas.jpg|Vulcan Presenting Venus with Arms for Aeneas








