[[Cheddar cheese]]

CATEGORIES: Somerset cuisine, British products with protected designation of origin, Cheeses with designation of origin protected in the European Union, Cow's-milk cheeses, English cheeses, English inventions

Cheddar cheese is a relatively hard, pale-yellow-to-off-white (unless artificially coloured), sometimes "sharp" (i.e., acidic)-tasting, natural cheese. Originating in the English village of Cheddar in Somerset, cheeses of this style are produced beyond this region and in several countries around the world.
Cheddar is the most popular type of cheese in the UK, accounting for 51 percent of the country's £1.9 billion annual cheese market. 
The United States produced  

History

The cheese originates from the village of Cheddar in Somerset, South West England. Cheddar Gorge on the edge of the village contains a number of caves, which provided the ideal humidity and constant temperature for maturing the cheese. Cheddar cheese traditionally had to be made within  of Wells Cathedral.
Cheddar has been produced since at least the 12th century. A pipe roll of King Henry II from 1170 records the purchase of   
Charles I (1600–1649) also bought cheese from the village.
Romans may have brought the recipe to Britain from the Cantal region of France.
Central to the modernisation and standardisation of cheddar cheese, was the 19th century Somerset dairyman Joseph Harding.
For his technical innovations, promotion of dairy hygiene, and volunteer dissemination of modern cheese-making techniques, he has been dubbed "the father of cheddar cheese".
Harding introduced new equipment to the process of cheese-making, including his "revolving breaker" for curd cutting, saving much manual effort.Transactions of the Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland, Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland, 1866-7 volume 1, AberdeenChristabel Susan Lowry Orwin, Edith Holt Whetham, "History of British Agriculture, 1846–1914", Agriculture (1964), page 145
The "Joseph Harding method" was the first modern system for cheddar production based upon scientific principles. Harding stated that cheddar cheese is "not made in the field, nor in the byre, nor even in the cow, it is made in the dairy". and facilitating the establishment of the cheese industry in New Zealand respectively. 
During the Second World War, and for nearly a decade after, most milk in Britain was used for the making of one single kind of cheese nicknamed "government cheddar" as part of war economies and rationing.
According to a United States Department of Agriculture researcher, cheddar cheese is the world's most popular variety of cheese, and the most studied type of cheese in scientific publications.

Process

The curds and whey are separated using rennet, an enzyme complex normally produced from the stomachs of newborn calves (in vegetarian or kosher cheeses, bacterial-, yeast- or mould-derived chymosin is used).
Cheddaring refers to an additional step in the production of cheddar cheese where, after heating, the curd is kneaded with salt, cut into cubes to drain the whey and then stacked and turned. Strong, extra-mature cheddar, sometimes called vintage, needs to be matured for up to 15 months. The cheese is kept at a constant temperature often requiring special facilities. As with other hard cheese varieties produced worldwide, caves provide an ideal environment for maturing cheese; still, today, some cheddar cheese is matured in the caves at Wookey Hole and Cheddar Gorge. Additionally, some versions of cheddar cheese are smoked... – Clark WolfKelly Jaggers, Moufflet: More Than 100 Gourmet Muffin Recipes That Rise to Any Occasion,  p. 104.

Character

The ideal quality of the original Somerset cheddar was described by Joseph Harding in 1864 as "close and firm in texture, yet mellow in character or quality; it is rich with a tendency to melt in the mouth, the flavour full and fine, approaching to that of a hazelnut".Transactions of the New-York State Agricultural Society for the Year 1864, page 232, volume 14 1865, Albany
Cheddar made in the classical way tends to have a sharp, pungent flavour, often slightly earthy. Its texture is firm, with farmhouse traditional cheddar being slightly crumbly; it should also, if mature, contain large cheese crystals consisting of calcium lactate – often precipitated when matured for times longer than six months.
Cheddar is usually a deep to pale yellow (off-white) colour, but food colourings are sometimes used in industrial varieties of cheddar-style cheeses. One commonly used example is annatto, extracted from seeds of the tropical achiote tree. The largest producer of industrial cheddar-style cheese in the United States, Kraft, uses a combination of annatto and oleoresin paprika, an extract of the lipophilic (oily) portion of paprika. According to David Feldman, an author of trivia books, "The only reason why cheesemakers colour their product is because consumers seem to prefer it."
Cheddar cheese was sometimes (and still can be found) packaged in black wax, but was more commonly packaged in larded cloth, which was impermeable to contaminants, but still allowed the cheese to "breathe", although this practice is now limited to artisan cheese makers.
The Slow Food Movement has created a Cheddar Presidium,
Notable cheddar cheeses include "Quickes", which in 2009 was awarded cheese of the year by the British Cheese Association, "Keen's", with a strong tang, and "Montgomery's", with an apple aftertaste. Lincolnshire Poacher cheese is an example of a cheese made in the style of a traditional cheddar in Lincolnshire.

International production

Status

The cheddar cheese name is used internationally; its name does not have a protected designation of origin (PDO) but the use of the name "West Country Farmhouse Cheddar" does. Countries making cheddar cheese include Australia, Argentina, Belgium, Canada, Ireland, the Netherlands, New Zealand, South Africa, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States. Cheddars can be industrial or artisan cheeses. The flavour, colour and quality of industrial cheese varies significantly, and food packaging will usually indicate a strength, such as mild, medium, strong, tasty, sharp, extra sharp, mature, old, or vintage; this may indicate the maturation period, or food additives used to enhance the flavour. Artisan varieties develop strong and diverse flavours over time.

Canada

Following a wheat midge outbreak in Canada in the mid-nineteenth century, farmers in Ontario began to convert to dairy farming in large numbers, and cheddar cheese became their main exportable product, even being exported to England. By the turn of the twentieth century there were 1,242 cheddar factories in Ontario, and cheddar had become Canada's second largest export after timber.ca Cheddar exports totaled  in 1904, but by 2012, Canada was a net importer of cheese. James L. Kraft grew up on a dairy farm in Ontario, before moving to Chicago. Acording to the writer Sarah Champman, "Although we cannot wholly lay the decline of cheese craft in Canada at the feet of James Lewis Kraft, it did correspond with the rise of Kraft's processed cheese empire." Most Canadian cheddar is produced by a number of large companies in Ontario, though other provinces produce some and there are some smaller artisanal producers. The annual production is 120,000 tons Types of cheddar cheese, Canadian Living It is aged a minimum of three months, but much of it is held for much longer, up to 10 years.
Canadian cheddar cheese soup is a featured dish at the Canada pavilion at Epcot, in Walt Disney World.Recipe for Canadian cheddar cheese soup at Epcot

New Zealand

Much of the cheddar cheese in New Zealand is factory produced but of good quality. Most of it is sold young within the country. The Anchor dairy company ships New Zealand cheddars to the UK, where it matures for another year or so.

United Kingdom

Only one producer of the cheese is now based in Cheddar itself, The Cheddar Gorge Cheese Co.

United States of America

The state of Wisconsin produces the most cheddar cheese in the U.S.A.; other centres of production include California, Idaho, upstate New York, Vermont, Tillamook (in Oregon), Texas and Oklahoma. It is sold in several varieties (mild, medium, sharp, extra-sharp, New York-style, white and Vermont). New York cheddar-style cheese is particularly sharp, but usually slightly softer than the milder-tasting varieties. Cheese that has not been artificially-coloured the familiar yellow-orange hue is frequently labelled as "white cheddar" or "Vermont cheddar" (regardless of whether it was actually produced there). Vermont has three creameries that produce what is regarded as first-class cheddar cheeses: the Cabot Creamery, which produces the sixteen-month-old "Private Stock Cheddar", the Grafton Village Company and Shelburne Farms. The Cheese Companion. Running Press, 2004, p. 77.
Some cheeses called "cheddar" are actually flavoured processed cheeses or "cheese foods"; they often bear little resemblance to the natural cheeses they were named for. Examples include Easy Cheese, a cheese food packaged in a pressurized spray can, or in packs of individually-wrapped, processed cheese slices.
Cheddar is one of several products used by the United States Department of Agriculture to track the status of America's overall dairy industry; reports are issued weekly detailing prices and production quantities.

Record cheddars

U.S. President Andrew Jackson once held an open house party at the White House at which he served a 1,400-pound (640 kg) block of cheddar cheese.
A cheese of 
In 1893, farmers from the town of Perth, Ontario, produced The Mammoth Cheese, which weighed 
Oregon members of the Federation of American Cheese-makers created the largest cheddar cheese in 1989. The cheese weighed 








