[[University of California, Irvine]]

CATEGORIES: University of California, Irvine, Schools accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, Educational institutions established in 1965, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities, William Pereira buildings, Universities and colleges in Orange County, California, 1965 establishments in California

The University of California, Irvine (UCI, UC Irvine, or Irvine), is a public research university located in Irvine, California, and one of the 10 general campuses in the University of California (UC) system. UCI's Orange County  campus is the fifth-largest in the UC system, with over 28,000 students, 1,100 faculty members and 9,000 staff.  Times Higher Education in 2013 ranked UC Irvine 1st among all US universities and 5th among the top 100 global universities under 50 years old.
UC Irvine is considered a Public Ivy and offers 80 undergraduate degrees and 98 graduate and professional degrees. The university is designated as having very high research activity in the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education, and in 2009 had $325.49 million in research and development expenditures according to the National Science Foundation. The university also administers the UC Irvine Medical Center, a large teaching hospital; the UC Irvine Health Sciences system in the City of Orange; the University of California, Irvine, Arboretum; and a portion of the University of California Natural Reserve System.
UCI was one of three new UC campuses established in the 1960s to accommodate growing enrollments across the UC system. A site in Orange County was identified in 1959, and in the following year the Irvine Company sold the University of California  of land for one dollar to establish the new campus. President Lyndon B. Johnson dedicated the campus in 1964. Orange County Archives' C.M. Featherly Collection.
The UC Irvine Anteaters compete in 18 men's and women's sports in the NCAA Division I as members of the Big West Conference and the Mountain Pacific Sports Federation. The university has won 28 national championships in nine different sports and has had 63 individual national champions.

History

Early years

The University of California, Irvine was one of three new campuses established in the 1960s under the California Master Plan for Higher Education with the San Diego and Santa Cruz campuses.
Unlike most other University of California campuses, UCI was not named for the city it was built in; at the time of the university's founding (1965), the current city of Irvine (established in 1975) did not exist. The name "Irvine" is a reference to James Irvine, a landowner who administered the  in 1964 for housing and commercial developments. Much of the land that was not purchased by UCI (which is now occupied by the cities of Irvine, Tustin, Newport Beach, and Newport Coast) is now held under The Irvine Company. During this time, the University also hired William Pereira and Associates as the Master Planner of the Irvine Ranch area. Pereira intended for the UC Irvine campus to complement the neighboring community, and the two grew in tandem. Soon after UC Irvine opened in 1965, the City of Irvine became incorporated and established in 1971 and 1975, respectively.
UC Irvine's first Chancellor, Daniel G. Aldrich, developed the campus' first academic plan around a College of Arts, Letters, and Science, a Graduate School of Administration, and a School of Engineering. The College of Arts, Letters, and Science was composed of twenty majors in five "Divisions": Biological Sciences, Fine Arts, Humanities, Physical Sciences, and Social Sciences (which transformed into the present-day "Schools").
On June 20, 1964, U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson dedicated UC Irvine before a crowd of 15,000 people, and on October 4, 1965 the campus began operations with 1,589 students, 241 staff members, 119 faculty, and 43 teaching assistants.
In 1965 the California College of Medicine (originally a school of osteopathy founded in 1896 and the oldest continuously operating medical college in the Southwest) became part of UC Irvine.UC Irvine School of Medicine Historical Timeline. UC Irvine School of Medicine.
In 1976, plans to establish an on-campus hospital were set aside, with the university instead purchasing the Orange County Medical Center (renamed the UC Irvine Medical Center) around 12 miles from UC Irvine, in the City of Orange.

Present day

As the largest employer in Orange County, UCI contributes an annual economic impact of $4.2 billion with an operating budget of almost $1.9 billion for 2008 including $328 million in extramural research funding.  Numerous other educational and training opportunities are offered in numerous areas ranging from physician residency programs at UC Irvine's Medical Center to community certificate programs and other coursework through University Extension.
In 2011-2012, UC Irvine awarded 8,443 degrees: 6,766 bachelor's degrees 1,105 Master's degrees, 413 Ph.D.s and Ed.D.s, 102 M.D.s, and 57 J.D.s.

Future growth

As a part of its long-term efforts to "attain flagship status,"

Campus

The layout of the core campus resembles a rough circle with its center being Aldrich Park (initially known as Central Park), lined up by the Ring Mall and buildings surrounding the road.  To further emphasize the layout, academic units are positioned relative to the center, wherein undergraduate schools are closer to the center than the graduate schools.
Aldrich Park is planted with over 11,120 trees (there are over 24,000 trees on the entire campus), including 33 species of eucalyptus. Two ceremonial trees were planted in 1990, one for Arbor Day and the second for former chancellor Daniel Aldrich who had died that year.  On the first anniversary of the September 11th tragedies, the chancellor planted a bay laurel tree in remembrance of the heroes and victims of the events of September 11, 2001.  The tree itself was a gift from the UCI Staff Assembly.  Aldrich Park is the site for "Wayzgoose," a medieval student festival held each year in conjunction with the "Celebrate UCI" open house.  It also hosts many extracurricular activities.
Ring Mall is the main pedestrian road used by students and faculty to travel around the core campus.  The road measures up to a perfect mile and completely encircles Aldrich Park.  Most schools and libraries are lined up by this road with each of these schools having their own central plaza which also connects to the Aldrich Park.
Other areas of the university outside of the core campus such as the School of Arts are connected by four pedestrian bridges.  Beyond the core campus and the bridges, the layout of the campus is more suburban.

Surroundings

UCI is close to beaches, mountains, and the attractions of Southern California.  Although the campus is located in the city of Irvine, it is located very close to the city of Newport Beach.  In fact, the campus itself is directly bounded by the city of Newport Beach and Newport Coast on many sides.  The western side of the campus borders the San Diego Creek and the San Joaquin Freshwater Marsh Reserve, through which Campus Drive connects UCI to the 405 freeway.  The northern and eastern sides of UCI are adjacent to Irvine proper; the eastern side of the campus is delineated by Bonita Canyon Road, which turns into Culver Drive at its northern terminus and offers links to the San Joaquin Hills Toll Road and 405 freeway, respectively.  Additionally, UCI's southern boundary is adjacent to the San Joaquin Transportation Corridor.
There exists a "North Campus" that houses the Facilities Management Department, the Faculty Research Facility, Central Receiving, Fleet Services, the Air Pollution Health Effects Laboratory, and numerous other functions.  It is located next to the UCI Arboretum; both the North Campus and the arboretum are located about  from the main campus.
William Pereira's original street layout for the region surrounding the University had a wingnut-shaped loop road as the main thoroughfare, which twice crossed the campus.  However, the Irvine Company's development plans expanded before it could be completed, and portions of California, Carlson, Harvard and Turtle Rock roads today constitute segments of what would have been the Loop Road.
Despite the suburban environment, a variety of wildlife inhabits the university's central park, open fields, and wetlands.  The university is home to bobcats, mountain lions, hawks, golden eagles, great blue herons, squirrels, opossums, peregrine falcons, rabbits, raccoons, owls, skunks, weasels, bats, and coyotes.  The UCI Arboretum hosts a collection of plants from California and Mediterranean climates around the world.  The rabbits in particular are very numerous and can be seen across campus in high numbers, especially during hours of low student traffic.

Architecture

The first buildings were designed by a team of architects led by William Pereira and including A. Quincy Jones and William Blurock.  The initial landscaping, including Aldrich Park, was designed by an association of three firms, including that of the noted urban-landscaping innovator Robert Herrick Carter.  Aldrich Park was designed under the direction of landscape architect Gene Uematsu, and was modeled after Frederick Law Olmsted's designs for New York City's Central Park.  The campus opened in 1965 with the inner circle and park only half-completed.  There were only nine buildings and a dirt road connecting the main campus to the housing units.  Only three of the six "spokes" that radiate from the central park were built, with only two buildings each.  Pereira was retained by the university to maintain a continuity of style among the buildings constructed in the inner ring around the park, the last of which was completed in 1972.  These buildings were designed in a style which combined sweeping curves and expressionistic shapes with elements of classic California architecture such as red tiled roofs and clay-tiled walkways, and distinctive white railings evoking the deck of an ocean liner. Anteater Chronicles: The UC Irvine Story. UC Irvine Library. These buildings featured an innovative structural design that freed the interiors from support columns in order to allow future alterations of their floor plans.
Construction on the campus all but ceased after the Administration building, Aldrich Hall, was completed in 1974, and then resumed in the late 1980s, beginning a massive building boom that still continues today.  This second building boom continued the futuristic trend, but emphasized a much more colorful, postmodern approach that somewhat contradicted the earthy, organic designs of the early buildings.  Architects such as Frank Gehry, Robert Venturi, Eric Owen Moss, James Stirling and Arthur Erickson were brought in to bring the campus more up to date.  The recession in the early 1990s along with internal politics led to a change in direction, due to the reduced capital budget, and changing attitudes towards architectural innovation at the university.  This in turn led to a "contextualist" approach beginning in the late 1990s combining stylistic elements of the first two phases in an attempt to provide an architectural "middle ground" between the two vastly different styles.  Gehry's building was recently removed from campus to make way for a new building, with a design that has been called a "big beige box with bands of bricks."  In 2009 the Humanities Gateway building, designed by Curtis W. Fentress, was opened.  Its curvilinear design marked a return to the sculptural treatment of concrete begun by Pereira.
As of 2005, the campus has more than 200 buildings and encompasses most of the university's . The campus is in the midst of a $1.1 billion construction campaign.

Libraries and study centers

UCI is noted for having many excellent special collections and archives.  In addition to holding a noted Critical Theory archive and Southeast Asian archive, the Libraries also contain extensive collections in Dance and Performing Arts, Regional History, and more.  Additionally, Langson Library hosts an extensive East Asian collection with materials in Chinese, Japanese, and Korean.
Nearly all departments and schools on campus complement the resources of the UC Irvine Libraries by maintaining their own reading rooms and scholarly meeting rooms.  They contain small reference collections and are the choice for more intimate lectures, graduate seminars, and study sessions.  There is also the large Gateway Study Center located across from Langson Library, one of the university's original buildings and under the custody of UC Irvine Libraries.  Having served formerly as a cafeteria and student center, it is now a dual-use computer lab and study area which is open nearly 24 hours.
The UCI Student Center offers a large number of study areas, auditoriums, and two food courts, and therefore is one of the most popular places to study on campus.  UC Irvine also has a number of computer labs that serve as study centers.  The School of Humanities maintains the Humanities Instructional Resource Center, a drop-in computer lab specializing in language and digital media.  Additionally, UCI maintains five other drop-in labs, four instructional computer labs, and a number of reservation-only SmartClassrooms, some of which are open 24 hours.  Other popular study areas include Aldrich Park, the Cross-Cultural Center, the Locus (a study room and computer lab used by the Campuswide Honors Program), and plazas located in every school.

Tunnels

An underground network of tunnels runs between many of the major buildings on campus and the Central Plant, with the major trunk passage located beneath Ring Mall.  Smaller tunnels branch off from this main passage to reach individual buildings, carrying electrical and air-conditioning utilities from the Central Plant.  These tunnels have been the subject of much campus lore, the most popular story being that the tunnels were constructed to facilitate the safe evacuation of faculty in the event of a student riot.  The main tunnel actually appears above ground in the form of an unusually thick bridge near the Engineering Tower, in an area where Ring Mall crosses between two hills.

Governance

Like other University of California campuses, UC Irvine is governed by a Chancellor who has significant authority over campus academic and planning affairs. The Chancellor, in turn, is nominated by and is responsible to the Regents of the University of California and the UC President:
After the Chancellor, the second most senior official is the Executive Vice Chancellor and Provost. He serves as the university's chief academic and operating officer. Every school on campus reports to the Executive Vice Chancellor and Provost through a Dean, and all other academic and administrative units report to his office through a Vice Chancellor or chief administrator. A partial list of these units includes Campus Recreation, Intercollegiate Athletics, Planning and Budget, Student Affairs, UC Irvine Libraries, UC Irvine Medical Center, and University Advancement. The Executive Vice Chancellor and Provost also governs the faculty senate.

Academics

Academic units

UC Irvine's academic units are referred to as Schools. As of the 2013-2014 school year, there are twelve Schools, two Programs, one Department, and various interdisciplinary programs.uci.edu/introduction/#text The College of Health Sciences was established in 2004,
Currently, the academic units consist of:

Research organizations

To complement its mission as a research university, UCI hosts a diverse array of nationally and internationally-recognized research organizations. These organizations are either chaired by or composed of UCI faculty, frequently draw upon undergraduates and graduates for research assistance, and produce a multitude of innovations, patents, and scholarly works. Some are housed in a school or department office; others are housed in their own multimillion-dollar facilities. These are a few of the more prolific research organizations at UCI:

Rankings and distinctions

UC Irvine is considered a Public Ivy.  For 2012-2013, US News & World Report ranked UC Irvine 44th among national universities and 12th among public universities in the US. U.S. News & World Report, 2012. Retrieved July 17, 2012. In addition, many of UCI's graduate programs consistently receive top-50 rankings from US News & World Report, earning distinction in literary criticism and theory (1), criminology (5), creative writing (6), health care management (9), organic chemistry (11), information systems (11), physical chemistry (12), drama and theater (12), psychology-neurobiology and behavior (12), psychology – cognitive science (16), theoretical chemistry (18), experimental psychology (19), cell biology/developmental biology (21), English (22), sociology (25), business-part-time (25), chemistry (26), computer science (28), aerospace engineering (29), psychology (29), mechanical engineering (30), physics (30), civil engineering (31), biological sciences (34), environmental engineering (34), political science (36), history (36), education (36), engineering (39), biomedical engineering (40), economics (46), mathematics (43), medicine-research (44), materials science engineering (45), psychology and social behavior (47), business (49), and electrical engineering (49).
Times Higher Education ranked UCI 4th in the world and 1st in the US among the top universities under 50 years of age in 2012.
In 2013 Kiplinger ranked UCI 16th out of the top 100 best-value public colleges and universities in the nation.
According to The Daily Beast UCI ranked 16th among "The 100 Happiest Colleges."

=Notable faculty and Nobel Laureates=

Three faculty members have been named National Medal of Science recipients. Additionally, three researchers from UCI's faculty received the Nobel Prize during their tenure at UCI: Frank Sherwood Rowland (Chemistry, 1995), Frederick Reines (Physics, 1995), and Irwin Rose (Chemistry, 2004). Dr. Rowland's Nobel-winning research was conducted exclusively at UC Irvine, along with fellow prize-winner Mario J. Molina. Irwin Rose received the Nobel Prize for his work on biological proteins. F. Sherwood Rowland helped to discover the harmful effects of CFCs on the ozone layer, while Frederick Reines received the Nobel Prize for his work in discovering the neutrino. UCI is the first public university to have two Nobel laureates (Rowland and Reines) who received their prizes in the same year (1995).
Thomas Keneally was a visiting professor at UCI where he taught the graduate fiction workshop for one quarter in 1985. From 1991 to 1995, he was a visiting professor in the writing program at UCI.  He is most famous for his book Schindler's Ark (1982) (later republished as Schindler's List), which won the Booker Prize and is the basis of the film Schindler's List that was directed by Steven Spielberg.
In January 2009, UCI Professor Reg Penner won the Faraday Medal for his research with nanowires.
Henry W. Sobel was awarded the Bruno Pontecorvo Prize in 2009 by the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR)in Dubna, Russia for his work on Neutrino Oscillations.
Evolutionary Biologist Francisco Ayala received the 2010 Templeton Prize for exceptional contribution to affirming life's spiritual dimension.

==Learned societies affiliations:==

|publisher=amacad.amacad.pdf |format=PDF|accessdate=December 23, 2008 }}[/ref]
|publisher=nae.nae.nsf/Members%20By%20Parent%20InstitutionU?OpenView&Start=1&Count=30&Expand=16#16 |accessdate=December 23, 2008 }}[/ref]

Admissions

UC Irvine is categorized by U.S. News & World Report as "more selective" for college admissions ratings within the United States. Fall 2012 admitted freshman applicants had an average high school GPA of 4.02, an average ACT Composite score of 27, and an average combined SAT score of 1844 (average SAT scores of 588 for Critical Reading, 645 for Mathematics, and 611 for Writing).
The choice to offer admission is based on the University of California's comprehensive review program. It considers a candidate's personal situation, community involvement, extracurricular activities, and academic potential in addition to the traditional high school academic record, personal statement, and entrance examination scores. While residency is not a factor in admission, it is a factor in tuition expenses, with out-of-state residents spending more annually than California residents. State law prohibits UC Irvine from practicing affirmative action in its admissions process.
For fall of 2012, the incoming freshman were predominately from Los Angeles County, followed by the Bay Area counties, Orange County,  Riverside County, San Bernardino County, San Diego County, and Imperial County.  The most popular major for freshmen is a major in Biological Sciences (20.6%),  followed by Engineering (16.6%), Undecided/Undeclared (16.5%), Social Sciences (13.4%), Physical Sciences (8.0%), Humanities (5.2%), Business (4.4%), Information and Computer Sciences (3.8%), Social Ecology (3.1%), Arts (2.8%), Pharmaceutical Sciences (2.8%), Health Sciences (1.5%), Other (1.0%), and Nursing (0.4%).

Student life

Greek life

UCI's Greek Life began in 1973 with three sororities (Delta Gamma, Pi Beta Phi, and Gamma Phi Beta) and three fraternities (Beta Theta Pi, Sigma Chi, and Phi Delta Theta).  Today it is a community with over 2,200 students in 26 sororities and 21 fraternities representing a wide range of ethnicities, cultures, and backgrounds.
There are three major overhead bodies on the campus that govern Greek Life: Inter Fraternity Council, The Panhellenic Association, and The Multicultural Greek Council. The IFC governs over the thirteen chapters which are considered Greek by the National Inter Fraternity Council (NIC). The Panhellenic Association has ten NPC (National Panhellenic Conference) chapters and two local chapters. The Panhellenic community was recently opened up for expansion in Fall 2008, where they welcome Sigma Kappa to the campus. The Multicultural Greek Council was first established in 2009, where MGC currently governs 20 Multicultural Greek Chapters.
Major events and programs in the Greek Community include Songfest, All Greek Conference, Greek Week, BANG (Being a New Greek), and risk management programs (topics vary).

=Fraternities and sororities=

Clubs and organizations

With over 600 student clubs and organizations on campus, students can readily find friends who share their interests whether academic, multicultural, political, religious, service, social, or athletic.  Campus activities throughout the year include cultural nights, arts performances, and live music at Anteater Plaza—special events such as Reggaefest, the Rainbow Festival, Wayzgoose, Shocktoberfest, and Earth Day are held yearly.
The Psi chapter of Phrateres, a non-exclusive, non-profit social-service club, was installed at UCI in 1967. Between 1924 and 1967, 23 chapters of Phrateres were installed in universities across North America.

Residential accommodations

UC Irvine has a number of residential options for students interested in living on campus.  Part of UCI's long-range development plan involves expanding on-campus housing to accommodate 50% of all UCI students.
The on-campus housing communities for undergraduates are: Mesa Court, Middle Earth, Arroyo Vista, Campus Village, Vista del Campo, Vista del Campo Norte, Camino del Sol, and Puerta del Sol.  Graduate students also have access to the on-campus housing communities: Palo Verde and Verano Place.
UCI's two freshman dormitory communities are Mesa Court and Middle Earth.  Mesa Court was the first housing community at UCI, it features a volleyball court, two basketball courts, a community center, a recreational center, and the Mesa Academic Center (MAC).  Middle Earth comprises 24 residence halls, two dining facilities (Brandywine and Pippin Commons), a student center, and several resource centers.  The name of each building in Middle Earth is named after a character or a place from J.R.R. Tolkien's The Hobbit and "The Lord of the Rings".  Middle Earth was built in three phases.  The first phase was built in 1974 and it includes seven halls: Hobbiton, Isengard, Lorien, Mirkwood, Misty Mountain, Rivendell, and the Shire, along with a separate Head Resident's manufactured home called "Bag End".  The second phase was built in 1989 with thirteen more halls: Balin, Harrowdale, Whispering Wood, Woodhall, Calmindon, Grey Havens, Aldor, Rohan, Gondolin, Snowbourn, Elrond, Shadowfax, and Quenya.  The third phase was built in 2000 with four halls: Crickhollow, Evenstar, Oakenshield, and Valimar. Each hall houses about fifty to eighty students, although Quenya was built with sixty single suite rooms which mainly house graduate students.
There are 42 houses located in Arroyo Vista, of which 9 are sorority houses and 5 are fraternity houses.  The sorority houses located in Arroyo Vista are Alpha Phi, Delta Delta Delta, Delta Gamma, Gamma Phi Beta, Pi Beta Phi, Alpha Chi Omega, Kappa Kappa Gamma, Sigma Kappa, and Kappa Alpha Theta. The fraternity houses located in Arroyo Vista are Sigma Phi Epsilon, Sigma Chi, Phi Gamma Delta, Kappa Sigma, and Sigma Alpha Epsilon.  Arroyo Vista also features many themed houses based on academic or social interests.  As of Fall 2012, Arroyo Vista started the "First Year Experience" and now houses first year students within six of its houses.  Students living in Arroyo Vista live in complexes that may be called houses, but have dorm-like qualities.
Apartment style on-campus housing at UCI can be found at Vista del Campo, Vista del Campo Norte, Camino del Sol, and Puerta del Sol.  VDC has single rooms available for undergraduates, while VDC Norte has both single rooms and double rooms available.  Camino del Sol features single rooms, a community center, a fitness center, and a pool.  In fall of 2012, Camino del Sol opened housing to incoming first-year students as an option instead of dorm living.  Each housing community is served by ASUCI shuttles that regularly travel to the main campus.
UCI off-campus housing options vary, based on a student's preferred living arrangements and budget.  However, a common denominator for off-campus apartment housing in Irvine, as well as nearby Newport Beach, Tustin, and Costa Mesa is the fact that most accommodations are maintained by The Irvine Company.

Athletics

UCI's sports teams are known as the Anteaters and the student body is known as Antourage. They participate in the NCAA's Division I, as members of the Big West Conference and the Mountain Pacific Sports Federation. Their traditional rival is Long Beach State.
UCI fields nationally competitive teams in baseball, basketball, cross country, soccer, track and field, volleyball, and water polo.  The university has won 28 national championships in nine different sports and has had 63 individual national champions.  The most recent NCAA Division I national title was won by the men's volleyball team on May 4, 2013 against BYU (3–0) at Pauley Pavilion (UCLA) in Los Angeles.  Men's volleyball at UCI has won a total of four national championships (2007, 2009, 2012, 2013).  UCI has also won three Division I men's water polo titles (1970, 1982, 1989).
UCI baseball currently competes in NCAA's Division I.  Previously, the baseball team had won two national championships at the Division II level.  The 2007 baseball team impressed the nation, the Anteaters being one of the Final Four teams left in the College World Series, just six years after the baseball program had been formally reinstated after a ten-year absence.  The week of April 20, 2009 was a historical milestone for the UCI athletics program, as both the school's baseball and men's volleyball squads were simultaneously ranked No. 1 nationally in NCAA Division I polls. This marked the first time ever that UCI possessed two teams ranked No. 1 in the nation, as baseball garnered the ranking based on Baseball America and Collegiate Baseball polls, while men's volleyball earned the top spot on the American Volleyball Coaches Association (AVCA) poll.
Other national championships won by UCI include three Division II men's swimming titles, and six Division II men's tennis titles.
More than 400 UCI student-athletes have earned All-America distinction, and Anteater teams have captured 66 conference championships in total.  Since 1983, 3,266 UCI student-athletes have earned conference scholar-athlete awards.


The anteater as mascot

left|thumb|The UCI mascot is the anteater. This 430-pound statue is a gift of the class of 1987. Three undergraduates named Pat Glasgow, Bob Ernst, and Schuyler Hadley Basset III were credited with choosing the anteater and designing a cartoon representation, having been disappointed with other candidates such as a roadrunner, unicorn, seahawk and golden bison.
The original anteater design was not based not on the Johnny Hart comic strip, "B.C." but on a somewhat less wholesome symbol — the Playboy bunny. In November 1965, the UCI students officially voted on the anteater, and many embraced their far-out mascot.  In a special follow-up election, students opted for a mascot based on the B.C. anteater over the Playboy version.  Since it was "original and slightly irrelevant," it became the mascot of UC Irvine after winning 56% of the vote, beating a close second with the choice of "none of the above".  The anteaters are not to be confused with the aardvark, an African animal that also eats ants.  The anteater has grown to become a beloved mascot, and is the inspiration for many of UCI's athletic and campus spirit traditions.  School chants and cheers feature the word "zot" which was the noise Johnny Hart's "Peter the Anteater" made while eating ants.
A hand signal called "Rip'em 'Eaters" was created by Blake Sasaki and Dennis Wisco in 2001.  When attacked, an anteater sits in a tripodal position with its hind feet and tail and tears and "rips" at its predator.  The hand signal is done by touching the tips of the two middle fingers with the thumb, and sliding the thumb back, making the pinky and index finger the ears and the fingers in the middle the snout of the anteater.
In August 2007, a small stuffed Peter accompanied astronaut Tracy Caldwell on the Space Shuttle Endeavour mission STS-118.

Controversy

Aramark

UC Irvine is the last UC campus that subcontracts its food services. In summer of 2004, UCI signed a contract with Aramark, a food services corporation, granting it control of nearly all residential dining facilities and restaurants on university property. This includes UCI's three dining halls (Brandywine, Pippin Commons, and Mesa Commons) and three on-campus restaurants (Phoenix Grille, B.C.'s Cavern on the Green, and Bistro by the Bridge). ASUCI, which is partially responsible for negotiating UCI's food services contract, has justified the decision to offer Aramark its business with the argument that Aramark has pledged to invest millions of dollars into the university's food service infrastructure.

Law school dean

In hiring an inaugural dean of the UC Irvine School of Law, which opened in 2009, the University approached Professor Erwin Chemerinsky, a well known legal scholar in constitutional law and liberal commentator.  After signing a contract with Chemerinsky on September 4, 2007, the hire was rescinded by UCI Chancellor Michael V. Drake because he felt the law professor's commentaries were "polarizing" and would not serve the interests of California's first new public law school in 40 years; Drake claimed the decision was his own and not the subject of any outside influence. 
The issue was the subject of a New York Times editorial on September 14, 2007.

UCI Extension

From 2002 to 2007, Capella University, a for-profit, on-line institution, paid $500 per student to UCI Extension for each of the 36 students who transferred to Capella. This undisclosed financial arrangement resulted in a total payment of $12,000 to UCI. The payments, first reported in the Chronicle of Higher Education, were inadvertently revealed when Jeffry La Marca, a former student of UCI Extension and Capella, filed a public records request for correspondence between UCI and Capella.
UCI continuing education dean Gary Matkin announced the school would end the arrangement by October 31, 2007 and plans to place $12,000 into a scholarship fund for needy students. UCI officials represented that the agreement was legal per Department of Education regulations, however, UCI had tried to hide the payments and the arrangement was frequently criticized as unethical because it raised the possibility that school counselors might make recommendations to students based on financial incentives rather than the student's best interests.

Allegations of antisemitism

On November 30, 2007, the Office of Civil Rights of the United States Department of Education issued a report finding "insufficient evidence" in support of allegations that Jewish students at UCI were harassed and subjected to a hostile environment based on their national origin. The federal agency investigated a total of 13 alleged incidents of harassment that occurred between Fall 2000 and December 2006, and determined that 5 were "isolated acts" that could not be addressed because they were reported more than 180 days after they occurred. Further, the agency considered these acts, which included a rock thrown at a Jewish student, the destruction of a Holocaust memorial display, and various threatening or harassing statements made to individual Jewish students, substantially different in nature as to be unrelated to the 8 other recurring acts it investigated, which included graffiti depicting swastikas on campus, events during an annual Zionist Awareness Week (in which several Jewish students had, however, partook), exclusion of Jewish students during an anti-hate rally, and the wearing of graduation stoles signifying support for Hamas
Following a speech by Chancellor Michael Drake at the national Hillel meeting in Washington, D.C. in March 2008, Anteaters for Israel, along with three other Jewish organizations, issued a press release defending Drake and claiming that anti-Semitic activity was "exaggerated." Since then, 20 current and former students issued a statement expressing concern over ongoing issues and Drake's handling of them.
In May 2009, UC Irvine hosted a two-week event titled "Israel: The Politics of Genocide", hosted by the school's Muslim Student Union.  Scheduled speakers included Cynthia McKinney and George Galloway.  Opponents of the event described it as "anti-Semitic" (despite its considerable support from Jewish students and stated criticism solely of Israeli policy) and have called for Chancellor Drake to condemn both the event and the sponsoring organization.  He has declined to do so.
In October 2009, students from UCI met with Hamas official Aziz Duwaik on a university-sponsored trip to the West Bank under a program called the Olive Tree Initiative (OTI), a neutral, apolitical education group that studies the Arab-Israeli conflict. The meeting was questioned by parties in 2011, and the initial response from UCI was that the meeting was justified, as the education group was studying the different narratives that contribute to the current situation in the middle east.  "Group: UC Irvine students met with Hamas leader." The Orange County Register.  March 31, 2011.  April 6, 2011. After the Zionist Organization of America informed UCI about Hamas' nature and urged UCI to dissociate itself from the OTI, UCI referred to the meeting as a "misstep."Agrela, Ramona H.  Letter to Morton A. Klein and Susan B. Tuchman, Esq. April 5, 2011.  Orange County Independent Task Force on Anti-Semitism. Many of these accusations were contradicted by many organizations and members of the group who are of pro-Israel and Jewish descent.
In May, 2010, forty members of the faculty issued an open letter expressing concern about "hate-promoting actions" including "a statement (by a speaker repeatedly invited by the Muslim Student Union) that the Zionist Jew is a party of Satan, a statement by another MSU speaker that the Holocaust was God's will" that have given UCI "a growing reputation as a center of hate and intolerance.". Neither of the speakers had been named nor any students shown to have had any affiliation with such remarks.

Arrests at Michael Oren lecture

UC Irvine attracted controversy in February 2010 when students disrupted a lecture by Israeli Ambassador Michael Oren.
Hecklers interrupted Oren's speech 10 times with many students cheering them in support. Among other slogans, the hecklers yelled, "Michael Oren, propagating murder is not an expression of free speech," "killers" and "how many Palestinians did you kill?" After the fourth disruption, Oren took a 20-minute leave before returning to the podium. Before continuing he said, "I've spent most of my life living in and studying the Middle East and one of the great and eternal cultural facets of the Middle East is hospitality... I'm your guest here and I'm asking for the Middle Eastern hospitality for your guest, I've come into your house." By the end of the program, 11 UC Irvine and Riverside students were reportedly arrested.
According to New University newspaper,  11 students were charged with section 403 of the UCIPD penal code – disrupting a public event on the University's property, for their actions. Nine were enrolled at UCI and three were from UCR.
During the event, UCI Chancellor Michael Drake and political science department chair Mark Petracca "chided the protesting crowd and called the disruptions embarrassing." At one point, Chairman Petracca yelled "Shame on you" to the heckling crowd. In a statement issued the next day, UCI Chancellor Drake called the students' behavior "intolerable," saying that "Freedom of speech is among the most fundamental, and among the most cherished of the bedrock values our nation is built upon."
In response, the university suspended the group for the 2010–2011 school year and the group will undergo a probationary period for the following year.  In addition, the members will be responsible for completing a collective 50 community service hours before the group can be reinstated.  The Muslim Student Union has appealed the suspension. The punishment was later modified to one academic quarter, one hundred hours of community service, and two years probation.
The Zionist Organization of America, describing UCI as "a campus that permitted bigotry", has called for college-bound students and financial donors to avoid UCI.

Notable alumni

As of 2011, UCI has more than 124,000 alumni.).
The UC Irvine writing program has produced a number of authors, such as Michael Chabon, James McMichael, Ron Carlson, Robert Peters, Alice Sebold, Aimee Bender, Richard Ford, Yusef Komunyakaa, Marti Leimbach, Whitney Otto and T. Jefferson Parker. The renown of these writers has contributed to the national reputation of the school's creative writing program. More recent alumni include Glen David Gold, Maile Meloy, Alex Espinoza and Joshua Ferris.
Several members of the faculty have been honored with the Nobel and Pulitzer. In 1995, two UCI Professors earned the Nobel Prize: Dr. Frank Sherwood Rowland won in chemistry and Dr. Frederick Reines won in physics. In 2004, Dr. Irwin Rose earned UCI its third Nobel, this time in chemistry. Michael Ramirez is a two-time Pulitzer Prize-winning American editorial cartoonist and a Senior Editor for Investor's Business Daily.
Claude Yarbrough (aka Jonathan Pendragon), class of '76, is one of the most influential magicians of the 20th and 21st centuries.8
Gregory Coleman, Masters in Fine Arts, 2005 was an accomplished classical guitarist, recording artist, composer, arranger and educator.
Ralph J. Cicerone, an earth system science professor and former chancellor of UCI, is currently president of the National Academy of Sciences.The Hardballer
Faculty members who have taught literary criticism and critical theory at UCI have included Jacques Derrida, Murray Krieger and Wolfgang Iser, and visiting professors in these fields have included Judith Butler, Slavoj Žižek, Giorgio Agamben, Barbara Johnson, Fredric Jameson, Elizabeth Grosz, and Étienne Balibar.
Movie directors who attended UCI include McG, and Robert Beaucage, director of Spike.
American interdisciplinary artist Kim Victoria Abeles, MFA 1980.
Danny Pang, an alleged Ponzi-schemer, who was featured on the CNBC television show American Greed.








