[[Kaid Mohamed]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 births, Living people, Sportspeople from Cardiff, Welsh footballers, Welsh people of Yemeni descent, Association football wingers, Association football forwards, Ely Rangers A.F.C. players, Cwmbrân Town A.F.C. players, Llanelli A.F.C. players, Carmarthen Town A.F.C. players, Swindon Town F.C. players, Torquay United F.C. players, Forest Green Rovers F.C. players, Newport County A.F.C. players, Bath City F.C. players, AFC Wimbledon players, Cheltenham Town F.C. players, Port Vale F.C. players, Bristol Rovers F.C. players, Players in the Welsh Premier League, The Football League players, Football Conference players

Kaid Yusef Mohamed (born 23 July 1984) is a Welsh footballer who plays as a winger for League Two side Bristol Rovers on loan from League One club Port Vale.
He spent the early part of his career in Welsh football with Ely Rangers, Cwmbrân Town, Llanelli, and Carmarthen Town. He came to prominence in the 2006–07 season, scoring two goals for Carmarthen in their Welsh Cup final victory. He left Carmarthen to go and play in the English Football League after he was handed a professional contract by Swindon Town in June 2007. From Swindon he was loaned out to Torquay United, before dropping into the Conference National on a permanent basis with Forest Green Rovers. After losing his first team place at Rovers, he was loaned out to Newport County, before dropping into the Conference South with Bath City. He helped Bath to win promotion at the end of the 2009–10 season, scoring the only goal of the play-off final. He left Bath for AFC Wimbledon in March 2011, and played for the "Dons" in their Conference play-off final victory. He signed with Cheltenham Town in June 2011, and played in two unsuccessful League Two play-off campaigns before transferring to Port Vale in June 2013. He was loaned back to Wimbledon in November 2013, and then loaned to Bristol Rovers in January 2014.

Career

Welsh Premier League

Mohamed played youth football for Chalkie Whites Youth Club, Danescourt and Taffs Well.

Swindon Town

Mohamed went on trial at League Two side Wrexham in June 2007, scoring against Blackburn Rovers in a pre-season friendly before adding a brace in a 4–1 win over Dungannon Swifts during a pre-season tour of Republic of Ireland.
On 26 January 2008, he joined Paul Buckle's Conference National side Torquay United on loan,

Forest Green Rovers

After his release from Swindon he signed for Conference National side Forest Green Rovers. Mohamed was released at the end of the 2008–09 season when he was not offered a new contract.

Bath City

In August 2009, Mohamed signed for Bath City on a non-contract basis,
He scored 13 goals in 34 league games in the 2010–11 season, including a run of scoring in five consecutive games. In March 2011, he refused to sit on the bench for Bath's game with Grimsby Town; manager Adie Britton later made a statement that read: "When I named the side he was not in it. He was upset and said he wanted no part in the game, he has made it clear that he wants to go back to full-time football".

AFC Wimbledon

On 25 March 2011, less than a week after the incident at Bath, Terry Brown, manager at Conference National rivals AFC Wimbledon, signed Mohamed for a 'nominal' fee on a short-term contract.

Cheltenham Town

Mohamed signed for League Two club Cheltenham Town on a two-year contract in June 2011.
Cheltenham pushed for promotion again in 2012–13, but this time lost out to Northampton Town in the play-off semi-finals.

Port Vale

Mohamed signed a two-year contract with newly promoted League One side Port Vale in June 2013.
In November 2013, Mohamed re-joined AFC Wimbledon, now in League Two, on loan until 4 January 2014.

Style of play

Mark Yates, speaking after signing Mohamed for Cheltenham Town in June 2011, stated that he possessed "physical strength, pace and power".

Personal life

Mohamed is an amateur rapper, and has performed raps on Soccer AM.

Career statistics

Honours






