[[David Liebe Hart]]

CATEGORIES: 1955 births, Living people, Alien abduction reports, American Christian Scientists, American male film actors, American puppeteers, American male television actors, Outsider musicians, American performance artists

David Nkrumah Liebe Unger Hart (born 19 April 1955; also credited as D.L. Hart) is an outsider musician, street performer, sign painter, artist, puppeteer and actor. He is best known for his appearances on Adult Swim's Tim and Eric Awesome Show, Great Job!, performing bizarre puppetry and singing in a variety of voice characterizations.

Career

During an interview with Jimmy Kimmel, David stated he first developed his passion for puppeteering upon attending church Sunday school in his youth.  He claims to have gotten his start in Hollywood touring with comedian Robin Williams and from making an appearance on The Gong Show in 1977. In 1990, he made an appearance in Golden Girls and in 1993 in Wings.
Hart frequently appears on the television shows The Del Talk Show, Tim and Eric Awesome Show, Great Job! as well as Tim and Eric Nite Live!.  In 2004, David Hart was featured in the documentary Public Access Hollywood.

Music

Hart writes his own music, mostly about religion, aliens, women, trains, and his life. He has teamed up with his friend and fellow public-access television host Adam Papagan to create music together, with Hart writing lyrics and singing, and Papagan creating the music. They have four full albums and an EP released together. Hart's songs from Tim and Eric are also featured on Awesome Record, Great Songs!.
David Hart has been known to sell an album titled Christian Hymns And Songs Of PraiseDavid Liebe Hart: Christian Hymns and Songs of Praise, CDBaby. In Spring 2011, Hart and Papagan toured the East and West Coast with a newly formed band that played punk music exclusively, including new interpretations of their older material. The Best of David and Adam, a compilation cassette tape/download featuring music from David and Adam's five albums, was released by Cellar Hits late-October.

Discography

=Solo=

=With Adam Papagan=

Personal life

David was born in Chicago and grew up in Park Forest, Illinois, where his father worked for the United States Postal Service and Chicago Public Schools. His interest in the history of the railroad system was sparked at a young age but extended throughout his life. He has written several songs discussing both his personal remembrances and history of mid-20th century railroad lines.
David claims that, when he was younger, he was abducted by Corinian aliens (from the Corendor system), who took skin and blood samples from him. He insists that aliens look like humans as opposed to the notion in pop culture that they're little green men. His most notable song, "Salame", refers to the salutation of the Corinian race. David has attended a weekly UFO meeting in Costa Mesa, California.
He is vocal about his abstinence from smoking, alcohol, drugs and his dislike of rap music—but other parts of his life, especially since his arrival in Hollywood in 1976, are less clear. In interviews he revealed that he served as a cook in the U.S. Navy at one point in his life. Hart divorced his wife, Brigitte Unger, in 1993. In his song "Dicksboro", he revealed that he lives at the Dicksboro Apartments in Los Angeles, where Dr. Steve Brule from Tim and Eric Awesome Show, Great Job! and Check It Out! with Dr. Steve Brule is also said to live.






