[[The Great Mall of the Great Plains]]

CATEGORIES: Shopping malls in Kansas, Shopping malls established in 1997, Outlet malls in the United States, Buildings and structures in Olathe, Kansas, Buildings and structures in Johnson County, Kansas, Visitor attractions in Johnson County, Kansas, 1997 establishments in Kansas

The Great Mall of the Great Plains is a shopping mall located in Olathe, Kansas, United States. The largest outlet mall in the state of Kansas, amenities include indoor glow-in-the-dark miniature golf course, a food court, a Game Zone arcade, and a Dickinson Theatres movie theater with sixteen screens. Great Mall of the Great Plains was owned & managed by Glimcher Properties Trust until January 2009. Currently, a  Johnson County driver's license bureau is located in the mall.

History

Great Mall of the Great Plains was co-developed by Glimcher Realty Trust and Jordan Robert Perlmutter & Co. The mall was intended to feature a "value oriented megamall" with a mix of outlet stores, traditional mall stores, big box retail, and entertainment venues, comparable to malls developed by the former Mills Corporation.
Originally scheduld to open in March 1997, the mall did not open until August 14 of that year, due to leasing issues. Upon its opening, the mall had several anchor stores: Linens 'n Things, Burlington Coat Factory, Oshman's SuperSports USA, Marshalls, Group USA Clothing Company, Foozles Bookstore, and Dillard's clearance center. Other original features of the mall included a family entertainment center called Jeepers, later to become Zonkers. A food court, and a Dickinson movie theater also reside in the mall. Great Mall of the Great Plains opened with 150 stores laid out in a half-mile "racetrack" pattern. The mall was the largest outlet mall in the state of Kansas.

Closures

Despite a highly successful opening which attracted more than one-and-a-half million visitors, Great Mall of the Great Plains saw its success waning with time, due in part to a retail saturation in the market.
Although Off 5th opened as an additional anchor store in 1999, while Steve & Barry's opened in 2005, and Famous Labels opened in 2007 but soon closed at the end of 2009. The food court now only has 4 restaurants in it. In early 2009, The Steve & Barry's closed as part of a national bankruptcy.
In an early 2008 Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Glimcher Realty Trust expressed a desire to sell the Great Mall of the Great Plains. On January 6, 2009, Glimcher sold the Great Mall of the Great Plains to focus on more valuable assets to Cecil Van Tuyl of the Van Tuyl Group. The mall is currently managed by MC Realty Group, LLC.






