[[John Bosley (Charlie's Angels)]]

CATEGORIES: Charlie's Angels characters, Fictional private investigators, Fictional characters introduced in 1976


John Bosley is a fictional character in the 1976-1981 television series Charlie's Angels. He was portrayed by David Doyle. 249. (ISBN 0740751182)
He, along with Kelly Garrett (actress Jaclyn Smith), is the only character to take part in every episode of the show's five-season run.
The character of John Bosley also appeared - played by Bill Murray - in the 2000 Charlie's Angels film and played by Bernie Mac in the sequel, Charlie's Angels: Full Throttle. In the 2011 television reboot, Bosley is portrayed by Ramón Rodríguez.

Original series


In early episodes, Bosley takes a playfully antagonistic role to the Angels.  He also frets about vacation days, car damages, and timeliness when the opportunity arises.[ref]R White - Lipgloss Feminists: Charlie's Angels and The Bionic Woman,
Storytelling: A Critical Journal of Popular Narrative (2006)[/ref]  Bosley is apparently the only Townsend Agency employee to have ever met Charlie, and he remains steadfast in never revealing Charlie's identity, or even a clue as to what he looks like.  This was a running joke in the series.
Most of the Angels found themselves romantically involved at one time or another with someone they encountered on the job, and Bosley is no exception.  In one early episode, Bosley mentions a wife, but by the second season he "has not been married for some time", and he became linked with several females encountered in cases, although always those of middle age. One particularly close relationship occurred when the Angels visited Aspen, Colorado in season three. However, these liaisons never seemed to last beyond the episode, and otherwise, we learn little about Bosley's private life.  He remains a father figure to the Angels.  Ironically, although Bosley is proficient with firearms, disguises, and accents, his actions occasionally hampered the Angels' work. In one episode, Bosley, acting as an auctioneer, gets caught up in the excitement and mistakenly sells valuable merchandise not to an Angel as per the plan, but to an actual bidder; this ruined the Angels' plan to catch a cat burglar.charliesangels.htm

Critic's analysis

John Bosley (often nicknamed "Boz") is portrayed as a middle-aged man of average looks, especially when contrasted with the glamorous "Angels". However, he is warm, funny, and intelligent, and often helps the Angels either with background information, or by joining them in the field. Seemingly asexualSherry A. Inness, Disco Divas, p.156. (ISBN 0812218418) (and thus unthreatening - Bosley has been described as an "indulgent eunuch". 121.  (ISBN 0415085004)), he helped direct the Angels meet Charlie's desired ends in the series where most men were villains and women were often victims (outside the Angels themselvesCharlie's Angels). Several times he played either a pratfall-type character, the buffoon,Bill Osgerby, Action TV, p. 94.  (ISBN 0415226201) or a Sugar Daddy as part of one of the Angels' covers.  Bosley always initiates the phone conferences between Charlie and the Angels as they learn of each case.  He also acts as a bumbling father figure to the ladies.

Recognition

David Doyle was nominated for a 1977 Emmy Award for Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series,

Film series

In the Charlie's Angels film, John Bosley was played by Bill Murray, and then in the sequel, a new character, John's adoptive brother Jimmy Bosley (late comedian Bernie Mac), replaced him. 113. (ISBN 0740738348)  Murray's take on the stodgy and avuncular Bosley character was more buffoon-like, giving rambling speeches of little or no help to the Angels.
For the first film, Drew Barrymore, the producer and star of the film series, pursued Murray for months to play Bosley; he consistently declined. Eventually, he did the film but did not return for the sequel. Murray clashed with co-star Lucy Liu on the set; the two eventually made up, but Murray didn't want to work again with her, fearing that they may have another clash despite the success of the first film.Bill Murray Clears Up 'Charlie's Angels' Feud with Lucy Liu




