[[Black people in Nazi Germany]]

CATEGORIES: Nazi Germany, African diaspora in Germany

While black people in Nazi Germany were never subject to mass extermination as in case of Jews and Poles, they were still considered an inferior race like most of the Slavs, all of the Jews and Gypsies after the Nuremberg racial laws were expanded in November 1935.

German citizens

Background

Even before World War I, Germany struggled with the idea of black Germans.  While interracial marriage was legal under German law at the time, beginning in 1890, some colonial officials started refusing to register them, using eugenics arguments about the inferiority of mixed-race children to support their decision.
After World War I, French occupation forces in the Rhineland included African colonial troops, some of whom fathered children with German women.  Newspaper campaigns against the use of these troops focused on these children, dubbed "Rhineland bastards", often with lurid stories of uncivilized African soldiers raping innocent German women. In the Rhineland itself, local opinion of the troops was very different, and the soldiers were described as "courteous and often popular", possibly because French colonial soldiers harbored less ill-will towards Germans than war-weary French occupiers.
In Mein Kampf, Hitler described children resulting from marriages to African occupation soldiers as a contamination of the white race "by Negro blood on the Rhine in the heart of Europe."Mein Kampf, volume 1, chapter XIII. He thought that "Jews were responsible for bringing Negroes into the Rhineland, with the ultimate idea of bastardizing the white race which they hate and thus lowering its cultural and political level so that the Jew might dominate."Mein Kampf, volume 1, chapter XI. He also implied that this was a plot on the part of the French, since the population of France was being increasingly "negrified". II, chapter XIII

Rhineland sterilization program

Under eugenics laws during the Third Reich, race alone was not sufficient criteria for forced sterilization, but anyone could request sterilization for themselves or a minor under their care.

Civilian life

Black people in Germany were socially isolated and forbidden to have sexual relations and marriages with Aryans by the racial laws. Blacks were placed at the bottom of the racial scale of non-Aryans along with Jews and Gypsies. The Holocaust: a reader. Malden, Massachusetts, USA; Oxford, England, UK; Carlton, Victoria, Australia: Blackwell Publishing, 2005. Pp. 14. The Nazis originally sought to rid the German state of Jews and Romani by means of emigration, while blacks were to be segregated and eventually exterminated through compulsory sterilization.
Beyond the compulsory sterilization program in the Rhineland, there was no coherent Nazi policy towards African Germans.

In the armed forces

A number of blacks served in the Wehrmacht. The number of German blacks was low, but there were some instances of their being enlisted within Nazi organizations like the Hitler Youth and later the Wehrmacht. In addition, there was an influx of foreign volunteers during the African campaign, which led to the existence of a number of blacks in the Wehrmacht and SS in such units as the Free Arabian Legion.

Non-German prisoners of war

While no orders were issued in regards to black prisoners of war, some German commanders undertook to separate blacks from captured French units for summary execution.
In prisoner of war camps, black soldiers were kept segregated from white, and generally experienced worse conditions than their white comrades, conditions that deteriorated further in the last days of the war.

Notes



Further reading




