[[Live Prayer]]

CATEGORIES: Evangelicalism, Christian television, 2003 American television series debuts, Ion Television network shows, Local television programming in the United States, English-language television programming

Live Prayer is a Christian evangelical Internet and television ministry located in Tampa, Florida, founded and operated by Bill Keller.
The ministry began in 1999 as a website featuring a daily devotional written by Keller and offers to accept and pray over emails, At the end of that period, the ministry was financially unable to continue purchasing national airtime and returned to the Florida market.
Live Prayer currently operates a service "Gold for Souls" through which people may donate their unwanted gold jewelry to the ministry in exchange for a tax receipt.

Television show

The Live Prayer television program began March 3, 2003 as a late-night show on WTOG where Bill Keller discussed current events from in relation to the ministry's theology and took phone calls. Callers would mostly ask Keller to pray with them over specific issues in their lives, occasionally contributing testimony of religious experience and their comments on scripture. Keller would sometimes encourage his opponents to call in and debate with him on contentions issues such as evolution, abortion, and homosexuality. Each episode ended with Keller inviting viewers to "accept Jesus" and recite a sinner's prayer with him.
Starting July 2006, the show was seen nationwide on ION Television, however this ended in November when Keller could not raise enough money to pay the significantly higher airtime fees. Live Prayer was, up until this point, shown without advertising and paid for entirely by donations. However, near the end of his time on ION, Keller began showing a limited number of ads from companies promoting gold investment schemes. Keller made a point of criticizing other televangelists for continually begging for money and misappropriating the donations they received. Keller also made his personal financial records available to reporters on request and informed viewers that his studio was austerely located on the donated grounds of a used car lot.
On August 31, 2007, after 1,175 episodes and nearly 5 years, Live Prayer was pulled from WTOG after complaints from the Council on American-Islamic RelationsTampa Bay's 10 - Televangelist loses TV show; Accessed September 20, 2007. Petersburg Televangelist Loses Show After Muslims Complain; Accessed September 20, 2007.B-92 News - Muslims claim televangelist ouster victory; Accessed September 20, 2007
In early November 2007, because WTTA suddenly changed its policy regarding live call-in shows, the show moved to local ION station WXPX; while still seen at 7:30 a.m. the show was cut to a half-hour.
On November 19, 2007, Keller announced that he was suspending his television program after the telecast on Friday, November 23, after officials from ION told Keller that it will no longer carry live programming. The ministry shows on public records that the income is about $500,000 a year gross, of which is claimed to have most of the money spent on internet band width. Keller made plans to revive the show on his website as an Internet-only live call-in broadcast in January 2008.

Website

Daily devotional

In August 1999, Keller began writing the Live Prayer Daily Devotional which he has continued to write everyday since.  The devotional is now emailed to over 2,400,000 people around the world. The Live Prayer Daily Devotional is also available on the website, in both written and audio form, as well as for cellphone users via WAP and in audio form over the phone.

Internet simulcast & show archive

The Live Prayer television program was also broadcast live on the website. When the television program was not live, a feed from a webcam showing the Live Prayer office was shown instead. The website also features an archive of past shows.

Prayer requests

At its peak, Live Prayer received about forty thousand email prayer requests each day.com - Prayer Times 60 Million? You Do the Math! A group of retired pastors read messages, pray over the requests, and write personalized replies. Live Prayer also maintains an archive of over three million praise reports from viewers.

Live Prayer interactive CD-ROM

In 2007, Keller released a Live Prayer interactive CD-ROM, proudly touting it as "the greatest spiritual resource other than the Bible." The CD-ROM, sold for US$10 on the Live Prayer website, contained an archive of Keller's past daily devotionals as well as videos inviting viewers to "accept Jesus."

Controversy

Criticism of Mitt Romney

On May 11, 2007, Keller wrote that "a vote for Romney is a vote for Satan" in his daily devotional because Mitt Romney is a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (commonly referred to as Mormonism), an organization that he considers to be a "cult".[ref]

Later, on June 21, 2007, Keller appeared on the show in a Mormon temple garment, which he characterized as "magical underwear". He challenged Romney to make public his own Mormon temple garment.

Message to Osama bin Laden

On September 17, 2007, Keller released a 10-minute video message, in which he asked Al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden to repent and "accept Jesus"; he also urged other Muslims to do the same. The video was released not only on Keller's own website, but also various other websites as well.St. Petersburg Times, September 18, 2007, page 1BLocal6.com (WKMG-TV) - Televangelist Urges Osama bin Laden To Become Christian

Criticism of Oprah Winfrey

Keller frequently criticizes talk-show host and media personality Oprah Winfrey for promoting new age spiritual products, such as The Secret and A Course in Miracles.






