[[Simply Believe]]

CATEGORIES: 2004 albums, Bonnie Tyler albums, Sony Music Entertainment albums

Simply Believe is the fourteenth studio album recorded by Bonnie Tyler, released in Europe on 13 April 2004 by Sony Music Entertainment.
The singles from Simply Believe were the two French duets with Kareen Antonn, both originally released as solo singles by Tyler years before. Their first duet, "Si demain... (Turn Around)", was a success, and reached number in the France for ten weeks and became the fourth best-selling single in France in 2004. Eight of the tracks on the album were also released by her then-future record company, Stick Music, on an EP called Bonnie Tyler in 2005. Critical reception of Simply Believe was mostly positive, with the album being regarded as Tyler's "comeback".

Background

After the release of Heart Strings in the previous year, Tyler had begun working on a new album. While getting plans together, French singer Kareen Antonn wrote to Tyler asking if she would be willing to record a bilingual version of "Total Eclipse of the Heart" as a duet with her. Though hesitant, Tyler requested a demo recording of Antonn singing the song in French. Impressed by what she received, Tyler accepted and flew to Paris to record the song. They later recorded a new version of "It's a Heartache" in the same format.
Simply Believe only contains six original songs. Tyler recorded new versions of "Holding Out for a Hero", "Here She Comes", "If You Were a Woman (And I Was a Man)", as well as two tracks from her 1995 Free Spirit album; "All Night to Know You" and "Driving Me Wild".

Promotion

Singles

The lead single from Simply Believe was released long before the album, due to popular demand from the public. Tyler explained to BBC News that even the single was released three weeks earlier than planned "after people heard it on the radio and went into the shops trying to buy it."
Following the success of the single, Simply Believe was released on 13 April 2004.

Track listing

Critical reception

The album received a three and a half star review from Rob Theakston of Allmusic. He said that Tyler was "still in fine form two decades (after her musical heyday) later" and that Simply Believe should "satisfy die-hard fans".

Chart performance

Personnel

Credits adapted from Allmusic:




