[[Jeffrey Montgomery]]

CATEGORIES: 1953 births, Living people, LGBT rights activists from the United States, People from Detroit, Michigan, LGBT people from Michigan

Jeffrey Montgomery (born 1953 in Detroit, Michigan), is an American lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) activist.  Montgomery was the founding Executive Director of Triangle Foundation since the organization was founded in 1991 until September 2007.

Political activism

Montgomery has appeared as a guest and commentator on television and radio programs, in newspapers, and as a presenter at national conferences. He is an advocate for human rights, civil rights and recognition of LGBT bias crimes.
Montgomery serves as a resource on LGBT-related homicide and "homosexual (gay) panic" defenses and his analysis has informed national media, such as the New York Times, Court TV and USA Today on those topics.  In 2001, Montgomery was a featured participant in an A&E Network documentary about the Matthew Shepard case.
In 1994, Montgomery led a delegation of gay community leaders in a meeting with then-Detroit Mayor Dennis Archer.
Montgomery was the co-chair of the National Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs (NCAVP), for which he was also a national spokesperson,
Montgomery was among a group of LGBT activists, representing NCAVP, invited to Washington, D.C., from 1997 to 2000, for meetings with senior policy officials at the White House, the Office of the Attorney General, and the Department of Justice.
In 2002, Montgomery was invited, with about a dozen other LGBT leaders from across the country, to meet with and inform United States Senators about the issues and challenges facing the LGBT community.
Montgomery is as a speaker at conferences, as keynoter, and on college campuses throughout the country.  In 1999 he delivered the inaugural Matthew Shepard Memorial Lecture at Brown University.  That address, "America...
In 2000, Montgomery was also selected by the Gill Foundation as one of 20 LGBT activists to participate in a program designed by the Center for Creative Leadership in Colorado Springs.
Montgomery is one of the founding board members of the Woodhull Freedom Foundation (also known as the Woodhull Sexual Freedom Alliance).
He is an inaugural member of the WikiQueer Global Advisory Board and serves as Strategic Counsel to the wiki's parent organization, The Aequalitas Project.

Honors

In May 2003, Michigan Governor Jennifer M. Granholm honored Jeffrey Montgomery's work with a special tribute, calling him a "hero and living legend." The Governor also noted that "he is among the most visible and accomplished advocates for safety and equality of gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people in Michigan history."
In 1993, the Detroit City Council made Montgomery a recipient of the first of three "Spirit of Detroit" awards and a City Council Testimonial Resolution for being "a strong leader in a difficult position for those who have been ignored in their fight for civil rights..."
In 1997 Montgomery received a Golden Apple Award from the Roeper School, as a role model for students and for reflecting the Roeper philosophy of "diversity and respect…and that everyone has the right to the possibilities of their own identity."
The Michigan Legislature has twice commended Montgomery with Special Tributes: in 1997, recognizing "his efforts in the struggle for gay and lesbian rights," and in 2000, citing his "relentless" advocacy for an end to bias crimes and assaults on the glbt community from the radical right.
In August 1999, Montgomery was named one of the "Best and Brightest" national LGBT activists by The Advocate magazine.
In May 2003, Montgomery was named, along with twelve other prominent leaders, a "Michiganian of the Year" by the Detroit News for contributions to the state and community and as an individual who makes a difference.
In September, 2012, the Woodhull Sexual Freedom Alliance honored Jeffrey with its Vicki Sexual Freedom Award.




