[[Vishal (actor)]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Male actors from Tamil Nadu, Indian male film actors, Male actors in Tamil cinema, Telugu people, Don Bosco schools alumni, Loyola College, Chennai alumni, 21st-century Indian male actors

Vishal Krishna Reddy, known by his stage name Vishal, is an Indian film actor who appears in Tamil cinema. Often starring in his home productions, Vishal became an actor after a stint as an assistant director in films.
He played his first role in the romantic thriller Chellamae, before going on to secure a run of three consecutive successes with roles as action hero in the 2005 film, Sandakozhi, and with Thimiru in 2006. After appearing in two further successful films thamirabarani and malaikottai, the failure of his hyped home production, Sathyam halted his streak. Following further commercial failure thoranai and average grosser theeratha vilayattu pillai, he enjoyed success again with Avan Ivan (2011), which became a significant film in his career.

Personal life

Vishal Krishna Reddy was born  to G. K. Reddy and Janaki Devi on the 25th December. His mother tongue is Telugu.

Career

After completing his degree in Visual Communication at Loyola College, Vishal was able to secure an apprenticeship with film-maker Ram Gopal Varma but his parents refused and wanted him to work in South Indian films. Vishal subsequently went on to assist actor-director Arjun in his venture Vedham.
His next film, the political drama Sivappathigaram directed by Karu Pazhaniappan and featuring Mamta Mohandas and Raghuvaran became a failure financially despite favourable reviews.
Vishal appeared in a leading role in Bala's Avan Ivan alongside Arya. During production, the film had gained Vishal acclaim for his change of image, with his portrayal as a squint being expected to gain him acclaim post-release. The film, a remake of the 2008 Telugu film Souryam, performed below average at the box office despite being promoted by Sun Pictures.
In the release Samar, Vishal plays a forest trek guide where he "rocks in the action sequences" which include Parkour moves.
His next project under director hari's direction opposite Shruthi Hassan and music by Yuvan Shankar Raja movie titled "Poojai" slated to begin filming in April 2014.sify.html
The Pooja of the movie held in the city recently.co.in/home/pooja-of-vishal-hari-filmpoojai/

Filmography

As Actor


