[[Sarah Bernhardt]]

CATEGORIES: 1844 births, 1923 deaths, 19th-century French actresses, Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery, Deaths from renal failure, Disease-related deaths in France, French amputees, French film actresses, Actor-managers, French people of Dutch descent, French stage actresses, French women writers, French silent film actresses, Légion d'honneur recipients, Mistresses of Edward VII, Actresses from Paris, Sociétaires of the Comédie-Française, Vaudeville performers, Jewish French actresses, Shakespearean actresses, 20th-century French actresses

Sarah Bernhardt ( Bernhardt made her fame on the stages of France in the 1870s, at the beginning of the Belle Epoque period, and was soon in demand in Europe and the Americas. She developed a reputation as a serious dramatic actress, earning the nickname "The Divine Sarah."

Early life

Bernhardt was born in Paris as Rosine Bernardt,In 1859 she enrolled with that name and a birthdate of 23 October 1844 at the Conservatoire National; this is the only record surviving from before her birth record was lost in 1871. See "Snel, Harmen. The ancestry of Sarah Bernhardt; a myth unravelled, Amsterdam, Joods Historisch Museum, 2007, ISBN 978-90-802029-3-1, pp 9–10". Snel argues that since her birth record was still available and there was little reason to obscure the truth, "this registration can be regarded as founded on facts". the daughter of Julie Bernardt (1821, Amsterdam – 1876, Paris) and an unknown father. Julie was one of six children of an itinerant Jewish spectacle merchant, "vision specialist" and petty criminal, Moritz Baruch Bernardt, and Sara Hirsch (later known as Janetta Hartog; c. 1797–1829). The ancestry of Sarah Bernhardt; a myth unravelled, Amsterdam, Joods Historisch Museum, 2007, ISBN 978-90-802029-3-1 Five weeks after his first wife's death in 1829, Julie's father married Sara Kinsbergen (1809–1878). He had abandoned his five daughters and one son with their stepmother by 1835. Julie together with her younger sister Rosine, left for Paris, where she made a living as a courtesan and was known by the name "Youle."  Julie had five daughters, including a twin who died in infancy in 1843.
Sarah Bernhardt changed her first name and added an "h" to her surname. Her birth records were lost in a fire in 1871. In order to prove French citizenship, necessary for Légion d'honneur eligibility, she created false birth records, in which she was the daughter of "Judith van Hard" and "Édouard Bernardt" from Le Havre, in later stories either a law student, accountant, naval cadet or naval officer. 1826) of her mother, who was raised in a boarding school in Tours and emigrated to Chile before 1860 (see Snel, p. 82)
When Sarah was young her mother sent her to Grandchamp, an Augustine convent school near Versailles.
Much of the uncertainty about Bernhardt's life arises because of her tendency to exaggerate and distort. Alexandre Dumas, fils, described her as a notorious liar.

Stage career

Bernhardt's stage career started in 1862 while she was a student at the Comédie-Française, France's most prestigious theater. She decided to leave France, and soon ended up in Belgium, where she became the mistress of Henri, Prince de Ligne, and gave birth to their son, Maurice, in 1864. After Maurice's birth, the Prince proposed marriage, but his family forbade it and persuaded Bernhardt to refuse and end their relationship.Madame Sarah, Cornelia Otis Skinner, Houghton Mifflin 1966
When expelled from the Comédie Française (see above) she resumed the life of courtesan to which her mother had introduced her at a young age, and made considerable money during that period (1862–65). During this time she acquired her famous coffin, in which she often slept in lieu of a bed – claiming that doing so helped her understand her many tragic roles.
Sarah then reverted to the theater, securing a contract at the Théâtre de L'Odéon where she began performing in 1866. Her most famous performance there was her travesty performance as the Florentine minstrel in François Coppé's Le Passant (January 1869).
In 1872, she left the Odéon and returned to Comédie-Française. One of her remarkable successes there was in the title role of Voltaire's Zaïre (1874). She even traveled to Cuba and performed in the Sauto Theater, in Matanzas, in 1887. She coached many young women in the art of acting, including actress and courtesan Liane de Pougy.
In 1899 Bernhardt took over the former Théâtre des Nations on the Place du Châtelet, renaming it the Théâtre Sarah-Bernhardt and opening on 21 January in one of her most admired parts, the title role in Victorien Sardou's La Tosca. This was followed by revivals of Racine's Phèdre (24 February), Octave Feuillet's Dalila (8 March), Gaston de Wailly's Patron Bénic (14 March), Edmond Rostand's La Samaritaine (25 March), and Alexandre Dumas fils's La Dame aux Camélias on 9 April. On 20 May, Sarah premiered her most controversial part, the title role in Shakespeare's Hamlet, in a prose adaptation which she had commissioned from Eugène Morand and Marcel Schwob. The play was greeted with rave reviews despite its running time of four hours.
Bernhardt also participated in scandalous productions such as John Wesley De Kay's "Judas." It performed in New York's Globe Theatre for only one night in December 1910 before it was banned there, as well as in Boston and Philadelphia. In New York's art scene of 1910 the story line of the play was nothing short of scandalous. Mary Magdalene, who at first became a lover of Pontius Pilate, then of Judas Iscariot, got involved with Jesus. Judas, after realizing that Mary Magdalene had given herself to Jesus, decided to betray his friend to the Romans. To top the provocation of New York's theater lovers, Judas was played by the voluptuous Sarah Bernhardt. Sommerfeld: Spymaster in Mexico, 1908 to 1914, Henselstone Verlag LLC, Amissville, VA, 2012, p. 352
In Paris, Bernhardt continued to direct the Théâtre Sarah-Bernhardt until her death, when her son Maurice took over. After his death in 1928, the theatre retained the name Sarah Bernhardt until the Occupation by the Germans in World War II,McCormick 1995. when the name was changed to Théâtre de la Cité because of Bernhardt's Jewish ancestry.

Fine arts career

After establishing herself on the stage, by age 25 Sarah began to study painting and sculpture. She studied under Mathieu Meusnier and Emilio Franceschi. Her early work consisted mainly of bust portraiture, but later works were more ambitious in design. Fifty works have been documented, of which 25 are known to still exist, including the naturalistic marble Après la Tempête (National Museum of Women in the Arts.nmwa. Bernhardt also painted, and while on a theatrical tour to New York, hosted a private viewing of her paintings and sculpture for 500 guests. New York Times. Published 14 November 1880.  She may be best known for her 1880 Art Nouveau decorative bronze inkwell, which portrays a self-portrait with bat wings and a fish tail (Museum of Fine Arts, Boston This may have been inspired by her 1874 performance in Le Sphinx. Sarah Bernhardt's First American Theatrical Tour 1880-1881. McFarland. p 175

Personal life

Bernhardt had an affair with a Belgian nobleman, Charles-Joseph Eugène Henri Georges Lamoral de Ligne (1837–1914), son of Eugène, 8th Prince of Ligne, with whom she had her only child, Maurice Bernhardt (1864–1928). Maurice did not become an actor but worked for most of his life as a manager and agent for various theaters and performers, frequently managing his mother's career in her later years, but rarely with great success. Maurice and his family were usually financially dependent, in full or in part, on his mother until her death. Maurice married a Polish princess, Maria Jablonowska (see Jablonowski), with whom he had two daughters, Simone (who married Edgar Gross, son of a wealthy Philadelphia soap manufacturer) and Lysiana (who married the playwright Louis Verneuil ).
Sarah's close friends included several artists, most notably Gustave Doré and Georges Clairin, and actors Mounet-Sully and Lou Tellegen, as well as the famous French author Victor Hugo. Alphonse Mucha based several of his iconic Art Nouveau works on her. Her friendship with Louise Abbéma (1853–1927), a French impressionist painter, some nine years her junior, was so close and passionate that the two women were rumored to be lovers. In 1990, a painting by Abbéma, depicting the two on a boat ride on the lake in the bois de Boulogne, was donated to the Comédie-Française. The accompanying letter stated that the painting was "Peint par Louise Abbéma, le jour anniversaire de leur liaison amoureuse"Guibert et al., Portrait(s) de Sarah Bernhardt, 2000 (loosely translated: "Painted by Louise Abbéma on the anniversary of their love affair.")
Bernhardt also expressed strong interest in inventor Nikola Tesla, only to be dismissed as a distraction to his work.
She later married Greek-born actor Aristides Damala (known in France by the stage name Jacques Damala) in London in 1882, but the marriage, which legally endured until Damala's death in 1889 at age 34, quickly collapsed, largely due to Damala's dependence on morphine. During the later years of this marriage, Bernhardt was said to have been involved in an affair with the future King King Edward VII while he was still the Prince of Wales.
Bernhardt once stated, "Me pray? Never! I'm an atheist." However, she had been baptised a Roman Catholic, and accepted the last rites shortly before her death.. Menefee, McFarland & Company, Inc, 2003

Silent film career

Bernhardt was one of the pioneer silent movie actresses, debuting as Hamlet in the two-minute long film Le Duel d'Hamlet in 1900. (Technically, this was not a silent film, and in fact, it is cited as one of the first examples of a sound and moving image syncing system created with the new phono-cinema-theatre system.) She went on to star in eight motion pictures and two biographical films in all. The latter included Sarah Bernhardt à Belle-Isle (1912), a film about her daily life at home.

Later career

In 1905, while performing in Victorien Sardou's La Tosca in Teatro Lírico do Rio de Janeiro, Bernhardt injured her right knee when jumping off the parapet in the final scene. The leg never healed properly. By 1915, gangrene had set in and her entire right leg was amputated; she was required to use a wheelchair for several months. Bernhardt reportedly refused a $10,000 offer by a showman to display her amputated leg as a medical curiosity. (While P.T. Barnum is usually cited as the one to have made the offer, he had been dead since 1891.)
She continued her career often without using a wooden prosthetic limb; she had tried to use one but didn't like it. She carried out a successful tour of America in 1915, and on returning to France she played in her own productions almost continuously until her death. Her later successes included Daniel (1920), La Gloire (1921), and Régine Armand (1922). According to Arthur Croxton, the manager of London's Coliseum, the amputation was not apparent during her performances, which were done with the use of an artificial limb.
Sarah Bernhardt died from uremia following kidney failure in 1923. Newspaper reports stated she died "peacefully, without suffering, in the arms of her son." "Obituary: Mme. Sarah Bernhardt." North-China Herald, 31 March 1923, p. 866. She is believed to have been 78 years old.

Books

Selected roles

Filmography

File:§§Bernhardt, Sarah (1844-1923) par Jules Bastien-Lepage (1848-1884) - 1879.jpg|Jules Bastien-Lepage, ''Portrait of Sarah 
File:Sarah Bernhardt Vanity Fair.
File:Sarah bernhardt 1844 1923i. Oil on canvas
File:Georges Jules Victor Clairin (1843-1919), Sarah Bernhardt (1844-1923) as the Queen in 'Ruy Blas' . 1897.jpg|Sarah Bernhardt as the Queen in 'Ruy Blas' by Georges Clairin
File:Georges Jules Victor Clairin (1843-1919), Sarah Bernhardt (1844-1923) in Sainte Therese d'Avila.jpg|Sarah Bernhardt in Sainte Therese d'Avila by Georges Clairin
File:Bernhardt, Sarah di Giovanni Boldini.jpg|Sarah Bernhardt by Giovanni Boldini
File:Sarah Bernhardt by Manuel Orazi.JPG|Sarah Bernhardt with a cup of coffee by Manuel Orazi
File:Bernhardt, Sarah (1844-1923) - 1875 - ritratta da Abbema, Louise (1858-1927).jpeg|Sarah Bernhardt by Louise Abbema 

Recordings

Gallery

File:Bernhardt.
File:Bernhardt_in_Theodora_Early_in_Career.
File:Bernhardt_with_elaborate_headdress.
File:Bernhardt_Performs_(Sorceress).jpg|Bernhardt as a Sorceress
File:Bernhardt_as_Joan_of_Arc.
File:Bernhardt_as_Cleopatra.
File:Bernhardt_(Gismonda).
File:Bernhardt_Near_Table.
File:Bernhardt later years 2.
File:SarahBernhardt alsKameliendame1881.jpg|Sarah Bernhardt La Dame aux camélias 1881
File:Sarony - Sarah Bernhardt.jpg
File:Grave of Sarah Bernhardt Père Lachaise.jpg|Bernhardt's grave at Père Lachaise Cemetery

Further reading






