[[Partial pressure]]

CATEGORIES: Engineering thermodynamics, Equilibrium chemistry, Gas laws, Gases, Physical chemistry, Pressure, Underwater diving physics

In a mixture of gases, each gas has a partial pressure which is the hypothetical pressure of that gas if it alone occupied the volume of the mixture at the same temperature.  The total pressure of an ideal gas mixture is the sum of the partial pressures of each individual gas in the mixture.
It relies on the following isotherm relation:
The partial pressure of a gas is a measure of thermodynamic activity of the gas's molecules.  Gases dissolve, diffuse, and react according to their partial pressures, and not according to their concentrations in gas mixtures or liquids. 
This general property of gases is also true of chemical reactions of gases in biology. For example, the necessary amount of oxygen for human respiration, and the amount that is toxic, is set by the partial pressure of oxygen alone. This is true across a very wide range of different concentrations of oxygen present in various inhaled breathing gases, or dissolved in blood.

Dalton's law of partial pressures

The total pressure of a mixture of gases is equal to the sum of the partial pressures of the individual gases in the mixture as stated by Dalton's law. Most actual real-world gases come very close to this ideal. For example, given an ideal gas mixture of nitrogen (N2), hydrogen (H2) and  ammonia (NH3):

Ideal gas mixtures

Ideally the ratio of partial pressures equals the ratio of the number of molecules. That is, the mole fraction of an individual gas component in an ideal gas mixture can be expressed in terms of the component's partial pressure or the moles of the component:
and the partial pressure of an individual gas component in an ideal gas can be obtained using this expression:
The mole fraction of a gas component in a gas mixture is equal to the volumetric fraction of that component in a gas mixture.Frostberg State University's "General Chemistry Online"

Partial volume (Amagat's law of additive volume)

The partial volume of a particular gas in a mixture is the volume of one component of the gas mixture. It is useful in gas mixtures, e.g. air, to focus on one particular gas component, e.g. oxygen.
It can be approximated both from partial pressure and molar fraction:Page 200 in: Medical biophysics. Flemming Cornelius. 6th Edition, 2008.

Vapour pressure

Vapour pressure is the pressure of a vapor in equilibrium with its non-vapor phases (i.e., liquid or solid). Most often the term is used to describe a liquid's tendency to evaporate.  It is a measure of the tendency of molecules and atoms to escape from a liquid or a solid. A liquid's atmospheric pressure boiling point corresponds to the temperature at which its vapour pressure is equal to the surrounding atmospheric pressure and it is often called the normal boiling point.
The higher the vapor pressure of a liquid at a given temperature, the lower the normal boiling point of the liquid.
The vapour pressure chart to the right has graphs of the vapor pressures versus temperatures for a variety of liquids. As can be seen in the chart, the liquids with the highest vapour pressures have the lowest normal boiling points. 
For example, at any given temperature, methyl chloride has the highest vapour pressure of any of the liquids in the chart. It also has the lowest normal boiling point (-24.2 °C), which is where the vapour pressure curve of methyl chloride (the blue line) intersects the horizontal pressure line of one atmosphere (atm) of absolute vapour pressure.

Equilibrium constants of reactions involving gas mixtures

It is possible to work out the equilibrium constant for a chemical reaction involving a mixture of gases given the partial pressure of each gas and the overall reaction formula. For a reversible reaction involving gas reactants and gas products, such as:
the equilibrium constant of the reaction would be:
For reversible reactions, changes in the total pressure, temperature or reactant concentrations will shift the equilibrium so as to favor either the right or left side of the reaction in accordance with Le Chatelier's Principle. However, the reaction kinetics may either oppose or enhance the equilibrium shift. In some cases, the reaction kinetics may be the over-riding factor to consider.

Henry's Law and the solubility of gases

Gases will dissolve in liquids to an extent that is determined by the equilibrium between the undissolved gas and the gas that has dissolved in the liquid (called the solvent).An extensive list of Henry's law constants, and a conversion tool The equilibrium constant for that equilibrium is: 
|-
|align=right|where:
| 
|-
|align=left|=  the equilibrium constant for the solvation process
|-
|-
|}
Henry's Law is sometimes written as:University of Arizona chemistry class notes
Henry's Law is an approximation that only applies for dilute, ideal solutions and for solutions where the liquid solvent does not react chemically with the gas being dissolved.

Partial pressure in diving breathing gases

In recreational diving and professional diving the richness of individual component gases of breathing gases is expressed by partial pressure. 
Using diving terms, partial pressure is calculated as:
For the component gas "i":
For example, at 50 metres (165 feet), the total absolute pressure is 6 bar (600 kPa) (i.e., 1 bar of atmospheric pressure + 5 bar of water pressure) and the partial pressures of the main components of 
air, oxygen 21% by volume and nitrogen 79% by volume are:
The minimum safe lower limit for the partial pressures of oxygen in a gas mixture is 0.16 bar (16 kPa) absolute. Hypoxia and sudden unconsciousness becomes a problem with an oxygen partial pressure of less than 0.16 bar absolute.  Oxygen toxicity, involving convulsions, becomes a problem when oxygen partial pressure is too high.  The NOAA Diving Manual recommends a maximum single exposure of 45 minutes at 1.6 bar absolute, of 120 minutes at 1.5 bar absolute, of 150 minutes at 1.4 bar absolute, of 180 minutes at 1.3 bar absolute and of 210 minutes at 1.2 bar absolute. Oxygen toxicity becomes a risk when these oxygen partial pressures and exposures are exceeded. The partial pressure of oxygen determines the maximum operating depth of a gas mixture.
Nitrogen narcosis is a problem when breathing gases at high pressure. Typically, the maximum total partial pressure of narcotic gases used when planning for technical diving is 4.5 bar absolute, based on an equivalent narcotic depth of .

In medicine






