[[Jörg Kachelmann]]

CATEGORIES: 1958 births, Living people, People acquitted of rape, People from Lörrach, Swiss meteorologists, Swiss television presenters, University of Zurich alumni, Weather presenters

Jörg Andreas Kachelmannmoneyhouse.

Biography

Jörg Kachelmann spent his youth in Schaffhausen. His childhood ambition was to become a meteorologist and record the weather.
During his school and university holidays he worked for various weather services.
He studied geography, mathematics and physics at the University of Zurich, where meteorology was not offered. He dropped out of the university before being awarded his degree and became a free-lance contributor to a Swiss newspaper, the Sonntagsblick. In between he also worked for Schaffhausen local radio station Radio Munot. From there he moved to the Scientific Editorship of Swiss Television SRG and in 1988 he became Deputy Editor in Chief of Schweizer Illustrierte.
For a long time he had faxed unsolicited weather forecasts to Südwestfunk. Eventually these were adopted. In 1989, Jörg Kachelmann bought an old farmhouse in Bächli and rebuilt this into a high tech weather station. In 1991 he founded the Meteomedia AG weather service operating over 1000 weather stations in Germany alone.
In 1996 Kachelmann became Programme Director of the German edition of the American television Weather Channel. After barely two years, however, the station discontinued the service citing "lack of viewer interest."
Apart from producing weather forecasts for ARD and various other broadcasters Kachelmann acted in other areas. In 1996 he presented the German programme "Vorsicht Blöff", appeared from 1999 to 2004 on the talk show "Riverboat", to which he returned in 2007 and which he gave up due to lack of time in 2009.
In April 2002 ARD changed its weather service provider from the German Weather Service, DWD, to Meteomedia AG. Since then he has presented the weather alternating with Claudia Kleinert, Sven Plöger and Alexander Lehmann before the main news. Kachelmann has become famous for his unconventional presentation of the weather. A common fallacy is that he introduced words such "Blumenkohlwolken" ("Cauliflower clouds" for Cumulus) and "schlürfende Winde" (slurping wind). He denied this in an interview with the German newspaper Der Tagesspiegel.
The headquarters of the Swiss Meteomedia AG is located in Gais AR near to St. Gallen, the headquarters of German Meteomedia GmbH is in Bochum. In 2004 Meteomedia founded the Weather Information on Demand (WIND) system in Austria. He has been criticised for his commercial exploitation of the media and describing himself as a "meteorologist" without holding a recognised qualification. Kachelmann has also been criticised for his sensationalism. He established a weather station at the Funtensee in Germany because of the extremely low temperatures in winter (up to -45 °C) caused by the location of the lake. It is situated in a valley which is shaded by high mountains, forming a sink for cold air.
In March 2010, Kachelmann was arrested at Frankfurt airport in Germany after an ex-girlfriend accused him of raping her  ). Subsequently, a jury of language scholars chose "Opfer-Abo" as German Un-Word of the Year, thus criticizing its usage as inappropriate and inhuman. Published online on 15 January 2013






