[[FreshXpress]]

CATEGORIES: Supermarkets of the United Kingdom, British companies established in 2007, Companies disestablished in 2009, Companies that have entered administration in the United Kingdom

FreshXpress was a discount supermarket chain in the United Kingdom. It was originally formed in 2007, from the rump of the defunct Kwik Save chain, by Irish retail entrepreneur Brendan Murtagh. It existed in its original form between July 2007 and March 2008, culminating in it going into administration, and was then resurrected in a smaller form, however during 2009 the resurrected company also went into administration, and has since ceased to exist.

History

From the remains of Kwik Save

In February 2007 Brendan Murtagh, a major shareholder in Cavan-based Kingspan building materials group backed 70% of a £50 million rescue plan for Kwik Save, with the Kwik Save managing director, Paul Niklas covering the remaining 30%. Murtagh's son Alan had already been a director of the business before he got involved.

A new beginning

FreshXpress Retail Limited first had 56 stores, the closed stores were sold in chunks to Tesco, Sainsbury's, and The Co-op.
Many of the stores were leased from the Somerfield group and are now being leased to other retailers

Into administration

Between September 2007 and March 2008 more under performing FreshXpress stores were closed down, leaving just nine stores, and Mr Niklas cut his ties with the company. In March 2008 FreshXpress went into administration. On 21 March David Whitehouse of Menzies Corporate Restructuring was appointed joint administrator.

2008

Another vehicle called FX Holdings (formerly Ivybrim), received the go ahead at Manchester Crown Court to acquire the remaining operating outlets. Andrew King, a former executive at Costcutter, one of the company's suppliers was to head up a nine store chain with 130 employees.

Into administration again

The parent company of the second incarnation of FreshXpress, FX Holdings was placed into administration and subject to a request for a winding up order in April 2009.




