[[Il secondo tragico Fantozzi]]

CATEGORIES: Italian films, 1970s comedy films, 1976 films, Italian-language films, Sequel films, Films directed by Luciano Salce, Films set in Rome, Films shot in Rome

Il secondo tragico Fantozzi (The Second Tragic Fantozzi) is an Italian comedy film released in 1976. It is the second film in the saga of the unlucky clerk Ugo Fantozzi, played by its creator, Paolo Villaggio.

Plot

The accountant Ugo Fantozzi in this story suffer abuses, deceptions and lies in tragic situations even worse than the first film. Initially he must accompany his Duke Count to a game of chance in Monte Carlo. His boss is very superstitious so that forces Fantozzi to shove his hand under his backside and drink a ton of mineral water so that he can continue to win. Unfortunately for Fantozzi, the Duke Count will lose all his money and blame Fantozzi for the bad luck, forcing him to go back home clinging under the train, as he had no money to pay for the ticket of the compartment. After getting back home, Fantozzi cannot move at all, but is "cured" by Mrs. Pina with scalding-hot cloths on his stomach. In the net episode, Fantozzi goes with fellow accountant Filini for a hunting party. However, the space reserved for hunters is very small and the men, having lost patience and not finding any game, start a real manhunt killing and capturing their peers mistaking them for game and wild animals, quickly escalating to heavy machine guns and tanks. Fantozzi and Filini are not killed but captured by others and exposed.
Countess Serbelloni Mazzanti Vien Dal Mare is selected to christen a new and massive cruise ship, but due to terrible aim with the classic bottle of champagne she hits several times Fantozzi and others present, including the mayor. Then it's decided to cut a wire metal cord that would set the shipin motion, but the countess being shortsighted misaims and cuts the little finger of the archbishop, who was present at the ceremony, with a hatchet. The man curses in an exaggerated way and starts to chase the countess with a hatchet in hand. That same evening the noble to celebrate the launch of the ship organizes a dinner with the rich and politicians, and also inviting Fantozzi and Filini which come under the clutches of the dog Ivan the Terrible XXXII. Dinner is not very good because the two accountants, not having any social skill of sorts, botch almost anything embarrassing their directory greatly.  After the evening Fantozzi starts to drive home, after escaping the fury of the huge dog again, but all the same he is being chased and forced to stay in the car for two weeks.
So the accountant chooses to once again pretend to be sick and go to see the spectacle of a circus with free tickets, but unfortunately there will find its director who recognized him immediately. Fantozzi initially pretends entertainer and frightened then hides in a cannon which is fired and thrown up to Agrigento in Sicily. Fantozzi there turns out to be on maternity leave and is guided to the hospital by a vision: the Archangel Gabriel. Here starts a long flashback to the past: Fantozzi before being hired in your company worked as a sponge licking stamps for letters to be sent. His superior Prof. Riccardelli was a passionate crowds of Russian cinema realist and forced his subordinates and colleagues from Fred to see screenings of silent classics. Among them was the "Battleship Kotiomkin" (parody film of Battleship Potemkin by Sergei Eisenstein - 1925). Colleagues to do the pimps and flatterers say every time after the screening that the film is a masterpiece, but really felt it was a real piece of crap, in particular Fantozzi is considered from Riccardelli to be a  scum (Italian expression: "merdaccia"). However, during yet another projection Fantozzi has the courage to express their views sula film and says, "For me... the "Battleship Kotiomkin"... is a crazy shit!" The phrase detonates a roar of applause and cheers from colleagues that last 92 minutes and then take all the cinema to watch pornographic films and demented. Unfortunately, the police burst in a few days and subjected to Riccardelli, since they burned the film of the film Russian forces everyone to play every Saturday scenes characteristic of the up Battleship Kotiomkin exasperation.
When his wife Pina part for a city of Abruzzo with his daughter, Fantozzi cones and colleagues Calboni Filini organizing an evening to a hot nightclub, but in the end the accounts will be so salty that the three do not find the money even to pay for the taxi drivers. Filini will be lynched by drivers. Meanwhile Calboni was the only one to garner a bit of money to have a good time make friends with a prostitute, thus betraying his wife Miss Silvani. Fantozzi then takes the opportunity to woo the nth time the woman act when trying to make perfectly for years behind his wife Pina, and this time finally succeeds. The two lovers land to the island of Capri for a honeymoon, but it will be studded with tragic situations and unexpected misunderstandings that result in the reconciliation of Silvani and Calboni and the defeat of the poor Fantozzi who, having tried to commit suicide, is caught by a speed boat and sold as a result of sea Italy. There is bought by his wife Pina to be able to return home safe and sound and in order to celebrate the Christmas. Fantozzi is positive, but in the very best moment of the evening he calls her on the phone Mega-Director Galactic which wants to offer him a new job. In fact Fantozzi was fired before leaving for Capri. The unfortunate accountant resume work in his company, but this time as a lightning rod.





 
 

