[[High School Debut]]

CATEGORIES: 2003 manga, Romantic comedy anime and manga, Romance anime and manga, School anime and manga, Shōjo manga, Manga adapted into films


. It was serialized in Japan by Shueisha in Bessatsu Margaret from 2003 to 2008 and collected in 13 bound volumes. The series was adapted as a drama CD and as a series of six light novels written by Yuu Kuramoto. The manga is licensed in North America by Viz Media, which published English editions of all 13 volumes between January 2008 and February 2010.
The series follows the relationship between Haruna Nagashima, an enthusiastic former softball star, and Yoh Komiyama, the cool boy she convinces to coach her in romance. It has been praised by reviewers as a standard shōjo manga premise made highly entertaining by Kawahara's handling of the characters, particularly the romantic leads, and artwork.

Plot

Haruna Nagashima gave her all to softball in middle school, now that she has made her high school debut, she has decided to give her all for a new goal: getting a boyfriend and falling in love. However, she has one small problem—since she never paid any attention to fashion or trends in middle school, she has no idea how to go about attracting her yet-to-be-found love. But a chance encounter with the popular Yoh Komiyama provides her with the opportunity she needs. If he coaches her in how to become attractive, surely she can find herself a boyfriend. 
He agrees to coach Haruna after her great persistence but on one condition: she mustn't fall in love with him.

Main characters

Media

Manga

High School Debut was written and illustrated by Kazune Kawahara. It was serialized in Japan by Shueisha in the shōjo (aimed at teenage girls) manga magazine Bessatsu Margaret between  2003 and August 2008. with all 13 volumes published in English. It is also published in Italy by Star Comics and in Korea.
Two sequel short stories called "Enren Debut" ("Long-Distance Love Debut"), set in the months after the conclusion of the series, were published in the March and May 2009 issues of Deluxe Margaret.
In March 2011 released a new volume of the series. -"Far Love Edition" or "Love Edition - Far High School Debut" - issued March 25, 2011.
This sequel of October 2013, already published two volumes, including this. The another  volumen 15 issued July 25, 2013 called "Far Love Knitting".

Drama CD

The series has been adapted as a drama CD released 10 June 2005.

Light novels

The series has also been adapted as a series of six light novels written by 

Live action

A live action movie of High School Debut with filming beginning in October 2010 was released 1 April 2011. Mizobata Junpei and Ohno Ito starred as the leading actor/actress.

Reception

High School Debut was among the best-selling manga in Japan during publication. For example, volumes 9, 10, and 11 all reached number 2 on the Tohan best-seller list,
Volumes one and two of the English edition were named as two of the Great Graphic Novels for Teens of 2008 by YALSA.
Kawahara's art was praised for its clean style and layout, dynamic figures, and emotional expressions, 
Reviewers consistently hailed Haruna as a comic heroine and a key to the series' appeal,






