[[Ben Bova]]

CATEGORIES: 1932 births, Living people, American science fiction writers, 20th-century American novelists, Writers of books about writing fiction, People from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, People from West Hartford, Connecticut, Writers from Connecticut, Hugo Award winning editors, Writers from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Science fiction editors, Worldcon Guests of Honor, Temple University alumni, Technical writers, Analog Science Fiction and Fact, American atheists

Benjamin William Bova (born November 8, 1932) is an American author of more than 120

Personal life

Ben Bova was born on November 8, 1932 in Philadelphia. In 1953, while attending Temple University in Philadelphia, he married Rosa Cucinotta; they had a son and a daughter. He would later divorce Rosa in 1974. In that same year he married Barbara Berson Rose. Barbara Bova died on September 23, 2009.
Bova was an avid fencer in his younger days, and organized Avco Everett's fencing club.
Bova is an atheist and is critical of what he sees as the unquestioning nature of religion.

Career

Bova worked as a technical writer for Project Vanguard in the 1950s and later for the Avco Everett Research Laboratory in the 1960s when they did research in lasers and fluid dynamics. At Avco Everett he met Arthur R. Kantrowitz (later of the Foresight Institute).
In 1972, Bova became editor of Analog Science Fiction after John W. Campbell's death in 1971. At Analog, Bova won six Hugo Awards for Best Professional Editor. After leaving Analog in 1978, he went on to edit Omni during 1978–1982.
In 1974, he wrote the screenplay for an episode of the children's science-fiction television series Land of the Lost entitled "The Search".
Bova served as the science advisor for the failed television series The Starlost, leaving in disgust after the airing of the first episode (1973). His novel The Starcrossed, loosely based on his experiences, featured a thinly veiled characterization of his friend and colleague Harlan Ellison. Bova dedicated the novel to "Cordwainer Bird", the pen name Harlan Ellison uses when he does not want to be associated with a television or film project.
Bova holds the position of President Emeritus of the National Space Society and served as President of Science-fiction and Fantasy Writers of America (SFWA) from 1990 to 1992.
Bova went back to school in the 1980s, earning an M.A. in communications in 1987 and a Ed.D. (from California Coast University) in 1996.
Bova has drawn on his experiences to create fact and fiction writings rich with references to spaceflight, lasers, artificial hearts, nanotechnology, environmentalism, fencing and martial arts, photography and artists.
, Bova has written over 115 books – non-fiction as well as science fiction. In 2000, he attended the 58th World Science Fiction Convention (Chicon 2000) as the Author Guest of Honor. He has appeared as the Guest of Honor at the Florida convention Necronomicon in 1995 and 2011.
Recently, Hollywood has taken an interest in Bova's works because of his wealth of knowledge about science and about what the future may look like. In 2007, Stuber/Parent Productions hired him as a consultant to provide insight into what the world may look like in the near future for their film Repo Men (2010) starring Jude Law and Forest Whitaker; also in 2007 he provided consulting services to Silver Pictures on the feature adaptation of Richard Morgan's novel Altered Carbon. In 2007, Velocity Management became Ben Bova's literary manager.

Bibliography

Collections

Exiles

Grand Tour

Bova's Grand Tour series of novels presents a fictional treatment of human colonization of the Solar System in the late 21st century. Bova addresses the issue of chronology in this series on his website: 

The internal chronology of the series lacks complete consistency.
According to 
Bova also published a short story collection including stories that span much of the timeline:

Sam Gunn

Chet Kinsman

Non-series novels

Orion

To Save the Sun

Voyagers

Watchmen

Non-fiction

Anthologies edited

Short fiction






