[[St. John the Baptist Diocesan High School]]

CATEGORIES: Roman Catholic secondary schools in New York, Islip (town), New York, Educational institutions established in 1967, Roman Catholic Diocese of Rockville Centre, Schools in Suffolk County, New York

St. John the Baptist Diocesan High School is a private, Roman Catholic high school in West Islip, New York.  It is operated by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Rockville Centre.

Faculty

Faculty members at St. John's are required to possess a Master's Degree, and have New York State Teacher Certification.
St. John's student to teacher ratio is approximately 16:1. 

Uniform

All students must wear the official school uniform appropriate for season, grade year, and gender to school. School shoes can be purchased through White Cross and uniforms through Lobel's in Massapequa, NY. If a uniform is worn improperly, a uniform infraction or a detention will be issued. Skorts are worn by the female class body and must be worn at an appropriate length or detentions will be issued by the faculty.
Also introduced during the 2007-2008 school year were identification cards. All students and faculty must wear their ID card with an official lanyard around their neck when they enter a building as a safety precaution. If a student forgets their ID cards three times, detention is issued.

School Layout and Building

The high school features five floors. The first three floors hold all of the classrooms. The fourth floor houses a conference center. St. John's also has a dance studio, large library, newly renovated lecture hall (as of September 2011), new athletic stadium bleachers ( as of September 2009).  The school contains the newly renovated gymnasium (as of September 2012), cafeteria, and a 1300 seat auditorium which had been updated through the generous donations of the Dunne family of alumni in honor of their mom, Ann Frances Dunne.

Academics

The basic curriculum includes required courses in Science, Math, Religious Studies, English, Social Studies and Physical Education.  French, Italian, or Spanish; Health, Fine Art or Performing Arts and Computer Science. All students graduate with a New York State Regents diploma after successfully completing the Regents examinations and coursework.  
A student receives a report card 4 times during the school year, as well as  4 Progress Reports. Final grades for full year courses are determined by calculating 20%  for each quarter and then 10% for the midterm/regents exam and 10% for the final/regents exam.
Three levels of classes are offered at St. Johns. Honors, Advanced Placement and regents courses. Also, College credit courses are offered through St. John's affiliates such as St. John's University, Molloy College and the New York Institute of Technology. Students placed in the SJB College extension program can work to earn 30 college credits (one year of college) before graduating from St. John's.stjohnthebaptistdhs.aspx?id=dc75ba5c-11b8-4858-964f-b6c7462d8a1f
Over the past six years, over 99% of St. John's graduates have gone on to college. St. John's graduates have been accepted to and graduated from such prestigious schools and universities as Harvard, Princeton, Yale, Carnegie Melon, Dartmouth, Georgetown, Holy Cross, Columbia, Notre Dame, Boston College, Emory, Johns Hopkins and all major military academies and more.stjohnthebaptistdhs.aspx?id=dc75ba5c-11b8-4858-964f-b6c7462d8a1f

Music and arts

The seven performing instrumental groups are the Concert Band, Orchestra, Jazz Ensemble, Chamber Ensemble, Percussion ensemble, and Wind Ensemble. The three performing vocal groups are, Chorus, MOVE (Men's Outstanding Vocal Ensemble), and the Women's Chorale, which has won numerous awards at the annual New York City Heritage Festival. The three vocal groups perform at concerts twice a year, in December and in the spring. The annual Dance Show showcases the talent and work of students in Danceworks, the Company (the competitive dance team) and the students from each of the dance courses as well as the student choreographers. The school Pep Band performs during half-time of varsity football and basketball games.
St. John's has a dedicated student art gallery for student work to be displayed in student themed art shows four times a year.
St. John's has a musical and a drama production program. Some musical productions put on by SJB include Crazy for You, Oliver!, Godspell, Anything Goes, Bye Bye Birdie (musical), Footloose, Peter Pan, The Sound of Music and "Thoroughly Modern Millie.  The most recent drama productions were Neil Simon's Odd Couple, Rumors and Arsenic and Old Lace.

Clubs and activities

St. Johns has many extracurricular activities, all are moderated by faculty members.

Athletics

The St. John's athletic program competes on frosh, JV and varsity levels. The men's and women's teams compete at regional and state levels in 18 sports. St. John the Baptist is a member of the Nassau-Suffolk Catholic High School Athletic Association (NSCHSAA)of New York. Common competitors of St. John the Baptist High School include other high schools in the Roman Catholic Diocese of Rockville Centre.  
Teams:

Notable alumni






