[[Victor Moses]]

CATEGORIES: 1990 births, 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players, Living people, Association football wingers, Chelsea F.C. players, Crystal Palace F.C. players, England under-21 international footballers, England youth international footballers, English footballers, English people of Nigerian descent, Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom, Nigerian footballers, Nigeria international footballers, Sportspeople from Lagos, Premier League players, The Football League players, Wigan Athletic F.C. players, Liverpool F.C. players

Victor Moses (born 12 December 1990) is a Nigerian professional footballer who plays for Liverpool on loan from Chelsea. Moses can play in a variety of positions, but in the first-team games he has taken part in so far, Moses has mostly played as a winger. Born in Nigeria, he represented England at under-16, under-17, under-19 and under-21 levels, but opted to play for the Nigeria as opposed to being fully capped for England.
Moses began his career in the Championship with Crystal Palace, before his performances caught the eye of Wigan Athletic. After two years, his game had improved to the extent that European Champions Chelsea were interested. Despite 10 goals during his first season, he was deemed surplus to requirements following the purchases of several attacking players, and he was let out on a season-long loan to Liverpool.

Early life

Moses was born in Lagos, Nigeria, the son of a Christian pastor. When he was 11, his parents were among thousands killed by rioters.."> A week later with his travel being paid for by relatives, Moses came to Britain as an asylum seeker. He attended Stanley Technical High School (now known as the Harris Academy) in South Norwood. Scouted playing football in the local Tandridge League for Cosmos 90 FC, Crystal Palace approached him, with the club's Selhurst Park stadium just streets away from his school. Offered a place in the Eagles' academy, Palace recommended him to the fee-paying Whitgift School in Croydon, where former Arsenal and Chelsea star Colin Pates was coaching the school football team.

Club career

Crystal Palace

Moses first came to prominence at 14 after scoring 50 goals for Palace's under-14s side. Playing alongside side Joe Szekeres for three years at both Whitgift and Palace, the pairing scored over 100 goals between them, as well as helping Whitgift win many School Cups, including a National Cup where Moses scored all five goals in the final against Healing School of Grimsby at the Walkers Stadium, Leicester.
He made his debut in The Championship on 6 November 2007 away from home against Cardiff. In the Palace first team Moses settled down well, scoring 3 times in his first season and settling into the squad well. In the close season Moses committed his future to Palace, signing a four-year contract to take him through until 2012, but the following season failed to ever really get going however, and despite a sustained period of starting matches he only managed to score twice.

Wigan Athletic

It was the 2009–10 season where he really came to prominence, when a run of five goals in eight games for the Eagles saw him become the hottest property of the January transfer window. On the final day of it he completed a £2.5 million transfer to Premier League side Wigan Athletic after Palace went into administration.
He made his debut on 6 February 2010 as a substitute against Sunderland in a 1–1 draw.
On 20 March 2010, Moses came on as a substitute against Burnley and got his first assist for the club, setting up team mate Hugo Rodallega for an injury time winner. He scored his first goal for Wigan on 3 May 2010 against Hull City.
Moses picked up two injuries at the start of the 2010–11 season, and found it difficult to make it back into the first-team due to increased competition for places. He scored his first league goal of the season
on 13 November 2010 in a 1–0 win against West Bromwich Albion.
Following the departure of Charles N'Zogbia, Moses became a regular starter for Wigan in the 2011–12 season. On 10 December 2011, he scored his first goal of the season against West Bromwich Albion – his first goal since scoring against the same team last season.

Chelsea

On 23 August 2012, Wigan Athletic accepted a fifth bid from Chelsea after they finally met Wigan's asking price after four previously unsuccessful bids. The player was given permission to speak with Chelsea.
Moses made his full debut for Chelsea when he started the League Cup game against Wolverhampton Wanderers and scored his first goal after 71 minutes in a game that finished 6–0 to the Blues.
On 3 November, Moses scored his first Premier League goal for Chelsea in the match against Swansea City, which ended in a 1–1 draw.
Moses scored his first Europa League goal for Chelsea in a 3–1 home win against Rubin Kazan,

=Loan to Liverpool=

On 2 September 2013, Moses signed for Liverpool on a season-long loan deal.
On 25 January 2014, he scored the first goal of a 2-0 against Bournemouth in the fourth round of the FA Cup.

International career

England

=U-16 and U-17 level=

Despite originally hailing from Nigeria Moses initially chose to represent his adopted home of England, featuring for the under-16 team, in which he won the Victory Shield in 2005, and under-17 level. He travelled with the squad to the 2007 UEFA European U-17 Championship in Belgium, scoring three times (including the only goal in the semi-final win over France) to help John Peacock's side to the competition final, where they were narrowly beaten by a single goal by Spain, though Moses managed to finish as the competition's top scorer and collect the Golden Boot for doing so.
That same summer the squad travelled to South Korea for the FIFA U-17 World Cup. Moses finished as the Young Lions' top scorer, netting three times in the Group B fixtures, but sustained an injury in the victory over Brazil that ruled him out of the competition. Moses' teammates went on to reach the quarterfinal stage.

=U-19s=

Following that tournament Moses was promoted to the under-18 squad, and following his goalscoring exploits for Palace's first-team, he was promoted to the under-19 side without appearing sufficiently for the U-18s to actually collect a cap. He went with the U-19s to the 2008 UEFA European U-19 Championship in the Czech Republic, playing two matches and picking up one assist as the Young Lions failed to make it out of Group B. Speculation grew as Stuart Pearce snubbed him that Moses would return to play for Nigeria in the 2010 World Cup, this move never materialised.

=U-21s=

Moses was promoted to the under-21 squad at the beginning of the 2010-2011 Premier League season and made his debut against Uzbekistan in a 2–0 win.

Nigeria

Moses was selected to play for Nigeria against Guatemala in February 2011, but the friendly was cancelled. kickoff. 14 January 2011. He accepted a call-up in March 2011 for Nigeria's games against Ethiopia and Kenya.

International goals

Career statistics

Club

International



Honours

Club

Chelsea

International

Nigeria

Individual






