[[Glomerida]]

CATEGORIES: Millipedes

Glomerida is an order of pill-millipedes found primarily in the Northern Hemisphere. They superficially resemble pill-bugs or woodlice, and can enroll into protective ball. They have twelve body segments, 17 to 19 pairs of legs, and males transfer sperm with modified rear legs called telopods. The order includes about 30 genera and at least 280 species, including Glomeris marginata, the common European pill-millipede. The order contains members in Europe, South-east Asia and the Americas from California to Guatemala. Although historically considered closely related with the similar sphaerotheriidans that also enroll, some DNA evidence suggest they may be more closely related to glomeridesmidans, a poorly known order that does not enroll.

Description

Glomeridans are small, oval-shaped millipedes reaching up to 

Distribution

Glomerida is predominantly a northern hemisphere group. It contains members in Europe, North Africa, Central and Southeast Asia, and the Americas. In the western hemisphere, Glomeridans occur in three disparate areas: an eastern, somewhat Appalachian region from Kentucky to northern Florida and Mississippi; a California region from the San Francisco Bay to the Monterey Bay, and a neotropical region from eastern Mexico (Nuevo León) to central Guatemala.

Classification

Glomerida contains approximately 30 genera, but the relationship of these to each other is debated. Some authors divide the order into three families, the large family Glomeridae, Glomeridellidae, and  Trachysphaeridae, while others classify the order into a more elaborate system of subfamilies and tribes and reognize the families Glomeridellidae, and Glomeridae and Protoglomeridae.
Glomerida is traditionally classified along with Sphaerotheriida in the superorder Oniscomorpha, which contains short-bodied millipedes capable of volvation. Oniscomorphs are united with the poorly known Glomeridesmida in the infraclass Pentazonia, which is characterized by posterior telopods and relatively short bodies, and is the sister group to the Helminthomorpha, or "worm-like" millipedes. This classification is supported by morphological similarites.  a hypothesis which would imply the enrolling behavior evolved twice or was lost in the ancestors of Glomeridesmidans.






