[[Anne D. Neal]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), Harvard Law School alumni, Living people, Spouses of members of the United States House of Representatives

Anne deHayden Neal is the president of the American Council of Trustees and Alumni (ACTA), a non-profit organization committed to advancing academic quality, accountability and affordability at colleges and universities in the United States.

Early life

Neal spent her childhood in Indiana, where her father was the editor of the Noblesville Daily Ledger, a small-town newspaper.

Career

Neal began her career as an attorney at the firm of Rogers & Wells in New York City, where she specialized in First Amendment law. She also served as an associate at Wiley Rein in Washington, D.C. Neal later served as senior vice president of corporate legal affairs for the Recording Industry Association of America where she was involved in the RIAA's campaign to oppose mandatory lyrics labeling.
In the early 1990s, Neal served as general counsel and congressional liaison for the National Endowment for the Humanities under Lynne V. Cheney, where she addressed a range of issues including academic freedom, intellectual diversity, and historical literacy. 
In both 2007 and 2010, Neal was appointed to the National Advisory Committee on Institutional Quality and Integrity, an advisory body that makes recommendations to the United States Secretary of Education.
Neal's writing has been published in the Washington Examiner,
Neal has testified before the Commission on the Future of Higher Education, the United States Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, the Louisiana Postsecondary Education Commission, and the California Advisory Committee to the U.S. Civil Rights Commission. She has presented at conferences sponsored by the American Enterprise Institute, the American Legislative Exchange Council, the University of Notre Dame, the Foreign Policy Association, the Association of American Colleges and Universities, Montana State University, the American Association of University Professors and the Council for Higher Education Accreditation.
Neal serves on the boards of the Mount Vernon Ladies' Association, the United States Capitol Historical Society, and Casey Trees.

Personal life

Neal is married to Congressman Thomas E. Petri (R-Wisconsin).




