[[Colette]]

CATEGORIES: 1873 births, 1954 deaths, People from Yonne, Bisexual writers, French novelists, French women writers, Modernist women writers, French opera librettists, French vedettes, Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery, LGBT writers from France, LGBT journalists, Grand Officiers of the Légion d'honneur, Bisexual women, 19th-century French novelists, 20th-century French novelists, 19th-century women writers, 20th-century women writers, LGBT novelists

Colette () was the surname of the French novelist and performer Sidonie-Gabrielle Colette (28 January 1873 – 3 August 1954). She is best known for her novel Gigi, upon which Lerner and Loewe based the stage and film musical comedies of the same title.

Early life and marriage

Colette was born to retired military officer Jules-Joseph Colette and his wife Adèle Eugénie Sidonie "Sido" Colette (nėe Landoy) in Saint-Sauveur-en-Puisaye, Yonne, in the Burgundy Region of France.
Her first books, the Claudine series, were published under her husband's pen name "Willy".  Claudine still has the power to charm; in belle époque, France it was downright shocking, much to Willy's satisfaction and profit.
According to one writer, "Colette had a poor relationship with her own daughter, Bel-Gazou."

Music hall career, affairs with women

In 1906, she left the unfaithful Gauthier-Villars, living for a time at the home of the American writer and salonist Natalie Clifford Barney. The two had a short affair, and remained friends until Colette's death.
Colette went to work in the music halls of Paris, under the wing of Mathilde de Morny, Marquise de Belbeuf, known as Missy, with whom she became romantically involved.  Another affair during this period was with the automobile-empire scion Auguste Heriot.

Second marriage, affair with stepson

In 1912, Colette married Henri de Jouvenel, the editor of the newspaper Le Matin. The couple had one daughter, Colette de Jouvenel, known to the family as Bel-Gazou ("beautiful babbling/chirping" in local dialect). Colette de Jouvenel later stated that her mother did not want a child and left her in the care of an English nanny, only rarely visiting her.
In 1914, during World War I, Colette was approached to write a ballet for the Paris Opera, which she outlined under the title "Divertissements pour ma fille". After Colette herself chose Maurice Ravel to write the music, he reimagined the work as an opera, to which Colette agreed. Ravel received the libretto to L'enfant et les sortilèges in 1918, and it was first performed on 21 March 1925.
During the war, she converted her husband's Saint-Malo estate into a hospital for the wounded, and was made a Chevalier of the Legion of Honour (1920). She divorced Henri de Jouvenel in 1924 after a much talked-about affair with her stepson, Bertrand de Jouvenel.

Third marriage

In 1935, Colette married Maurice Goudeket, an uncle of Juliet Goudeket alias Jetta Goudal. Silent Players:A Biographical and Autobiographical Study of 100 Silent Film Actors and Actresses. University Press of Kentucky, 2002. ISBN 0-8131-2249-X. page 148. After 1935, her legal name was simply Sidonie Goudeket. Maurice Goudeket published a book about his wife, Close to Colette: An Intimate Portrait of a Woman of Genius. An English translation was published in 1957 by Farrar, Straus & Cudahy, New York.

Continued writings

Post-World War I, her writing career bloomed following the publication of Chéri (1920). In the end, Léa demonstrates all the survival skills, which Colette associates with femininity. (The story continued in La Fin de Chéri (1926), which contrasts Léa's strength and Chéri's fragility and decline.) Considered nowadays to be Colette's masterpiece, Chéri was originally met with controversy because of its choice of setting - the demimonde of the Parisian courtesans - and also because of its portrayal of the hedonistic Chéri.
After Chéri, Colette entered the world of modern poetry and painting revolving around Jean Cocteau, who was later her neighbor in Jardins du Palais-Royal. Their relationship and life is vividly depicted in their books. By 1927, she was frequently acclaimed as France's greatest woman writer. "It ... has no plot, and yet tells of three lives all that should be known", wrote Janet Flanner of Sido on its publication in 1930. "Once again, and at greater length than usual, she has been hailed for her genius, humanities and perfect prose by those literary journals which years ago ... lifted nothing at all in her direction except the finger of scorn."
During World War II, Colette remained in Paris during the German Occupation and continuing to write and publish because "she said that she had to make a living." Gigi, set in the same Belle Epoque world as Cheri, became a bestseller because it took place during a glamorous time that "sweep her readers away from their everyday concerns of wartime shortages and danger."
She spent her final years in a wheelchair, being cared for by Goudeket, whom she called "a saint".  In 1951 she attended the premiere of a documentary about her life, and at the end she was heard saying to Goudeket, "What a beautiful life I've had".
Upon her death in Paris in 1954, Colette left 50 published novels in total, many with autobiographical elements. Her themes can be roughly divided into idyllic natural tales or dark struggles in relationships and love. All her novels were marked by clever observation and dialogue with an intimate, explicit style.
Her popular novella Gigi was made into a Broadway play and a highly successful Hollywood motion picture of the same name, starring Leslie Caron, Louis Jourdan, and Maurice Chevalier. Colette is directly credited with the discovery of a young, unknown Audrey Hepburn, whom the elder chose on sight to play the eponymous Broadway lead in Gigi. According to Hepburn herself, she was garrisoned with the 1952 film production company of Monte Carlo Baby at a hotel in the south of France for brief location shooting, the relatively unglamorous assignment part of a standard contract. Hepburn at the time commanded barely more stature than many unknowns after the Armistice in a European film industry decimated by World War II. Colette chanced to see the young Hepburn walking across the lobby of the hotel and immediately said to her companion of the moment, "There is my Gigi!" In 2009, an adaptation by Christopher Hampton of both Chéri and La Fin de Chéri was made into a film starring Michelle Pfeiffer, Rupert Friend, and Kathy Bates and directed by Stephen Frears.  
A pre-Broadway production of the musical, newly adapted by Heidi Thomas (Call the Midwife, Cranford, Upstairs Downstairs) and directed by Eric D. Schaeffer (Follies, Million Dollar Quartet) is planned to run the Kennedy Center in January 2015.  "Pre-Broadway Engagement of Gigi, Directed by Eric Schaeffer, Will Play Kennedy Center" playbill.com, November 6, 2013

Legacy

A controversial figure throughout her life, Colette flaunted her lesbian affairs.  
She was a member of the Belgian Royal Academy (1935), president of the Académie Goncourt (1949) (and the first woman to be admitted into it, in 1945), and a Chevalier (1920) and a Grand Officier (1953) of the Légion d'honneur.
During the German occupation of France during World War II, she aided her Jewish friends, including hiding her husband in her attic all through the war. When she died in Paris on 3 August 1954, she was the first woman given a state funeral in France, although she was refused Roman Catholic rites because of her divorces.  Colette is interred in Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.
Singer-songwriter Rosanne Cash paid tribute to the writer in the song, "The Summer I Read Colette", on her 1996 album 10 Song Demo.
Truman Capote wrote a short story about her (1970) called "The White Rose".
The Colette Study Centre in France has numerorous items relation to Colette's life.

Notable works





Sources

Further reading





