[[Tropical Storm Barry (2007)]]

CATEGORIES: 2007 Atlantic hurricane season, Atlantic tropical storms, Hurricanes in Cuba, Hurricanes in Florida, Hurricanes in Georgia (U.S. state), Hurricanes in South Carolina, Hurricanes in North Carolina, Hurricanes in Virginia, Hurricanes in Maryland, Hurricanes in Delaware, Hurricanes in New Jersey, Hurricanes in Pennsylvania, Hurricanes in New York, Hurricanes in New England, 2007 natural disasters in the United States

Tropical Storm Barry was a rapidly forming tropical cyclone that made landfall on Florida, United States, in early June 2007. The second named storm of the 2007 Atlantic hurricane season, Barry developed from a trough of low pressure in the southeastern Gulf of Mexico on June 1. It tracked rapidly northeastward, reaching peak winds of 60 mph (95 km/h) before weakening and making landfall near Tampa Bay as a tropical depression. Barry quickly lost tropical characteristics after wind shear removed much of the convection, and early on June 3 it completed the transition into an extratropical cyclone. The extratropical remnants tracked up the East Coast of the United States, and were absorbed by a larger extratropical cyclone on June 5.
The precursor trough produced heavy rainfall across the western Caribbean Sea, which on Cuba unofficially reached over 7.8 inches (200 mm). Outer rainbands in Pinar del Río Province injured three people and damaged 55 houses. In Florida, Barry dropped a moderate amount of precipitation across the drought-ridden state; rainfall peaked at 6.99 inches (178 mm). The rain caused some flooding and wet roads, which led to two indirect traffic fatalities. Rough seas killed one Florida surfer in Pinellas County. In Florida and Georgia, the precipitation assisted firefighters in combating severe wildfires. Overall damage from the storm was minor.

Meteorological history

By late on May 29, a weak trough over the Yucatán Peninsula produced a small area of convection over the Yucatán Channel. The deep convection became more concentrated near the center, and it is estimated the system developed into a tropical depression at 1200 UTC on June 1 just to the northwest of the western tip of Cuba. Operationally, it was not classified until eleven hours later.
The depression developed a large area of squalls, and organized enough to warrant a Hurricane Hunters flight into the area. Embedded within the southwesterly flow ahead of an approaching mid-level trough, it tracked quickly northward, and early on June 2 attained peak winds of 60 mph (95 km/h).
Shortly after reaching peak intensity, strong wind shear removed most of the deep convection; the cloud pattern consisted of an exposed yet well-defined center surrounded by a curved convective band extending from Cuba along the eastern Gulf of Mexico. and late on June 5 the remnants of Barry were absorbed by a larger extratropical cyclone near the border between the U.S. state of Maine and the Canadian province of Quebec.

Preparations

Coinciding with its classification as a tropical storm, the National Hurricane Center issued a tropical storm warning for the west coast of Florida from Bonita Beach through Keaton Beach, with a tropical storm watch declared from Keaton Beach northward to Saint Marks.
After becoming an extratropical cyclone, local National Weather Service offices issued flood watches for portions of South Carolina, much of eastern North Carolina, southeastern Virginia, and southeastern Maryland. Later, flood and flash flood watches were issued for southeast Pennsylvania, northern Delaware, northern New Jersey, east-central New York, and southern New England. Wind and lake wind advisories were posted in parts of Georgia.

Impact

Caribbean

In El Salvador, the precursor trough produced about 2.76 inches (70 mm) of rainfall in about ten hours.
The precursor system dropped heavy rainfall across western Cuba, peaking at 12.0 inches (305 mm) in Sancti Spíritus Province. Several other locations recorded over 4 inches (100 mm) of precipitation, which caused flooding along rivers and low-lying areas. The city of Guane was isolated after flooding cut off communications. In total, more than 2,000 people were evacuated due to the threat for flooding. Additionally, the precursor disturbance spawned four tornadoes in Pinar del Río Province; the tornadoes injured three people and damaged fifty-five houses, of which four collapsed.

United States

=Florida=

Barry dropped moderate to heavy rainfall across Florida, peaking at 6.99 inches (178 mm) at Palm Beach International Airport; several other locations reported over 3 inches (75 mm). The rainfall alleviated persistent drought conditions and assisted in combating severe wildfires across the state.
The storm produced heavy surf along the western coastline, as well as a storm tide of 4.78 feet (1.46 m) at Clearwater Beach. The wave action caused minor beach erosion, with 50–60 feet (15–18 m) of sand washed away at Bradenton Beach. The increased ocean action caused minor flooding along several roads in the Tampa Bay area, At Indian Shores, a woman died after sustaining injuries from the rough surf.
High winds across the state included a report of 47 mph (76 km/h) near the state's southeastern coastline.

=Elsewhere=

Rainfall in Georgia peaked at 8 inches (203 mm) in Mount Vernon. The precipitation assisted firefighters in combating wildfires in the southern portion of the state, which gave thousands of workers a brief respite after they had fought the fires daily for over a month. Heavy rainfall from the storm spread across much of the East Coast of the United States. State totals peaked at 6.12 inches (155 mm) near Hardeeville, South Carolina, 3.73 inches (95 mm) in Fuquay-Varina, North Carolina, and 3.75 inches (95 mm) near Pennington Gap, Virginia. High winds also occurred in South Carolina.
The extratropical remnants of Barry produced gusty winds alone the Atlantic coastline which peaked at 60 mph (97 km/h) near Charleston, South Carolina. Around 200 houses in Craven County, North Carolina, were without power after winds downed a power line.








