[[Ismael Blanco]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, 1984 births, Argentine people of Egyptian descent, Argentine footballers, Argentine expatriate footballers, People from Entre Ríos Province, Association football forwards, AEK Athens F.C. players, Colón de Santa Fe footballers, Club Libertad footballers, Olimpo footballers, San Luis F.C. footballers, Legia Warsaw players, TSV 1860 München players, Club Atlético Lanús footballers, Expatriate footballers in Paraguay, Argentine expatriates in Paraguay, Expatriate footballers in Mexico, Argentine expatriates in Mexico, Expatriate footballers in Greece, Argentine expatriates in Greece, Expatriate footballers in Poland, Argentine expatriates in Poland, Expatriate footballers in Germany, Argentine expatriates in Germany, Primera División Argentina players, Superleague Greece players, Liga MX footballers, Ekstraklasa players, 2. Bundesliga players

Ismael Blanco (born on 19 January 1983 in Santa Elena, Entre Ríos) is an Argentine professional footballer who currently plays as a striker for Lanús.

Club career

Argentina

Blanco started his career with Colón in 2002. He suffered a serious knee injury (cruciate ligament) in 2004.
Having lost his place on the first team, after his rehabilitation he was loaned out in January 2005 to Club Libertad of Paraguay, where he had the opportunity to participate at the Copa Libertadores 2005, scoring twice during his team's unsuccessful effort in Group 1.
After his loan spell in Club Libertad, he returned in June 2005 to Argentina, to play on loan for Olimpo de Bahía Blanca, a Primera B Nacional team. During his stay there he managed to score 46 times in 90 games helping his team win the Primera B Nacional and the promotion to Primera División and being the top scorer in both the Apertura 2006 (18 goals) and the Clausura 2007 (11 goals). In summer 2007, he rejoined Colón, but not for long.

AEK Athens

He did not stay with Colon for long, on 10 August 2007 Blanco joined AEK Athens
Blanco started his second season in AEK scoring the winning goal via a penalty against Panathinaikos in the year's first derby match. Blanco also stated to the press that he does not want to leave AEK and wants to be playing for many years in Greece.blogspot.html Blanco scored his first Greek Cup goal against Chaidari. Blanco finished top scorer in the 2008–09 Superleague Greece having scored 14 goals in 30 games (plus three goals at six playoff games). Blanco's third season at AEK wasn't as successful as the previous years as he scored only 13 goals all season, (eight in the league, four in Europe, one in playoffs). In his fourth season he scored 15 goals in all competitions. His first goals came in the 5–1 win against Panthrakikos F.C. for the Greek Cup, in which Blanco scored his first hat-trick. He scored also game winner against arch rivals Olympiakos in the 90th minute (he came in the game as a substitution).
Blanco decided not to renew his contract with AEK and not to accept the proposal of AEK and he was released to a free agent.com/content/league/story.

San Luis

On 18 August 2011, Blanco was signed by Mexican club San Luis. He managed to score two goals in 15 appearances for the Mexican League.

Legia Warsaw

On 24 February 2012, Blanco was signed by Polish club Legia Warsaw until 30 June 2012 with an option of extending to another season. Legia managed to win the Polish Cup of that season.

1860 München

After leaving Legia Warsaw, Blanco signed TSV 1860 München, as well as his former AEK Athens' teammate Grigoris Makos. He didn't fulfill the expectations of the club, having scored no goals in 13 caps for the Second Division for the German League.

Lanús

In February 2013, Blanco returned to his homeland, Argentina to join Lanús. He was given the number "18", his favorite number. He scored five goals in 16 appearances for the 2013 Torneo Final and Lanús took the third place.

Celebration

On 26 September 2007 in a match against Veria, after putting AEK Athens in front, Blanco revealed a Zorro mask from his sock and drew a big Z in the air celebrating the winning goal. He keeps doing so from time to time though referees usually punish him with a yellow card.

Personal life

Blanco is of Egyptian descent.

Career statistics

Honours






