[[New York Friars Club]]

CATEGORIES: Clubs and societies in the United States, Private clubs, Roast (comedy), Traditional gentlemen's clubs in the United States, Clubs and societies in New York City, 1904 establishments in New York, Organizations established in 1904

The Friars Club  is a private club in New York City, founded in 1904 and famous for its risqué celebrity roasts. The club's membership is composed mostly of comedians and other celebrities.  It is located at 57 East 55th Street between Park and Madison Avenues in a building it calls the Monastery.friarsclub.htm  

History

Early years

The organization traces its roots to 1904 when representatives of the Broadway theatres working with New York publicists organized the Press Agents' Association to exchange lists of people who were fraudulently receiving complimentary passes to shows.com Shortly thereafter it began its tribute dinners to theatrical celebrities with the first being Clyde Fitch; impresario Oscar Hammerstein was toasted in 1908, the year the Friars moved into a club house at 107 West 47th Street.  
The first Friars Frolics were held in 1911, with Abbott George M. Cohan working with Will Rogers, Irving Berlin (who wrote "Alexander's Ragtime Band" for the event), and Victor Herbert; the money generated by the Frolics enabled them to purchase 106-108-110 West 48th Street. Under Abbott Cohan it laid a cornerstone on the building in 1915. In 1924 Walter Donaldson wrote the music for "My Blue Heaven" one afternoon while waiting in the club for his turn at the billiard table.

Current location

The Friars Club moved into its current headquarters in 1957, an English Renaissance mansion built for Speyer & Company investment banker Martin Erdman by architects Alfredo S. G. Taylor and Levi in 1908.com - Retrieved November 8, 2008
In 1999 filmmaker Dean Ward's documentary Let Me In, I Hear Laughter: A Salute To The Friars Club appeared on Cinemax. It featured never-before-seen roast footage and interviews with Friars such as Milton Berle, Buddy Hackett, Sid Caesar, Steve Allen, Henny Youngman, Jeffrey Ross, Larry King, Ed McMahon, and Phyllis Diller.
In 2001 Hugh Hefner's roast at The Club was the scene of Gilbert Gottfried's public telling of the Aristocrats joke,
In 2008, the Friars Club began a stand-up comedy competition entitled, "So You Think You Can Roast!?" On October 24 of that year, the winner performed at the Friars Club Roast of Matt Lauer. The inaugural Friar's Club Comedy Film Festival was held in September 2009, opening with the American premiere of the Coen Brothers' A Serious Man.

Organization

Frederick F. Schrader is credited with suggesting "Friars" as the organization's name. Following the theme, their monthly newsletter is known as the Epistle. Officers of the Club (as distinct from the Friars Foundation2008 Friars Foundation Officers & Directors from the Friars' Club website) are given monastic titles:
In the 1960s, The Friars' Club, The Lambs Club, and The Players Club were often confused. Columnist Earl Wilson put it this way in 1964: "Long ago a New Yorker asked the difference between the Lambs, Friars, and Players, since the membership was, at the time, predominantly from Broadway." It was left to "a wit believed to have been George S. Kaufman" to draw the distinction: "The Players are gentlemen trying to be actors, the Lambs are actors trying to be gentlemen, and the Friars are neither trying to be both."
Michael Gyure is the Executive Director of the Friars Club and of its charitable arm the Friars Foundation.

Roasts

Between 1998 and 2002, the roasts were aired on Comedy Central.
|url = 
|title = Jack Carter, Smothers Brothers at Rip-Roaring Friars Roast
|publisher = New York Observer
|accessdate = 2007-08-15
|first= Frank|last= DiGiacomo
|date = October 12, 2003
}}[/ref]

Friars Club Comedy Film Festival

In its debut year, the festival featured the US premiere of the Coen brothers' Academy Award-nominated film, A Serious Man.








