[[Angelus (comics)]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional angels, Top Cow titles, Witchblade characters, Characters created by Marc Silvestri, Characters created by Garth Ennis, Fictional characters who can manipulate light

The Angelus is an American comic book character published by Top Cow Productions which first appeared in The Darkness comic in 1997. The Angelus has been featured in comics with her enemies the Darkness and the Witchblade.

Publication history

The Angelus played a prominent role in the First Born limited series and had a one-shot by Ian Edginton released in December 2007 as part of the Top Cow Pilot Season event.

Fictional character biography

The Angelus is an ageless power dating back beyond human history and ripped apart Krakatoa. 1, #11 She claims that both God and Jesus Christ are redundant in her presence. 1, Issue #13
Her main goal is to rid the world of the Darkness.
The Angelus would once again attempt to kill the Darkness and would also come into conflict with the new Magdalena, Patience. During the fight, Appolonia ran the Angelus through with the Spear of Destiny. The Angelus temporarily takes possession of Patience, but the spirit is forced out of Patience's body by her strong will and benevolence.
During the time the Angelus was without a host, her followers sensed that the balance between the light and the dark has been tipped in favor of Jackie Estacado, and had begun preparing for war while the Angelus searched for a new host.
Celestine later returned to fight Jackie Estacado. While caught in the middle of a fight between the hosts of the Glacier Stone and Ember Stone, Celestine was decapitated with the Blood Sword wielded by Jackie Estacado.
The Angelus was once again without a host until she came across Finch, friend of Danielle Baptiste, and possesses her. During a fight with Sara Pezzini (hosting the Darkness portion of the Witchblade and corrupted by it), she attempts to kill the bearer of the Angelus portion of the Witchblade, Dani. After emerging victorious, Sara absorbed the remaining half of the Witchblade into herself while still being corrupted. Sara was on the brink of killing Dani when an Angelus-possessed Finch swoops in to save Dani from death, and the Angelus transfers hosts from Finch to Dani.
Sabine later attempted a coup to overthrow Dani and become the new Angelus host. Sabine then acquired the Wheel of Shadows, one of the other thirteen Artifacts, and battled Dani, but was defeated.
Following the recreation of the universe, Dani never becomes the Angelus. Instead, the Angelus possesses the various Angelus Warriors, creating a hive mind in the process,

Powers and abilities

The Angelus is a force of nature with the power of the sun flowing through her. 1, Issue #14 The Angelus has been described as beautiful as the Morningstar and as ferocious as Kali. and the memories of all previous Angelus hosts. 1, Issue #4The Angelus Vol. 1 
She can also breathe fire, melt magical armor with her touch,The Darkness Vol. 1, Issue #6 channel blasts of light from either her weapons or hands, teleport both herself and others, withstand the full heat of a dying sun for 13 years without harm or nourishment by sustaining herself on the "will of the Almighty" alone,The Darkness: Accursed Vol. 4 and fly through outer space at a speed "besting the hands of time".
However, the Angelus' powers are limited since functioning in complete darkness quickly drains her of her powers which can also cause her host to age away and die within moments if she is of old age, and anything she creates turns to dust in the dark.

Video games

The Angelus is mentioned several times throughout The Darkness II video game and appears in the post-credits scene. After Jackie rescues Jenny from Hell, they have a moment of peace together and declare their love for each other once more. Jenny states that she will always love Jackie no matter what, and that she is sorry for whatever happens. She is then ripped away from Jackie as the Angelus takes over her. The Angelus states that Jenny is still within her and that the world has gone too long without her light. The Angelus then states that Jackie is too powerful and that he and the Darkness are now where they belong. She then ascends back to Earth, leaving Jackie and the Darkness in Hell, with Jackie screaming in anger.






