[[Mardi Gras]]

CATEGORIES: Mardi Gras, Tuesday, February observances, February events, March observances, March events, Religious festivals, Moveable holidays (Easter date based)

Mardi Gras  is French for "Fat Tuesday," reflecting the practice of the last night of eating richer, fatty foods before the ritual fasting of the Lenten season.
Related popular practices are associated with celebrations before the fasting and religious obligations associated with the penitential season of Lent. The date of Fat Tuesday coincides with that of celebrations of Shrove Tuesday, from the word shrive, meaning "confess."

Traditions

Popular practices include wearing masks and costumes, overturning social conventions, dancing, sports competitions, parades, debauchery, etc. Similar expressions to Mardi Gras appear in other European languages sharing the Christian tradition, as it is associated with the religious requirement for confession before Lent begins.
In many areas, the term "Mardi Gras" has come to mean the whole period of activity related to the celebratory events, beyond just the single day. In some American cities, it is now called "Mardi Gras Day".[ref]
  In London, Mardi Gras season: "Paul's Pastry Shop kneads a
  ton of dough in Picayune", Allbusiness.com, 2009, webpage:
  [
united-states-mississippi/1014135-1.
[/ref][ref]
  In New Orleans, Mardi Gras season: "Mardi Gras in New
  Orleans | Metro.co.co.uk, 2009, webpage;
  [
in_article_id=2315&in_page_id=1 Metro.co.
[/ref][ref]
  In Mobile, Mardi Gras season: "New Orleans has competition
  for Mardi Gras", USATODAY.com, February 2006, webpage:
  [
2006-02-17-mardi-gras_x.
[/ref][ref]
  In San Diego, Mardi Gras season: "sandiego.com - Mardi
  Gras in San Diego: FAQ's", SanDiego.com, 2008, webpage:
  [
mardi-gras-in-san-diego:-faq's/ SanDiego.
[/ref][ref]
  In Texas, Mardi Gras season: "Let's Celebrate: Mardi
  Gras 2008", Southernbyways.com, January 2008, webpage:
  [
lets-celebrate-mardi-gras-2008/ southernbyways-com-TX].
[/ref] It also has become a single people's counter to the coupled-centric Valentine's Day.[ref]
  In Texas, Mardi Gras season: "Let's Celebrate: Mardi
  Gras 2008", Southernbyways.com, January 2008, webpage:
  [
lets-celebrate-mardi-gras-2008/ southernbyways-com-TX].
[/ref] 
The festival season varies from city to city, as some traditions consider Mardi Gras the entire period between Epiphany or Twelfth Night and Ash Wednesday. In Mobile, Alabama, Mardi Gras-associated social events begin in November, followed by mystic society balls on Thanksgiving,[ref]
  "Mobile Carnival Association, 1927",
  MardiGrasDigest.com, 2006, webpage:
  [
mobile_carnival_association.
[/ref] then New Year's Eve, followed by parades and balls in January and February, celebrating up to midnight before Ash Wednesday. In earlier times parades were held on New Year's Day. Other cities famous for Mardi Gras celebrations include Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Barranquilla, Colombia; Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago; Quebec City, Canada; Mazatlán, Sinaloa, Mexico; and New Orleans, Louisiana. 
Carnival is an important celebration in Anglican and Catholic European nations. In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the week before Ash Wednesday is called "shrovetide", ending on Shrove Tuesday. It has its popular celebratory aspects as well. Pancakes are a traditional food. Pancakes and related fried breads or pastries made with sugar, fat and eggs are also traditionally consumed at this time in many parts of Latin America and the Caribbean.

Belgium

In the Belgian city of Binche the Mardi Gras festival is one of the most important days of the year and the summit of the Carnival of Binche. Around 1000 Gilles dance throughout the city from morning until past dusk, whilst traditional carnival songs play. In 2003, the "Carnival of Binche" was proclaimed one of the Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO.

Brazil

Carnival is the most famous Brazilian holiday. During this time period Brazil attracts 70% of its tourists. Variations in carnival celebrations are observed throughout the multitude of Brazilian cities. Yet, a commonality observed among them is the incorporation of samba into the celebrations. The southeastern cities of Brazil have massive parades that take place in large sambadromes. The largest carnival celebration in Brazil and the world occurs in Rio de Janeiro, where two million people are found celebrating in the city. The city of Salvador also holds a large carnival celebration.

Germany

The celebration of Mardi Gras in Germany is called Karneval, Fastnacht, or Fasching, depending on the region. Fastnacht means "Eve of the Fast", but all three terms cover the whole carnival season with famous parades held in Cologne, Mainz, and Düsseldorf on the Monday before Ash Wednesday, called Rosenmontag (Rose Monday).  The traditional start of Fasching is at 11:11 in the morning.

Italy

In Italy Mardi Gras is called Martedí Grasso (Fat Tuesday).  It's the main day of Carnival along with the Thursday before, called Giovedí Grasso (Fat Thursday), which ratifies the start of the celebrations. The most famous Carnivals in Italy are in Venice, Viareggio and Ivrea. Ivrea has the characteristic "Battle of Oranges" that finds its roots in medieval times.  Italy is the birthplace of Carnival celebrations, having its origins in the ancient Roman festival of Saturnalia. The Italian version of the festival is spelled Carnevale.

Netherlands

The Netherlands also has a festival similar to Mardi Gras. It's called Carnaval and is similar to the Venice Carnival. The origin of the word Carnaval is 'Carne Vale' which means "Goodbye to the meat" in Latin. It marks the beginning of lent leading up to Easter.
The carnival in the Netherlands is mainly held in the southern part of the Netherlands in the provinces of Noord-Brabant and Limburg, some parts of Zeeland and in eastern parts of Twente and Gelderland. As with many popular festivals, people tend to loosen some moral codes and become laid-back or loose, which is based in the ancient role-reversal origins of Carnaval, including dressing in costumes.

Sweden

In Sweden the celebration is called Fastan, when you eat fastlagsbulle, also called Fettisdagsbulle . That name comes from the words "fett" (fat) and "tisdag" (Tuesday). Originally, this was the only day one should eat faslagsbullar.

United States

While not observed nationally throughout the United States, a number of traditionally ethnic French cities and regions in the country have notable celebrations. Mardi Gras arrived in North America as a French Catholic tradition with the Le Moyne brothers,[ref]
   "New Orleans & Mardi Gras History Timeline
" (event list),
   Mardi Gras Digest, 2005, webpage:
   [
[/ref] Pierre Le Moyne d'Iberville and Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville, in the late 17th century, when King Louis XIV sent the pair to defend France's claim on the territory of Louisiane, which included what are now the U.S. states of Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana.
The expedition, led by Iberville, entered the mouth of the Mississippi River on the evening of March 2, 1699, Lundi Gras. They did not yet know it was the river explored and claimed for France by René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle in 1683. The party proceeded upstream to a place on the east bank about 60 miles downriver from where New Orleans is today, and made camp. This was on March 3, 1699, Mardi Gras, so in honor of this holiday, Iberville named the spot Point du Mardi Gras (French: "Mardi Gras Point") and called the nearby tributary Bayou Mardi Gras. Bienville went on to found the settlement of Mobile, Alabama in 1702 as the first capital of French Louisiana.[ref]
   "Timeline 18th Century:" (events),
   Timelines of History, 2007, webpage:
   [ TLine-1700-1724]:
   on "1702-1711" of Mobile.
[/ref] In 1703 French settlers in Mobile established the first organized Mardi Gras celebration tradition in what was to become the United States.[ref]
   "Mardi Gras in Mobile" (history),
