[[University of the Philippines Los Baños College of Development Communication]]

CATEGORIES: University of the Philippines Los Baños, Educational institutions established in 1954, Communications and media organizations, 1954 establishments in the Philippines

The College of Development Communication (CDC) is the ninth college established under the University of the Philippines Los Baños (UPLB).

Degree Programs

The CDC currently offers four degree programs:
It also conducts regular training workshops in coordination with various international and government agencies, and non-government organizations.

Departments

The CDC is currently organized into four departments:
Each department represents a field of specialization the undergraduate student can focus on (DDBT represents Community Broadcasting), until the curriculum was revised in favor of a more generalist one.

History

In 1954 the UP College of Agriculture (UPCA) started put up the Office of Extension and Publications (CA-OEP). Among its recruits was Nora C. Quebral, who would later pioneer the academic field.[ref]
Cadiz, Maria Celeste H. Nora Cruz Quebral: writer and thinker par excellence in Glocal Times web magazine 
In 1962, the CA-OEP was elevated into the Department of Agricultural Information and Communication (DAIC), which offered the first communication course in the country in 1960, under the Bachelor of Science in Agriculture curriculum.  The department was renamed the Department of Agricultural Communication in 1968.
In 1974, the world's first degree programs in development communication was offered by what was renamed the Department of Development Communication.  It was again renamed when it was elevated into  an institute (Institute of Development Communication) in 1987. It was elevated into a full college of UPLB on 18 December 1998.

Location and Facilities

The CDC is located at the University of the Philippines Los Baños campus in College, Laguna, Philippines. The UPLB campus is about 63 km southeast of Metro Manila. It is at the foot of the legendary Mt. Makiling, which hosts one of the few remaining rain forests in Luzon.  It is also situated near international and regional research centers and science and technology parks.
The College's building is within UPLB's administration circle and is among the first buildings one sees when entering UPLB's main gate.  It is adjacent to Carabao Park, which is UPLB's alumni plaza, and is right across the University's main administration building.
The CDC's facilities include experimental radio station DZLB AM, which broadcasts at 1116 kHz and serves as a developmental community radio station for Laguna, and its sister station LB FM, which broadcasts at 97.4 mHz and serves as the campus radio station.  Photography students are allowed to use the college's two darkrooms, and two computer laboratories are intended for students studying instructional materials production and Information and Communication Technologies, respectively.
The CDC's reading room's collection of reading materials is specifically geared towards the use of communication to promote social development.

Organizations

The college is host to a number of student organizations, namely:



Additional Sources


