[[Corinth]]

CATEGORIES: Corinth, Greek prefectural capitals, Mediterranean port cities and towns in Greece, Populated places in Corinthia, Ports and harbours of Greece, Populated coastal places in Greece

Corinth (Greek Κόρινθος, Kórinthos,  It is the capital of Corinthia.
It was founded as Nea Korinthos or New Corinth in 1858 after an earthquake destroyed the existing settlement of Corinth, which had developed in and around the site of ancient Corinth.

Geography

Located about  southwest of Athens, Corinth is surrounded by the coastal townlets of (clockwise) Lechaio, Isthmia, Kechries, and the inland townlets of Examilia and the archaeological site and village of ancient Corinth. Geophysically the city is likewise surrounded by the narrow coastal plain of Vocha, Corinthian Gulf, Corinth Canal, the Isthmus of Corinth, Saronic Gulf, Oneia Mountains, and the monolithic rock of Acrocorinth, where the medieval acropolis was built.

History

Corinth derives its name from Ancient Corinth, a city-state of antiquity. In 1858, the old city of Corinth (now known as Archaia Korinthos (Αρχαία Κόρινθος), located  SW of the modern city), was totally destroyed by an earthquake. This led to the establishment of Nea or New Corinth, on the coast of the Gulf of Corinth. New Corinth was rebuilt after a further earthquake in 1928 and again after a great fire in 1933.

Demographics

Corinth is the second largest city in the region of the Peloponnese. Between the census of 1981 and 1991, the city had one of the fastest-increasing populations in the country.

The Municipality of Corinth, or Dimos Korinthion, has a population of 58,280 (2011 census) and 36,991 (2001 census). It has a population density of 95.34 per km². The municipality includes the town of Archaia Korinthos (1,770 inhabitants), the town of Examilia (1,547 inhabitants), and the smaller settlements of Xylokeriza (777 inhabitants) and Corinthia (686 inhabitants).

Economy

Industry

Corinth is a major industrial hub at a national level. Copper cables, petroleum products, leather, medical equipment, marble, gypsum, ceramic tiles, salt, mineral water and beverages, meat products, and gums are produced nearby. As of 2005, a period of deindustrialization has commenced as a large pipework complex, a textile factory and a meat packing facility disrupted their operations.

Transport

Roads

Corinth is a major road hub. The A7 toll motorway for Tripoli and Kalamata, (and Sparta via A71 toll), branches off the A8/European route E94 toll motorway from Athens at Corinth.  Corinth is the main entry point to the Peloponnesian peninsula, the southernmost area of continental Greece.

Railways

The city has been connected to the Proastiakos, the Athens suburban rail network, since 2005, when the new Corinth railway station was completed.

Port

The port of Corinth, located north of the city centre and close to the northwest entrance of the Corinth Canal, at 37 56.0' N / 22 56.0' E, serves the local needs of industry and agriculture. It is mainly a cargo exporting facility.
It is an artificial harbour (depth approximately , protected by a concrete mole (length approximately 930 metres, width 100 metres, mole surface 93,000 m2). A new pier finished in the late 1980s doubled the capacity of the port. The reinforced mole protects anchored vessels from strong northern winds.
Within the port operates a customs office facility and a Hellenic Coast Guard post. Sea traffic is limited to trade in the export of local produce, mainly citrus fruits, grapes, marble, aggregates and some domestic imports. The port operates as a contingency facility for general cargo ships, bulk carriers and ROROs, in case of strikes at Piraeus port. There is a ferry line (RORO) connecting Corinth to Italy.

=Ferries=

There was a ferry link to Catania, Sicily and Genoa  in Italy.

Canal

The Corinth Canal, carrying ship traffic between the western Mediterranean Sea and the Aegean Sea, is about  wide at its base, making it impassable for most modern ships. It now has little economic importance.
The canal was mooted in classical times and an abortive effort was made to build it in the 1st century AD. Construction finally got underway in 1881 but was hampered by geological and financial problems that bankrupted the original builders. It was completed in 1893, but due to the canal's narrowness, navigational problems and periodic closures to repair landslips from its steep walls, it failed to attract the level of traffic anticipated by its operators. It is now used mainly for tourist traffic.

Sport

The city's association football team is Korinthos F.C. (Π.Α.E. Κόρινθος), established in 1999 after the merger of Pankorinthian Football Club (Παγκορινθιακός) and Corinth Football Club (Κόρινθος). During the 2006-2007 season, the team played in the Greek Fourth Division's Regional Group 7. The team went undefeated that season and it earned the top spot. This granted the team a promotion to the Gamma Ethnikí (Third Division) for the 2007-2008 season. For the 2008-2009 season, Korinthos F.C. competed in the Gamma Ethniki (Third Division) southern grouping.

Twin towns — sister cities

Corinth is twinned with:

Notable people

Other locations named after Corinth

Due to its ancient history and the presence of St. Paul the Apostle in Corinth some locations all over the world have been named Corinth.





External material




