[[Alyson Hannigan]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from Atlanta, Georgia, Actresses from Los Angeles, California, Actresses from Washington, D.C., American child actresses, American film actresses, American people of Irish descent, American stage actresses, American television actresses, Jewish American actresses, California State University, Northridge alumni, Living people

Alyson Lee Hannigan (born March 24, 1974) is an American actress. She is best known for her roles as Willow Rosenberg in the television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer (1997–2003), Lily Aldrin on the CBS sitcom How I Met Your Mother (2005–2014) and Michelle Flaherty in the American Pie film series (1999–present).

Early life

Hannigan was born in Washington, D.C., the only child of Emilie (Posner) Haas, a real estate agent, and Al Hannigan, a truck driver.

Career

1978–1996

At age four, Hannigan began appearing in commercials.
Hannigan's first major film role was in My Stepmother Is an Alien, a science fiction comedy released in 1988; one of her co-stars in the film was actor Seth Green, who later joined her in the regular cast of Buffy as her on-screen boyfriend. Then in 1989, her first regular role on a TV series came when she was cast in the short-lived ABC sitcom Free Spirit. As a teenager, Hannigan babysat for the kids of Bob Saget, who later narrated her TV series, How I Met Your Mother."It's Evening in America". Vanity Fair. May 2012. Page 158.

1997–present

In 1997, Hannigan was cast to play Willow Rosenberg, Buffy Summers' best friend, on the television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer. The show became a success, and Hannigan gained recognition, subsequently appearing in several notable films aimed at teenage audiences, including American Pie, American Pie 2, Boys and Girls and American Wedding. She also had a guest spot on the Buffy spin-off, Angel, reprising her role of Willow in a few episodes (including most notably "Orpheus," during the fourth season of Angel and the seventh season of Buffy), but none after Buffy finished production.
In early 2004, Hannigan made her West End debut, starring in a stage adaptation of When Harry Met Sally... at the Theatre Royal Haymarket, opposite Luke Perry.
In 2005, Hannigan returned to starring in a regular television series, appearing in the hit comedy How I Met Your Mother as Lily, and also playing a recurring guest role on Veronica Mars as Trina Echolls.
In February 2006, Hannigan starred as Julia Jones in Date Movie, a parody of romantic comedies. She was also a guest star on the ABC animated sitcom The Goode Family in 2009.
Hannigan joined forces with Emily Deschanel, Jaime King, Minka Kelly, and Katharine McPhee in a "video slumber party" featured on FunnyorDie.
In 2012, Hannigan reprised the role of Michelle in American Reunion.

Personal life

Hannigan married fellow Buffy the Vampire Slayer actor Alexis Denisof at Two Bunch Palms Resort in Desert Hot Springs, California, on October 11, 2003. The couple have two daughters, Satyana Marie Denisof, born March 24, 2009,
Hannigan and her husband are godparents to Joss Whedon's son, Arden.

Stalking

On February 13, 2013, Hannigan was granted a temporary restraining order against New Hampshire resident John Hobbs after he began sending her threatening and obsessive messages via the Internet, wishing to meet and possibly kill her. On March 6, 2013, the restraining order was extended to last for an additional 4 years. Alyson Hannigan Secures Restraining Order Over Alleged Online Death Threats ca.com. February 13, 2013.

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations






