[[Lyrics]]

CATEGORIES: Poetry, Lyrics

Lyrics are a set of words that make up a song, usually consisting of verses and choruses. The writer of lyrics is a lyricist. The words to an extended musical composition such as an opera are, however, usually known as a "libretto" and their writer, as a "librettist". The meaning of lyrics can either be explicit or implicit. Some lyrics are abstract, almost unintelligible, and, in such cases, their explication emphasizes form, articulation, meter, and symmetry of expression.

Etymology

"Lyric" derives via Latin lyricus from the Greek ". Clarendon Press (Oxford), 1996. Hosted at the Perseus Project. Accessed 15 Jan 2014. It first appeared in English in the mid-16th century in reference to the Earl of Surrey's translations of Petrarch and to his own sonnets. An Apologie for Poetrie op. cit. OED (1903). Greek lyric poetry had been defined by the manner in which it was sung accompanied by the lyre or cithara,Miller, Andrew. Greek Lyric: An Anthology in Translation, pp. xii ff. Hackett Publishing (Indianapolis), 1996. ISBN 978-0872202917. as opposed to the chanted formal epics or the more passionate elegies accompanied by the flute. The personal nature of many of the verses of the Nine Lyric Poets led to the present sense of "lyric poetry" but the original Greek sense{–}words set to music{–}eventually led to its use as "lyrics", first attested in Stainer and Barrett's 1876 Dictionary of Musical Terms. A Dictionary of Musical Terms, p. 276. (London), 1876. Stainer and Barrett used the word as a singular substantive: "Lyric, poetry or blank verse intended to be set to music and sung". By the 1930s, the present use of the plurale tantum "lyrics" had begun; it has been standard since the 1950s. The singular form "lyric" still appears; its present use, however, is to refer to a specific phrase within a song's lyrics.

Poems as lyrics

The differences between poem and song may become less meaningful where verse is set to music, to the point that any distinction becomes untenable. This is perhaps recognised in the way popular songs have lyrics.
However, the verse may pre-date its tune (in the way that "Rule Britannia" was set to music, and "And did those feet in ancient time" has become the hymn "Jerusalem"), or the tune may be lost over time but the words survive, matched by a number of different tunes (this is particularly common with hymns and ballads).
Possible classifications proliferate (under anthem, ballad, blues, carol, folk song, hymn, libretto, lied, lullaby, march, praise song, round, spiritual). Nursery rhymes may be songs, or doggerel: the term doesn't imply a distinction. The ghazal is a sung form that is considered primarily poetic. See also rapping, roots of hip hop music.
Analogously, verse drama might normally be judged (at its best) as poetry, but not consisting of poems (see dramatic verse).
In Baroque music, melodies and their lyrics where prose. Rather than paired lines they consist of rhetorical sentences or paragraphs consisting of an opening gesture, an amplification (often featuring sequence), and a close (featuring a cadence); in German Vordersatz-Fortspinnung-Epilog. Early Music: A Very Short Introduction, . For example:
 When I was a child,                                  [opening gesture]
 I spake as a child,                                  [amplification...]
 I understood as a child,                             [...]
 I thought as a child;                                [...]
 But when I became a man, I put away childish things. [close]
  -1 Corinthians 13:11

Shifter

In the lyrics of popular music a shifterDurant (1984). Cited in Middleton, Richard (1990/2002). Studying Popular Music. Philadelphia: Open University Press. ISBN 0-335-15275-9. is a word, often a pronoun, "where reference varies according to who is speaking, when and where",Middleton (1990), p.167. such as "I", "you", "my", "our". For example, who is the "my" of "My Generation"?

Copyright and royalties

Currently, there are many websites featuring song lyrics. This offering, however, is controversial, since some sites include copyrighted lyrics offered without the holder's permission. The U.S. Music Publishers' Association (MPA), which represents sheet music companies, launched a legal campaign against such websites in December 2005, the MPA's president, Lauren Keiser, said the free lyrics web sites are "completely illegal" and wanted some website operators jailed.
Lyrics licenses could be obtained in North America through one of the two aggregators; Gracenote Inc. and LyricFind. The first company to provide legal lyrics was Yahoo!, quickly followed by MetroLyrics and Lyrics.  More and more lyric websites are beginning to provide legal lyrics, such as SongMeanings and LyricWiki.
Many competing lyrics web sites are still offering unlicensed content, causing challenges around the legality and accuracy of lyrics.

Academic study

Riskiest search

A 2009 report published by McAfee found that lyrics-related searches and searches containing the word "free" are the most likely to have risky results from search engines, both in terms of average risk of all results, and maximum risk of any result.








