[[Paula White]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 births, American Christians, American Pentecostals, American television talk show hosts, Charismatic and Pentecostal Christianity, Living people, American television evangelists, People from Tupelo, Mississippi

Paula Michelle White is an international Christian evangelist and teacher, TV personality, author and philanthropist.  She is the Senior Pastor of New Destiny Christian Center in Apopka, Florida (Orlando metropolitan area), which is a non-denominational, multi-cultural church whose membership ranges in the thousands. She hosts a television show, Paula White Today, produced by Paula White Ministries, that is seen on multiple networks, at one point including Black Entertainment Television (BET) and Trinity Broadcasting Network (TBN). Formerly she was the co-pastor of Without Walls International Church in Tampa, a church she co-founded with pastor Randy White.
She has received many awards for her work, including the Rosa Parks Lifetime Achievement Award in 2013, Impact Leadership Award in 2011; the Humanitarian Award by the Trumpet Award Foundation in 2009; the Behind the Bench "Mind, Body, Spirit Award" from the NBA Wives Organization in 2007, and the "Trailblazer Award" by Jesse Jackson and Rainbow Coalition in 2006.  In many of her sermons, empowerment seminars, and books Paula White discusses her childhood traumas to teach about God's transforming power

Early life and youth

She was born Paula Michelle Furr, April 20, 1966, in Tupelo, Mississippi, to Myra Joanelle and Donald Paul Furr III. Her parents owned a thriving toy and craft store, and Paula and her brother Mark had a privileged life. However, Donald and Myra Furr's marriage began to fail when Paula was five years old. Paula's mother left Tupelo and took her to Memphis. Paula's father followed with an ultimatum for Myra to give Paula to him or he would commit suicide, and Myra refused. Later that night Donald Furr killed himself by running his car into a tree. Paula's mother experienced a drastic change in socioeconomic status because of her husband's death, throwing Paula, her brother and mother into poverty.  
Paula's mother remarried when Paula was 9 years old to a military man. Her family moved to the Washington D.C. area when her stepfather became stationed at the National Naval Medical Center. Paula White is a graduate of Seneca Valley High School in Germantown, Maryland.
In 1984 while living in Maryland, she was introduced to the gospel and became a Christian. On her television show in July 2005, White recounted the vision she received from God shortly after conversion: "When I was just eighteen years old, the Lord gave me a vision that every time I opened my mouth and declared the Word of the Lord, there was a manifestation of his spirit where people were either healed, delivered, or saved. When I shut my mouth, they fell off into utter darkness and God spoke to me and said I called you to preach the gospel."
Paula White later on became a part of the National Church of God in Fort Washington under T.L. Lowery of Church of God (Cleveland, Tennessee), and a small church in Gaithersburg-Damascus, Maryland area.

Christian Ministry

Without Walls International Church

Without Walls International Church, originally named South Tampa Christian Center, was founded in Tampa, Florida, by the then-couple Paula and Randy White in 1991.
The church struggled financially at first, and it could not afford to pay Randy and Paula White a salary for the first two years. As a result, Randy and Paula lived on government assistance and the kindness of others.  Soon the church began to grow quickly through the various outreach programs. From 1991 to 1998, the church changed locations three times until they secured the property located at 2511 North Grady Avenue in Tampa, and changed the name of the church to Without Walls International Church.
While the church was holding services in an outdoor tent in 1999, they reported 5,000 attendees a week and 10,000 ministered to outside of the church with 230 outreach ministries.
Without Walls International Church then purchased the property next to them at 3860 West Columbus Drive expanding their Tampa campus. The property acquired was a Canada Dry warehouse which they remodeled and is now today the main sanctuary for the church.
In 2002, Without Walls International Church began to expand to its second location in Lakeland, Florida. At this time, the church reported 14,000 members and 200 ministries including job training, evangelism among public housing projects and a teen club.  Without Walls International Church also began to hold Saturday night services at Carpenter's Home Church in Lakeland renting the property.
In 2004, Without Walls International Church reported a congregation of 20,000 as the largest congregation in the area making the church the seventh largest church in the United States.
The Tampa Tribune reported on March 5, 2008 that Without Walls International Church had put its 4,500–seat Tampa church up for sale, along with its 
On July 12, 2009, White became the senior pastor of the church she co-founded, Without Walls International Church, replacing her former husband Randy White, who stated that he was stepping down as pastor due to health reasons and would still remain connected with the church in a different position.
On January 1, 2011, following the resignation of Scott Thomas, White became the senior pastor of Without Walls Central Church in Lakeland, Florida making her the pastor of both church locations. However later that year, both senior pastor positions were restored to pastor Randy White. Paula White is no longer associated with Without Walls International Church.

Senate inquiry

On November 6, 2007, United States senator Chuck Grassley of Iowa announced an investigation of  White's ministry by the United States Senate Committee on Finance along with five other ministries. Without Walls International Church was one of four ministries that refused to provide the full information Senator Grassley requested.senate.gov/newsroom/ranking/release/?id=5fa343ed-87eb-49b0-82b9-28a9502910f7
On January 6, 2011, Senator Grassley concluded the three-year investigation with no penalties and no definitive findings of wrongdoing. The Alliance Defense Fund protested the investigation and the National Religious Broadcasters said the questions Senator Grassley asked were too broad.  The Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability plans to create a national commission in response to the Grassley report to lead a review on accountability and policy. White interpreted the conclusion of the investigation to mean that Without Walls International Church was cleared.

Paula White Ministries

White recorded the first broadcast of Paula White Today in December 2001 and, by 2006, her show appeared on nine television networks, including Trinity Broadcast Network, Daystar, and Black Entertainment Television
Ebony magazine said of White, "You know you're on to something new and significant when the most popular woman preacher on the Black Entertainment Network is a white woman."
White considers T.D. Jakes her spiritual father. Jakes invited her to speak at his "Woman Thou Art Loosed" conference in 2000. She also participated in the Mega Fest, hosted by Jakes in Atlanta, in 2004 and 2005. In March 2013 the godson of civil rights heroine Rosa Parks presented Paula White with the 'Rosa Parks Lifetime Achievement Award', a prestigious award previously awarded to Queen Latifah, Dick Gregory, Marla Gibbs, and Johnnie Cochran.
White has ministered to some well-known people including Michael Jackson, Donald Trump, Gary Sheffield, and Darryl Strawberry. Trump, who often brings her to Atlantic City for private Bible studies, has appeared on her television show. She was the personal pastor to Darryl Strawberry, starting in 2003 following Strawberry's release from prison for cocaine possession. Charisse Strawberry, Darryl Strawberry's wife at that time, worked as an assistant to White, accompanying her on speaking engagements.

New Destiny Christian Center

On December 31, 2011, the board of New Destiny Christian Church in Apopka, Florida, announced they had appointed Paula White to succeed Zachery Tims as the new senior pastor. New Destiny Christian Center had been searching for his replacement since Tims' death in August 2011. 
Upon hearing of the controversy, Paula White addressed New Destiny Christian Center during a service she was leading.  "I'm not asking you to like me. I'm not asking you to love me or respect me, because I'll do the work to earn that. I always ask people to give me one year of your life and I promise you will be changed."
On January 1, 2012, Paula White officially became the Senior Pastor for New Destiny Christian Center in Apopka, Florida. 

Personal life

Marriage

White's first marriage was as a teenager to the father of her son, Dean Knight. In 1984, while living in Maryland with her newborn baby, she was introduced to the gospel and became a Christian. Her marriage ended soon after. 
According to the book, Holy Mavericks, a vital turning point came in White's life in 1989 when she met Randy White, a third-generation preacher in the Church of God denomination. Randy was recovering from the divorce of his first marriage and was in the early stages of reviving his career as a preacher and evangelist. They met while he was visiting the church where White volunteered as a janitor. They became friends and dated for several months, working together in ministry projects. Less than a year after meeting, Randy proposed during a tour to Israel and she accepted. Shortly thereafter they moved from Maryland to Tampa, Florida.
In an article published in The Tampa Tribune in 2007, when Paula's husband (Randy White) was asked whether he was contemplating a divorce he replied, "No one can predict the future."
On August 23, 2007, Randy White announced to the Without Walls International Church congregation that he and Paula were divorcing. Randy stated from the pulpit of Without Walls International Church: "We have a very difficult announcement to make tonight before Tim Storey preaches. And that is that we are going through a divorce. It is the most difficult decision that I have had to make in my entire life and I come to you tonight to first let you know that I take full responsibility for a failed marriage." According to The Christian Post, White says the divorce was amicable and they remain friends. 

Family

White has a son named Bradley. She is a step-mother to the three children Randy had from a previous marriage: Kristen Renee, Angie, and Brandon. White and Randy did not have children together. Kristen Renee died on April 30, 2008, at the age of 30 years old after a difficult battle with brain cancer. Randy White founded the Kristen Renee Foundation in Kristen's memory. White has no official role with the foundation but is an active supporter.

Bibliography






