[[Almeno tu nell'universo]]

CATEGORIES: 1989 singles, 2003 singles, Mia Martini songs, Elisa (Italian singer) songs, Italian-language songs, Number-one singles in Italy, Sanremo Music Festival songs, 1989 songs

"Almeno tu nell'universo" is a song written by Bruno Lauzi and Maurizio Fabrizio and recorded by Italian singer Mia Martini, who released it as a single in 1989 and included the track in the album Martini Mia.
The song was performed for the first time by Mia Martini during the Sanremo Music Festival in 1989, where it placed 9th in a field of 24, receiving the Critics Award, which was later entitled to Martini herself. The song later became a commercial success. It was also covered by several artists, including Elisa, Mina, Thelma Houston and Marco Mengoni, becoming a classic of Italian popular music.
In 2005, "Almeno tu nell'universo" was voted the best Sanremo Music Festival song by the readers of the Italian newspaper la Repubblica.

Background

The music of "Almeno tu nell'universo" was composed in 1974 by Italian songwriter Maurizio Fabrizio. During the same year, Bruno Lauzi was asked to write the lyrics for the song, and he completed "Almeno tu nell'universo" in thirty minutes. The authors of the song immediately asked Mia Martini to record the song, but she refused it.

Track listing

Charts

Cover versions

In 1995, Mina decided to include a cover of "Almeno tu nell'universo" in her album Pappa di latte, replacing Domenico Modugno's "Resta cu'mme", which was originally chosen as a track of the album. Mina's cover was the first recorded tribute to Martini, who had died earlier during the same year.
A cover of the song was recorded by Italian singer Elisa in 2003 for the official soundtrack of the movie Remember Me, My Love, directed by Gabriele Muccino.
In 2009 the song was also covered by Italian X Factor winner Marco Mengoni, who performed it during the 9th live show. Mengoni included a studio recording of the track in his debut extended play, Dove si vola, and a live performance of the song in Re matto live, released in 2010.




