[[Natalie Portman]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 births, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from Connecticut, Actresses from Jerusalem, Actresses from Los Angeles, California, Actresses from New York City, Actresses from Washington, D.C., American child actresses, American female models, American film actresses, American people of Austrian-Jewish descent, American people of Polish-Jewish descent, American people of Romanian-Jewish descent, American people of Russian-Jewish descent, American stage actresses, American television actresses, Animal rights advocates, BAFTA winners (people), Best Actress Academy Award winners, Best Actress BAFTA Award winners, Best Drama Actress Golden Globe (film) winners, Best Supporting Actress Golden Globe (film) winners, Harvard University alumni, Independent Spirit Award for Best Female Lead winners, Israeli emigrants to the United States, Israeli female models, Israeli film actresses, Israeli Jews, Israeli people of Austrian-Jewish descent, Israeli people of Polish-Jewish descent, Israeli people of Romanian-Jewish descent, Israeli people of Moldovan-Jewish descent, Israeli people of Russian-Jewish descent, Israeli stage actresses, Israeli television actresses, Jewish activists, Jewish American actresses, Jewish female models, LGBT rights activists from the United States, LGBT rights activists from Israel, Living people, Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role Screen Actors Guild Award winners, People from Syosset, New York

Natalie Portman (born Natalie Hershlag;Dickerson, James L. Natalie Portman: Queen of Hearts (ECW Press, 2002), p. 32. "Natalie Portman: The Prodigy Comes of Age". The Observer, January 2, 2011. Retrieved January 6, 2011. 
In 2001, Portman opened in New York City's Public Theater production of Anton Chekhov's The Seagull. In 2005, Portman won a Golden Globe Award and received an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress for her performance in the drama Closer. She won a Constellation Award for Best Female Performance and a Saturn Award for Best Actress for her starring role in V for Vendetta (2006). She played leading roles in the historical dramas Goya's Ghosts (2006) and The Other Boleyn Girl (2008). In May 2008, she served as the youngest member of the 61st Annual Cannes Film Festival jury. Portman directed a segment of the collective film New York, I Love You. Portman is also known for her portrayal as Jane Foster, the love interest of Marvel superhero Thor, in the film adaptation Thor (2011), and its sequel, Thor: The Dark World (2013).
In 2010, Portman starred in the psychological thriller Black Swan. Her performance received critical praise and earned her a second Golden Globe Award, the Screen Actors Guild Award, the BAFTA Award, the Broadcast Film Critics Association Award and the Academy Award for Best Actress in 2011.

Early life

Portman was born in Jerusalem, Israel.
Portman's parents met at a Jewish student center at Ohio State University, where her mother was selling tickets. They corresponded after her father returned to Israel and were married when her mother visited a few years later. In 1984, when Portman was three years old, the family moved to the United States, where her father received his medical training. Portman, a dual citizen of the United States and Israel, has said that although she "really loves the States... my heart's in Jerusalem. That's where I feel at home."
Portman and her family first lived in Washington, D.C., but relocated to Connecticut in 1988 and then lived in Jericho, New York, on Long Island,

Education

In Washington, D.C., Portman attended Charles E. Smith Jewish Day School. Portman learned to speak Hebrew
In 2003, Portman graduated from Harvard University with an A.B. degree in psychology. "Natalie Portman Pushes Microfinance". The Stanford ReviewBeale, Lewis (March 14, 2006). "COVER STORY An action figure with substance, Natalie Portman loves a good laugh, but not when she talks about her violent role in the film 'V for Vendetta"Professors Reflect on Natalie Portman". The Harvard Crimson. March 1, 2011. Retrieved June 28, 2011. While attending Harvard, she was a resident of Lowell HouseGarlow, Stephanie S. and Zhang, Joyce Y. (March 24, 2006). "Housing Frenzy Welcomes Freshmen". The Harvard Crimson. Retrieved July 31, 2011. and wrote a letter to the Harvard Crimson in response to an essay critical of Israeli actions toward Palestinians. "Israeli Diversity Shown Even Among Leaders". The Harvard Crimson. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
Portman took graduate courses at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in the spring of 2004.
Portman has professed an interest in foreign languages since childhood and has studied French,
As a student, Portman co-authored two research papers that were published in scientific journals. Her 1998 high school paper, "A Simple Method to Demonstrate the Enzymatic Production of Hydrogen from Sugar," co-authored with scientists Ian Hurley and Jonathan Woodward, was entered in the Intel Science Talent Search.. New York Post.. Retrieved January 6, 2010. "Before graduating from Harvard with a psychology degree in June 2003, Portman was credited – under her given name, Natalie Hershlag – as a research assistant to Alan Dershowitz's 'Case for Israel' and had a study on memory called 'Frontal Lobe Activation During Object Permanence' published in a scientific journal."

Career

Early work

Portman started dancing lessons at age four and performed in local troupes. At the age of ten, a Revlon agent asked her to become a child model,
On school holidays, Portman attended theater camps. When she was ten, Portman auditioned for the 1992 Off-Broadway show Ruthless!, a musical about a girl who is prepared to commit murder to get the lead in a school play. Portman and future pop star Britney Spears were chosen as the understudies for star Laura Bell Bundy. In 1993, she auditioned for the role of a child who befriends a middle-aged hitman in Luc Besson's film, Léon: The Professional. Soon after getting the part, she took her paternal grandmother's maiden name, "Portman", as her stage name in the interest of privacy and to protect her family's identity. "Natalie Portman: How studying psychology helped her in her latest role", The Independent, March 17, 2006 Léon: The Professional opened on November 18, 1994, marking her feature film debut. That same year she appeared in the short film Developing, which aired on television.

1995–99

During the mid-1990s, Portman had roles in the films Heat, Everyone Says I Love You, and Mars Attacks!, as well as a major role in Beautiful Girls. She was the first choice to play Juliet in William Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet, but producers felt her age wasn't suitable. In 1997, Portman played the role of Anne Frank in a Broadway adaptation of The Diary of Anne Frank.
Also in 1997, Portman was cast as Padmé Amidala in the Star Wars prequel trilogy. The first film, The Phantom Menace, began filming in June 1997 and opened in May 1999."The Beginning" Making Episode I, Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace DVD documentary, 2001 Following production on The Phantom Menace, she initially turned down a lead role in the film Anywhere but Here after learning it would involve a sex scene, but director Wayne Wang and actress Susan Sarandon (who played Portman's mother in the film) demanded a rewrite of the script. Portman was shown a new draft, and she decided to accept the role. The film opened in late 1999, and she received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Supporting Actress for her role as Ann August. She then signed on to play the lead role of a teenaged mother in Where the Heart Is, which opened in April 2000.

2000–05

After filming Where the Heart Is, Portman moved into the dorms of Harvard University to pursue her bachelor's degree in psychology. She said in a 1999 interview that, with the exception of the Star Wars prequels, she would not act for the next four years in order to concentrate on studying. During the summer break from June to September 2000, Portman filmed Star Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones in Sydney, along with additional production in London. 167–171.
In July 2001, Portman opened in New York City's Public Theater production of Chekhov's The Seagull, directed by Mike Nichols; she played the role of Nina alongside Meryl Streep, Kevin Kline, and Philip Seymour Hoffman. The play opened at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park. That same year, she was one of many celebrities who made cameo appearances in the 2001 comedy Zoolander. Portman was cast in a small role in the film Cold Mountain alongside Jude Law and Nicole Kidman.
In 2004, Portman appeared in the independent movies Garden State and Closer. Garden State was an official selection of the Sundance Film Festival and won Best First Feature at the Independent Spirit Awards. Her performance as Alice in Closer earned her a Supporting Actress Golden Globe as well as a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress.
The final Star Wars prequel, Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, was released on May 19, 2005. The film was the highest grossing domestic film of the year

2006–09

Portman hosted Saturday Night Live on March 4, 2006. "Portman's bald truth: She's no pixie". USA Today. March 14, 2006. Retrieved January 16, 2011. In a SNL Digital Short, she portrays herself as an angry gangsta rapper (with Andy Samberg as her Flavor Flav-esque partner in Viking garb) during a faux-interview with Chris Parnell, saying she cheated at Harvard University while high on marijuana and cocaine."Saturday Night Live – Natalie Raps – Video". nbc. Retrieved July 31, 2011. The song, titled "Natalie's Rap," was released – alongside other sketches from the show – in 2009 on Incredibad, an album by the Lonely Island. "'SNL' Star Andy Samberg Recruits T-Pain, Justin Timberlake, Norah Jones For New Album". mtv. Retrieved July 31, 2011. In another sketch, she portrays a student named Rebecca Hershlag (her actual surname) attending a Bar Mitzvah, and in an installment of the recurring sketch The Needlers (also known as Sally and Dan, The Couple That Should Be Divorced), plays a fertility specialist (her father's profession).
V for Vendetta opened in early 2006. Portman portrayed Evey Hammond, a young woman who is saved from the secret police by the main character, V. Portman worked with a voice coach for the role, learning to speak with an English accent, and she famously had her head shaved.
Portman has commented on V for Vendetta
Both Goya's Ghosts and Free Zone received limited releases in 2006. Portman starred in the children's film Mr. Magorium's Wonder Emporium, which began filming in April 2006 and was released in November 2007; she has said that she was "excited to do a kids' movie." In late 2006, Portman filmed The Other Boleyn Girl, a historical drama in which she plays Anne Boleyn; Eric Bana and Scarlett Johansson co-starred. She was named one of the hottest women of film and TV by Blender Magazine.
In 2006, she filmed Wong Kar-wai's road movie My Blueberry Nights. She won acclaim for her role as gambler Leslie, because "for once she's not playing a waif or a child princess but a mature, full-bodied woman... but she's not coasting on her looks... She uses her appeal to simultaneously flirt with and taunt the gambler across the table." Portman voiced Bart Simpson's girlfriend Darcy in the episode "Little Big Girl" of The Simpsons' 18th season. "Bart's First Girlfriend". ugo. July 11, 2008. Retrieved March 4, 2011.
She appeared in Paul McCartney's music video "Dance Tonight" from his 2007 album Memory Almost Full, directed by Michel Gondry.
In 2008, Portman at age 27 made her directorial debut at the Venice Film Festival. Eve, a short film about a young woman who is dragged along on her grandmother's romantic date, was screened out of competition. Portman said she had always had a fascination with the older generation and drew inspiration for the character from her own grandmother.

2010–present

Portman played a young ballerina in Darren Aronofsky's 2010 film Black Swan, a role of which critic Kurt Loder wrote: "Portman gives one of her most compelling performances in this film, which is saying something."Loder, Kurt (December 2, 2010) Black Swan, Reason To prepare for the role, she went through five to eight hours of dance training each day for six months and lost 20 pounds. "Natalie Portman: Spreading Her Wings". Vogue, January 2011. Retrieved January 12, 2011. In 2011, she won both the Golden Globe Award and the Academy Award for Best Actress. "Pregnant Natalie Portman wins best actress as The Social Network scoops top honours at the Golden Globes". dailymail.co.uk. January 16, 2011. Retrieved January 16, 2011. "'King's Speech' rules at the 83rd Oscars". cnn. February 28, 2011. Retrieved February 28, 2011.
After Portman's Oscar win, controversy arose over who performed the bulk of the on-screen dancing in Black Swan. Director Aronofsky defended Portman by issuing a statement insisting that Portman performed 80 percent of the on-screen dancing in the movie.
Portman was trained by professional ballerina Mary Helen Bowers for her role in the film and later wrote the foreword to Bowers' book, Ballet Beautiful.
Portman co-starred in the 2011 film No Strings Attached, alongside Ashton Kutcher. She was also an executive producer on the film. She then starred in Your Highness, opposite James Franco and Danny McBride, and also played the role of Jane Foster in Kenneth Branagh's superhero film adaptation Thor.
In 2010, Portman signed on with Dior and appeared in several of the company's advertising campaigns. In October 2012, Britain's Advertising Standards Authority banned a Dior advertisement that featured Portman wearing Dior mascara after a complaint from Dior's competitor, L'Oreal. The ASA ruled that the photographs of Portman "misleadingly exaggerated the likely effects of the product".
By February 2012, Portman had signed on for two Terrence Malick projects, one named Knight of Cups and one yet untitled, both planned for release within two years.
In July 2013, Portman announced she had chosen an adaptation of Israeli author Amos Oz's autobiographical novel A Tale of Love and Darkness as her directorial feature debut. Portman will also star in the film and was a co-writer on the script.

Social and political causes

Portman, who is an advocate for animal rights, has been a vegetarian since childhood.
In 2007, Portman traveled to Rwanda with Jack Hanna, to film the documentary Gorillas on the Brink. Later, at a naming ceremony, Portman christened a baby gorilla Gukina, which means "to play."
Portman has also supported antipoverty activities. In 2004 and 2005, she traveled to Uganda, Guatemala, and Ecuador as the Ambassador of Hope for FINCA International, an organization that promotes micro-lending to help finance women-owned businesses in developing countries.
In the "Voices" segment of the April 29, 2007, episode of the ABC Sunday morning program This Week with George Stephanopoulos, Portman discussed her work with FINCA and how it can benefit women and children in Third World countries.
Portman is a supporter of the Democratic Party, and in the 2004 presidential race she campaigned for the Democratic nominee, Senator John Kerry. In the 2008 presidential election, Portman supported Senator Hillary Clinton of New York in the Democratic primaries. She later campaigned for the eventual Democratic nominee, Senator Barack Obama of Illinois, during the general election.
In 2010, Portman's activist work and popularity with young people earned her a nomination for VH1's Do Something Awards, which is dedicated to honoring individuals who do good.
In 2011, Portman and her then fiancé Benjamin Millepied were among the signers of a petition to President Obama in support of same-sex marriage.
In January 2011, Portman became an ambassador of Free The Children, an international charity and educational partner, spearheading their Power of a Girl campaign. She hosted a contest challenging girls in North America to fundraise for one of Free The Children's all-girls schools in Kenya. As incentives for the contest winner, she offered her designer Rodarte dress, worn at the red carpet premier of Black Swan, along with tickets to her next premier.
Free The Children's all-girls school was also the beneficiary of proceeds from sales of Nude Grege #169, the lipstick Portman designed for Christian Dior.

Personal life

In 2006, she commented that she felt more Jewish in Israel and that she would like to raise her children Jewish: "A priority for me is definitely that I'd like to raise my kids Jewish, but the ultimate thing is to have someone who is a good person and who is a partner."
After starring in the video for his song "Carmensita", she began a relationship with American folk singer Devendra Banhart,
Portman began dating ballet dancer Benjamin Millepied in 2009. The couple met while she was filming Black Swan, for which he was the choreographer.. People. February 28, 2012. On August 4, 2012, Portman and Millepied married in an intimate Jewish ceremony in Big Sur, California."Natalie Portman Wedding: 'Black Swan' Actress Marries Benjamin Millepied". The Huffington Post. August 5, 2012."Natalie Portman Marries Benjamin Millepied". People. August 5, 2012.
In 2013, it was announced that Millepied had accepted the position of director of the Paris Opera Ballet. The couple plan to relocate to Paris when Millepied's new job starts in fall 2014. Portman has said she would like to become a French citizen when they move."Natalie Portman wants French citizenship for Paris move". San Francisco Chronicle. September 10, 2013.

Filmography

Discography

Awards and nominations






