[[Glenn Close]]

CATEGORIES: 1947 births, Living people, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from Greenwich, Connecticut, American film actresses, American film directors, American musical theatre actresses, American stage actresses, American television actresses, American voice actresses, Best Drama Actress Golden Globe (television) winners, Best Miniseries or Television Movie Actress Golden Globe winners, Choate Rosemary Hall alumni, College of William & Mary alumni, American women film directors, Obie Award recipients, Outstanding Performance by a Lead Actress in a Drama Series Primetime Emmy Award winners, Outstanding Performance by a Lead Actress in a Miniseries or Movie Primetime Emmy Award winners, Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie Screen Actors Guild Award winners, Shakespearean actresses, Tony Award winners, Mental health activists

Glenn Close (born March 19, 1947) is an American film, television and stage actress. Throughout her long and varied career, she has been consistently acclaimed for her versatility and is considered by many to be one of the greatest actresses of all time.paleycenter.starpulse.
Close began her professional stage career in 1974 in Love for Love, and was mostly a Broadway actress through the rest of the 1970s and early 1980s, appearing in both plays and musicals, including major productions such as Barnum in 1980 and The Real Thing in 1983, for which she won the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play. Her first film role was in The World According to Garp (1982), which she followed up with supporting roles in The Big Chill (1983), and The Natural (1984); all three earned her nominations for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress.  She would later receive nominations for the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performances in Fatal Attraction (1987), Dangerous Liaisons (1988), and Albert Nobbs (2011). In the 1990s, she won two more Tony Awards, for Death and the Maiden in 1992 and Sunset Boulevard in 1995. 
On television, she won her first Emmy for the 1995 TV movie Serving in Silence: The Margarethe Cammermeyer Story. She starred as Eleanor of Aquitaine in the 2003 version of The Lion in Winter, winning a Golden Globe. In 2005, she starred in the drama series The Shield, then from 2007-2012, she starred as Patty Hewes in the FX drama series Damages, a role that won her a Golden Globe and two Emmys. 
Close is a six-time Academy Award nominee, tying the record for being the actress with the most nominations never to have won (along with Deborah Kerr and Thelma Ritter). In addition, she has been nominated for four  Tonys (three wins), fourteen Emmys (three wins), fourteen Golden Globes (two wins) and eight Screen Actors Guild Awards (one win). She has also been nominated three times for a Grammy Award and once for a BAFTA.

Early life and family

Close was born in Greenwich, Connecticut, the daughter of Bettine (née Moore) and William Taliaferro Close,
During her childhood, Close lived with her parents in a stone cottage on her maternal grandfather's estate, in Greenwich."In a speech at Princeton University on February 19, 2009 When she was seven years old, her parents joined a "cult group", the Moral Re-Armament (MRA), in which her family remained involved for fifteen years, living in communal centers. Close has stated that the family "struggled to survive the pressures of a culture that dictated everything about how we lived our lives." Close traveled for several years in the mid-to-late 1960s with an MRA singing group called Up With People, and attended Rosemary Hall (now Choate Rosemary Hall), graduating in 1965. It was in the College's theatre department that she began to train as a serious actor, under Howard Scammon. She was elected to membership in the honor society of Phi Beta Kappa.

Career

Film and television

Close started her professional stage career in 1974, and her film work in 1982.  She has been nominated for six Academy Awards, for Best Actress in Dangerous Liaisons, Fatal Attraction, and Albert Nobbs and for Best Supporting Actress in The Natural, The Big Chill, and The World According to Garp (her first film). Her six nominations have her tied with Deborah Kerr and Thelma Ritter as the most nominated actress not to win an Oscar.
After her sixth Oscar nomination, Close was asked about the fact of not having an Oscar, for which she answered: "And I remember being astounded that I met some people who were really kind of almost hyper-ventilating as to whether they were going to win or not Oscar, and I have never understood that. Because if you just do the simple math, the amount of people who are in our two unions, the amount of people who in our profession are out of work at any given time, the amount of movies that are made every year, and then you're one of five. How could you possibly think of yourself as a loser?"
In total she has been nominated fourteen times for an Emmy (winning three)Glenn Close Emmy Award Winner and thirteen times at the Golden Globes (winning two).
In 1984, Close starred in the critically acclaimed drama Something About Amelia, a Golden Globe-winning television movie about a family destroyed by sexual abuse. In 1987 she played the disturbed book editor Alex in Fatal Attraction, and in 1988 she played the scheming aristocrat The Marquise de Merteuil in Dangerous Liaisons.  She played the role of Sunny von Bülow in the 1990 film Reversal of Fortune to critical acclaim.
Glenn Close hosted Saturday Night Live twice during that time once in 1989 and once in 1992.
In the 1990s, she starred in the highly rated Hallmark Hall of Fame television drama Sarah, Plain and Tall (1991), as well as its two sequels. She also played the title role in the made-for-TV movie Serving in Silence: The Margarethe Cammermeyer Story in 1995, for which she won her first Emmy. She also appeared in the newsroom comedy-drama The Paper (1994), Steven Spielberg's Hook, the alien invasion satire Mars Attacks! (1996, as The First Lady), the Disney hit 101 Dalmatians (1996, as the sinister Cruella de Vil) and its sequel 102 Dalmatians (2000), and the blockbuster Air Force One (1997), as the trustworthy vice president to Harrison Ford's president. In 2001, she starred in a production of Rodgers and Hammerstein's classic musical South Pacific.
In 2005, Close joined the FX crime series The Shield, in which she played a no-nonsense precinct captain. She starred in a series of her own for 2007, Damages (also on FX) instead of continuing her character on The Shield. Close won the 2009 Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama series for her role in Damages. In an interview after her win, Close stated that her role of Patty Hewes in the series was the role of her life. Also in 2009, she narrated the environmental film Home.
In December 2010, Close began filming Albert Nobbs in Dublin. She had previously won an Obie in 1982 for her role in the play on stage. She had been working on the film, in which she appeared alongside 101 Dalmatians co-star Mark Williams, for 10 years, and aside from starring in it, she co-wrote the screenplay and produced the film.net (Source:Daily Mail), December 5, 2010BWW Staff. "Glenn Close Reprises 'Albert Nobbs' in New Film" broadwayworld.com, December 15, 2010
In the film, Close played the title role of Albert Nobbs, a woman living her life as a man in 1800s Ireland after being sexually assaulted as a young girl. For the film, Close sat through hours of makeup to transform herself into a man. While the film itself received mixed reviews, Close and Janet McTeer received rave reviews for their performances. Close's performance was noted for being her most subtle and introverted performance yet and a departure from her other roles. Close received Academy Award, Golden Globe, Screen Actors Guild, and multiple critics nominations for her performance in Albert Nobbs.
Recently Close along with Viola Davis and Uma Thurman was featured in the Documentary Love, Marilyn reading excerpts from Marilyn Monroe's diaries. Critic Stephen Farber has described the film as "One of the most skillful and entertaining summaries of Marilyn's endlessly fascinating rise and fall."

Stage

Close has had an extensive career performing in Broadway musicals. One of her most notable roles on stage was Norma Desmond in the Andrew Lloyd Webber production of Sunset Boulevard, for which Close won a Tony Award, playing the role on Broadway in 1994. Close was also a guest star at the Andrew Lloyd Webber fiftieth birthday party celebration in the Royal Albert Hall in 1998. She appeared as Norma Desmond and performed songs from Sunset Boulevard. Close has also won Tony Awards in 1984 for The Real Thing, and in 1992 for Death and the Maiden. Close performed at Carnegie Hall, narrating the violin concerto The Runaway Bunny, a concerto for reader, violin and orchestra, composed and conducted by Glen Roven.
Close provided the voice of the "Giant" in the Summer 2012 production of the musical Into the Woods at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park. The production also featured Amy Adams as The Baker's Wife and Donna Murphy as The Witch."Glenn Close to Voice The Giant in Public Theaters 'Into the Woods'" broadwayworld.com, July 16, 2012

Personal life and causes

Close was married to Cabot Wade, a guitarist whom she had met during her time at Up with People, from 1969 to 1971. "Glenn Close and David Shaw", Marriage.com, accessed December 31, 2011 From 1979 to 1983 she dated Broadway actor Len Cariou. She was married to businessman James Marlas from 1984 to 1987. Soon afterward, she began a relationship with producer John Starke, whom she had previously met on the set of The World According to Garp. In 1988 the two had a daughter together, Annie Starke, who is currently an aspiring actress.com, March 31, 2011 They separated in 1991.
In 1995 Close was engaged to carpenter Steve Beers, who had worked on Sunset Boulevard, but the two never married, and they separated in 1999. 
In February 2006, Close married executive and venture capitalist David Evans Shaw in Maine."Glenn Close Marries on Maine Retreat", People Magazine, February 6, 2006.
Close is a second cousin once removed to actress Brooke Shields. 
Close is a dog lover and writes a blog for Fetchdog.fetchdog.
Close has donated money to the election campaigns of many Democratic politicians, including Hillary Rodham Clinton, Howard Dean, John Edwards and Barack Obama. 
Close was a founder and is chairperson of BringChange2Mind, a US campaign to eradicate the stigma and discrimination surrounding mental illness, supporting her sister Jessie who has bipolar disorder.
During the month of July 2013, Close put up over 380 designer items up for auction on eBay from the wardrobe her character Patty Hewes wore on Damages. All proceeds were raised to go to her charity BringChange2Mind.

Awards and nominations

Filmography






