[[Mariner 1]]

CATEGORIES: Missions to Venus, Mariner program, Spacecraft launched in 1962, Satellite launch failures, Spacecraft launched by Atlas-Agena rockets

Mariner 1 was the first spacecraft of the American Mariner program. A range safety officer ordered its destructive abort at 09:26:16 UT, 294.5 seconds after it was launched on July 22, 1962 as a Venus flyby mission.[ref]
[/ref]
According to NASA's current account for the public:
What NASA's website describes as "improper operation of the Atlas airborne beacon equipment" caused the booster to lose contact with one of the guidance systems on the ground, setting the stage for an apparent software-related guidance system failure.  The role of software error in the launch failure remains somewhat mysterious in nature, shrouded in the ambiguities and conflicts among (and in some accounts, even within) the various accounts, official and otherwise. Mariner 1 was launched by an Atlas-Agena rocket.
The probe's mission was later completed by Mariner 2. The cryptic nature of the problems that led to the decision to abort Mariner 1, as well as the confusion in various reports on the incident, gave rise to an urban legend of sorts.  Indirectly, this confusion also contributed to some software-engineering folklore about the role of supposed Fortran code in the guidance systems.  This folklore persisted at least as late as 2006, despite a lack of evidence that Fortran was even in use for real-time guidance computations for the Mariner missions. Many accounts, instead, note a "missing hyphen" when a weak radio-guidance signal triggered the rare use of error-recovery software which lacked a hyphen in an equation, causing miscalculation or truncation of the remainder of the equation, which then pointed the rocket downward.

Spacecraft and subsystems

The Mariner 1 spacecraft was identical to Mariner 2, launched 27 August 1962. Mariner 1 consisted of a hexagonal base, ). Attached by an arm to one side of the base and extending below the spacecraft was a large directional dish antenna.
The Mariner 1 power system consisted of the two solar cell wings, one  dacron extension (a solar sail) to balance the solar pressure on the panels. Those panels powered the craft directly or recharged a 1,000-Watt-hour sealed silver-zinc cell battery, which was to be used before the panels were deployed, when the panels were not illuminated by the Sun, and when loads were heavy. A power-switching and booster regulator device controlled the power flow. Communications consisted of a 3 Watt transmitter capable of continuous telemetry operation, the large high gain directional dish antenna, a cylindrical omnidirectional antenna at the top of the instrument mast, and two command antennas, one on the end of either solar panel, which received instructions for midcourse maneuvers and other functions.
Propulsion for midcourse maneuvers was supplied by a monopropellant (anhydrous hydrazine) 225 N retro-rocket. The hydrazine was ignited using nitrogen tetroxide and aluminium oxide pellets, and thrust direction was controlled by four jet vanes situated below the thrust chamber. Attitude control with a 1 degree pointing error was maintained by a system of nitrogen gas jets. The Sun and Earth were used as references for attitude stabilization. Overall timing and control was performed by a digital Central Computer and Sequencer. Thermal control was achieved through the use of passive reflecting and absorbing surfaces, thermal shields, and movable louvers.
The scientific experiments were mounted on the instrument mast and base. A magnetometer was attached to the top of the mast below the omnidirectional antenna. Particle detectors were mounted halfway up the mast, along with the cosmic ray detector. A cosmic-dust detector and solar plasma spectrometer/detector were attached to the top edges of the spacecraft base. A microwave radiometer and an infrared radiometer and the radiometer reference horns were rigidly mounted to a  diameter parabolic radiometer antenna mounted near the bottom of the mast.
In addition, a small 91 × 150 cm (3-by-5-foot) United States flag was folded and stowed onboard Mariner 1 (and Mariner 2), before it was mated to the Agena.

Program error

"The most expensive hyphen in history"

The most consistent account was that the error was in hand-transcription of a mathematical symbol in the program specification, in particular a missing overbar.  Yet the story persists of a "missing hyphen" ('-'), either in the data or in the computer instructions, or even somehow in the equations. Several factors contributed to the "missing hyphen" narrative and its longevity, even in official accounts from technical cognoscenti at JPL and NASA.  Among the factors cited (or obvious enough):
Regardless of whatever may have given rise to initial reports of a "missing hyphen", the simplest and most consistent-sounding explanation that the public and Congress would accept would probably have been preferable to those who simply wanted to get on with the job of a Venus fly-by mission. The stories had contradictions, perhaps, but they were so technical that nobody who could have interfered with Mariner-program progress was likely to care about them or even notice. (After all, even in one later NASA account, the supposed "hyphen" is reported as missing from instructions at one point in the text, and from equations at anotherNASA publication SP-480, Far Travelers -- The Exploring Machines, Oran W. Nicks, 1985).

=Ambiguity of error location=

The New York Times, reporting on the results of a review board, said that the error stemmed from "the omission of a hyphen in some mathematical data"
.
[/ref]
The same report also said the hyphen was
This sort of inconsistency or ambiguity was seen in many subsequent variations on the story, official and otherwise.  "Missing hyphen" versions of the story gained from official support before the month was out.  NASA official Richard B. Morrison testified before Congress that the supposed hyphen
(Note that Morrison says the spacecraft "crashed", not that it was intentionally destroyed).  In a NASA account submitted to Congress in 1963, the hyphen is described as missing in two different ways:
In the same 1963 report to Congress, Morrison's testimony from the previous year is recounted differently:
JPL's Mariner Venus Final Project Report in 1965 noted that, at 4 minutes and 25 seconds into the flight, there was an "Unscheduled yaw-lift maneuver":
[/ref]
Arthur C. Clarke wrote several years later that Mariner 1 was "wrecked by the most expensive hyphen in history". Clarke, 1968, p. 225.
In a NASA report published in 1985, Oran Nicks offered another slightly differing account, but with the software-related error still identified as a missing "hyphen":
NASA's website now says the problem was:

Other punctuation

In other versions of the legend, the bug consisted of:

Overbar transcription error

The error had occurred when a symbol was being transcribed by hand in the specification for the guidance program. The writer missed the superscript bar (or overline) in
by which was meant "the nth smoothed value of the time derivative of a radius R".  Without the smoothing function indicated by the bar, the program treated normal minor variations of velocity as if they were serious, causing spurious corrections that sent the rocket off course.faqs.Beyond the Limits: Flight Enters the Computer Age, Paul E. Ceruzzi, p.203.  In one of the notes for this book (p. 250), the author writes "The same flawed program had been used in earlier Ranger launches with no ill effects."






