[[Big Brother (Greece)]]

CATEGORIES: ANT1 shows, Alpha TV shows, Greek reality television series, 2001 Greek television series debuts, 2005 Greek television series endings, 2010 Greek television series debuts, 2011 Greek television series endings, 2000s Greek television series, 2010s Greek television series, Big Brother (TV series), Greek-language television programming, Television shows set in Athens

Big Brother Greece is a television series based on Endemol's Big Brother format. Greek tv station ANT1 launched the series in Greece on September 10, 2001 running for a total of four seasons until 2005. During its run, the network changed the format of the show twice, with season 3 being known as "The Wall" and season 4 being known as "Big Mother". Season 5 was aired from Alpha TV.

Seasons Overview

Season 1 (2001)

Season 1 premiered on ANT1 on September 10, 2001 for a duration of 113 days. The season ended on December 31, 2001. The season used the traditional Big Brother format. This season is considered the most successful season out of the three to follow on ANT1, with massive viewership. Its finale on New Year's Eve attracted more than 80% of the television share. Important personalities from the season include runner-up Prodromos Kathiniotis who later went on to release a studio album and also dab in TV hosting.
Start Date: 10 September 2001
End Date: 31 December 2001
Duration: 113 days
The Winner: 2 - Giorgos (The Winner) & Prodromos Kathiniotis (Runner-up)
Evicted Housemates: 10 - Dora, Elina, Filippos, Katerina, Kostas, Mairi, Nikol, Ntinos, Rea & Xristos

Nominations Table

Season 2 (2002)

Season 2 premiered on ANT1 on March 8, 2002 and was on for a duration of 116 days. The season ended on July 1, 2002.

Season 3 (2003)

Season 3 premiered on ANT1 on March 10, 2003 and was on for a duration of 113 days. The season ended on June 30, 2003. This season was known as "The Wall" and introduced the notion of "The Battle," in which the house is separated into a luxurious half and a poor half, with two teams of housemates constantly fighting for time in the luxurious half. Expectations for the format proved unsuccessful with ANT1 choosing not to use it again.

Season 4 (2005)

ANT1 decided to revive the Big Brother concept in 2005 again, with Season 4 premiering on ANT1 on October 3, 2005 for a duration of 88 days. The season ended on December 29, 2005. Season 4 featured a new format and was known as "Big Mother". In "Big Mother", the nine housemates take part in the game with their mothers, with whom they must coexist during the contest. The "mamas" were not able to win the prize but they would stay with their children until their eviction. However, this proved to be a failure with the show's audience and the show switched back to the traditional Big Brother format in mid-season. Despite the switch back to the traditional Big Brother format, ratings still did not meet expectations and ANT1 decided to abandon the Big Brother franchise.
  Nikos won €200,000.- cash prize.

=Nominations table=

Notes:
  In the first four rounds of nominations before nominations took place the housemates voted for who they wanted to be Big Mother that week. The housemate voted Big Mother would, along with her child, be safe from eviction and would have to nominate one nominee each week and break nomination ties when necessary.
  In round one of nominations Konstantinos, Eliana & Andreas all received 3 nominations. As only two people could be nominated. Foteinh, as Big Mother, had to choose which of the three would be nominated for eviction. She chose Eliana.
  In round two of nominations Tonia & Maria received the most nomination with three each, as only one of them could join Andreas, who was already up for eviction, Big Mother Tezerak had to decide which of them would face eviction. Tezerak chose Maria to face eviction.
  In the third round of nominations Konstantinos received the most nominations with seven. Giannis and Andreas both received the next highest with two. As only one of them could face eviction it was up to Big Mother Katerina to choose which of them would be up for eviction along with Konstantinos. She chose Giannis.
  In the third round of nominations the initial nominees Kostas and Elli were asked to save one housemate from eviction, they saved Konstantinos.
  In the fourth round of nominations Andreas and Giannis received the same amount of nominations. As Big mother it was up to Katerina to decide which of the two would be nominated for eviction, she chose Giannis.
  Following the fourth eviction the housemates were informed by Big brother that one member of each mother/child pair had to be evicted and that it was up to them to decide who it would be.
  On day 29 Tezerak decided to voluntarily leave the house. As Tezerak was voted Big mother before deciding to leave the house she still nominated a housemate for eviction.
  Following the voluntary exit of Tezerak from the house her son Andreas was given the opportunity to return to the house under the condition that he would automatically face eviction against Tezeraks nominee for eviction which was Konstantinos.
  In the sixth round of nominations Ornelia was votes HOH by the former mothers.
  In round sixth of nominations Konstantina D. was nominated by the housemate nominations. As Head of Household Ornelia had to choose the second person up for eviction, she chose Alexandros.
  In the seventh round of nominations Big brother told the housemates they were nominating like usual, however what they did not know was that instead of nominating they were really voting for Head of Household.
  In the seventh round of nominations Louis was automatically nominated by Ana and Kostas who were secretly living in the bedset.
  In the eighth round of nominations Alexandros was nominated for eviction through nominations. As Head of Household Ana nominated the other nominee Dimitra.
  On day 56 Big brother nominated Konstantinos and Ornelia for eviction for rule breaking. Instead of having the public vote to evict which of the two should leave Big brother had their fellow housemates vote to decide which would go.
  In the ninth round of nominations Nikos was nominated for eviction through nominations. As Head of Household Kostas nominated the other nominee Louis.
  In the eleventh round of nominations there was a tie in the HOH vote between Giorgos and Kostas. As the most recently evicted housemate it was up to Louis to decide who would be HOH, he chose Giorgos.
  In the eleventh round of nominations evicted housemate Louis was allowed to nominate.
  In the eleventh round of nominations Eva was nominated through nominations. As Head of Household it was up to Giorgos to nominate the second housemate for eviction, he nominated Tonia.
  In the twelfth round of nominations Big brother decided that either Eva, Kostas or Nikos would automatically be nominated for eviction and that they would have to decide which of them it would be, they chose Kostas. The other nominee was decided by recently evicted housemate Tonia after there was a tie between Anna and Giorgos following nominations, she chose to nominate Giorgos.
  Prior to the thirteenth round of nominations Big brother had the housemates compete in a gift opening competition in which the winner would receive immunity, Nikos was the first to find an exemption in a present and was given immunity.
  In the thirteenth round of nominations there was a tie in both the nomination and HOH vote, therefore it was left up to Kostas to choose between Ana and Konstantinos to nominate and Alexandros and Konstantinos for HOH. Kostas chose to make Ana the first nominee for the week and to make Konstantinos HOH.
  As the Head of Household it was up to Konstantinos to nominate a second nominee for eviction, he chose to nominate Eva.

Season 5 (2010-2011)

Alpha TV announced in July 2010 that they have bought the rights to the Big Brother format, and aired their own revamped version in Fall 2010. However, the show on NOVA was cut by ESR. The show premiered on Sunday October 3, 2010 and ended on January 30, 2011. As with other Alpha TV programs, the show will also air live in Cyprus through their affiliate Sigma TV.

=Housemates=

=Nominations table=

Each week, housemates will nominate two of their fellow housemates for eviction. Housemates who are immune from nomination will be noted as "Exempt" for the week or weeks in which they are exempt.
Notes:

  In round four of nominations, Mihalis had immunity after having won a competition.
  In round four of nominations, Giorgos was automatically nominated for eviction by Big Brother for refusing to nominate.
  In round five of nominations, Maria was immune from nominations as she was a new housemate.
  In round six of nominations, Christina was immune from nominations as she was a new housemate.
  In round seven of nominations, Alexis was automatically nominated for eviction by Big Brother for refusing to nominate although he was able to be nominated by other housemates.
  In round nine of nominations, Giannis F. was automatically nominated as he was "captain" and refused to make a housemate immune from the nominations.
  In round ten of nominations, Antonis was automatically nominated as he was "captain" and refused to make a housemate immune from the nominations.
  In round eleven of nominations, Elias, who was the "captain" last week, gave Evelina immunity from nominations.
  In round eleven of nominations, Stella, as she was the "captain" this week, her nomination votes counted as double.
  In round twelve of nominations, Stella was banned from nominating (broke one of the rules), but was immune from nominations as she found the lucky coin in a pie the housemates were given.
  In round twelve of nominations, Giorgos was automatically nominated as he was "captain" and refused to make a housemate or himself immune from the nominations.
  In round thirteen of nominations, Alexis was automatically nominated as he was "captain" and refused to make a housemate or himself immune from the nominations.
  In round fourteen of nominations, Giannis F. and Stella were automatically nominated for eviction by Big Brother for refusing to nominate.
  In round fourteen of nominations, Evelina, as she was the "captain" this week, her nomination votes counted as double.
  In round fourteen of nominations, Elias was banned from nominating (broke one of the rules). However, he was elected as the "captain" for the next week and gave Evelina immunity from nominations. 

Critical reception

Big Brother was criticized for the voyeuristic nature of the show, in which contestants volunteer to surrender their privacy in return for minor celebrity status and a comparatively small cash prize, has attracted much scorn. On numerous occasions, participants in the various series have become sexually involved with each other, sometimes engaging in intercourse in front of Big Brother's cameras. This recorded material is typically not broadcast due to its explicit nature, as in the Australian and American editions. Other editions, however, such as the German and British versions, do broadcast it. The Internet stream also captures such moments, which has led to some controversy, with certain jurisdictions such as Greece attempting to have the show removed from the airwaves.






