[[Yogen Früz]]

CATEGORIES: Food companies of Canada, Companies based in Markham, Ontario, Fast-food chains of Canada, Fast-food chains of China, Fast-food chains of Japan, Fast-food chains of Saudi Arabia, Fast-food chains of Singapore, Fast-food chains of the United Kingdom, Fast-food franchises, Retail companies established in 1986, Ice cream parlors, Frozen yogurt businesses, 1986 establishments in Canada

Yogen Früz is an international chain of frozen yogurt and smoothie stores that also serves healthy alternative food products. The chain is run through company-owned, franchised, and non traditional partnerships.
The headquarters is in Markham, Ontario in the Greater Toronto Area."Contact Us." Yogen Früz. "Yogen Früz headquarters 210 Shields Court Markham, Ontario L3R 8V2, Canada"

History

Yogen Früz was founded in 1986 by brothers Michael Serruya and Aaron Serruya,  who opened the firm's first outlet,  in August 1986 at   The Promenade Shopping Centre in Thornhill, Ontario, Canada. The umlaut over the "u" in the store's name is an example of foreign branding.
The store offered made-to-order frozen yogurt in cups as well as frozen shakes mixed with fresh fruit; it  was successful, and within a year the company's first franchises opened in London, Ontario. A younger brother, Simon, joined the company in 1989 at the age of 18, while their father sold his typesetting business to oversee offices in Europe.
In December 2005, International Franchise Corp. acquired Yogen Früz and CoolBrands International's franchise division.
Today, the company serves proprietary probiotic frozen yogurt, The company aims to brand itself as a healthy-choice lifestyle product.

Menu

Yogen Früz developed a unique blending system which combines its frozen yogurt bars with freshly frozen fruits, allowing customers to choose their own custom blend. Custom frozen yogurt blends can be created into frozen yogurt cups or smoothies. 
Yogen Früz has created frozen yogurt versions of favourite dessert treats called Ü Sensations, flavors under this label include Strawberry Cheesecake, Apple Pie, Chai Latte, Pina Colada, and more. 

Business strategy and organization

The firm frequently uses  "master franchisees", which can obtain the rights either to open stores directly or sell franchise licenses to others.   Master franchisees are granted for periods varying between ten and twenty years, and usually require the franchisee to open a minimum number of outlets each year .  s. Additionally, the firm uses a non-traditional method of expansion involving co-branding, which allowed for the mingling of Yogen Früz products with other known food services by way of "mini-counters" in established stores. As of 2008, master franchise agreements and co-branding remain the firm's main business/
The Serruya brothers initially sought expansion overseas rather than compete in the United States, because frozen yogurt dessert shops had already neared market saturation in the United States in the 1980s, and, unlike today, the average consumer was then neither familiar with nor accepting of the taste of yogurt. In early 1995 Yogen Früz franchisees operated 170 outlets in Canada, which comprised 80 percent of the frozen yogurt market in Canada. As of 2007, Yogen Früz has over 1,200 stores operating in over 25 countries including the  United States,   
In 2008 the company announced its new store design and branding, which was designed to be applied to small and large outlets in both malls and free-standing stores.
On January 14, 2010, Archeology Investments announced a master franchise agreement which grants rights to the company to open shops in Dubai, Oman, Qatar, Bahrain and Kuwait.

Awards



Footnotes

Notations




