[[Marduk-nadin-ahhe]]

CATEGORIES: Babylonian kings, 11th-century BC rulers

Marduk-nādin-aḫḫē, inscribed mdAMAR. 1099–1082 BC, was the sixth king of the 2nd Dynasty of Isin and the 4th Dynasty of Babylon. He is best known for his restoration of the Eganunmaḫ in Ur and the famines and droughts that accompanied his reign.

Biography

He was related to all three of his immediate predecessors: his father was Ninurta-nādin-šumi, the third king, his brother was Nabu-kudurri-uṣur, the fourth king, and his nephew was Enlil-nādin-apli the fifth king, against whom he revolted and deposed.
His relationship with his Assyrian counterpart, Tukultī-apil-Ešarra,Synchronistic king list, KAV 216, Ass 14616c, ii 17 and fragment KAV 12, VAT 11338, 5ff. was antagonistic and he launched a raid early in his reign into Assyria, capturing the cultic idols of Adad and Šala from Ekallāte, a town only around thirty miles from Assur. For his part, Tukultī-apil-Ešarra led several retaliatory raids into the heartland of Babylonia, recalled with typical bombastic rhetoric:

The Synchronistic History recalls the battles were in the first instance "by the Lower Zab, opposite Ahizûhina, and in the second year he defeated Marduk-nadin-ahhe at Gurmarritu, which is upstream from Akkad."Synchronistic History ii 14-24, preserved in three copies, K 4401a + Rm 854, K 4401b and Sm 2106. Although "Ugarsallu (immediately south of the Lesser Zab) he plundered as far as Lubda (located in the area of Arrapha). He ruled every part of Suhu (in the middle Euphrates Valley) as far as Rapiqu (southern border of Assyria)," these places are on the periphery of Babylonia and the idols were not recovered until centuries later:


Kudurru tradition

There are seven kudurrus, two building inscriptions, four Luristan daggers, oneLuristan dagger ME 123060. "belonging to Šamaš-killani, officer of the king," a Sumerian inscription on a copper cylinderCopper Cylinder BM 123124, 61 lines. and one unpublished garment inventoryEconomic text H.S. 157 dated to his fifth year listing clothes brought to Nippur from Babylon by Napsamenni, seer and high priest of Enlil. attesting to this king.
Another kudurruThe Warwick Kudurru, Warwickshire Museum. dated eight months earlier in the same year granted Iddin-Ninurta, a leather worker, two GUR of land and was witnessed by the same seven officers of royal service: Irība-Ištarān, the governor of Isin, Bābilāiu, the chamberlain, Eulmaš-šākin-šumi, the marshall, Marduk-andulli, the vizier, Enlil-mukîn-apli, the commandant, Ea-kudirri-ibni, the provincial governor and Nabû-nādin-aḫḫē, the overseer of the storehouse. As this was from Kār-Bēl-mātāti, a town probably in the vicinity of Babylon, it is thought the men were courtiers who accompanied the king in his travels. This gives Šapiku, the son of Itti-Marduk-balāṭu, the "son" of Arad-Ea, as the land-surveyor and this is probably the same individual as the last witness, "scribe" and "son of Arad-Ea," on a kudurruYBC 2154 kudurru. dated to Marduk-nādin-aḫḫē's eighth year.

Kudurrus dated to his reign

Also assigned to this era is the undated Caillou Michaux (kudurru), in the Musée du Louvre.

Other sources

He restored the Eganunmaḫ at Ur, without any apparent alteration to the plan of Kassite king Kurigalzu's (Kurigalzu I or II undetermined) original plan, and constructed a "kitchen complex" on the northwest side of the ziggurat. Three inscribed door-sockets were found at the sanctuary.

Sadly, it was not to be, as he seems to have lost his throne and "disappeared" (šadâ ēmid) following the disruptions caused by Arameans migrating into Mesopotamia under the pressure from famine, the Babylonians themselves apparently resorting to cannibalism, "......"Assyrian chronicle fragment 4, VAT 10453, 2f.





Inscriptions


