[[Led Zeppelin (album)]]

CATEGORIES: 1969 debut albums, Albums produced by Jimmy Page, Atlantic Records albums, English-language albums, Grammy Hall of Fame Award recipients, Led Zeppelin albums, LZ 129 Hindenburg, Polydor Records albums, Warner Music Group albums, Albums certified diamond by the Canadian Recording Industry Association, Albums certified platinum by the Syndicat National de l'Édition Phonographique, Albums certified gold by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry of Switzerland, Albums certified gold by the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers, Albums certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association, Albums certified multi-platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America, Albums certified platinum by the Productores de Música de España, Albums certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry

Led Zeppelin is the debut album by English rock band Led Zeppelin. It was recorded in October 1968 at Olympic Studios in London and released on Atlantic Records on 12 January 1969 in the United States and 31 March in the United Kingdom. Featuring integral contributions from each of the group's four musicians, the album established their fusion of blues and rock. It also attracted a large and devoted following to the band; Zeppelin's take on the emerging heavy metal sound endeared them to parts of the counterculture on both sides of the Atlantic.
Although the album first received negative reviews, it was commercially very successful, and critics have come to view it in a much more positive light. In 2003, the album was ranked No. 29 on Rolling Stone magazine's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time (it kept its rank when Rolling Stone updated the list in 2012). In 2004, the album was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame.org Retrieved 30 October 2012

Background

In August 1968, the English rock band The Yardbirds had completely disbanded. Guitarist Jimmy Page, The Yardbirds' sole remaining member, was left with rights to the group's name and contractual obligations for a series of concerts in Scandinavia.

Recording and production

Recording sessions

In a 1990 interview, Page said that the album took only about 36 hours of studio time (over a span of a few weeks) to create (including mixing), adding that he knew this because of the amount charged on the studio bill. ISBN 1-85797-930-3, pp. 28, 37. One of the primary reasons for the short recording time was that the material selected for the album had been well-rehearsed and pre-arranged by the band on Led Zeppelin's tour of Scandinavia in September 1968. As Page explained, "band had begun developing the arrangements on the Scandinavian tour and I knew what sound I was looking for. It just came together incredibly quickly."Lewis, Dave and Pallett, Simon (1997) Led Zeppelin: The Concert File, London: Omnibus Press. ISBN 0-7119-5307-4, p. 13.
In addition, since the band had not yet signed their deal with Atlantic Records, Page and Zeppelin's manager Peter Grant paid for the sessions entirely themselves, meaning there was no record company money to waste on excessive studio time. In fact, I financed and completely recorded the first album before going to Atlantic... It wasn't your typical story where you get an advance to make an album—we arrived at Atlantic with tapes in hand... Atlantic's reaction was very positive – I mean they signed us, didn't they?"Interview with Jimmy Page, Guitar World magazine, 1993
The group recorded their songs reportedly for £1,782. 52. Led Zeppelin expert Dave Lewis noted that "with the possible exception of the 12 hours that the Beatles took to record their first album at Abbey Road, rarely has studio time been used so economically. Led Zeppelin's debut album went on to gross more than £3.5 million, just short of 2,000 times more than they invested!"
For the recordings, Page played a psychedelically painted Fender Telecaster guitar, a gift from Jeff Beck after Page recommended his boyhood friend to the Yardbirds in 1965 as potential replacement for Eric Clapton on lead guitar. This was a different guitar from those he favoured for later albums (most notably a Gibson Les Paul). Page played the Telecaster through a Supro amplifier. He also used a Gibson J-200, borrowed from Big Jim Sullivan, for the album's acoustic tracks. For "Your Time Is Gonna Come" he used an out-of-tune Fender 10-string steel guitar.

Production

Led Zeppelin was produced by Jimmy Page and engineered by Glyn Johns, who had previously worked with The Beatles, The Rolling Stones and The Who. According to Page, "The first album is a live album, it really is, and it's done intentionally in that way. It's got overdubs on it, but the original tracks are live.""I first met Jimmy on Tolworth Broadway, holding a bag of exotic fish...", Uncut, January 2009, p. 42.
Page reportedly used natural room ambience to enhance the reverb and recording texture on the record, demonstrating the innovations in sound recording he had learned during his session days. Up until the late 1960s, most music producers placed microphones directly in front of the amplifiers and drums. For Led Zeppelin, Page developed the idea of placing an additional microphone some distance from the amplifier (as far as twenty feet) and then recording the balance between the two. By adopting this "distance equals depth" technique, Page became one of the first producers to record a band's "ambient sound": the distance of a note's time-lag from one end of the room to the other. "Light and Shade". Guitar World. "The Long Shadow of Led Zeppelin". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 26 June 2008.
Another notable feature of the album was the "leakage" on the recordings of Plant's vocals. In a 1998 Guitar World interview, Page stated that "Robert's voice was extremely powerful and, as a result, would get on some of the other tracks. But oddly, the leakage sounds intentional." On "You Shook Me", Page used the "backward echo" technique. It involves hearing the echo before the main sound (instead of after it), and is achieved by turning the tape over and recording the echo on a spare track, then turning the tape back over again to get the echo preceding the signal.
The album was one of the first albums to be released in stereo-only form; at the time, the practice of releasing both mono and stereo versions was the norm.

Artwork

Led Zeppelin's front cover, which was chosen by Page, features a black-and-white image of the burning Hindenburg airship. The image refers to the origin of the band's name itself: when Page, Beck and The Who's Keith Moon and John Entwistle were discussing the idea of forming a group, Moon joked, "It would probably go over like a lead balloon", and Entwistle allegedly replied, "...a lead zeppelin!"
The album's back cover features a photograph of the band taken by former-Yardbird Chris Dreja. The entire design of the album's sleeve was coordinated by George Hardie, with whom the band would continue to collaborate for future sleeves.
Hardie recalled that he originally offered the band a design based on an old club sign in San Francisco—a multi-sequential image of a phallic zeppelin airship up in the clouds. Page declined but it was retained as the logo for the back cover of Led Zeppelin's first two albums and a number of early press advertisements. During the first few weeks of release in the UK, the sleeve featured the band's name and the Atlantic logo in turquoise. When this was switched to the now-common orange print later in the year, the turquoise-printed sleeve became a collector's item.
The album cover received widespread attention when, at a February 1970 gig in Copenhagen, the band were billed as "The Nobs" as the result of a legal threat from aristocrat Eva von Zeppelin (a relative of the creator of the Zeppelin aircraft). Zeppelin, upon seeing the logo of the Hindenburg crashing in flames, threatened to have the show pulled off the air.com) In 2001, Greg Kot wrote in Rolling Stone that "The cover of Led Zeppelin... shows the Hindenburg airship, in all its phallic glory, going down in flames. The image did a pretty good job of encapsulating the music inside: sex, catastrophe and things blowing up."

Composition

Tracks such as "Good Times Bad Times", "Dazed and Confused" and "Communication Breakdown" displayed a distinctively heavy sound that was uncommon in the late-1960s. Led Zeppelin also featured steel-string acoustic guitar by Page on "Black Mountain Side", and a combination of acoustic and electric approaches on their adaptation of "Babe I'm Gonna Leave You". Page's credit for writing "Black Mountainside" has generated some controversy over the years, as it is very similar to the Bert Jansch version of the traditional folk song "Black Water Side".
"Dazed and Confused", based on the 1967 Jake Holmes song of the same name, is often considered to be the album's centrepiece; its arrangement features a descending bass line from Jones, heavy drumming from Bonham and distorted guitar riffs and soloing from Page. It also showcased Page playing guitar with a violin bow (an idea suggested by David McCallum Sr., whom Page had met while doing studio session work).) Led Zeppelin: Dazed and Confused, the Stories Behind Every Song. (Page 23) Thunder's Mouth Press, 1998 ISBN 1-56025-188-3 This technique was also employed on "How Many More Times", a song which features a "Bolero" riff and an improvised shift in cadence.
Many of Led Zeppelin's earliest songs were based on blues standards, and the album also included three songs composed by others: "You Shook Me" and "I Can't Quit You Baby", both by blues artist Willie Dixon, and "Babe I'm Gonna Leave You". Regarding the last of these, at the time Page mistakenly believed he was adapting a traditional folk song he had heard on a Joan Baez record, but this was corrected on subsequent rereleases after it was revealed that the song was composed by Anne Bredon in the 1950s. On "You Shook Me", Plant vocally mimics Page's guitar effects, a metallicised version of the "call and response" blues technique.
Beck had previously recorded "You Shook Me" for his album, Truth, and accused Page of stealing his idea. With John Paul Jones and Keith Moon, Page had written, played on, and arranged "Beck's Bolero", an instrumental on Truth that would be grooved into the mix of the Led Zeppelin jam "How Many More Times". These cross-pollinations led to a rift between Beck and Page, who had played in the Yardbirds together and been friends since childhood. In fact, it was Page who first suggested Beck for the Yardbirds' guitarist position when he was contacted by the band after Eric Clapton's departure.
In an interview he gave in 1975, Page offered his own perspective on the album's music:

Plant is credited on the album with "occasional bass". In an interview he gave to Rolling Stone magazine in 2005, Plant made reference to this:


Reception

The album was advertised in selected music papers under the slogan "Led Zeppelin — the only way to fly". It initially received poor reviews. In a stinging assessment, Rolling Stone magazine asserted that the band offered "little that its twin, the Jeff Beck Group, didn't say as well or better three months ago... It would seem that if they are to fill the void created by the demise of Cream, they will have to find a producer, editor and some material worthy of their collective talents."Rolling Stone, 15 March 1969. 74–82. It also called Plant "as foppish as Rod Stewart, but nowhere near so exciting". John Paul Jones later recalled:
As was noted by rock journalist Cameron Crowe years later: "It was a time of 'super-groups', of furiously hyped bands who could barely cut it, and Led Zeppelin initially found themselves fighting upstream to prove their authenticity."Liner notes by Cameron Crowe for The Complete Studio Recordings
However, press reaction to the album was not entirely negative. In Britain the album received a glowing review in the Melody Maker. Chris Welch wrote, in a review titled "Jimmy Page triumphs — Led Zeppelin is a gas!": "their material does not rely on obvious blues riffs, although when they do play them, they avoid the emaciated feebleness of most so-called British blues bands".
The album was very successful commercially. It was initially released in the US on 12 January 1969 to capitalise on the band's first North American concert tour. Before that, Atlantic Records had distributed a few hundred advance white label copies to key radio stations and reviewers. A positive reaction to its contents, coupled with a good reaction to the band's opening concerts, resulted in the album generating 50,000 advance orders. Within two months of its release the album had reached Billboard Top 10.

Legacy

The success and influence of the album is today widely acknowledged, even amongst publications that were initially sceptical. In 2006, for example, Rolling Stone stated that:

According to Lewis:
In 2003, VH1 named Led Zeppelin the 44th greatest album of all time, while Rolling Stone ranked it 29th on the magazine's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time. It is widely regarded as marking a significant turning point in the evolution of hard rock and heavy metal.Review by Allmusic

Accolades

 denotes an unordered list

2014 Reissue

Along with the group's two next albums, Led Zeppelin II and Led Zeppelin III, the album was remastered and reissued by Page at the start of 2014. The reissue comes in 5 formats: a standard CD edition, a deluxe 2 CD edition, a standard LP version, a deluxe 3 LP version, and a super deluxe 2 CD+3 LP version with a hardback book. The deluxe and super deluxe editions feature bonus material from a concert in Paris recorded in October 1969.

Track listing

"How Many More Times" includes passages (uncredited) from "The Hunter," written by Booker T. Jones, Steve Cropper, Duck Dunn, Al Jackson, Jr. and Carl Wells in 1967 and popularised by Albert King. Most LP editions of the album also incorrectly list the running time of "How Many More Times" as 3:30.
It has been said that Plant participated in songwriting but wasn't given credit because of unexpired contractual obligations resulting from his association with CBS Records. This claim is disputed by Mick Wall, author of the Led Zeppelin biography When Giants Walked the Earth.
Some cassette versions of the album reversed the order of the sides. For these versions, side one began with "Your Time Is Gonna Come" and ended with "How Many More Times", while side two began with "Good Times Bad Times" and ended with "Dazed and Confused".

Deluxe edition bonus disc

Sales chart positions

Sales certifications

Note: (*) Remastered sales only

Personnel






