[[Polokwane]]

CATEGORIES: Polokwane, Populated places established in 1886, Populated places in the Polokwane Local Municipality, Provincial capitals in South Africa, Populated places founded by Afrikaners, 1886 establishments in the South African Republic

Polokwane, meaning "Place of Safety",Polokwane - The Heart of the Limpopo Province. City of Polokwane official website. Pietersburg. Polokwane is a major urban centre, the biggest and most important north of Gauteng. Polokwane was one of the host cities of the 2010 FIFA World Cup.

History

In the 1840s, Voortrekkers under the leadership of Andries Potgieter established Zoutpansbergdorp, a town 100 km to the north west. This settlement had to be abandoned because of clashes with the local tribes. They founded a new town in 1886 and named it Pietersburg in honour of Voortrekker leader Petrus Jacobus Joubert. The British built a concentration camp at Pietersburg during the Boer War to house almost 4,000 Boer women and children. The town officially became a city on April 23, 1992; on February 25, 2005, the government declared the official name of the city as Polokwane, a name that was generally in use by the speakers of Northern Sotho. The city was the site of the ANC national conference which saw Jacob Zuma take over as head of the party.com

Demographics

In 1904 Pietersburg had a population of 3,276, of whom 1,620 (49.5%) were whites.1911encyclopedia. After the dismantling of apartheid the city still retained a large white population. Neighbouring townships have a black majority.mbendi.asp?pid=13626
Apartheid was implemented by the NP Natunale party and was not agreed with by all white population. Before the NP apartheid did not exist.
The South African Census showed the population of Polokwane as 271,911 in 2001 and 503,000 in 2010.

Districts/suburbs/townships

Under the apartheid government certain areas were allocated to certain racial groups; these areas still have a majority of these racial groups present.
Former White suburbs in the city include:
These suburbs no longer host exclusive racial groups and the local government has launched a project to encourage integration.polokwane.za/index.php?view_page+683

Climate

Polokwane features a semi-arid climate under the Köppen climate classification. Despite its position on the Tropic of Capricorn,2007, GISS
Polokwane has a dry climate with a summer rainy season and a pronounced dry spell during winter. Average annual rainfall is , with December or (less often) January the wettest month and July the driest.GHCN monthly rainfall Pietersburg , NGDC, 1932-1992

Transport

Air

A public airport, Polokwane International Airport,  is located just North of the city. There are daily flights to Johannesburg.gaal.co.za/

Road

Polokwane lies roughly halfway between Gauteng (300 km) and the Zimbabwean border (200 km) on the N1 highway, which connects Zimbabwe with the major cities of South Africa, such as Pretoria, Johannesburg, Bloemfontein and Cape Town.
Running east the R71 connects the city with Tzaneen, Phalaborwa and the Kruger National Park.
On the outskirts of Polokwane when approachng from the direction of Johannesburg is the Nelson Mandela road traffic island which was built prior to the 2010 Fifa World Cup as part of beautifying the city for the event.
There are a number of private bus services running in the city and also services connecting Polokwane to other major centers in the country.

Railways

Polokwane is connected to Johannesburg and other major centres via rail. Agricultural produce in the area, including tomatoes, citrus fruit, bananas and avocados, is also transported via freight rail.

Society and culture

Media

The South African Broadcasting Corporation has a branch located in the city.Jacaranda 94.2FM The first and only commercial radio station in Limpopo, CapricornFM also broadcasts from the city.

Museums, monuments and memorials

Churches

One of the earliest churches established in Polokwane (then Pietersburg) was the "English Church." Prior to 1894 there were occasional services for the English Church held by visiting priests in the local Court House.  Work began on building a church in Market Street in 1895.  The building was completed in 1897 and Christ Church Polokwane had a permanent venue.  The church struggled with a lack of members during the Anglo-Boer war (Boer Wars) but regular services resumed in November 1901 and have continued to this day. The Anglican church moved from Market Street to Biccard Street in the 1960s. There is also a Roman Catholic church situated in Biccard street.

Sports

Cricket

The Polokwane Cricket Club is one of the oldest in the country and was established in 1902.observer.co.za/stories/century-old-cricket-club-make-way-2010-f

Rugby

Noordelikes Rugby Club is the largest amateur rugby club based in the city.polokwane.za/index.php?view_page+559
Starting in 2013, the city will host a Limpopo provincial team in the Vodacom Cup.sport24.co.za/Rugby/Limpopo-to-get-Vodacom-Cup-side-20120116
Former Springbok rugby lock, Victor Matfield grew up in Polokwane.
Former Springbok rugby captain John Smit was born in Polokwane.

Soccer

Winners Park F.C., Black Leopards F.C. and Polokwane City F.C, South African football clubs, are based in the city. Polokwane City F.C

Swimming

Polokwane has a number of swimming clubs. Former Olympic gold-medalist and world-record swimmer Lyndon Ferns is from the city.

Tennis

There is a large tennis club situated in the city and various local tournaments are held regularly.

Stadiums

Tourism

Polokwane provides access to various nature and wildlife viewing opportunities for ecotourists.  The Polokwane Bird and Reptile Park is home to over 280 species of birds. The Polokwane Game Reserve houses various South African species of wildlife, birdlife, and plants in an unspoiled bushveld environment. The Moletzie Bird Sanctuary protects rare birds like the Cape Vulture. The Modjadji Rainforest near Duiwelskloof holds the largest concentration of indigenous cycads in the world, and Cheune Crocodile Farm provides a place to learn about the life of crocodiles.
An extensive art collection is preserved in Polokwane's art gallery, open to the public. The city has more public sculptures per capita in its parks than elsewhere in South Africa. Polokwane was also the first to unveil a bust of the ex-president Nelson Mandela in its City Square (Civic Gardens), and it was authorized by Nelson Mandela personally.rawson.co.za/property/polokwane
The city is considered the premier hunting destination in South Africa.

Commerce and industry

The city hosts several major industries such as Coca-ColaCoca-Cola | South Africa and South African Breweries.

Education

Tertiary education

The Tshwane University of Technology, and the University of South Africa both have satellite campuses in the city.
Secondary education=== 

Shopping malls






