[[David Van der Gulik]]

CATEGORIES: 1983 births, Abbotsford Heat players, Boston University Terriers men's ice hockey players, Calgary Flames draft picks, Calgary Flames players, Canadian ice hockey right wingers, Chilliwack Chiefs players, Colorado Avalanche players, Ice hockey people from British Columbia, Lake Erie Monsters players, Living people, Omaha Ak-Sar-Ben Knights players, People from Abbotsford, British Columbia, Quad City Flames players

David Van der Gulik (born April 20, 1983) is a Canadian professional ice hockey Winger currently playing with the Lake Erie Monsters of the American Hockey League, under contract to the Colorado Avalanche organization of the National Hockey League (NHL). He was a draft pick of the Calgary Flames, selected 206th overall in the 2002 NHL Entry Draft, and appeared in six games with the team in 2008–09.

Playing career

Amateur

Following three seasons of Junior A hockey as an offensive star with the Chilliwack Chiefs of the British Columbia Hockey League,
With a slightly undersized physical frame as a winger, Van der Gulik relied on his offensive ability and hardworking mentality to increase his goal totals in each of his sophomore and junior years.

Professional

After finishing his collegiate career, Van der Gulik was signed to a two-year entry level contract with the Calgary Flames on May 22, 2006. Attending Calgary's 2006–07 training camp he was then assigned to American Hockey League affiliate, the Omaha Ak-Sar-Ben Knights to start the year.  
In the 2007–08 season Van der Gulik followed the Knights relocation to Quad City and established himself among the Flames offensive leaders in with 19 goals and 42 points. On a largely underwhelming Quad City team, Van der Gulik proved defensively responsible, finishing as the only Quad City forward in the positive in Plus/minus (+3). On July 1, 2007, he was re-signed as a restricted free agent to a two-year contract by the Flames. He finished with six games with the Flames, recording two assists.  
Van der Gulik spent the entire 2009–10 season in his hometown with new Flames AHL affiliate, the Abbotsford Heat, finishing second in scoring with 40 points. After four years within the Flames organization he left following the season, signing as a free agent to a one-year contract with the Colorado Avalanche on July 2, 2010.  
His first NHL goal was scored on November 4, 2010 against Cory Schneider of the Vancouver Canucks.

Career statistics

Awards and honors






