[[Stronger (Kanye West song)]]

CATEGORIES: 2007 singles, Kanye West songs, Music videos directed by Hype Williams, Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles, Billboard Pop 100 number-one singles, Billboard Mainstream Top 40 (Pop Songs) number-one singles, Canadian Hot 100 number-one singles, Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance, Number-one singles in New Zealand, UK Singles Chart number-one singles, Singles certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America, Song recordings produced by Kanye West, Electronic songs, Songs written by Kanye West, Thirty Seconds to Mars songs, Roc-A-Fella Records singles

"Stronger" is a song by American hip hop artist Kanye West, released as the second single from his third studio album Graduation. It was produced by West and contains an extended outro co-produced with Mike Dean. The song contains a vocal sample of "Harder, Better, Faster, Stronger" by French house duo Daft Punk, who thereby have songwriting credits along with Edwin Birdsong, whose song "Cola Bottle Baby" formed the basis of "Harder, Better, Faster, Stronger." The single was first released digitally on July 31, 2007 and soon became West's third number-one single. It won a Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance at the 50th Grammy Awards. As of March 2013, "Stronger" has sold over 5 million digital copies in the United States.

Background

A portion of "Stronger" was first released in May 2007 on West's Can't Tell Me Nothing mixtape.
The cover artwork features a cartoon version of West's mascot "Dropout Bear" wearing sunglasses similar to the those West wears in the music video, as well as the small, trademark robot helmets of the Daft Punk duo Thomas Bangalter and Guy-Manuel de Homem-Christo.
The single was released to iTunes on July 31, 2007. It debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number forty-seven and eventually peaked at the number-one position, the same week his album Graduation took the number one spot.  It is West's third number-one single in the United States, following "Slow Jamz" and "Gold Digger." After becoming West's first number one single in the UK, "Stronger" went on to be met by widespread international success, reaching number-one in Canada, Turkey, and New Zealand. The song was also met by critical recognition and was the recipient of multiple awards, including a Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance. Daft Punk themselves made a surprise appearance at the 50th Grammy Awards on February 10, 2008 to join West in performing a reworked version of the song on stage at the Staples Center in Los Angeles. A press release specified that this was the very first televised live performance by Daft Punk in their career.

Music and structure

"Stronger" is an electronica-infused hip-hop song composed in the key of E-flat minor. It is written in common time and moves at 104 beats per minute. The production of the track revolves around a vocoder-affected vocal sample of the song "Harder, Better, Faster, Stronger" by French house duo Daft Punk. Following the introduction, where the cut-up sample of Daft Punk's robotic vocals is played continuously in the background at a decreased tempo, West raps the song's refrain over a four-to-the-floor rhythmic pattern.  
Feeling dissatisfied after he heard "Stronger" inside a club alongside Timbaland's 2007 single "The Way I Are," which was his favourite beat at the moment, West enlisted the hip-hop record producer to assist him in redoing his song's drum programming for the final version of the track, which appears on the Graduation album. 
This version contains a master use of Edwin Birdsong's "Cola Bottle Baby," the song that had been previously sampled by Daft Punk themselves to produce "Harder, Better, Faster, Stronger". The pre-album version of "Stronger", known to the public and being used by radio, television and other outlets, was the version used as the single.  On October 4, 2007, a previously unreleased version of "Stronger" was revealed. This version retains a singular, unused verse from West, while the structure features less synthesizer chords and percussion. It is believed that this version was an early draft of the final song.kanYe Live! - The #1 kanYe West Fan Site » Alternate Version of Stronger (Unreleased)
On July 3, 2007, West told Zane Lowe on BBC Radio 1 that although he believes "Stronger" is a great song, it does not compare to the sampled original. Daft Punk were delighted upon first hearing the new song on Power 106 while on a San Francisco flight. As Guy-Manuel de Homem-Christo of the duo stated, "Our song had a good sound, but when radio DJ put Kanye's record on, the sound was really fat. It sounds really big." The use of "Harder, Better, Faster, Stronger" was requested through Pedro Winter, Daft Punk's manager at the time, and approved by the duo. In a 2008 interview, de Homem-Christo specified that the live performance of "Stronger" at the 50th Grammy Awards was "truly a collaboration from the start. We really did it all hand in hand."Blurt, "Encounters of the Daft Kind" (September 2008) pgs. 28-29.

Media reception

The song was named the number one record of 2007 in the January 2008 issue of Spin magazine with Kanye West and Daft Punk presiding on the cover. This song was number 11 on Rolling Stones list of the 100 Best Songs of 2007.

Chart performance

"Stronger" entered the Billboard Hot 100 on the charting week of August 11, 2007 at number forty-seven, the highest debut single on the chart that week. Over the next eight weeks, the song steadily climbed upwards, reaching the number one position on the charting week of September 29, 2007, pushing the previous week's chart topper, Soulja Boy Tell 'Em's "Crank That (Soulja Boy)" into the number two position. However, the following week, "Crank That (Soulja Boy)" replaced "Stronger" atop the charts, making West's single reach its peak for only one week. As of March 2013, the single has sold over 5 million digital copies in the US alone.
The song debuted at number three in the United Kingdom and rose to become West's very first British number one single. Climbing on downloads alone, it surpassed the prior week's number one single, Robyn's "With Every Heartbeat". It has also topped the Canadian Hot 100, New Zealand, and the Turkish Singles charts. "Stronger" also spent 18 weeks on the German Singles Chart.  The song ended 2007 as the 19th biggest-selling single in the United Kingdom of that year.

Music video

The music video for "Stronger" was directed by Hype Williams and shot over nine days in Japan. It include shots filmed in Aoyama-based clothing store A Bathing Ape as well as Harajuku clothing store Billionaire Boys Club/Ice Cream. The video took over three months to complete. West first premiered a rough cut at the Tribeca Studios in New York City on June 19, 2007. It made its public premiere on June 26, 2007, on MTV Germany's TRL. The video was also shown on the BET countdown show 106 & Park on June 28, 2007.
The video features appearances by singer and model Cassie Ventura, a real-life Japanese motorcycle gang, and the two principal actors from the film Daft Punk's Electroma dressed as Daft Punk. The video also features multiple scenes which pay homage to the 1988 anime film Akira.

Cover versions and media usage

The JabbaWockeeZ performed to this song in the finale of America's Best Dance Crew (season 1) as their victory performance for being crowned champions. Thirty Seconds to Mars performed a cover version of "Stronger" on BBC Radio 1, which is featured on Radio 1's Live Lounge – Volume 2 and a UK release of the single "From Yesterday". The cover features a slower tempo on guitar and omits the profanity, which was reworded by their lead singer Jared Leto. Leto said that he "hoped that Kanye was okay" with the editing.BBC - Radio 1 - Jo Whiley
The song can be heard for the promo of the 2007 film The Kingdom. It can also be heard as the introductory song of the Baltimore Orioles, Toronto Raptors, New York Mets, Texas Longhorns, Washington Wizards, Cincinnati Reds and Tampa Bay Rays. The New York Giants entered the field to this song at Super Bowl XLII and during most of their home games during the season. The New York Rangers and Chicago Blackhawks play it at every home game as well. The song won the Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance for the 50th Grammy Awards and is also Featured in Season 4 Episode 4 of Entourage as background music in a night club. The A-Trak remix of the song is used in an advert for the short-lived American TV show Bionic Woman. This song is also used by Animal Planet to promote their new show Jockeys, appearing in commercials as well as being the series' opening theme. UK rapper Kano has freestyled over this song on his mixtape MC No.1. The song also appeared on the trailer for the videogame Top Spin 4. In 2008 "Stronger" was featured in the movie "Never Back Down", when the main character, Jake Tyler, enters the "Beatdown" tournament.
In 2011 Stronger appeared on the soundtrack for the movie The Hangover Part II and in the scene where the characters walk through the airport. That same year, West performed the song live at the Victoria's Secret Fashion Show, starting the introduction with a tribute to his mother who had died before his scheduled performance four years before, saying: "In 2007, I was supposed to perform this song on this show… and I lost my superhero – now she's my super-angel."
In 2013, on the HBO show Girls, Allison Williams's character performed the song at a slower tempo. "Stronger" was also used as a track that can be selected on the Hollywood Rip Ride Rockit at Universal Studios Florida. The band Time for Three used their arrangement of "Stronger" in an anti-bullying video.Q&A: Time for Three Mixes Classic With New | Art Beat | PBS NewsHour | PBS

Track listing

CD single (International)
Promo 12" single
CD single (UK)
12" picture disc (UK)
iTunes Remixes single

Personnel

Information taken from Graduation liner notes.

Charts and certifications

Weekly charts

Year-end charts

Certifications








