[[John M. Gregory (businessman)]]

CATEGORIES: Businesspeople in the pharmaceutical industry, Businesspeople from Tennessee, Living people

John M. Gregory is a former CEO of King Pharmaceuticals, Inc. and resides in Bristol, Tennessee. In addition to having started up King Pharmaceuticals back in 1993, Gregory has started up several other notable business ventures including SJ Strategic Investments (a privately held investment firm) and Leitner Pharmaceuticals. Most recently, Gregory has also made major investment outside of the pharmaceutical industry, such as his investments within the privately held United Coal Company located in southwest Virginia and Adams Golf with U.S. corporate offices in Texas.

King Pharmaceuticals, Inc. acquiring U.S. marketing and distribution rights to Altace

During 1994, the U.S. National Right to Life Committee announced an anti-RU-486 boycott, targeting all Hoechst pharmaceutical products including Altace. By September 17, the pro-life organization Pharmacists For Life International joined the NRLC anti-RU-486 boycott "... Life Communications. November, 1994. while asking U.S. consumers to "..."Abortion Foes To Boycott Drugs (Altace) Made By RU-486 Manufacturer". The Virginia-Pilot. Associated Press. July 8, 1994.
Hoechst merged with Marion Merrill Dow of Kansas City, Missouri in 1995, forming the Hoechst U.S. pharmaceutical subsidiary Hoechst Marion Roussel (HMR). Altace was bringing in under $90 million in U.S. revenues for HMR and Hoechst had stopped promoting Altace within the United States.,"Faith Healers: The born-again Gregory brothers worked a financial miracle from cast-off drug brands". Forbes. Zina Moukheiber. October 28, 2002. and King Pharmaceuticals President Jefferson "Jeff" Gregory also began negotiations in 1995 with Hoechst to acquire U.S. distribution rights to Altace.
The King Pharmaceuticals wholly owned subsidiary Monarch Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (another brother of John Gregory - Joseph Gregory - was then the president of Monarch Pharmaceuticals) acquired ownership of the U.S. distribution and marketing rights to Altace and other Hoescht products from Hoescht AG subsidiary Hoechst Marion Roussel of Kansas City, Missouri on December 18, 1998,  News Update-Monarch Pharmaceuticals acquired April 25, 2001. Hoechst Marion Roussel. Retrieved at Internet Archive. following a January 1999 merger a few weeks later with Rhône-Poulenc, Hoechst assumed the new corporate identity of Aventis).
In 2001, Forbes magazine ranked John Gregory among the 400 richest Americans. The bulk of Gregory's personal fortune was due in large part due to the ability of King Pharmaceuticals, Inc. to reintroduce the Hoechst branded prescription drug Altace back into the U.S. market under the King Pharmaceuticals,Inc. subsidiary Monarch Pharmaceuticals brand following the 1998 U.S. marketing and distribution agreement between KingPharmaceuticals/Monarch and Hoechst/HMR.

Political connection to Altace, pharmaceutical industry

Gregory, along with his family members and subordinate company executives, has been making considerable financial impact through his political campaign donations to Republican candidates in Tennessee, Virginia and Maryland state elections and within both U.S. congressional and presidential elections on the federal level. He financed and founded the now defunct Tennessee Conservative PAC"John M. Gregory: Founder and Chairman". Brett Holcomb and has made large donations to other political action committees supporting Republican candidates. Gregory is also a prominent campaign contributor to pro-life political action committees in Tennessee, including Tennessee Right To Life PAC,"John Gregory uses checkbook to promote conservative causes". Hank Haynes. September 3, 2006 the State of Franklin PAC,"Campaign Finance Reform Bill Fails". Andy Spears. May 3, 2005 and the Tennessee Conservative PAC."Tennessee Conservative PAC - About Us". Brett Holcomb 
As a Tennessee state senator from Sullivan County, Tennessee Lt. Governor Ron Ramsey organized an August 1999 lobbying airlift from Northeast Tennessee aboard King Pharmaceuticals-owned corporate aircraft and flew to a Nashville meeting with TennCare Director Brian Lapps that was also attended by State Representatives Jason Mumpower, Steve Godsey, and David Davis at the request of King Pharmaceuticals lobbyist"Leading Democrats castigate King Pharmaceuticals". go4truth. September 30, 2004 and former Tennessee State Senator James "Jim" L. Holcomb. The meeting was successful in placing the recently acquired Monarch Pharmaceuticals (a King Pharmaceuticals subsidiary) branded drug Altace onto the TennCare Preferred Drug List within only 33 days. Lapps resigned as TennCare Director on September 27, 1999." TennCare chief Lapps resigns". Tennessean. Bonna M. de la Cruz. September 28, 1999.   

Allegations of Corruption and Fraud

On March 24, 2006, King Pharmaceuticals settled for $124 million in national Medicaid fraud case in which King was found to have overcharged for pharmaceutical products sold to 49 states Medicare programs as well as the Federal government. . 
On October 24, 2003, the company was the subject of a consolidated class actionlawsuit which alleging materially false and misleading statements in the SEC filings in relation to the Jones Pharma merger.  On November 22, 1999, King sold $2,775,000 of pharmaceuticals, including Fluogen vials,to a "third party distributor" (who Lead Plaintiffs' counsel identified through its investigation as Castellon, Inc.), who in turn, sold the drugs to the King Benevolent Fund, a non-profit organization controlled by officers of the company. In
the transactions, King sold 150,000 of the 158,000 vials of Fluogen remaining in its
inventory. This single sale, which occurred at the end of the typical flu vaccine selling
season, represented the Company's largest sale of Fluogen during the 1999-2000 flu
season.  The company later admitted that the Fluogen vials held by the benevolent fund had expired and were never distributed.stanford.pdf






