[[Heart of Brooklyn]]

CATEGORIES: 2001 establishments in New York, Culture of Brooklyn, Non-profit organizations based in New York, Tourism in New York City, Organizations established in 2001

Heart of Brooklyn (HOB), A Cultural Partnership, was founded as a non-profit organization in 2001 by six cultural institutions located near Grand Army Plaza in central Brooklyn: Brooklyn Botanic Garden, Brooklyn Children's Museum, Brooklyn Museum, Brooklyn Public Library, Prospect Park and Prospect Park Zoo.

History

Seeking a way in which to encourage visitors to Manhattan to see New York City's other four boroughs, the six organizations came together to promote Brooklyn as a cultural destination. the group was able to expand its offerings and better pool its resources.

Activities

HOB runs the Brooklyn Cultural Adventures Program (BCAP), a program and summer camp based at HOB's member institutions. The camp is designed to engage children in cultural activities during the summer as well as introduce them to the organizations and their collections thereby attracting a new generation of cultural consumers.
Heart of Brooklyn's goal is to make its organizations more visible and accessible. The partnership runs a free shuttle service called The HOB Connection, announced in November 2008, which delivers passengers to its cultural institutions. The new service is designed to help tourists in Manhattan and residents of Brooklyn reach the cultural hub surrounding Prospect Park.
HOB also works with local merchants and community leaders on neighborhood revitalization efforts, having been selected as a Core Provider for Avenue NYC as well as participating in the NYC Clean Streets program. HOB is a member of and active participant in the Washington Avenue-Prospect Heights Merchants Association (WAPHA).
In addition, HOB's collaboration with Brooklyn Borough Hall has produced tourism initiatives geared toward marketing the borough as a whole, such as Brooklyn Pass.
HOB publishes a monthly newsletter entitled Heartbeat, and in May 2009, published the Extraordinary Places in the Heart of Brooklyn coupon booklet in cooperation with neighborhood shops and businesses.

Awards and recognition

In 2008, Heart of Brooklyn, in conjunction with American Express and Commerce Bank, was awarded an Encore AwardArts & Business Council of New York Encore Awards web page by the Arts & Business Council of New York. The award recognized the efforts of these institutions to link local economic and cultural activities, most notably through Heart of Brooklyn and American Express' Keep It Local campaign.
On July 13, 2009, HOB was presented with a 2009 Neighborhood Achievement Award presented by the Mayor and Department of Small Business Services, in recognition of its efforts in the neighborhood of Prospect Heights.
Heart of Brooklyn's BCAP program was selected as a 2009 Coming Up Taller semifinalist by the President's Committee on the Arts and Humanities.






