[[Carole Lombard]]

CATEGORIES: 1908 births, 1942 deaths, 20th-century American actresses, 20th-century Bahá'ís, Accidental deaths in Nevada, Actresses from Indiana, American Bahá'ís, American film actresses, American silent film actresses, Burials at Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Glendale), Fairfax High School (Los Angeles) alumni, People from Fort Wayne, Indiana, Victims of aviation accidents or incidents in the United States, Paramount Pictures contract players

Carole Lombard (born Jane Alice Peters; October 6, 1908 – January 16, 1942) was an American film actress. She is particularly noted for her zany, energetic roles in the screwball comedies of the 1930s. She was the highest-paid star in Hollywood in the late 1930s.
Lombard was born into a wealthy family in Fort Wayne, Indiana, on October 6, 1908. She attended Virgil Junior High School, where she excelled in sports, and while playing baseball caught the attention of the film director Allan Dwan, which led to her screen debut in A Perfect Crime (1921). In October 1924, at the age of 16, she signed a contract with the Fox Film Corporation, and got her first break the following year opposite Edmund Lowe in the successful drama Marriage in Transit. Soon dropped by Fox following a car accident which left a scar on her face, she appeared in 15 short films of Pathé Exchange between September 1927 and March 1929,  and then began appearing in feature films  such as High Voltage and  The Racketeer. After a successful one-off appearance opposite Warner Baxter in Fox's The Arizona Kid, she signed a contract with Paramount Pictures who cast her in the Buddy Rogers comedy Safety in Numbers (1930).
Lombard  began appearing in comedies with William Powell such as Man of the World and Ladies Man, and married him in June 1931. The marriage to Powell increased Lombard's fame, and the two would continue to occasionally star together throughout the 1930s, despite being divorced in 1933. Lombard starred alongside Clark Gable (whom she married in 1939) in  No Man of Her Own (1932) and George Raft in  Bolero (1934), where her dance skills were praised.  After roles in successful films such as Twentieth Century (1934),  Hands Across the Table (1935), which was the first of four comedies made with Fred MacMurray,  The Princess Comes Across (1936), My Man Godfrey (1936), which won her an Academy Award nomination opposite Powell,  Swing High, Swing Low (1937), and Nothing Sacred (1937), Lombard had become the highest-paid actress in Hollywood and one of its most popular stars. Eager to win an Oscar, by the end of the decade she began to move away from comedies towards more serious roles, appearing opposite James Stewart in the drama Made for Each Other (1939) and alongside Cary Grant in the romance In Name Only (1939). Her role as a nurse in Vigil in the Night was her most notable attempt to win an Oscar but didn't receive a nomination. Lombard returned to comedy in Alfred Hitchcock's Mr. & Mrs. Smith in 1941.
Lombard's career was cut short when she died at the age of 33 in an aircraft crash on Mount Potosi, Nevada while returning from a World War II War Bond tour. Her final film, Ernst Lubitsch 's To Be or Not to Be (1942), a satire about Nazism and the war, was in post-production at the time of her death. Today she is remembered as one of the definitive actresses of the screwball comedy genre and American comedy, and ranks among the American Film Institute's  greatest stars of all time. The World War II Liberty Ship SS Carole Lombard and the Carole Lombard Memorial Bridge over the St. Mary's River near Fort Wayne were named after her.

Early years

Childhood

Lombard was born in Fort Wayne, Indiana, on October 6, 1908. Christened with the name Jane Alice Peters, she was the third child of Frederic Peters (1875–1935) and Elizabeth "Bessie" Knight Peters (1877–1942). Her older brothers were Frederic Jr. (born 1902) and Stuart (born 1906).
Described by her biographer Wes Gehring as "a free-spirited tomboy", the young Lombard was passionately involved in sports and enjoyed watching movies.

Aspiring actress, Fox (1921–26)

A Perfect Crime was not widely distributed, but the brief experience spurred Lombard and her mother to look for more film work. The teenager attended several auditions, but none were successful.
In October 1924, shortly after these disappointments, 16-year-old Lombard was signed to a contract with the Fox Film Corporation. How this came about is uncertain: in her lifetime, it was reported that a director for the studio scouted her at a dinner party, but more recent evidence suggests that Lombard's mother contacted Louella Parsons, the gossip columnist, who then got her a screen test.
The majority of Lombard's appearances with Fox were bit parts
In March 1925, Fox gave Lombard a leading role in the drama Marriage in Transit, opposite Edmund Lowe. Her performance was well-received, with a reviewer for Motion Picture News writing that she displayed, "good poise and considerable charm."

Breakthrough

Sennett and Pathé (1927–29)

After a year without work, Lombard obtained a screen test for the "King of Comedy" Mack Sennett. She was offered a contract, and although she initially had reservations about performing in slapstick comedies, the actress joined his company as one of the "Sennett Bathing Beauties".
Sennett's productions were distributed by Pathé Exchange, and in 1928 the company began casting Lombard in feature films. She had prominent roles in Show Folks and Ned McCobb's Daughter,

Paramount, Powell marriage (1930–33)

In 1930, Lombard returned to Fox for a one-off role in the western The Arizona Kid. It was a big release for the studio, starring the popular actor Warner Baxter, in which Lombard received third billing.
Lombard appeared in five films throughout 1931, beginning with the Frank Tuttle comedy It Pays to Advertise. Her next two films, Man of the World and Ladies Man, both featured William Powell, Paramount's top male star.
The marriage to Powell increased Lombard's fame,
In August 1933, Lombard and Powell divorced after 26 months of marriage. At the time she blamed it on their careers,

Hollywood star

Screwball beginnings (1934–35)

The year 1934 marked a high point in Lombard's career.
Lombard was then recruited by the director Howard Hawks, a second cousin,
The next films Lombard appeared in were Henry Hathaway's Now and Forever (1934), featuring Gary Cooper and the new child star Shirley Temple, and Lady by Choice (1934), which was a critical and commercial success. The Gay Bride (1934) placed her opposite Chester Morris in a gangster comedy, but this outing was panned by critics.

Continued success (1936–37)

Lombard's first film of 1936 was Love Before Breakfast, described by Gehring as "The Taming of the Shrew, screwball style".
By 1937, Lombard was one of Hollywood's most popular actresses, 
more than five times the salary of the U.S. President.
As her salary was widely reported in the press, Lombard stated that 80 percent of her earnings went in taxes but that she was happy to help improve her country.
Her first release of the year was Leisen's Swing High, Swing Low, a third pairing with MacMurray. The film focused on a romance between two cabaret performers, and was a critical and commercial success.
Lombard continued with screwball comedies, next starring in what Swindell calls one of her "wackiest" films, True Confession (1937).

Gable marriage, dramatic efforts (1938–40)

True Confession was the last film Lombard made on her Paramount contract, and she remained an independent performer for the rest of her career.
Fools for Scandal was the only film Lombard made in 1938. By this time, she was devoted to a relationship with Clark Gable.
While continuing with a slower work-rate, Lombard decided to move away from comedies and return to dramatic roles.
Lombard was eager to win an Academy Award, and selected her next project—from several possible scripts—with the expectation that it would bring her the trophy.

Final roles (1941–1942)

Accepting that "my name doesn't sell tickets to serious pictures",
It was nearly a year before Lombard committed to another film, as she focussed instead on her home and marriage.

Death

When the U.S. entered World War II at the end of 1941, Lombard traveled to her home state of Indiana for a war bond rally with her mother, Bess Peters, and Clark Gable's press agent, Otto Winkler. Lombard was able to raise over $2 million in defense bonds in a single evening. Her party had initially been scheduled to return to Los Angeles by train, but Lombard was anxious to reach home more quickly and wanted to fly by a scheduled airline. Her mother and Winkler were both afraid of flying and insisted they follow their original travel plans. Lombard suggested they flip a coin; they agreed and Lombard won the toss. "Carole Lombard: Lovable Madcap." Classic Hollywood Bios.
In the early morning hours of January 16, 1942, Lombard, her mother, and Winkler boarded a Transcontinental and Western Air Douglas DST aircraft to return to California.

Aftermath

Gable was flown to Las Vegas after learning of the tragedy to claim the bodies of his wife, mother-in-law, and Winkler, who aside from being his press agent had been a close friend. Lombard's funeral was held on January 21 at Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery in Glendale, California. She was interred beside her mother under the name of Carole Lombard Gable."Carole Lombard". findagrave. Despite remarrying twice following her death, Gable chose to be interred beside Lombard when he died in 1960.
Lombard's final film, To Be or Not to Be (1942), directed by Ernst Lubitsch and co-starring Jack Benny, a satire about Nazism and World War II, was in post-production at the time of her death. The film's producers decided to cut part of the film in which Lombard's character asks, "What can happen on a plane?" out of respect for the circumstances surrounding her death. When the film was released, it received mixed reviews, particularly about its controversial content, but Lombard's performance was hailed as the perfect send-off to one of 1930s Hollywood's most important stars.
At the time of her death, Lombard had been scheduled to star in the film They All Kissed the Bride; when production started, her role was given to Joan Crawford. Crawford donated all of her salary for the film to the Red Cross, which had helped extensively in the recovery of bodies from the air crash.
Shortly after Lombard's death, Gable, who was inconsolable and devastated by his loss, joined the United States Army Air Forces. Lombard had asked him to do that numerous times after the United States had entered World War II. After officer training, Gable headed a six-man motion picture unit attached to a B-17 bomb group in England to film aerial gunners in combat, flying five missions himself. In December 1943, the United States Maritime Commission announced that a Liberty ship named after Carole Lombard would be launched."Tribute to Carole Lombard" (December 29, 1943). 4. Gable attended the launch of the SS Carole Lombard on January 15, 1944, the two-year anniversary of Lombard's record-breaking war bond drive. The ship was involved in rescuing hundreds of survivors from sunken ships in the Pacific and returning them to safety.

Style and legacy

Author Robert D. Matzen has cited Lombard as "among the most commercially successful and admired film personalities in Hollywood in the 1930s", 
Lombard was particularly noted for the zaniness of her performances,
In 1999, the American Film Institute ranked Lombard 23rd on its list of the 50 greatest American female screen legends,
Lombard's Fort Wayne childhood home has been designated a historic landmark.  The city named the nearby bridge over the St. Mary's River the Carole Lombard Memorial Bridge.

Filmography



Notes

Citations

Bibliography




