[[SM City Sta. Mesa]]

CATEGORIES: Shopping malls in Metro Manila, SM Prime Holdings, Shopping malls established in 1990, Buildings and structures in Quezon City

SM City Sta. Mesa, formerly known as SM Centerpoint is an upscale shopping mall located between the City of Manila and Quezon City, Philippines. It is the second of SM Supermall and the seventh SM branch developed and operated by SM Prime Holdings owned by Henry Sy, Sr.. It has a land area of 3 hectares and has a gross floor area of an approximate 133,327 square meters.

History

The mall was opened to the public on 28 September 1990, and was the second SM Supermall to open after the then-largest SM Supermall in the country, SM City North EDSA. It was initially named SM Centerpoint as it is located very near the tripoint of the City of Manila, Quezon City and what was then the municipality of San Juan. The mall featured several amusement venues, namely Quantum, Worlds of Fun and an annexe. To celebrate its 15th anniversary, the mall was rebranded SM City Sta. Mesa since it borders the Santa Mesa district of Manila despite being under the territorial jurisdiction of Quezon City.
On September 26, 2009, the basement level was flooded when Typhoon Ondoy (Ketsana) battered the capital. The appliance center, supermarket, food court and other retail stores located at the basement level were heavily damaged. The basement level was temporarily closed for several days.
From late 2008 to early 2009, the four-tower apartment complex called Mezza Residences was constructed by SM Residences in the corner lot across the mall.
The mall's developers were criticised for not following the building guidelines during construction of the carpark building, which was built on the banks of the San Juan River.

Physical Amenities

The Mall is the main structure of SM City Sta. Mesa, the second of SM Supermall constructed. It features and houses most anchors, the department store, all the amusement venues, the main atrium, all the theater houses, most of the restaurants, all the retail stores and most of the entertainment venues and other services. All the major anchors are located within the vicinity of the structure. The mall has undergone several renovations for better guest accommodations and serves the daily foot traffic of about 200,000 people.
The Carpark Building is a four-story structure which serves thousands of vehicles daily and is adjacent to the mall.
The Annex Building of the mall was one of the first annex buildings built and constructed by SM Prime Holdings. Its operations began at the opening of the mall. The Annex Building houses several junior anchors and is located east of the main mall.

Mezza Residences

The quadruplet residential towers of Mezza Residences was constructed at the front of the mall. The Mezza Residences was one of the major projects of SM Developments, Inc., whose mother company is SM Prime Holdings.

Anchors

Major Anchors

=SM Department Store=

The SM Department Store is the foundation and one of the major anchors of the mall. The department store attracts about 150,000 people daily. The department store hosts quality products for fashion, footwear and others.

=SM Supermarket=

The SM Supermarket is another one of the major anchors of the mall. The SM Supermarket Inc. supervises the supermarket operation on the mall and was the second supermarket opened by SM Prime Holdings. It is located at the basement level along with Ace Hardware, the Quantum and SM Food court.

=SM Cinema=

Being one of the major tenants, the theater houses are the main entertainment attraction in the mall. It is available for viewing local and international films. During the Metro Manila Film Festival, the theaters are jam-packed with more than 50,000 people. It consists of 10 theater houses. The cinema occupies the entire fourth floor of the main mall along with an Internet café.

=SM Food court=

The SM Food court is another one of the major tenants of the mall. It consists of more than 100 food stalls from both local and international brands. The food court is located at the basement level along with Ace Hardware, Quantum and the supermarket.

Minor Anchors

=ACE Hardware=

Ace Hardware is another junior anchor of the mall. Ace Hardware is a shop which sells hardware-related products. It is located on the basement level along with the food court, the Quantum and the supermarket.

=Watsons=

Watsons is one of the junior anchors residing on the mall. It is a pharmacy and convenience store. It is located on the ground floor among other retail stores.

=National Bookstore=

National Bookstore was one of the junior anchors of the mall. Various school supplies and books are available for purchasing. It is located at the second floor the mall and situated near several restaurants and other retail stores.

=SM Appliance Center=

The SM Appliance Center is one of the junior anchors of the mall and features appliances and appliance-related products. It is located on the Annex Building.

=Surplus=

Surplus Shop is another junior anchors of the mall. Surplus Shop features clothing products sold at affordable prices.

=Toy Kingdom=

Toy Kingdom features toy-related products. It is owned by SM Group; under its corporation name International Toyworld Inc.; it would soon open a branch inside the mall.






