[[Houlihan Lokey]]

CATEGORIES: Investment banks, Bankruptcy in the United States, Companies based in Los Angeles, California, Investment companies of the United States, Companies established in 1972, Companies based in the City of Westminster, Privately held companies of the United Kingdom

Houlihan Lokey, Inc. is an independent, advisory-focused, global investment bank. It is one of the largest privately owned investment banks in the world.emergingmarkets.Vincent, Roger. "Energy cells help power Century City skyscraper." Los Angeles Times. February 5, 2012. Retrieved February 5, 2012. The firm advises large public and closely held companies as well as institutions and governments." Houlihan Lokey. Retrieved December 19, 2011. "Registered Office : 1930 Century Park West  Los Angeles, CA 90067-6802, United States"  Its main service lines include mergers and acquisitions, capital markets, restructuring, fairness opinions, and valuations. As of 2012, Houlihan Lokey employed over 850 employees worldwide.hl.pdf
In 2012, Houlihan Lokey was named the No. 1 Global Investment Banking Restructuring Advisor by Thomson Reuters, the No. 1 M&A advisor for U.S. transactions under $3 billion, and the No. 1 Global M&A Fairness Opinion Advisor Over the Past 10 Years. The firm was also named the Best Bank to Work For the last four years by Vault.

History

1970s

Houlihan Lokey  was founded in Los Angeles in 1972 as a provider of general business advisory services to privately held companies.  The 1974 passage of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act launched the firm's valuation business by creating demand for independent valuations of private businesses, particularly those that had formed employee stock ownership programs.

1980s

In 1986, Kenneth T. Friedman founded and became President of Houlihan Lokey's investment  banking broker-dealer to provide  corporate finance services including M&A advisory services and procuring debt and equity financing.  Friedman formed the investment bank to provide Wall Street level expertise to the expanding investment banking demands of the middle-market. By 1987, many of the highly leveraged transactions completed earlier in the decade, were starting to exhibit signs of financial distress. Accordingly, a market was developing for financial restructuring advisory services. To position itself to serve this burgeoning market, the investment banking broker- dealer purchased Cheviot Capital Corporation, in 1987, and began assembling, led by Jeff Werbalowsky and Irwin Gold, what would become an active, dominant worldwide financial restructuring group.
With the surge of mergers, acquisitions and leveraged buyouts, Wall Street's large investment banking firms began calling on Houlihan Lokey for independent valuation expertise in fairness, solvency and employee stock ownership plan (ESOP) opinions. The firm advised on transactions valued at more than $100 billion during this period. The firm also started to offer estate planning valuation services. In addition, the firm opened several offices in the '80s in New York, San Francisco and Chicago.

1990s

Houlihan Lokey opened eight offices across the U.S. in the 1980s and 1990s as it expanded. In 1995, to grow its information services division, Houlihan Lokey acquired Mergerstat, a publishing company with a 30-year history in analytical M&A research, from Merrill Lynch.

2000s

In 2001, Houlihan Lokey launched its first non-U.S. office by expanding into London.  The firm opened a Paris office in 2005 and a Frankfurt office in 2006.  It also expanded its industry group platform and private equity coverage program in keeping with investment banking trends.
In 2002, Houlihan Lokey advised the official creditors committees in three large bankruptcies: WorldCom, Enron and Conseco.
In 2006, Houlihan Lokey agreed to merge with ORIX USA, the U.S. corporate lending operations of ORIX Corp. of Japan, to address the growing international demand for middle-market investment banking services. Houlihan Lokey opened offices in Hong Kong and Tokyo in 2007. The firm opened an office in Beijing, Mumbai and Singapore the next three years.

Operations

Financial Restructuring

The financial restructuring team has nearly 180 professionals worldwide and every assignment is staffed with professionals who facilitate the completion of due diligence and analysis. In the past years, Houlihan Lokey has advised several extremely complicated deals. During this period the firm advised on almost 1000 restructuring transactions (including 12 of the 15 largest bankruptcy cases), special situations or Distressed M&A, with aggregate debt claims in excess of $1.5 trillion, including cases such as Lehman Brothers, WorldCom, Enron, General Motors and CIT Group.

Corporate Finance

Corporate finance is best known for offering mergers & acquisitions and capital markets advisory services. The firm has advised public and private institutions on buy-side and sell-side transactions as well as leveraged loans, private mezzanine debt, and high-yield debt, IPOs, follow-ons, convertibles, PIPEs, private equity, and liability management transactions. The company has also developed an expertise in advising financial sponsors on all types on transactions, effectively creating one of the largest financial sponsors groups on Wall Street.

Financial Advisory Services

This division offers opinion services, transaction & valuation reporting services, portfolio valuation and financial consulting to company owners, managers and special committees in their interactions with auditors and regulators.

Rankings

Houlihan Lokey has won the Best Investment Banking Firm Award several times over the last few years. The firm has led Mergers & Acquisitions Journal's annual M&A fairness opinion advisory rankings for the past seven years. It was named International Financing Review's European Restructuring House." Lehman Fees Could Reach $1.4 Billion, Besting Enron (Update1). Retrieved December 19, 2011.
Here is a brief list of the 2010 awards won by Houlihan Lokey:
• No. 1 Global Investment Banking Restructuring Advisor, Thomson Reuters
• No. 1 M&A Advisor for U.S. Transactions Under $2 Billion, Thomson Reuters
• No. 1 Global M&A Fairness Opinion Advisor Over the Past 10 Years, Thomson Reuters
• Investment Banking Firm of the Year, M&A Advisor International Awards
• Valuation Firm of the Year, M&A Advisor International Awards
• Debt Financing Deal-Maker of the Year, M&A Advisor International Awards
• Middle-Market M&A Financing Deal of the Year for a Healthcare industry deal, M&A Advisor International Awards
• Best Middle-Market Investment Bank, Buyouts Magazine
In 2011, Vault.

Industries

Houlihan Lokey bankers focus on industries that include:
Aerospace,
Building Products,
Business Services,
Chemicals,
Consumer Products,
Defense and Government Services,
Energy,
Financial Institutions,
Healthcare,
Industrial & Environmental Technologies,
Industrials Automotive,
Infrastructure Services & Construction,
Lodging & Leisure,
Materials Engineering,
Media,
Metals,
Plastics & Packaging,
Real Estate,
Retail & Food,
Sports & Entertainment,
Technology,
Telecommunications
and Transportation & Logistics

Office locations

 Atlanta

 Beijing

 Chicago

 Dallas

 Frankfurt

 Hong Kong

 London

 Los Angeles

 Minneapolis

 Mumbai

 New York

 Paris

 San Francisco

 Singapore

 Tokyo

 Washington, D.C.

Notes and references




