[[Amélie]]

CATEGORIES: 2001 films, 2000s romantic comedy films, French films, French comedy films, French-language films, Films directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet, Best Film César Award winners, César Award winners, Crystal Globe winners, Fantasy-comedy films, Films set in 1997, Films set in France, Films set in Paris, Films shot in Paris, Independent Spirit Award for Best Foreign Film winners, Magic realism films, Montmartre, Miramax Films films

Amélie (
The film met with critical acclaim and was a major box-office success. Amélie won Best Film at the European Film Awards; it won four César Awards (including Best Film and Best Director), two BAFTA Awards (including Best Original Screenplay), and was nominated for five Academy Awards. A Broadway adaptation is in development.

Plot

Amélie Poulain was raised by eccentric parents who — erroneously believing that she had a heart defect — prevented her from meeting other children. She was home schooled by her mother. She developed an active imagination and fantasy life to cope with her loneliness. After her mother is killed due to a freak accident, her father's withdrawal from society worsens. Amélie eventually decides to leave home and becomes a waitress at Café des 2 Moulins in Montmartre, which is staffed and frequented by a collection of eccentrics. Spurning romantic relationships after a few disappointing efforts, she finds contentment in simple pleasures and letting her imagination roam free.
On 31 August 1997, Amélie is startled by the news of the death of Diana, Princess of Wales, causing her to drop a glass perfume stopper which in turn dislodges a loose bathroom tile. Behind the tile she finds an old metal box of childhood memorabilia hidden by a boy who lived in her apartment decades earlier. She resolves to track down the boy and return the box to him, and promises herself that if she finds him and it makes him happy, she will devote her life to bringing happiness to others and helping others as much as she can.
She asks Mrs. Wells, the concierge, about the boy. Wells redirects her to the abusive greengrocer, Mr. Collignon, who redirects Amélie to his mother. Mrs. Collignon remembers the name "Dominique Bredoteau", but Amélie has no success finding the owner of the box. Amélie meets her reclusive neighbour, Raymond Dufayel, an artist who repaints Luncheon of the Boating Party by Pierre-Auguste Renoir every year. He remembers the boy also, but correctly recalls the name as "Bretodeau". Amélie quickly finds the man and surreptitiously passes him the box. Moved to tears by the discovery and the memories it holds, Bretodeau resolves to reconcile with his estranged daughter and the grandson he has never met. Amélie happily embarks on her new mission.
Amélie secretly executes complex schemes that affect the lives of those around her. She escorts a blind man to the Métro station, giving him a rich description of the street scenes he passes. She persuades her father to follow his dream of touring the world by stealing his garden gnome and having a flight attendant friend airmail pictures of it posing with landmarks from all over the world. She kindles a romance between a middle-aged co-worker and one of the customers in the bar. She convinces Mrs. Wells that the husband who abandoned her had sent her a final conciliatory love letter just before his accidental death years before. She avenges Lucien, Mr. Collignon's meek amputee assistant and the target of his abuse, by playing practical jokes on Collignon until his arrogance is deflated.
While she is looking after others, Mr. Dufayel is observing her.  He begins a conversation with her about his painting, a replicate of Luncheon of the Boating Party by Renoir. Although he has copied the same painting 20 times, he has never quite captured the look of the girl drinking a glass of water. They discuss the meaning of this character, and over several conversations Amélie begins projecting her loneliness on to the image. Dufayel recognizes this, and uses the girl in the painting to push Amélie to examine her attraction to a quirky young man who collects the discarded photographs of strangers from passport photo booths. When Amélie bumps into the young man a second time, she realizes she is falling in love with him.  He accidentally drops a photo album in the street. Amélie retrieves it. She discovers his name is Nino Quincampoix, and she plays a cat and mouse game with him around Paris before returning his treasured album anonymously. After orchestrating a proper meeting at the 2 Moulins, she is too shy to approach him and tries to deny her identity.  Her co-worker, concerned for Amélie's well-being, screens Nino for her; a café patron's comment about this misleads Amélie to believe she has lost Nino to the co-worker. It takes Dufayel's insight to give her the courage to pursue Nino, resulting in a romantic night together and the beginning of a relationship.

Cast

Production

In his DVD commentary, Jeunet explains that he originally wrote the role of Amélie for the English actress Emily Watson; in the original draft, Amélie's father was an Englishman living in London. However, Watson's French was not strong, and when she became unavailable to shoot the film, owing to a conflict with the filming of Gosford Park, Jeunet rewrote the screenplay for a French actress. Audrey Tautou was the first actress he auditioned having seen her on the poster for Venus Beauty Institute.
The movie was filmed mainly in Paris. The Café des 2 Moulins (15 Rue Lepic, Montmartre, Paris) where Amélie works is a real place.
The filmmakers made use of computer-generated imagery and a digital intermediate.

Release

The film was released in France, Belgium, and French-speaking western Switzerland in April 2001, with subsequent screenings at various film festivals followed by releases around the world. It received limited releases in North America, the UK and Australasia later in 2001.
Cannes Film Festival selector Gilles Jacob described Amélie as "uninteresting", and therefore it was not screened at the festival, although the version he viewed was an early cut without music. The absence of Amélie at the festival caused something of a controversy because of the warm welcome by the French media and audience in contrast with the reaction of the selector.

Critical response

The film has divided many critics. According to Rotten Tomatoes 90% of critics liked the film, while its Metacritic score of 69 (indicating lukewarm reviews) has incredibly high variance including four perfect scores of 100 and four scores of 40 or below.
Alan Morrison from Empire Online gave Amélie five stars and called it "one of the year's best, with crossover potential along the lines of Cyrano De Bergerac and Il Postino. Given its quirky heart, it might well surpass them all."
Paul Tatara from CNN Reviewer praised Amélie
The film was attacked by critic Serge Kaganski of Les Inrockuptibles for an unrealistic and picturesque vision of a bygone French society with few ethnic minorities. Jeunet dismissed the criticism by pointing out that the photo collection contains pictures of people from numerous ethnic backgrounds, and that Jamel Debbouze, who plays Lucien, is of Moroccan descent.
Awards and honors== 
The film was a critical and box office success, gaining wide play internationally as well. It was nominated for five Academy Awards:
In 2001 it won several awards at the European Film Awards, including the Best Film award. It also won the People's Choice Award at the Toronto International Film Festival and the Crystal Globe Award at the Karlovy Vary International Film Festival. In 2002, in France, it won the César Award for Best Film, Best Director, Best Music and Best Production Design. It was also awarded the French Syndicate of Cinema Critics's Prix Mélies (Best French Film) in the same year.
The film was selected by The New York Times as one of "The Best 1,000 Movies Ever Made".
Entertainment Weekly named the film poster one of the best on its list of the top 25 film posters in the past 25 years.

Soundtrack

The soundtrack to Amélie was composed by Yann Tiersen.

Musical adaptation

On 23 August 2013 composer Dan Messe, one of the founders and members of the band Hem, confirmed speculation that he would be writing the score for a musical adaptation of Amelie to premiere on Broadway. He will be collaborating with  Craig Lucas and Nathan Tysen.
Jeunet distanced himself from the musical, saying he only sold the rights to raise funds for children's charity "Mecenat Chirurgie Cardiaque" (Cardiac Surgery Patronage).

Influence

For the 2007 television show Pushing Daisies, a "quirky fairy tale", American Broadcasting Company (ABC) sought an Amélie feel, with the same chords of "whimsy and spirit and magic". Pushing Daisies director Bryan Fuller said Amélie is his favorite film. "All the things I love are represented in that movie," he said. "It's a movie that will make me cry based on kindness as opposed to sadness." The New York Times' review of Pushing Daisies reported "the 'Amélie' influence on 'Pushing Daisies' is everywhere".
In the 2009 film Bunny and the Bull, the scenes set in the real world of Stephen's flat have the same red, green and gold feel of Amelie's interiors. Additionally, the opening credits are similar to Delicatessen, an earlier film of Amélie's director Jean-Pierre Jeunet.
A species of frog was named Cochranella amelie. The scientist who named it said: "this new species of Glass frog is for Amélie, protagonist of the extraordinary movie "Le Fabuleux Destin d'Amélie Poulain"; a film where little details play an important role in the achievement of joie de vivre; like the important role that Glassfrogs and all amphibians and reptiles play in the health of our planet". in an article entitled "An enigmatic new species of Glassfrog (Amphibia: Anura: Centrolenidae) from the Amazonian Andean slopes of Ecuador"
The song "La Valse d'Amélie" from the soundtrack of the film was sampled in the song "Diary" on the 2009 album Attention Deficit by hip-hop artist Wale.
The girl's name Amelie soared in popularity after the release of the film.

Home media

The film has no overall worldwide distributor, but Blu-ray discs have been released in Canada and Australia. The first release occurred in Canada in September 2008 by TVA Films. This version did not contain any English subtitles and received criticisms regarding picture quality. Momentum Pictures released a Blu-ray in the UK on 17 October 2011. The film is also available on HD on iTunes and other digital download services.








