[[Glion Institute of Higher Education]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 1967, Hospitality schools, Schools in Switzerland, New England Association of Schools and Colleges, Universities in Switzerland, Education in Switzerland

Glion Institute of Higher Education is a is a private hospitality school with two campuses located in Glion and Bulle within the French-speaking part of Switzerland and one campus located in London. 

History

Opened in Autumn 1962 in the former Bellevue Hotel, Glion was the first private, university-level Swiss hotel management school.
Glion Institute of Higher Education was founded by Walter Hunziker and Frédéric Tissot. The original name of the school, whose tuition was given in French, was the Institut International de Glion. The campus was built in the renovated Grand Hôtel Bellevue for a first class composed of 15 students from 5 countries. The campus site was chosen for its location and view. Glion evolved through different management structures and names such as the Centre International de Glion (CIG) of 1977,  the Glion Hotel School, and became Glion Institute of Higher Education in 2002. In the mid 80's, the student body and staff had grown and it became necessary to move. The close town of Bulle was chosen for the new campus which was completed in 1989. In 2012, Glion opened a new campus in London on the existing site of Whiteland College of the University of Roehampton. 
In 2002, Glion became part of  Laureate Education Inc. which in Switzerland also coordinates administration of Les Roches International School of Hotel Management.net/CentersofExcellence/Hospitality.  Glion is member of the Swiss Hotel Association.Members extract
In 2012, Glion enrolled 1634 students from over 98 different countries.glion.

Academic programs

Glion Institute of Higher Education offers undergraduate, postgraduate and graduate programs. The degree tracks include hospitality management or event, sport and entertainment with a variety of specializations and entrance/exit-points. Glion is accredited at university level by the Commission on Institutions of Higher Education (CIHE) of the New England Association of Schools and Colleges (NEASC) for the United States Department of Education.neasc. 
Glion Institute of Higher Education has three program divisions: the undergraduate hospitality management programs, the undergraduate event, sport and entertainment management programs, and the graduate programs. The hospitality management programs educate students in hospitality operations management, business administration, general education and industry training. The event, sport and entertainment programs offer courses covering event, sport and entertainment facility and venue management, business administration, general education and industry training.
At the undergraduate level, Glion's associate degrees require 2 years of study and a 6-month internship. The bachelor degrees require an additional internship and a final year of study for a total of 3.5 years.  In their final year at Glion, students can choose from 7 specializations in hospitality management or 5 specializations in event, sport and entertainment management.  
Glion's graduate school offers two types of degrees: master and postgraduate. The Master of Business Administration in International Hospitality & Service Industries Management has two specializations: Leadership or Marketing. This degree focuses on developing strategic management competencies and requires a dissertation. This course requires a dissertation and can be completed with full-time attendance over one year, or alternative attendance allowing for flexibility around work schedules. Starting in January 2013, Glion offers Master of Science in International Hospitality Finance. This program covers the principles of financial management in the hospitality industry and is delivered on campus during 6 months, followed by 6 months of online courses.  Glion Masters Degree. 
The Postgraduate Diploma in Hospitality Administration or Higher Diploma in Hospitality Management offer operational and administrative hospitality management courses. After 12–18 months of study, students must validate a 6-month internship in hospitality to receive the diploma. Mature students who do not hold a bachelor degree can take the same program and finish with a Professional Development Diploma. The same postgraduate program structure exists for the Event, Sport and Entertainment track. 
Glion's most recent program is the Online MBA in International Hospitality & Service Industries Management, offered in collaboration with Laureate Higher Education Group (LHEG), a provider of online services to more than 35,000 masters and Ph.D students worldwide. The new Glion Online MBA offers specializations in General Management for Service Industries, Marketing and Innovation, Asset and Revenue Management as well as a Self Designed option. The program has five intakes per year with the first intake starting in August 2010.hotelworldnetwork.
In 1995, Glion put in place a new Bachelor Degree program based on the American system of university programs. Under the American system, new programs were introduced offering specialisation tracks for Hospitality Management, Tourism, Finance and Human Resources. In 2001, Glion introduced a sports management program which has now become the Event, Sport and Entertainment programme and the university received accreditation by the Commission on Institutions of Higher Education (CIHE) of the New England Association of Schools and Colleges (NEASC). 
Glion London delivers a Bachelor of Business Administration in Hospitality Management and a Postgraduate Diploma in Hospitality Administration.

Accreditation

Glion Institute of Higher Education is accredited by the Commission on Institutions of Higher Education (CIHE) of the New England Association of Schools and Colleges.NEASC membersheet
Glion is also recognized by the Swiss Cantonal authorities for the Canton of Fribourg where Glion delivers its degrees.

Rankings

Glion Institute of Higher Education was ranked in 2013 among the top 3 hospitality schools worldwide for preparing students for an international career in hospitality management. The survey was conducted by Taylor Nelson Sofres (TNS) Travel & Tourism (U.K.), the world's largest provider of custom research and analysis, and targeted hiring managers from luxury international hospitality companies in 80 countries around the world.

Campuses

Glion Campus

Overlooking the city of Montreux, the Glion campus has a view of the Swiss Riviera and the French and Swiss Alps. Glion campus has culinary and restaurant facilities. The Glion campus has four student-run restaurants, TV and entertainment lounges, a fitness center and gymnasium. 

Bulle Campus

The Bulle campus is located in the town of Bulle in the Gruyère region. The university style campus was designed for the academic courses of the graduate programs and upper-level undergraduate students.glion.
The Bulle campus has a library and study area. Campus facilities include a catered restaurant and student lounge. The new residence buildings on Bulle campus were built responding to the Swiss "minergie P" standards.glion.

London Campus

The Glion London campus is located on the site of Roehampton University, in Southwest London. Glion London is the first Swiss hospitality institute located in the UK. Students have access to the resources of the University of Roehampton.roehampton.ac.

Alumni Association

In almost 50 years of existence, Glion Institute of Higher Education has produced over 8'500 graduates.glion. The Alumni Association of Glion or Association des Anciens de Glion (AAG) is the official networking community for Glion graduates. The association currently serves over 3,500 Alumni members from 120 countries.

Key Dates

1885 The Bellevue and Belvédère Hotel opens

1962 Opening of The "Institut International de Glion" hotel school with some 15 students from five countries.

1964 Creation of the Alumni Association

1977 The name changes to "Centre International de Glion" (CIG).

1985 Glion is a founding member of the newly formed Swiss Hotel Schools Association ASEH.

1989 Opening of Bulle campus.

1993 The first franchising contract is signed with The European Centre for Tourism Studies, Corfu, Greece.

1995 Introduction of the first Bachelor Degree.

2000 Start of the Endicott's Master of Education programme.

2001 The School is accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges (NEASC), Extension of the residential facilities on Bulle Campus with the opening of the Residence Raymond Jaussi.

2002 Opening of Glion Sports Management School on the Glion campus. Creation of Glion Institute of Higher Education which regroups both Schools (Glion Hotel School and Glion Sports Management School).

2008 Les Roches-Gruyère University of Applied Sciences achieves Swiss Federal government recognition and recruits its first students at Bulle and Les Roches-Bluche. 

2010 Bill Clinton (42nd President of the United States) became Honorary Chancellor of Laureate International 
Universities. 

2010 GIHE launches the first online MBA in International Hospitality Management.   

2012 Glion London opens its doors to students from the UK, EU, EEA, Swiss or British Overseas Territory nationals for the Bachelor of Business Administration in Hospitality Management and the Postgraduate Diploma in Hospitality Administration, with the same curriculum and accreditation as the flagship campus in Switzerland.  

2012 A new Master of Science in International Hospitality Finance is offered on Bulle campus.glion.






