[[George Hoadley (Alberta politician)]]

CATEGORIES: 1866 births, 1955 deaths, Leaders of the Progressive Conservative Association of Alberta, Progressive Conservative Association of Alberta MLAs, United Farmers of Alberta MLAs, Members of the Executive Council of Alberta

right|frame|George HoadleyGeorge Hoadley (May 16, 1867 – December 14, 1955) was a long serving popular provincial politician and rancher from Alberta, Canada. Hoadley served a legendary career in the Alberta legislature during the early years when he led the Alberta Conservative Party in opposition and his effect in shaping policy in the province is widely remembered to this day as he served a broad range of portfolios during his years in the United Farmers government.

Early political career

Hoadley was born at Abbey, England and came to Canada in 1890.google. He was defeated in the High River electoral district by Richard Wallace
Hoadley ran again for a seat in the Alberta Legislature seven years later. He won his seat in 1909 Alberta general election in the newly created electoral district of Okotoks. Hoadley won a hotly contested and very close election against Liberal candidate M. McHardy. He served his first term in the Legislative Assembly in the opposition Conservative caucus.
Hoadley sought a second term in office standing for re-election in the 1913 Alberta general election. He retained his seat, increasing his margin of victory.
Hoadley was re-elected to a third term in office again with increased plurality in the 1917 Alberta general election. His third term saw him assume the reins as the Conservative Party leader and become Leader of the Official Opposition.

Opposition leader

Hoadley having been one of the most senior Conservative MLAs led the Alberta Conservative Party and became leader of His Majesty's Loyal Opposition in Alberta for 3 years assuming the party's leadership from Edward Michener in 1917 after he resigned from the Legislature to take a seat in the Canadian Senate.
Hoadey was stripped of his leadership of the Conservatives at a caucus meeting in 1920. Members of the Conservative caucus decided James Ramsey should temporarily be the new leader.

United Farmers

Hoadley switched party affiliations in 1920 after being removed as leader of the Conservatives. He crossed the floor to the unproven United Farmers of Alberta political party. He was acclaimed at a nomination meeting as the Okotoks candidate on July 9, 1921.
Hoadley would stand for re-election in his Okotoks district for the 1921 Alberta general election under the United Farmer banner. He was re-elected with a landslide taking about 74% of the popular vote. The switch in parties had worked to his favor and he was the only member from the Conservative caucus that had kept his seat in that election..
Hoadley's prior years of experience in the legislature made him a very valuable asset to the new government and he was sworn into his first cabinet post. Hoadley was given the Minister of Agriculture portfolio in the new United Farmers government by Premier Herbert Greenfield. He was re-elected by acclamation in a Ministerial By-election in December 1921.

Sexual sterilization

Hoadley was one of the primary architects behind the Sexual Sterilization Act one of the most controversial pieces of legislation in Alberta history.

Defeat

With the United Farmers of Alberta sagging in popular support in the midst of the Great Depression, Hoadley attempted to run for a record 7th term in office. When the returns of the 1935 Alberta general election had come in Hoadley in his Okotoks riding that he had held since its inception in 1909. The result of the vote had him defeated in a landslide. The plurality Social Credit candidate William Morrison was just over 2000 votes, putting 
Hoadley a distant second place in the standings out of four candidates. His record 26 year straight career in the legislature came to an end.
Hoadley served as an elected member of the executive for the Western Livestock Union. He died in 1955 in Victoria, British Columbia.org/pal:/MM9.1.1/FLPR-4D5
The town of Hoadley, Alberta was named in his honor.






