[[Antipyretic]]

CATEGORIES: Antipyretics

Antipyretics   Antipyretics cause the hypothalamus to override an interleukin-induced increase in temperature. The body then works to lower the temperature, resulting in a reduction in fever.
Most antipyretic medications have other purposes. The most common antipyretics in the United States are ibuprofen and aspirin, which are used primarily as pain relievers. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are antipyretic, anti-inflammatory, and pain relievers.
There is some debate over the appropriate use of such medications, as fever is part of the body's immune response to infection.

Non-pharmacological treatment

Bathing or sponging with lukewarm or cool water can effectively reduce body temperature in those with heat illness but not usually in those with fever.

Medications

Many medications have antipyretic effects and thus are useful for fever but not heat illness, including:

Plants

Traditional use of higher plants with antipyretic properties is a common worldwide feature of many ethnobotanical cultural systems. In ethnobotany, plants with naturally occurring antipyretic properties are commonly referred to as febrifuges.E.; Raffauf, R.F. De Plantis Toxicariis e Mundo Novo Tropicale Commentationes. XXXIX. Febrifuges of northwest Amazonia.  Harvard Papers in Botany Vol. 5, pp. 52-68. 1994. Shah  and Avinash K. Seth Medicinal Plants as a Source of Anti-Pyretic Agents – A Review   

In children

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) notes that improper dosing is one of the biggest problems in giving acetaminophen (paracetamol) to children. 
Due to concerns about Reye syndrome, the U.K. NHS,Reye's syndrome - Prevention the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the U.S. Surgeon General, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommend that aspirin and combination products containing aspirin not be given to children or teenagers during episodes of fever-causing illnesses.S. Children However, the decreased use of Aspirin with the converse increased use of Acetaminophen/Paracetamol has been linked to the increase in asthma and other autoimmune disorders by several studies. Physicians recommending Acetaminophen/Paracetamol should use caution and be especially attentive to any genetic or environmental predisposition to asthma or other autoimmune disorders.




