[[Peter Wallace]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, Australian rugby league players, Australian people of Scottish descent, Scotland national rugby league team players, Penrith Panthers players, Brisbane Broncos players, New South Wales City Origin rugby league team players, New South Wales Rugby League State of Origin players, Prime Minister's XIII players, Rugby league halfbacks, Rugby league five-eighths, Rugby league hookers, Sportspeople from Melbourne, People from the Blue Mountains (New South Wales), Living people

Peter James Wallace (born 16 October 1985 in MelbournePlayer Profile:  A Scotland international and New South Wales City and State of Origin representative halfback, he also previously played for the Brisbane Broncos club.

Background

Wallace was born in Melbourne and moved to Blaxland, New South Wales as a baby. He attended Blaxland East Public School and began playing rugby league for Lower Mountains JRLC under-7s before moving to St Marys JRLC at the age of 12.

Penrith Panthers

Wallace made his NRL debut at Canberra Stadium against the Canberra Raiders in Round 17 of the 2005 season. In Round 3, 2007, against the Brisbane Broncos, Wallace kicked a 44-metre field goal in golden point, with Penrith winning 29–28.
Wallace was the subject of controversy when he was dropped to NSWRL Premier League in Round 15 of the NRL competition in 2007. Penrith coach Matthew Elliott moved Wallace to the premier league on what he claimed to be poor form. However Wallace had earned a man of the match award only two weeks before, but had a poor game the week later. The controversy came when claims were made that Wallace was dropped due to the fact that he had signed with the Broncos, but team-mate Joel Clinton, who was also Broncos bound, wasn't dropped. There were rumours from the media, that Wallace wanted out of the Penrith Panthers to go to Brisbane mid-season. Wallace denied these claims, and wanted to fulfill his contract with the Panthers, even if it was in premier league.
It remains unclear how the move to the Broncos came about.

Brisbane Broncos

Wallace's career at the Broncos started in 2008. He guided his new club to a first round defeat of his old club, the Panthers, before picking up consecutive "Man of The Match" awards in his next two matches, also wins for Brisbane. Wallace performed very strongly while Darren Lockyer was injured and provided much needed stability in the Broncos halves and a good kicking game.
Wallace was selected for the City vs Country Origin match in 2008. In May, 2008, Wallace was selected as halfback for New South Wales for game I of State of Origin on 21 May at ANZ Stadium. With his first touch of the ball, he made a line break. He also had a hand in two tries and placed a pin point accurate kick for Anthony Quinn to score the second try of the night. He made only one error and took many hits from Queensland players, making 29 tackles.
Wallace was selected for the Blues again in Game II (playing on his normal home ground) before he ruptured a testicle and missed Game III. After State of Origin ended Wallace was reunited with halves partner Darren Lockyer at the Broncos. Wallace's great form from the start of the season had slightly been lost but he still remains to be a future star and a great prospect for the Brisbane Broncos. On 15 July 2008, Wallace extended his contract with the Brisbane Broncos until 2012.
On 20 October 2008, Wallace was arrested after a scuffle with security at a pub in Mooloolaba, Queensland, where it was believed he was celebrating his 23rd birthday.
Under the "grandfather rule", Wallace was eligible to play for Scotland in the 2008 Rugby League World Cup, but was unable to make the team due to treatment for injuries. He was selected for City in the  City vs Country match on 8  May 2009.
In May 2009, he was named in the 17 man squad to represent New South Wales in the opening State of Origin match on 3 June 2009, in Melbourne.
Wallace was injured at the time of the Broncos' 2009 post-Origin slump and upon his return the club enjoyed its best winning streak in 5 years, reaching the finals. However in Brisbane's second play-off win Wallace broke his ankle, meaning he would miss the grand final qualifier.
thumb|150px|right|Wallace while playing for Scotland at the 2013 World Cup.

Statistics

(* denotes season still competing.)

Footnotes




