[[Nepalese royal massacre]]

CATEGORIES: 2001 in Nepal, Deaths by firearm in Nepal, Mass murder in 2001, Massacres in Nepal, Murder–suicides, Nepalese royalty, Regicides, Royalty who committed suicide, Conspiracy theories

The Nepalese royal massacre occurred on 1 June 2001, at a house in the grounds of the Narayanhity Royal Palace, then the residence of the Nepalese monarchy.  The heir to the throne, Prince Dipendra, killed nine members of his family and himself. The dead included King Birendra of Nepal and Queen Aishwarya. 
Prince Dipendra became de jure King of Nepal upon his father's death and died after three days after the massacre without recovering from a coma.
There are claims like that of a junior army staff deputed at the Narayanhiti Palace that Dipendra was already dead before being declared as the King.
Gyanendra became king after the massacre and the death of Prince Dipendra. The current living King of Nepal and Greater Nepal is Raja Mahendra Chand of Kumaon, married to Rani Gita Chand and they have three children. Rajkumari Aakanksha Chand, Rajkumari Mallika Chand and Rajkumar Aryan Chand.

Overview of events

According to reports, Dipendra had been drinking heavily, smoked large quantities of Hashish (a drug extracted from the Cannabis plant) and had "misbehaved" with a guest, which resulted in his father, King Birendra, telling his oldest son to leave the party. The drunken Dipendra was taken to his room by his brother Prince Nirajan and cousin Prince Paras.
One hour later, Dipendra returned to the party armed with an H&K MP5, a Franchi SPAS-12 and an M16 and fired a single shot into the ceiling before turning the gun on his father, King Birendra. Seconds later, Dipendra shot one of his aunts. He then shot his uncle Dhirendra in the chest at point-blank range when he tried to stop Dipendra. During the shooting, Prince Paras suffered slight injuries and managed to save at least three royals, including two children, by pulling a sofa over them. During the attack, Dipendra darted in and out of the room firing shots each time.
Excerpts from the two-member committee report by Chief Justice Keshab Prasad Upadhyaya say that Nepal's late King Birendra had made an abortive last-minute attempt to shoot at his son, then Crown Prince Dipendra as the latter fired indiscriminately on the royals at the Narayanhity Palace on the night of June 1, according to the details of the official probe report released in Kathmandu. 
After getting injured in the first attack by Dipendra, the late King Birendra picked up the 9mm caliber MP-5K automatic sub-machine gun, which the former had thrown before entering the billiards room in the palace for the second time and firing at the monarch and others, the late king's sister Princess Shova Shahi is quoted as having told the high-level probe panel.
However, Shahi snatched the weapon from her brother and pulled out the magazine thinking that it was the only weapon Dipendra had. 
Corroborating Shova Shahi's version, Prince Paras is quoted as having said, "She (Shova) must have thought that it was the only weapon Dai (Dipendra) had but I saw that he had much more weapons." 
His mother, Queen Aishwarya, who came into the room when the first shots were fired, left quickly, looking for help.
Dipendra's mother Aishwarya and his brother Nirajan confronted him in the garden of the palace, where they were both fatally shot multiple times. Dipendra then proceeded to a small bridge over a stream running through the palace, where he shot himself.
Lamteri, a junior army staff at Narayanhiti Palace, claimed that he saw Dipendra, who got six bullet shots in his back and one on the left hand, in an inebriated state in his private room before the royal family was killed.

Victims of the massacre

Wounded

Aftermath

Dipendra was proclaimed king while in a coma, but he died on 4 June 2001, after a three-day reign. Gyanendra was appointed regent for the three days, then ascended the throne himself after Dipendra died.
While Dipendra lived, Gyanendra maintained that the deaths were the result of an "accidental discharge of an automatic weapon". However, he later said that he made this claim due to "legal and constitutional hurdles", since under the constitution, and by tradition, Dipendra could not have been charged with murder had he survived. A full investigation took place, and Crown Prince Dipendra was found to be responsible for the killing.
A two-man committee comprising Keshav Prasad Upadhaya, the Supreme Court Chief Justice, and Taranath Ranabhat, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, carried out the week-long investigation into the massacre.

Rumours regarding cause of massacre

The widely circulated rumour is that Prince Dipendra was angry over a marriage dispute.
Prince Dipendra also courted Supriya Shah, who was the granddaughter of Queen Mother Ratna's own sister. Queen Aishwarya, though initially against the relationship due to family ties and the view that Supriya would be incompetent as a queen, which was heard by an aide. However, she was approved more than Devyani Rana by the Queen since if Supriya become the queen, the Shah dynasty would have to share its power with the Ranas that would result in the formation of a political alliance.

Ceremonial response

On 11 June 2001, a Hindu katto ceremony was held to exorcise or banish the spirit of the dead King from Nepal. A brahmin Durga Prasad Sapkota, dressed as Birendra to symbolise the late King, rode an elephant out of Kathmandu and into symbolic exile, taking many of the actual belongings of the King with him.go.Tymk41wltKI

Conspiracy theories

Many Nepalese people are skeptical of the official report that the then Crown Prince Dipendra carried out the murder.
Despite the fact that two survivors have publicly confirmed that Dipendra did the shooting, as was documented in a BBC documentary, the chain of events is disputed by some Nepalese. After the monarchy was abolished through a populist uprising there have been several claims refuting the official report, among them is a recent book published in Nepal named Raktakunda recounting the massacre. It looks at the incident through the eyes of one of the surviving witnesses, Queen Mother Ratna's personal maid, identified in the book as Shanta. The book, which the author says is a "historical novel", posits that two men masked as Crown Prince Dipendra fired the shots that led to the massacre. Shanta's husband, Trilochan Acharya, also a royal palace employee, was killed along with 10 royal family members, including the entire family of King Birendra. According to her,there were different people in the disguise of C.P. Dipendra.  Probably the people she saw were masked. She has claimed that she had been watching the whole incident, hiding, from one of the windows and her husband too was killed. She has claimed that she HAD seen many people who were the same as Dipendra. She also has questions which the public have-how could Dipendra kill himself with a machine gun? If he would have killed himself, he needed to aim at himself with the gun probably in his foot and shoot himself with his toes. That never was possible because he wasn't bare footed. Why were the remains of the site where the massacre had taken place destroyed?    The Nepalese people have been left in jeopardy. They have never known about the precise truth that had enveloped the entire nation with sorrow. The reports are based on the sayings of witnesses but it has to be said that all the witnesses are not unanimous about this because the witnesses we know to have been investigated are all Royal members and the claims and voices of other witnesses who were general workers are never issued or entertained by the government. They remain untold. And the public is never provided with a precise evidence, no footage, just claims and sayings....  In addition to details of the royal massacre, Shanta alleged many other cover-ups by the royal family, including a claim that the previous king King Mahendra committed suicide.

Documentary

The massacre story featured in the third season of the documentary series Zero Hour, based on a reconstruction of the event taken from surviving eyewitnesses.



Notes




