[[Climate of Florida]]

CATEGORIES: Climate of Florida

The climate of the north and central parts of the US state of Florida is humid subtropical. South Florida has a tropical climate.Köppen Classification Map, clearly showing South Florida has a tropical climate (image will take a few seconds to load) There is a defined rainy season from June through September, which are the months most at risk of landfalling tropical cyclones. Thunderstorms lead to several lightning-strike deaths per year statewide. Florida is one of the most tornado-prone states in the United States. During mid summer, dust emanating from Africa affects the state. 
Between October and May, Florida is often dry. Occasionally, fronts  sweep through the northern and central parts of the state which brings some light rainfall. Towards the end of the dry season in the spring, brush fires become common statewide. In winters where an El Niño climate cycle exists, rainfall increases while temperatures are cooler statewide. On average, most areas of Florida do not experience any type of frozen precipitation, although a few areas north Florida can see a fleeting period of snow or sleet every few years to decade. 
The Gulf Stream running through the Florida Straits and off the Florida East Coast keep temperatures moderate across the southern peninsula year round, with few extremes in temperature.

Pressure

The low pressure measured from an extratropical cyclone was 28.84 inches/976.7 hPa during the Storm of the Century (1993). Tallahassee Weather Extremes. Retrieved on 2007-06-03.   From a tropical cyclone, the lowest pressure measured was 26.35&nbliest, Costliest, and Most Intense United States Tropical Cyclones from 1851 to 2006 (AND OTHER FREQUENTLY REQUESTED HURRICANE FACTS).] Retrieved on 2007-06-03.[/ref]  The highest known pressure measured statewide was 30.74 inches/1041.1 hPa in Tallahassee on February 5, 1996 and January 4, 1979.

Wind

Over the entire year, winds average out of the north across the panhandle and near Orlando, out of the west at Gainesville and Jacksonville, and generally out of the east elsewhere. During the summer months, the average wind pattern implies a surface ridge axis normally lies across central Florida, with easterly winds from Tampa southward and southwest winds across northern Florida, once Orlando is not considered for the distribution. The peak wind gust during the 1930 through 1997 period was 115 mph/100 knots at Miami International Airport during Hurricane Andrew. Climatic Wind Data for the United States. Retrieved on 2007-06-02. 

African dust outbreaks

In July the tradewinds south of the northward-moving subtropical ridge expand northwestward into Florida. On occasion, dust from the Sahara moving around the southern periphery of the ridge moves into the state, suppressing rainfall and changing the sky from a blue to a white appearance and leads to an increase in red sunsets. Its presence negatively impacts air quality across the Southeastern United States during the summer, by adding to the count of airborne particulates. This is in sharp contrast to the normally clean air over Florida and the southeastern USA, which on average in the cleanest air in the USA. Science Daily. African Dust Called A Major Factor Affecting Southeast U.S. Air Quality. Retrieved on 2007-06-10.  Over 50% of the African dust that reaches the United States affects Florida. Microbes And The Dust They Ride In On Pose Potential Health Risks. Retrieved on 2007-06-10.  Since 1970, dust outbreaks have worsened due to periods of drought in Africa. There is a large variability in the dust transport to the Caribbean and Florida from year to year.state. Study Says African Dust Affects Climate in U.S., Caribbean. Retrieved on 2007-06-10.  Dust events are possibly linked to a decline in the health of coral reefs across the Caribbean and Florida, primarily since the 1970s.U. S. Geological Survey. Coral Mortality and African Dust. Retrieved on 2007-06-10. 

Winter

On average, wintertime is mild to warm throughout Florida. Lows range from  
Three "hardiness" zones exist. The warmest is South Florida, but includes Tampa, Melbourne and Orlando. Low temperatures range from 

Summer

During the summer, minima range from near  at Monticello in 1931.

Fog

Like the remainder of the Southeastern United States, Florida has a winter maximum in dense fog conditions. Unlike the remainder of the region, the maximum in Florida contains roughly half of the annual occurrences per year, on average. Its summer minimum is less than the remainder of the Southeast. The annual number of heavy fog days (with visibility of  or less) has ranged from 50 in Tallahassee, to 1 in Key West, the least foggy region in the state. The two types of fog that are mostly common in Florida are advection and radiational. Fog can be hazardous  to early morning commuters. On January 9, 2008, when fog on Interstate 4 combined with smoke from a nearby fire reduced visibility to nearly zero. As a result, five individuals died in a 70-car pileup. B. Johnson, W. G. Schmitz, and J. Blume. Retrieved on 2007-06-07. Seaman. Florida's Climate and Weather. Retrieved on 2012-16-03.

Precipitation

Averages

Statewide, the highest rainfall amounts occur during the summer months. In northern Florida, there is a weak winter secondary maximum while statewide the driest months of the year are during the spring.  During El Niño, Florida sees greater rainfall between November and March.  Due to the lack of the secondary maximum across the peninsula, a distinct dry season is seen in the averages from winter through spring. This dry season provokes brush fires annually as temperatures rise during the late spring, before they fade during early June as the rainy season gets underway.

Extremes

The heaviest rainfall to occur in 24 hours was measured in Yankeetown during Hurricane Easy (1950), . This is also the highest known point storm total maximum related to any tropical cyclone which has impacted Florida,David Roth. Tropical Cyclone Point Maxima. Retrieved on 2007-06-02. and by itself would be the highest known rainfall total for any month from any location within Florida. This rainfall amount remained the national 24-hour rainfall record until Tropical Storm Claudette (1979). Hurricane Easy (1950) Rainfall Graphic. Retrieved on 2007-06-02.  Heavy rainfall events have fallen due to stalled fronts near the state as well, and occur during the March through May and October through November timeframe.
The wettest month recorded at a Florida climate station was during May 1891 when Gainesville, Florida received  fell at Key West. Key West Precipitation Data. Retrieved on 2007-06-02.
One of the worst years for wildfires was in 1998, at the end of an El Nino cycle. 480 wildfires consumed 
A statewide drought existed until 2009, that began in November 2005, a month after Hurricane Wilma's passage through the state.Drought Saps Fla. Growers, Golf Courses Retrieved on 2007-06-02.  The previous significant drought occurred in 2000, which was the state's driest year on record. SEVERE DROUGHT CONDITIONS/FIRE DANGER LIKELY TO PERSIST THROUGHOUT CENTRAL FLORIDA. Retrieved on 2007-06-02.

Snowfall

The earliest recorded occurrence of snow or sleet occurred in 1774.
The state record for snowfall is 

Thunderstorms

Florida reports more thunderstorms than any other US state. Some places report in excess of 90 thunderstorm days per year, making Florida one of the most thundery regions outside of the tropics. 
Florida receives the highest density of lightning strikes within the United States.  Several deaths per year are blamed on lightning, making lightning one of the deadliest weather-related phenomenon in the state.  However, since 1992, the number of lightning deaths has been slowly dropping despite a rising population, suggesting that lightning awareness programs are effective.  The most likely targets of lightning strikes are construction workers and others who work outside, though 12 percent of the cases occurred indoors to people using electronic devices.
Severe thunderstorms can sometimes produce hail, very strong straight line winds and tornadoes. Very heavy rainfall from thunderstorms can result in flash flooding. Thunderstorms occur most often during the summer but can occur at any time of the year. 

Tornadoes

There are more tornadoes per square mile in Florida than any other state.ncdc.gov/oa/climate/severeweather/tornadoes.html
Downloaded Sunday, 04-Aug-2013 18:25:05 EDT    
Last Updated Monday, 20-May-2013 10:45:01 EDT
 However, these tornadoes tend to be much weaker and short-lived than in other states like the Midwest or Great Plains.  There are fewer deaths and property damage than are experienced by some other states.  Strong tornadoes do occasionally form in Florida, usually in conjunctions with a cold frontal passage in the winter or spring.  A total of 42 people died in February 1998 from the deadliest such tornado outbreak in Central Florida, which occurred during the nighttime hours.

Tropical cyclones

The earliest in the year a tropical cyclone has struck the sunshine state was the Groundhog Day Tropical Storm in 1952. The latest impact was from a hurricane which struck near Tampa on December 1, 1925. The strongest hurricane to strike Florida was the Labor Day Hurricane of 1935. Hurricane Easy in 1950 produced the wettest known point total from any tropical cyclone.  The record number of hurricane strikes on the state in one season is four in 2004. Atlantic Tracks File 1851-2006. Retrieved on 2007-06-02. 
Tropical cyclones have affected Florida in every month of the year but January and March. Nearly one-third of the cyclones affected the state in September, and nearly three-fourths of the storms affected the state between August and October, which coincides with the peak of the hurricane season. Portions of the coastline have the lowest return period, or the frequency at which a certain intensity or category of hurricane can be expected within 86 mi (139 km) of a given location, in the country. Monroe County was struck by 26 hurricanes since 1926, which is the greatest total for any county in the United States.

Effect of climate cycles

El Niño has the following effects on Florida climate: above average rainfall in the spring. 
La Niña has the following effects: often dry conditions prevail in late fall, winter and early spring, increased risk of wildfires in spring and summer months, the temperatures average slightly above normal, and the chance of hurricane activity increases substantially.
Long term forecasts are made based on these effects. However, they are easily overridden, in winter, by the Arctic oscillation and North Atlantic oscillations, which can only be predicted about two weeks in advance. These can drop the temperature noticeably from seasonal norms.

Climates of selected Florida cities

The climate regime for much of the state is humid subtropical (Köppen Cfa), though portions of the Gold Coast of southeast Florida, as well as all of the Florida Keys, qualify as tropical wet-and-dry (Köppen Aw).
A narrow eastern part of the state including Orlando and Jacksonville receives between 2,400 and 2,800 hours of sunshine annually. The rest of the state, including Miami, receives between 2,800 and 3,200 hours annually.








