[[Michael Bloomberg]]

CATEGORIES: Michael Bloomberg, 1942 births, Living people, 20th-century American businesspeople, 20th-century American writers, 20th-century politicians, 21st-century American businesspeople, 21st-century American writers, American aviators, American billionaires, American financial businesspeople, American financial company founders, American gun control advocates, American mass media owners, American memoirists, American people of Belarusian-Jewish descent, American people of Russian-Jewish descent, American political writers, American Reform Jews, Anti-obesity activists, Businesspeople from Massachusetts, Businesspeople from New York City, Eagle Scouts, Giving Pledgers, Harvard Business School alumni, Independent politicians in the United States, Jewish American mayors, Jewish American philanthropists, Jewish American writers, Johns Hopkins University alumni, Massachusetts Democrats, Massachusetts Republicans, Mayors of New York City, New York Democrats, New York Republicans, News agency founders, People from Upper East Side, Writers from Boston, Massachusetts, Writers from New York City

Michael Rubens Bloomberg (born February 14, 1942) is an American business magnate, politician and philanthropist. He served as the 108th Mayor of New York City, holding office for three consecutive terms beginning with his first election in 2001. With a net worth of $33 billion, he is the eleventh-richest person in the United States and the sixteenth-wealthiest in the world.
He is the founder and 88% owner of Bloomberg L.P., the global financial data and media company notable for its Bloomberg Terminal.
Bloomberg began his career at the securities brokerage Salomon Brothers before forming his company in 1981 and spending the next twenty years as its chairman and CEO. He also served as chairman of the board of trustees at his alma mater Johns Hopkins University from 1996 to 2002. A Democrat before seeking elective office, Bloomberg switched his party registration in 2001 to run for mayor as a Republican. He defeated opponent Mark Green in a close election held just weeks after the September 11 terrorist attacks. Bloomberg won a second term in 2005 and left the Republican Party two years later. He campaigned to change the city's term limits law and was elected to his third term in 2009 as an independent candidate on the Republican ballot line.
He was frequently mentioned as a possible candidate for the U.S. presidential elections in 2008 and 2012,
On January 31, 2014, United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon announced that he had appointed Mr. Bloomberg as his Special Envoy for Cities and Climate Change, assisting him in consultations with mayors and related key stakeholders to raise political will and mobilize action among cities as part of a long-term strategy to advance efforts on climate change.

Early life

Michael Bloomberg was born at St. Elizabeth's Hospital, in the Brighton neighborhood of Boston, on February 14, 1942. "Charlotte Bloomberg, Mayor Bloomberg's Mother, Dies at 102". Daily News (New York).  Retrieved July 12, 2011.
The family lived in Allston, Massachusetts, until Bloomberg was two years old. They moved to Brookline, Massachusetts, for the next two years, finally settling in Medford, a Boston suburb, where he lived until after he graduated from college.
Bloomberg attended Johns Hopkins University, where he joined the fraternity Phi Kappa Psi. In 1962, as a sophomore, he conceived of and  constructed the schools mascot, the bluejay. He was inside the costume when it debuted at the Hopkins Cornell lacrosse game that year. He graduated in 1964 with a Bachelor of Science in electrical engineering."Office of the Mayor: Biography". The City of New York. In 1966 he received his Master of Business Administration from Harvard Business School.

Business career

In 1973, Bloomberg became a general partner at Salomon Brothers, a bulge-bracket Wall Street investment bank, where he headed equity trading and, later, systems development. In 1981, Salomon Brothers was boughtBloomberg, Michael (1997). Bloomberg by Bloomberg, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. "The Last Supper", ISBN 0-471-15545-4 and Bloomberg was laid off from the investment bank and given a $10 million severance package. His business plan was based on the realization that Wall Street (and the financial community generally) was willing to pay for high quality business information, delivered as quickly as possible and in as many usable forms possible, via technology (e.g., graphs of highly specific trends). Goldberg (January 2009). The Battle for Wall Street, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. "Case Study: Michael R. Bloomberg—Democratization of Information", ISBN 0470222794, 9780470222799 In 1982, Merrill Lynch became the new company's first customer, installing 22 of the company's Market Master terminals and investing $30 million in the company. The company was renamed Bloomberg L.P. in 1987. By 1990, it had installed 8,000 terminals. Bloomberg by Bloomberg, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., ISBN 0-471-15545-4 Over the years, ancillary products including Bloomberg News, Bloomberg Message, and Bloomberg Tradebook were launched.
As of 2012, the company had more than 310,000 terminals worldwide.
Bloomberg wrote an autobiography, with help from Bloomberg News Editor-in-Chief Matthew Winkler, called Bloomberg by Bloomberg.

Wealth

In September 2013, Forbes reported Bloomberg's wealth as $33 billion and ranked him as the 13th richest person in the world. In March 2012, Forbes reported Bloomberg's wealth at $22 billion, ranking him 20th in the world and 11th in the United States. In March 2009, Forbes reported Bloomberg's wealth at $16 billion, a gain of $4.5 billion over the previous year, enjoying the world's biggest increase in wealth in 2009. At that time, there were only four fortunes in the U.S. that were larger (although the Wal-Mart family fortune is split among four people). He moved from 142nd to 17th in the Forbes list of the world's billionaires in only two years (March 2007 – March 2009)."The World's Billionaires", Forbes, March 8, 2007he is "The World's Billionaires", Forbes, March 1, 2009

Elections

2001 election

In 2001, the incumbent mayor of New York City, Rudy Giuliani, was ineligible for re-election, as the city limited the mayoralty to two consecutive terms. Several well-known New York City politicians aspired to succeed him. Bloomberg, a lifelong member of the Democratic Party, decided to run for mayor as a member of the Republican Party ticket.
Voting in the primary began on the morning of September 11, 2001. The primary was postponed later that day. In the rescheduled primary, Bloomberg defeated Herman Badillo, a former Congressman, to become the Republican nominee. Meanwhile, the Democratic primary did not produce a first-round winner. After a runoff, the Democratic nomination went to New York City Public Advocate Mark J. Green.
In the general election, Bloomberg received Giuliani's endorsement. He also had a huge spending advantage. Although New York City's campaign finance law restricts the amount of contributions which a candidate can accept, Bloomberg chose not to use public campaign funds and therefore his campaign was not subject to these restrictions. He spent $73 million of his own money on his campaign, outspending Green five to one. One of the major themes of his campaign was that, with the city's economy suffering from the effects of the World Trade Center attacks, it needed a mayor with business experience.
In addition to serving as the Republican nominee, Bloomberg had the ballot line of the controversial Independence Party, in which "Social Therapy" leaders Fred Newman and Lenora Fulani exert strong influence. Some say that endorsement was important, as Bloomberg's votes on that line exceeded his margin of victory over Green. (Under New York's fusion rules, a candidate can run on more than one party's line and combine all the votes received on all lines. Green, the Democrat, also had the ballot line of the Working Families Party. He also created an independent line called Students First whose votes were combined with those on the Independence line). Another factor was the vote in Staten Island, which has traditionally been far friendlier to Republicans than the rest of the city. Bloomberg handily beat Green in that borough, taking 75 percent of the vote there. Overall, Bloomberg won 50 percent to 48 percent.
Bloomberg's election marked the first time in New York City history that two different Republicans had been elected mayor consecutively. New York City has not been won by a Republican in a presidential election since Calvin Coolidge won in 1924. Bloomberg is considered a social liberal, who is pro-choice, in favor of legalizing same-sex marriage and an advocate for stricter gun control laws.
Despite the fact that 68 percent of New York City's registered voters are Democrats, Bloomberg decided the city should host the 2004 Republican National Convention. The Convention drew thousands of protesters, many of them local residents angry over the Iraq war and other issues. The Police Department arrested approximately 1,800 protesters, but according to The New York Times, more than 90 percent of the cases were later dismissed or dropped for lack of evidence.

2005 election

Bloomberg was re-elected mayor in November 2005 by a margin of 20 percent, the widest margin ever for a Republican mayor of New York.
Bloomberg spent over $1 million on his campaign by late October 2005 and was projected to exceed the record of $74 million he spent on the previous election. In late 2004 or early 2005, Bloomberg gave the Independence Party of New York $250,000 to fund a phone bank seeking to recruit volunteers for his re-election campaign.
Former Bronx Borough President Fernando Ferrer won the Democratic nomination to oppose Bloomberg in the general election. Thomas Ognibene sought to run against Bloomberg in the Republican Party's primary election. "Ognibene Loses Bid for Line on Ballot Against Bloomberg". The New York Times. Bloomberg's campaign successfully challenged enough of the signatures Ognibene had submitted to the Board of Elections to prevent Ognibene from appearing on ballots for the Republican primary. Instead, Ognibene ran only on the Conservative Party ticket. "Ognibene Will Fight Bloomberg All the Way to November Election". The New York Sun. April 27, 2005. Ognibene accused Bloomberg of betraying Republican Party ideals, a feeling echoed by others. "Bloomberg's 'Republican' Problem". The New York Sun. September 19, 2005. "GOP Mayors Reign Over Liberal NYC". CBS News. October 22, 2005. "Democrats Celebrate as Voters Pile Woe Upon Woe for Bush". The Times.  November 10, 2005. "Mike Takes It on Chin from MSG & Own Party on the City". Daily News (New York). February 13, 2005. "Bloomberg News: A 'Subway Series' for President?" National Public Radio. June 20, 2007.
Bloomberg opposed the confirmation of John Roberts as Chief Justice of the United States. Though a Republican at the time, Bloomberg is a staunch supporter of abortion rights and did not believe that Roberts was committed to maintaining Roe v. Wade.
In addition to receiving Republican support, Bloomberg obtained the endorsements of several prominent Democrats: former Democratic Mayor Ed Koch; former Democratic governor Hugh Carey; former Democratic City Council Speaker Peter Vallone, and his son, Councilman Peter Vallone, Jr.; former Democratic Congressman Floyd Flake (who had previously endorsed Bloomberg in 2001), and Brooklyn Borough President Marty Markowitz.

2009 election

On October 2, 2008, Bloomberg announced that he would seek to extend the city's term limits law and run for a third mayoral term in 2009, arguing that a leader of his field is needed during the Wall Street financial crisis. "Handling this financial crisis while strengthening essential services ... is a challenge I want to take on," Bloomberg said at a news conference. "So should the City Council vote to amend term limits, I plan to ask New Yorkers to look at my record of independent leadership and then decide if I have earned another term."
Bloomberg's bid for a third term generated some controversy. Civil libertarians such as former New York Civil Liberties Union Director Norman Siegel and New York Civil Rights Coalition Executive Director Michael Meyers joined with local politicians such as New York State Senator Eric Adams to protest the term limits extension.
Bloomberg's opponent was Democratic and Working Families Party nominee Bill Thompson, who had been New York City Comptroller for the past eight years and before that, President of the New York City Board of Education.
After the release of Independence Party campaign filings in January 2010, it was reported that Bloomberg had made two $600,000 contributions from his personal account to the Independence Party on October 30 and November 2, 2009.
This prompted an investigation beginning in February 2010 by the office of New York County District Attorney Cyrus Vance, Jr. into possible improprieties.

2013 election endorsements

On September 13, 2013, Bloomberg announced that he would not endorse any of then current candidates to succeed him. On his radio show, he stated, "I don't want to do anything that complicates it for the next mayor. And that's one of the reasons I've decided I'm just not going to make an endorsement in the race." He added, "I want to make sure that person is ready to succeed, to take what we've done and build on that."
Prior to the announcement in an interview in New York magazine, Bloomberg praised the New York Times for its endorsement of Christine Quinn and Joe Lhota as their favorite candidates in the Democratic and Republican primaries. Quinn came in third in the Democratic primary and Lhota won the Republican primary.
Earlier in the month, Bloomberg was chastised in the press for his remarks regarding Democratic mayoral candidate Bill de Blasio's campaign methods.
 Well, no, no, I mean he's making an appeal using his family to gain support. I think it's pretty obvious to anyone watching what he's been doing. I do not think he himself is racist. It's comparable to me pointing out I'm Jewish in attracting the Jewish vote. You tailor messages to your audiences and address issues you think your audience cares about. 

Mayoralty

Bloomberg assumed office as the 108th Mayor of New York City on January 1, 2002. He won re-election in 2005 and again in 2009. As mayor, Bloomberg initially struggled to gain high approval levels from the public; however, he subsequently developed and maintained high approval ratings.
Bloomberg's re-election means the Republicans have won the previous four mayoral elections (although Bloomberg's decision to leave the Republican Party and be declared an independent on June 19, 2007, resulted in the Republican Party's losing the mayor's seat prior to the expiration of his second term). Bloomberg joins Rudy Giuliani and Fiorello La Guardia as re-elected Republican mayors in the mostly Democratic city. (John Lindsay was also elected mayor of New York twice while a registered Republican; however, Lindsay did not receive the Republican Party nomination during his 1969 campaign for re-election but ran successfully on the Liberal ticket and joined the Democratic Party during his second term.)
Bloomberg has said that he wants public education reform to be the legacy of his first term and addressing poverty to be the legacy of his second."The Mayor's Legacy", Gotham Gazette, September 2006. Some According to the National Assessment of Educational Performance, fourth-grade reading scores from 2002 through 2009 rose nationally by 11 points. However, on May 10, 2010, The New York Times reported: According to the test NAEP, New York City eighth graders have shown no significant improvement math or reading since they began taking it in 2003, mirroring the largely flat performance of American eighth graders as a whole during that period. In the city, the lack of improvement held true across ethnic groups and also among lower-income students. 
Some
Bloomberg has chosen to apply a statistical, results-based approach to city management, appointing city commissioners based on their expertise and granting them wide autonomy in their decision-making. Breaking with 190 years of tradition, he implemented what New York Times political reporter Adam Nagourney called a "bullpen" open office plan, similar to a Wall Street trading floor, in which dozens of aides and managerial staff are seated together in a large chamber. The design is intended to promote accountability and accessibility. "Bloomberg Vows to Work at Center of Things". The New York Times.
In efforts to create "cutbacks" in the New York City Spending Bracket, Bloomberg declined to receive a city salary. He accepted a remuneration of $1 annually for his services. Michael Bloomberg – Billionaire Mayor, Biographiq. ISBN 1599860651, 978-1599860657 He maintains a public listing in the New York City phone directory,Mike McIntire "Who Has Bloomberg's Number? Anybody With a Phone Book", "The New York Times", July 13, 2005 and during his term as mayor, he lived not in Gracie Mansion – the official mayoral residence – but instead at his own home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, at 17 East 79th Street between Madison and Fifth Avenues. He owns additional homes in London; Bermuda; and Vail, Colorado.Chris Smith, "The Mayor and His Money", "NY Mag", September 26, 2005
Bloomberg stated that during his mayoralty, he rode the New York City Subway on a daily basis, particularly in the commute from his 79th Street home to his office at City Hall. An August 2007 story in The New York Times asserted that he was often seen chauffeured by two New York Police Department-owned SUVs to an express train station to avoid having to change from the local to the express trains on the IRT Lexington Avenue Line. Grynbaum "Mayor Takes the Subway — by Way of S.U.V.", "The New York Times", August 1, 2007 He also supported the construction of the 7 Subway Extension and the Second Avenue Subway; on December 20, 2013, Bloomberg took a ceremonial ride on a train to the new 34th Street station to celebrate a part of his legacy as mayor.

Political stands

Some of the policies Bloomberg advocates parallel those of either the Democratic or the Republican party platform. He is socially liberal or progressive, supporting abortion rights, same-sex marriage, some gun control measures, and a pathway to citizenship for illegal immigrants, for example. On economics, foreign, and domestic issues, Bloomberg tends to be conservative. He opposed a timeline for withdrawal from the Iraq War, and criticized those who favored one. Economically, he supports government involvement in issues such as public welfare, while being strongly in favor of free trade, pro-business, and describing himself as a fiscal conservative because he balanced the city's budget. The New York Times. July 2, 2007. Environmentally, he believes that man-made climate change is real. Bloomberg has been cited for not allowing many emergency officials who responded to the September 11, 2001, attacks to attend the tenth anniversary observation of that day.

Social issues

Bloomberg supports abortion rights, stating: "Reproductive choice is a fundamental human right and we can never take it for granted. On this issue, you're either with us or against us." He has criticized pro-choice politicians who support pro-life candidates.
Bloomberg supports governmental funding for embryonic stem cell research, calling the Republican position on the issue "insanity".
Bloomberg supports the strict drug laws of New York City. He has stated that he smoked marijuana in the past, and was quoted in a 2001 interview as saying "You bet I did. I enjoyed it." This led to a reported $500,000 advertising campaign by NORML, featuring his image and the quote. Bloomberg stated in a 2002 interview that he regrets the remark and does not believe that marijuana should be decriminalized.

Crime and punishment

In April 2006, along with Boston mayor Thomas Menino, Bloomberg co-founded Mayors Against Illegal Guns. A December 2013 press release by the group said the bipartisan coalition included over 1,000 mayors.
As mayor, Bloomberg increased the mandatory minimum sentence for illegal possession of a loaded handgun, saying: "Illegal guns don't belong on our streets and we're sending that message loud and clear. We're determined to see that gun dealers who break the law are held accountable, and that criminals who carry illegal loaded guns serve serious time behind bars." He opposes the death penalty, saying he would "rather lock somebody up and throw away the key and put them in hard labor."

Education

Bloomberg replaced the school board set up by the state with direct mayoral control over public education.

Environmental issues

In 2012, Travel + Leisure rated New York City the "Dirtiest American City," for having the most unremoved, publicly visible litter. The dubious honor was bestowed by votes of both magazine readership and city residents. Travelandleisure. In dealing with global warming and New York's role in it, Bloomberg has enacted a plan called PlaNYC: A Greener, Greater New York to fight global warming, protect the environment and prepare New York for the projected 1 million more people expected to be living in the city by the year 2030. His ideas have occasionally been rejected, such as the New York State Assembly's rejection of his idea for applying congestion pricing below 60th Street in Manhattan.
On February 21, 2013, Bloomberg spoke with oil tycoon, T. Boone Pickens in support of a new eco-friendly food truck. A press conference took place in front of city hall where the company, Neapolitan Express, explained how their mobile pizzeria emits 75% less greenhouse gases than trucks running on gas or diesel. The company is expected to launch early 2013.
Moore, Tina. "Neapolitan Express unveils city's first eco-friendly food truck powered by compressed natural gas", New York Daily News, New York, February 21, 2013.

Immigration

On issues of domestic and homeland security, Bloomberg has attacked social conservatives on immigration, calling their stance unrealistic, "We're not going to deport 12 million people, so let's stop this fiction. Let's give them permanent status." In 2006, Bloomberg stated on his weekly WABC radio show that illegal immigration does not strain the financial resources of New York City, since many immigrants are hard working and "do not avail themselves of services until their situation is dire"."Illegal Immigrants Don't Cost Taxpayers". newsmax. January 27, 2006. Retrieved January 12, 2011.

Health regulations

In January 2011, city schools began a pilot program which allows girls over 14 years old to be provided with Plan B emergency contraception without parental consent, unless parents opt out in writing. Beginning with five schools, the pilot had been expanded to thirteen schools by September 2012.
In September 2012, the city passed a law limiting the practice of circumcision among orthodox Jews. The legislation requires that at each event, the circumciser receives signed consent forms from the parents, acknowledging that they were notified of health risks associated with cleaning the wound by sucking blood from the male baby's organ. This regulation caused an outcry among the orthodox communities on the infringement of their religious freedom,
During the same month, the NYC Board of Health approved Bloomberg's proposal to ban the sale of many sweetened drinks more than 16 ounces (473 ml.) in volume. The limit would have applied to businesses such as restaurants and movie theaters, but did not apply to grocery stores, including 7-Eleven. Diet varieties of sweetened drinks were unaffected.
Bloomberg has been criticized for some of his policies which have been described by many as facilitating the creation of a nanny state. Others have pointed out the fact that the smoking rate has dropped quickly during Bloomberg's time in office (which has involved the banning of smoking in certain areas).
Criticism of Bloomberg's attempt to ban the sale of large soft drinks was picked up, mostly by Republican and libertarian commentators and politicians, as a line of attack in political campaigns around the United States. In one example, Virginia Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli and Kentucky Senator Rand Paul brought Big Gulps to a joint appearance for Cuccinelli's ultimately unsuccessful 2013 gubernatorial campaign to symbolize Bloomberg's efforts to restrict soft drink sales, criticizing the mayor for wanting "to buy the governor's office down here", a reference to pro-gun control advertisements his political action committee was running in the state.

Response to 9/11

Bloomberg believes that the September 11, 2001 attacks were not intended to be solitary events. When he assumed office, he set up a Counterterrorism Bureau which works along with the NYPD intelligence division to gather information about terrorism affecting New York worldwide.
After the April 15, 2013, Boston Marathon bombings, Bloomberg expressed the view that terrorism threats may require a reconsideration of civil liberties, saying "the people who are worried about privacy have a legitimate worry, but we live in a complex world where you're going to have to have a level of security greater than you did back in the olden days, if you will ... our laws and our interpretation of the Constitution, I think, have to change.""Mayor Bloomberg: Interpretation of U.S. Constitution Will 'Have to Change' Following Boston Bombings". TheBlaze. Retrieved August 16, 2013.

Economic issues

Bloomberg characterizes himself as a fiscal conservative for turning the city's $6 billion deficit into a $3 billion surplus; however, conservative PAC Club for Growth has criticized him because he increased property taxes and spending while doing so.

Bloomberg has expressed a distaste of taxes, stating, "Taxes are not good things, but if you want services, somebody's got to pay for them, so they're a necessary evil."
Bloomberg's self-described fiscal conservatism also led him to eliminate the existing $6-billion deficit when he assumed office. Bloomberg balanced the budget of New York City by raising property taxes and making cuts to city agencies.
Bloomberg is in favor of providing tax breaks to big corporations for the good of the whole community. As mayor, Bloomberg lobbied the CEO of Goldman Sachs to establish its headquarters across from Ground Zero by promising $1.65 billion in tax breaks. Regarding this deal, Bloomberg stated, "This York City is where the best want to live and work. So I told him of Goldman Sachs, 'We can help with minimizing taxes. Minimizing your rent. Improving security. But in the end, this is about people.'"
Bloomberg has had a less cordial relationship with unions as mayor. In 2002, when New York City's transit workers threatened to strike, Bloomberg responded by riding a mountain bike through the city to show how the city could deal with the transit strike by finding alternate means of transportation and not pandering to the unions.
Bloomberg is a staunch advocate of free trade and is strongly opposed to protectionism, stating, "The things that we have to worry about is this protectionist movement that has reared its head again in this country...." He worries about the growth of China and fears the lessening gap between the United States and other countries: "The rest of the world is catching up, and, there are people that say, surpassing us. I hope they are wrong. I hope those who think we are still in good shape are right. But nevertheless, the time to address these issues is right now."
Bloomberg has placed a strong emphasis on public health and welfare, adopting many liberal policies. As the mayor he made HIV, diabetes, and hypertension all top priorities. He extended the city's smoking ban to all commercial establishments and implemented a trans fat ban in restaurants.
Bloomberg has expressed concern about poverty and growing class divisions stating, "This society cannot go forward, the way we have been going forward, where the gap between the rich and the poor keeps growing."

Foreign policy

As mayor, Bloomberg made trips to Mexico, the United Kingdom, Ireland, and Israel in the first four months of 2007. In late 2007 he conducted an Asia trip that brought him to China, where he called for greater freedom of information to promote innovation. He attended the United Nations Climate Conference in Bali.
Initially, Bloomberg strongly supported the war in Iraq and the rationale for going in. He stated, "Don't forget that the war started not very many blocks from here"
His enthusiasm seemed to have lessened somewhat over the course of the war. In August 2005 he said, "I think everybody has very mixed emotions about the war that was started to find weapons of mass destruction and then they were not found."

Preservation and development issues

Bloomberg is a proponent of large-scale development. He has repeatedly come down in favor of projects such as the Atlantic Yards mega-development, the Hudson Yards redevelopment, and the Harlem rezoning proposal. "Harlem Councilwoman Opposes Rezoning Plan". The New York Times. On smaller-scale issues, Bloomberg usually takes the side of development as well. He favors the demolition of Admiral's RowBelenkaya, Veronika. "Navy Yard Museum Approved but 'Admiral's Row' Gotta Go"

2008 presidential campaign speculation

On February 27, 2008, Bloomberg announced that he would not run for president in 2008, and that he would endorse a candidate who takes an independent and non-partisan approach. Despite prior public statements by Bloomberg denying plans for a presidential run,Cardwell, Diane; Steinhauer, Jennifer (June 20, 2007). "Bloomberg Insists He Will Not Be Running". The New York Times. many pundits believed Bloomberg would announce a campaign at a later date. On January 7, 2008, he met at the University of Oklahoma with a bipartisan group, including (now former) Nebraska Senator Chuck Hagel and former Georgia Senator Sam Nunn, both of whom had been frequently mentioned as possible running mates – to pressure the major party candidates to promote national unity and reduce partisan gridlock. Speculation that Bloomberg would choose this forum to announce his candidacy proved to be unfounded. "Bloomberg Moves Closer to Running for President". The New York Times. (December 30, 2007).  "Bipartisan Group Eyes Independent Bid". The Washington Post. Other purported signs that he planned to run included:
In summer 2006, he met with Al From of the Democratic Leadership Council, a centrist group, to talk about the logistics of a possible run. "His American Dream". New York. December 11, 2006. After a conversation with Bloomberg, Republican Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska suggested that he and Bloomberg could run on a shared independent ticket for the presidency."Hagel-Bloomberg In '08? – You Never Know". Face the Nation. May 13, 2007.
On This Week on June 10, 2007, anchor George Stephanopoulos included panelist Jay Carney, who mentioned a conversation between Bloomberg and top staffers where he heard Bloomberg ask approximately how much a presidential campaign would cost. Carney said that one staffer replied, "Around $500 million." According to a Washington Post article, a $500 million budget would allow Bloomberg to circumvent many of the common obstacles faced by third party candidates seeking the White House.
Despite continued denials, a possible Bloomberg candidacy continued to be the subject of media attention, including a November Newsweek cover story. "The Revolutionary: He Has the Money and the Message To Upend 2008 – Michael Bloomberg's American Odyssey".  Newsweek. Retrieved November 8, 2007. During a private reception in December 2007, Bloomberg conducted a version of bingo in which guests were to guess the meaning of the numbers on a printed card. When Bloomberg asked the significance of 271, one guest answered correctly: the number of electoral votes received by George W. Bush in 2000. In January 2008, CNN reported that a source close to Bloomberg said that the mayor had launched a research effort to assess his chances of winning a potential presidential bid. According to the report, the unidentified source also stated that Bloomberg had set early March as a timetable for making a decision as to whether or not to run."Source: Bloomberg Research Effort Assessing Presidential Run". CNN. Retrieved January 10, 2008. On January 16, 2008, it was reported that Bloomberg's business interests were placed in "a sort of blind trust" because of his possible run for the presidency. His interests were put under the management of Quadrangle Group, co-founded by reported Bloomberg friend Steven Rattner, though Bloomberg would "continue to have control of and access to certain investment decisions". "Bloomberg Chooses a Friend To Manage His Fortune". The New York Times.  Retrieved February 23, 2009.
On January 18, 2008, the Associated Press reported that Bloomberg had a meeting in Austin, Texas, with Clay Mulford, a ballot-access expert and campaign manager for Ross Perot's third party presidential campaigns. Bloomberg denied that the meeting concerned a possible presidential campaign by him, stating "I'm not a candidate – it couldn't be clearer. Which of the words do you not understand?" On February 28, 2008, Bloomberg stated "I am not – and will not be – a candidate for president." He added that he is "hopeful that the current campaigns can rise to the challenge by offering truly independent leadership. The most productive role that I can serve is to push them forward, by using the means at my disposal to promote a real and honest debate.
At the same time that the presidential run was being considered, there was also some speculation that Bloomberg could be a candidate for the vice presidency in 2008. In a blog posting of June 21, 2007, The Politico's Ben Smith asked the question of whether a vice-presidential candidate can self-finance an entire presidential ticket. Many believed that Bloomberg would in fact be legally permitted to self-finance a campaign as the vice-presidential candidate.
Adding more fuel to the speculation that Bloomberg might consider a VP slot were a series of meetings he had in mid-August 2007 with former Georgia Senator Sam Nunn and later with Barack Obama on November 30, 2007. A May 17, 2008, breakfast meeting with John McCain led to speculation that Bloomberg might be on McCain's short list of possible VP candidates.

Rumored gubernatorial campaign

On November 6, 2007, the New York Post detailed efforts by New York Republicans to recruit Bloomberg to oppose then-incumbent Governor Eliot Spitzer in the 2010 election. Early polls indicated Bloomberg would defeat Spitzer in a landslide. (The potential 2010 match-up became moot when Spitzer resigned on March 17, 2008.)"Mike's Secret Bid To Run vs. Spitzer". New York Post. November 6, 2007. A March 20, 2008, poll of New York State voters had the Mayor topping newly ascended Governor David Paterson and former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani for the 2010 gubernatorial election."New York State Voters Have High Hopes for New Gov, Quinnipiac University Poll Finds; Bloomberg Tops List for Next Governor". Quinnipiac University. March 20, 2008. Bloomberg denied plans to run for the governorship in 2010, and did not seek the nomination."Q&A: Michael Bloomberg on Free Wi-Fi, Crime and Higher Office", Wired. December 20, 2007.

2012 presidential campaign speculation and role

In March 2010, Bloomberg's top political strategist Kevin Sheekey resigned from his mayoral advisory position and returned to Bloomberg LP, Bloomberg's company. It was speculated that the move would allow Sheekey to begin preliminary efforts for a Bloomberg presidential campaign in the 2012 election. An individual close to Bloomberg said, "the idea of continuing onward is not far from his Bloomberg's mind". "Bloomberg Aide's Exit Fuels Talk of Presidential Run". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved March 3, 2010.
In October 2010, The Committee to Draft Michael Bloomberg – which had attempted to recruit Bloomberg to run for the presidency in 2008 – announced it was relaunching its effort to persuade Bloomberg to wage a presidential campaign in 2012. "Dispatches from the Campaign Trail". New York Post. Retrieved October 15, 2010.  The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved October 14, 2010. The committee members insisted that they would persist in the effort in spite of Bloomberg's repeated denials of interest in seeking the presidency."Bloomberg: I'm Not Running For President", WCBS-TV (New York). October 14, 2010. Retrieved October 15, 2010.
While on the December 12, 2010, episode of Meet the Press, Bloomberg ruled out a run for the Presidency in 2012, stating: "I'm not going to run for president," further adding "I'm not looking at the possibility of running ... no way, no how."
On July 24, 2011, in the midst of Democrats' and Republicans' inability to agree on a budget plan and thus an increase in the federal debt limit, the Washington Post published a blog post about groups organizing third party approaches. It focused on Bloomberg as the best hope for a serious third-party presidential candidacy in 2012.
During an appearance on The Daily Show in June 2012, London Mayor Boris Johnson told host Jon Stewart that he didn't know why Bloomberg had ruled out a bid for the presidency in the upcoming election, declaring that he'd be "a great candidate".
Bloomberg had privately indicated he could not support Mitt Romney in 2012 because of Romney's positions on social issues such as abortion and gun control. The New York Times. Retrieved June 18, 2012. In the immediate aftermath of Hurricane Sandy in November 2012, Bloomberg penned an op-ed officially endorsing Barack Obama for President, citing Obama's policies on climate change."A Vote for a President to Lead on Climate Change" Bloomberg. Retrieved November 1, 2012.

Personal life

In 1975, Bloomberg married Yorkshire-born Susan Brown. ca. 1979) and Georgina (b. 1983), who were featured on Born Rich, a documentary film about the children of the extremely wealthy. Bloomberg divorced Brown in 1993, but he has said she remains his "best friend."
In 2010 Bloomberg was living with former New York state banking superintendent Diana Taylor.
Licensed as a commercial pilot,Airspace Above Hudson a Highway With Few Signs Bloomberg pilots an AW109 helicopter, and is near the top of the waiting list for an AW609 tiltrotor aircraft."In His Helicopter, Bloomberg Can Rule Skies, and Even Get to Albany" The New York Times, April 12, 2012. Retrieved April 17, 2012. Bloomberg was also a licensed amateur radio operator in his youth was proficient in Morse code and built ham radios.
His younger sister, Marjorie Tiven, has been Commissioner of the New York City Commission for the United Nations, Consular Corps and Protocol, since February 2002.

Philanthropy

According to a profile of Bloomberg in Fast Company, his Bloomberg Philanthropies foundation has five areas of focus: public health, the arts, government innovation, the environment, and education.Sridhar Pappu, "What's Next For Michael Bloomberg", Fast Company, August 8, 2011
According to the Chronicle of Philanthropy, Bloomberg, through his Bloomberg Philanthropies Foundation, donated and/or pledged $240 million in 2005, $60 million in 2006, $47 million in 2007, $150 million in 2009, $332 million in 2010 and $311 million in 2011. 5: Michael R. Bloomberg", The Chronicle of Philanthropy, February 6, 2012 2011 recipients included the Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health; World Lung Foundation and the World Health Organization. In 2013 it was reported that Bloomberg had donated $109.24 million in 556 grants and 61 countries to campaigns against tobacco.
According to The New York Times, Bloomberg was an "anonymous donor" to the Carnegie Corporation from 2001 to 2010, with gifts ranging from $5 million to $20 million each year. He continues to support the arts through his foundation.Kate Taylor, "Bloomberg Family Foundation to Support Arts", The New York Times, February 15, 2011
In 1996, Bloomberg endowed the William Henry Bloomberg Professorship at Harvard with a $3 million gift in honor of his father, who died in 1963, saying, "throughout his life, he recognized the importance of reaching out to the nonprofit sector to help better the welfare of the entire community.""Bloomberg Endows Professorship for Five Faculties", The Harvard University Gazette, September 19, 1996 Bloomberg also endowed his hometown synagogue, Temple Shalom, which was renamed for his parents as the William and Charlotte Bloomberg Jewish Community Center of Medford."Bloomberg — America's first Jewish president?", MSNBC, July 6, 2007
Bloomberg reports giving $254 million in 2009 to almost 1,400 nonprofit organizations, saying, "I am a big believer in giving it all away and have always said that the best financial planning ends with bouncing the check to the undertaker."
On July 21, 2011, Bloomberg announced that he would donate $50 million to Sierra Club's "Beyond Coal" campaign, the grassroots organization's efforts to close older coal plants and prevent new ones from being built. The gift, spread out over four years, will come from Bloomberg Philanthropies.Christian Torres and Juliet Eilperin, "Mayor Bloomberg gives $50 million to fight coal-fired power plants", The Washington Post, July 21, 2011
Also in July 2011, Bloomberg launched a $24 million initiative to fund "Innovation Delivery Teams" in five cities. The teams are one of Bloomberg Philanthropies' key goals: advancing government innovation."Mayor's Innovation Delivery Team to funnel grant for inner-city revival", The Commercial Appeal (Memphis, TN), January 6, 2012
In December 2011, Bloomberg Philanthropies launched a partnership with online ticket search engine SeatGeek to connect artists with new audiences. Called the Discover New York Arts Project, the project includes organizations HERE, New York Theatre Workshop, and the Kaufman Center."SeatGeek and Bloomberg to support 30 treasured arts groups in NYC", The Next Web December 8, 2011
On March 22, 2012, Bloomberg announced his foundation was pledging another $220 million over four years in the fight against global tobacco use.Sharon Begley, "Bloomberg charity adds $220 million to anti-smoking effort", Reuters, March 22, 2012
Bloomberg has donated $200 million towards new buildings at Johns Hopkins Hospital, the teaching hospital and biomedical research facility of Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, including the Charlotte R. Bloomberg Children's Center. Bloomberg has donated over $1.8 billion to more than 850 charities.
In January 2013, Johns Hopkins University announced that with a recent $350 million gift, Bloomberg's total giving to his undergraduate alma mater surpassed $1.118 billion. His first gift to the school was $5 in 1965."$1.1 Billion in Thanks From Bloomberg to Johns Hopkins", The New York Times, May 10, 2013

Awards and honors

At the 2007 commencement exercises for Tufts University, Bloomberg delivered the commencement address."Commencement Address: New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg" Tufts University, May 20, 2007 He was awarded an honorary degree in Public Service from the university. Likewise, Bloomberg delivered the 2007 commencement address at Bard College, where he was also awarded an honorary degree of Doctor of Humane Letters."Bard Commencement Address " Bard College, May 26, 2007 In February 2003, he received the "Award for Distinguished Leadership in Global Capital Markets" from the Yale School of Management."Yale School of Management Honors Michael R. Bloomberg for Distinguished Leadership in Global Capital Markets" Yale University, February 10, 2003 Bloomberg was named the 39th most influential person in the world in the 2007 and 2008 Time 100. Kennedy, Jr. "The 2008 TIME 100", Time Magazine, April 30, 2009 In October 2010, Vanity Fair ranked him #7 in its "Vanity Fair 100: The New Establish 2010."Alan Deutschman, Peter Newcomb, Richard Siklos, Duff McDonald, and Jessica Flint. Research and reporting by Adrienne Gaffney. "The Vanity Fair 100" Vanity Fair, October 2010
In May 2008, Bloomberg was awarded an honorary doctorate of laws from the University of Pennsylvania, where he delivered the commencement speech to the class of 2008.
In May 2011, Bloomberg was the speaker for Princeton University's 2011 baccalaureate service.Ian Cahir, "Bloomberg urges seniors to follow a path of service" News at Princeton, May 29, 2011
Bloomberg was also awarded a tribute award at the 2007 Gotham Awards, a New York-based celebrator of independent film."Gotham Awards" Wikipedia On November 19, 2008, Bloomberg received The Hundred Year Association of New York's Gold Medal "in recognition of outstanding contributions to the City of New York"."The Hundred Year Association of New York" Wikipedia Additionally, he was awarded an honorary doctorate at Fordham University's 2009 commencement ceremonies."Mayor Michael Bloomberg's Commencement Remarks" Fordham University, May 16, 2009
In 2009, Bloomberg received a Healthy Communities Leadership Award from Leadership for Healthy Communities – a Robert Wood Johnson Foundation national program – for his policies and programs that increase access to healthful foods and physical activity options in the city."Top Policy Groups Take Action to Create Healthy Communities, Prevent Childhood Obesity" Newswire, April 30, 2009 For instance, to increase access to grocery stores in underserved areas, the Bloomberg administration developed a program called FRESH that offers zoning and financial incentives to developers, grocery store operators and land owners."Mayor Bloomberg, Governor Paterson and Speaker Quinn announce comprehensive strategies to increase and retain grocery stores in New York City" NYC. NYC.gov, July 2, 2012 and committed $111 million in capital funding for playground improvements."Playground improvements planned for NYC children" Activeliving. New York also was one of the first cities in the nation to help patrons make more informed decisions about their food choices by requiring fast-food and chain restaurants to label their menus with calorie information."New York's calorie counting" The Economist, July 28, 2011
In 2010, Bloomberg received the U.S. Senator John Heinz Award for Greatest Public Service by an Elected or Appointed Official, an award given out annually by Jefferson Awards. Jefferson Awards.
In 2013, Bloomberg was chosen as the inaugural laureate of the Genesis Prize, a $1 million award to be presented annually for Jewish values.nytimes.html





Notes

Further reading



collected news and commentary] at Newsday
|-


