[[Edward Keating]]

CATEGORIES: 1875 births, 1965 deaths, Members of the United States House of Representatives from Colorado

Edward Keating (July 9, 1875 – March 18, 1965) Colorado newspaper editor,  U.S. Representative (1913–1919) from Colorado, advocate for better working conditions for the laboring class, as long time editor (1919–1953) of the newspaper Labor (jointly owned by several railroad unions) engaged in many political campaigns throughout the United States to elect union friendly legislators.

Biographical

Edward (no middle name) Keating was born to Irish immigrants Stephen Keating, a widower, and Julia O'Connor Quinlan, a widow, on a small farm near Kansas City, MO. 

Journalism career in Colorado

Keating at age 14 became a copyholder on the Denver Republican. 

Political career in Colorado

Although Keating began his political career by being active in the Populist Party, by the mid 1890's he had joined the Democrats and remained a Democrat the rest of his life. 

Political career in Washington, D.C

Elected as a Democrat to the Sixty-third, Sixty-fourth, and Sixty-fifth Congresses (March 4, 1913 – March 3, 1919). In the Sixty-fifth Congress, Keating was chairman of the Committee on Expenditures in the Post Office Department. He was unsuccessful in his bid for reelection in 1918.
In 1916, along with Robert Owen, sponsored a bill called the Keating-Owen Act,which barred the interstate commerce of goods produced by children. Shortly after the act went into effect it was declared unconstitutional; nevertheless it is regarded as an historic landmark in the story of the regulation of child labor in the United States.  Several states already had child labot laws but these varied widely.  Although bills regulating child labor had been introduced in previous congressional sessions they didn't pass.  The Keating-Owen bill was the first to become a law and thus became the first federal intervention in the tackling of the child labor problem. (Later many of the provisions of the Keating-Owen Act were incorportated into other labor legislation which was upheld by the Supreme Court.) 	
In 1919 introduced the Keating War Powers Bill to regulate child labor in certain industries.	
Member Congressional Joint Committee on Reclassification of Salaries for Civilian Employees in the District of Columbia, March 1919 – April 1920. 
Campaign manager (1919) for the Plumb Plan sponsored by the Plumb Plan League, 
Journalism career in Washington, D.C.== 
In 1919 founding editor and manager of a national weekly paper Labor (Washington,D.C.) sponsored by fifteen associated railroad labor organization and continued in those capacities until his retirement on April 1, 1953.
Writings== 	
Under the pen name, Raymond Lonergan, contributed a weekly Washington column for the
Chicago Tribune during most of his years as Labor's editor. 
The Story of Labor: Thirty-three Years on Rail Workers' Fighting Front (1953) – reminiscences of his years as editor of the union newspaper Labor and the numerous political campaigns it became involved in. 
The Gentleman from Colorado, a memoir (1964) – Not a coherent autobiography but a series of reminiscences about  people and incidents Keating was connected with.  Many of the stories have a what-really-happened behind the scenes slant.  There are five sections: early life,  newspaper and political stories, interesting people, congressional experiences and the railroad unions

Notes




