[[Confectionery]]

CATEGORIES: Confectionery, Desserts

Confectionery, or the making of confections, are food items that are rich in sugar.  Confectionery is divided into two broad and somewhat overlapping categories, bakers' confections and sugar confections.  Bakers' confectionery includes principally sweet pastries, cakes, and similar baked goods.  Sugar confectionery includes sweets, candied nuts, chocolates, chewing gum, sweetmeats, pastillage, and other confections that are made primarily of sugar.  Confections include sweet foods, sweetmeats, digestive aids that are sweet, elaborate creations, and something amusing and frivolous.com. Dictionary.com. Retrieved on 2014-02-16.
Confectionery refers to the art of creating sugar-based dessert forms, or subtleties (subtlety or sotelty). From the Old French confection, origin of Latin confectio(n-), from conficere, to "put together". Oxforddictionaries. Retrieved on 2014-02-16. Merriam-webster. Retrieved on 2014-02-16.
The confectionery industry also includes specialized training schools and extensive historical records.historicfood.pdf Traditional confectionery goes back to ancient times, and continued to be eaten through the Middle Ages into the modern era. 
Modern usage may include substances rich in artificial sweeteners as well. The words candy (US and Canada),  sweets (UK and Ireland), and lollies (Australia and New Zealand) are also used for the extensive variety of sugar confectionery.

Nutrition

Generally, confections are low in micronutrients but rich in calories. Specially formulated chocolate has been manufactured in the past for military use as a high density food energy source.

Sweetening agents

Confections are defined by the presence of sweeteners. These are usually sugars, but it is possible to buy sugar-free sweets, such as sugar-free peppermints. Most common is the disaccharide sucrose.  Hydrolysis of sucrose gives a mixture called invert sugar, which is sweeter and is also a common ingredient. Finally confections, especially commercial ones, are sweetened by a variety of syrups obtained by hydrolysis of starch, these include corn syrup.  

Bakers' confectionery

Bakers' confectionery includes sweet baked goods, especially those that are served for the dessert course.  Bakers' confections are sweet foods that feature flour as a main ingredient and are baked.  Major categories include cakes, sweet pastries, doughnuts, scones, and cookies.

Sugar confectionery

Different dialects of English use regional terms for sugar confections:

Examples

Sugar confectionery items include sweets, lollipops, candy bars, chocolate, cotton candy, and other sweet items of snack food.  Some of the categories and types of sugar confectionery include the following:

Risks

Excessive consumption of confectionery has been associated with increased incidences of type 2 diabetes, obesity, and tooth decay.com (Health & Cooking), 28 January 2009 (Retrieved: 11 July 2009)
Contaminants and coloring agents as well as toys and other non-nutritive products in confectionery can be particularly harmful to children. This non-nutritive material can cause injury or pose choking hazards. Therefore, confectionery contaminants such as high levels of lead have been restricted to 1 ppm in the US. There is no specific maximum in the EU.EFSA Scientific Opinion on Lead in Food European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), Retrieved 11/13/2012
Candy colorants, particularly yellow colorants such as E102 Tartrazine, E104 Quinoline Yellow and E110 Sunset Yellow FCF, do have many restrictions around the world. Tartrazine, for example, can cause allergic and asthmatic reactions and was once banned in Austria, Germany, and Norway. Some countries such as the UK have asked the food industry to phase out the use of these colorants, especially for products marketed to children.Ministers agree food Color ban BBC News, Retrieved 11/14/2012
Non-nutritive toy products such as chocolate eggs containing packaging with a toy inside are banned from sale in the US. If the material attached to confectionery does have a function and will not cause any injury to the consumer, it is allowed to be marketed. In the EU however, the Toy Safety Directive 2009/48/EC specifies that toys contained in food only need separate packaging that cannot be swallowed.Colors, Contaminants and Toys - Regulatory Standards for Children's Confectionery SGS Consumer Compact Bulletin, Retrieved 11/14/2012





Further reading




