[[Coming of Age (BBC TV series)]]

CATEGORIES: 2000s British television series, 2010s British television series, 2007 British television programme debuts, 2011 British television programme endings, BBC television sitcoms, Television shows set in Oxfordshire, English-language television programming, Lists of British television series episodes, Lists of comedy television series episodes

For other uses, see Coming of Age (disambiguation)

Coming of Age was a British situation comedy, written by Tim Dawson, and produced in house by BBC Productions, and broadcast on BBC Three. The show took a direct look at five sixth form students, Jas, Ollie, Matt, Chloe and DK, as well as, from series three, new character Robyn Crisp, who are living in Abingdon. Their lives rotate around the fictional Wooton College, their bedrooms, and Ollie's garden shed.

Recording

Coming of Age is set in Abingdon, Oxfordshire.

Theme

The Coming of Age production team joined forces with BBC Introducing, a BBC-wide project that supports unsigned, undiscovered and under-the-radar artists and DJs, to find the original theme tune and sound for the show. They held a competition for six up-and-coming artists including Kate Goes, to write a theme tune for the show from a written specification. KateGoes won, and worked with experienced composer Richie Webb, whose credits include That Mitchell and Webb Look and Comedy Shuffle, to create the final theme tune for the show.

Cast

Episodes

Twenty-three episodes of Coming of Age were broadcast over the course of three series. There are number of differences between the pilot and the subsequent series. Most notably, Alex Kew and Amy Yamazaki, who played Ollie and Jas in the pilot, have been replaced by Ceri Phillips and Hannah Job. Also, Dani Harmer originally played Chloe, but was replaced by Anabel Barnston. As well as new sets, the theme tune also changed, from "Steady, As She Goes" by The Raconteurs to a specially written piece by Birmingham band KateGoes and Richie Webb.

Pilot (2007)

Series One (2008)

Comic Relief Special (2009)

Series Two (2010)

Series Three (2011)

Reception

The show proved enormously popular with its target audience from the beginning, with Series 1 enjoying an average weekly reach of 1.2 million, and each episode appearing in the top 10 requested programmes on BBC iPlayer the day following transmission. Harry Venning in The Stage
stated that most of the show's humour "was unremittingly dire" and stated " I sat through Coming Of Age with the will to live seeping from my every pore, leaving me drenched in a puddle of despair. Apparently writer Tim Dawson was 19 when he wrote it, which is about six years older than I would have guessed."
[ref]of Age"  The Stage,
13 October 2008. Retrieved 26 April 2014. [/ref] 
Meanwhile, The Scotsman said simply: "Coming of Age may be the worst BBC sitcom yet. It is supposedly aimed at teenagers, but I refuse to believe that even the easiest-to-please teenager is happy to accept something so horribly written, horribly acted and horribly vulgar in lieu of actual humour." However, some have been more willing to acknowledge the sitcom's appeal, with the British Comedy Guide conceding, "For its fans, it's a heightened reflection of their own experience of teenage years, with brilliantly absurd exchanges and sublime vulgarity to match."

DVD releases






