[[Bedaquiline]]

CATEGORIES: Tuberculosis, Quinolines, Janssen Pharmaceutica, Anti-infective agents

Bedaquiline (trade name Sirturo, code names TMC207 and R207910) is a diarylquinoline anti-tuberculosis drug, which was discovered by a team led by Koen Andries at Janssen Pharmaceutica. and is specifically approved to treat multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis.

Mode of action

Bedaquiline affects the proton pump for ATP synthase. This mechanism is unlike that of the quinolones, whose target is DNA gyrase.

Clinical trials and approval

Bedaquiline was described for the first time in 2004 at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy (ICAAC) meeting, after the drug had been in development for over seven years.
One of the first published trials of Bedaquiline was a Phase II trial of 47 patients, which showed that the drug was effective in reducing the time to TB-free sputum cultures.
It is manufactured by Johnson & Johnson (J&J), who sought accelerated approval of the drug, a type of temporary approval for diseases lacking other viable treatment options.
It was formally approved for use by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in tuberculosis (TB) treatment, as part of a fast-track approval for use only in cases of multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis, and the more resistant extensively drug resistant tuberculosis.
There is some controversy over the approval for the drug, as the FDA's ruling was based on a surrogate outcome (sputum cultures) as opposed to patient deaths. In the clinical trials used for approval, the patients taking bedaquiline were more likely to die (a rate of death of 11.4% in the treatment group, compared to 2.5% in the control group

Drug interactions

Bedaquiline should not be co-administered with other drugs that are strong inducers or inhibitors of CYP3A4, the hepatic enzyme responsible for oxidative metabolism of the drug. Co-administration with rifampin, a strong CYP3A4 inducer, results in a 52% decrease in the AUC of the drug. This reduces the exposure of the body to the drug and decreases the antibacterial effect. Co-administration with ketoconazole, a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor, results in a 22% increase in the AUC, and potentially an increase in the rate of adverse effects experienced

Adverse effects

The most common side effects of bedaquiline in studies were nausea, joint and chest pain, and headache. The drug also has a black-box warning for arrhythmias, as it may induce long QT syndrome by blocking the hERG channel.com: Sirturo Side Effects
The following table provides a summary of adverse drug reactions of bedaquiline, as evidenced by one study:






