[[List of tallest buildings in Philadelphia]]

CATEGORIES: Skyscrapers in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Lists of tallest buildings in the United States by city, Lists of buildings and structures in Pennsylvania

This list of tallest buildings in Philadelphia ranks skyscrapers in the city of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania by height. The tallest building in the city is currently the 57-story Comcast Center, which at 975 feet (297 meters) and was Philly's tallest for 20 years. Six of the ten tallest buildings in Pennsylvania are in Philadelphia, with the remainder being in Pittsburgh.
Philadelphia's history of tall buildings is generally thought to begin with the 1754 addition of the steeple to Christ Church, which was one of America's first high-rise structures. Despite this, Philadelphia amassed a large collection of high-rise buildings. The completion of One Liberty Place in 1987 broke the agreement, and Philadelphia has since seen the construction of eight skyscrapers that eclipse City Hall in height.
Philadelphia has twice held the tallest habitable building in North America, first with Christ Church, then with City Hall. The latter reigned as the world's tallest building from 1901 to 1908,

Tallest buildings

This lists ranks completed and topped out skyscrapers in Philadelphia that stand at least 

Tallest approved and proposed

This lists buildings that are proposed for construction in Philadelphia and are planned to rise at least . A floor count of 40 stories is used as the cutoff for buildings whose heights have not yet been released by their developers.
 Table entries with dashes (—) indicate that information regarding building heights or dates of completion has not yet been released.

Timeline of tallest buildings

Philadelphia has seen few city record-holders compared to other cities with comparable skylines. Although churches, cathedrals, and the like are not technically considered to be skyscrapers, Christ Church, after being surmounted with its lofty spire in 1754, stood as its tallest building for 102 years before being surpassed by the (no longer extant) spire of Tenth Presbyterian Church, which was only surpassed by the North American Building in 1900. Then, due to the "gentlemen's agreement" not to build higher than the top of the statue of William Penn atop City Hall, that building stood as the city's tallest structure for 86 years; it also held the world record for tallest habitable building from 1901 until the 1908 completion of the Singer Building in New York City.








