[[EST and The Forum in popular culture]]

CATEGORIES: Human Potential Movement, Topics in popular culture

Werner Erhard and his self-improvement courses have been referenced in popular culture in various forms of fictional media including literature, film, television and theatre.  These courses, known as est, were delivered by the company Erhard Seminars Training (EST, or est). Under the name The Forum, they were delivered by Werner Erhard and Associates.  Also, the Landmark Forum, a program created by Erhard's former employees after purchasing his intellectual property, has had an influence on popular culture.  Some of these works have taken a comedic tack, parodying Erhard and satirizing the methodology used in these courses. Other works have taken a more direct approach, and analyzed and questioned Erhard's early life and controversy through fictionalized accounts.
Both est and The Forum have been depicted more often in film and television than in literary works.  The 1977 film Semi-Tough satirized Erhard and the est Training, through the fictional "Bismark Earthwalk Action Training."  Bert Convy portrayed the Erhard parody character. est students Diana Ross and Joel Schumacher incorporated Werner Erhard's teachings into the 1978 musical film, The Wiz.  The 1990 film The Spirit of '76 also parodied est, where Rob Reiner portrayed an abusive trainer for the est-like "Be, Inc. Seminars."  Movie critics have also drawn parallels to est and Werner Erhard, in reviews of the films Fight Club and Magnolia. Concepts from the Landmark Forum were utilized by the The Wachowskis in their film The Matrix Revolutions. Werner Erhard's training programs have been parodied in television. The 1979 episode of  Mork & Mindy, "Mork Goes Erk", and the 2002 episode of Six Feet Under, "The Plan", are the most notable. In the Mork & Mindy episode, the Erhard parody character was played by David Letterman.
Madison, Wisconsin's Broom Street Theater produced a play about Werner Erhard and The Forum in 1995, called Devil In Paradise, The Fall and Rise of Werner Erhard.  This piece presented a fictionalized version of controversial issues surrounding Erhard.

Background

Werner Erhard (born John Paul Rosenberg), a California-based former salesman, training manager and executive in the encyclopedia business, Participants were taught that they were responsible for their life outcomes, and were promised a dramatic change in their self-perception.
est was controversial: critics characterized the training methods as brainwashing, A group of his associates formed the company Landmark Education in 1991, purchasing The Forum's course "technology" from Erhard.

Fiction

Fictional inspiration for est

Werner Erhard drew on non-fiction sources when he developed Erhard Seminars Training, including the self-help course Mind Dynamics, cybernetics, the book Think and Grow Rich by Napoleon Hill, Scientology courses and the writings of its founder L. Ron Hubbard.  However, Erhard's self-awareness courses were also influenced by a science fiction book he read shortly before forming est, called: est: The Steersman Handbook, Charts of the Coming Decade of Conflict, by L. Clark Stevens.  The book later became required reading for associates on Erhard's Mind Dynamics sales team.  R. Buckminster Fuller, mentioned in the book by L. Clark Stevens as one of the "est people" that would bring about social transformation integral to Earth's survival, later helped Werner Erhard found The Hunger Project.[ref]
</ref>

est and successors in literature

Depictions of est and The Forum in literature have dealt with direct references to these trainings, and have provided educational background on the larger term encompassing these trainings, known as "Large Group Awareness Training." Erhard and est are parodied in the March 1980 issue of the Marvel Comics Howard the Duck series, titled: "The Dreadcliff Cuckoos".
In Pressure Points, a 2001 novel by Larry Brooks, one of the book's protagonists asserts that the programs developed by Werner Erhard, William Penn Patrick, and Alexander Everett all came from the same source.  In the novel, the seminar leader had "married two cult models," which one of the protagonists described as a blend of the "psychotherapeutic cult," and the "self-improvement cult."  The character then tells his friend that "The Program", is similar to a combination of the Sullivanians and Lifespring.  Werner Erhard is quoted, prior to the opening of the prologue.

Film

1970s

Werner Erhard and his est Training programs and later The Forum have been parodied in films, both directly and through more subtle references.  Still in other films that did not directly intend to parody the subject matter, other reviewers have found elements of the est movement as applied to the genre of fictional self-help films.  The 1977 movie Semi-Tough, starring Burt Reynolds, parodied the est training.  Bert Convy played "Frederick Bismark," a caricature of Werner Erhard.  Bismark's organization and its training went by the name "B.E.A.T.", which stands for: "Bismark Earthwalk Action Training."  A form of Rolfing was also parodied in the film, and Lotte Lenya's character "Clara Pelf" was described as: "a Rolf like masseuse."  The press caught on to this satire of Erhard in the film, and gave these sections of the film positive reviews.  The Wall Street Journal did not give an overall positive review, but did appreciate the portions where Werner Erhard was parodied: "The movie isn't much - an erratic ramble - But it has some pleasant moments, and a delicious send-up of The self-improvement guru Werner Erhard."[ref]
