[[David Boies]]

CATEGORIES: 1941 births, Cardozo School of Law faculty, Living people, New York lawyers, New York University faculty, New York Democrats, LGBT rights activists from the United States, New York University School of Law alumni, Northwestern University alumni, University of Redlands alumni, John F. Kennedy School of Government people, Yale Law School alumni, People from McHenry County, Illinois, American law firm executives

David Boies (born March 11, 1941) is an American lawyer and chairman of the law firm Boies, Schiller & Flexner. Corporate Website He has been involved in various high-profile cases in the United States.

Early life and education

Boies was born in Sycamore, Illinois, to two teachers, and raised in a farming community.google. His first job was when he was 10 years old—a paper route with 120 customers. Boies has dyslexia and he did not learn to read until the third grade.

Professional history

Law firm

Boies was an attorney at Cravath, Swaine & Moore, where he started upon law school graduation in 1966 and became a partner in 1973.

Government

Boies was also Chief Counsel and Staff Director of the United States Senate Antitrust Subcommittee in 1978, and served as Chief Counsel and Staff Director of the United States Senate Judiciary Committee in 1979.

Academia

Boies has taught courses at New York University Law School and Cardozo School of Law.

Notable cases

Bibliography

Personal life

Boies owns a home in Westchester County, New York, and Horse Vineyards in Northern California, an oceangoing yacht, and a large wine collection."Get Me Boies!" TIME magazine

In popular culture

Boies was portrayed by actor Ed Begley, Jr. in the 2008 film Recount, by Jack Laufer in the 2010 TV series Proposition 8 Trial Re-Enactment, and by George Clooney and Morgan Freeman in the 2012 play 8.imdb.com/title/tt2290075/

Philanthropy

David and Mary Boies also fund the "Mary and David Boies Fellowships" for foreign students at the Harvard Kennedy School.  The Boies give an annual picnic at their home for the incoming Teach for America corps for New York City (300–500 people). They support the Central European and Eurasian Law Institute (CEELI), a Prague-based institute that trains judges from newly democratized countries in Eastern Europe and the Middle East. There is a "Mary and David Boies Reading Room" at the CEELI Institute in Prague.

Awards and honors

Criticism

In his 2001 book, prosecutor and author Vincent Bugliosi criticized Boies' abilities as a trial lawyer, arguing that Boies "wasn't forceful or eloquent at all in making his points" in Bush v. Gore. "Although he seemed to have a very good grasp of the facts, he seemed completely incapable of drawing powerful, irresistible inferences from those facts that painted his opposition into a corner".The Betrayal of America



Cites

Articles

Books

Notes




