[[Nora C. Quebral]]

CATEGORIES: University of the Philippines faculty, University of the Philippines alumni, Filipino academics, Living people

Nora Cruz Quebral is a pioneering figure in the discipline of Development Communication in Asia and is often referred to as the "Mother of Development Communication", giving birth not only to an academic discipline but to a new crop of scholars in the field as well.
In three separate terms spanning 17 years, from 1966 to 1985, Quebral served as the chairperson of the various earlier incarnations of what later became the CDC, where her colleagues have fondly come to refer to her by her initials, "NCQ".
She now mostly serves as a consultant, and founded the Nora C. Quebral Development Communication Centre, Inc., which "undertakes a wide variety of development communication projects in health communication, environmental communication and agricultural communication".
She recently received the first Hildegard Award for Women in Media and Communication last March 5, 2007.

Development Communication

The former dean of the UPLB College of Development Communication, noted that:
Quebral has, time and again, redefined development communication over the years, rethinking its basic tenets and reorienting her definition to fit the evolving challenge of development.  These revisions to her definition of the field have served as guides towards new directions for the numerous scholars and practitioners of the field.
While she first gave a definition for the development communication in 1971, her latest revision, presented in 2001, delineates the field as:

Educational background

Quebral graduated magna cum laude with a BA in English from the University of the Philippines in 1950. She then earned her MS in agricultural journalism at the University of Wisconsin–Madison as US International Cooperation Agency and Philippine National Economic Council scholar in 1956-57, and then received her PhD in communication at the University of Illinois as Rockefeller Foundation scholar in 1963-66.

Early career

While a student, Quebral worked as secretary at the Claims Service of the US Army. When she graduated in 1950, she served as a debate stenographer of the Labor Management Advisory Board.
In 1952, she became a copy editor of the journal Philippine Agriculturist, starting her career in what was then the University of the Philippines College of Agriculture (UPCA).
In October 1954, UPCA put up the Office of Extension and Publications (UPCA-OEP); Quebral was one of its three Filipino staff members.  The office was put up to so that the then 45-year old agriculture campus could add an extension component to its mission, in addition to instruction and research.  This office became an academic department in 1960, and Quebral's academic career took full flight.

Pioneering the field of Development Communication

In 1971 she delivered her paper Development Communication in the Agricultural Context at a UPCA symposium in honor of its outgoing dean, Dioscoro L. Umali. Drawing from the works of Alan Chalkley, Wilbur Schramm, and Daniel Lerner, among others, she coined a definition of the field outlining its basic theory and practice.
In that paper she noted that:
The UP College of Agriculture was declared an autonomous unit of the University of the Philippines system the following year, 1972, and was reborn as the University of the Philippines Los Baños (UPLB).
Quebral's department was renamed the Department of Development Communication the following year, 1973, and opened the Master of Science in Development Communication program — the Philippines' first academic degree program in Communication.  The next year, UPLB's university council approved the Bachelor's Degree program in Development Communication.
When the PhD program in Development Communication received approval in 1976, the DDC became the first in the world to offer degree courses in Development Communication at the undergraduate, masteral, and doctorate levels.
She also founded Development Communication in Xavier University - Ateneo de Cagayan in the late 60's.

Retirement

The DDC was elevated into the Institute of Development Communication in 1987 and Quebral decided to take an early retirement the following year, after 28 years in the academe. She set up the Nora C. Quebral Development Communication Center, Inc. (NCQDCCI) and devoted more time to professional practice and research.
She was later named Professor Emeritus at UPLB CDC, "enjoying serving as consultant and expert in development communication as the opportunities arise, and guiding and interacting with Development Communication scholars."








