[[Centers for Disease Control and Prevention]]

CATEGORIES: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, United States Department of Health and Human Services agencies, Government agencies established in 1942, Government agencies established in 1992, Medical research institutes in the United States, Organizations based in DeKalb County, Georgia, Public health organizations, United States Public Health Service, Health education organizations, Public health education, Druid Hills, Georgia, Biosafety level 4 laboratories

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is the national public health institute of the United States. The CDC is a federal agency under the Department of Health and Human Services and is headquartered in Atlanta, unincorporated DeKalb County, Georgia, in Greater Atlanta. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Atlanta Journal-Constitution. December 3, 1985. A21. "The new facility will sit behind and be connected to CDC's red-brick complex of buildings on Clifton Road in DeKalb County...""Druid Hills CDP, GA." United States Census Bureau. Its main goal is to protect public health and safety through the control and prevention of disease, injury, and disability. The CDC focuses national attention on developing and applying disease control and prevention. It especially focuses its attention on infectious disease, food borne pathogens, environmental health, occupational safety and health, health promotion, injury prevention and educational activities designed to improve the health of United States citizens. In addition, the CDC researches and provides information on non-infectious diseases such as obesity and diabetes and is a founding member of the International Association of National Public Health Institutes.

History

The Communicable Diseases Center was founded July 1, 1946 as the successor to the World War II Malaria Control in War Areas program
The new agency was a branch of the U.S. Public Health Service and Atlanta was chosen as the location because malaria was endemic in the Southern United States. The agency changed names (see infobox on top right) before adopting the name Communicable Disease Center in 1946. Offices were located on the sixth floor of the Volunteer Building on Peachtree Street. With a budget at the time of about $1 million, 59 percent of its personnel were engaged in mosquito abatement and habitat control with the objective of control and eradication of malaria in the United States (see National Malaria Eradication Program). Among its 369 employees, the main jobs at CDC were originally entomology and engineering. In CDC's initial years, more than six and a half million homes were sprayed, mostly with DDT.  In 1946, there were only seven medical officers on duty and an early organization chart was drawn, somewhat fancifully, in the shape of a mosquito.
Under Dr. Joseph Mountin the CDC continued to advocate for public health issues and pushed to extend its responsibilities to many other communicable diseases. In 1947, CDC made a token payment of $10 to Emory University for  of land on Clifton Road in DeKalb County, still the home of CDC headquarters today. CDC employees collected the money to make the purchase. The benefactor behind the "gift" was Robert Woodruff, chairman of the board of The Coca-Cola Company. Woodruff had a long-time interest in malaria control, which had been a problem in areas where he went hunting.  The same year, the PHS transferred its San Francisco based plague laboratory into the CDC as the Epidemiology Division, and a new Veterinary Diseases Division was established.
The mission of CDC expanded beyond its original focus on malaria to include sexually transmitted diseases when the Venereal Disease Division of the U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) was transferred to the CDC in 1957. Shortly thereafter, Tuberculosis Control was transferred (in 1960) to the CDC from PHS, and then in 1963 the Immunization program was established.
It became the National Communicable Disease Center (NCDC) effective July 1, 1967. The organization was renamed the Center for Disease Control (CDC) on June 24, 1970, and Centers for Disease Control effective October 14, 1980. An act of the United States Congress appended the words "and Prevention" to the name effective October 27, 1992.  However, Congress directed that the initialism CDC be retained because of its name recognition. CDC now operates under the Department of Health and Human Services umbrella.
Currently the CDC focus has broadened to include chronic diseases, disabilities, injury control, workplace hazards, environmental health threats, and terrorism preparedness. CDC combats emerging diseases and other health risks, including birth defects, West Nile virus, obesity, avian, swine, and pandemic flu, E. coli, and bioterrorism, to name a few.  The organization would also prove to be an important factor in preventing the abuse of penicillin.
In May 1994 the CDC admitted to having sent several biological warfare agents to the Iraqi government from 1984 through 1989, including Botulinum toxin, West Nile virus, Yersinia pestis and Dengue fever virus."The eleventh plague: the politics of biological and chemical warfare" (p. 84-86) by Leonard A. Cole (1993)
The CDC has one of the few Biosafety Level 4 laboratories in the country, as well as one of only two official repositories of smallpox in the world. The second smallpox store resides at the State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology VECTOR in the Russian Federation.

Budget and workforce

CDC's FY2008 budget was $9.2 billion. As of 2008, staff numbered approximately 15,000 (including 6,000 contractors and 840 Commissioned Corps officers) in 170 occupations. Eighty percent have earned bachelor's degrees or higher; almost half have advanced degrees (a master's degree or a doctorate such as a PhD, D.O., or M.D.).
In addition to its Atlanta headquarters, the CDC has other locations in the United States and Puerto Rico. Those locations include Anchorage; Cleveland; Cincinnati; Fort Collins; Hyattsville; Morgantown; Pittsburgh; Research Triangle Park; San Juan, Puerto Rico; Spokane, Washington; Detroit; and Washington, D.C.
The CDC also conducts the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System, the world's largest, on-going telephone health survey system.
The CDC offers grants that help many organizations each year bring health, safety and awareness to surrounding communities throughout the entire United States.  As a government-run department, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention awards over 85 percent of its annual budget through these grants to accomplish its ultimate goal of disease control and quality health for all.
The CDC also operates the Public Health Associate Program (PHAP), a two-year paid fellowship for recent college graduates to work in public health agencies all over the United States. PHAP was founded in 2007 and currently has 159 associates in 34 states. Cdc. Retrieved on 2014-04-12.

Directors

The President of the United States appoints the director of the CDC and the appointment does not require Senate confirmation. The director serves at the pleasure of the President and may be fired at any time. "Obama Chooses NYC Health Chief to Head CDC." Washington Post. May 16, 2009. Sentinel for Health: A History of the Centers for Disease Control. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1992. ISBN 978-0-520-07107-0; Patel, Kant; Rushefsky, Mark E.; and McFarlane, Deborah R. The Politics of Public Health in the United States. M.E. Sharpe, 2005. ISBN 978-0-7656-1135-2. Sixteen directors have served the CDC or its predecessor agencies. Retrieved 2009-10-04.

Organizational restructuring

On April 21, 2005, the then-director of CDC, Dr. Julie Gerberding, formally announced the reorganization of CDC to "confront the challenges of 21st-century health threats". The four Coordinating Centers—established under the G. W. Bush Administration and Gerberding—"diminished the influence of national centers under their umbrella" and were ordered cut under the Obama Administration and Frieden in 2009.

Foundation

The CDC Foundation operates independently from CDC as a private, nonprofit 501(c)(3) organization incorporated in the State of Georgia. The creation of the Foundation was authorized by section 399F of the Public Health Service Act to support the mission of CDC in partnership with the private sector, including organizations, foundations, businesses, educational groups, and individuals.

Data and survey systems

|url=
|title=CDC Data and Statistics
|publisher=CDC – National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion
|accessdate=2006-08-10
}}[/ref]
|url=
|title=Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System
|publisher=CDC – National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion
|accessdate=2006-08-10
}}[/ref]
|url=
|title=NCHS – Mortality Data – About the Mortality Medical Data System
|publisher=CDC – National Center for Health Statistics
|accessdate=2007-01-09
}}[/ref]

Publications

Diseases with which the CDC is involved

Influenza

The CDC has launched campaigns targeting the transmission of influenza, including the H1N1 swine flu.  The CDC has launched websites including flu.

Other infectious diseases

The CDC's website (see below) has information on other infectious diseases, including smallpox, measles, and others.
The CDC runs a program that protects the public from rare and dangerous substances such as anthrax and the Ebola virus. The program, called the Select Agents Program, calls for inspections of labs in the U.S. that work with dangerous pathogens. "CDC's Select Agents Program protects against bioterror threats". BioPrepWatch. February 10, 2014 (Retrieved 02-10-14).

Non-infectious disease

The CDC also combats non-infectious diseases, including obesity.

Investigations by the Department of Health and Human Services Office of Inspector General (OIG)

On the June 15, 2011, the OIG published a report critical of the CDC's failure to oversee recipients' use of President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) funds. The report read in part:

On June 5, 2012, the OIG published a report identifying vulnerabilities in vaccine management in the CDC's domestic 'Vaccines for Children' (VFC) program. The report read in part:

On the November 19, 2012, the OIG published a report critical of the CDC Namibia Office's failure to properly monitor recipients' use of PEPFAR funds. The report read in part:

CDC zombie apocalypse outreach campaign

On May 16, 2011, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's blog published an article instructing the public on what to do to prepare for a zombie invasion. While the article did not claim that such a scenario was possible, it did use the popular culture appeal as a means of urging citizens to prepare for all potential hazards, such as earthquakes, tornadoes, and floods.
According to David Daigle, the Associate Director for Communications, Public Health Preparedness and Response, the idea arose when his team was discussing their upcoming hurricane information campaign and Daigle mused that "we say pretty much the same things every year, in the same way, and I just wonder how many people are paying attention." A social media employee mentioned that the subject of zombies had come up a lot on Twitter when she had been tweeting about the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster and radiation. The team realized that a campaign like this would most likely reach a different audience than normally pays attention to hurricane preparedness warnings, and went to work on the zombie campaign, launching it right before hurricane season began. "The whole idea was, if you're prepared for a zombie apocalypse, you're prepared for pretty much anything," said Daigle.
Once the blog article became popular, the CDC announced an open contest for YouTube submissions of the most creative and effective videos covering preparedness for a zombie apocalypse (or apocalypse of any kind), to be judged by the "CDC Zombie Task Force". Submissions were open until October 11, 2011.



Notes and references




