[[Jason Macendale]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional characters from Massachusetts, Marvel Comics supervillains, Fictional characters who have made pacts with devils, Fictional mercenaries, Fictional CIA agents, Fictional cyborgs, Comics characters introduced in 1981, Characters created by Steve Ditko, Fictional goblins, Spider-Man characters

Jason Philip Macendale, Jr. is a fictional character that appears in comic books published by Marvel Comics.

Publication history

The character first appears in Machine Man #19 (Feb 1981), and was created by writer Tom DeFalco and artist Steve Ditko. In The Amazing Spider-Man #289 (June 1987) he switches identities from Jack O'Lantern to the Hobgoblin.
The character was killed off in Spider-Man: Hobgoblin Lives #1 in order to make room for Roderick Kingsley to assume the Hobgoblin mantle. Writer Roger Stern recounted that he was initially uncertain of how to resolve the situation of there being two Hobgoblins: 

Fictional character biography

Jason Philip Macendale was a former CIA agent who was recruited out of college to become an agent for the organization. Macendale proved to be a liability to the organization, due to his violent nature and amoral personality. This rejection turned Macendale to become a mercenary and ultimately a costumed terrorist, as he adopted the costumed alter ego of Jack O'Lantern.Machine Man #19
Jack O'Lantern became a regular nemesis for Spider-Man, meeting him in battle the first time in Spectacular Spider-Man #56. He was later hired to retrieve the Hobgoblin's lost battle van and despite the untimely appearance of Spider-Man, pulled off the mission successfully.The Amazing Spider-Man #254
Wishing to increase his underworld status, Macendale formed an alliance with the Hobgoblin, who at this time was using brainwashed journalist Ned Leeds as a proxy. The brainwashing treatments used on Ned Leeds to make him Hobgoblin began to affect his sanity, ultimately leading to him doublecrossing Macendale when the two were fleeing a horde of police officers. Upon killing Leeds, all known copies of the Hobgoblin's weapons and costumes were handed over to Macendale, who took over the identity in order to steal Ned's notoriety within the supervillain community.The Amazing Spider-Man #289, Spider-Man Vs Wolverine
Macendale's scheme was foiled; he exposed as the new Hobgoblin, and lost a battle against Spider-Man which was meant to prove his ability. Green Goblin overcame the Hobgoblin.The Amazing Spider-Man #312
Dejected and humiliated, Macendale offered to sell his soul to N'astirh, a demon leading an invasion of Manhattan, in exchange for the power of a demon. N'astirh fused a demon to Macendale. With his new demonic powers, he defeated Spider-Man easily, but Mary Jane Watson intervened before he could deliver the killing blow.Web of Spider-Man #48  
Macendale put aside his personal enmity for Spider-Man, and used his new demonic powers to become a top contract killer. Strange (vol. 3) #11 and Darkhawk. He would also join two reformed incarnations of the Sinister Six.The Amazing Spider-Man #335-339Spider-Man #18-23 
Eventually, Macendale's personality was overcome by the insane demon who shared his body, and he began to consider himself an agent of God sent to Earth to kill sinners. This led him into conflict with Ghost Riders Danny Ketch and Johnny Blaze and Spider-Man; during the battle, a blast from Johnny Blaze's "Hellfire Shotgun" destabilized the demon within Macendale, long enough for him to briefly regain his sanity. 
During a fight between Macendale, Spider-Man, Moon Knight, and Doctor Strange, the heroes realized that Macendale's insanity was partly caused by despair over losing his handsome face. To try to calm the monstrous man/demon, Doctor Strange agreed to cast an illusion spell upon Macendale that caused Macendale to see his true face in reflections of himself. This helped Macendale enough that he was ultimately able to expel the demon from within himself, with the demon referring to itself as the Demogoblin. As Hobgoblin, Macendale was stiff-armed by Doctor Octopus into joining the 2nd incarnation of the group the Sinister Six, which twice tried to take over the world, failing due to counter measures by Spider-Man, the Hulk, Ghost Rider, the Fantastic Four, and many more heroes.Spider-Man #24, Spirits of Vengeance #5
Next the Hobgoblin was hired by the Foreigner to assassinate Moon Knight and Nick Katzenberg, only to be stopped by Moon Knight and Spider-Man. Spider-Man turned him over to the authorities.Web of Spider-Man #93-96, Spirits of Vengeance #6
Macendale obtained the strength formula of Kraven the Hunter, which enables him to easily defeat his demonic doppelganger, Demogoblin, who then dies saving a young child in battle.Spider-Man #47-49
Macendale was defeated once more by Spider-Man along with Coldheart, during an attempt to kidnap Macendale's long-lost son. However, Macendale's reunion would be an unhappy one as Macendale attempted (unsuccessfully) to use his son as a hostage to avoid going back to jail. He would remain in jail for some time before being freed by Gaunt, sending him into combat against Ben Reilly. In exchange for doing Gaunt's bidding, the scientist turned Macendale into a cyborg, complete with removal of one of Macendale's eyes with a new high-tech cybernetic eye. He failed however and was once again arrested.The Amazing Spider-Man #411Spider-Man #68-69
Jason Macendale went on trial for his many crimes. Found guilty on several counts, including convictions for acts caused by both the Roderick and Leeds Hobgoblins, a disgusted Macendale responded by revealing that Ned Leeds "was" Hobgoblin. Roderick Kingsley, fearful that Macendale's continued testimony could expose him as the original Hobgoblin, broke into prison and murdered Macendale.Hobgoblin Lives

Powers and abilities

Macendale originally possessed no superhuman powers, but used similar paraphernalia to the Hobgoblin and Green Goblin; in both his Jack O'Lantern and Hobgoblin persona he used a rocket-powered glider, pumpkin bombs, and gauntlet blasters.
During the time in which a demon was grafted to him, he had superhuman strength, speed, and agility, as well as hellfire powers enabling him to create weapons and gliders at will. In one story it is implied that his demonic abilities allowed him to create organic fibers strong enough to bind a normal person.Spider-Man #6
After Macendale acquired the formula of Kraven the Hunter, he had enhanced his strength, speed, stamina, durability, reflexes, and agility to superhuman levels. His later cybernetically enhanced body further increased his strength, speed, reflexes, durability, and stamina.

Personality, skills, and training

Macendale had extensive military training in hand-to-hand combat, martial arts, espionage, and knowledge of conventional weaponry. He often used conventional military weapons. When he adopted the Hobgoblin persona he was able to make improvements to the maneuverability to the goblin glider, by utilizing skills he gained from his masters degrees in both mechanical engineering and physics.
Macendale was a sociopath and a sadist, which led to his dishonorable discharge from the military.

In other media

Television

Video games

Toys






