[[Ivan Maric]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 births, Living people, Richmond Football Club players, Adelaide Football Club players, Port Adelaide Magpies players, Australian people of Croatian descent, Australian rules footballers from Victoria (Australia), Calder Cannons players, Keilor Football Club players

Ivan Maric ( who plays with the Richmond Football Club in the Australian Football League (AFL). Previously he played for the Adelaide Crows Football Club between 2005 and 2011 and joined Richmond in 2012. He is one of the most distinct players in the AFL, thanks to his hard 'old-style' footballing demeanour, and his mullet hairstyle. He pronounces his name as 'E-varn Marrich'.Greenberg's draft Grabs

Early career

A late starter to the game, Maric didn't play competitive football until he was 16 because of a blossoming basketball career. Maric nearly quit in his second season with the Calder Cannons because of his frustration with the technical aspects of the game. However Maric was talked into playing on and was drafted by the Crows with pick 40 in the 2004 AFL Draft only months later. Maric was assigned to the Port Adelaide Magpies in the SANFL where he quickly became the number one ruckman in 2005.

Adelaide career

Maric's AFL debut was in round six of 2006 in the Showdown against Port Adelaide. He had seven disposals and kicked 1 goal on debut. Maric played a total of eight matches in 2006 and averaged 6 disposals and 9 hit-outs a game. 
In 2007, a hip injury meant that he missed the early part of the season and returned to the senior side for the round 14 match against Hawthorn. In the round 19 clash with the Geelong Football Club Maric was promoted to the number 1 ruckman but was then dropped for the round 20 clash with the Western Bulldogs. In 2008, a pre-season injury and form delayed his return to midway through the season. He played out the rest of the season in the ruck, cementing his spot as the new number one ruck. 2009 saw Maric continued as Adelaide's clear number one ruckman.
In 2011 the combination of the new interchange rules and the arrival of Sam Jacobs at the Crows saw Maric given limited opportunities. Maric played just six games for the season. At the season's end it was reported Maric was keen to leave the Crows, with strong interest from Richmond. 2011. He was traded to Richmond in the 2011 Trade Week period, with Adelaide accepting Richmond's second-round pick (no. 37) for him, which was then subsequently on-traded to St. Kilda for Tom Lynch.

Richmond career

Maric joined Richmond in 2012 and established himself as the club's number one ruckman. In his first year he played 21 games and finished third in the club's best and fairest award, the Jack Dyer Medal.
In 2014, Maric was again voted onto the club's (now five man) leadership group by his fellow players.






