[[Seeman (director)]]

CATEGORIES: Tamil film directors, Indian people, Tamil people, Living people, Tamil Nadu politicians, Tamil activists, 1969 births

Senthamizhan Seeman() is an Tamil film actor, writer,  director, politician, orator and activist in Tamil Nadu. He is the Chief Coordinator of the organisation "Naam Thamizhar Iyakkam" which turned as a political party "Naam Thamizhar Katchi" in May 2010. He was Prisioned by Tamil Nadu Government for supporting LTTE and for saying Prabhakaran as Tamil's leader in his hardline speeches. Some of the main agenda of "Naam Thamizhar Katchi" is to free "Tamil Eelam" from Srilanka which is Tamils mother land, only Tamils should rule Tamil Nadu and to spread the importance of Tamil language only by which unity of Tamil People is possible.

Early life and Background

Seeman was born in Sivagangai district in South Tamil Nadu to Mr. Senthamizhan and Mrs. Annammal Senthamizhan. He married K. Kayalvizhi, daughter of K. Kalimuthu (former speaker of Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly) in September 2013 in the presence of Pazha. Nedumaran and others. The ceremony was held according to Tamil traditions at the YMCA grounds, Nandanam, Chennai.

Film career

Seeman took up film direction as a career after being inspired by the films of his mentor, Bharathi Raja and also the work of Manivannan. Seeman started his career by directing Panchalankurichi, a village action film starring Prabhu and Madhubala.cinesouth.cgi?name=panchalanguruchi He collaborated with actor Prabhu again in Iniyavalae, a romantic film also featuring Suvalakshmi, Gouthami and Keerthi Reddy. His third film Veeranadai with Sathyaraj and Kushboo after that he took a long break from films.
In 2006, he came back with a successful film Thambi with actor Madhavan.imdb. Seeman turned actor with the film Pori where he played the role of a Malaysian Business man. The same year he directed the love story Vaazhthugal again with Madhavan and Bhavana, with every single word used in the movie being written in pure Tamil.imdb.com/title/tt1509832/
In 2013, Seeman played a lead role in Director and his mentor Manivannan's Nagaraja Cholan MA, MLA(sequel to the critically acclaimed Amaidhi Padai), the latter's 50th and last film as a director.

Politics and Activism

Seeman is known to be a vociferous and fearless campaigner for the rights of the Sri Lankan Tamil people and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam braving several counts of intimidation and detention. 
Seeman along with several other Tamil activists gathered on 18 May 2009, coinciding the end of the Sri Lankan Civil War at Madurai to form the Naam Tamilar Iyakkam, as a social outfit.

2011 Anti-Congress campaigning

Upon his release from a 5 month detention at the Vellore prison, Seeman actively campaigned for the defeat of the Congress party in the State Assembly elections for their alleged role in the genocide of Tamils in Sri Lanka.
He was instrumental in bringing about a crushing and humiliating defeat of the DMK-Congress alliance in the state. 

2011-present

Since the 2011 Assembly elections, Seeman and his party has been actively involved in various causes such as the anti-nuclear Power plant protests in Kudankulam fishermen.
In March 2013, Seeman and his Attorney T. Chandrasekar attended the 22nd UNHRC sessions in Geneva.
For the upcoming parliamentary elections in 2014, Seeman has stated that the Naam Tamilar Katchi would campaign for the defeat of the defeat of the candidates fielded by the Congress, BJP and the DMDK where they are contesting.

Books

Filmography

As director

As actor






