[[Sudhir Kakar]]

CATEGORIES: 1938 births, Living people, Indian writers, Indian psychologists, Psychoanalysts

Sudhir Kakar (born 1938) is a lay psychoanalyst and author in the fields of cultural psychology and the psychology of religion.

Education and personal life

Kakar spent his early childhood near Sargodha, now in Pakistan. He began his training in psychoanalysis at the Sigmund-Freud Institute in Frankfurt, Germany in 1971.
His aunt, Kamla,  moved to Delhi, and Kakar moved there as well.

Career

Kakar was in private psychoanalytic practice in New Delhi for 25 years before moving to his current place of residence in Goa, India.
Before he began his practice, he was a Professor of Organizational Behaviour at Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad and a Professor of Social Sciences at Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi. Kakar has also
held several visiting appointments at international universities, Chicago(1989–92), McGill, Melbourne, and INSEAD, Fontainbleau.

Psychoanalysis and mysticism

A portion of Sudhir Kakar's work involves the relationship between psychoanalysis and mysticism. His analyses of personages include that of Swami Vivekananda in The Inner World (1978), Mohandas Gandhi in Intimate Relations (1989), and  Ramakrishna in The Analyst and the Mystic (1991). 1996 New Delhi: Viking by Penguin. Reprint of 1991 book.
Kakar's fiction novel, Ecstasy (2003)  deals with the "making of a mystic" and with "two characters who are very different. One is steeped in traditional religiosity. The other is a modern, rational sceptic but who is not closed to tradition. It deals with their encounters. And how one is influenced by the other" and the characters were based on Ramakrishna and Vivekananda. The story is set in Rajasthan of 1940s or 1960sThe Rediff Interview/Psychoanalyst Sudhir Kakar Date accessed: 1 April 2008
Psychoanalyst Alan Roland (2009) writes that when Kakar applies his psychoanalytic understanding to these "three spiritual figures Vivekananda, Gandhi, Ramakrishna", his analyses are as "fully reductionistic as those of Jeffrey Masson". Roland also disputes the Kakar's theoretical understanding of mysticism from a psychoanalytic standpoint, and writes that it is "highly questionable whether spiritual aspirations, practices, and experiences essentially involve regression."

Awards And Honors

Sudhir Kakar's honors include the Kardiner Lecturership at the Institute of Psychoanalytic Medicine, Columbia University,

Works

Non-fiction
Fiction

Bibliography

Further reading



Notes



|title=Me and my couch: A review of A Book of Memory—Confessions and Reflections By Sudhir Kakar, Penguin/Viking, Pages: 318, Rs. 499|journal=Outlook|url=




