[[Reggio Calabria]]

CATEGORIES: Cities and towns in Calabria, Reggio Calabria, Coastal cities and towns in Italy, Euboean colonies of Magna Graecia, Cumaean colonies, Populated places established in the 8th century BC, Mediterranean port cities and towns in Italy

Reggio di Calabria ( or Reggio in Southern Italy, is the biggest city and the most populated comune of Calabria, Southern Italy, is the capital of the Province of Reggio Calabria and is the seat of the Regional Council of Calabria.
Reggio is located on the "toe" of the Italian peninsula and is separated from the island of Sicily by the Strait of Messina. It is situated on the slopes of the Aspromonte, a long, craggy mountain range that runs up through the center of the region. The third economic center of mainland Southern Italy, the city proper has a population of more than 180,000 inhabitants spread over 
As a major functional pole in the region, it has strong historical, cultural and economic ties with the city of Messina, which lies across the strait in Sicily. With the sicilian metropolitan city of Messina, is also talk of a 'possible creation' of the metropolitan city of the Straits of Messina, with approximately 800,000 to 900,000 inhabitants.
Reggio is the oldest city in the region, and despite its ancient foundation – Ρηγιον was an important and flourishing colony of Magna Graecia – it boasts a modern urban system, set up after the catastrophic earthquake on December 28, 1908, which destroyed most of the city. The region is subject to earthquakes and tsunami. It is a major economic center for regional services and transport on the southern shores of the Mediterranean.
Reggio, with Naples and Taranto, is home to one of the most important archaeological museums, the prestigious National Archaeological Museum of Magna Græcia, dedicated to Ancient Greece (which houses the famous Bronzes of Riace, rare example of Greek bronze sculpture, which became one of the symbols of the city). Reggio is the seat, since 1907, of the Archeological Superintendence of Bruttium and Lucania. The city has two recently founded universities: the "Mediterranea" University, and the "Università per Stranieri" (University for Foreigners). There are also an Academy of Fine Arts (opened in 1967) and a Conservatory of Music (founded in 1927).
The city center, consisting primarily of Liberty buildings, has a linear development along the coast with parallel streets, and the promenade is dotted with rare magnolias and exotic palms.
Reggio has commonly used popular nicknames: The "city of Bronzes", for the Riace bronzes which are testimonials of its Greek origins; the "city of bergamot", which is exclusively cultivated in the region; and the "city of Fatamorgana", an optical phenomenon visible in Italy only from the Reggio seaside.
The city is one of the Italian candidates, to become in 2019 the European Capital of Culture.

History

Etymology

During its 3500 year history Reggio has often been renamed. Each name corresponds with the city's major historical phases:
The toponym of the city is perhaps derived from Chaldean word Rec (meaning king) or maybe from the Greek one régnȳmi referring to the Straits between Calabria and Sicily as a break in the land.

Ancient times

The origins of the ancient city of Reggio merge into the mists of mythology and the meanderings of archaeology. From the late third millennium BC until the 8th century BC it was inhabited by peoples called Opici and Osci (perhaps Askenazi) and also by Oenotrians, Phoenicians, Mycenaeans, Ausones, Sicilians, Morgeti and Itali.google.
After Cumae, Reggio is one of the oldest Greek colonies in southern Italy. The colony was settled by the inhabitants of Chalcis in 730 or 743 BC on the site of the older settlement, Erythrà (Ερυθρά), meaning "the Red one". This dated back to the 3rd millennium BC and was perhaps established by the Ausones. The last Ausonian ruler was king Italus, from whom the name of Italy is derived:Lessico Universale Italiano XI, "Italo", Enciclopedia Italiana Treccani, Roma, 1973 the land round Reggio was at first known as Saturnia and then Italia, which in Roman times became the name of the whole peninsula, but in those days corresponded only to present-day southern Calabria, which was also known later as Bruzium. King Iokastos is buried on the Punta Calamizzi promontory, called "Pallantiòn", where Greek settlers later arrived. The colony retained the earlier name of "Rhégion" (Ρήγιoν).
Under Greek rule, Reggio became a Polis of Magna Græcia: it was governed by the Messenians, from 737 to 461 BC; by Syracuse from 387 to 351 BC, when it was known as Febea and then by the Campanians although for a time in the 5th–3rd centuries BC, it was also a republic. Reggio was one of the most important cities in Greater Greece, reaching great economic and political power during the 5th and 6th centuries BC under the Anaxilas government. Anaxilas allowed Reggio to rule over all the Messina Strait, including Zancle (modern Messina). Rhegion later allied with Athens during the Peloponnesian War until 387 BC when the city was taken by the Syracusans. Later, the polis of Rhegion reached great artistic and cultural heights, as is shown by the presence of art, philosophy and science academies, such as the Pythagorean School and also for its well-known poets, historians and sculptors such Ibycus, Ippy and Pythagoras of Rhegium. Many items of archaeological interest from this Hellenic era have been retrieved and are displayed in various places locally.
As an independent city Rhegium was an important ally and "socia navalis" of Rome. During the Imperial age it became one of the most important and flourishing cities of southern Italy when it was the seat of the "Corrector", the Governor of "Regio II Lucania et Bruttii" (province of Lucany and Brutium). It was devastated by several major earthquakes and associated tsunami during the Roman Empire when it was called "Rhegium Julium" and was a noble Roman city. It was a central pivot for both maritime and mainland traffic, reached by the final part of the Via Popilia or Annia and nearby there was the port of Columna Rhegina. Rhegium boasted in imperial times, no less than eight thermal baths, one of which is still visible today. During the whole Latin age Reggio maintained not only its Greek customs and language but also its Mint. The Apostle, St. Paul passed through Rhegium in his final voyage to Rome (Acts XXVIII:13) converting the first local Christians and, according to tradition, laying the foundations of the Christianization of Bruttium.
After the invasions by the Vandals, the Longobards and the Goths in the 5th–6th centuries AD, Reggio became the capital of the "metropolis of the Byzantine possessions in southern Italy" and several times between 536 and 1060 AD it was also the capital of the Duchy of Calabria and linchpin of the Greek church in Italy. In addition to being a Byzantine centre of culture, during the 8th century the city became a Holy See: Reggio was until the 16th century, the most important Greek Rite Bishopric in Italy.

Middle Ages

Numerous occupying armies came to Reggio during the early Middle Ages due to the city's strategic importance. For hundreds of years Reggio was taken by various factions. The Saracens established a self-proclaimed sultanate on the Southern Italian coast under Mofareg-ibn-Salem which, at its peak reached, from Bari to Reggio and lasted from approximately 853–871. Following their expulsion from Italy, the Saracens occupied Reggio in 918 and sold most of it inhabitants into slavery. I, ed. Kenneth M. Setton and Marshall W. Baldwin, (University of Wisconsin Press, 1969), 50.  For brief periods in the 10th–11th centuries the city was ruled by the Arabs and, renamed Rivàh, became part of the Emirate of Sicily.
The city passed under the crowns of the Normans from 1060 to 1194 when it was called Risa and of the Swabians from 1194 to 1266. In 1060 the Normans, under Robert Guiscard and Roger I of Sicily, captured Reggio but Greek cultural and religious elements persisted until the 17th century. In 1234 the town fair was established by decree of the Emperor, Frederick II.Mario CALIGIURI, Breve Storia della Calabria · Newton & Compton, Roma 1996
Reggio, because of its geographical position was often contested between the Kingdom of Naples (on continental Italy) and the Kingdom of Sicily, in fact between 1266 and 1503 Reggio passed between the rule of the Aragonese, who called it Regols and who enlarged its medieval castle and also of the Angevins.
In the 12th century Reggio became part of the Kingdom of Sicily. In 1282, during the Sicilian Vespers, Reggio rallied in support of Messina and the other oriental Sicily cities because of the shared history, commercial and cultural interests. For 413 years Reggio was the capital of the Calabrian Giustizierato, from 1147 to 1443 and from 1465 to 1582. It supported the Aragonese forces against the House of Anjou. The city was ranked to Kingdom of Naples. In the 14th century it obtained new administrative powers.
Reggio, throughout the Middle Ages, when sometimes it was written as Regio, was first an important centre of calligraphy and then of printing after this was invented, boasting the first dated printed edition of a Hebrew, a Rashi commentary on the Pentateuch, printed in 1475 in La Giudecca of Reggio"The Books of the People of the Book – Hebraic Collections" (Hebrew book with date), Library of Congress, Washington, D.C., 2003-11-06, webpage: LibraryCongress-Hebraic. although scholars consider Rome as the city where Hebrew printing began. The Jewish Community was also considered to be among the foremost internationally, for the dyeing and the trading of silk.

Early modern period

Later came the Habsburgs of Spain although Reggio was ruled by a viceroy from 1504 to 1713; the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily were in fact part of the Spanish crown territories. The 16th and 17th centuries were an age of decay due to high Spanish taxes, pestilence, the 1562 earthquake, and the Ottoman Turkish invasions suffered by Reggio between 1543 and 1594. After Barbary pirates attacked Reggio in 1558, they took most of its inhabitants as slaves to Tripoli.A history of the Maghrib in the Islamic period Jamil M. Abun-Nasr p. 191 
In 1714 southern Italy became once more property of the Austrian Hasburgs until 1734, when the Bourbons of Spain took possession. Then, in 1759, Reggio became part of the newly independent Kingdom of Naples. In 1783 a disastrous earthquake damaged Reggio, all southern Calabria and Messina.
The precious citrus fruit, Bergamot, which had been cultivated and used in the Reggio area since the 15th century, was in 1750, for the first time in the world grown and produced intensively. Travellers such as Johann Hermann von Riedesel (1767), Jean Claude Richard de Saint-Non (1778) and Edward Lear (1847) likened the city and its surroundings to a "beautiful garden".
In 1806 Napoleon Bonaparte took Reggio and made the city a Duchy and General Headquarters.
Reggio was the capital of Calabria Ulteriore Prima with the Bourbons of Naples from 1759 to 1860. Under the Bourbons, in 1816, the two ancient Kingdoms of Naples and of Sicily were unified becoming the Kingdom of Two Sicilies. During the 19th century the area became an economic and military European power boasting of various conquests in the fields of science, technology, the arts and law.

Late modern and contemporary

On August 21, 1860, during the famous "Battaglia di Piazza Duomo" (Cathedral Square Battle), Giuseppe Garibaldi conquered the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. Bruno Antonio Rossi (the mayor of Reggio after the historian Domenico Spanò Bolani, who helped the citizenship during the previous turbulent years) was the first in the kingdom to proclaim the new Garibaldi Dictatorship and the end of the rule of Francis II. The city, renamed Reggio di Calabria, came under the House of Savoy, which was heavily indebted and who impoverished southern Italy to pay their debts by looting the state coffers and by crushing flourishing local activities such as forestry, mining, boat-building (the Calabrian steel factory was then in fact the largest in Italy), silkworm breeding, silk-weaving and agriculture; they also issued laws to eliminate standing scolarships.
On December 28, 1908, at exactly 5:21 AM, the town was hit by a heavy earthquake and shook violently for 31 seconds. Damage was even worse in Messina across the Straits. It is estimated that 25,000 people perished in Reggio and 65,000 in Messina. Reggio lost 27% of its inhabitants and Messina lost 42%. Ten minutes after the catastrophic earthquake those who tried to escape running towards the open spaces of the coast were engulfed by a 10 metre high tsunami. Three waves of 6–12 metres swept away the whole waterfront. The 1908 Messina earthquake remains one of the worst on record in modern western European history.1): A Great Earthquake throughout a Century of Seismology, Historical Seismologist, March/April 2009 It took Reggio a generation to fully recover. The city was rebuilt according to then modern standards.
Under Fascism with the Podestà Genoese-Zerbi, in 1927 the city became an administrative centre for the surrounding municipalities and was called Grande Reggio ('Greater Reggio'), but because of its strategic military position, it suffered a devastating air raid by the British 8th Army in 1943. After the Second World War Reggio recovered considerably.
During 1970–1971 the city was the scene of a popular uprising – known as the Moti di Reggio – against the government choice of Catanzaro (a 'less important' town than Reggio) as capital of the newly instituted Region of Calabria. 50 The revolt was taken over by young neofascists of the Italian Social Movement (Movimento Sociale Italiano – MSI) backed by the 'Ndrangheta, a Mafia-type criminal organisation based in Calabria. 198Town the mafia shut down, The Independent, February 4, 1996 The Reggio Calabria protests were the expression of malcontent about cronyism and the lack of industrial planning.
Between the 1970s and the 1980s Reggio went through twenty years of an increase in organized crime by the 'Ndrangheta as well as urban decay. The town is home to several 'ndrine, such as the Condello-Imerti and the De Stefano-Tegano clans, which were involved in bloody wars against each other during this period.
The spiral of corruption reached its zenith in the early 1990s. The sitting mayor at the time, Agatino Licandro, made a remarkable confession reporting "suitcases coming into city hall stuffed with money but going out empty". As a result of the nationwide corruption scandals most of the city council was arrested. But, since the early 1990s, the so-called "Primavera di Reggio" (Reggio Spring) – a spontaneous movement of people and government institutions – encouraged city recovery and a renewed and stronger identity. The symbol of the Reggio Spring is the Lungomare Falcomatà, the sea-side boulevard named after Italo Falcomatà the centre-left mayor who initiated the recovery of the town.Dieci anni senza Italo, il sindaco della primavera di Reggio Calabria, Corriere della Calabria, December 11, 2011
On October 9, 2012, the Italian government decided to dissolve the city council of Reggio Calabria for infiltration by the 'Ndrangheta. The move came after some councillors were suspected of having ties to the powerful crime syndicate, under the 10-year centre-right rule of Giuseppe Scopelliti, mayor from 2002 to 2010. It is the first time that the entire government of a provincial capital has been dismissed over suspected links to organized crime. Three commissioners will run the city for 18 months until a new election.Il Viminale scioglie per mafia il comune di Reggio Calabria, La Repubblica, October 9, 2012

Earthquakes in history

Reggio has been destroyed by earthquakes several times over the centuries, such as in 91 BC, after which the city was reconstructed by order of the Emperor Augustus, followed by another earthquake in the year 17 AD; yet another one in 305 AD, and again another in 374. The earthquake of 1562 destroyed the natural, medieval port of the city and brought about the submersion of the Calamizzi promontory, known in ancient times as the Pallantiòn, where, we are told, the first Greek settlers, the Calcidesi, had set foot. The particularly devastating earthquake of 1783 and that of 1908, which was the worst natural calamity to take place in Europe in human memory, both profoundly altered the urban aspect of the city, due to the successive re-building which gave the present-day layout of straight, intersecting roads, planned by Giovanbattista Mori in 1784 and by Pietro De Nava in 1911. But some town-planning policies at the time were decided upon with no respect for the architectural history of Reggio, as is shown by the demolition of the remaining Norman part of the Castle, following the last big  earthquake, in 1923.

Geography

Territory and Natural environment

=Morphology=

=Hydrology=

=Climate=

According to the Köppen climate classification, Reggio Calabria possesses a typical Mediterranean climate (Köppen: Csa). Its climate is mostly identical with Messina which lies on the other side of the strait. Precipitation is the only exception because Messina receives approximately  more.

=Flora=

=Fauna=

Population and Human environment

=Administrative division and city government=

Reggio di Calabria is located in the last point of the "boot" of the Italian peninsula, between the Tyrrhenian Sea and the Ionian Sea, in front there is the Strait of Messina, and neighbor across there is the homonymous city.
The municipality of Reggio is divided into 15 sub-municipalities (Circoscrizioni) containing the frazioni ("subdivisions", mainly villages and hamlets) of Catona, Gallico, Archi, Pentimele, Gallina, Mosorrofa () and Saracinello.
They are: Centro Storico (1st); Pineta Zerbi, Tremulini and Eremo (2nd); Santa Caterina, San Brunello and Vito (3rd); Trabochetto, Condera and Spirito Santo (4th); Rione Ferrovieri, Stadio and Gebbione (5th); Sbarre (6th); San Giorgio, Modena, Scido and San Sperato (7th); Catona, Salice, Rosalì and Villa San Giuseppe (8th); Gallico and Sambatello (9th); Archi (10th); Ortì, Podàrgoni and Terreti (11th); Cannavò, Mosorrofa and Cataforio (12th); Ravagnese, San Gregorio, Croce Valanidi and Trunca (13th); Gallina (14th); Pellaro and Bocale (15th).
Reggio di Calabria is twinned with:

=Demography=

Economy

Reggio retains a somewhat rural ambience despite its sizable population. Industry in the city revolves primarily around agriculture and export, fruits, tobacco, briar and the precious essence of the bergamot which is used in perfume production. Reggio is a port city with a sizeable fishing industry.
The beaches of the city have become a popular tourist destination., even if the sea is often polluted by untreated sewers.liberareggio.

Agriculture and fishing

Trade, tourism and Tertiary

Industry

Sites and monuments of historical and artistic interest

Castles, churches and cathedrals

Museums, palaces and theatres

Archaeological sites and natural sites

New waterfront: Museum and Performing Arts Centre

The new waterfront designed by the architect Zaha Hadid, located on a narrow strait separating Italy from Sicily, marks the city of Reggio Calabria as a Mediterranean cultural capital. The museum (13,400 sqm) draws inspiration from the organic form of the starfish, utilizing a radial symmetry to coordinate communication and circulation between different program elements: exhibition spaces, restoration facilities, archive, aquarium and library. A second, multifunctional building (8,000 sqm), comprises two separate elements, placed around a partially covered piazza. Here are contained: offices, gyms, craft laboratories, cinema and flexible auditoria.

Culture

Education

Art

Literature and theater

Cinema, music and media

Notable people

For more information, see :Category:People from Reggio Calabria

Traditions

Food and wine

Sports

Infrastructure and transport

Highway

Reggio is a road junction on the SS18 Napoli-Reggio and on the SS106 Reggio-Taranto roads and also on the A3 Napoli-Salerno-Reggio motorway.

Tramway

The Tramway of Reggio was operative since 1918 until 1937. Tramway line was 5.3 km long, from Sbarre district (southern suburbs) till Annunziata bridge (northern part of town centre) passing by the whole historical centre.

Railway

It has an important main central railway station, the largest in Calabria, opened in 1866, with ten smaller stations.

Port

The Port of Reggio was enlarged after the 1908 earthquake.

Airport

The city, served by air from the Reggio Calabria Airport (IATA: REG, ICAO: LICR) also known as Aeroporto dello Stretto or Tito Minniti Airport, is located a few kilometres south of Reggio. The first runway was built in 1939 for military purposes. On 11 July 1943 a US air raid razed the structure, which later was rebuilt for civil aviation. The first civilian flight took place on 10 April 1947 with a twin-engine propeller-driven "Douglas DC-3" on the Turin – Bologna – Florence – Naples – Reggio di Calabria – Palermo route.
Design of the first paved runway began in October 1960. By decision of the Ministry of Defense-Air Force, on 10 December 1975 the airport was named Tito Minniti, after a pilot who crashed in East Africa on 26 December 1935 during the Ethiopian war. The airport structure is increasingly being improved; the recent phase of modernization has allowed for an increase in the number of available flights to Rome, Milan, Venice, Turin, Pisa, Bologna and other cities in Europe and the Mediterranean area (such as the island of Malta).








