[[Davide Ballardini]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, Living people, People from Ravenna, Italian football managers, S.S. Sambenedettese Calcio managers, Delfino Pescara 1936 managers, Cagliari Calcio managers, U.S. Città di Palermo managers, Genoa C.F.C. managers, Serie A managers, A.C. Cesena players, Italian footballers, S.S. Lazio managers, Bologna F.C. 1909 managers

Davide Ballardini (born 6 January 1964) is an Italian football manager. He formerly played professionally for Cesena, and is currently managing Bologna.

Career

Playing

Ballardini spent seven years as a player with Cesena, under youth team coach Arrigo Sacchi and first team coach Osvaldo Bagnoli, which are often cited by him as his personal mentors.

Coaching

Ballardini started his coaching career serving as youth team coach for Bologna, and successively Cesena and AC Milan. He then worked as Parma under-19 youth team coach from 2002 to 2004.
Ballardini started the 2006–07 season at the helm of Serie B side Pescara, where he however lasted only until October, following a very unimpressive beginning in the league.
On 4 September 2008 Palermo announced to have dismissed head coach Stefano Colantuono, appointing Ballardini as new rosanero boss in a one-year contract.
After weeks of rumours regarding a possible departure of Ballardini from Palermo at the end of the season, on 30 May the rosanero head coach announced he had agreed for a 10-day period to give a definite answer to the club regarding his intentions. Later that day, Palermo chairman Maurizio Zamparini announced Ballardini had asked to be relieved from his position due to his unwillingness to keep on serving as Palermo head coach.
Finally, after long rumours connecting Ballardini's name as the next coach of Lazio following Delio Rossi's departure, he was appointed as the new manager of the Roman club on 15 June 2009. He signed a two year contract with an option for a third worth 750,000 euro per year.
On his first competitive match as Lazio boss, Ballardini led the club to triumph in the 2009 Supercoppa Italiana, as his side won 2–1 to outgoing Italian champions Inter in a single-legged game played at Beijing National Stadium, Beijing, China. However, Ballardini did not repeat this triumph in Serie A level, and also failed to qualify to the 2009–10 UEFA Europa League knockout round. Later in January and February a number of disappointing results left Lazio in 18th place, in danger of being relegated, leading club chairman Claudio Lotito to dismiss Ballardini and appoint Edy Reja as new head coach.
On 8 November 2010 Ballardini returned into management, accepting an offer as head coach of Serie A club Genoa. He signed a two-year contract with the club, but club president Enrico Preziosi terminated the contract with him for no particular reason on 5 June 2011.
On 9 November 2011, Ballardini returned to manage Cagliari for the third time in his career. He was dismissed for just cause on March 11, 2012.
On 21 January 2013, Ballardini returned to Genoa to try and save them from relegation. He has managed to do so with still one game to go. Nevertheless chairman Preziosi may decide yet again to let him go at the end of the season. Ballardini is loved by many Genoa supporters for his manners and his energy on the pitch. Many want him to lead Genoa next season too.
On 8 January 2014, Serie A club Bologna announced that Ballardini agreed a 6-month deal to coach their first team.

Personal

Ballardini was born in Ravenna. He has three sons, all of them being footballers: Leo Natale (born 1990) played in the role of striker for Igea Virtus and Elia (born 1991, striker) for Virtus Entella, whereas Erik (born 1995, midfielder) are currently part of Cesena youth ranks.

Honours

As manager

Lazio




