[[Henry V of England]]

CATEGORIES: Henry V of England, 1386 births, 1422 deaths, People from Monmouth, Wales, English monarchs, English people of French descent, House of Lancaster, House of Valois, House of Plantagenet, People of the Hundred Years' War, English pretenders to the French throne, Deaths from dysentery, Princes of Wales, Dukes of Cornwall, Dukes of Lancaster, Regents of France, Lords Warden of the Cinque Ports, Knights of the Garter, Alumni of The Queen's College, Oxford, English Roman Catholics, Roman Catholic monarchs, High Sheriffs of Cornwall, Burials at Westminster Abbey, Infectious disease deaths in France, Order of the Dragon, 15th-century monarchs in Europe

Henry V (16 September 1386 – 31 August 1422), also known as the Star of England (Latin: Erasmus in Anglia), was King of England from 1413 until his death at the age of 35 in 1422. He was the second English monarch who came from the House of Lancaster.
After military experience fighting various lords who rebelled against his father, Henry IV, Henry came into political conflict with the increasingly ill king.  After his father's death, Henry rapidly assumed control of the country and embarked on war with France in the ongoing Hundred Years' War (1337 - 1453) between the two nations. His military successes culminated in his famous victory at the Battle of Agincourt (1415) and saw him come close to conquering France. After months of negotiation with Charles VI of France, the Treaty of Troyes (1420) recognized Henry V as regent and heir-apparent to the French throne, and he was subsequently married to Charles's daughter, Catherine of Valois (1401 - 1437). Following Henry V's sudden and unexpected death in France two years later, he was succeeded by his infant son, who reigned as Henry VI (1421 - 1471). V, 1854, pg. 90.
Henry features in three plays by William Shakespeare. He is shown as a young scapegrace who redeems himself in battle in the two Henry IV plays and as a decisive leader in Henry V. Henry's epithet the Star of England, originated in the epilogue of Shakespeare's Henry V, when the Chorus states: "in that small time most greatly lived this star of England..." 

Early life

Henry was born in the tower above the gatehouse of Monmouth Castle (and for that reason was sometimes called Henry of Monmouth).  He was the son of Henry of Bolingbroke, later Henry IV, and sixteen-year-old Mary de Bohun. He was also the grandson of the influential John of Gaunt and great-grandson of Edward III of England. At the time of his birth,  Richard II, his cousin once removed, was king. As he was not close to the line of succession to the throne, Henry's date of birth was not officially documented. His grandfather, John of Gaunt, was the guardian of the king at that time. Two birth dates are suggested: 9 August or 16 September, in either 1386 or 1387..
Upon the exile of Henry's father in 1398, Richard II took the boy into his own charge and treated him kindly. The young Henry accompanied King Richard to Ireland, and while in the royal service, he visited Trim Castle in County Meath, the ancient meeting place of the Irish Parliament. In 1399, Henry's grandfather died. The same year King Richard II was overthrown by the Lancastrian usurpation that brought Henry's father to the throne, and Henry was recalled from Ireland into prominence as heir apparent to the Kingdom of England. He was created Prince of Wales at his father's coronation, and Duke of Lancaster on 10 November 1399, the third person to hold the title that year. His other titles were Duke of Cornwall, Earl of Chester, and Duke of Aquitaine. A contemporary record notes that during that year Henry spent time at The Queen's College, Oxford, under the care of his uncle Henry Beaufort, the Chancellor of the university. From 1400 to 1404, he carried out the duties of High Sheriff of Cornwall.
Less than three years later, Henry was in command of part of the English forces—he led his own army into Wales against Owain Glyndŵr and joined forces with his father to fight Harry Hotspur at the Battle of Shrewsbury in 1403.

Role in government and conflict with Henry IV

The Welsh revolt of Owain Glyndŵr absorbed Henry's energies until 1408.  Then, as a result of the king's ill health, Henry began to take a wider share in politics.  From January 1410, helped by his uncles Henry and Thomas Beaufort – legitimated sons of John of Gaunt – he had practical control of the government.
Both in foreign and domestic policy he differed from the king, who in November 1411 discharged the prince from the council.  The quarrel of father and son was political only, though it is probable that the Beauforts had discussed the abdication of Henry IV, and their opponents certainly endeavoured to defame the prince.

Supposed riotous youth

It may be that the tradition of Henry's riotous youth, immortalised by Shakespeare, is partly due to political enmity. Henry's record of involvement in war and politics, even in his youth, disproves this tradition. The most famous incident, his quarrel with the chief justice, has no contemporary authority and was first related by Sir Thomas Elyot in 1531.
The story of Falstaff originated in Henry's early friendship with Sir John Oldcastle, a supporter of the Lollards. Shakespeare's Falstaff was originally named "Oldcastle", following his main source, The Famous Victories of Henry V.  However, his descendants objected, and the name was changed (the character became a composite of several real persons, including Sir John Fastolf).  That friendship, and the prince's political opposition to Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, perhaps encouraged Lollard hopes.  If so, their disappointment may account for the statements of ecclesiastical writers like Thomas Walsingham that Henry, on becoming king, was suddenly changed into a new man.

Accession to the throne

After Henry IV died on 20 March 1413, Henry V succeeded him and was crowned on 9 April 1413 at Westminster Abbey.  The ceremony was marked by a terrible snowstorm, but the common people were undecided as to whether it was a good or bad omen..

Domestic policy

Henry tackled all of the domestic policies together and gradually built on them a wider policy. From the first, he made it clear that he would rule England as the head of a united nation. On the one hand, he let past differences be forgotten – the late Richard II was honourably re-interred; the young Mortimer was taken into favour; the heirs of those who had suffered in the last reign were restored gradually to their titles and estates.  On the other hand, where Henry saw a grave domestic danger, he acted firmly and ruthlessly – such as the Lollard discontent in January 1414, including the execution by burning of Henry's old friend Sir John Oldcastle, so as to "nip the movement in the bud" and make his own position as ruler secure.
His reign was generally free from serious trouble at home. The exception was the Southampton Plot in favour of Mortimer, involving Henry Scrope, 3rd Baron Scrope of Masham and Richard, Earl of Cambridge (grandfather of the future King Edward IV), in July 1415.
Starting in August 1417, Henry V promoted the use of the English language in government, .

Foreign affairs

Diplomacy

Henry could now turn his attention to foreign affairs. A writer of the next generation was the first to allege that Henry was encouraged by ecclesiastical statesmen to enter into the French war as a means of diverting attention from home troubles. This story seems to have no foundation. Old commercial disputes and the support the French had lent to Owain Glyndŵr were used as an excuse for war, while the disordered state of France afforded no security for peace. The French king, Charles VI, was prone to mental illness, at times he thought he was made of glass, and his eldest son was an unpromising prospect. However, it was the old dynastic claim to the throne of France, first pursued by Edward III, that justified war with France in English opinion.
Following Agincourt, Hungarian King (later Holy Roman Emperor 1433–37) Sigismund made a visit to Henry in hopes of making peace between England and France. His goal was to persuade Henry to modify his demands against the French. Henry lavishly entertained the emperor and even had him enrolled in the Order of the Garter. Sigismund, in turn, inducted Henry into the Order of the Dragon.[ref]
