[[Catapult]]

CATEGORIES: Projectile weapons, Siege engines, Obsolete technologies

A catapult is a ballistic device used to launch a projectile a great distance without the aid of explosive devices—particularly various types of ancient and medieval siege engines.

Greek and Roman catapults

The catapult and crossbow in Greece are closely intertwined.  Primitive catapults were essentially "the product of relatively straightforward attempts to increase the range and penetrating power of missiles by strengthening the bow which propelled them". The historian Diodorus Siculus (fl. 1st century BC), described the invention of a mechanical arrow-firing catapult (katapeltikon) by a Greek task force in 399 BC. Sic. 14.42.1..
A third Greek author, Biton (fl. 2nd century BC), whose reliability has been positively reevaluated by recent scholarship,. The bows of these machines already featured a winched pull back system and could apparently throw two missiles at once.
Philo of Byzantium provides probably the most detailed account on the establishment of a theory of belopoietics ("belos" = projectile; "poietike" = (art) of making) circa 200 BC. The central principle to this theory was that "all parts of a catapult, including the weight or length of the projectile, were proportional to the size of the torsion springs".  This kind of innovation is indicative of the increasing rate at which geometry and physics were being assimilated into military enterprises.
From the mid-4th century BC onwards, evidence of the Greek use of arrow-shooting machines becomes more dense and varied: arrow firing machines (katapaltai) are briefly mentioned by Aeneas Tacticus in his treatise on siegecraft written around 350 BC. An extant inscription from the Athenian arsenal, dated between 338 and 326 BC, lists a number of stored catapults with shooting bolts of varying size and springs of sinews..
The Romans started to use catapults as arms for their wars against Syracuse, Macedon, Sparta and Aetolia (3rd and 2nd centuries BC). The Roman machine known as an arcuballista was similar to a large crossbow.. Later the Romans used ballista catapults on their warships.

Other ancient catapults

Ajatshatru is recorded in Jaina texts as having used a catapult in his campaign against the Licchavis. 

Medieval catapults

Castles and fortified walled cities were common during this period – and catapults were used as a key siege weapon against them.  As well as attempting to breach the walls, incendiary missiles could be thrown inside—or early biological warfare attempted with diseased carcasses or putrid garbage catapulted over the walls.
Defensive techniques in the Middle Ages progressed to a point that rendered catapults ineffective for the most part.  The Viking siege of Paris (885–6 A.D.) "saw the employment by both sides of virtually every instrument of siege craft known to the classical world, including a variety of catapults," to little effect, resulting in failure..
The most widely used catapults throughout the Middle Ages were as follows:.

Modern use

The last large scale military use of catapults was during the trench warfare of World War I.  During the early stages of the war, catapults were used to throw hand grenades across no man's land into enemy trenches.  They were eventually replaced by small mortars.
Special variants called aircraft catapults are used to launch planes from land bases and sea carriers when the takeoff runway is too short for a powered takeoff or simply impractical to extend.  Ships also use them to launch torpedoes and deploy bombs against submarines.  Small catapults, referred to as traps, are still widely used to launch clay targets into the air in the sport of clay pigeon shooting.
Until recently, catapults were used by thrill-seekers to experience being catapulted through the air. The practice has been discontinued due to fatalities, when the participants failed to land onto the safety net.
Pumpkin chunking is another widely popularized use, in which people compete to see who can launch a pumpkin the farthest by mechanical means (although the world record is held by a pneumatic air cannon).
In January 2011, PopSci.  The machine was found 20 feet from the border fence with .

Models

In the US, catapults of all types and sizes are being built for school science and history fairs, competitions or as a hobby. Catapult projects can inspire students to study different subjects including physics, engineering, science, math and history. These kits can be purchased from Renaissance Fairs, or from several online stores.



Notes



Bibliography




