[[Dannii Minogue]]

CATEGORIES: Dannii Minogue, 1971 births, Australian people of Irish descent, Australian people of Welsh descent, 20th-century Australian actresses, 20th-century Australian singers, 21st-century Australian actresses, 21st-century Australian singers, Actresses from Melbourne, Australia's Got Talent, Australian child actresses, Australian dance musicians, Australian expatriates in the United Kingdom, Australian female singers, Australian film actresses, Australian house musicians, Australian pop singers, Australian singer-songwriters, Australian television actresses, Disco musicians, Nu-disco musicians, People associated with Southampton Solent University, Reality television judges, Singers from Melbourne, The X Factor (TV series) judges, The X Factor (Australian TV series), The X Factor (UK TV series), Living people

Danielle Jane "Dannii" Minogue (born 20 October 1971)
In 2001, Minogue further returned to musical success with the release of her biggest worldwide hit to date, "Who Do You Love Now?", while her subsequent album, Neon Nights, became the most successful of her career. In the UK, she has achieved 12 consecutive number one dance singles, becoming the best-performing artist on the UK Upfront Club Chart.
Since 2007, Minogue has established herself as a successful talent show judge and television personality. She judged on Australia's Got Talent in Australia from 2007 until her departure in 2012, and until 2010, she also judged The X Factor UK, where she was the winning mentor in both 2007 and 2010 with Leon Jackson and Matt Cardle, respectively. In 2010, Minogue launched her own fashion label Project D London with her best friend Tabitha Somerset Webb. On 9 November 2011, she received an honorary doctorate degree in Media and Arts from Southampton Solent University for her 30-year varied career in the showbiz and media industry. In 2013, Minogue became a judge on the ninth series of Britain & Ireland's Next Top Model,Dannii Minogue joins Next Top Model as mentor and judge snubbing X Factor - Mirror Online and on the fifth series of The X Factor Australia, where she was the winning mentor in 2013 with Dami Im.

Childhood and beginning

Minogue was brought up in Surrey Hills, Melbourne and attended Canterbury Primary School and later Camberwell High School. Dannii was the younger daughter of accountant Ronald Charles Allano Minogue, who is of Irish descent,"Why we love Kylie – By three of the people who know her best". Daily Mail. 9 November 2007. Retrieved 15 November 2008. and Carol Jones, a dancer from Maesteg, Wales. "Family shock at Kylie's illness ". BBC. 18 May 2005. Retrieved 15 November 2008. She is the youngest of three children; her older sister Kylie Minogue is also a pop singer, and her brother, Brendan, is a news cameraman in Australia. "Kylie finishes 'successful' breast cancer treatment". The Times. 13 January 2006. Retrieved 16 November 2008.
Minogue began her career as a child on Australian television. From the age of 7, she appeared in several soap operas, including Skyways and The Sullivans. In 1981, she joined the successful weekly music programme Young Talent Time. Minogue recorded her first solo recordings for the programme, including a cover version of Madonna's hit single "Material Girl"; during this time, she also performed live at several sold-out nationwide concert tours."Chronology" DanniiMusic. Retrieved 5 December 2006. In 1988, Minogue departed from Young Talent Time to continue her acting career, appearing as the rebellious tomboyish teenager Emma Jackson on the soap opera Home and Away in 1989. Minogue remained on the programme for only a year. She proved to be popular among Australian audiences when she was nominated for a Silver Logie as the Most Popular Actress on Australian television.
In September 1988, Minogue released her own fashion range Dannii. She became interested in fashion design while appearing on Young Talent Time. Minogue had designed the clothing she had worn on the show, and the positive response from the audience resulted in her releasing her own line. "Dannii Minogue Interview". FamousInterview. Retrieved 14 December 2006. Minogue's debut line Dannii sold out across Australia in ten days, and was followed by three additional summer lines in 1989.

Career

1990–1995: Career beginnings, Dannii and Get into You

Minogue signed a recording contract with Australian-based Mushroom Records in January 1989. Her first album, Dannii, was released the following year and reached number 24 on the Australian albums chart."Discography Dannii Minogue". Australian-Charts. Retrieved 11 November 2008. Outside Australia, the album was released in 1991, under the title Love and Kisses, and became a top 10 hit. Minogue's debut single "Love and Kisses" peaked at number four on the Australian singles chart and was certified gold. In the UK, the song reached the top 10 on the  singles chart."Chart Stats: Dannii Minogue". ChartStats. Retrieved 11 November 2008. In August 1991 she embarked on an extensive promotional tour of South East Asia, including Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Taipei and the Philippines.
Minogue released Love and Kisses and..., a re-issue of her debut album, in November 1991. The album, a collection of dance songs, comprised tracks and remixes from Love and Kisses. It peaked at number 42 on the UK albums chart, and sold nearly 60,000 copies in its own right. Several remixes by producer and DJ Steve "Silk" Hurley were successful in European dance clubs. She credits these remixes for providing her with a "new image and sound to work with" on future releases. Also that year, Minogue made her feature film debut in Secrets, which co-starred Noah Taylor. The film revolved around five Australian teenagers who become stuck in the basement of a hotel in an attempt to see The Beatles. The film was not well received by audiences or critics, with Minogue's performance being described as "not all that convincing". Secrets Critical Review and Bibliography. Murdoch.au. Retrieved 12 December 2006.
Minogue released her second album Get Into You, which included the songs "Show You the Way to Go", "This Is It" and "This Is the Way", in October 1993. The album contained uptempo dance tracks and mature poser, but despite her past chart success, failed to make the British top fifty. In mid-1994, Minogue returned to television as a presenter, co-hosting Channel 4's morning show The Big Breakfast in the UK. In 1995, Minogue released the singles "Rescue Me" and "Boogie Woogie", a collaboration with dance act Eurogroove. Released only in Japan, both songs reached number one on the Japanese singles chart. She began recording her third album in 1995; however, Minogue and her record label, Mushroom Records, parted ways in late 1995 following a contract disagreement.
The tracks recorded in 1994/1995 for Minogue's then planned 3rd album were unheard for many years, they were finally released in 2009 via Cargo Records on the compilation album The 1995 Sessions.
In 1990, Minogue appeared before the Queen at the Royal Variety Show where she sang her latest release "Success".

1996–2004: Girl and Neon Nights

In 1996, Minogue resumed her co-hosting duties, presenting the Eggs on Legs road show segment. That same year, Minogue briefly hosted the children's show Disney Time and co-hosted, with Gareth Jones, the teenage Saturday morning entertainment show It's Not Just Saturday for 16. In 1997, Minogue hosted Top of the Pops, a British music chart television programme, before returning to her recording career later that year. In April 1997, Minogue made her stage debut as Rizzo in the musical Grease: The Arena Spectacular. In Australia, the show sold over 450,000 tickets during its first season. The following year, Minogue resumed her role as Rizzo, performing in New Zealand. At the 1998 MO Awards, Minogue was nominated for "Best Female Musical Theater Performer" for her role.
Following the release of several remixes of her songs by Steve "Silk" Hurley, Minogue became interested in dance music. She commented that the remixes were "the first thing I did that was really cool and my love of dance music and clubbing started from there." Minogue's interest in dance music and clubbing influenced her third album, Girl, released in September 1997, which featured collaborations with musicians such as Brian Higgins of Xenomania. The album presented a more sophisticated and adult style of dance music, but despite generally positive reviews, failed to make the British top 50. The lead single "All I Wanna Do", which the Daily Mirror described as a "bass-bumping, shuddering return",Hyland, Ian. "Dreamy Danni is Putting on a Great Front". Daily Mirror. 10 August 1997. Retrieved 5 December 2006. was a success peaking at number four on the UK singles chart. In her native Australia, the single also proved to be a success peaking at number eleven and was certified gold. The album's second single "Everything I Wanted" made the top 20 in the UK and the top 50 in Australia, while the third single "Disremembrance" narrowly missed the top 20y in the UK, peaking at number 21. All three singles released from Girl reached number one on the UK dance chart.
In June 1998, Minogue began The Unleashed Tour, a 22-date UK tour. Mushroom Records released two budget compilation albums in December 1998, as part of the label's 25th anniversary. Released only in Australia, The Singles comprised all Minogue's single releases, while The Remixes contained popular remixes. These releases were promoted with the song "Coconut" which was previously only available as a hidden track on CD versions of the Girl album. In January 1999, following her performance at the 1998 Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras, Minogue released the festival's first official theme song,
"Everlasting Night". It appeared on the compilation CD Gay & Lesbian Mardi Gras of 1999, and its music video, co-directed by Minogue, was a tribute to Australia's gay and lesbian community. All Around the World. June 2006.
In November 2001, Minogue released the single, "Who Do You Love Now?", a collaboration with Riva. Described by Sound Generator as a "nice serene and dreamy vocal on the dance floor anthem", the song peaked at number three on the UK singles chart, and reached number one on the dance charts."A 'proper' record from young Dannii of well crafted little gems". SoundGenerator. 19 March 2002. Retrieved 12 December 2006. In Australia, the song peaked at number 15, while in the United States the song was released to dance clubs, and reached number 12 on the United States' Billboard Dance Club chart. In 2001, Minogue signed a six-album deal with London Records, a subsidiary of Warner Music International."Dannii Minogue Ditched By Record Label". ContactMusic. Retrieved 22 January 2007.

In March 2003, Minogue released her fourth album, Neon Nights, which the BBC called "a pleasant cocktail of pop sophistication, club culture and accessibility". "Review of Neon Nights". BBC. Retrieved 4 December 2006. It consisted of 1980s inspired dance-pop songs and provided Minogue with some of the strongest reviews of her career. Neon Nights peaked at number eight on the UK albums chart (her highest ranking since her debut), and produced four top 10 singles. "Who Do You Love Now?" was not officially released as the first single, however it was included on the album. The official lead single was "Put the Needle on It", a 1980s inspired dance-pop song which proved to be a top 10n hit in the UK, peaking at number seven. It enjoyed top 20 success in multiple countries including Australia, where it peaked at number 11 and was certified gold. The second single, "I Begin to Wonder", was declared one of the "best things" on the album by Ireland's Radio Telefís Éireann and became her highest charting single in the UK, peaking at number two. "Review of Neon Nights". Radio Telefís Éireann. 23 April 2003. Retrieved 4 December 2006. In Australia, the single garnered Minogue another top 20 hit, peaking at number 14 and was also certified gold. Third single "Don't Wanna Lose This Feeling" was equally successful as its predecessors, peaking at number five in the UK, while in Australia the single just missed the top 20, charting at number 22. The album's success was equally widespread, and following extensive airplay by North American dance radio, Warner Music Group released it in the United States in late 2003. Singles "I Begin to Wonder" and "Don't Wanna Lose This Feeling" were also substantial successes on the US dance charts."Dannii Minogue > Charts & Awards > Billboard Singles". Allmusic. Retrieved 11 November 2008.

2004–2006: The Hits & Beyond

In June 2004, Afterlife released the album Speck of Gold, which featured Danni on the single "Take Me Inside." The album was released in Australia in 2008, featured two different versions of the song, both featuring Danni.
In October 2004, Minogue released the single "You Won't Forget About Me", a collaboration with the dance act Flower Power. Described by MSN Entertainment as a "real grower" and noted for its "snip snapping house beats and '80s flecked synths", the song peaked at number seven on the UK singles chart and also made the top 20 in Australia."Review of "You Won't Forget About Me"". MSN. 22 October 2004. Retrieved 4 December 2006. "Perfection", a collaboration with the Soul Seekerz, followed in October 2005 where it reached the top twenty in both the UK and Australia.

Minogue released The Hits & Beyond, a greatest hits album, in June 2006. The album consisted of new songs alongside singles from her four studio albums. It debuted at number 17 on the UK albums chart. In Australia, The Hits & Beyond became one of Minogue's lowest charting albums, peaking at #67. The album introduced a new single, "So Under Pressure", inspired by the cancer diagnoses of her sister Kylie as well as that of an unnamed friend.. DanniiMusic. 19 September 2006. Retrieved 4 December 2006.
In November 2006, Minogue performed Sister Sledge's 1979 song "He's the Greatest Dancer" on BBC One's Children in Need telethon. A studio version of the song, remixed by Fugitive, appeared on the dance compilation Clubland 10, which was released in November 2006."Clubland Vol. 10". DanniiMusic. Retrieved 21 December 2006. It also charted in the top 40 on the Australian singles chart.

2007–2010: Unleashed, Club Disco, Australia's Got Talent and The X Factor UK

October onwards saw a total of five releases from Minogue; first, on 29 October, reissues of her 1997 and 2003 albums Girl and Neon Nights, each containing a double-disc, the second disc of which includes remixes. The Dannii Minogue Official Forum. Retrieved 6 October 2007. Dannii Minogue Official Forum. Retrieved 6 October 2007. On 5 November, she released Unleashed, a collection of previously unheard material from her time with London Records, and The Video Collection, which includes every one of her music videos as well as bonus features. Dannii Minogue Official Forum. Retrieved 6 October 2007. Digital album Club Disco was released on the same date, featuring several previously released singles, such as "You Won't Forget About Me", "Perfection" and "So Under Pressure", cancelled single "I Can't Sleep at Night" and covers of "Xanadu" and the disco classic "He's the Greatest Dancer". Finally, on 3 December, a new single was released, entitled "Touch Me Like That" which peaked at number one on the UK Dance Chart.
In early 2008, Minogue was hired as the headline performer at Australian Fashion Week. In particular she was booked to make an appearance as the opening party hosted by MAC Cosmetics. She also returned as a judge on Australia's Got Talent for its second series and released Club Disco as a double album in Australia with some changes to the tracklisting.
At the start of 2009, a digital compilation album, "The Early Years", was released online that featured songs from Minogue's first two studio albums. Simon Cowell later confirmed that Minogue would return to her role as a judge on The X Factor for its sixth series
On 7 December 2009, Minogue released The 1995 Sessions, an album full of previously unreleased recordings made for what would have been her then third studio album, which never materialized due to differences with her then label... Dannii Minogue to release her lost album The Guardian. 27 October 2009. On the same date, Dannii re-released remastered editions of her first two albums with MCA Records, her debut Love & Kisses and the follow-up Get Into You.com (UK) : Dannii Minogue – Get Into You (Deluxe Edition) (2CD) : CD – Free DeliveryPlay.Eriksen, Alanah. "Dannii the doctor! Miss Minogue awarded an honorary degree for her 'major contribution to the entertainment industry'" The Daily Mail. 10 November 2011. Retrieved 1 September 2012.
On 23 June 2010, ITV2 announced Dannii Minogue: Style Queen, a three-part documentary about Minogue's fashion line "Project D", The X Factor, motherhood, her partner Kris Smith, and her return to music as well as writing her autobiography – My Story, which was produced by Steve Vizard and broadcast in Australia on Foxtel.39

2011–present: The X Factor Australia, Britain & Ireland's Next Top Model and This Is It: The Very Best Of

On 14 May 2011, it was announced that Minogue would not return to The X Factor for its eighth series.digitalspy.co.html Minogue was replaced by Kelly Rowland.
In January 2012, Minogue appeared in the ITV documentary The Talent Show Story where she talked about her time on The X Factor UK and working on talent shows. Other talent show judges interviewed included Gary Barlow, Louis Walsh, Kelly Rowland, Tulisa Contostavlos, Amanda Holden, Piers Morgan, Carrie Grant, and Simon Cowell, as well as The X Factor host Dermot O'Leary, and Britain's Got Talent hosts Ant & Dec.
In February 2012, Minogue officially opened Madame Tussauds Sydney, unveiling a waxwork of herself at the launch. Minogue was replaced by Geri Halliwell. 
In June 2013, Minogue joined Elle Macpherson and Tyson Beckford on the judging panel for the ninth series of Sky Living's Britain & Ireland's Next Top Model. On 29 July 2013, Minogue made her debut on the Australian version of The X Factor, joining Ronan Keating, Natalie Bassingthwaighte and Redfoo on the judging panel for the fifth series of the show. In August 2013, Minogue released This Is It: The Very Best Of, a singles compilation that coincided with her debut on The X Factor Australia.Dannii Minogue is releasing a new greatest hits and it'll feature a new song called "'Cos You're Beautiful' - Popjustice 
In September 2013, Minogue teamed up with X Factor judge Ronan Keating to record a duet of Christmas classic "Santa Claus Is Coming To Town" for department store chain Myer's "The Spirit of Christmas 2013" compilation..

Acting, presenting and television

Minogue's other main TV project in 2008 came on 20 September when she presented the Nickelodeon UK Kids' Choice Awards 2008 ceremony. "Dannii Minogue to host Nickelodeon awards". DigitalSpy.co.uk. Retrieved 28 October 2011.
Minogue also appeared as a judge and mentor in the fourth series of ITV's The X Factor, alongside Simon Cowell, Louis Walsh and Sharon Osbourne."Minogue, Friedman join 'The X Factor'". Digital Spy. 4 June 2007. Retrieved 28 October 2011. She mentored the boys category during the show and selected Leon Jackson, Rhydian Roberts and Andy Williams to represent her in the live rounds of the competition.
