[[Chipmunk]]

CATEGORIES: Chipmunks, Squirrels

Chipmunks are small, striped rodents of the family Sciuridae.  All species of chipmunks are found in North America, with the exception of the Siberian chipmunk, which is found primarily in Asia.

Taxonomy and systematics

Chipmunks may be classified either as a single genus, Tamias (

File:Streifenhoernchen.jpg|A Siberian chipmunk, in South Korea
File:Streifenhörnchen Zion.jpg|A western chipmunk (probably a Uinta chipmunk) in Zion National Park, Utah
File:Tamias striatus2.jpg|An eastern chipmunk

The genus name Tamias is Greek for "treasurer", "steward", or "housekeeper",
The common name originally may have been spelled "chitmunk," from the native Odawa (Ottawa) word jidmoonh, meaning "red squirrel" (cf. Ojibwe, ajidamoo). Chipmunks have also been referred to as "striped squirrels," "chippers," "munks," "timber tigers," or "ground squirrels" (although the name "ground squirrel" usually refers to other squirrels, such as those of the genus Spermophilus).

Diet

Chipmunks have an omnivorous diet primarily consisting of seeds, nuts and other fruits, and buds. They also commonly eat grass, shoots, and many other forms of plant matter, as well as fungi, insects and other arthropods, small frogs, worms, and bird eggs.

Ecology and life history

Eastern chipmunks mate in early spring and again in early summer, producing litters of four or five young twice each year.
These small mammals fulfill several important functions in forest ecosystems. Their activities harvesting and hoarding tree seeds play a crucial role in seedling establishment. They consume many different kinds of fungi, including those involved in symbiotic mycorrhizal associations with trees, and are an important vector for dispersal of the spores of subterranean sporocarps (truffles) which have co-evolved with these and other mycophagous mammals and thus lost the ability to disperse their spores through the air.
Chipmunks construct expansive burrows which can be more than 3.5 m in length with several well-concealed entrances. The sleeping quarters are kept extremely clean as shells and feces are stored in refuse tunnels.
The eastern chipmunk hibernates in the winter, while western chipmunks do not, relying on the stores in their burrows.
Chipmunks play an important role as prey for various predatory mammals and birds, but are also opportunistic predators themselves, particularly with regard to bird eggs and nestlings. In Oregon, mountain bluebirds (Siala currucoides) have been observed energetically mobbing chipmunks that they see near their nest trees.
Chipmunks typically live about three years, although have been observed living to nine years in captivity.
Chipmunks in captivity are said to sleep for an average of about 15 hours a day. It is thought that mammals which can sleep in hiding, such as rodents and bats, tend to sleep longer than those that must remain on alert."40 Winks?" Jennifer S. Holland, National Geographic Vol. 220, No. 1. July 2011.

Species list

Subgenus Eutamias
Subgenus TamiasTamias, Mammal Species of the World, 3rd ed.
Subgenus Neotamias
Extinct:





Further reading




