[[Victor McLaglen]]

CATEGORIES: 1886 births, 1959 deaths, Bare-knuckle boxers, Best Actor Academy Award winners, British Army personnel of World War I, British Life Guards soldiers, Burials at Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Glendale), Deaths from myocardial infarction, Disease-related deaths in California, English boxers, English male film actors, English male silent film actors, Middlesex Regiment officers, People from Royal Tunbridge Wells, Vaudeville performers, Male Western (genre) film actors, 20th-century English male actors, Male actors from Kent

Victor Andrew de Bier Everleigh McLaglen (10 December 1886 – 7 November 1959) was an English boxer and World War I veteran who became a successful film actor.
Towards the end of his life he was naturalised as a U.S. citizen.

Early life

McLaglen was born in Tunbridge Wells, Kent. His father, later a bishop of the Free Protestant Episcopal Church of England,McLaglen's father – new revelations; Peter Anson BISHOPS AT LARGE (1964) has further information on Bishop McLaglen. moved the family to South Africa when McLaglen was a child. He had eight brothers and a sister.  Four of his brothers also became actors:  Arthur (1888–1972), an actor and sculptor, and Clifford (1892–1978), Cyril (1899–1987) and Kenneth (circa 1901-1979). Great War Forum. Invisionzone. 19 March 2006. Other siblings included Frederick (b. circa 1882), Sydney (b. circa 1884), Lewis (b. circa 1889), and a sister, Lily (b. circa 1893). Another brother, Leopold McLaglen, who appeared in one film, gained notoriety prior to World War I as a showman and self-proclaimed World Jujutsu Champion,"The Science of Jiujitsu". Journal of Non-lethal Combatives. December 2002. who authored a book on the subject. Early Ju-jutsu: The Challenges''. Dragon-Tsunami.

Before Hollywood

He left home at fourteen to join the British Army with the intention of fighting in the Second Boer War. However, much to his chagrin, he was stationed at Windsor Castle with the Life Guards and was later forced to leave the army when his true age was discovered.
Four years later, he moved to Canada, where he earned a living as a wrestler and heavyweight boxer, with several notable wins in the ring. One of his most famous fights was against Heavyweight Champion Jack Johnson, in a 6 round exhibition bout. Cyber Boxing Zone. This was Johnson's first bout since winning the heavyweight title from Tommy Burns. Between bouts, McLaglen toured with a circus, which offered $25 to anyone who could go three rounds with him. He returned to Britain in 1913 and during World War I served as a Captain (acting) with the 10th Battalion, Middlesex Regiment, part of The Princess of Wales's Royal Regiment (Queen's and Royal Hampshires). Later he claimed to have served with the Royal Irish Fusiliers. He served for a time as military Provost Marshal for the city of Baghdad. Great War Forum. Invisionzone. 26 September 2005. He also continued boxing, and was named Heavyweight Champion of the British Army in 1918. After the war, he began taking roles in British silent films.

Film career

McLaglen's career took a surprise turn in the 1920s, when he moved to Hollywood. He became a popular character actor, with a particular knack for playing drunks. He also usually played Irishmen, leading many film fans to mistakenly assume he was Irish rather than English. McLaglen played one of the titular Unholy Three in Lon Chaney, Sr.'s original silent version of the macabre crime drama. The highlight of his career was an Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in The Informer (1935), based on a novel by Liam O'Flaherty; Frank Tashlin's 1938 cartoon Have You Got Any Castles? features a caricature of McLaglen emerging from the novel and literally informing someone about some shady characters. Arguably his most famous film remains Gunga Din (1939) with Cary Grant and Douglas Fairbanks, Jr., an adventure epic loosely based on Rudyard Kipling's poem that served as an influence decades later on Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom (1984). McLaglen was nominated again, this time for Best Supporting Actor for his role opposite John Wayne in The Quiet Man (1952). He was especially popular with director John Ford, who frequently included McLaglen in his films, often as comedy relief. Toward the end of his career, McLaglen made several guest appearances on television, particularly in Western series such as Have Gun, Will Travel and Rawhide. The episodes of those series in which McLaglen guest-starred were both directed by his son, Andrew V. McLaglen, who later was a film director frequently directing John Wayne.

Personal life

In 1935 McLaglen spent a reported $40,000 to build his own stadium near Riverside Drive and Hyperion Avenue, near Griffith Park and the Atwater Village neighborhood of Los Angeles.  The stadium was used for soccer and many other activities.  The Los Angeles River flood of 1938 seriously damaged the stadium and it fell into disuse thereafter.A. Sports Venues That Are No More", LA Weekly, December 23, 2013. 27, 45-47. Excerpts available at Google Books.
Victor McLaglen was the elder brother of the actor Cyril McLaglen.
Victor McLaglen was married three times. His first marriage was to Enid Lamont in 1919. The couple had one daughter, Sheila, and one son, Andrew. Andrew McLaglen was a television and film director. Andrew's children, Mary and Josh McLaglen, are both film producers and directors. Sheila's daughter, Gwyneth Horder-Payton, is a television director. Enid Lamont McLaglen died in 1942 as a result of a horse riding accident.
Victor McLaglen married twice more. His second marriage was to Suzanne M. Brueggeman. That marriage lasted from 1943 until 1948. His third and final marriage was to Margaret Pumphrey, whom he married in 1948. He had by that time become a naturalized U.S. citizen. He was buried in Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale, California.

Filmography








