[[United States Secretary of Transportation]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of members of the Cabinet of the United States, Cabinet of the United States, United States Secretaries of Transportation, Transport ministers

The United States Secretary of Transportation is the head of the United States Department of Transportation, a member of the President's Cabinet, and twelfth in the Presidential line of succession.
The first Secretary of Transportation was Alan Stephenson Boyd, nominated to the post by Democratic President Lyndon B. Johnson. Ronald Reagan's second Secretary of Transportation, Elizabeth Dole, was the first female holder, and Mary Peters was the second. Gerald Ford's nominee William Thaddeus Coleman, Jr. was the first African American to serve as Transportation Secretary, and Federico Peña, serving under Bill Clinton, was the first Hispanic to hold the position, subsequently becoming Secretary of Energy. Japanese American Norman Mineta, who had previously been Secretary of Commerce, is the longest-serving Secretary, holding the post for over five and a half years, and Andrew Card is the shortest-serving Secretary, serving only eleven months. Neil Goldschmidt was the youngest secretary, taking office at age thirty-nine, while Norman Mineta was the oldest, retiring at age seventy-four.
Anthony Foxx, the Mayor of Charlotte, North Carolina was nominated by President Barack Obama on April 29, 2013, to succeed Ray LaHood. On June 27, 2013 the Senate confirmed his appointment by a vote of 100-0. (2013-06-28) Cabinet post caps Charlotte Mayor Anthony Foxx's steep ascent. CharlotteObserver. Retrieved on 2014-04-28.

Secretaries of Transportation

Line of succession

The line of succession regarding who would act as Secretary of Transportation in the event of a vacancy or incapacitation is as follows:



The order of succession of the U.S. Department of Transportation is as follows :
(1) Deputy Secretary. 
(2) Under Secretary of Transportation 
for Policy. 
(3) General Counsel. 
(4) Assistant Secretary for Budget and Programs. 
(5) Assistant Secretary for 
Transportation Policy. 
(6) Assistant Secretary for 
Governmental Affairs. 
(7) Assistant Secretary for Aviation 
and International Affairs. 
(8) Assistant Secretary for 
Administration. 
(9) Administrator of the Federal Highway Administration
(10) Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration
(11) Administrator of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
(12) Administrator of the Federal Railroad Administration
(13) Administrator of the Federal Transit Administration
(14) Administrator of the Maritime Administration
(15) Administrator of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
(16) Administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
(17) Administrator of the Research and Innovative Technology Administration
(18) Administrator of the Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation
(19) Regional Administrator, Southern Region, Federal Aviation Administration
(20) Director, Resource Center, Lakewood, Colorado, Federal Highway Administration
(21) Regional Administrator, Northwest Mountain Region, Federal Aviation Administration




