[[Frankfurt School of Finance & Management]]

CATEGORIES: Business schools in Germany, Education in Frankfurt, Universities in Germany, Universities and colleges in Hesse, Management education, Management science, Educational institutions established in 1957

The Frankfurt School of Finance & Management is a private non-profit Business school in Frankfurt, Germany.

History

The Frankfurt School of Finance & Management was founded 1957 as  (HfB), an academic institution offering degree programs. A consulting arm, International Advisory Services, was added in the 1990s as well, as was a separate department for Executive Education and tailor-made training programs for companies. Efiport, a subsidiary for e-learning and IT solutions for higher education, was created in 2001.
In 2004 HfB officially became a research institution with the rank of a university and was granted the right to award doctoral degrees. In 2007 HfB and were merged under the new name Frankfurt School of Finance & Management.

Reputation

The Frankfurt School is officially recognised as a higher education institution with the rank of a university by the German authorities. As such, it has the right to award undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral degrees. It has also been accredited by the German Council of Science and Humanities () and by the FIBAA. Its MBA in International Healthcare Management is accredited by the EFMD. Frankfurt School is currently pursuing accreditation by the AACSB and EQUIS.
It was ranked the sixth best Business School in Germany by business magazine Wirtschaftswoche in 2012, based on a survey of 500 HR directors.
In a 2012 ranking of German undergraduate business programs by higher education think tank CHE, Frankfurt School was ranked best together with the University of Mannheim, the Technical University Munich, EBS, and WHU.
The 2011/12 international Eduniversal list of the 1,000 best Business Schools ranked Frankfurt School 3rd in Germany and 126th worldwide.
Being located in the heart of Frankfurt, Frankfurt School of Finance & Management boasts one of the best networks in the country for students interested in a career in the financial sector.

Degree programs

Undergraduate

The School offers six undergraduate programs, all awarding the degree of Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.). All programs are full-time with a total of  210 ECTS credit points. Two programs combine studies with a work position, and all have internships in Germany and abroad.

Postgraduate

Frankfurt School offers nine postgraduate programs and awards the degrees Master of Science (M.Sc.), Master of Arts (M.A.), Master of Business Administration (MBA) and Master of Laws (LL.M.).

PhD

Frankfurt School also has a 3-year doctoral program which awards the degree Dr. rer. pol.

Continuing and Executive Education

Faculty

The faculty at Frankfurt School is organized in five departments. In addition to the professors and lecturers there are eleven Program Directors who oversee and develop the degree programs. They are counted as faculty, although they form part of a different team that reports to the President rather than the Vice President for Academic Affairs and not all of them teach continuously.

Campus

The School's campus is located in Frankfurt, Germany in the district Ostend, directly opposite the construction site for the new headquarters of the European Central Bank. It also has rented office space in adjacent buildings. However, due to sustained growth the School will build a new, state of the art campus in Frankfurt's  Nordend, which is slated to open in 2017.
Frankfurt School also has study centers in Hamburg and Munich and five offices around the world, mainly for recruitment of students and for activities related to its consulting and executive education: Nairobi, Beijing, Shanghai, Pune (India) and São Paulo.

Consulting

International Advisory Services (IAS) structures and implements consulting and training projects in emerging markets and developing countries. Clients include international donor organisations, non-governmental organisations (NGOs), international financial institutions (IFIs), microfinance institutions (MFIs), banks and other financial institutions.
Experts of Frankfurt School of Finance & Management's division International Advisory Services have supported partners and clients in the following areas:
IAS reaches its clients through seven core competence centers:

Subsidiaries

Frankfurt School has three subsidiaries: the publisher Frankfurt School Verlag; efiport, which specializes in IT solutions for higher education and Frankfurt School Financial Services, an asset management firm for development projects.

International partners

Frankfurt School is a very international Business School, partly due to the fact that all undergraduate students go abroad for at least one semester. Currently, there are 84 partner institutions in 33 countries. The School has two dual degree agreements for the Bachelor program International Business Administration with Bond University in Australia and with the University of Colorado Colorado Springs in the United States.

Notable people

In the last 50 years over 100,000 students have graduated from the Frankfurt School of Finance & Management and its predecessors  and HfB. Many of them hold important positions in German and international companies, especially in financial institutions.






