[[Maynard Morrison (American football)]]

CATEGORIES: 1909 births, 2006 deaths, People from Royal Oak, Michigan, Players of American football from Michigan, American football centers, Michigan Wolverines football players, Brooklyn Dodgers (NFL) players

Maynard Davis "Doc" Morrison (May 28, 1909  In 1931, he was chosen by Grantland Rice and the NEA Service as a first-team All-American at center and helped lead Michigan to a Big Ten Conference championship.

1929 season

As a sophomore in 1929, Morrison was already a significant contributor at the fullback position.  When Morrison finished his freshman year, he "was rated the outstanding fullback prospect in Michigan history."  In the fall of 1929, Morrison missed five games at the beginning of the season due to injury.  Then, against Illinois, he was placed in the lineup at tackle and became "the individual star of the Wolverines by a wide, handsome and undisputed margin."  On defense, he was taken out of the line and played at defensive fullback, and when an Illinois back found a hole in the line, Grantland Rice wrote that "Morrison usually picked him up bodily and hurled him back into the breach in the wall."  And occasionally, "he was content with merely smacking the ball carriers against the ground as they had never been smacked before."  After the Illinois game, Coach Kipke said of Morrison, "That boy will develop into the finest defensive back in Michigan's history.  His injured knee isn't entirely well, and when it is he will add more speed to his play."
At the end of the 1929 season, Coach Kipke touted Morrison as the best back to wear the Michigan uniform in 15 years: "Coach Harry Kipke says Maynard Morrison . . . is the nearest approach to Johnny Maulbetsch the Wolverines have seen in the last 15 years.  Morrison is a husky sophomore of more than 200 pounds and hits the line with all the force and power that made Maulbetsch famous as a line smasher.  Morrison suffered early season injuries that kept him from play during the first month but he is expected to show his stuff in the closing games."

1930 season

In the summer of 1930, Coach Kipke reported that he had 15 varsity caliber backs but was lacking in talent in the line.  Accordingly, Kipke reported he was considering moving Morrison to the center position.
After ten days of experimenting during fall practice, Kipke made the switch, moving Maynard from fullback to center.
Morrison performed well at his new position in 1930, being praised by the AP for his "defensive genius."

1931 season

In 1931, Morrison started nine games for the 8-1-1 Wolverines team that tied for the Big Ten Conference championship.  Morrison was selected as a first-team All-American in 1931 by Grantland Rice for Collier's magazine and by the NEA Service All-America Board.
In announcing Morrison as its All-Big Ten team center, the Associated Press described him as "Michigan's 210 pound center from Royal Oak, Michigan," a player who was "big, shifty and fast," and "the key man of Michigan's defense."
Morrison was part of a long line of All-American centers at Michigan, starting with William Cunningham and Germany Schulz followed by Ernie Vick, Jack Blott,  Bob Brown, and Chuck Bernard.

Honors and accolades

Among the honors received by Morrison are the following:

Notes






