[[Kincraig Lake Ecological Reserve]]

CATEGORIES: The Fylde, Geography of Blackpool, Parks and commons in Blackpool

Kincraig Lake Ecological Reserve (also known as Bispham Marsh and Kincraig Pond) is a wildlife reserve located in Bispham in Blackpool on the Fylde coast, Lancashire, England. It is owned by Blackpool Council.

History

The site was originally a marl pit, excavated in the 1890s for fertiliser and surrounded by open farmland.[ref]
[/ref]
Kincraig Lake Ecological Reserve is one of fourteen Biological Heritage Sites (BHS) in Blackpool. A BHS provides a refuge for rare and threatened plants and animals. 

Wildlife

There is a variety of wildlife seen at the reserve. In winter 2007 the local Fylde Bird Club organised a Christmas Bird Hunt around the Fylde and recorded the following birds at Kincraig Lake – Grey Heron, Mallard, Mute Swan, Canada Geese, Shoveler, Teal, Mallard, Coot, Moorhen, Sparrowhawk, Little Grebe, starling, magpie, Long-tailed Tit, snipe, Grey Wagtail, Greylag Geese, Black-headed Gull, Goldcrest, Blue Tit, Gadwall, Tufted Duck, Great Crested Grebe and Great Spotted Woodpecker.[ref]
[/ref]
Since then Fylde Bird Club have recorded additional birds at the lake including, Cormorant, European Goldfinch, Kingfisher and Water Rail

Friends of Kincraig Lake

In January 2008 a new "Friends of Kincraig Lake" group was set up by local residents to help restore the wetland back to its former glory, following years of tipping, vandalism and neglect. The group's first priority being to repair the footpaths which circumnavigate the entire lake at a cost of about £10,000, which would improve disabled access to the lake.[ref]
 On 12 April 2008 the Friends group organised a litter pick which was attended by local MP, Joan Humble and they removed nearly one tonne of litter and fly-tipping from around the lake. As part of the National Moth Night, the Friends organised a moth recording event for 7 June.

Ashfield pond and local area

There are a number of ponds of various sizes in the surrounding area including Ashfield pond () as well as ponds on Robins Lane.
Ashfield pond, which is located to the north of Ashfield Road by Blackpool and The Fylde College Bispham campus. The Heritage Lottery Fund gave a grant of £22,800 to the Kincraig Pond Heritage Group and the Kincraig Neighbourhood Play Steering Group as part of a Community Heritage Project for the local area and Ashfield pond. The projects aim being to "restore the pond and surrounding area, research and record history of the local area, promote a greater awareness amongst local residents of the historical and environmental value of the local area."
Dumfries Place pond iw part of an ecological area within 

Gallery

Image:Kincraig Lake02.jpg|A view of part of the lake showing part of one island
Image:Kincraig Lake04.jpg|Another view of part of the lake showing one of the islands
Image:Kincraig Lake05.jpg|Two mallard drakes swimming on the lake








