[[Nino Konis Santana National Park]]

CATEGORIES: National parks of East Timor, Protected areas established in 2007, Lautém District, Important Bird Areas of East Timor

The Nino Konis Santana National Park  is East Timor's first national park. The park, established on 3 August 2007, covers  of the Coral Triangle, an underwater area which supposedly contains the world's greatest diversity of both coral and coral reef fish. Some of the rare birds protected by this park are the critically endangered Yellow-crested Cockatoo, the endemic Timor Green-pigeon, the endangered Timor Imperial-pigeon, and the vulnerable Timor Sparrow.
The park is named in honor of the independence movement national hero Nino Konis Santana, a former commander of Revolutionary Front for an Independent East Timor (FRETILIN), who was born in Tutuala, a village within the borders of the national park.

History

Part of the park first became a natural conservation reserve during the occupation of the country by Indonesia in the period from 1975-1999. When the country was under the United Nations (UN) Control as United Nations Transitional Administration in Timor Leste (UNTEAT), the same area was declared a "protected wild area" (but combined Tutuala beach and its adjoining forest) in 2000 under Regulation Number 2000/19. The cultural heritage of the five villages and the 15,000 people with their ancient ancestral heritage was made integral to the protected area.
Following the independence of the country in 2002, along with the scientific assessment of Important Bird Areas in the country, action to identify and declare the first National Park was also undertaken by Bird Life International in association with the Department of Environment and Climate Change (DECC), New South Wales, (Australia) and Australian Volunteers International, with financial assistance provided by Regional Natural Heritage Programme of the Australian Government, Keidanren Nature Conservation Fund (Japan), and the Darwin Initiative of the Government of the United Kingdom.

Geography

Located at the eastern tip of the island, the park covers  
The national park also links the Important Bird Areas of Loré, Monte Paitchau, Lake Ira Lalaro and Jaco Island, identified through biological surveys undertaken by BirdLife International after the country attained independence in 2002, which cover  
There are six villages within the national park, including Com, Tutuala, Méhara and Maupitine, while Malahara is a hamlet. Former settlements include Mua Mimiraka, Lo Chami, and Lori Lata. Walled settlements are found at  Tutuala, Lori Lata, Lopomalai, Ili Mimiraka, Mua Mimiraka, and Tutun (Tutunca'u). Lautem District features Lake Iralaloro. Shell midden sites are situated at Kusu Midden and Valu Beach Midden. Oirata Latamoko, situated at Manuméri Hoiku, is considered to be an ancestral landing site for the Koawatea villagers. Of the rock shelters, Léné Ara (or Lene Hara) contains internationally exceptional heritage value; Jerimalai's occupation is dated to more than 40,000 years BP, while Matja Kuru 2 is dated to 32,000 years BP, and Matja Kuru 1 is dated to c. 14,000 BP.  The Paichao Range is situated along the south coast. Cape Hero is also known as Tanjung Tei. Jaco Island (or Totina) is seen from Ili Kérékéré cliff. The Fuiloro Plateau is also located with the NP.
Moist deciduous lowland forest and evergreen forest on the hills are the vegetation types in the park, apart from the marshy lands of Lake Ira Lalaro. Primary forests are a notable feature of the flora in the park. Dry deciduous, swamp forest and coastal strand vegetation are also the floral varieties recorded in the park.

Wildlife

Flora

Vegetation types which are part of the common usage of the people are medicinal plants, bamboo, and canoe trees.

Fauna

There are no endemic mammals in the park. Most were introduced from outside the island during late prehistoric and historic times when people had started inhabiting the area. Some of the common species seen in the wild are birds, bats, murids and most commonly exploited marsupial cuscus (Phalanger orientalis) which is reported to have been introduced from Papua New Guinea about 9,000 years ago. 
The Coral Triangle part of the park is one of the greatest diversity areas for coral and coral reef fish in the world.

=Avifauna=

The terrestrial area of the park has 25 bird species, of which the endangered species are green pigeon (Treron psittaceus) (the cause for the species getting recorded under the Endangered list is the loss of monsoon forest due to deforestation) and the Yellow-crested Cockatoo (Cacatua sulphurea), a Critically Endangered species affected due to its worldwide trade. The bird species listed by the Bird Life International are the following.
Legend: CR Critically Endangered; EN Endangered; NT Near Threatened
Cultural value== 
Over 200 cultural sites have been identified within the national park. The settlements in the park are inhabited by Fataluku people who speak a linguistically-distinct language and consider themselves to be ethnically distinct from those who do not speak their language.



Bibliography


