[[Chennai]]

CATEGORIES: Chennai, Cities and towns in Tamil Nadu, Indian capital cities, Metropolitan cities in India, Populated coastal places in India, Port cities in India

Chennai  and a major cultural, economic and educational centre.
According to the provisional results of 2011 census, the city had 4.68 million residents, making it the sixth most populous city in India. The area of Chennai was expanded in 2011 from 176 Sq Km to 426 Sq Km. The urban agglomeration, which comprises the city and its suburbs, is home to approximately 8.9 million, making it the fourth most populous metropolitan area in the country and 31st largest urban area in the world.
The city is host to the third largest expatriate population in India after Mumbai and Delhi, with 35,000 in 2009 and steadily climbing to 82,790 in 2011.

Toponomy

Chennai is also known as Chennapattanam. The town grew around Fort St. George, which was built by English in 1639.
Two different aspects explain the origin of the name Chennapattanam:
Multiple explanations attempt to account for the city's colonial name, Madras:
| title = The Geography of India: Sacred and Historic Places | publisher = Britannica Educational Publishing | isbn = 978-1-61530-202-4 |accessdate = 28 December 2012|year=2011}}[/ref] However, it is uncertain whether the name 'Madraspattinam' was in use before the arrival of European influence. 
[/ref]
| work=International Herald Tribune|date=6 September 2002|accessdate=28 December 2012}}[/ref]
In 1996 the state government officially changed the name to Chennai. At that time many Indian cities underwent a change of name. However, the name Madras continues in occasional use for the city,[ref]
Kalpana (2003) Madras: The Architectural Heritage Muthiah (2004), Madras Rediscovered Ali (2005), Madras on Rainy Days Ashok & Balasubramanian (2005) Chennai latté: a Madras brew Chandrasekhar, Government Museum (2006) The wild ferns of Madras city and its immediate neighbourhood Maracayyā (2008), Madras: Tracing the Growth of the City since 1639 Barlow (2009) The Story of Madras Muthiah (2011) A Madras Miscellany: A Decade of People, Places & Potpourri
[/ref] as well as for places named after the city, such as the University of Madras and The Indian Institute of Technology, Madras.

History

The region around Chennai has served as an important administrative, military, and economic centre for many centuries. During 1st century CE, a poet and weaver named Thiruvalluvar lived in the town of Mylapore (a neighbourhood of present Chennai).
Stone age implements have been found near Pallavaram in Chennai. According to the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), Pallavaram was a megalithic cultural establishment, and pre-historic communities resided in the settlement.
The Portuguese first arrived in 1522 and built a port called São Tomé after the Christian apostle, St. Thomas, who is believed to have preached in the area between 52 and 70 AD. In 1612, the Dutch established themselves near Pulicat, north of Chennai. On 22 August 1639, which is referred to as Madras Day, the British East India Company under Francis Day bought a small strip of land stretching 3 miles on the Coromandel Coast. They got a license to build a fort and a castle in the contracted region. The ruler Damarla Chennappa Nayakudu, the Nayaka of Vandavasi, granted the British permission to build a factory and warehouse for their trading enterprises. The region was then primarily a fishing village known as "Madraspatnam". A year later, the British built Fort St. George, the first major British settlement in India, The Tamil Nadu Assembly was again moved back to Fort St. George.
In 1746, Fort St. George and Madras were captured by the French under General La Bourdonnais, the Governor of Mauritius, who plundered the town and its outlying villages. The British regained control in 1749 through the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle and strengthened the town's fortress wall to withstand further attacks from the French and Hyder Ali, the Sultan of Mysore. By the late 18th century, the British had conquered most of the region around Tamil Nadu and the northern modern–day states of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, establishing the Madras Presidency with Madras as the capital.
Gradually, the city grew into a major naval base and became the central administrative centre for the British in South India. With the advent of railways in India in the 19th century, the thriving urban centre was connected to other important cities such as Bombay and Calcutta, promoting increased communication and trade with the hinterland. Sir Arthur Lawley was Governor of Madras from 1906 to 1911 and promoted modern agriculture, industry, railways, education, the arts and more democratic governance. The Governor lived in Government House, Fort St George, and had a country home at Guindy, with access to a golf course, hockey pitches, riding stables and the Guindy Horse Racing Track. Catastrophe, Conspiracy, Celebration. The Benefits of Empire, Lady Lawley Cottage (Western Australian Red Cross) 2008 iBookNotes on the Administration of Sir Arthur Lawley, Governor of Madras,1906–1911. Madras Government Press, 1912 In the First World War as Red Cross Commissioner in Mesopotamia, he looked after the welfare of Indian soldiers.A Message from Mesopotamia, Sir Arthur Lawley, Hodder and Stoughton, London. 1917. Madras was the only Indian city to be attacked by the Central Powers during World War I,
After India gained its independence in 1947, the city became the capital of Madras State, which was renamed as Tamil Nadu in 1969. The violent agitations of 1965 against the compulsory imposition of Hindi in the state marked a major shift in the political dynamics of the city and eventually it had a big impact on the whole state.[ref]
</ref>

Environment

Geography

Chennai, sometimes referred to as the "Gateway to South India," inland, runs parallel to the coast, linking the two rivers. The Otteri Nullah, an east–west stream, runs through north Chennai and meets the Buckingham Canal at Basin Bridge. Several lakes of varying size are located on the western fringes of the city. Some areas of the city have the problem of excess iron content in groundwater.
Chennai's soil is mostly clay, shale and sandstone. Clay underlies most of the city, chiefly Manali, Kolathur, Maduravoyal, K. K. Nagar, Semmencherry, Alapakkam, Vyasarpadi and Anna Nagar. Sandy areas are found along the river banks and coasts, and include areas such as Tiruvottiyur, George Town, Madhavaram, New Washermanpet, Chepauk, Mylapore, Porur, Adyar, Besant Nagar and Uthandi. In these areas, rainwater runoff percolates quickly through the soil. Areas having hard rock surface include Guindy, Nanganallur, Pallikaranai, Alandur, Jaladampet, Velachery, Adambakkam and a part of Saidapet and Perungudi.

Geology

Chennai is classified as being in Seismic Zone III, indicating a moderate risk of damage from earthquakes.[ref]
