[[William Morris (Next Century Foundation)]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, 1950 births, British anti-war activists, Alumni of the Royal Agricultural University, Alumni of the University of Exeter

William Morris is Secretary General of the Next Century Foundation.

Early life

He is the son of Cornish author and publisher Claud Morris and Patricia (née′ Holton), an American writer and broadcaster. Educated variously at the Bible College of Wales, Grenville College, City of Westminster College, London College of Printing, Royal Agricultural College, Exeter University Department of Lifelong Learning, all in the United Kingdom.
Formerly a journalist and publisher, William Morris is an expert on Arab Affairs with close family connections with the Arab world. At one time William Morris edited "Voice", a periodical on Arab Affairs. He is a dual national (UK/US).
William started his career as a publisher in the late sixties founding a number of publications including the now defunct London Law Quarterly. William left publishing in the early eighties to set up a sheep farm in South Wales and became a volunteer Prison Visitor at Swansea Prison (eventually becoming local National Association of Official Prison Visitors secretary). He was then elected as a County Councillor for West Glamorgan County Council and served on the Public Protection Committee. Following an ill fated venture in the Mining Industry (Founded Carreg Goch Mining in the Swansea Valley in 1988) William moved to the Middle East in 1991.
William Morris then worked as the Special Advisor to the Deputy Prime Minister of the Sultanate of Oman, in which capacity he lived and worked in the Sultanate where he was based at Sultan Qaboos University for six years from 1991 to 1996. In this role he advised the Deputy Premier on a range of issues, particularly with regard to launching a series of academic journals at Oman's newly established university. He also established the Sultan Qaboos University Press.

Next Century Foundation

William returned with his family to Cornwall in 1996 and soon after he was appointed as the Secretary General of the Next Century Foundation, an organization whose founders included Jon Kimche and Lord Arnold Weinstock, with backing from Andrew Cavendish, 11th Duke of Devonshire and the then Crown Prince (now Amir) of Qatar.
He then worked closely with the incoming Labour Government in Britain. At the behest of Derek Fatchett MP (then Minister at the Foreign Office) he produced a report on Kashmir in consultation with the Mirpuri community in Britain. In October 2000 William Morris helped set up a war avoidance team to carry messages back and forth between the then Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Mr Peter Hain, and Iraqi Minister Mr Tariq Aziz (a matter then confidential which has since been put on public record in an interview with Mr Hain by the Today program and in responses to questions from news reporters).politics.co.uk/reference/peter-gerald-hain
He has led three electoral monitoring delegations to Iraq (the NCF is the only accredited international election- monitoring organisation travelling extensively in the interior of the country, operating in both the Green and Red zones).NCF Election Monitoring in Iraq
In April 2011 he worked closely with the Libyan opposition to facilitate the relief of Misrata.
In June 2012 he established the Syria unit of the NCF, which has produced regular confidential reports on the developments in the Syrian war. Working with the secular Syrian opposition and lobbying the international community to promote a peace that leads to substantive post-war reform. The Syria unit has also recorded casualty figures in the ongoing conflict since June 2012, reporting these figures monthly.Syria Working Group NCF
William Morris was a speaker at The Policy Studies Organization's Middle East Dialogue 2012 "The Middle East Today: The Arab Spring, The Syrian Summer"

International Media Council

In 2003 he was appointed as chairman of the International Media Council (now part of the International Council for Press and Broadcasting) based in London in May 2003.youtube.  The professed goal of the Media Council is to counter xenophobia and disinformation in the press of the Middle East and the West. The International Media Council holds an annual International Media Awards in London. A number of prominent Israeli journalists have been recipients of its media awards in London including Ari Rath, Danny Rubinstein and Yoav Stern. Arab recipients have included Sami Abdul Shafi and Jihad al Khazen.International Media Awards

Police and Crime Commissioner Election

William Morris ran as an independent candidate in the England and Wales Police and Crime Commissioner Elections 2012 for Devon and Cornwall Police but lost to the Conservative candidate, Commander Tony Hogg.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-19521181Tony Hogg elected Police and Crime Commissioner for Devon and Cornwall

Voluntary

William Morris is a trustee of Sanghata Global,Sanghata Global a non-profit organisation for transformational change that designs and implements breakthrough conceptual models focused on serving humanity. It is a charitable company incorporated in the United Kingdom.

Personal life

He married Veronica Harding in 1978.  William Morris has three children: two sons and one daughter and one granddaughter.






