[[Mississippi's 1st congressional district special election, 2008]]

CATEGORIES: Mississippi elections, 2008, Special elections to the 110th United States Congress, United States House of Representatives elections, 2008, United States House of Representatives elections in Mississippi, United States House of Representatives special elections

The 2008 Mississippi 1st congressional district special election was a special election in the state of Mississippi to determine who would serve the remainder of former Representative Roger Wicker's term.  After an April 22, 2008 ballot resulted in no candidate receiving a majority, Democratic Party candidate Travis Childers defeated Republican candidate Greg Davis in a runoff election on May 13, 2008.

Democratic primary

Candidates

Results

Runoff Results

Republican primary

Candidates

Results

Runoff results

General election

Candidates

Campaign

On December 31, 2007, Mississippi governor Haley Barbour appointed Roger Wicker to the Senate seat vacated 13 days earlier by Sen. Trent Lott. At the time of his appointment, Wicker was already a U.S. Representative for Mississippi's District 1. As a result of Wicker's appointment to the Senate, his House seat became vacant, necessitating a special election to determine who would serve the remainder of Wicker's term.
 covers the northeastern part of the state, including the cities of Columbus, Grenada, Oxford, Southaven, and Tupelo.  The district had been represented by Republican Roger Wicker since 1995.  The district has demonstrated itself to be "reliably conservative" in past elections, with George W. Bush winning the district by 25 points in the 2004 presidential election.A House Race Holds Clues for GOP, Susan Davis, The Wall Street Journal, May 13, 2008. Early speculation had Republicans Greg Davis, Glenn McCullough, and Randy Russell and Democrats Steve Holland and Jamie Franks as contenders.com Southaven mayor hopes to represent First District in Congress, January 12, 2008The Clarion-Ledger: "Wicker moves up; who moves in?", January 1, 2008 All but Franks ended up as candidates.
The party primaries were held on March 11. The primary runoff election was held on April 1, 2008. Mississippi was one of the states where right wing commentators such as Rush Limbaugh suggested people cross party lines on March 11 in order to keep the competition alive between Democratic Presidential candidates Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama. Several websites such as the Daily Kos"DailyKos:' Limbaugh's system-gaming could give us a new Democratic congressman  and politico.com: Primary shenanigans could backfire suggested that this is why the Republican primary runoff was so close between the more moderate McCullough and Davis as many of the more Conservative Republicans were not allowed to vote in that runoff. It is also believed that this has led to the final special election race involving a conservative Democrat (Childers) who has a better than usual chance to win the general election. Republicans were particularly concerned that a race between Childers and McCullough would've increased the Democrat's chances. 
The initial special election to fill the seat was held on April 22, 2008; no one received a majority of the vote so a runoff election was held between the two top vote getters: Democrat Travis Childers (who was the top vote getter with 49.4% of the vote) and Republican Greg Davis (who received 46.3% of the initial special election vote) on May 13, 2008.
The National Republican Congressional Committee spent over $1.3 million in support of Davis' bid for the vacant seat.  Freedom's Watch, a Republican-supporting advocacy group, purchased an additional $550,000 in advertising.  The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee spent $1.5 million in support of Childers.
Despite the district's Republican leanings, Childers defeated Davis in the final round of the special election by a 54% to 46% margin. Democrat wins House seat in special election, Emily Waggster Pettus, Associated Press, May 13, 2008.  Once sworn in, Childers will serve through the end of the 110th Congress in January 2009.
Childers victory represents the 3rd time during the 110th Congress that a Democrat has been elected to a previously Republican-held seat in a special election. Childers victory is seen as a surprise upset for the Republican party as Mississippi's 1st district has been historically right leaning. It is believed that this sends "a clear signal of national problems ahead for Republicans in the fall". Jeremiah Wright.
Childers and Davis faced off against each other in the November general election.

Results

Runoff results

Newspaper endorsements

Childers was endorsed by the Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal,





Campaigns' websites




