[[Dennis Bergkamp]]

CATEGORIES: 1969 births, Living people, Association football forwards, FIFA 100, Eredivisie players, Netherlands international footballers, Dutch expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in England, Dutch footballers, Arsenal F.C. players, AFC Ajax players, Inter Milan players, Premier League players, Serie A footballers, UEFA Euro 1992 players, 1994 FIFA World Cup players, UEFA Euro 1996 players, 1998 FIFA World Cup players, UEFA Euro 2000 players, Sportspeople from Amsterdam, Expatriate footballers in Italy, Dutch expatriates in Italy, English Football Hall of Fame inductees, AFC Ajax non-playing staff

Dennis Nicolaas Bergkamp (
The son of an electrician, Bergkamp was born in Amsterdam and played as an amateur in the lower leagues. He was spotted by Ajax at the age of 11 and made his professional debut in 1986. Good form led to an international call-up a year later, attracting the attention of several European clubs. Bergkamp signed for Italian club Internazionale in 1993, where he had two disappointing seasons. He then joined Arsenal in 1995. It was at Arsenal where Bergkamp rejuvenated his career, helping the club to win three Premier League titles, four FA Cup trophies and reach the 2006 UEFA Champions League Final, which marked his last appearance as a player. With the Netherlands national team, Bergkamp surpassed Faas Wilkes's record to become the country's top goalscorer of all time in 1998, a record later eclipsed by Patrick Kluivert and since 2013 by Robin van Persie.
Bergkamp was selected by Pelé as one of the FIFA 100 greatest living players and is widely regarded as one of the greatest players in his generation. In 2007, he was inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame, the first and so far only Dutch player ever to receive such honour. Bergkamp has also finished third in the FIFA World Player of the Year award twice. Due to his fear of flying, Bergkamp has been affectionately nicknamed the "Non-Flying Dutchman" by Arsenal supporters.

Early life

Born in Amsterdam, Bergkamp was the last of Wim and Tonnie Bergkamp's four sons. Although in later years he said visits to church did not appeal to him, Bergkamp still maintains his faith.

Club career

Ajax: 1986–1993

Bergkamp was brought up through Ajax's youth system, joining the club at age 11. Manager Johan Cruyff gave him his professional debut on 14 December 1986 against Roda JC; the game ended in a 2–0 victory for Ajax.
In later seasons, Bergkamp established himself as a first-team player for Ajax. This culminated in a period of success for the club, which won the Eredivisie title in the 1989–90 season for the first time in five years. Bergkamp scored 29 goals in 36 games the following season and became the joint top goalscorer in the league, sharing the accolade with PSV Eindhoven striker Romário. Ajax won the 1992 UEFA Cup Final, beating Torino through the away goals ruling. They then defeated SC Heerenveen 6–2 in the final of the KNVB Cup on 20 May 1993. In total, he scored 122 goals in 239 games for his hometown club.

Internazionale: 1993–1995

Bergkamp attracted the attention of several European clubs as a result of his performances for Ajax. Cruyff advised him not to join Real Madrid, one of the teams said to have been interested in him. Upon signing, Bergkamp said Inter "met all my demands. The most important thing for me was the stadium, the people at the club and their style of play."
Bergkamp made his debut against Reggiana on 29 August 1993 at the San Siro in a 2–1 victory.
In Bergkamp's second season at Inter, the club changed managers again, appointing Ottavio Bianchi. Bergkamp endured a disappointing campaign, troubled with stress injuries and fatigue from the 1994 World Cup. He managed to score five goals in 26 appearances. Off the field, Bergkamp's relationship with the Italian press and fans became uncomfortable. His shy persona and his propensity to go home after matches was interpreted as apathy.

Arsenal: 1995–2006

As Moratti prepared to make wholesale changes at the club, Bergkamp left Inter and signed with Arsenal in June 1995 for a transfer fee estimated at £7.5 million.
The appointment of Arsène Wenger as Arsenal manager in September 1996 marked a turning point in Bergkamp's career.
Bergkamp was instrumental the following season in helping Arsenal complete a domestic league and cup double. He became the club's top scorer with 22 goals and recorded a strike rate of 0.57. Arsenal's achievement was all the more astonishing given that the team, written off by many in December 1997, had made ground on reigning Premier League champions Manchester United.
After an effective 1998 World Cup campaign with the national team, Bergkamp had another productive season in 1998–99. Although Arsenal failed to retain the Premier League after losing the title on the final day of the season to Manchester United, Bergkamp was the club's second-top scorer with 16 goals. The team were also defeated in a FA Cup semi-final replay against Manchester United in April 1999. With the score 1–1 heading into injury time, Arsenal were awarded a penalty after midfielder Ray Parlour was brought down by Phil Neville inside the 18-yard box. Bergkamp took the penalty shot, but it was saved by goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel. In the second half of extra time, Ryan Giggs scored the winner, a goal regarded by many as the greatest in the competition's history.
The 1999–2000 season proved to be a frustrating one for both Arsenal and Bergkamp. The club finished second in the league, 18 points behind Manchester United, and lost in the 2000 UEFA Cup Final to Turkish opponents Galatasaray on penalties.

Success finally came in the 2001–02 season. Arsenal regained the league, beating Manchester United at Old Trafford in the penultimate game of the season to complete the club's second double under Wenger; Arsenal defeated Chelsea 2–0 to win the FA Cup four days prior.
Bergkamp reached a personal landmark during the 2002–03 season, scoring his 100th goal for Arsenal against Oxford United in a FA Cup third-round tie on 4 January 2003.
Bergkamp started in 29 league matches in the 2004–05 season, but Arsenal's title defence ended unsuccessfully. The team finished second, 12 points behind Chelsea. At home against Middlesbrough on 22 August 2004, Bergkamp acted as captain for the injured Vieira in a match where Arsenal came back from 1–3 down to win 5–3 and equal Nottingham Forest's record of 42 league matches undefeated.
The team finished fourth in the league in Bergkamp's final season at Arsenal.
Bergkamp was the focus of the first match at Arsenal's new ground, the Emirates Stadium. On 22 July 2006, a testimonial was played in his honour at the new stadium as Arsenal played his old club Ajax. Bergkamp kicked off the match with his father, Wim, and son, Mitchel. All four children acted as the match's mascots. The first half was played by members of Arsenal and Ajax's current squads, while the second was played by famous ex-players from both sides, including Ian Wright, Vieira, Overmars, Petit and David Seaman for Arsenal, and Cruyff, Marco van Basten, Danny Blind, Frank and Ronald de Boer for Ajax. Arsenal won the match 2–1 with goals from Henry and Nwankwo Kanu. Klaas-Jan Huntelaar had earlier opened the scoring for Ajax, making him the first goalscorer at the Emirates Stadium.

International career

Bergkamp made his international debut for the Netherlands national team against Italy on 26 September 1990 as a substitute for Frank de Boer.
In the qualification for the 1994 FIFA World Cup, Bergkamp scored five goals and was selected for the finals, staged in the United States. He featured in every game for the national team, getting goals against Morocco in the group stages and the Republic of Ireland in the round-of-16. Bergkamp scored the second goal for the Netherlands against Brazil, but the team lost 3–2, exiting in the quarter-finals.
Against Wales in the 1998 FIFA World Cup qualification on 9 November 1996, he scored his first hat-trick for the national team. Bergkamp made the All-Star team of the tournament, alongside Frank de Boer and Edgar Davids.
On 9 October 1999, Bergkamp scored his final goal for the Netherlands, against Brazil.

Coaching career

Upon retiring, Bergkamp insisted he would not move into coaching. He turned down an offer to scout for Arsenal and instead concentrated on travelling and spending time with his family.
As of August 2011, Bergkamp has been De Boer's assistant at Ajax.

Personal life

Bergkamp has been married to Henrita Ruizendaal since 16 June 1993.

Aerophobia

Bergkamp's nickname is the Non-Flying Dutchman due to his fear of flying. This stemmed from an incident with the Netherlands national team at the 1994 World Cup where the engine of the plane cut out during a flight, Following this incident, Bergkamp decided he would never fly again but did consider seeking psychiatric help: I've got this problem and I have to live with it. I can't do anything about it, it is a psychological thing and I can't explain it. I have not flown on a plane for two years. The Dutch FA has been sympathetic, so have Arsenal, so far. I am considering psychiatric help. I can't fly. I just freeze. I get panicky. It starts the day before, when I can't sleep. 
The condition severely limited his ability to play in away matches in European competitions and to travel with the national team. In some cases, he would travel overland by car or train, but the logistics of some matches were such that he would not travel at all. In the build-up to Arsenal's Champions League match against Olympique Lyonnais in February 2001, Wenger spoke of his concerns for Bergkamp travelling by train and car, because of the exertions involved.

Style of play

Bergkamp was schooled in Total Football, a playing style and philosophy which relied on versatility. This was primarily to maximise the footballer's potential; players tried out every outfield position before finding one that suit them best. Every age group at Ajax played in the same style and formation on the first team – 3–4–3 – to allow individuals to slot in without effort when moving up the pyramid. Bergkamp "played in every position apart from goalie" and believed he benefited from the experience of playing as a defender, as it helped him "know how they think and how to beat them". When he made his debut as a substitute against Roda JC, Bergkamp was positioned on the right wing, where he remained for three years. During his time at Inter Milan, he was switched to a main striker, but failed to cooperate with partner Ruben Sosa, whom he later called "selfish". When Bergkamp joined Arsenal in 1995, he enjoyed a successful strike partnership with Wright, and in later seasons Anelka and Henry, playing in his preferred position as a second striker. The arrival of Overmars in the 1997–98 season enhanced Bergkamp's play, as he was getting more of the ball. Between August and October 1997, he scored seven goals in seven league matches. A similar rapport developed between him and Ljungberg during the 2001–02 season.
Throughout his playing career Bergkamp was referred to as a "cheat" and "dirty player", something his former manager Wenger refuted. In an interview with The Times in 2004, he said that while he was at Inter Milan, he realized the importance of being mentally tough in order to survive: "A lot of people there try to hurt you, not just physically but mentally as well, and coming from the easygoing culture in Holland, I had to adopt a tougher approach. There, it was a case of two strikers up against four or five hard defenders who would stop at nothing." Bergkamp says his aggression often stems from frustration.

Honours

Player

Assistant coach

Individual

Bergkamp has received several accolades during his playing career. He twice finished in third place for the 1993 and 1996 FIFA World Player of the Year award and was named in FIFA 100, a list compiled by footballer Pelé of the 125 greatest living footballers. For his national team, Bergkamp was the top goalscorer in Euro 1992 and was selected in the FIFA World Cup All-Star Team for the 1998 FIFA World Cup.
In April 2007, Bergkamp was inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame by viewers of BBC's Football Focus. In February 2014, Arsenal unveiled a statue of Bergkamp outside the Emirates Stadium to honour his time at the club. A summary of Bergkamp's individual achievements are as follows in chronological order:

Career statistics

Club


 1Includes cup competitions: the KNVB Cup, Coppa Italia, Football League Cup and FA Cup. Super Cups such as the FA Community Shield are not included.

International



International goals






