[[2008 League of Ireland]]

CATEGORIES: League of Ireland seasons, 2008 in Republic of Ireland football leagues

The 2008 League of Ireland season consisted of both Premier and First Division, as well as the newly introduced 'A' Championship. The season kicked off in March and the 'A' Championship commenced in June. In order to prepare for the 'A' Championship, competing clubs were offered the opportunity to compete in a Shield competition, which began in March.Four new clubs added to League roster
The season was a transitional one in order to reduce the number of clubs in the Premier Division to ten and increase the number in the First Division to twelve. As a result there was no playoffs with just the three bottom clubs in the Premier Division automatically relegated to the First Division and the First Division champions automatically promoted to the Premier Division.
There was a playoff between the bottom placed side in the First Division and an 'A' Championship qualifier to determine who would participate in 2009 in the First Division.

Pre-season developments

Managerial changes

Several League of Ireland clubs changed their managers during pre-season. Alan Mathews resigned as manager of recently relegated Longford Town. The First Division club have since promoted Mathews' assistant at the club, Aaron Callaghan, to replace him as manager of the club. He was manager of Bohemians after they sacked Sean Connor. Kenny was sacked by the Scottish club this season.Cork confirm Richardson settlement The 2007 FAI Cup winners have since appointed Alan Mathews as their new manager.Cork City will introduce Alan Matthews as new manager on Wednesday

Kilkenny City withdraw from League

Shortly before the league issued fixtures for the new season Kilkenny City issued a statement saying they were withdrawing from the League due to financial and inadequate support.Sporting Fingal to be offered First Division place

'A' Championship

The 'A' Championship was a new league introduced in order to provide a link between non-league soccer in the Republic of Ireland and the eircom League. It gave clubs the opportunity to win promotion to the league for the first time. It has been decided that this championship would not kick off until June but a Shield competition, starting in March, was put in place in order to give the 'A' Championship participants a chance to prepare. The league contained reserve sides of the eircom League clubs also. The previous December four new clubs were accepted for entry into the championship. These clubs were Mervue United, Salthill Devon (both from Galway), Tullamore Town from Offaly and newly formed Dublin club Sporting Fingal who have since been elevated to the First Division.

Television coverage

For the first time in the history of the league the national broadcaster Radio Telefís Éireann started showing highlights of every Premier Division game played on its new show Monday Night Soccer. This show was presented by Con Murphy. This replaced eircom League Weekly which had run on TV3 on Monday nights from 2002-07. The final season of live weekly radio coverage was provided by national broadcaster RTÉ with live reports and commentary on match nights, which was dropped from the end of 2008. Live games were shown by RTÉ, Setanta Sports and TG4's  Sacar Beo.

Clubs information

League

Rules

=Procedure=

There were twelve participating clubs in the Premier Division and ten participating clubs in the First Division for 2007. During the course of the 2008 season (which lasted from March to November) each Premier club played the respective others three times. A pre-season draw decided which clubs will have the benefit of two home games in these matches. First Division sides played each other four times throughout the season - two games at home and two games at the stadium of the opposition. Each team in the Premier Division played 33 matches in total during the season, while those in the First Division played 36 games. The 'A' League Championship contained three clubs and reserve sides from Premier Division and some First Division clubs.  The Championship was divided into two sections or groups. This didn't start until June with a Shield competition taking place before that.
Teams received three points for a win and one point for a draw. No points were awarded for a loss. Teams were ranked by total points, then goal difference and then goals scored. If there is equality in points, goal difference and goals for tallies, the clubs involved must partake in a play-off to decide their finishing positions. At the end of the season, the club with the most points in their division were crowned as champion of that division. The three lowest placed teams in the Premier were automatically relegated into the First Division and the top team from the First Division was automatically promoted to the Premier Division. In addition, the 2007 winner of the First Division had a once-off play-off with the winners of the FAI League Cup for a Setanta Cup place. The team that finished last in the First Division participated in a promotion/relegation playoff. The winners of the playoff between the highest placed non-reserve sides in both 'A' League Championship groups, provided that they both finished in the top four in their respective group, would have challenged the team that finished last in the First Division for their place in a promotion/relegation playoff. However, since only one of the 'A' League Championship groups had a non-reserve side in the top four then this team automatically faced the club that finished last in the First Division in a promotion/relegation playoff. If eircom League reserve sides had occupied the top four positions in both 'A' League Championship sections then no promotion/relegation playoff would have taken place and the team that finished last in the First Division would not have been relegated.

=Qualification for 2009–10 European competitions=

The top team in the Premier League qualified for the UEFA Champions League second qualifying round and must win three two-legged knockout ties against higher seeded and stronger opposition with progression in order to enter the group phase.
There were also three spots reserved in newly formed UEFA Europa League, two through league positions and one through domestic cup. The second-placed and third-placed team should have qualified for the UEFA Europa League first qualifying round while the cup winners should have qualified for the UEFA Europa League second qualifying round. However, since Bohemians won both the cup and the league, Europa League spot went to cup runners-up. Because they qualified for Europe through league, fourth-placed team were also awarded with a spot in the Europa League. The spot were thereby given to teams according to league positions. League runners-up and third-place team were given spots in the second, while the fourth-placed team was given a spot in the first qualifying round of the UEFA Europa League.

=Prize funds=

The trend of increasing prize funds for the league has continued this season. Between the National League, FAI Cup, FAI League Cup and the Setanta Cup a prize fund in excess of €2 million was available. The prize fund for the Premier Division in 2008 has increased with the winners being awarded €250,000. Unlike previous year every team received funds, even the last placed.

Season

Tables

=Premier Division=

=First Division=

='A' League Championship=

Promotion play-off

Kildare County and Mervue United competed in a two-legged playoff for one spot in 2009 First Division. Mervue United won 5–2 on aggregate and thereby secured a place in next year's FAI First Division.

'A' Championship play-off

Bohemians 'A' and UCD 'A' competed in a playoff for the inaugural 'A' Championship title. UCD 'A' won 2–1 and therefore became the 2008 'A' Championship winners.

Results

=Premier League=

==Matches 1–22==

==Matches 23–33==

=First Division=

==First half of season==

==Second half of season==

='A' Championship=

==Group 1==

==Group 2==

Top goalscorers

The following sections contain only goals which were scored in the respective leagues.

=Premier League=

Source: soccerway.com

=First Division=

Source: soccerway.com

2008 national league UEFA ranking

The FAI National League's UEFA coefficient accumulated to a total value of 7.332 as of the 2007–08 European season. Ranking going into 2008–09 European season:








