[[Uffizi]]

CATEGORIES: Uffizi, 1765 establishments in Italy, Art museums and galleries in Florence, Art museums established in 1765, Collections of the Uffizi, Palaces in Florence, National museums of Italy

The Uffizi Gallery () is a museum in Florence, Italy. It is one of the oldest and most famous art museums of the Western world.

History

Building of the palace was begun by Giorgio Vasari in 1560 for Cosimo I de' Medici as the offices for the Florentine magistrates—hence the name "uffizi ("offices"). Construction was continued to Vasari's design by Alfonso Parigi and Bernardo Buontalenti and ended in 1581. The cortile (internal courtyard) is so long and narrow, and open to the Arno River at its far end through a Doric screen that articulates the space without blocking it, that architectural historiansSigfried Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture (1941) 1962 fig.17. treat it as the first regularized streetscape of Europe. Vasari, a painter as well as architect, emphasized the perspective length by the matching facades' continuous roof cornices, and unbroken cornices between storeys and the three continuous steps on which the palace-fronts stand. The niches in the piers that alternate with columns
filled with sculptures of famous artists in the 19th century.
The Palazzo degli Uffizi brought together under one roof the administrative offices, the Tribunal and the state archive (Archivio di Stato). The project that was planned by Cosimo I de' Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany to arrange prime works of art in the Medici collections on the piano nobile was effected by Francis I of Tuscany, who commissioned Buontalenti the famous Tribuna degli Uffizi that united a selection of the outstanding masterpieces in the collection in an ensemble that was a star attraction of the Grand Tour.
Over the years, further parts of the palace evolved into a display place for many of the paintings and sculpture collected by the Medici family or commissioned by them. According to Vasari, who was not only the architect of the Uffizi but also the author of Lives of the Artists, published in 1550 and 1568, artists such as Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo gathered at the Uffizi "for beauty, for work and for recreation."Fossi, Gloria. The Uffizi. (Giuniti, 1999), p. 8.
After the house of Medici was extinguished, the art treasures remained in Florence by terms of the famous Patto di famiglia negotiated by Anna Maria Luisa, the last Medici heiress; it formed one of the first modern museums. The gallery had been open to visitors by request since the sixteenth century, and in 1765 it was officially opened to the public.
Because of its huge collection, some of its works have in the past been transferred to other museums in Florence—for example, some famous statues to the Bargello. A project is currently underway to expand the museum's exhibition space in 2006 from some 6,000 metres² (64,000 ft²) to almost 13,000 metres² (139,000 ft²), allowing public viewing of many artworks that have usually been in storage.
In 1993, a car bomb exploded in Via dei Georgofili and damaged parts of the palace, killing five people. The most severe damage was to the Niobe room and classical sculptures and neoclassical interior of which have been restored, although its frescoes were damaged beyond repair. The identity of the bomber or bombers are unknown, although it was almost certainly attributable to the Sicilian Mafia who were engaged in a period of terrorism at that time.
Today, the Uffizi is one of the most popular tourist attractions of Florence. In high season (particularly in July), waiting times can be up to five hours. Visitors who reserve a ticket in advance have a substantially shorter wait. Tickets can also be purchased from a lesser-used ticket window at the Orsanmichele that serves multiple museums. 
In early August 2007, Florence was caught with a large rainstorm, and the Gallery was partially flooded, with water leaking through the ceiling, and the visitors had to be evacuated.  There was a much more significant flood in 1966 which damaged most of the art collections in Florence severely, including the Uffizi.
 
 
Here is a selection from the painting collection:

The collection also contains some ancient sculptures, such as the Arrotino and the Two Wrestlers.

Gallery

Image:Simone_Martini_and_Lippo_Memmi_-_The_Annunciation_and_Two_Saints_-_WGA15010.jpg|Simone Martini Annunciation, 305 x 265 cm
Image:GiottoMadonna.
Image:Gentile da Fabriano Adoration. 
Image:Botticelli Venus.
Image:Botticelli-primavera.
Image:Botticelli, adorazione dei magi uffizi 1490--1500.
Image:Leonardo da Vinci - Adoration of the Magi - WGA12693. 
Image:Leonardo Da Vinci - Annunciazione. 
Image:Andrea del Verrocchio 002. 
Image:Giovanni Bellini 001. 
Image:Piero di Cosimo - Liberazione di Andromeda - Google Art Project.jpg|Piero di Cosimo Perseus Freeing Andromeda, 70 x 123 cm
Image:Trittico degli uffizi. 
Image:Girolamo Francesco Maria Mazzola - Madonna with the Long Neck.
Image:Tizian 102. 
Image:Tiziano - Flora - Google Art Project.
Image:Raffaello Sanzio - Madonna del Cardellino - Google Art Project.
Image:Michelangelo Buonarroti - Tondo Doni - Google Art Project.
image:Raffael 040. 
Image:Sacrifice of Isaac-Caravaggio (Uffizi).jpg|Caravaggio Sacrifice of Isaac, 104 x 135 cm
Image:Medusa by Carvaggio. 
Image:Correggio Rest. 
Image:Piero, Double portrait of the Dukes of Urbino 03.
Image:Uccello Battle of San Romano Uffizi. 
Image:Giorgione, Moses Undergoing Trial by Fire. 
Image:Rogier van der Weyden 013.1.
Image:Albrecht Durer Adoration of the Magi 1504. 
Image:Hans Memling 061.
Image:Francisco de Goya y Lucientes - Portrait of María Teresa de Vallabriga on Horseback - WGA9990.
Image:Self-portrait by Diego Velázquez. 
Image:Harmensz van Rijn Rembrandt - Ritratto di giovane - Google Art Project. 
Image:Paolo Veronese - Martirio di Santa Giustina - Google Art Project.
Image:El Greco - Sts John and Francis - WGA10549. John and St. Francis, 110 x 86 cm. 
Image:Anthony Van Dick - Ritratto equestre dell'imperatore Carlo V - Google Art Project.

In popular culture



Notes




