[[Rolling highway]]

CATEGORIES: Trains, Freight rolling stock, Intermodal transport

In rail transportation, a rolling highway, or rolling road is a form of combined transport involving the conveying of road trucks by rail. The concept is a form of piggyback transportation.
Special wagons are used: wagons are usually close-coupled flatcars with small-diameter wheels and  may provided a driveable track along the entire length of the train for loading and unloading purposes.
During a rolling-highway journey, the truck drivers are accommodated in a passenger car with seats or beds. At both ends of the rail link there are purpose-built terminals that allow the train to be easily loaded and unloaded.

Examples of rolling highways

Rolling highways are mostly used for transit routes, e.g. through the Alps or from western to eastern Europe.

Austria

In Austria, rolling highways exist from Bayern via Tyrol to Italy or to Eastern Europe. Traditionally, Austria is a transit country and therefore the rolling highway is of environmental importance. In 1999 the Austrian Federal Railways (ÖBB) carried 254,000 trucks, which equals  of freight (158,989 trucks in 1993). The rolling highway trains in Austria are operated by Ökombi GmbH, a division of Rail Cargo Austria, the cargo division of ÖBB. There is a direct rolling highway between Salzburg and the harbour of Trieste, Italy, where the trucks arrive on ferries from Turkey. In those cases, drivers arrive by plane via Ljubljana airport, to take over the trucks.

India

In 1999, the Konkan Railway Corporation introduced the Roll On Roll Off (RORO) service on the section between Kolad in Maharashtra and Verna in Goa,

Switzerland

In Switzerland, rolling highways across the alps exist for both the Gotthard and Lötschberg - Simplon route. They are operated by Hupac AG, headquartered in Chiasso, and in the case of the Novara - Freiburg im Breisgau route by RAlpin AG, headquartered in Olten.RAlpin AG

Italy

In Italy, Trenitalia and Trasposervizi signed an agreement between Italy, Austria and Germany for a new rolling road that connects the inland of Roncafort (north of Trento) with Regensburg (north of Munich) and previously managed by the Austrian Ökombi.Ferrovie: autostrada Trento-Monaco su ANSA

France

Two rolling highways are currently in operation in France, both using French Modalohr technology: the 175 km Autoroute Ferroviaire Alpin, connecting the Savoy region to Turin through the Fréjus Rail Tunnel owned and operated jointly by SNCF and Trenitalia, and the 1,050 km  Lorry-Rail which connects Bettembourg, Luxembourg, to Perpignan operated by SNCF. Lorry-Rail only carries trailers, while the AFA carries accompanied and unaccompanied trailers. Since June 2012, these two are operated under the brand "VIIA" by SNCF Geodis.
Plans have been announced to add two more routes in France.
One will link Dourges (near Lille) to Tarnos (near Bayonne) and the other is an extension North from Bettembourg to Calais

Canada

Canadian Pacific Railway runs a rolling highway service between Windsor, Ontario and Montreal (and further east). This corridor is normally truck serviced on the Interstate 75, Ontario Highway 401, Quebec Autoroute 20 line, but this route becomes heavily congested in several areas, especially around Toronto and Montreal. CP's service also means the trucks are only driven for short distances on either end of the route, avoiding overnight stops and greatly reducing costs in some situations. This service now accounts for a considerable percentage of CP's traffic along its Lake Ontario mainline route.







|title=System comparison: Concepts for combined cargo
|date=June 2011
}}

