[[Iranian Green Movement]]

CATEGORIES: 2009 establishments in Iran, Iranian presidential election, 2009, History of civil rights and liberties in Iran, History of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Protests in Iran, Iranian democracy movements, Nonviolent resistance movements

{{Blacklisted-links|1=

The Iranian Green Movement refers to a political movement that arose after the 2009 Iranian presidential election, in which protesters demanded the removal of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad from office. Green was initially used as the symbol of Mir Hossein Mousavi's campaign, but after the election it became the symbol of unity and hope for those asking for annulment of what they regarded as a fraudulent election. 
The Green Movement protests were a major event in Iran's modern political history and observers claimed that protests were the largest since the Iranian Revolution of 1978-1979.

Outcome of 2009-2010 Iranian election protests

The election was held on June 12, 2009. The official results showed Ahmadinejad winning by a landslide, though Mousavi and others believed the results were fraudulent. They suggested that the Interior Minister, Sadegh Mahsouli, an ally of Ahmadinejad, had interfered with the election and distorted the votes to keep Ahmadinejad in power. Mousavi then claimed victory, and called for his supporters to celebrate it which led to the 2009–2010 Iranian election protests.

Protests

Clashes broke out between police and groups protesting the election results from early morning on Saturday onward. Initially, the protests were largely peaceful. However, as time passed, they became increasingly violent. Some protesters began to get violent after the results of the election were announced. Angry crowds in Tehran broke into shops, tore down signs, and smashed windows.
The demonstrations grew bigger and more heated than the 1999 student protests. Mousavi has urged for calm and asked that his supporters refrain from acts of violence.
Ynet reported on 14 June that two people had died in the rioting so far.
On 15 June, Mousavi rallied, with anywhere from hundreds of thousands[ref]
Competing rallies for Mousavi and for Ahmadinejad took place on 16 June. The pro-Ahmadinejad protesters, chanting the phrases "Death to America!" and "Death to Israel!", outnumbered their opponents, but they did not match the numbers of opponents who had protested the day before. Reports from the state media and elsewhere stated on 16 June that seven people have died in all of the protests so far. Over half a million reformist Iranians marched silently from Haft-e-Tir Square to Vali Asr Square on 17 June. Huffington Post reported that day that 32 people had died protesting so far.
On February 14, 2011, the largest Green demonstrations in Iran in more than a year broke out. In response pro-government MPs called for the death of opposition leaders Mir Hussein Moussavi and Mehdi Karroubi.com, 16 February 2011

Government actions

=Arrests=

On the weekend of 13 and 14 June, in a series of raids across Tehran, the government arrested over 170 people, according to police officials. An estimated 200 people were detained after clashes with students at Tehran university, although many were later released.
Acting Police Chief Ahmad-Reza Radan stated via the state press service on the 14th that "in the interrogation of related rebels, we intend to find the link between the plotters and foreign media".
On 16 June, Reuters reported that former vice-president Mohammad-Ali Abtahi and former presidential advisor Saeed Hajjarian had been arrested. Over 100 students were arrested after security forces fired tear gas at protesters at Shiraz University on the same day. Reporters Without Borders reported that 5 of 11 arrested journalists were still detention as of 16 June, and that a further 10 journalists were unaccounted for and may have been arrested.
On 17 June, former foreign minister and secretary-general of the Freedom Movement of Iran, Ebrahim Yazdi, was arrested while undergoing tests at Pars hospital in Tehran. In Tabriz, other Freedom Movement activists and eight members of the IIPF were arrested, with reports of at least 100 civic figures' arrests. The total number of arrests across Iran since the election was reported as 500.
Aaron Rhodes, a spokesman for the International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran, stated that "Iranian intelligence and security forces are using the public protests to engage in what appears to be a major purge of reform-oriented individuals whose situations in detention could be life-threatening".

=The Green Path of Hope=

Mousavi and other reformist leaders are now working in peaceful and legal methods to widen the influence of their reforms. They have set up a new coalition named "The Green Path of Hope". Iranian political parties and movements need to be authorized by the Interior Ministry. Mousavi neither recognizes the current government as legitimate nor is likely to receive permission; so, the movement was named a "path" in order to bypass this law.
The Green Path of Hope claims it seeks to continue protests against Ahmadinejad's presidency following lawful and peaceful methods, and the full execution of the constitution, as Mousavi says:

According to organization officials, the movement functions encompasses numerous political parties, NGO's and social networks.  Mousavi emphasized that existent, autonomous social networks in the community are part of this movement:

The "Green Path" has six main members of the central council, who are connected to reformist parties, NGOs, and social networks. The main body will be ordinary protesters. The strategy is to connect existent pressures and issues in society in a social network, and to therefore lead protests in a lawful manner.

Where is my vote?

Where is my vote? ( and supporters of Mousavi and Karroubi accused the government of rigging the votes.
In the aftermath of the election, protests were widened and several massive protests were held around the country by the people. The government arrested a large number of the protesters
Although the Iranian government prohibited any form of gathering by opposition-supporters in Tehran and across the country, significantly slowed down internet access and censored any form of media agreeing with the opposition, hundreds of thousands of Iranians chanted this motto, defying the law and challenging the Islamic Republic.Iranians, by hundreds of thousands, ask: Where is my vote?

Legal ways

Mousavi and the reformists later attempted to implement reforms though legal processes and set up a new coalition, named The Green Path of Hope, to support this.

Calls for an Evolution, not a revolution

Even though some protesters tried to turn the movement into a revolution to overthrow the Islamic Republic, the essence of the movement is a quest for an "evolution", a reform in the regime and not another "revolution".Think Again: Iran's Green Movement Huffington Post

Iran national football team

During the Iran's final game of the 2010 FIFA World Cup qualifiers against South Korea in Seoul on 17 June 2009, seven members of the team, Javad Nekounam, Ali Karimi, Hossein Kaebi, Masoud Shojaei, Mohammad Nosrati, Vahid Hashemian, and captain Mehdi Mahdavikia wore green wristbands in support of the Iranian Green Movement during the 2009 Iranian election protests. Initial reports were that all seven players were banned for life by the Iranian Football Federation, however, state-run media claimed that all seven had "retired". As of 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification, several of the above players have played again for the national team, notably Javad Nekounam, Masoud Shojaei, Mehdi Mahdavikia, and Ali Karimi.








