[[Central Plaza (Hong Kong)]]

CATEGORIES: Office buildings completed in 1992, Wan Chai North, Skyscrapers in Hong Kong, Skyscrapers over 350 meters, Office buildings in Hong Kong, Sun Hung Kai Properties

Central Plaza is a 78-storey,  skyscraper completed in August 1992 at 18 Harbour Road, in Wan Chai on Hong Kong Island in Hong Kong. It is the third tallest tower in the city after 2 IFC in Central and the ICC in West Kowloon. It was the tallest building in Asia from 1992 to 1996, until the Shun Hing Square in neighbouring Shenzhen was built. Central Plaza surpassed the Bank of China Tower as the tallest building in Hong Kong until the completion of 2IFC.
Central Plaza was also the tallest reinforced concrete building in the world, until it was surpassed by CITIC Plaza, Guangzhou. The building uses a triangular floor plan. On the top of the tower is a four-bar neon clock that indicates the time by displaying different colours in 15 minute intervals, blinking at the change of the quarter.
An anemometer is installed on the tip of the building's mast; the anemometer sits at . It also houses the world's highest church inside a skyscraper, Sky City Church.

Design

Central Plaza is made up of two principal components: a free standing  tall tower mast.
The ground level public area along with the public sitting out area form an  landscaped garden with fountain, trees and artificial stone paving. No commercial element is included in the podium. The first level is a public thoroughfare for three pedestrian bridges linking the Mass Transit Railway, the Convention and Exhibition Centre and the China Resource Building. By turning these space to public use, the building got 20% plot ratio more as bonus. The shape of the tower is not truly triangular but with its three corners cut off to provide better internal office spaces.

Design constraints

Triangular shaped floor plan

The building was designed to be in triangular shape because it could provide 20% more of the office area to enjoy the harbour view as compared with the square or rectangular shaped buildings. From an architectural point of view, this arrangement could provide better floor area utilisation, offering an internal column-free office area with a clear depth of  and an overall usable floor area efficiency of 81%.
Nonetheless, the triangular building plan causes the air handling unit (AHU) room in the internal core also to assume a triangular configuration with only limited space. This makes the adoption of a standard AHU not feasible. Furthermore, all air-conditioning ducting, electrical trunking and piping gathered inside the core area had to be squeezed into a very narrow and congested corridor ceiling void.

Super high-rise building

As the building is situated opposite to the HKCEC, the only way to get more sea view for the building and not be obstructed by the neighbouring high-rise buildings is to build it tall enough. However, a tall building brings a lot of difficulties to structural and building services design, for example, excessive system static pressure for water systems, high line voltage drop and long distance of vertical transportation. All these problems can increase the capital cost of the building systems and impair the safety operation of the building.

Maximum clear ceiling height

As a general practice, for achieving a clear height of  in office area could still be achieved with careful coordination and dedicated integration.

Structural constraints

Steel structure vs reinforced concrete

Steel structure is more commonly adopted in high-rise building. In the original scheme, an externally cross-braced framed tube was applied with primary/secondary beams carrying metal decking with reinforced concrete slab. The core was also of steelwork, designed to carry vertical load only. Later after a financial review by the developer, they decided to reduce the height of the superstructure by increasing the size of the floor plate so as to reduce the complex architectural requirements of the tower base which means a highstrength concrete solution became possible.
In the final scheme, columns at  deep floor edge beams were used to replace the large steel corner columns. As climbing form and table form construction method and efficient construction management are used in this project which make this reinforced concrete structure take no longer construction time than the steel structure. And the most attractive point is that the reinforced concrete scheme can save HK$230 million compared to that of steel structure. Hence the reinforced concrete structure was adopted and Central Plaza is now one of the tallest reinforced concrete buildings in the world.
In the reinforced concrete structure scheme, the core has a similar arrangement to the steel scheme and the wind shear is taken out from the core at the lowest basement level and transferred to the perimeter diaphragm walls. In order to reduce large shear reversals in the core walls in the basement, and at the top of the tower base level, the ground floor, basement levels 1 and 2 and the 5th and 6th floors, the floor slabs and beams are separated horizontally from the core walls.
Another advantage of using reinforced concrete structure is that it is more flexible to cope with changes in structural layout, sizes and height according to the site conditions by using table form system.

Current tenants

  
</ref>
  
</ref>
  
</ref>
  
 </ref>
  
</ref>
  
</ref>
  
</ref>

Gallery

Image:Hong Kong Central Plaza.jpeg|Central Plaza, 20 April 2003
Image:HK_Wan_Chai_Platform_Great_Eagle_Centre_n_Central_Plaza.JPG|Central Plaza and the Great Eagle Centre, 19 May 2007
image:central-plaza2.jpg|Triangular shaped floor plan of Central Plaza, 20 April 2003
image:central-plaza3.jpg|Vertical shot of Central Plaza, 20 April 2003
Image:HKWanchaiwaterfront.jpg|A view of Wanchai waterfront with Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Centre in the foreground and Central Plaza behind it, August 2005
image:Central Pier 9.jpg|A view of Wanchai waterfront as seen from Central Pier 9, Nov 2007
Image:Flags at half-staff outside Central Plaza.jpg| Flags at half mast, at the foot of Central Plaza



 






