[[Edward Shirley Kennedy]]

CATEGORIES: 1817 births, 1898 deaths, English book editors, English sportswriters, English mountain climbers, Presidents of the Alpine Club (UK), Alumni of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge

Edward Shirley Kennedy (usually known as E. S. Kennedy) (1817 – 1898) was an English mountaineer and author, and a founding member of the Alpine Club.

Early life

Kennedy was a gentleman of independent means,Founders of the Alpine Club (act. 1857–1863) by Peter H. Hansen in Oxford Dictionary of National Biography online (accessed 6 January 2008): Founders of the Alpine Club (act. 1857–1863) by Peter H. Hansen in Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (OUP, 2004) who attended Caius College, Cambridge as a Fellow-Commoner in his mid-thirties.

Founding of the Alpine Club

During an ascent of the Finsteraarhorn on 13 August 1857,Finsteraarhorn at stnet. C. W. Ellis, John Frederick Hardy, William Mathews, Benjamin St John Attwood-Mathews, by four guides, Auguste Simond and Jean Baptiste Croz, of Chamonix, Johann Jaun the Elder, of Meiringen, Aloys Bortis, of Fiesch, and by one porter, Alexander Guntern. Kennedy discussed the formation of a national mountaineering club with William Mathews, who had corresponded with F. J. A. Hort about the idea in February 1857.'According to institutional histories the Alpine Club was first proposed by William Mathews (1828–1901), a Birmingham land agent and surveyor, in letters during 1857 to F. J. A. Hort, a Cambridge don.' (from Founders of the Alpine Club in Oxford Dictionary of National Biography). See also The Early Days of the Alpine Club at stnet.Clublife at thebmc.co. W. Hinchliff as Secretary. 112. Mathews and Kennedy approached John Ruskin to become a member, but he declined. p. 113.
Kennedy served as President of the Club between 1860 and 1863.
A wood engraving by Edward Whymper of The Alpine Club at Zermatt in 1864 shows Kennedy with John Ball, William Mathews, T. G. Bonney, John Tyndall, Alfred Wills (the Alpine Club's third president), and Ulrich Lauener. Kennedy appears as a man of above average height, with a full beard, carrying a long plain wooden staff, several inches taller than himself.

Alpinism

In 1854 Kennedy attempted the unclimbed Dom – the highest mountain entirely within Switzerland – with Saas-Fee priest and hotel owner Abbé Joseph Imseng and two Swiss guides, but the guides were unwilling to tackle a particularly tricky passage, although both Kennedy and Imseng were happy to continue. 104. Engel writes of this unsuccessful expedition: 'The party had taken two Saas guides whose names are not given. They climbed to a height "much above the lower Mischabels" – the still anonymous Lenzspitze and Nadelhorn – according to Kennedy.' p. 104. The Dom was first climbed four years later, by the Rev. J. L. Davies and guides in 1858. Together with Charles Hudson, Kennedy was one of the earliest practitioners of climbing without guides in the Alps, climbing Mont Blanc du Tacul and Mont Blanc (by a new route)Helmut Dumler and Willi P. Burkhardt, The High Mountains of the Alps, London: Diadem, 1994, p. 206. Dumler writes that this party – comprising Kennedy, Hudson, the Smyth brothers (Christopher and Grenville), and Charles Ainslie – 'reached the Col du Dôme and then dropped down to the Grand Plateau and ascended the mountain by the Corridor route'. Leslie Stephen, Melchior Anderegg and party made the first complete ascent of the Goûter ridge in 1862. in guideless parties.
Kennedy was the editor of the second series of Peaks, Passes, and Glaciers (1862). Like the first series (1858), this was a collection of papers (in two volumes) published by the Alpine Club; these were the forerunners of the Alpine Journal, which first appeared in 1863. Walt Unsworth, London: Allen Lane, 1981, p. 15. This is a modern collection with – the comma aside – the same title.
Kennedy was also active in discussions concerning modification to the traditional ice axe, proposing a design based on the American backwoodsman's axe. 161.

First ascents

Bibliography

Note

E. S. Kennedy should not be confused with T. S. Kennedy of Leeds, an alpinist who made several first ascents during the same period (e.g. Dent Blanche (1862), Moine ridge of the Aiguille Verte (1865)).




