[[History of the North Sea]]

CATEGORIES: History of the North Sea

The North Sea, though often an area of conflict, has an extensive history of maritime commerce and trade routes between its coastal nations whose economies and industries were also able to exploit its resources.  The earliest records of Roman explorations of the sea begin in 12 BC.  Southern Britain was formally invaded in 43 AD and gradually assimilated into the Roman Empire, beginning sustained trade across the North Sea and the English Channel. The Germanic Angles, Saxons, and Jutes began the next great migration across the North Sea during the Migration Period, conquering, displacing, and mixing with the native Celtic populations.  The Viking Age began in 793 and for the next two centuries the Vikings ruled the North Sea.
From the Middle Ages until the end of the 15th century, before the development of good roads, maritime trade on the North Sea connected the economies of northern Europe, Britain, and Scandinavia with each other as well as with the Baltic and the Mediterranean.
The Netherland low countries and German speaking lands were the central hub for English Channel and North Sea coastal trade and organizations such as the Hanseatic League, aimed at protecting interests of the merchants and trade, also became increasingly prominent.Dollinger 1999: 62
Important overseas colonies, a vast merchant marine, and a powerful navy made the Dutch the main rivals of growing England, which saw its future in these three spheres.  This conflict was at the root of the first three Anglo-Dutch Wars between 1652 and 1673. Scotland emerged as a prominent economic power during the Scottish Enlightenment of the 18th century. Between 1700 and 1815, the North Sea saw only 45 years of peace, and could be regarded as the most dangerous eras to sail the sea.  Tensions in the North Sea were again heightened in 1904 by the Dogger Bank incident.  However, the British did not face a challenge to their dominance of the North Sea until World War One broke out in 1914.  During the First World War the North Sea became the main theatre of the war for surface action.  The Second World War also saw action in the North Sea, though it was restricted more to submarines and smaller vessels such as minesweepers, and torpedo boats and similar vessels.
After the war, the North Sea lost much of its military significance because it is bordered only by NATO member-states.  However, it gained significant economic importance in the 1960s as the states on the North Sea coasts began full-scale exploitation of its oil and gas resources.  The North Sea continues to be an active trade route. The countries bordering the North Sea all claim the  of territorial waters within which they have exclusive fishing rights. Today, the North Sea is more important as a fishery and source of fossil fuel and renewable energy, since territorial expansion of the adjoining countries has ceased.

Naming

One of the earliest recorded names was Septentrionalis Oceanus, or "Northern Ocean" which was cited by Pliny. However, the Celts who lived along its coast referred to it as the Morimaru, the "dead sea", which was also taken up by the Germanic peoples, giving Morimarusa. This name may refer to the dead water patches resulting from a layer of fresh water sitting on top of a layer of salt water making it quite still. Names referring to the same phenomenon lasted into the Middle Ages, e.g.,  Old High German mere giliberōt and Middle Dutch lebermer or libersee. Other common names in use for long periods were the Latin terms  Mare Frisicum, Oceanum- or Mare Germanicum as well as their English equivalents, "Frisian Sea", "German Ocean", "German Sea" and "Germanic Sea" (from the Latin Mare Germanicum).[ref]
Other names were Amalchium Mare, Britannie ef Frisie mare, Fresonicus Ocecnus, Magnum Mare, Occidentale Mare, Occidentalis Oceanus
[/ref]

Early history

Roman Empire

The first historically confirmed intensive use of the North Sea was by the Romans in 12 BC, when Nero Claudius Drusus built and launched a fleet of over a thousand ships into the North Sea conquering the indigenous tribes, including the Frisii and the Chauci.  By 5 BC the Roman knowledge of the Sea was greatly expanded as far as the Elbe by a military expedition under Tiberius.  Pliny the Elder describes Roman sailors going through Helgoland and as far as the northeast coast of Denmark.
 and with the later conquest of Britain by Aulus Plautius in 43 AD, regular trade began between Rome and Britain via ports in Gaul.  Using Roman naval support along the North Sea coast of Scotland, Gnaeus Julius Agricola continued the invasion and exploration northward into the Scottish Highlands. This traffic continued to some extent even after Emperor Honarius abandoned responsibility for defending Britain in 410 AD.

Migration period

In the power vacuum left by Rome, the Germanic Angles, Saxons, and Jutes began the next great migration across the North Sea.  Having already been used as mercenaries in Britain by the Romans, many people from these tribes migrated across the North Sea during the Migration Period, conquering and perhaps displacing the native Celtic populations.[ref]
</ref>
Around the 7th century a wave of Frisian migrants moved to several islands in the North Sea, and a second wave moved to what is now Nordfriesland in northern Germany and South Jutland in southern Denmark in the 11th century.

Vikings

The attack on Lindisfarne in 793 is generally considered the beginning of the Viking Age.
For the next 250 years the Scandinavian raiders of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark dominated the North Sea, raiding monasteries, homes, and towns along the coast and along the rivers that ran inland.  According to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle they began to settle in Britain in 851.  They continued to settle in the British Isles and the continent until around 1050.
Alfred the Great, who is counted as the first English king, was the first to mount significant opposition to the Vikings.  Eventually he relegated them to the Danelaw, carving out his own kingdom.  Harthacanute of Denmark and England was the last Viking king to rule over a territory spanning the North Sea.  After Harthacanute's death, the kingdom broke apart.[ref]
</ref>
With the rise of William the Conqueror the North Sea began to lose its significance as an invasion route.  The new order oriented most of England and Scandinavia's trade south, toward the Mediterranean and the Orient.  The Baltic Sea became increasingly important for northern Germany and Scandinavia as well as the powerful Hanseatic League began to rise.

Hanseatic League

Though the Hanseatic League was centered in the Baltic, it also had important Kontors on the North Sea, including Bergen, the Steelyard in London, and Bruges.[ref]
</ref>
The rise of Bruges as a center of trade and a corresponding revival of the North Sea economic importance began in 1134 when a storm tide created a deeper waterway to the city allowing the entry of large ships to port.  A lively trade sprang up between Bruges and London, mostly in textiles.  Bruges became the end point of the Hanseatic East-West trade line that began in Novgorod and was very important for maritime connections between France, Spain, Italy, and the Netherlands and the Hanseatic regions of Northern Europe. The Hanseatic league monopolised trade of the Northern Isles during this era.
in 1441 the Hanseatic League was forced to recognize the equality of the Netherlands as Antwerp had risen as an economic power and tied itself to Denmark.  After the so-called Count's Feud, a war of succession in Denmark, the Dutch were able to encroach upon the League's monopoly on Baltic trade and the reign of the Hanseatic League was at an end as the Netherlands became the center of the Northern European economy.

Renaissance

The Renaissance, a period of great cultural change and achievement in Europe that spanned the period from the end of the 14th century to about 1600, marking the transition between Medieval and Early Modern Europe.  The majority of commerce took place via maritime shipping due to undeveloped roadways between the 16th and 18th centuries.  The east coast of Great Britain operated several ports for intercontinental trade.  The European coastal ports supplied domestic goods, dyes, linen, metal products, salt and wine.  The Scandinavian and Baltic shoreline provided fish, grain, naval goods, and timber.  The Mediterranean area traded dyes, premium cloths, fruits and spices.  The Burgundian Netherlands, French Netherlands, Spanish Netherlands and Austrian Netherlands and German lands were a central focus situated on the banks of the North Sea or the English Channel.  Antwerp experienced three booms during its golden age, the first based on the pepper market, a second launched by American silver coming from Seville (ending with the bankruptcy of Spain in 1557), and a third boom, after the stabilising Treaty of Cateau-Cambresis, in 1559, based on the textiles industry becoming the second largest European city north of the Alps by 1560.

Early modern history

The Netherlands

In the 16th century, the Netherlands became the preeminent economic power in the world.  For the Dutch merchant marine the North Sea served more as a starting point for their oceanic voyages.  It had become the gateway and crucial outlet allowing Dutch merchants direct access to world markets.[ref]
</ref>
During the Eighty Years War, the Dutch began a heavily invested worldwide trade - hunting whales around Svalbard, trading spices from India and Indonesia, founding colonies in Brazil, South Africa, North America (New Netherlands), and the Caribbean.   The empire, which they accumulated through trade, led to the Dutch Golden Age in the 17th century. The Dutch fishing industry peaked in the early 17th century.  The Herring Buss improved harvest of herring, and the Dutch also expanded to cod and whale fisheries.
In 1651, England passed the Navigation Acts, which damaged Dutch trade interests. The disagreements concerning the Acts led to the First Anglo–Dutch War, which lasted from 1652–1654 and ended in the Treaty of Westminster (1654), whereby the Dutch were forced to recognize the acts.  
In 1665 the English declared war on the Dutch once again, beginning the Second Anglo-Dutch War.  With the support of the French, who, between the war, had marched into the Spanish Netherlands—present day Belgium, the Dutch gained the upper hand.  In 1667, following Admiral de Ruyter's destruction of a large part of the British fleet on the Medway, the English and the Dutch signed the Treaty of Breda  The peace dictated that the English would take over administration of Dutch possessions in North America (present day New York City) while the Dutch would get Suriname from the English and were able to amend the Navigation Acts.
1672 is known in the Netherlands as "Rampjaar," the year of disaster.  England declared war on the Netherlands once again, beginning the Third Anglo-Dutch War, and were quickly followed by France, the Prince-Bishopric of Münster, and the Archbishopric of Cologne in an alliance against the Dutch.  The three continental allies advanced on the Netherlands while the landing of English troops along the coast was only barely prevented.[ref]
