[[Panton, Leslie & Company]]

CATEGORIES: Spanish Florida, British East Florida

Panton, Leslie & Company was a company of Scottish merchants active in trading in the Bahamas and with the Indians of what is now the Southeastern United States during the late 18th and early 19th centuries.  
Panton, Leslie & Company was a partnership formed at St. Augustine, capital of British East Florida, by William Panton, John Leslie, Thomas Forbes, Charles McLatchy and William Alexander in 1783 for the purpose of trading with the Indians of Florida and adjacent territory claimed by Spain. The partners, who were Loyalists, had been forced out of the United States during the American Revolution, with their property confiscated. Having established themselves in Florida and the Bahamas, the company was able to continue operating in Florida after the colony's return to Spain in 1783 because there were no Spanish traders established in the trade with the region's Indians. Panton, Leslie & Company were granted a monopoly on this trade in East Florida, and eventually also dominated the Indian trade in West Florida. 
For many years Panton, Leslie & Company dominated trade with the Creeks and Seminoles. They eventually captured much of the trade with the Choctaws and Chickasaws, and were important in the trade with the Cherokees. The partners harbored a great antipathy to the United States, and used their influence with the Indians to advance Spanish territorial claims against the United States, and to encourage the Indians to resist white settlers and the United States' attempts to acquire land from the tribes. 
Panton, Leslie & Company also operated as merchants in the Bahamas, organizing shipping of cotton and other local products, and acting as agents for merchants in Britain.Johnson:13
After the deaths of William Panton and John Leslie, the company was reorganized in 1804 as John Forbes & Company.

History

Scots immigrants and the deerskin trade

John Gordon, a Scots immigrant from Aberdeenshire, established a vast trade network in South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida during the 1760s that laid the foundation of Panton, Leslie, and Company, which would become the largest mercantile company on the southern frontier.
After immigrating to the American colonies, William Panton and John Forbes, Thomas's younger brother, had done business with James Spalding (a trader who settled at St. Simon's island) and his partners before 1776 through Gordon's Charleston firm.
Forbes was Gordon's maternal nephew. Panton and Thomas Forbes were two of the founding partners of Panton, Leslie & Company.
The firm's five founding partners—William Panton, Thomas Forbes, John Leslie, William Alexander, and Charles McLatchy—formed Panton, Leslie & Company at St. Augustine, the capital of British East Florida, in late 1782 or early 1783. They were all Scotsmen who had traded with the colonists and Indians of South Carolina, Georgia, and East Florida before and during the American Revolution. It was a matter of survival for them to remain loyal to Great Britain, as most of their trade goods, especially guns, lead, and gunpowder, came from the mother country, and rebelling against the British would have cut off those supplies.
Between 1710 and 1714, European cattle stocks had been devastated by deadly bovine diseases, causing England to prohibit the importation of cowhides from the Continent.  As those supplies declined, the market for deerskins from the American Southeast and Spanish Florida had expanded rapidly. Buckskin was used in place of cowhide to manufacture saddles, leggings, shoes, gloves, harnesses, whips, breeches, and aprons; by the middle of the 18th century, yellow buckskin breeches, formerly the working garb of common laborers, was worn by members of all social classes in England.
The southern deerskin trade declined gradually after the Revolutionary War, but the resourceful Scottish merchants found new opportunities for trade with the Indians even as they lost political and economic influence in the former British colonies of South Carolina and Georgia. Panton, Leslie & Company and its successor, John Forbes & Company, were actively involved in Indian affairs and had sway over international diplomacy in the region.
As early as 1776, Panton had 32,000 deerskins stored in his main warehouse: his other enterprises included naval stores, lumber, a rice and indigo plantation, and tracts of land. In the 1780s he and his partner Thomas Forbes were granted thousands of acres of land west of present-day Palatka; here they used slave labor to build drainage canals and dikes for a rice plantation, as well as to grow indigo and tap pine trees for naval stores such as turpentine, pitch, tar, and rosin.

Monopoly of the Indian trade

In January of 1783 a conference was held in St. Augustine between the representatives of the British crown—Governor Patrick Tonyn, Brigadier General Archibald McArthur, and Thomas Brown, the superintendent of Indian affairs—and the head men and principal warriors of the towns of the Upper and the Lower Creeks, who complained of the long distance they must travel to the stores from which they obtained their supplies. The Indians offered protection to merchants who would move their stores to locations closer to their territory, and pointed out the Appalachicola River as a suitable place for a trading house. The Creeks said it was not only more convenient for themselves, but also much nearer to the Choctaw, Chickasaw, and Cherokee Indians, and requested that the house of Panton, Leslie, & Co., who had been supplying them with goods, should be solicited to settle there for that purpose.
William Panton was present at the conference, and agreed with the Indians to establish a store at such a place as he or his co-partners might find suitable between the forks of Flint river and the mouth of the Appalachicola River, provided that letters of license were issued to him and his partners William Alexander, John Leslie, Thomas Forbes, and Charles McLatchy. The agreement was confirmed by the Crown, and the traders were granted the necessary license, although the store was not built until 1786.
Many different traders and trading houses had vied for a share of the Indian trade on the southern frontier, but few survived long. Panton, Leslie, & Company made an alliance with Alexander McGillivray, the quarter-blood leader of the Upper Creeks, who became a virtual silent partner in the concern. William Panton knew his father, Lachlan McGillivray, a prosperous Scots planter and a deerskin trader himself, and had recognized Alexander's ability since he was a child. Augustine J. A. Brown The Florida Historical Quarterly Vol. 37, No. 3/4, Pensacola Quadricentennial Issue (Jan. - Apr., 1959), p. 328
By 1786, when Spain granted Panton, Leslie & Company a monopoly over the Indian trade in East and West Florida,Across the Border: Commodity Flow and Merchants in Spanish St. Augustine James Cusick The Florida Historical Quarterly Vol. 69, No. 3 (Jan., 1991) p. 280 the firm owned 250 slaves and nineteen individual land grants in the Floridas encompassing 12,820 acres. Most of the slaves worked on company plantations and cattle ranches, but a few had specialized jobs: e.g., the company rented out its slave Langueste to the Spanish government as an Indian interpreter.
