[[Portrait Professional]]

CATEGORIES: Raster graphics editors, Photo software, Adobe Photoshop, Windows graphics-related software, OS X graphics-related software

Portrait Professional or Portrait Pro is PC and Mac based portrait enhancement software targeted at professional and keen amateur photographers. Developed by Anthropics Technology Ltd  The current software, version 11 was released in November 2012.  Portrait Professional and Portrait Professional Studio are image editors for Windows and Mac OS X, specifically targeted at editing portrait photographs.
Rather than using brushes as a traditional image editor does, the user of Portrait Professional first describes where the face is in the picture,Digital Photo News: Portrait Professional Review, visited January 03, 2007. then most of the transformations are done through sliders.  One of the unique, but controversialBoing Boing:Creepy automated photo retouching software, visited January 10, 2007. features is the ability to automatically reshape the face to fit a model of beauty.New Scientist: Beauty and the digital beast, visited January 10, 2007.
Portrait Professional Studio does the above and additionally handles raw files, 16 bit tiffs and color profiles. It is also available as a Photoshop plugin.

Features

Plugin

Portrait Professional Studio functions as a standalone, as a Photoshop plugin and as a plugin to Elements, Lightroom, and Aperture 

Language availability

Portrait Professional is available in the following languages: English, French, German, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Brazilian Portuguese, Korean and Japanese.portraitprofessional.com/faq/?q=74

Cultural impact

The cultural impact of airbrushing software being readily available to anyone is a proliferation of airbrushed images being used on social media profiles and online dating sites.unlv.pdf
Portrait editing software such as Portrait Professional enables anyone to easily alter their own portrait photographs, making themselves look younger, with less wrinkles and blemishes.abcnews.marketwatch.com/story/10-things-dating-sites-wont-tell-you-2013-02-08?pagenumber=7

Previous versions

 My Perfect Picture
Portrait Professional was originally known as My Perfect Picture. 
Version 4
The first version of Portrait Professional was version 4. It required a web server to process the image.
Version 5
Also required a web server to process the image. 
Version 6
Version 6 was the first version to run without needing a connection to a web server.
Version 8
Featured enhanced face sculpting and slimming, an improvement in user interface, color calibration and improved raw support in the Studio version.portraitprofessional.com/photo_editing_software/new_in_v8/
Version 9
Version 9 was the first version to feature ClearSkin ® skin improving technology and also to function as a standalone and as a Photoshop plugin. Other improvements included the ability to handle profile views, a batch mode, and an intelligent touch up brush.portraitprofessional.com/photo_editing_software/new_in_v9/
Version 10
In response to customer requests, version 10 featured improved plugin support for Photoshop, Lightroom and Aperture, a new child mode, and an enhance skin only mode.portraitprofessional.com/photo_editing_software/new_in_v10/
Version 11
Released in November 2012, major improvements in version 11 included its automated face and feature finder, an improved handling of multiple faces within one session, and improved face contouring and slimming.portraitprofessional.com/photo_editing_software/new_in_v11/

Tools

Presets
Known as Saved Sliders or Presets depending on version, these are pre-loaded slider settings that have been determined to work best for a particular subject, for example to make a young woman look glamorous.
Touch Up/ Restore Brush
Use the Touch Up brush to paint over spots or blemishes in the skin that have not been eliminated automatically.
Use the Restore Brush to paint over spots in the skin that have been removed, but that you would like to keep.
Adjust the size and strength of the brush with the sliders beside it.
Batch Mode
Developed to particularly appeal to those photographers who retouch a high volume of photos.
Face Sculpt Controls
Subtly reshape the face to beautify facial features.portraitprofessional.0_Win_Manual.pdf
Skin Smoothing Controls
Improve the appearance of the skin. Also provides tools to let you refine the areas that Portrait Professional treats as skin.portraitprofessional.0_Win_Manual.pdf
Eye Controls
Improve the appearance of the eyes. Also provides an option to enable red-eye removal.portraitprofessional.0_Win_Manual.pdf
Mouth and Nose Controls
Improve the appearance of the mouth and nose.portraitprofessional.0_Win_Manual.pdf
Skin Coloring Controls
Alter the color of the skin.portraitprofessional.0_Win_Manual.pdf
Skin Lighting Controls
Enhance the lighting on the skin.portraitprofessional.0_Win_Manual.pdf
Hair Controls
Improve the appearance of the hair. Also provides tools to let you refine the areas that Portrait Professional treats as hair.portraitprofessional.0_Win_Manual.pdf
Picture Controls
Control various aspects of the whole image, such as brightness and contrast. Also provides a tool that lets you crop the image. 








