[[Tom Hiddleston]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 births, Living people, People educated at The Dragon School, People educated at Eton College, Alumni of Pembroke College, Cambridge, Alumni of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, English male film actors, English male radio actors, English male stage actors, English male television actors, English people of Scottish descent, Laurence Olivier Award winners, Male Shakespearean actors, 21st-century English male actors

Thomas William "Tom" Hiddleston (born 9 February 1981) is an English actor. He is known for playing the character of Loki in the Marvel Studios films Thor (2011), The Avengers (2012), and Thor: The Dark World (2013). He has also appeared in Steven Spielberg's First World War film War Horse (2011), The Deep Blue Sea (2011), Woody Allen's romantic comedy Midnight in Paris (2011), the 2012 BBC series Henry IV, Henry V, and the romantic vampire film Only Lovers Left Alive (2013). In theatre, he has been in the productions of Cymbeline (2007) and Ivanov (2008). In December 2013 he starred as the title character in the Donmar Warehouse production of Coriolanus which played until February 2014.
He won the Laurence Olivier Award for Best Newcomer in a Play for his role in Cymbeline while also being nominated for the same award the same year for his role of Cassio in Othello. In 2011 he won the Empire Award for Best Male Newcomer and nominated for the BAFTA Rising Star Award for his role in Thor. He won the MTV Movie Award for Best Fight and Best Villain in 2013 for his role in The Avengers.

Early life and education

Hiddleston was born in Westminster, London. He is the son of arts administrator/former stage manager Diana Patricia (Servaes) Hiddleston and physical chemist James Norman Hiddleston.
Hiddleston continued on to Pembroke College at the University of Cambridge, where he earned a double first in Classics. 
During his second term at Cambridge he was seen in a production of A Streetcar Named Desire by talent agent Lorraine Hamilton, of Hamilton Hodell. He proceeded to study acting at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, from which he graduated in 2005.

Career

Film and television

While still doing student plays Hiddleston began doing television, landing parts in Stephen Whittaker's adaptation of Nicholas Nickleby for ITV
On graduating from the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art Hiddleston won his first film role, playing Oakley in Joanna Hogg's first feature, Unrelated. He also appeared in the leading role of Edward in Joanna Hogg's second feature, Archipelago. His TV credits include Magnus Martinsson in the BBC detective drama Wallander, Bill Hazledine in Suburban Shootout, John Plumptre in the BBC costume drama TV film Miss Austen Regrets and William Buxton in the BBC drama series Return to Cranford. In 2007 he joined a list of British actors, including Kate Winslet and Orlando Bloom, to have guest starred in the long-running medical drama Casualty.
Hiddleston is well known for his portrayal of Loki in the 2011 Marvel Studios film, Thor. He was invited to audition by Kenneth Branagh, the film's director, after having previously worked with Branagh on Ivanov and Wallander. Hiddleston said of Branagh, "Ken has had a life-changing effect. He was able to say to the executives, 'Trust me on this, you can cast Tom and he will deliver'. It was massive and it's completely changed the course of what is available to me to do. Ken gave me my break."
Also in 2011 Hiddleston portrayed novelist F. Scott Fitzgerald in writer-director Woody Allen's Midnight in Paris, the noble Captain Nicholls in War Horse, a film based on the 1982 novel by Michael Morpurgo, directed by Steven Spielberg, and Freddie Page, a RAF pilot in the British drama The Deep Blue Sea, alongside Rachel Weisz. In 2012, he reprised his role as the supervillain Loki in The Avengers. While filming a scene with Chris Hemsworth, who plays Thor, the film's director, Joss Whedon told the fighting duo that the scene did not look real enough, so Hiddleston told Hemsworth to really hit him for the fight scene. "I said to Chris, 'Dude, just hit me.  Just hit me because I'm protected here and it's fine.'  He's like, 'Are you sure?'  I was like, 'Yeah, it will look great. Just go for it.'"
On television in 2012 Hiddleston appeared in the BBC Two series The Hollow Crown, portraying Prince Hal opposite Jeremy Irons as Henry IV in the adaptation of Shakespeare's Henry IV, Part I and Part II. He later as appeared as King Henry V in the television film Henry V. He had a cameo in the 2014 film Muppets Most Wanted, as the Great Escapo.
Hiddleston replaced Benedict Cumberbatch in the upcoming gothic horror film Crimson Peak directed by Guillermo Del Toro.

Theatre

Hiddleston had leading roles in Declan Donnellan's company Cheek by Jowl's productions The Changeling, and Cymbeline. For the latter he won the Laurence Olivier Award for Best Newcomer in a Play. His Donmar Warehouse credits include Cassio in Michael Grandage's production of Shakespeare's Othello alongside Chiwetel Ejiofor and Ewan McGregor and later Lvov in their West End revival of Chekhov's Ivanov with Kenneth Branagh.
Hiddleston appeared with Benedict Cumberbatch, Gemma Arterton, Eddie Redmayne and Rose Byrne among others in Danny Boyle's one time production of The Children's Monologues on 14 November 2010 where he played Prudence, a young girl upset with her mother for her father leaving and excited for her birthday. The play was a one time event of adapted stories of children's first-hand experiences in South Africa being re-interpreted by and performed by various actors.

Narrations

Hiddleston was the voiceover for BBC's documentary on the Galapagos Island in 2006.

Filmography

Film

Television

Theatre

Video game

Radio

Awards and nominations






