[[Colorado (horse)]]

CATEGORIES: 1923 racehorse births, 1929 racehorse deaths, Thoroughbred racehorses, Racehorses bred in the United Kingdom, Racehorses trained in the United Kingdom, British racehorses, British Classic Race winners, Thoroughbred family 3

Colorado (1923–1929) was a British Thoroughbred racehorse and sire. He won the 2000 Guineas in 1926 and the Eclipse Stakes in 1927. He was also noted for his rivalry with the Derby winner Coronach whom he defeated on three of their four meetings.

Background

Until the emergence of Fairway at the end of the decade, Colorado was regarded as the best racehorse sired by Phalaris,
He was a small, but powerfully built colt standing just over 15 hands,

Racing career

1925:two-year-old season

Colorado was a leading two-year-old in 1925, winning the Coventry Stakes at Royal Ascot. In the Free Handicap, an official assessment of the year's two year olds, Colorado was assesses on 118lbs, eight pounds below the joint topweights Coronach and Legatee.

1926:three-year-old season

At three he won the Union Jack Stakes over a mile at Liverpool in March but worked poorly before the 2000 Guineas and started at 100/8 behind the strongly favoured Coronach. Colorado "dashed" into the lead in the final furlong and went clear to win by five lengths, giving Lord Derby his first win in the race.
He started favourite for the Derby but Coronach reversed the placings, winning by five lengths, with Colorado losing second place by a short head to Lancegaye. Weston, was certain that he would have at least been closer at Epsom if he had not been instructed to employ exaggerated waiting tactics.

1927:four-year-old season

After having taken a long time to recover his form after the Derby, Colorado returned to beat Coronach in their two meetings in 1927. He was unplaced on his debut, but won the one and a half mile Newbury Summer Cup in June.
In a much anticipated race for the Princess of Wales's Stakes Tommy Weston tracked Coronach in the early stages before moving Colorado up to challenge for the lead. After a brief "duel" Colorado pulled away to win by eight lengths. and was retired to stud as the winner of nine races, worth £30,358.

Stud career

Colorado died after only two seasons at stud. He had made a prominsing start as a stallion, siring Felicitation who defeated Hyperion in the 1934 Ascot Gold Cup. He also got the Eclipse Stakes winner Loaningdale, Scarlet Tiger, who was third in the St. Leger, the top sprinter Coroado and the very versatile Colorado Kid.




