[[Jackson Martínez]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 births, Living people, People from Quibdó, Colombian footballers, Colombia international footballers, 2011 Copa América players, Independiente Medellín footballers, Jaguares de Chiapas footballers, F.C. Porto players, Liga MX footballers, Primeira Liga players, Colombian expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in Mexico, Expatriate footballers in Portugal, Colombian expatriates in Portugal, Colombian people of African descent, Colombian expatriates in Mexico

Jackson Arley Martínez Valencia (; born on 3 October 1986) or simply Jackson is a Colombian footballer who plays as a striker for F.C. Porto of the Portuguese Primeira Liga.
He is often named Cha Cha Cha for his dance-like moves on the pitch.
Jackson has also represented Colombia's national team since 2009, where he has gained 26 caps and scored 8 goals so far.

Club career

Independiente de Medellín

In 2009 he became the top goalscorer for the season, with 18 goals in the Colombian league. He also led Independiente Medellín to their 5th league title.

Jaguares de Chiapas

After several good seasons in Colombia, Martínez attracted interest from teams in Argentina and Mexico, and was eventually signed by Chiapas from the Mexican Primera División. He ended a good first season with nine goals, placing him fourth in the top scorers table. In the Copa Libertadores 2011, Martínez was a key player for Chiapas as they reached the quarter-finals. He was named captain of Jaguares at the beginning of the Clausura 2012 season. He did very well scoring over thirty goals for the season. Along with his performances for the Colombia national football team, his outstanding performances in Mexico subsequently led to interest from Portuguese team Porto.

Porto

=2012–13 season=

On 7 July 2012, Martínez signed with Porto for US$11 million.
He scored his first league goal on 25 August from the penalty spot against Vitória de Guimarães in the 80th minute with Porto winning the game 4–0.
With 11 goals in 12 matches, he beat the record of former Porto strikers Radamel Falcao, Lisandro López and Hulk.Jackson supera Falcão (Jackson superior to Falcão); Record, 15 November 2012 
In the final round of the Champions League group stage, he scored a goal against Paris Saint-Germain in a 2–1 defeat. Despite the loss, Porto advanced to the next round as the second-placed club in their group.  Against Moreirense, he scored a goal following an assist from James Rodríguez.
In the beginning of the second half of the league, Jackson scored a header in a 1–0 victory over Nacional. Jackson played in the O Clássico against rivals Benfica where he scored in a 2–2 draw. In the delayed match against Vitória de Setúbal, Jackson scored a double, one via the penalty spot. In his next match, he sealed a 5–0 victory with a 90th minute goal against Gil Vicente. He scored a hat-trick against Vitória de Guimarães which included 2 headers making it his first hat-trick for Porto. Jackson had at this time scored 18 goals in 17 matches in the Portuguese Liga. Jackson continued his goal scoring streak by scoring the equaliser in a 1–1 draw with Olhanense. He scored a goal against Beira-Mar a week later. Martinez added 2 more goals, against Rio Ave, including a penalty and a volley following a cross by James Rodríguez. Martínez was elected for the February SJPF Player of the Month.
Martínez made his Taça da Liga debut in the 2012–13 Taça da Liga semi-finals against Rio Ave where he failed to score a single goal. Regardless, Porto won the match 4–0 and advanced to the finals. Jackson ended his goal drought in a 3–0 away victory over Moreirense, where he scored a brace.
In the final match of the league season against Paços de Ferreira, Jackson sealed the 2–0 victory with scoring the second goal and assuring Porto's 3rd consecutive league title (Benfica also won their last match). The goal marked Jackson's 26th goal within the league while becoming the top goal scorer as well. With winning the Portuguese Supercup earlier in the season, finishing as top goal scorer, and winning the league title (in just his debut season playing not only for Porto but in Europe), Jackson had a very successful season debut.fifa.html?intcmp=newsreader_news_box_1
ESPN noted Jackson as one of the best signings for the 2012–13 season following his successful seasonal European debut.

=2013–14 season=

In the 2013 Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira, Jackson scored the second goal in a 3-0 victory against Vitória SC at the Estádio Municipal de Aveiro, thus claiming his second Portuguese Supercup in a row.
In the opening league match against Vitoria Setubal, Jackson scored the 3rd goal in a 3-1 win. 

International career

A Colombian international at the age of 22, he has become a regular feature in his nation's qualification and friendly games. He scored his first international goal on 5 September 2009 against Ecuador in a 2010 FIFA World Cup qualifying match.com, 5 September 2009 On 7 June 2011, he was selected by Hernán Darío Gómez to be a part of the squad-of-23 for the 2011 Copa América.Falcão e Guarín na Copa América (Falcão and Guarín at the Copa América); Record, 7 June 2011 

Career statistics

 1Refers as Copa Colombia, Copa MX and Taça de Portugal.
  2Refers as Copa Libertadores, Copa Sudamericana, UEFA Champions League and Europa League.
 Source: Footballdatabase.com

International goals

Honours

Club

Individual






