[[Will Clark (pornographic actor)]]

CATEGORIES: BDSM people, People from Wausau, Wisconsin, 1968 births, Living people

Will Clark (born March 9, 1968, Wausau, Wisconsin)

Entertainment career

Prior to his pornographic film career, Clark was a struggling actor in New York City
A music promoter encouraged him to apply to Falcon Studios and was rejected. "'You're too white, you're too hairy, you're a redhead. We don't care for any of that stuff. And you need to bulk up,'" he recalled being told. 
Clark began his pornographic film career in 1995.
Clark has managed his image and public persona to maintain his popularity. "I've been good at marketing on the Web. I take care of my fans when I tour—give them pictures and promotional materials,

HIV/AIDS activism

Clark's HIV/AIDS activism-fundraising efforts began in 1997 when he volunteered with Stop AIDS Chicago and Aid for AIDS. 

Writing career

Clark is a published magazine article author being a regular contributor to Dude magazine, International Leatherman,International Leatherman magazine Web site. and PulpPulp magazine Web site. (a fashion and style magazine published in Palm Springs, California). 
Two children's plays of his have been produced on the southern California stage. 

Awards

Clark has won several awards of merit for his work in the gay pornographic film industry. He shared the Grabby Awards for "Performer of the Year" in 1999,
His efforts for non-sexual activities were recognized in 1998 with the GayVN "Performer Special Achievement Awardfor AIDS Causes", and in November 1998 with presentation of the Leo Ford Humanitarian Award by the Gay Erotic Video Awards. 
During his pornographic film career, Clark has been nominated for a variety of gay pornographic film industry awards (won some) for acting work roles for other than sexual encounters. For example, the Men in Video Awards named him "Best Bushwhacker" in 1997 and 1998, an award that characterizes his penchant for severely trimmed pubic hair."1998 'Men In Video' Award Winners," 
Clark also won the Northeast Mr. Drummer title in 1997, which qualified him to compete for the International Mister Leather title; he did not win. 

Selected videography



Notes






