[[Kannada alphabet]]

CATEGORIES: Brahmic scripts, Kannada language, Konkani, Tulu language, Alphabets

The Kannada 

History

Kannada (Kanarese or Canarese) script is derived from the Old Kannada script. Old Kannada script, which evolved around 10th century, is the continuation of the Kadamba script, which in turn came during 4th century CE.
The Kadamba script is said to have evolved from the Proto-Kannada script (during 4th century CE). The Kadamba script is also known as Pre-Old-Kannada script. The Proto-Kannada evolved from the ancient Brahmi script around 3rd century BCE.

Evolution

Over the centuries some changes have been made to the Kannada script. These changes consist of:
These changes have facilitated the use of the Kannada script for writing many of the literary Indic languages, including Sanskrit.

General

Kannada script has forty-nine characters in its alphasyllabary and is phonemic. The Kannada character set is almost identical to that of other Indian languages. The number of written symbols, however, is far more than the 49 characters in the alphasyllabary, because different characters can be combined to form compound characters (ottaksharas). Each written symbol in the Kannada script corresponds with one syllable, as opposed to one phoneme in languages like English. The Kannada writing system is an abugida, with consonants appearing with an inherent vowel.
The characters are classified into three categories: swaras (vowels), vyanjanas (consonants) and Yogavaahakas (part vowel, part consonants).
The name given for a pure, true letter is akshara, akkara or varna. Each letter has its own form (ākāra) and sound (shabda); providing the visible and audible representations, respectively. Kannada is written from left to right.A Grammar of the Kannada Language. F. Kittel (1993), p. 5
Kannada alphabet (aksharamale or varnamale) now consists of 49 letters.
Each sound has its own distinct letter, and therefore every word is pronounced exactly as it is spelt; so the ear is a sufficient guide. After the exact sounds of the letters have been once gained, every word can be pronounced with perfect accuracy. The accent falls on the first syllable. Each consonant sound has two distinct pronunciations:
The sound with normal pronunciation (deergha) is generally used in the varnamala or aksharamala.

Vowels

There are thirteen vowels (swaras).

Yogavaahakas

The Yogavaahakas (part-vowel, part consonant) include two letters:
Another two Yogavaahakas used in Sanskrit, but present in Kannada script, are known as Ardhavisarga:

Consonants

Two types of consonants (vyanjana) are identified in Kannada: the structured consonants and the unstructured consonants. The structured consonants are classified according to where the tongue touches the palate of the mouth and are classified accordingly into five structured groups.

Structured consonants

These consonants are shown here with their IAST transcriptions.
See place of articulation for more information on tongue positions.

Unstructured consonants

The unstructured consonants are consonants that do not fall into any of the above structures:
 (ya),
 (ra),
 (ṟa) (obsolete),
 (la),
 (va),
 (śa),
),
 (sa),
 (ha),
),
 (ḻ) (obsolete).

Consonant Conjuncts

The Kannada script is rich in conjunct consonant clusters, with most consonants having a standard subjoined form and few true ligature clusters. A table of consonant conjuncts follows, although the forms of individual conjuncts may differ according to font.

Numerals

The decimal numerals in the script are:

Akshara

Written Kannada is composed of akshara or kagunita, corresponding to syllables. The signs for consonants may combine with the signs for vowels to form ligatures. Each kagunita corresponds to a syllable. In the table below the top row lists the vowels, and the leftmost column from row 2 down the consonants (actually represented by kagunita, namely that obtained by combining each consonant with the "neutral" vowel 'a'). The remaining cells contain the corresponding kagunita obtained by combining the consonant of that row with the vowel of that column.
Formation example:
The formations shown bold above are seldom used in the normal course of the language.

Script similarities

Telugu script is closely related to the Kannada script.
Scripts which are close to Kannada script other than Telugu script are Sinhala script[ref]
[/ref] (which included some elements from the Kadamba script), and old Peguan script
(used in Burma).

Look of Disapproval

Due to its resemblance to an eye and an eyebrow, the Kannada letter ಠ is used in a popular emoticon called the look of disapproval, which is displayed as ಠ_ಠ. The use of the emoticon has been documented since 2007, and it is used to convey disapproval or contempt. Similarly, the akshara ರೃ has been used in an emoticon to represent a monocle.[ref]"Now, you too can evoke this trope with this Emoticon! ಠ_ರೃ" 
[/ref]

Unicode








