[[Never Say Die (horse)]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 racehorse births, 1975 racehorse deaths, Thoroughbred racehorses, Racehorses bred in Kentucky, Racehorses trained in the United Kingdom, British racehorses, British Classic Race winners, Thoroughbred family 1

Never Say Die (1951–1975) was an American-bred, British-trained Thoroughbred racehorse. After winning only once from his first nine races, he demonstrated much improved form in the summer of 1954 to win the Epsom Derby, becoming the first American colt to win the race for seventy-three years. Later that year he added a second British Classic when winning the St. Leger Stakes by a record margin of twelve lengths. He was later retired to a successful stud career.

Background

Never Say Die was a chestnut colt with a white blaze and three white feet, bred and raced by the American philanthropist and art collector Robert Sterling Clark. At the time of his Derby win, the horse stood 15.3 ½ hands high.

Racing career

1953:two-year-old season

In six races as a two-year-old, Never Say Die showed some good form but appeared to be somewhat below the best of his generation. He won the six furlong Rosslyn Stakes at Ascot Racecourse in July and fimished third in both the Richmond Stakes and Dewhurst Stakes. In the Free Handicap, a rating of the year's best British juveniles, Never Say Die was allotted a weight of 115 pounds, eighteen pounds below the top-rated The Pie King.

1954:three-year-old season

Never Say Die made good physical progress over the winter, but showed little improvement in his first two starts. He finished second in the Union Jack Stakes at Aintree Racecourse and then finished unplaced in the Free Handicap at Newmarket in April. On his final trial race for the Epsom Derby, Never Say Die returned to Newmarket and was moved up in distance for the Newmarket Stakes over ten furlongs. Ridden by Manny Mercer, he took the lead a furlong out but was overtaken in the closing stages and finished third to Elopement and Golden God.
On a dull, chilly day
The suspended Piggott was replaced by Charlie Smirke for Never Say Die's run in the St Leger at Doncaster in September. The colt started 100/30 favourite in a field of sixteen. He won very easily by twelve lengths, the biggest winning margin officially recorded in the race's history. He was retired to stud shortly after his win at Doncaster.

Assessment

Timeform awarded Never Say Die a rating of 137, the highest for any horse in 1954. A rating of 130 is considered the mark of an above average European Group One winner.
In their book A Century of Champions, John Randall and Tony Morris rated  Never Say Die a "superior" Derby winner and the fifty-third best British racehorse of the 20th Century .

Stud record

On retirement, Clark, gave him to the British National Stud. He was champion sire in 1962, thanks to Larkspur's Derby victory. He also sired the Epsom Oaks and 1,000 Guineas winner Never Too Late and other good winners in Die Hard and Sostenuto, stayers who both won the Ebor Handicap.
Never say Die was put down in 1975, by when his stock had won 309 races worth more than £400,000 in Great Britain. He is buried in The National Stud's horse cemetery.

Pedigree




