[[Nat Agar]]

CATEGORIES: 1888 births, 1978 deaths, Businesspeople from New York, Jewish American sportspeople, American soccer chairmen and investors, American soccer coaches, American Soccer League (1921–33) coaches, American Soccer League (1921–33) players, American soccer players, American soccer referees, Brooklyn Wanderers players, English expatriate footballers, English footballers, English football managers, English football referees, English emigrants to the United States, English Jews, Expatriate soccer players in the United States, Jewish footballers, People from New York City, Sportspeople from Sheffield, United States men's national soccer team managers

Nathan "Nat" Agar (July 26, 1888 – June 24, 1978) was an English-American soccer player, coach, referee, team owner and league executive. He was part of the formation of the United States Football Association, but later fought it as a team owner and league official of the American Soccer League and Southern New York State Football Association during the 1928 "Soccer War."  He also coached three United States national team games against Canada in 1925 and 1926.

Early career

At some point in the early 1900s, Agar immigrated to the United States from his native England. In 1905, he founded his first team, Critchleys.

Referee

Agar also served as a referee for the New York Amateur Association League, being assaulted while officiating a game in April 1910.

USFA

While Agar was part of the founding of the United States Football Association in 1913."

American Soccer League

In 1922, Agar entered the realm of professional team ownership when he entered the Brooklyn Wanderers into the American Soccer League. The ASL was set for its first season and the Wanderers would play at Hawthorne Field, a dedicated soccer facility owned by Agar.  Despite the additional talent, the Wanderers remained a mid-table team for much of its existence.

Southern New York State Football Association

During the Soccer War, the USFA brokered the creation of the Eastern Soccer League composed of three teams suspended from the American Soccer League as well as several teams from the Southern New York State Football Association. The SNYFA considered the ESL to be encroaching on its territory, and, when the association president, Dr. Manning, resigned, Agar was elected in his place.

National team coach

In June 1926, Agar was selected to coach the U.S. national team in a two game, home and away, series with Canada. The U.S. lost the first, 1–0, in Canada, but won the November rematch 6–1, in the U.S. On June 11, 1926, Agar again led the U.S. to a 6–2 victory over Canada.






