[[The Hunting of the Snark]]

CATEGORIES: 1876 poems, Alice in Wonderland, British children's literature, British poems, English poems, Literature featuring anthropomorphic characters, Macmillan Publishers books, Mock-heroic English poems, Victorian poetry, Works by Lewis Carroll

The Hunting of the Snark (An Agony in 8 Fits) is typically categorized as a nonsense poem written by Lewis Carroll, the pen name of Charles Lutwidge Dodgson. Written from 1874 to 1876, the poem borrows the setting, some creatures, and eight portmanteau words from Carroll's earlier poem "Jabberwocky" in his children's novel Through the Looking Glass (1871). The plot follows a crew of ten trying to hunt the Snark, an animal which may turn out to be a highly dangerous Boojum. The only one of the crew to find the Snark quickly vanishes, leading the narrator to explain that it was a Boojum after all. The poem is dedicated to young Gertrude Chataway, whom Carroll met at the English seaside town Sandown in the Isle of Wight in 1875. 
The Hunting of the Snark was published by Macmillan in late March 1876, with illustrations by Henry Holiday. It had mixed reviews from reviewers who found it strange. The first printing of The Hunting of the Snark consisted of 10,000 copies, with two reprintings by the conclusion of the year; in total, the poem was reprinted seventeen times between 1876 to 1908. Carroll often denied knowing the meaning behind the poem; however, in an 1896 reply to one letter, he agreed with one interpretation of the poem as an allegory for the search for happiness. Scholars have found various meanings in the poem, among them existential angst, an allegory for tuberculosis, and a mockery of the Tichbourne case. The Hunting of the Snark has been alluded to in various works and has been adapted for musicals, opera, plays, and music.

Plot

Setting

The Hunting of the Snark shares its fictional setting with Lewis Carroll's earlier poem "Jabberwocky" published in his children's novel Through the Looking-Glass (1871).

Characters

The crew consists of ten members, whose descriptions all begin with the letter B: a Bellman (the leader), a "Boots", a Bonnet-maker, a Barrister, a Broker, a Billiard-marker, a Banker, a Butcher, and a Baker, as well as a Beaver. The Boots is the only character who is not shown in any illustration in the original.

File:Snark Bellman.jpg|Bellman
File:Snark Bonnet Maker.jpg|Bonnet Maker
File:Snark Barrister.jpg|Barrister
File:Snark Broker.jpg|Broker
File:Snark Billiard Marker.jpg|Billiard-Marker
File:Snark Banker.jpg|Banker
File:Snark Butcher.jpg|Butcher
File:Snark Baker.jpg|Baker
File:Snark Beaver.jpg|Beaver

Summary

After crossing the sea guided by the Bellman's map of the Ocean—a blank sheet of paper—the hunting party arrive in a strange land, and the Bellman informs them of the five signs of a Snark: its "meagre and hollow, but crisp" taste; a habit of rising late and taking breakfast during five o'clock tea; "its slowness in taking a jest"; a "fondness for bathing-machines"; and its ambition. The Baker confesses that the notion of this sudden vanishment brings him much distress.
With this in mind, they split up to hunt the Snark: "They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care; / They pursued it with forks and hope; / They threatened its life with a railway-share; / They charmed it with smiles and soap." Along the way, the Butcher and Beaver—previously mutually wary, as the Butcher can only kill beavers—become fast friends, after the Butcher teaches it more in ten minutes than it could learn from books in seventy years. The Barrister, meanwhile, dreams of the court trial of a pig accused of deserting its sty, whom the Snark is defending. The Snark, however, finds the pig guilty and sentences it to transportation and a fine of forty pound. His dream concludes with the jailer informing the court that the pig has actually been dead for years, to the judge's disgust.
During the hunt, the Banker finds himself attacked by a bandersnatch, and loses his sanity after trying to bribe the creature. At the conclusion of the poem, the Baker calls out that he has found a snark, but when the others arrive, he has mysteriously disappeared, leading the narrator to explain: "For the Snark was a Boojum, you see."

Development

Two explanations of which event in Carroll's life gave rise to The Hunting of the Snark have been offered. Biographer Morton N. Cohen connects the creation of The Hunting of the Snark with the illness of Carroll's cousin and godson, the twenty-two-year-old Charlie Wilcox.
Carroll chose Henry Holiday to illustrate the poem, whom he had met in 1869 or 1870.

File:Lewis Carroll - Henry Holiday - Hunting of the Snark - Plate 1.jpg
File:Lewis Carroll - Henry Holiday - Hunting of the Snark - Plate 2.jpg
File:Lewis Carroll - Henry Holiday - Hunting of the Snark - Plate 3.jpg
File:Lewis Carroll - Henry Holiday - Hunting of the Snark - Plate 4.jpg
File:Lewis Carroll - Henry Holiday - Hunting of the Snark - Plate 5.jpg
File:Lewis Carroll - Henry Holiday - Hunting of the Snark - Plate 6.jpg
File:Lewis Carroll - Henry Holiday - Hunting of the Snark - Plate 7.jpg
File:Lewis Carroll - Henry Holiday - Hunting of the Snark - Plate 8.jpg
File:Lewis Carroll - Henry Holiday - Hunting of the Snark - Plate 9.jpg
File:Lewis Carroll - Henry Holiday - Hunting of the Snark - Plate 10.jpg

Carroll dedicated The Hunting of the Snark to Chataway, whom he had befriended in summer 1875 at the English seaside town Sandown in the Isle of Wight.
Upon the printing of the book on 29 March 1876, Carroll sent eighty signed copies to his favourite child friends. In a typical fashion, he signed them with short poems, many of them acrostics of the child's name. Additionally, Carroll inserted on his own expense an "Easter Greeting" into the first edition of his poem after it already was printed: "... And if I have written anything to add to those stores of innocent and healthy amusement that are laid up in books for the children I love so well, it is surely something I may hope to look back upon without shame and sorrow (as how much of life must then be recalled!) when my turn comes to walk through the valley of shadows. ..."

Reception and legacy

The first printing of The Hunting of the Snark consisted of 10,000 copies. In total, the poem was reprinted seventeen times between 1876 to 1908.
The Hunting of the Snark received largely mixed reviews from Carroll's contemporary reviewers. The Academys Andrew Lang criticised Carroll's decision to use poetry instead of prose and its too appealing title. The Athenaeum described it as "the most bewildering of modern poetry," wondering "if he has merely been inspired to reduce to idiotcy as many readers and more especially reviewers, as possible." According to Vanity Fair, Carroll's work had progressively worsened after Alice's Adventures in Wonderland (1865), with The Hunting of the Snark being the worst of his works and "not worthy of the name of nonsense". While The Spectator  wrote that the poem's final line had the potential to become a proverb, it criticised the poem as "a failure" that might have succeeded with more work from the author. The Saturday Review wrote that the poem offered "endless speculation" as to the true identity of the snark, although the unnamed reviewer felt that the familiar nature of Carroll's nonsense weakened its effect for the reader. Conversely, The Graphic praised the poem as a welcome departure from the Alice books, and called it "a glorious piece of nonsense," that could appeal to all Alice fans.
"The Hunting of the Snark" has in common some elements with Carroll's other works. It shares its author's love of puns on the word 'fit' with Alice's Adventures in Wonderland,
Other hands have been responsible for providing illustrations for Carroll's text, among them Mervyn Peake (1941),Bibliography, "The Annotated Snark" ed. by Martin Gardner (Penguin Books, 1987), p. 97. Tove Jansson (1959)Bibliography, p. 100. and Ralph Steadman (1975). The main illustrators are:

Analysis

Various themes have been suggested by scholars. According to biographer Florence Becker Lennon, the poem's "motif of loss of name or identity" is typical of Carroll's work. 
In response to various letters asking for the meaning of the poem, Carroll often replied that he did not know.

Influence

The Hunting of the Snark has seen various adaptations into musicals, opera, theatre, plays, and music,
It has also been alluded to in court rulings. Judge Merrick Garland of United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit referred to the Bellman's Rule in his ruling in Parhat v. Gates, saying, "The government suggests that several of the assertions in the intelligence documents are reliable because they are made in at least three different documents ... We are not persuaded. Lewis Carroll notwithstanding, the fact the government has 'said it thrice' does not make the allegation true. In fact we have no basis for concluding that there are independent sources for the documents' thrice-made assertions".
Additionally, references to the poem appear in science. N. David Mermin named a phenomenon in superfluidity after the Boojum."E pluribus boojum: the physicist as neologist", Physics Today, Vol. 34, April 1981, pp. 46–53.
The poem has also been referred to in video games. In Half-Life exists a monster called snark, which can be used as a weapon.
The Michigan Terminal System, an early time-sharing system, would display the message "Help, Help, Snark in MTS" on the operator's terminal when a crash had occurred.
It also figures prominently in Jacques Rivette's epic film, Out 1.



Notes



Further reading




