[[Prince George's County, Maryland]]

CATEGORIES: 1696 establishments in Maryland, Baltimore–Washington metropolitan area, Maryland counties, Potomac River counties, Prince George's County, Maryland, Washington metropolitan area

Prince George's County is a county located in the U.S. state of Maryland, immediately north, east, and south of Washington, D.C. As of the 2010 U.S. Census, the population was 863,420.
Prince George's County is part of the Baltimore–Washington, D.C. Metropolitan Area and is home to Joint Base Andrews.

Etymology

Prince George's County is named after Prince George of Denmark (1653–1708), the husband of Anne, Queen of Great Britain, and the brother of King Christian V of Denmark and Norway. The demonym for Prince George's County is Prince Georgian. Prince George's County is frequently referred to as "P.G." or "P.G. County", an abbreviation which is viewed as pejorative by some residents.

History

The Cretaceous Era brought dinosaurs to the area which left a number of fossils, now preserved in a 
In the mid to late Holocene era, the area was occupied by Paleo-Native Americans and then later, Native Americans. When the first European settlers arrived, what is now Prince Georges County was inhabited by people of the Piscataway Indian Nation three branches of the tribe are still living today, two of which are headquartered in Prince Georges County.
Prince George's County was created by the Council of Maryland in the Province of Maryland in 1696 from portions of Charles, and Calvert Counties, and a portion was detached in 1748 to form Frederick County. Because Frederick County was subsequently divided to form the present Allegany, Garrett, Montgomery, and Washington counties, all of these counties in addition were derived from what had up to 1748 been Prince George's County. In 1696, the Council of Maryland divided Prince George's County into six districts referred to as "Hundreds": Mattapany, Petuxant, Collington, Mount Calvert, Piscattoway and New Scotland.[ref]
</ref>
In 1791, portions of Prince George's County were ceded to form the new District of Columbia, along with portions of Montgomery County, Maryland, as well as the parts of Northern Virginia; that were later returned to Virginia.
During the War of 1812, the British marched through the county by way of Bladensburg to burn the White House. On their return, they kidnapped a prominent doctor, William Beanes. Lawyer, Francis Scott Key was asked to negotiate for his release, which resulted in his writing the Star Spangled Banner.
In April 1865, John Wilkes Booth made his escape through Prince George's County after shooting President Abraham Lincoln. He was on his way to Virginia.
Since much of the southern part of the county was tobacco farms that were worked by slaves, there was a high population of African Americans who unsuccessfully attempted to become part of Maryland politics in the late 19th century. Floyd, M-NCPPC ©1989 The population of African Americans declined during the first half of the 20th century, but was renewed to over 50% in the early 1990s when the county again became majority African American.[ref]PRINCE GEORGE'S COUNTY HITTING 300
Washington Post – Friday, April 19, 1996 Author: Larry Fox[/ref] The first African American County Executive was Wayne K. Curry, elected in 1994.
On July 1, 1997, the Prince George's County section of the city of Takoma Park, Maryland, which straddled the boundary between Prince George's and Montgomery counties, was transferred to Montgomery County.
The county has a number of properties on the National Register of Historic Places.

Geography

Prince George's County lies in the Atlantic coastal plain, and its landscape is characterized by gently rolling hills and valleys. Along its western border with Montgomery County, Adelphi, Calverton and West Laurel rise into the piedmont, exceeding  (or 2.61%) is water.
The Patuxent River forms the county's eastern border with Howard, Anne Arundel, and Calvert counties.

Regions

