[[Ard Patrick]]

CATEGORIES: 1899 racehorse births, 1923 racehorse deaths, Thoroughbred racehorses, Racehorses bred in the United Kingdom, Racehorses trained in the United Kingdom, British racehorses, British Classic Race winners, Thoroughbred family 5

Ard Patrick (1899–1923) was an Irish-bred, British-trained Thoroughbred racehorse and sire. One of the leading two-year-olds of 1901, he improved in 1902 to win the Epsom Derby, defeating the filly Sceptre. He returned from Injury problems to record his most important success when he defeated Sceptre and the Derby winner Rock Sand in the 1903 Eclipse Stakes at Sandown Park Racecourse. He was then retired from racing and exported to Germany where he became a successful sire of winners.

Background

Ard Patrick was an exceptionally big brown horse, reportedly standing 17 hands high, who was bred by his owner John Gubbins at his Knockany Stud near Bruree, County Limerick, Ireland, (at that time part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland) and named after the nearby village of Ardpatrick (Ard Pádraig). He was sired by St Florian, a well bred horse by St Simon, who had an unremarkable record both as a racehorse and as a sire. He was a member of Thoroughbred Family Number 20, which at that time had a poor record of producing breeding stallions.
Gubbins sent his colt into training with Sam Darling at Beckhampton in Wiltshire.

Racing record

1901: two-year-old season

Ard Patrick was a "powerful and massively-built youngster"

1902: three-year-old season

According to press reports, Gubbins turned down an offer of 20,000 guineas for his colt from an unnamed source.
At Epsom Downs Racecourse on 4 June, Ard Patrick was ridden by the American jockey John "Skeets" Martin and started at odds of 100/14 for the Derby in a field of eighteen runners. Sceptre who had also won the 1000 Guineas started evens favourite, having been the subject of an unprecedented gamble which saw her backed to win over half a million pounds.
The remainder of Ard Patrick's three-year-old campaign was disappointing as he failed to reproduce his Epsom form. At Royal Ascot on 17 June he started 11/10 favourite for the thirteen furlong Prince of Wales's Stakes in which he was required to concede weight to seven opponents. The Duke of Westminster's Cupbearer, who was receiving thirteen pounds from the Derby winner, won the race by three-quarters of a length from Ard Patrick, but was disqualified for "bumping and boring" the runner-up and placed last after an objection. Ard Patrick then developed leg trouble and was withdrawn from the Eclipse Stakes, which was won by Cheers, a colt he had beaten at both Epsom and Ascot.

1903: four-year-old season

Before the start of the 1903 season, Gubbins reportedly turned down an offer of £15,000 for Ard Patrick from Samuel S. Brown of Pittsburgh. Before his next race, Ard Patrick was sold as a prospective stallion to Count Lehndorff acting for the German government for £21,000, although a condition of the sale was that he would ran in Gubbins' colours in his remaining races.
The 1903 Eclipse Stakes at Sandown on 17 July was one of the most anticipated British races of the early 20th century with Ard Patrick and Sceptre facing that year's Epsom Derby winner, Rock Sand. The race thus brought together "the three best horses in England", This was the second time in three attempts that Ard Patrick had beaten Sceptre.
A rematch between Ard Patrick, Sceptre and Rock Sand was expected in the Jockey Club Stakes,

Assessment

In their book A Century of Champions, John Randall and Tony Morris rated Ard Patrick a "great" Derby winner and the twentieth best British-trained racehorse of the 20th Century. The authors described Ard Patrick as "the greatest unsung hero of British Flat racing."

Stud record

Retired to stud duty, he was the Leading sire in Germany three times and notably sired Deutsches Derby winner, Ariel, the successful mare Antwort and the dams of Herold and Alchemist.Pryor, Peter, The Classic Connection, Cortney Publications, Luton, 1979

Pedigree




