[[Car Talk]]

CATEGORIES: American talk radio programs, Automobile maintenance, Media in Boston, Massachusetts, NPR programs, Peabody Award winning radio programs, National Radio Hall of Fame inductees, Cambridge, Massachusetts

Car Talk  was a Peabody Award-winning radio talk show broadcast weekly on NPR stations and elsewhere. Its subjects were automobiles and automotive repair, discussed often in a humorous way. It was hosted by brothers Tom and Ray Magliozzi, known also as Click and Clack, the Tappet Brothers.
The show was produced from 1977 to October 2012, until the Magliozzi brothers retired.  Edited reruns continue to be available for airing on NPR affiliates.

Show

Car Talk was presented in the form of a call-in radio show: listeners called in with questions related to motor vehicle maintenance and repair. Most of the advice sought was diagnostic, with callers describing symptoms and demonstrating sounds of an ailing vehicle while the Magliozzis make an attempt at identifying the malfunction. While the hosts peppered their call-in sessions with jokes directed at both the caller and at themselves, the Magliozzis were usually able to arrive at a diagnosis and give helpful advice.
Edited reruns are carried on Sirius XM Radio via both the Public Radio and NPR Now channels.
The Car Talk theme song is "Dawggy Mountain Breakdown" by bluegrass artist David Grisman.

Call-in procedure

Throughout the program, listeners were encouraged to dial the toll-free telephone number, 1-888-CAR-TALK (1-888-227-8255), which connected to a 24-hour answering service. Although the approximately 2,000 queries received each week were screened by the Car Talk staff, the questions were unknown to the Magliozzis in advance as "that would entail researching the right answer, which is what? ..."

Features

The show originally consisted of two segments with a break in between.  Then the show was changed to three segments.  The hosts used to refer to content coming up in the second half of the program.  Ever since the shift to the three segment format, it became a running joke to refer to the last segment as "the third half" of the program.
The show opened with a short comedy segment, typically jokes sent in by listeners, followed by eight call-in sessions. The hosts ran a contest called the "Puzzler", in which a riddle, sometimes car-related, was presented. The answer to the previous week's "Puzzler" was given at the beginning of the "second half" of the show, and a new "Puzzler" was given at the start of the "third half". The hosts gave instructions to listeners to write answers addressed to "Puzzler Tower" on some non-existent or expensive object, such as a "$26 bill" or an advanced digital SLR camera. This gag initially started as suggestions that the answers be written "on the back of a $20 bill". A running gag concerned Tom's inability to remember the previous week's "Puzzler" without heavy prompting from Ray. For each puzzler, one correct answer was chosen at random, with the winner receiving a $26 gift certificate to the Car Talk store, referred to as the "Shameless Commerce Division"."Puzzler", Car Talk website  It was originally $25, but was increased for inflation after a few years. Originally, the winner received a specific item from the store, but it soon changed to a gift certificate to allow the winner to choose the item they wanted (though Tom often made an item suggestion).
A recurring feature was "Stump the Chumps," in which the hosts revisited a caller from a previous show to determine the accuracy and the effect, if any, of their advice. A similar feature began in May 2001, "Where Are They Now, Tommy?"  It began with a comical musical theme with a sputtering, backfiring car engine and a horn as a backdrop.  Tom then announced who the previous caller was, followed by a short replay of the essence of the previous caller was played, preceded and followed by harp music often used in other audiovisual media to indicate recalling and returning from a dream.  The hosts then greeted the previous caller, asking them if there have been any influences on the answer they're about to relate, such as arcane bribes by the NPR staff.  The repair story was then discussed, followed by a fanfare and applause if the Tappet Brothers' diagnosis was correct, or a wah-wah-wah music piece mixed with a car starter operated by a weak battery (an engine which won't start) if the diagnosis was wrong.  The hosts then thanked the caller for their return appearance.
The brothers also had an official Animal-Vehicle Biologist and Wildlife Guru named  Kieran Lindsey.
 Celebrities have been callers as well. Examples include Geena Davis, Morley Safer, Ashley Judd, Gordon Elliott, former Major League pitcher Bill Lee, and astronaut John Grunsfeld calling from the Space Shuttle.
There were numerous appearances from NPR personalities, including Bob Edwards, Susan Stamberg, Scott Simon, Ray Suarez, Will Shortz, Sylvia Poggioli, and commentator and author Daniel Pinkwater. On one occasion, the show featured Martha Stewart as an in-studio guest, whom the Magliozzis twice during the segment referred to as "Margaret".
In addition to at least one on-orbit call, the Brothers once received a call asking advice on winterizing a couple of "kit cars". After much beating around the bush and increasing evasiveness by the caller, they asked him just how much these kit cars were worth. The answer: about $800 million. It was a joke call from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory concerning the preparation of the Mars Rovers (Spirit and Opportunity) for the oncoming Martian winter.

Humor

Humor and wisecracking pervaded the program. Tom and Ray are known for their self-deprecating humor, often joking about the supposedly poor quality of their advice and the show in general. They also commented at the end of each show: "Well, it's happened again — you've squandered another perfectly good hour listening to Car Talk."
At some point in almost every show, usually when giving the address for the Puzzler answers, Ray mentioned Cambridge, Massachusetts (where the show originates), at which point Tom reverently interjected with a tone of civic pride, "Our fair city." Ray invariably mocked "Cambridge, MA" the US Postal Service's two letter abbreviation for "Massachusetts" by pronouncing it as a word.
Leading into each break in the show, one of the hosts led up to the network identification with a humorous take on a disgusted reaction of some usually famous person to hearing that identification.  The full line went along the pattern of, for example, "And even though Roger Clemens stabs his radio with a syringe whenever he hears us say it, this is NPR: National Public Radio (later just '..."
The ending credits of the show started with thanks to the colorfully nicknamed actual staffers: producer Doug "the subway fugitive, not a slave to fashion, bongo boy frogman" Berman;
At the end of the show, Ray warned the audience, "Don't drive like my brother," to which Tom replied, "And don't drive like my brother."  The original tag line was "Don't drive like a knucklehead."  There have been variations such as, "Don't drive like my brother..." "And don't drive like his brother," and "Don't drive like my sister..." "And don't drive like my sister." The tagline was heard in a cameo for the Pixar film Cars, in which Tom and Ray voiced anthropomorphized vehicles (Rusty and Dusty Rust-Eze, respectively a 1963 Dodge Dart V1.0 and 1963 Dodge A100 van, as Lightning McQueen's racing sponsors) with personalities similar to their own on-air personae.

History

Car Talk was first broadcast on WBUR in Boston in 1977 and was picked up nationally by NPR ten years later.
In 1992, Car Talk won a Peabody Award, saying "Each week, master mechanics Tom and Ray Magliozzi provide useful information about preserving and protecting our cars. But the real core of this program is what it tells us about human mechanics.... Magliozzi, in conjunction with their producer Doug Berman, provide a weekly mental tune-up for a vast and ever-growing public radio audience."}
In May 2007, the program, which previously had been available only digitally as a paid subscription from Audible.
As of 2012, it had 3.3 million listeners each week, on about 660 stations. On June 8, 2012, the brothers announced that they would no longer broadcast new episodes as of October.  Executive producer Doug Berman said the best material from 25 years of past shows would be used to put together "repurposed" shows for NPR to broadcast. Berman estimated the archives contain enough for eight years' worth of material before anything would have to be repeated. The brothers will continue to write their syndicated newspaper column.

Hosts

The Magliozzis are long-time car mechanics. Ray Magliozzi has a bachelor of science degree in humanities and science from MIT, while Tom has a bachelor of science degree in economics from MIT and an MBA and DBA from the Boston University Graduate School of Management.
The duo, usually led by Ray, were known for rants on the evils of the internal combustion engine, people who talk on cell phones while driving, Peugeots, women named Donna who always seem to drive Camaros, lawyers, the clever use of the English language, people who choose to live in Alaska (or similar snowy, icy climates), and practically anything else, including themselves. They had a relaxed and humorous approach to cars, car repair, cup holders, pets, lawyers, car repair mechanics, SUVs, and almost everything else. They often cast a critical, jaundiced insider's eye toward the auto industry. Tom and Ray are committed to the values of defensive driving and environmentalism.
The Magliozzis operate a garage. The show's offices were located nearby at the corner of JFK Street and Brattle Street in Harvard Square, marked as "Dewey, Cheetham & Howe", the imaginary law firm to which they refer on-air. DC&H doubled as the business name of Tappet Brothers Associates, the corporation established to manage the business end of Car Talk.  Initially a joke, the company was incorporated after the show expanded from a single station to national syndication.
The two were commencement speakers at MIT in 1999.
Executive producer Doug Berman said in 2012, "The guys are culturally right up there with Mark Twain and the Marx Brothers. They will stand the test of time. People will still be enjoying them years from now. They're that good."

Adaptations

The show was the inspiration for the short-lived The George Wendt Show, which briefly aired on CBS in the 1994-95 season- as a mid-season replacement.
In July 2007, PBS announced that it had greenlit an animated adaptation of Car Talk, to air on prime-time in 2008.
Car Talk: The Musical!!! was written and directed by Wesley Savick, and composed by Michael Wartofsky. The adaptation was presented by Suffolk University, and opened on March 31, 2011, at the Modern Theatre in Boston, Massachusetts.






