[[Shadow Moon]]

CATEGORIES: Kamen Rider characters, Fictional cyborgs

 is a fictional character who serves as the primary antagonist in the Japanese tokusatsu drama Kamen Rider Black.

Fictional character biography

 was born on the day of a solar eclipse alongside his stepbrother Kotaro Minami, revered by the Gorgom as the heirs to their leader's throne: the Century Kings "Shadow Moon" and "Black Sun". Raised together, the two were like brothers. Once the two were of the ideal age, Gorgom captured them and infused them each with a King Stone. While Kotaro manages to escape with his memory intact, Nobuhiko's mind was wiped clean while left in a state of suspended animation before being finally reborn as Shadow Moon through the Stones of Earth, Heaven, and Sea. Shadow Moon sets up his regime as a general of Gorgom, serving as Black's nemesis and forcing him to fight him so he can become the new Creation King. In their final battle, Shadow Moon is weakened by Kamen Rider Black after the Satan Sabre is used to slash his King Stone. Though he appears to die after being left inside the Gorgom headquarters when it explodes, Shadow Moon returns years later to seek revenge against Kotaro, who is now Black RX. However, he lost all of his memories related to Gorgom after its destruction. He is finally defeated by Black RX when he thrusted the Revolcane through Shadow Moon's King Stone, destroying it once more. He turns back into Nobuhiko, renouncing his evil ways as he saved two children trapped in the explosive lava, shortly before he dies.
In all of Shadow Moon's appearances, he is voiced by Masaki Terasoma, including the 3D short film Kamen Rider World as the main antagonist and the 40th anniversary film OOO, Den-O, All Riders: Let's Go Kamen Riders as a member of Shocker. Shadow Moon also appears in crossover films Kamen Rider × Super Sentai: Super Hero Taisen as a member of Dai Shocker and Kamen Rider × Super Sentai × Space Sheriff: Super Hero Taisen Z as a leading figure in Space Shocker.

Equipment

King Stone

The . Through this stone, Shadow Moon can telepathically communicate with Kotaro via his own King Stone.

Satan Sabre

The  is a weapon created for use by the Century Kings. Though Bilgenia took it, Shadow Moon reclaimed the weapon and took it as his own. He lost it to Black during their final battle.

Shadow Sabers

The  are pairs of long and short swords manifested by the King Stone, this weapon was used as replacement for the Satan Sabre.

Battle Hopper

 is a living motorcycle created by Gorgom, made specifically for the upcoming Creation Kings Black Sun and Shadow Moon. Battle Hopper was later stolen by Shadow Moon via his Shadow Flash before Black used his King Stone Flash to free him from Shadow Moon. As a result, Shadow Moon attacks Battle Hopper with the Satan Sabre and the Bike soon dies.

Reception and merchandise

Shadow Moon is one of the few villains in the Kamen Rider Series to be given an action figure,

Appearances in other Kamen Rider Series media

Shadow Moon serves as the main villain in the 3D theme park ride movie Kamen Rider World where he appears as a giant to be fought by Kamen Rider J.
In Kamen Rider SD, he is voiced by Kaneto Shiozawa, who was comically referred to as "Sunshine Moon". 
An alternate version of Shadow Moon appears in the film Kamen Rider Decade: All Riders vs. Dai-Shocker named Nobuhiko Tsukikage and portrayed by Ryuichi Oura. He is depicted as using Tsukasa's sister to his own benefit during the film to become the leader of Dai-Shocker, though she ultimately turns on him. After knocked into the Dai-Shocker fortress's emblem by Kamen Rider Double in a hit and run, Shadow Moon is destroyed by every main Kamen Rider in the franchise up to Decade all execute their signature Rider Kicks to destroy both him and the building.






