[[San Marino in the Eurovision Song Contest 2008]]

CATEGORIES: San Marino in the Eurovision Song Contest, 2008 in San Marino, Countries in the Eurovision Song Contest 2008

San Marino participated in the Eurovision Song Contest in 2008, marking its debut in the long-running international contest. The Sammarinese national broadcaster Radiotelevisione della Repubblica di San Marino (SMRTV) officially confirmed San Marino's participation in the contest in November 2007 after deliberation amongst the broadcaster's shareholders.
The pop-rock band Miodio represented San Marino at the contest in Belgrade with the Italian language song "Complice". However, San Marino's debut entry in the contest was not very successful, with the song placing last in the first semi-final of the contest with just five points.
After participating for the first time, San Marino withdrew from the 2009 contest due to financial difficulties at SMRTV, having originally submitted its application for participation. It returned again in 2011.

Background

San Marino's debuted at the Eurovision Song Contest in 2008. Radiotelevisione della Repubblica di San Marino (SMRTV) announced in November 2007 that it was considering entering the Eurovision Song Contest for the first time in 2008, all depending of the share holders of San Marino RTV.
As the Sammarinese broadcaster of the event, it was SMRTV's job to organize a process to select the country's entrant. For its first Eurovision appearance, SMRTV sought to host an internal selection process.

Selection process

A jury, headed by singer Little Tony, was appointed to select the entry from a pool of songs submitted by those interested; the deadline for songs to be submitted was set at 25 February 2008.
On 11 March 2008, Miodio consists of Nicola Della Valle (vocals), Paolo Macina (guitar), Andrea Marco 'Polly' Pollice (bass), Francesco Sancisi (keyboard) and Alessandro Gobbi (drums). Upon the announcement of their participation, they stated that they embody "a new way of thinking, born by anger and the will to react what each individual carries in their ego".

At Eurovision

As only the "Big Four" and the winner of the previous contest were guaranteed a place at the final, San Marino had to qualify through a semi-final. The 2008 contest featured a new system for semi-final allocation in order to reduce the problems of neighborly and diaspora voting that occurred in years past. Following a draw held on 28 January 2008, San Marino was allocated a place in the first semi-final, held on 20 May 2008.

Semi-final

Miodio performed in the first semi-final on 20 May 2008, appearing fifth out of the nineteen countries. The performance featured the band wearing black suits, but with each member wearing it in a different style. The background on the large television screens on stage was a wavy light blue colour.
Miodio's performance did not manage to inspire the crowd, and San Marino only managed to receive five points with its debut entry: two points from Andorra and three points from Greece, placing it last of the 19 entries. Each country is allowed to give a maximum of twelve points to a song, and only the top ten countries went on to the final. Placing last in the semi-final, San Marino did not qualify for the final and became the eighth country to debut in the contest with a last place finish.

=Points awarded by San Marino (Semi-Final 1)=

=Semi-Final 1=

After Eurovision

After coming last in Eurovision, Miodio went on to compete in the Golden Stag Festival in Romania, as well as the Pjesma Mediterana contest in Montenegro.
It was announced in May 2008 that the Winner's Tour for the Eurovision Song Contest 2008 would finish in San Marino after traveling through Europe. 
It had been rumoured that SMRTV would withdraw from the 2009 contest due to poor results in their debut attempt, However, San Marino came back to ESC in 2011.






