[[Triad (environmental science)]]

CATEGORIES: Environmental science

The Triad Triad Resource Center is an approach by the United States Environmental Protection Agency to decision-making for hazardous-waste site cleanup.pp.91-111, Crumbling, Griffith, Powell During the late 1990s, technology advocates from the environmental sector in the United States developed the approach by combining innovations in management and technology with ideas from hazardous-waste site cleanup experience. 
Their goal was to form a framework for real-time environmental sensors and tools, to improve decision-making at contaminated sites. This resulted in a more formalized set of ideas in 2001 that soon became known as the Triad approach. The ideas spawned a Community of Practice by 2005. 
The Triad Community of Practice includes representatives of federal, state, and private sector organizations in the U.S. and abroad. By 2008, a European CoP had been formed European CoP Info In 2008, a technical conference led largely by the CoP and covering the Triad Approach was held at the University of Massachusetts in Amherst, "Triad Investigations: New Approaches and Innovative Strategies.2008 Triad Conference"
The term Triad represents three elements: systematic project planning (SPP), dynamic work strategies, and innovative rapid sampling and analytical technologies. While elements of the Triad have long been used for site cleanup, Triad packages these best management practices together with the guiding principles:
1. Use a planning process, which includes participation of all stakeholders (including a multidisciplinary project team, federal and state regulators, legal counsel, community members, and other environmental professionals), to determine the types of data required and to evaluate whether the site could benefit from real-time measurement technologies.
2. Discussion of uncertainty management, data representativeness, and site closure strategies.
3. Use of a site model that recognizes site characterization is an element used at all stages of remediation.   
4. Use of sampling, measurement, and data management technologies to support uncertainty management strategies.  
5. Project teams that have communication, trust, discussion of individual interests and goals, and expertise in the appropriate fields.
Triad is an open-marketplace idea that is not owned by one entity. There is considerable U.S. Multiagency support for Triad. Beginning in 2006, The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Office of Superfund Remediation and Technology Innovation expressed support of Triad by requesting the cooperation of its regional managers to expand the use of Triad at Superfund sites, where appropriate.1-55

Elements of the Triad

Although the following elements are the legs that gave the impetus for calling the process "Triad," the goal of the Triad approach is to infuse the concepts into hazardous-waste site cleanups, no matter what the lead organization calls the process. (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Technical Project Planning Process TPP for systematic planning, for example.)

Systematic Project Planning

Project planning identifies the problems and encourages stakeholders to negotiate the steps necessary to mediate the risks the environmental contamination pose to human health and ecology. The specific goals of a project (redevelopment, revitalization, et al.) may differ, but the specific objectives during the SPP process are:

Dynamic work strategies

Dynamic work strategies are strategies that incorporate adaptable project activities to site conditions as new information becomes available while work is underway. This adaptation may be in response to data collection activities designed to address CSM unknowns, or it may be in response to completely unexpected site conditions encountered during the course of work.
Dynamic work strategies as part of a Triad approach can be included in almost every activity associated with hazardous waste site characterization and remediation. This includes overall project strategies, sampling and analysis programs for characterization purposes, remedial action design, implementation, and performance monitoring, long-term monitoring for sites that require it, closure plans, and quality assurance/quality control activities.

Innovative rapid sampling

Sometimes referred to as 'real-time' measurement systems, these are analytical or measurement technologies capable of producing data quickly enough to direct the progress of field activities (characterization or remediation) while they are underway  Example analytical methods include X-ray Fluorescence (XRF), portable gas chromatograph and mass spectrometry (GC-MS) technologies, and immunoassay test kits. However, some have used standard laboratory approaches with quick turn-around results. The analysis enables in-field decision-making and ensures logical internal consistency among Triad concepts 

Conceptual site models

At the core of each project is the conceptual site model (CSM). The term CSM is sometimes used to only describe pieces of the whole model. Geological, hydrogeological, contaminant fate and transport all may have computer models referred to as 'conceptual,' and a risk assessment may contain a CSM, but in a Triad sense, a CSM is the holistic model that can effectively portray site concerns significant to the decisions that must be made.

Citations and notes






