[[Vivekananda]]

CATEGORIES: Vivekananda, Hindu philosophers, Hindu gurus, Bengali people, Contemporary Indian philosophers, Indian religious leaders, People from Kolkata, Presidency University, Kolkata alumni, Scottish Church College, Calcutta alumni, University of Calcutta alumni, Ramakrishna Mission, Advaitin philosophers, Hindu missionaries, Indian missionaries, Indian Hindus, 1863 births, 1902 deaths, Monastic disciples of Ramakrishna, Hindu religious figures, Hindu writers, New Age predecessors, 19th-century philosophers, Indian religious writers, Bengali Hindus, Indian yogis, Hindu reformers, People with eidetic memory

Swami Vivekananda ( in which he introduced Hinduism at the Parliament of the World's Religions in Chicago in 1893.
Born into an aristocratic Bengali family of Calcutta, Vivekananda was inclined towards spirituality. He was influenced by his guru, Ramakrishna, from whom he learnt that all living beings were an embodiment of the divine self; therefore, service to God could be rendered by service to mankind. After Ramakrishna's death, Vivekananda toured the Indian subcontinent extensively and acquired first-hand knowledge of the conditions prevailing in British India. He later travelled to the United States, representing India at the 1893 Parliament of the World Religions. Vivekananda conducted hundreds of public and private lectures and classes, disseminating tenets of Hindu philosophy in the United States, England and Europe. In India, Vivekananda is regarded as a patriotic saint and his birthday is celebrated as National Youth Day in India.

Early life (1863–1888)

Birth and childhood

Vivekananda was born Narendranath Datta (shortened to Narendra or Naren)
Narendra was interested in spirituality from a young age, and used to play at meditating before the images of deities such as Shiva, Rama, and Sita.

Education

In 1871 Narendra enrolled at Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar's Metropolitan Institution, where he studied until his family moved to Raipur in 1877.
Narendra studied Western logic, Western philosophy and European history at the General Assembly's Institution (now known as the Scottish Church College).

Spiritual apprenticeship

Narendra became a member of a Freemasonry lodge and a breakaway faction of the Brahmo Samaj led by Keshub Chandra Sen and Debendranath Tagore.
At this time, Narendra met Debendranath Tagore (the leader of Brahmo Samaj) and asked if he had seen God. Instead of answering his question, Tagore said "My boy, you have the Yogi

With Ramakrishna

Narendra's first introduction to Ramakrishna occurred in a literature class at General Assembly's Institution when he heard Professor William Hastie lecturing on William Wordsworth's poem, The Excursion.

In November 1881,.
In late 1881 or early 1882, Narendra went to Dakshineswar with two friends and met Ramakrishna.
Narendra's father's sudden death in 1884 left the family bankrupt; creditors began demanding the repayment of loans, and relatives threatened to evict the family from their ancestral home. Narendra, once a son of a well-to-do family, became one of the poorest students in his college.
One day Narendra requested Ramakrishna to pray to goddess Kali for their family's financial welfare. Ramakrishna suggested he go to the temple and pray it himself. Following Ramakrishna's suggestion, he went to the temple thrice, but failed to pray for any kind of worldly necessities and ultimately prayed for true knowledge and devotion from the goddess.
In 1885, Ramakrishna developed throat cancer, and was transferred to Calcutta and (later) to a garden house in Cossipore. Narendra and Ramakrishna's other disciples took care of him during his last days, and Narendra's spiritual education continued. At Cossipore, he experienced Nirvikalpa samadhi.

Founding of first Ramakrishna Math at Baranagar

After Ramakrishna's death, his devotees and admirers stopped supporting his disciples. Unpaid rent accumulated, and Narendra and the other disciples had to find a new place to live.
In 1887, Narendra compiled a Bengali song anthology named Sangeet Kalpataru with Vaishnav Charan Basak. Narendra collected and arranged most of the songs of this compilation, but could not finish the work of the book for unfavourable circumstances.

Monastic vows

In December 1886, the mother of Baburam

Travels in India (1888–1893)

In 1888, Narendra left the monastery as a Parivrâjaka— the Hindu religious life of a wandering monk, "without fixed abode, without ties, independent and strangers wherever they go".

North

In 1888 Narendra's first destination was Varanasi, where he visited the places where Gautama Buddha and Adi Shankara preached
 

While on the way to Haridwar, in September 1888,
After leaving Hathras Narendra and Gupta first went to Haridwar, and from there travelled to Hrishikesh, on foot. Here Narendra initiated Gupta into Sannyasa and was named Swami Sadananda.

=Meeting with Pavhari Baba=

Between 1888 and 1890, Narendra visited Vaidyanath and Allahabad. In January 1890 he went from Allahabad to Ghazipur and met Pavhari Baba,

Return to Baranger Math and Himalayan journey (1890–91)

During the first half of 1890, after the deaths of fellow Ramakrishna disciples Balaram Bose and Suresh Chandra Mitra, Narendra returned to Baranagar Math because of ill health and to arrange for the math's financial support. (accompanied by fellow monk Swami Akhandananda) for  the Himalayas.
This constituted the first phase of a journey which would bring Narendra to the West.

Rajputana (1891)

After visiting historical sites at Delhi, Narendra started his travel towards Rajputana. In these days, he drew inspiration from the words of the Gautama Buddha— 
 Go forward without a path,
 Fearing nothing, caring for nothing!
Wandering alone, like the rhinoceros!
Even as a lion, not trembling at noises,
Even as the wind, not caught in the net,
Even as the lotus leaf, untainted by water,
Do thou wander alone, like the rhinoceros!
In February 1891, he first went to Alwar, where he was warmly welcomed by the Hindus and the Muslims.
From Alwar, Narendra went to Jaipur, where he studied Panini's Ashtadhyayi with a Sanskrit scholar. Narendra then went to Ajmer, where he visited the palace of Akbar and the Dargah Sharif. At Mount Abu he met Raja Ajit Singh of Khetri, who became an ardent devotee and supporter. Swami Tathagatananda, a senior monk in the Ramakrishna Order, wrote of their relationship:

At Khetri Narendra delivered discourses to the Raja, became acquainted with pandit Ajjada Adibhatla Narayana Dasu and studied the Mahābhāṣya on the sutras of Panini. After two-and-a-half months there, in October 1891 he left for Maharastra.

West (1891–1892)

Narendra visited Ahmedabad, Wadhwan and Limbdi; at the former, he completed his studies of Islamic and Jain cultures.
Narendra's next destinations included Mahabaleshwar, Pune, Khandwa and Indore. At Kathiawar he heard of the 1893 Parliament of the World's Religions, and was urged by his followers to attend it. After a brief stay in Bombay in July 1892, he met Bal Gangadhar Tilak during a train journey.

South (1892–1893)

Narendra later travelled to Bangalore, where he became acquainted with K. Seshadri Iyer (diwan of the Mysore state). Iyer described Narendra as "a magnetic personality and a divine force which were destined to leave their mark on the history of his country". Iyer introduced him to the Maharaja (king) of Mysore Chamaraja Wodeyar. Wodeyar invited Narendra to stay in his palace as a guest.
From Bangalore, Narendra visited Trissur, Kodungalloor and Ernakulam. At Ernakulam he met Chattampi Swamikal, a contemporary of Narayana Guru, in early December 1892.
From Kanyakumari, Narendra visited Madurai and had meetings with the Raja of Ramnad Bhaskara Sethupathi (to whom he had a letter of introduction). During his meetings, he had extensive discussions on Hindu philosophy with eminent scholars like Mahavidwan R. Raghava Iyengar. The raja became his disciple, urging him to attend the Parliament of Religions in Chicago. From Madurai, Narendra visited Rameswaram, Pondicherry and Madras; there, he met some of his disciples, specially Alasinga Perumal (who played important roles in collecting funds for his voyage to America and later establishing the Ramakrishna Mission in Madras).

First visit to the West (1893–1897)

Vivekananda started his journey to the West on 31 May 1893

Parliament of the World's Religions

The Parliament of the World's Religions opened on 11 September 1893 at the Art Institute of Chicago as part of the World's Columbian Exposition.
Parliament President John Henry Barrows said, "India, the Mother of religions was represented by Swami Vivekananda, the Orange-monk who exercised the most wonderful influence over his auditors".
The Boston Evening Transcript reported that Vivekananda was "a great favourite at the parliament... if he merely crosses the platform, he is applauded".

Lecture tours in the U.S. and England


After the Parliament of Religions, he toured many parts of the US as a guest. His popularity opened up new views for expanding on "life and religion to thousands".". During a question-answer session at Brooklyn Ethical Society, he remarked— "I have a message to the West as Buddha had a message to the East."
Vivekananda spent nearly two years lecturing in the eastern and central United States, primarily in Chicago, Detroit, Boston, and New York. He founded the Vedanta Society of New York in 1894.
During his first visit to the West he travelled to England twice, in 1895 and 1896, lecturing successfully there.

From the West, Vivekananda revived his work in India. He regularly corresponded with his followers and brother monks,

Back in India (1897–1899)

The ship from Europe arrived in Colombo, Sri Lanka on 15 January 1897,

On 1 May 1897 in Calcutta, Vivekananda founded the Ramakrishna Mission for social service. Its ideals are based on Karma Yoga,
Vivekananda earlier inspired Jamsetji Tata to set up a research and educational institution when they travelled together from Yokohama to Chicago on Vivekananda's first visit to the West in 1893. Tata now asked him to head his Research Institute of Science; Vivekananda declined the offer, citing a conflict with his "spiritual interests".

Second visit to the West and final years (1899–1902)

Despite declining health, Vivekananda left for the West for a second time in June 1899
After a brief visit to the Advaita Ashrama in Mayavati Vivekananda settled at Belur Math, where he continued co-ordinating the works of Ramakrishna Mission, the math and the work in England and the U.S. He had many visitors, including royalty and politicians. Although Vivekananda was unable to attend the Congress of Religions in 1901 in Japan due to deteriorating health, he made pilgrimages to Bodhgaya and Varanasi.

Death

On 4 July 1902 (the day of his death) Vivekananda awoke early, went to the chapel at Belur Math and meditated for three hours. He taught Shukla-Yajur-Veda, Sanskrit grammar and the philosophy of yoga to pupils,

Teachings and philosophy

Vivekananda believed that a country's future depends on its people, and his teachings focused on human development.

Vivekananda linked morality with control of the  mind, seeing truth, purity and unselfishness as traits which strengthened it.

Influence and legacy

Vivekananda revitalised Hinduism within and outside India, and was the principal reason for the enthusiastic reception of yoga, transcendental meditation and other forms of Indian spiritual self-improvement in the West.

In the background of emerging nationalism in British-ruled India, Vivekananda crystallised the nationalistic ideal. In the words of social reformer Charles Freer Andrews, "The Swami's intrepid patriotism gave a new colour to the national movement throughout India. More than any other single individual of that period Vivekananda had made his contribution to the new awakening of India".
The first governor-general of independent India, Chakravarti Rajagopalachari, said "Vivekananda saved Hinduism, saved India".
Jamsetji Tata was inspired by Vivekananda to establish the Indian Institute of Science, one of India's best-known research universities.
The state technical university in Chhattisgarh has been named the Chhattisgarh Swami Vivekananda Technical University.
The 150th birth anniversary of Swami Vivekananda was celebrated in India and abroad. The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports in India officially observed 2013 as the occasion in a declaration.

Literary works

Vivekananda was a powerful orator and writer in English and Bengali; "A singer, a painter, a wonderful master of language and a poet, Vivekananda was a complete artist." composing many songs and poems (including his favourite, "Kali the Mother"). Vivekananda blended humour with his teachings, and his language was lucid. His Bengali writings testify to his belief that words (spoken or written) should clarify ideas, rather than demonstrating the speaker (or writer's) knowledge.
Bartaman Bharat meaning "Present Day India" 
Here a list of selected books of Vivekananda published after his death (1902)



Notes

Citations

Sources

| publisher =Fairleigh Dickinson University Press |location= Madison, New Jersey | year = 1974|isbn = 978-0-8386-1021-3}}

Further reading




