[[Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert]]

CATEGORIES: 2007 in music, Benefit concerts, Led Zeppelin, 2007 in London, Tribute concerts

The Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert was a benefit concert held in memory of music executive Ahmet Ertegün at The O2 Arena in London on December 10, 2007.  The headline act was the English rock band, Led Zeppelin, who performed their first full-length concert since the death of drummer John Bonham in 1980, in a one-off reunion. Bonham's son Jason Bonham played drums during the band's set, and also provided backing vocals on two songs.
According to Guinness World Records 2009, the concert holds the world record for the "Highest Demand for Tickets for One Music Concert" as 20 million requests for the reunion show were rendered online. "Guinness 2010 entertainment winners", TVNZ, December 17, 2009. Accessed April 16, 2012. "Led Zeppelin broke the world record for the Highest Demand for Tickets for One Music Concert when 20 million requests came through for the one-time reunion show in December 2007."
In October 2012, Celebration Day, a concert film documenting the event, was released. Both the film and performance by Led Zeppelin have been highly acclaimed. A shortened version of the concert was broadcast by the BBC in the UK on 8 December 2012.

Background

On September 12, 2007, it was confirmed during a press conference by promoter Harvey Goldsmith that the surviving members of Led Zeppelin would reunite for the show, with Jason Bonham filling in on drums. The concert was originally scheduled to take place on November 26, 2007. It was to help raise money for the Ahmet Ertegun Education Fund, which pays for university scholarships in the UK, US and Turkey.
Tickets were made available via a lottery system through the website Ahmettribute.Nagara, Bunn. "Get your Led out", The Star (Malaysia), December 10, 2007. Accessed January 5, 2008. "Today they play a one-off concert at London's O2 Arena, in aid of the late Atlantic Records founder Ahmet Ertegun's education fund. More than two million fans chased nearly 20,000 tickets, and with more than a billion page views the website soon crashed." Led Zeppelin guitarist Jimmy Page later commented:
On November 1, 2007, it was announced that Page fractured the little finger on his left hand after a fall in his garden and the reunion show was postponed to December 10, 2007.

The concert

Opening acts

The show opened with a band consisting of Keith Emerson, Chris Squire, Alan White and Simon Kirke
The show also featured Bill Wyman's Rhythm Kings, Paul Rodgers, Paolo Nutini, and Foreigner as supporting acts. The majority of the performance was by the Rhythm Kings, with Nutini and Rodgers both guesting on two songs each. The performance billed as "Foreigner" was in fact only Mick Jones performing "I Want to Know What Love Is" with St. Lukes C of E secondary school as the choir and Brian Tichy (former Foreigner drummer) and the Rhythm Kings as the backing band. Other guests on the Rhythm Kings set included Maggie Bell and Alvin Lee.Com

Led Zeppelin

The band performed 16 songs—including two encores—featuring a range of songs from across the spectrum of their career; however no material from the band's final album, In Through the Out Door, was performed. Included in the set list were two numbers which were played live in their entirety for the first time ever by Led Zeppelin—"Ramble On" and "For Your Life".

Setlist

First Encore:
Second Encore:
The concert sound was mixed by Metallica's FOH engineer Big Mick. In 2012 an album and film were released as Celebration Day.
The concert was also recorded by many fans. Sophisticated bootleg versions of the show are available on the Internet, including a wide-screen DVD with a surround sound audio track mixed from 10 different audience recordings of the show.
The historic concert attracted nearly 20 million fans from all corners of the globe.  Because of the enormous demand for tickets, an online lottery system was implemented in which fans entered a random drawing.  Eight thousand fans were selected and allowed to purchase the 16,000 tickets that were made available to the public.  To combat fears of ticket scalping, lottery winners had to be present in London with ID to pick up their tickets and wristbands for entry. Hundreds of fans with General Admission tickets arrived at the O2 Arena days in advance with the hopes of being front and center for such a landmark occasion.
A number of celebrities attended the gig, including Chad Smith, Dave Grohl, BBC Radio 1 DJs Chris Moyles & Fearne Cotton, Brett Hull, BBC Radio 2's Chris Evans, Bob Harris, Ilan Rubin, Arctic Monkeys, The Edge, Bernard Sumner, Dave Mustaine (who received free tickets from Ross Halfin), Peter Gabriel, John Squire, Mick Jagger, Crown Prince Frederik of Denmark, Matt Morgan, Juliette Lewis, James Dean Bradfield, Richard Hammond, Jeremy Clarkson, Richard Ashcroft,NME Marilyn Manson, Warren Haynes, Kate Moss, Naomi Campbell, David Boreanaz, W. Earl Brown, Erika Sawajiri, Jerry Hall, Priscilla Presley,The moment Led Zeppelin fan tried to rip Naomi Campbell's VIP pass from her neck. Daily Mail Paris HiltonErika Sawajiri & Tsuyoshi Takashiro Spotted Together in Led Zeppelin Concert and Neil Finn.Enz on Campbell Live - Topic Powered by eve communityTo Attend Led Zeppelin Gig

Critical response

Music critics in attendance were unanimous in their praise for Led Zeppelin's performance. New Musical Express proclaimed, "what they have done here tonight is proof that they can still perform to the level that originally earned them their legendary reputation..."
The New Yorker critic Sasha Frere-Jones, who attended the concert wrote, "The failed gigs of the nineteen-eighties and nineties have been supplanted by a triumph, and the band should be pleased to have done Ertegun proud with such a spirited performance."
Members of the band have also expressed their satisfaction with the concert. Page commented that "it was a wonderful celebration of the music, a celebration of the fact that the essence of it, the energy, was still there,". He also reflected that "It's great that we did it. I look back on that night with a great amount of fondness, but Jason Bonham was the hero. For me that gig was about him."James Jackson, "Jimmy Page on Led Zeppelin's good times, bad times and reunion rumours", The Times, January 8, 2010.
Plant has stated:
In an interview he gave to The Times in January 2010, Page recalled:






