[[Horse-eye jack]]

CATEGORIES: Caranx, Saltwater fish of Florida

The horse-eye jack, Caranx latus, is a gamefish and minor commercial fish in the family Carangidae. It is also known as the big-eye jack, and is similar in appearance to the crevalle jack, although the head of the horse-eye jack is not as blunt. The horse-eye jack is known to feed on smaller fish and on many invertebrates, such as shrimp and crab.

Taxonomy and phylogeny

The horse-eye jack is classified  within the genus Caranx, one of a number of groups known as the jacks or trevallies. Caranx itself is part of the larger jack and horse mackerel family Carangidae, a group of percoid fishes in the order Perciformes.
The horse-eye jack was first scientifically described in 1831 by the Swiss naturalist Louis Agassiz based on a specimen collected from the waters of Brazil. Agassiz published this description, along with a further three carangids, in a volume co-authored with the German biologist Johann Baptist von Spix entitled Selecta Genera et Species Piscium Brasiliensium. This analysis is no longer accepted, with the two species considered separate.
The horse-eye jack was included in a wide-ranging study of the molecular systematics of the Carangidae. In various analyses and models, C. latus always reliably placed in Caranx, being basal to a clade consisting of C. vinctus and C. caninus.
The species is commonly known as the horse-eye jack or horse-eye crevalle in reference to the large eyes of the species. Other lesser used names include big-eye jack and false jack.

Description

The horse-eye jack is a large fish, growing to a maximum recorded length of 101 cm and a weight of 13.4 kg, however is more common at lengths less than 60 cm. The horse-eye jack has a body form similar to other large jacks found throughout its range, with a moderately compressed elongate and deep body.
Adult horse-eye jack are typically dark blue to silvery-blue above, becoming silvery white to golden below. Unlike the crevalle jack, there is no dark spot at the base of the pectoral fin, although but there may be dark spots on the gill covers. Juveniles exhibit a series of about five dark vertical bars on their flanks which fade with age.

Habitat and range

The horse-eye jack is commonly found in the subtropical Atlantic ocean from Bermuda and the northern Gulf of Mexico and south to Rio de Janeiro. In the eastern Atlantic, it is found from St. Paul's Rocks to Ascension Island and, rarely, the in the Gulf of Guinea. 
It is a pelagic fish. It can be found on reefs and offshore oil rigs. The juvenile can be found closer to shore along sandy and muddy bottoms. The species may venture into brackish waters and can live in river mouths, but it is typically found in saltwater up to 140 m in depth.
The adult horse-eye jack commonly swims with others in a school, either as one species or mixed with crevalle jack. Sometimes it also swims as a pair with a member of a very different species, such as Halichoeres radiatus, a type of wrasse.

Interaction with humans

The fish is generally wary of scuba divers; it will move slowly away as divers approach. However, schools have been known to crowd around divers, apparently attracted to the bubbles the diver exhales.




