[[Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan]]

CATEGORIES: 1888 births, 1975 deaths, 20th-century philosophers, Advaitin philosophers, Madras Christian College alumni, Ambassadors of India to the Soviet Union, Contemporary Indian philosophers, Fellows of All Souls College, Oxford, Fellows of the British Academy, Hindu philosophers, Honorary Members of the Order of Merit, Indian educationists, Indian Hindus, Indian knights, Knights Bachelor, Members of Constituent Assembly of India, Modern Hindu writers, Presidents of India, Recipients of the Bharat Ratna, Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class), Telugu people, Templeton Prize laureates, Vice-Presidents of India, Vice Chancellors of Banaras Hindu University, University of Calcutta alumni, University of Calcutta faculty, University of Mysore faculty, University of Madras faculty, Maharaja's College, Mysore faculty, 1st Lok Sabha members, 5th Lok Sabha members

Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan( who was the first Vice President of India (1952–1962) and the second President of India from 1962 to 1967.nic.html
One of India's best and most influential twentieth-century scholars of comparative religion and philosophy,Sheldon Pollock (2011), Crisis in the Classics, Social Research Vol. 78 : No.1 : Spring 2011 his academic appointments included the King George V Chair of Mental and Moral Science at the University of Calcutta (1921–1932) and Spalding Professor of Eastern Religion and Ethics at University of Oxford (1936–1952).
His philosophy was grounded in Advaita Vedanta, reinterpreting this tradition for a contemporary understanding. He defended Hinduism against "uninformed Western criticism", He has been influential in shaping the West's understanding of Hinduism, India, and the East,and earned a reputation as a bridge-builder between India and the West.Hawley, Radhakrishnan, IEP bio
Radhakrishnan was awarded the Bharat Ratna, the highest civilian award in India, in 1954. Among the other important honours he received were the British Knight Bachelor in 1931, although he ceased to use the title "Sir" after India attained independence,The Great Philosophers of India, By Kuttan, Published by Authorhouse member of the German "Order pour le Merite for Arts and Science" in 1954, and honorary membership of the British Royal Order of Merit in 1963. He was also awarded the Templeton Prize in 1975 for advocating non-aggression and conveying "love and wisdom for all people."The Templeton Prize - Previous Prize Winners, Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (1975)
Radhakrishnan believed that "teachers should be the best minds in the country". Since 1962, his birthday is celebrated in India as Teachers' Day on 5 September.

Biography

Early life and education

Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan was born in a Telugu Brahmin family  and his mother's was Sitamma. His early years were spent in Tiruttani and Tirupati. His father was a subordinate revenue official in the service of a local zamindar (landlord). His primary education was at Primary Board High School at Tiruttani. In 1896 he moved to the Hermansburg Evangelical Lutheral Mission School in Tirupati. 11

Education

Radhakrishnan was awarded scholarships throughout his academic life. He joined Voorhees College in Vellore but switched to the Madras Christian College at the age of 17. He graduated from there in 1906 with a Master's degree in Philosophy, being one of its most distinguished alumni.15
Radhakrishnan studied philosophy by chance rather than choice. Being a financially constrained student, when a cousin who graduated from the same college passed on his philosophy textbooks in to Radhakrishnan, it automatically decided his academic course.6Sarvepalli Gopal: Radhakrishnan; a Biography (1989) p.14
Radhakrishnan wrote his thesis for the M.A. degree on "The Ethics of the Vedanta and its Metaphysical Presuppositions".17 It "was intended to be a reply to the charge that the Vedanta system had no room for ethics." Radhakrishnan himself describes how, as a student,

This led him to his critical study of Indian philosophy and religion,

Marriage

Radhakrishnan was married to Sivakamu,Radhakrishnan's wife's name is spelled differently in different sources. It is spelled Sivakamu by Sarvepalli Gopal (1989); Sivakamuamma by Mamta Anand (2006); and still differently by others. a distant cousin, at the age of 16.12  As per tradition the marriage was arranged by the family. The couple had five daughters and a son, Sarvepalli Gopal. Sarvepalli Gopal went on to a notable career as a historian. Sivakamu died in 1956. They were married for over 51 years.

Academic career

In April 1909, Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan was appointed to the Department of Philosophy at the Madras Presidency College. Thereafter, in 1918, he was selected as Professor of Philosophy by the University of Mysore, where he taught at its Maharaja's College, Mysore.  By that time he had written many articles for journals of repute like The Quest, Journal of Philosophy and the International Journal of Ethics. He also completed his first book, The Philosophy of Rabindranath Tagore. He believed Tagore's philosophy to be the "genuine manifestation of the Indian spirit". His second book, The Reign of Religion in Contemporary Philosophy was published in 1920.
In 1921 he was appointed as a professor in philosophy to occupy the King George V Chair of Mental and Moral Science at the University of Calcutta. He represented the University of Calcutta at the Congress of the Universities of the British Empire in June 1926 and the International Congress of Philosophy at Harvard University in September 1926. Another important academic event during this period was the invitation to deliver the Hibbert Lecture on the ideals of life which he delivered at Harris Manchester College, Oxford in 1929 and which was subsequently published in book form as An Idealist View of Life.
In 1929 Radhakrishnan was invited to take the post vacated by Principal J. Estlin Carpenter at Harris Manchester College. This gave him the opportunity to lecture to the students of the University of Oxford on Comparative Religion. For his services to education he was knighted by George V in the June 1931 Birthday Honours, However, he ceased to use the title after Indian independence,[ref]
  preferring instead his academic title of 'Doctor'.
He was the Vice-Chancellor of Andhra University from 1931 to 1936. In 1936 Radhakrishnan was named Spalding Professor of Eastern Religions and Ethics at the University of Oxford, and was elected a Fellow of All Souls College. In 1939 Pt. Madan Mohan Malaviya invited him to succeed him as the Vice-Chancellor of Banaras Hindu University (BHU). He served as its Vice-Chancellor till January 1948.

Political career

Radhakrishnan started his political career "rather late in life", When India became independent in 1947, Radhakrishnan represented India at UNESCO (1946–52) and was later Ambassador of India to the Soviet Union, from 1949 to 1952. He was also elected to the Constituent Assembly of India. Radhakrishnan was elected as the first Vice President of India in 1952,TeluguOne and elected as the second President of India (1962–1967).
Radhakrishnan did not have a background in the Congress Party, nor was he active in the struggle against British rule. According to Brown,


Teacher's Day

When he became President, some of his students and friends requested him to allow them to celebrate his birthday, 5 September. He replied,  "Instead of celebrating my birthday, it would be my proud privilege if 5 September is observed as Teachers' Day."  His birthday has since been celebrated as Teachers' Day in India.

Charity

Along with Ghanshyam Das Birla and some other social workers in the pre-independence era, Radhakrishnan formed the Krishnarpan Charity Trust.

Philosophy

Radhakrishnan tried to bridge eastern and western thought,

Advaita Vedanta

Radhakrishnan was one of the most prominent spokesman of Neo-Vedanta. Radhakrishnan also reinterpreted Shankara's notion of maya. According to Radhakrishnan, maya is not a strict absolute idealism, but "a subjective misperception of the world as ultimately real."

Intuition and religious experience

"Intuition", or anubhava, synonymously called "religious experience", has a central place in Radhakrishnan's philosophy as a source of knowledge which is not mediated by conscious thought.
According to Radhakrishnan, intuition plays a specific role in all kinds of experience. Radhakrishnan discernes five sorts of experience:

Classification of religions

For Radhakrishnan, theology and creeds are intellectual formulations, and symbols of religious experience or "religious intuitions". Radhakrishnan qualified the variety of religions hierarchically according to their apprehension of "religious experience", giving Advaita Vedanta the highest place:
Radhakrishnan saw Hinduism as a scientific religion based on facts, apprehended via intuition or religious experience. According to Radhakrishnan, "if philosophy of religion is to become scientific, it must become empirical and found itself on religious experience". He saw this empiricism exemplified in the Vedas:
To Radhakrishnan, Advaita Vedanta was the best representative of Hinduism, as being grounded in intuition, in contrast to the "intellectually mediated interpretations" of other religions. According to Radhakrishnan, Vedanta offers the most direct intuitive experience and inner realization, which makes it the highest form of religion:
Radhakrishnan saw other religions, "including what Radhakrishnan understands as lower forms of Hinduism," as interpretations of Advaita Vedanta, thereby Hindusizing all religions.
Although Radhakrishnan was well-acquainted with western culture and philosophy, he was also critical of them. He stated that Western philosophers, despite all claims to objectivity, were influenced by theological influences of their own culture.), A Source Book in Indian Philosophy, Princeton: Princeton University Press 1989, 610–639

Influence

Radhakrishnan was one of India's best and most influential twentieth-century scholars of comparative religion and philosophy,
Radhakrishnan's defense of the Hindu traditions has been highly influential, In the western world, Radhakrishnan's interpretations of the Hindu tradition, and his emphasis on "spiritual experience", made Hinduism more readily accessible for a western audience, and contributed to the influence Hinduism has on modern spirituality:


Appraisal

Radhakrishnan has been highly appraised. According to Paul Artur Schillp:

And according to Hawley:

Criticism and context

Radhakrishnan's ideas have also received criticism and challenges, for their perennialist and the use of an East-West dichotomy.

=Perennialism=

According to Radhakrishnan, there is not only an underlying "divine unity"{{refn|group=note|See, especially, Steven T. Katz:

Rinehart also points out that "perennialist claims notwithstanding, modern Hindu thought is a product of history",

=Universalism, communalism and Hindu nationalism=

According to Richard King, the elevation of Vedanta as the essence of Hinduism, and Advaita Vedanta as the "paradigmatic example of the mystical nature of the Hindu religion" It

This "opportunity" has been criticised. According to Sucheta Mazumdar and Vasant Kaiwar,

Rinehart also criticises the inclusivism of Radhakrishnan's approach, since it provides "a theological scheme for subsuming religious difference under the aegis of of Vedantic truth." Yet Rinehart also points out that it is


=Post-colonialism=

Colonialism left deep traces in the hearts and minds of the Indian people, influencing the way they understood and represented themselves. The influences of "colonialist forms of knowledge" can also be found in the works of Radhakrishnan. According to Hawley, Radhakirshnan's division between East and West, the East being spiritual and mystical, and the West being rational and dogmatical,
Since the 1990s, the colonial influences on the 'construction' and 'representation' of Hinduism have been the topic of debate among scholars of Hinduism

Awards and honours

Quotes

Bibilography

Works by Radhakrishnan

Biographies and monographs on Radhakrishnan

Several books have been published on Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan:



Notes



Sources

Published sources

Web-sources




