[[Ardencaple Castle]]

CATEGORIES: Castles in Argyll and Bute, Category B listed buildings in Argyll and Bute, Clan MacAulay, Listed lighthouses in Scotland, Listed castles in Scotland, Demolished buildings and structures in Scotland, Helensburgh, Clan Campbell

Ardencaple Castle, also known as Ardincaple Castle, and sometimes referred to as Ardencaple Castle Light, is a listed building, situated about 

Lairds of Ardincaple

The word Ardencaple or Ardincaple has been said to be derived from the Gaelic Ard na gCapull, meaning "cape of the horses", or "of the mares", or "height of the horses". From the Middle Ages the lands of Ardencaple were controlled by the Lairds of Ardincaple. By the late 15th century or 16th century the lairds had adopted the surname MacAulay. By this time the Laird of Ardincaple was considered the clan chief of Clan MacAulay.
The fortunes of the Lairds of Ardincaple failed in the 18th century. These chiefs of Clan MacAulay were forced to divide and sell, piece by piece, the lands once governed by former lairds of Ardincaple. In the 1740s, the 12th chief, Aulay MacAulay, died at High Laggarie (now within the present village of Rhu).org.uk. Retrieved on March 27, 2007

Renovations to the Ardincaple Estate

Modern era and destruction of the castle

In 1923, Sir Iain Colquhoun sold the castle to Mrs. H. Macaulay-Stromberg, The castle then passed to Adelaide Parker Voorheis until 1935, when it passed to a consortium of developers who had constructed, in 1936-1937 a housing estate on what used to be the Tower Lawn. The castle then was requisitioned by the Royal Navy with the outbreak of World War II.
In 1957 most of the castle was demolished by the government in order to build naval housing for the nearby HMNB Clyde (Faslane Naval Base), though one tower was left to be used as a mount for navigational beacons and transit lights for the Royal Navy. Ardencaple Castle has been considered a Category B listed building since May 14, 1971. Today, all that remains of the grand turreted mansion is one solitary tower.






