[[Dayjur]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 racehorse births, 2013 racehorse deaths, Thoroughbred racehorses, Racehorses trained in the United Kingdom, Racehorses bred in the United States, Northern Dancer bloodline, Thoroughbred family 1

Dayjur (6 February 1987 - 25 September 2013) was an American-bred, British-trained Thoroughbred racehorse. A specialist sprinter he ran eleven times between June 1989 and October 1990 and won seven races. In 1990 he dominated European sprinting, winning the King's Stand Stakes' the Nunthorpe Stakes, the Ladbroke Sprint Cup and the Prix de l'Abbaye de Longchamp. On his final racecourse appearance he finished second to Safely Kept in the Breeders' Cup Sprint. The Racing Post called him "the world's fastest horse".

Background

Dayjur is a dark brown horse standing 15.3 hands by Hamdan Al-Maktoum and sent to be trained in England. Dayjur was trained by Dick Hern at West Ilsley in Berkshire. He was ridden in all his races by the veteran Scottish jockey Willie Carson.

Racing career

1989: two-year-old season

Dayjur made his first racecourse appearance in the six furlong Kennett Maiden Stakes at Newbury on 15 June. He started the 8/15 favourite against thirteen opponents and won "easily" by a length. A month later he was moved up in class for the Listed Manton Rose Bowl Stakes over the same course and distance. He started 8/13 favourite but was beaten half a length by the Clive Brittain-trained Rushmore. At the end of the year he was given a "Hobday" operation to improve his breathing.

1990: three-year-old season

=Spring=

In the spring of 1990, Dayjur was aimed at the 2000 Guineas, but ran disappointing in his trial race, finishing seventh of the ten runners in the European Free Handicap over seven furlongs at Newmarket. He was moved back down to six furlongs and won a minor race at Nottingham

=Summer=

In June, Dayjur was sent to Royal Ascot for the five furlong King's Stand Stakes, which was then a Group Two race. Hern was concerned about the soft ground, but Hamdan Al Maktoum insisted on running him.

=Autumn=

In September, Dayjur was moved back up to six furlongs for the Ladbroke Sprint Cup at Haydock Park. He started the 1/2 favourite against a field which included the July Cup winner Royal Academy and the Prix Maurice de Gheest winner Dead Certain. Dayjur led from the start, went clear inside the final quarter mile and held the late challenge of Royal Academy to win by one and a half lengths. and lost some ground when appearing to jump a shadow cast across the course.
During his final race, the 1990 Breeders' Cup Sprint at Belmont Park, Dayjur overcame a difficult wide draw and after bitterly contesting the lead with Safely Kept, had got on top and looked set for a famous victory. However, in the closing seconds of the race, Dayjur jumped a dark shadow cast over the track - and another at the line - allowing the filly to claim victory by a neck.

Assessment

In their book A Century of Champions, John Randall and Tony Morris rated Dayjur the best racehorse foaled in 1987 and the fifth best British sprinter of the twentieth century behind Abernant, Irish Elegance, Pappa Fourway and Tetratema.

Stud career

He retired to the Shadwell Racing farm in Kentucky of his owner Sheikh Hamdan Al-Maktoum, from where he has sired several good winners like Tipsy Creek (Temple Stakes), Hayil (Middle Park Stakes) and Millstream (Cornwallis Stakes).

Pedigree




