[[Franz Schubert]]

CATEGORIES: 1797 births, 1828 deaths, Franz Schubert, 19th-century Austrian people, 19th-century classical composers, Austrian agnostics, Austrian composers, Austrian expatriates in Hungary, Austrian people of Moravian-German descent, Austrian people of Silesian German descent, Burials at the Zentralfriedhof, Child classical musicians, Classical-period composers, Composers for piano, House of Esterházy, Opera composers, Romantic composers, Viennese composers

Franz Peter Schubert (19 November 1828) was an Austrian composer.
In a short lifespan of less than 32 years, Schubert was a prolific composer, writing some 600 Lieder, ten complete or nearly complete symphonies, liturgical music, operas, incidental music and a large body of chamber and solo piano music. Appreciation of his music while he was alive was limited to a relatively small circle of admirers in Vienna, but interest in his work increased significantly in the decades immediately after his death. Felix Mendelssohn, Robert Schumann, Franz Liszt, Johannes Brahms and other 19th-century composers discovered and championed his works. Today, Schubert is ranked among the greatest composers of the early Romantic era and, as such, is one of the most frequently performed composers of the early twenty-first century.

Biography

Early life and education

Schubert was born in Himmelpfortgrund (now a part of Alsergrund), Vienna, on 31 January 1797. His father, Franz Theodor Schubert, the son of a Moravian peasant, was a parish schoolmaster; his mother, Elisabeth (Vietz), was the daughter of a Silesian master locksmith and had been a housemaid for a Viennese family before her marriage. Of Franz Theodor's fourteen children (one of them illegitimate, born in 1783),Rita Steblin, "Franz Schubert – das dreizehnte Kind", Wiener Geschichtsblätter, 3/2001, 245–265. nine died in infancy and only five survived. Their father was a well-known teacher, and his school in Lichtental (in Vienna's ninth district) was well attended. 2 "the school was much frequented" He was not a well-known or even formally trained musician, but was able to pass on certain musical basics to his gifted son. 3
At the age of six, Franz began to receive regular instruction from his father and a year later was enrolled at his father's school. His formal musical education also started around the same time. His father taught him basic violin technique, and his brother Ignaz gave him piano lessons. 25 At the age of seven, he was given his first lessons outside the family by Michael Holzer, organist and choirmaster of the local parish church in Lichtental, lessons which may have largely consisted of conversations and expressions of admiration. E. Brown, The New Grove Schubert, ISBN 0-393-30087-0, pp. 2–3 The boy seemed to gain more from his acquaintance with a friendly joiner's apprentice who used to take him to a neighboring pianoforte warehouse where he could practice on better instruments. 3 He also played viola in the family string quartet, with brothers Ferdinand and Ignaz on first and second violin and his father on the cello. He wrote his earliest string quartets for this ensemble. 26
Young Schubert first came to the attention of Antonio Salieri, then Vienna's leading musical authority, in 1804, when his vocal talent was recognized. In October 1808, he became a pupil at the Stadtkonvikt (Imperial Seminary) through a choir scholarship. At the Stadtkonvikt, he was introduced to the overtures and symphonies of Mozart and the symphonies of Joseph and Michael Haydn. 5–7 His exposure to these and lesser works, combined with occasional visits to the opera, laid the foundation for a broader musical education. One important musical influence came from the songs of Johann Rudolf Zumsteeg, who was an important Lieder composer of the time, which, his friend Joseph von Spaun reported, the precocious young student "wanted to modernize". 29 Schubert's friendship with Spaun began at the Stadtkonvikt and lasted throughout his short life. In those early days, the financially well-off Spaun furnished the impoverished Schubert with much of his manuscript paper. 7
In the meantime, his genius began to show in his compositions. Schubert was occasionally permitted to lead the Stadtkonvikt's orchestra, and Salieri decided to start training him privately in music theory and even in composition. 9 It was the first orchestra he wrote for, and he devoted much of the rest of his time at the Stadtkonvikt to composing chamber music, several songs, piano pieces and, more ambitiously, liturgical choral works in the form of a Kyrie (D. 31) and a Salve Regina (D. 27) in addition to a wind octet (D. 72/72a, said to commemorate the 1812 death of his mother),Frost, p. 9 a cantata for guitar and male voices (D. 110, for his father's birthday in 1813), and his first symphony (D. 82). 10

Teacher at his father's school

At the end of 1813, he left the Stadtkonvikt and returned home for teacher training at the Normalhauptschule. In 1814, he entered his father's school as teacher of the youngest pupils. For over two years young Schubert endured such drudgery, dragging himself through it with resounding indifference. 13–14 There were, however, compensatory interests even then. He continued to take private lessons in composition from Salieri, who gave Schubert more actual technical training than any of his other teachers before they parted ways in 1817.
In 1814, Schubert met a young soprano named Therese Grob, daughter of a local silk manufacturer and wrote several of his liturgical works (including a Salve Regina and a Tantum Ergo) for her; she also was a soloist in the premiere of his first Mass (D. 105) in SeptemberErich Benedikt, "Notizen zu Schuberts Messen. Mit neuem Uraufführungsdatum der Messe in F-Dur", Österreichische Musikzeitschrift 52, 1-2/1997, p. 64 1814. Schubert wanted to marry her, but was hindered by the harsh marriage-consent law of 1815Steblin requiring an aspiring bridegroom to show he had the means to support a family. 39 In November 1816, after failing to gain a musical post in Laibach, Schubert sent Grob's brother Heinrich a collection of songs retained by the family into the twentieth century. 64
One of Schubert's most prolific years was 1815. He composed over 20,000 bars of music, more than half of which was for orchestra, including nine church works (despite being agnostic), a symphony, and about 140 Lieder. 40 In that year, he was also introduced to Anselm Hüttenbrenner and Franz von Schober, who would become his lifelong friends. Another friend, Johann Mayrhofer, was introduced to him by Spaun in 1814. 108 Maynard Solomon suggested that Schubert was erotically attracted to men,Solomon, M. (1989): "Franz Schubert and the peacocks of Benvenuto Cellini. 19th-Century Music 12, pp. 193–206. a thesis that has, at times, been heatedly debated."Schubert: Music, Sexuality, Culture." 19th-Century Music, 1993, 17:3–101. Musicologist and Schubert expert Rita Steblin claimed that he was "chasing women"." 19th-Century Music. Berkeley, California: Univ. of California Press, ISSN 0148-2076, ZDB-ID 4395712, T 17., 1, pp. 5–33; Steblin, Rita (1996), Babette und Therese Kunz: neue Forschungen zum Freundeskreis um Franz Schubert und Leopold Kupelwieser, Wien: Vom Pasqualatihaus. ISBN/ISMN: 3901254161; Steblin, Rita (1997): "Schubert's 'Nina' and the True Peacocks." The Musical Times 138, S. 13–19; Steblin, Rita (1998): Die Unsinnsgesellschaft: Franz Schubert, Leopold Kupelwieser und ihr Freundeskreis. Böhlau. ISBN 3-205-98820-5; Steblin, Rita (2001): "Schubert's Problematic Relationship with Johann Mayrhofer: New Documentary Evidence". Barbara Haggh (ed.): Essays on Music and Culture in Honor of Herbert Kellman. Paris-Tours: Minerve, pp. 465–495; Steblin, Rita (2008), "Schubert's Pepi: His Love Affair with the Chambermaid Josepha Pöcklhofer and Her Surprising Fate." The Musical Times, S. 47–69.

Supported by friends

Significant changes happened in 1816. Schober, a student of good family and some means, invited Schubert to room with him at his mother's house. The proposal was particularly opportune, for Schubert had just made the unsuccessful application for the post of Kapellmeister at Laibach, and he had also decided not to resume teaching duties at his father's school. By the end of the year, he became a guest in Schober's lodgings. For a time, he attempted to increase the household resources by giving music lessons, but they were soon abandoned, and he devoted himself to composition. "I compose every morning, and when one piece is done, I begin another."Duncan (1905), p. 26 During this year, he focused on orchestral and choral works, although he also continued to write Lieder (songs). 56 Much of this work was unpublished, but manuscripts and copies circulated among friends and admirers. 44
In early 1817, Schober introduced Schubert to Johann Michael Vogl, a prominent baritone twenty years Schubert's senior. Vogl, for whom Schubert went on to write a great many songs, became one of Schubert's main proponents in Viennese musical circles. He also met Joseph Hüttenbrenner (brother to Anselm), who also played a role in promoting Schubert's music. 66 These, and an increasing circle of friends and musicians, became responsible for promoting, collecting, and, after his death, preserving his work. 90–93
In late 1817, Schubert's father gained a new position at a school in Rossau (not far from Lichtental). Schubert rejoined his father and reluctantly took up teaching duties there. In early 1818, he was rejected for membership in the prestigious Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde, something that might have furthered his musical career. However, he began to gain more notice in the press, and the first public performance of a secular work, an overture performed in February 1818, received praise from the press in Vienna and abroad. 59
Schubert spent the summer of 1818 as music teacher to the family of Count Johann Karl Esterházy at their château in Zseliz (then in Austria, now in Slovakia). His duties were relatively light (teaching piano and singing to the two daughters, Marie and Karoline), and the pay was relatively good. As a result, he happily continued to compose during this time. It may have been at this time that he wrote one of his now world-famous compositions, the Marche militaire No. 1 in D major. Marie and Karoline both being his piano students, and the original score of "Marche Militaire" being a piano duet, lend credence to this view. On his return from Zseliz, he took up residence with his friend Mayrhofer. 69–72 The respite at Zseliz led to a succession of compositions for piano duet. 235
During the early 1820s, Schubert was part of a close-knit circle of artists and students who had social gatherings together that became known as "Schubertiaden". The tight circle of friends with which Schubert surrounded himself was dealt a blow in early 1820. Schubert and four of his friends were arrested by the Austrian police, who (in the aftermath of the French Revolution and Napoleonic Wars) were on their guard against revolutionary activities and suspicious of any gathering of youth or students. One of Schubert's friends, Johann Senn, was put on trial, imprisoned for over a year, and then permanently forbidden to enter Vienna. The other four, including Schubert, were "severely reprimanded", in part for "inveighing against officials with insulting and opprobrious language". 67 While Schubert never saw Senn again, he did set some of his poems, "Selige Welt" and "Schwanengesang", to music. The incident may have played a role in a falling-out with Mayrhofer, with whom he was living at the time. 68
He was nicknamed "Schwämmerl" by his friends, which Gibbs describes as translating to "Tubby" or "Little Mushroom". Schubert, at 1.52 m height, was not quite five feet tall. "Schwammerl" is Austrian (and other) dialect for mushroom; the umlaut makes it a diminutive.

Musical maturity

The compositions of 1819 and 1820 show a marked advance in development and maturity of style.[ref]
