[[Gerard O'Kane]]

CATEGORIES: Derry Gaelic footballers, Glenullin Gaelic footballers, 1984 births, Living people, Alumni of Queen's University Belfast

Gerard O'Kane () is an Irish Gaelic footballer who plays for Derry, with whom he has won a National League title.
He plays his club football for John Mitchel's Glenullin and has won a Derry Senior Football Championship with the club. He plays in the half back line for club and county, with his pace and stamina being two of his key attributes.

Personal life

O'Kane is from Glenullin, County Londonderry, near Garvagh. He is a cousin of fellow Derry and Glenullin players Paddy and Eoin Bradley.

Football career

Club

O'Kane plays club football for John Mitchel's Glenullin. O'Kane won the Derry Senior Football Championship with the club in the Derry Senior Football Championship of 2007.  Glenullin met Bellaghy in the final, and, after a replay, won the title. He won the man of the match award for his performance in the final replay.
Earlier that year Glenullin won the Ulster Senior Club Football League, beating Latton of Monaghan 
In 2008 the club reached the final of the All-Ireland Sevens Championship, organised by Kilmacud Crokes, but lost 1-11 to 0-13 to St. Gall's, Antrim in the decider, with O'Kane scoring 0-01 in the match.

Inter-county

O'Kane captained the Derry Minor side that won the 2002 Ulster Minor Championship and All-Ireland Minor Championship.
He made his Derry Senior debut in 2004. He was part of the Derry team that won the 2008 National League where Derry beat Kerry in the final.
O'Kane and Derry again reached the National League final in 2009, but were defeated by Kerry.

School/college

Gerard O'Kane captained St. Pat's, Maghera, to success in the 2003 MacRory Cup and Hogan Cup. These successes came months after winning the All-Ireland Minor title with Derry, becoming the first player since 1949 to captain a winning Hogan Cup team the year after captaining a victorious All-Ireland Minor side. He was awarded Ulster Colleges Football All-Stars in both 2002 and 2003. In 2007 he won the Ryan Cup and Sigerson Cup with Queens University Belfast. In  2005 and 2007 he was voted onto the Datapac Combined Universities (All Star) team. 

Honours

Inter-county

Club

College

Individual

Note: The above lists may be incomplete. Please add any other honours you know of.







