[[Rêver]]

CATEGORIES: 1995 songs, 1996 singles, Mylène Farmer songs, Songs with lyrics by Mylène Farmer, Songs with music by Laurent Boutonnat, Songs about the Holocaust

"Rêver" (English: "Dreaming") is a 1995 song recorded by French singer-songwriter Mylène Farmer. It was the fifth single from her fourth album Anamorphosée and was released on 16 November 1996. In spite of moderate sales and chart performances, the song remains one of most known by the general public because of the subjects it deals with, namely the Holocaust and a call for tolerance.

Background, writing and release

Initially, only four singles from the studio album Anamorphosée were scheduled. However, because of the fall of Farmer during a concert in Lyon on 15 June 1996, the song "Rêver" was chosen as the fifth single in order to make the fans wait, since the release of the live album would be deferred.
The single was released only as CD, and there was no vinyl. On the single cover, Farmer is kneeling, completely naked while showing modesty, which seems to be paradoxal. 147. The digipack version of the CD maxi contains a new remix of "XXL". The second track of the CD single is the live version of the song. As for the single remix ('stripped dream remix'), it was produced by Laurent Boutonnat.

Lyrics and video

"Rêver" was Farmer's first song to refer to the genocide of World War II, in the first line, through the book If This Is a Man, written by Primo Levi (the second single was "Souviens-toi du jour"). When the single was released, many did not see the reference to this tragedy in the song, which Farmer did not enjoy. One line of the chorus, "J'irai cracher sur vos tombeaux", refers to a book by Boris VianChuberre, 2007, pp. 263-64. under the pseudonym of Vernon Sullivan. This book provoked a controversy in 1947 because of its violent and sexual content. "Dansent les flammes, les bras se lèvent" refer to the poem "Esprit pensant" and lyrics "Le monde comme une pendule, qui s'est arrêtée" seem to be inspired by the poem "Toujours là". 165. The song also mentions the "angels", a recurrent theme in Farmer's songs. 203.
In this song, Farmer says she "hopes for a better world, and confesses that she was perhaps misled glorifying misery. However, (...) her, that hope is just an inaccessible dream". "Rêver" ends in a different way from other Farmer's songs: not with the chorus, but with the phrase "J'ai rêvé qu'on pouvait s'aimer / J'avais rêvé du mot aimer". 76-77. French author Erwan Chuberre says "Rêver" is probably one of the most moving songs of Farmer's directory. 197.
Initially, a video in a studio version was scheduled, but finally a live version was produced (in two versions). The video shows images from the 1996 concert in which Farmer is wearing a golden dress.

Live performances

A few time after the single release, Farmer performed the song in playback in one television show, Les Enfants de la guerre, on 27 November 1996, on TF1, in which she wore the same dress made by Paco Rabanne as that of 1996 concerts.
"Rêver" was performed during her last six tours: 1996 Tour, Mylenium Tour, Avant que l'ombre... à Bercy, Mylène Farmer en tournée and Timeless. When Farmer sang this song at these occasions, she often wore a white dress, was accompanied by Cassar on the piano and sometimes wept. 19,176,341. No choreography was used for these performances. On the 1999 tour, Farmer wore an orange costume composed of a privateer trousers, a thick jacket and orange shoes, with high heels. On the 2013 tour, Farmer closed the show with the song. 

Chart performances

The song entered the French Single Chart at number eight on 23 November 1996 and peaked at number seven the next week, thus becoming Farmer's 14th top ten hit in France. Then the single dropped and remained in the top 50 for 15 weeks. However, although sales were moderate, the single managed the album Anamorphosée to be able to reach number one for two weeks on the top album, one year and a half after its release, and was most aired on radio. 
In Belgium (Wallonia), the song debuted at number 30 on the Ultratop 50 on 21 December 1996 and reached a peak of number 12, on 2 February 1997. It fell off the chart after 17 weeks,

Cover versions

In 2002, Gregorian covered the song in a 5:02 new age version which features on the album Masters of Chant Chapter II.
The most notable cover was recorded with a video in 2002 by Les Enfoirés for the album 2002: Tous dans le même bateau (track 17, 4:45). Among the artists who perform "Rêver", there are Francis Cabrel, Pascal Obispo, Marc Lavoine, Patrick Bruel, Muriel Robin and Maurane. In this version, Alizée sings alone the first verses.
Prohor Shalyapin, a former contestant of Russian television reality show Star Academy covered the song in Russian-language and his version is available on his own site.

Formats and track listings

These are the formats and track listings of single releases of "Rêver":

Release history

Official versions

Credits and personnel

These are the credits and the personnel as they appear on the back of the single:

Charts and sales

Peak positions

End of year charts

Sales



Notes




