[[Us Placers]]

CATEGORIES: 2007 songs, Lupe Fiasco songs, Kanye West songs, Pharrell Williams songs, Music videos directed by Vashtie Kola, Songs written by Lupe Fiasco, Songs written by Kanye West, Songs written by Pharrell Williams, Songs written by Thom Yorke

"Us Placers" is the debut song by American supergroup Child Rebel Soldier, a musical collaboration consisting of hip-hop artists Lupe Fiasco, Kanye West and Pharrell Williams.

Background

"Us Placers" was produced by Lupe Fiasco, who initially crafted the song for inclusion within his own mixtape. His intention was to create a mashup mixtape entitled, Us Placers, a hip-hop remake of alternative rock musician Thom Yorke's 2006 solo album, The Eraser, along with a few Radiohead songs. Fiasco originally wanted Kanye West—who also deeply enjoyed Yorke's album—and English hip-hop artist The Streets to appear on the track.

Composition

"Us Placers" is an up-tempo hip-hop song. It is set in the time signature of common time with a moderate tempo of 120 beats per minute. Each verse is organized around a chorus that is provided by the melodic vocal sample. The chorus is coupled with a harmonic hook delivered by Lupe, whose vocals implement overdubbing. During the chorus, the song's chord progression changes to and takes on a more moody, atmospheric sound. The song ends with an echoing reiteration of its piano keys.
Lyrically, "Us Placers" is a meditation on the perils of fame. Citing aspiring participants of reality television programs such as The Real World and American Idol and internet celebrities as examples, he implies the fate of those who become instantly famous if only for a short time. In that once their fifteen minutes of fame are over, they then fade away into obscurity, possibly never to enter the public eye ever again. Pharrell takes a more stream-of-consciousness approach to his verse. He swiftly touches on a series of social issues ranging from greenhouse gases, drug dealers, the will God and troubled youth. Pharrell concludes his verse by exposing the motive behind the Virginia Tech massacre. He states the irony of the suicidal shooter, in that he finally achieved the fame and recognition he sought in life, but isn't alive to see it. After each verse, Yorke's melodious vocals sing a mournful yet defiant chorus that complements the song's concept of the sisyphean pursuit of fame: "The more you try to erase me, the more that I appear."

Critical reception

"Us Placers" received overwhelmingly positive reviews from music critics and was widely regarded as the highlight of the Can't Tell Me Nothing mixtape. Rolling Stone not only cited the song as the best track on the mixtape but also placed it at number forty-three on their list of the 100 Best Songs of 2007.

Music video

Though the group has yet to release a music video for the "Us Placers", an non-commissioned video was produced by music video director Va$htie.

Live performance

Lupe Fiasco provided a solo performance of "Us Placers" on August 5, 2007 during his set at Lollapalooza, to the delight of the largely alternative rock audience.






