[[Michigan Technological University]]

CATEGORIES: Michigan Technological University, Educational institutions established in 1885, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, Schools of mines in the United States, Universities and colleges in Michigan, Education in Houghton County, Michigan, Technical universities and colleges, Oak Ridge Associated Universities, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities, American Association of State Colleges and Universities, Forestry education, Buildings and structures in Houghton County, Michigan, 1885 establishments in Michigan

Michigan Technological University (commonly referred to as Michigan Tech, MTU, or simply Tech) is a public research university located in Houghton, Michigan, United States. Its main campus sits on  on a bluff overlooking Portage Lake. Michigan Tech was founded in 1885 as the first post-secondary institution in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, and was created to train mining engineers to operate the local copper mines.
The university's name has changed three times to reflect expansions of degree offerings. Science, technology, forestry and business have been added to the numerous engineering disciplines, and Michigan Tech now offers more than 130 degree programs through its five colleges and schools. US News and World Report ranked Michigan Tech's undergraduate program 115th in the nation based on peer assessment, student selectivity, financial resources and other factors.
Michigan Tech's athletic teams are nicknamed the Huskies and compete primarily in the NCAA Division II Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (GLIAC). The men's hockey team competes in Division I as a member of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association (WCHA), and has won three national championships. The women's basketball team were national runners-up in 2011.

History

Michigan Tech was founded in 1885 as the Michigan Mining School. The name Michigan Technological University was chosen in order to retain the nickname of Michigan Tech that had already been in use since 1927. Although engineering still accounts for some 59 percent of all enrollment as of fall 2010, the University now offers more than 130-degree programs. Along with the new name, Michigan Technological University, the school gained new constitutional status in 1964. The new status gave responsibility for control of the university to its Board of Control rather than legislature."Why a New Name and Constitutional Status for Michigan College of Mining and Technology" Vertical File: History- MTU-Name Change from MCMT to MTU. Michigan Tech Archives & Copper Country Historical Collections.

File:Michigan School of Mines, Houghton, Mich..jpg|Michigan School of Mines, c1906
File:Michigan School of Mines, Houghton, Mich.jpg|Michigan School of Mines, c1906
File:Main building, Michigan School of Mines, Houghton, Mich..jpg|Main building, c1906
File:Chemical laboratory, Michigan School of Mines, Houghton, Mich..jpg|Chemical laboratory, c1906
File:Cirkut photo of Mining College, Houghton, Mich..jpg|Panorama, c1910

Campus

The main Michigan Tech campus is located mainly on US 41 in Houghton, Michigan. It is the safest campus in Michigan, and the third safest in the United States according to Reader's Digest. The main part of campus is relatively small, and can be traversed in about 10 minutes. Many of the buildings are tall, reducing the physical size of the campus and giving the impression of being a park of high-rise office buildings. In addition, the offices of the Michigan Tech Fund are located in the Citizens Bank Building in Hancock.A to Z | Michigan Technological University. Admin.edu. Retrieved on 2013-08-16. The Lakeshore Center in downtown Houghton houses the offices of Human Relations, Vice President for Research and other departments.
Faculty are involved in several distance education programs with clients such as General Motors.
The Portage Lake Golf Course opened for play in April 1902. In 1945 the members could no longer support the needs of the course and sold it to Michigan Tech for one dollar. Since then many improvements have been made such as the addition of another nine holes in 1969. Then in 1984 the new clubhouse was constructed. In 1996 a sprinkler system was installed to modernize the course and keep it playable. The Portage Lake Golf Course is located two miles (3 km) southeast of campus.

Academics

Michigan Tech offers more than 130 undergraduate and graduate degrees in engineering, natural and physical sciences, computing, business and economics, technology, environmental studies, arts, humanities, and social sciences. The university is divided into five schools and colleges. The average overall ACT scores for incoming students is 26.4 in fall 2010,
Michigan Tech has also developed an alternative program to provide students with engineering and other design experience called the Enterprise program. Enterprises develop engineering skills by allowing students to work in business-like environments on real-world projects while completing their education. Enterprises include Nanotechnology Innovations, Hybrid Transportation, Aerospace, Blue Marble Security, Husky Game Development, Boardsports Technologies, and Wireless Communications Enterprises. Enterprise.edu. Retrieved on 2013-08-16.

Student body

The student body consists of more than 7,000 graduate and undergraduate students (Fall 2011) and more than 450 academic faculty (Fall 2010). As is historically true of engineering institutions, female enrollment at Michigan Tech is low. The male to female student ratio was 22:1 in 1960; since 1980 it has remained around 3:1. Michigan Tech's admissions office has enlisted female students and faculty to contact every admitted female applicant via telephone or personal letter in an attempt to increase female enrollment. In this last semester, Fall 2012,  female enrollment has risen for the 6th straight year to reach an all-time high of 1,837 students. This pulls women up to 26.1%. The Fall 2010 freshman class had a ratio of 3.1:1.
Michigan Tech students are primarily from Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Illinois. The student body is approximately 75.4% European-American/Non-Hispanic, 14.2% International, 1.6% Hispanic, 1.5% percent African American, 1.0% Asian, 0.6% Native American, 1.0% Multiracial, 0.1% Pacific Islander, and the remaining 4.5% was not supplied. The university has recently focused on achieving a more diverse student body, in terms of ethnicity, gender, and areas of study. A key step in this effort was the recent introduction of several new academic majors, including psychology, biochemistry and molecular biology, Cheminformatics, communication and culture studies, pharmaceutical chemistry, exercise science, sound design, audio production, and theater and entertainment technology.

Research

Michigan Tech ranked 172nd of 600 US colleges and universities in research and development expenditures in 2007.

Student life

Students attending Michigan Technological University have a wide range of activities to participate in, whether or not they are living in the residence halls. In addition to the various small interest groups which form throughout the year, they participate in Greek Life, Student Organizations, and the Enterprise Program; many organize and attend varsity day events, such as K-Day, the Parade of Nations, and the Winter Carnival (which also attracts alumni from across the country); furthermore, there are motivational drives to raise student activity levels and involvement in the school community, typically for those without membership in a student organization.

Student organizations

Michigan Tech currently recognizes more than two hundred student organizations, including:

Greek life

Michigan Tech is currently host to thirteen fraternities, including three international fraternities and three local fraternities.

Athletics

As the school mascot is the husky (specifically, Blizzard T. Husky), the school's sports teams are known as the "Huskies". Michigan Tech competes in the NCAA's Division II Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference. The men's hockey team competes in Division I as a member of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association. Michigan Tech owns a downhill ski/snowboard hill, Mont Ripley, just across Portage Lake from campus, and maintains extensive cross-country ski trails (used for mountain biking in summer).

=School songs=

Michigan Tech has both an official fight song and an official Alma Mater. At most sporting events, however, both the "Engineer's Song" and "In Heaven There Is No Beer" are played by the Huskies Pep Band, and many students consider these to be the unofficial school songs. The "Blue Skirt Waltz" is played at home ice hockey games and is called the "Copper Country Anthem." During the song, the fans join arms and swing back and forth to the music.

Special events

People

There are over 68,000 Michigan Tech alumni living in all 50 states and over 100 countries. Some notable alumni include:



Notes and references




