[[Lynne Brindley]]

CATEGORIES: 1950 births, Living people, Alumni of the University of Reading, Alumni of University College London, English librarians, Dames Commander of the Order of the British Empire, People associated with Aston University, People associated with the London School of Economics, People associated with the University of Leeds, Place of birth missing (living people), Employees of the British Library, Female Fellows of the Royal Society of Arts

Dame Lynne Janie Brindley [ref]
[/ref] is a British professional librarian and was Chief Executive of the British Library, the United Kingdom's national library from July 2000 until July 2012. She is currently Master of Pembroke College, Oxford. 

Career

Brindley gained a first class degree in music at the University of Reading ca. 1975 and then began her professional career as a library trainee at the Bodleian Library, University of Oxford. She studied librarianship at the School of Librarianship, University College London, where she was awarded the Sir John MacAlister Medal as top student on her course. She first worked for the British Library in 1979, in the Bibliographic Services Division and by 1983 she led the chief executive's office. She moved on to be director of library services at the University of Aston, and spent some time as a consultant for KPMG. She was librarian of the British Library of Political and Economic Science at the London School of Economics (LSE), before moving to the University of Leeds as Librarian and Keeper of the Brotherton Collection, and later as Pro Vice-Chancellor. 
On 17 November 2011, Brindley announced that she would be stepping down from her post as Chief Executive at the British Library at the end of July 2012.
Brindley became the Master of Pembroke College, Oxford, from 1 August 2013.

Context of change

A switch from print to digital publishing by the year 2020 is anticipated; which implies that readers will have diminishing physical contact with books, the primary experience and foundation of civilization for the last 500 years. In this context of change, Brindley is committed to ensuring that the Library does not become little more than "a book museum". 

Book preservation

Brindley's BL has long been the conservator of historic print collections and regarded as a place of quiet study; but with the explosion of the internet and electronic publishing, users are increasingly turning their backs on libraries as a physical space, using them as virtual, digital environments instead. In this context, the BL role in warehousing large book collections is at risk.

Research

Brindley accords special priority to the needs of researchers and believes that libraries should also play a key role in helping to teach information literacy skills. In this context, Brindley observed that: "the younger generation is technologically more literate but not more information literate is a challenge that must be tackled by libraries and education more widely. Students who simply want to use Google and take what it says as gospel do a real disservice to the skills people will increasingly need to survive in the digital economy. Libraries add a degree of sophistication, support and richness of content, all of which will encourage creativity, quality research and participation of the citizen in the global digital world that we are in." 

Academic awards

Brindley has received honorary degrees of D.
A full list follows: 

Honours, styles and titles

She is a Fellow (FRSA) of the Royal Society of Arts and
became a Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 2008 New Year's Honours List for services to education..



Sources




