[[Alessi (Italian company)]]

CATEGORIES: Companies based in Piedmont, Kitchenware brands, Design companies, Italian design, Italian brands, Companies established in 1921, 1921 establishments in Italy

Alessi is a kitchen utensil company from Italy. They make everyday items from plastic and metal designed by famous designers.
From the 1980s onward, Alessi has been particularly associated with the notion of designer objects - otherwise ordinary tools and objects executed as high design, particularly in a post-modern mode, from designers such as Philippe Starck. Most of the memorable designer kettles, designer toothbrushes, designer graters and so on were Alessi products.

History

1920s to 1940s

Alessi was founded in 1921 by Giovanni Alessi. The firm began as a workshop in Valle Strona near Lake Orta in the Italian Alps near Switzerland. An area known for its tradition in making small objects of wood or metal for in the house and in the kitchen in general. Alessi started with producing a wide range of tableware items in nickel, chromium and silver-plated brass. The company's intention was to produce hand-crafted items with the aid of machines. Design in the current sense of the term began when Carlo Alessi (born 1916), son of Giovanni, was named chief designer. Carlo was trained as an industrial designer. Between 1935 and 1945 he developed virtually all of the products Alessi produced. In 1945 he ascended to chief executive and designed the coffee service Bombé, which is still in production. Alessi since 1921, Milan 1998 pp. 8-15. That same year Carlo's younger brother, Ettore Alessi, joined the company as a technician.

1950s and 1960s

In the 1950s the company was under the leadership of Carlo Alessi. With some architects, he designed a number of items which were created for the hotel needs. Through his intervention caused many individual objects, which were best-sellers, such as the historical series of wire baskets. One of the key designs of this period is the shaker from 1957 by Luigi Massoni and Carlo Mazzeri. This was designed in a series with an Ice bucket and Ice tongs as part of the Program 4 for the 11 triennale in Milan. Alessi since 1921, Milan 1998 pp. 16-18. This was the first time that the Alessi products got shown with manufactured goods.

1970s and 1980s

In 1970 Alberto Alessi was responsible for the third transformation of the company. Alessi was considered a part of the Italian Design Factories. In this decade under the leadership of Alberto Alessi the company collaborated with some design maestros like Achille Castiglioni, Richard Sapper, Alessandro Mendini and Ettore Sottsass, who are now all icons of the 1970s. In the '70s Alessi produced the Condiment set (salt, pepper and toothpicks) by Ettore Sottsass, the Espressomaker by Sapper.
The 1980s marked a period in which Italian Design Factories had to compete with mass production. These movements had a different view on design, for the Italian Design Factories the design and therefore the designer was the most important part of the process while for the mass production the design had to be functional and easy to be reproduced.youtube. For Alessi the '80s are marked with some iconic designs like the two tone kettle by Sapper, their first cutlery set Dry by Castiglioni. Offcourse Alessi collaborated with new designers like Aldo Rossi, Michael Graves and Philippe Starck who have been responsible for the some of Alessi's all time bestseller like the kettle with a bird whistle by Graves.

1990s to the present

In the 1990s Alessi started to work a lot with plastic. This originated in a request from the designers because it is an easier material to work with than metal and therefore gave the designers more freedom in their designs. The nineties is marked by the project 'Family Follows Fiction' with playful and imaginative objects. Many artists designed for this project like Stefano Giovannoni and Alessandro Mendini who designed Fruit Mama and the bestseller Anna G. Also metal is still a working material in the nineties, for example the Girotondo family by King Kong. 
During the 2000s Alessi collaborated with several architects for the coffee and tea towers, with a new generation of architects such as Wiel Arets, Zaha Hadid, Toyo Ito, Tom Kovac, Greg Lynn, MVRDV, Jean Nouvel, and UN Studio. These sets had a limited production of 99 copies. Other remarkable designs in the zero's is the Blow Up series by Fratelli Campana. The brothers played with form and shape to create baskets and other objects that look like they fall apart when you touch them. 
In 2006, the company reclassified its products under three lines: A di Alessi , Alessi  and Officina Alessi. A di Alessi is more 'democratic' and more 'pop'. This product line is the lower price range of Alessi. Alessi is the historic brand company and continues to develop the best of industrial mass production industry from the view of quality and design in a medium/high price range. The Officina Alessi is more exclusive, innovative and experimental, this is marked by small production series and limited series.
Alessi products are on display in museums worldwide like Museum of Modern Art New York, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Victoria and Albert Museum, Pompidou Centre and Stedelijk Museum Amsterdam.

Designers and their designs

From 1945 until today Alessi collaborates with designers and even other brands or companies for their products. Some key designs and their designers:
Another notable collection is the collaboration with the National Palace Museum of Taiwan, a collection of various kitchenware products with Asian themes.

Image:Kessel R Sapper.jpg|Sapper kettle, 1983
Image:Graves kittel 1984.jpg|Graves kettle, 1984
Image:Juicy Salif - 78365.jpg|Starck's Juicy Salif








