[[Craig Rosevear]]

CATEGORIES: Australian rock drummers, Living people

Craig "Rosie" Gary Rosevear is an Australian drummer from Newcastle who joined hard rock group The Screaming Jets from 1993 to 2000. From 2001 to 2003, he relocated to the United States and was a member of American band, Cinderglass. By 2003, he had returned to Australia and set up a music school in Newcastle focusing on drumming and percussion. His portrait, Rock and role model by Peter Sesselmann, was entered for the 2009 Archibald Prize.

Biography

Craig Rosevear started his musical career with the Sydney Youth Orchestra, before becoming lead drummer for 5 years with the Newcastle Combined High Schools Marching Band, or The Marching Koalas. He was also percussionist with the Broadmeadow High School Concert Band.
In 1990, he joined Sydney-based hard rock bands Angry Snuff Puppett and then BB Steal.
Rosevear joined rock group, The Screaming Jets, in July 1993. He was the permanent replacement for founding drummer, Brad Heaney who had been sacked in April and was temporarily filled-in by United Kingodom's Dave Holland (ex-Judas Priest) for the last leg of their European tour.
In 2001, Rosevear moved to the US, where he played with Albanian singer Simaku and then joined US band Cinderglass. After the demise of Cinderglass he returned to Newcastle and resumed playing with DV8 and also played with The Retro Rockets. In 2003 he set up his own music school called "Rosie's School of Rock" inspired from some of the Rock Schools he saw in USA. The school provides tuition on all Rock instruments and hosts concerts every term. The school's core aim is to provide a learning environment that creates confidence in kids by enabling them to create a 'cooler' image for themselves, including kids with disabilities. Many students form bands, perform, make and promote albums, get on radio and TV. With Retro Rockets, Rosevear released a third album, Cars, Guitars and Girls from Mars in 2007. In 2009, Peter Sesselmann's portrait of Rosevear was entered into the Archibald Prize as Rock and role model and was "symbolic of the rock drummer's transition from touring musician to educator over the past few years". In 2011, DV8 released a live album, Live at the Wicko.






