[[John McCormack (Scottish footballer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1955 births, Sportspeople from Glasgow, Living people, Association football defenders, Scottish footballers, Clydebank F.C. players, St. Mirren F.C. players, Dundee F.C. players, Airdrieonians F.C. (1878) players, Partick Thistle F.C. players, Scottish Football League players, Scottish football managers, Albion Rovers F.C. managers, Dundee F.C. managers, Greenock Morton F.C. managers, Queen's Park F.C. managers, Greenock Morton F.C. non-playing staff, Hamilton Academical F.C. non-playing staff, Clyde F.C. non-playing staff, Clyde F.C. managers, Scottish Football League managers

John Duffy McCormack (born 25 April 1955 in Glasgow) is a Scottish former footballer who played as a defender and has managed several Scottish clubs.

Career

McCormack began his playing career in 1976 with Clydebank, making over 100 league appearances and scoring 24 times before joining St. Mirren in 1980. While playing for St. Mirren, McCormack acquired the nickname "Cowboy", because he had the same name as a professional boxer with that nickname. He moved to Dundee in 1984 before returning to the west of Scotland in 1986, spending single seasons with Airdrieonians and Partick Thistle before retiring in 1988.
Following his retirement from playing, McCormack was employed by Glasgow City Council for several years, working in sports centres in the city. He then returned to Dundee as a youth coach, before progressing to assistant manager and becoming manager in 1997. Just months later, McCormack was sacked – despite Dundee leading the Scottish Football League First Division – and went on to join Queen's Park. In November 2002, McCormack was appointed manager of Greenock Morton,
McCormack was appointed manager of Scottish Third Division side Albion Rovers in May 2007, but later won a claim for unfair dismissal against the club.
McCormack returned to the game in September 2009, becoming first team coach at Second Division club Clyde. Despite making a number of changes to the squad, McCormack had failed to arrest a decline in Clyde's fortunes and left the club in April 2010.

Honours






