[[Anton Chaitkin]]

CATEGORIES: LaRouche movement, Living people, 1943 births, U.S. Labor Party politicians

Anton "Tony" Chaitkin (born 1943) is an author, historian, and political activist with the LaRouche movement. He serves as History Editor for Executive Intelligence Review.
Chaitkin's father was Jacob Chaitkin, who was the legal counsel and strategist for the boycott against Nazi Germany carried on by the American Jewish Congress in the 1930s. Wertz Jr., have also been active in the LaRouche movement."Writer and Translator Marianna Wertz, 54;" Washington Post. Washington, D.C.: Jan 19, 2003. pg. C.11

Activism

Chaitkin became a founding member of the LaRouche movement in the mid-1960s.
In 1973 Chaitkin was a candidate for Mayor of New York City, representing the National Caucus of Labor Committees."Look at This: Communist Party Needs 'Trotskyist' Goons!," New Solidarity, Vol. IV, No. 4, April 30-May 4, 1973 (Published Weekly by the National Caucus of Labor Committees), pp. 1, 4-5.mises.pdf He also ran for Governor of New York in 1974, and for Pennsylvania's 2nd congressional district in 1978. Chaitkin
During the early 1970s Chaitkin was repeatedly cited for disrupting meetings. Chaitkin was among ten NCLC members arrested for participating in a melee at a Newark city council meeting. The group was asserting, among other things, that two local political figures, activist and poet/playwright Imamu Imir Baraka (also known as LeRoi Jones) and Anthony Imperiale were tools of the CIA."A socialist Caucus Denounces Gibson And His Enemies--Baraka and Imperiale; Group Scores C.I.A.", RICHARD PHALON. New York Times, September 10, 1973, Page 74"Arraignment Put Off in Council Melee". New York Times September 7, 1973, Page 74  Due to his heckling, Chaitkin was forcibly ejected from a press conference held by a competing candidate for U.S. Senate, Ramsey Clark, on October 18, 1973."Crowds and Demonstrators Focus Attention on Beame; Victimization an Issue", MAURICE CARROLL, New York Times November 2, 1973, Page 26 Chaitkin was arrested for disorderly conduct and criminal trespass on April 21, 1975, for trying to sneak into a conference of mayors posing as an accredited journalist."Newark, Jersey City, Trenton Mayors Hail Economist's Call for Aid to Cities", FRED FERRETTI, New York Times, April 22, 1975, Section: The Week In Review
He was quoted in an organization publication as saying "we intend to disrupt the campaigns of our major opponents." He was quoted in the movement's New Solidarity speaking about "Operation Mop Up", saying "many CPers Party members have been sent to hospital after jumping Labor Committee members in the CP's own meetings.""Five Independent Candidates Are In Race For Mayoralty", Peter Khiss, New York Times, October 7, 1973,
During the 1990s, Chaitkin helped to lead a campaign that called for the removal of the statue of Albert Pike from federal property in Judiciary Square, located in Washington, D.C. Chaitkin charged that Pike, a leader of the Scottish rite of Freemasonry and author of Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry, was an important founder of the Ku Klux Klan. Chaitkin, along with the Rev. James Bevel, participated in weekly non-violent protests at the site of the statue throughout the 1990s,Citizens Electoral Council of Australia and was arrested in November 1992 by Federal Park Police for "statue climbing." According to the Citizens Electoral Council they "beat the trumped-up charges," while according to the Washington Post both were found guilty of a misdemeanor and sentenced to one week in jail."Judge Convicts Two Protesters Of Pike Statue", Washington Post. Washington, D.C.: Apr 20, 1993. pg. C.05
Chaitkin ushered in the LaRouche movement's campaign against the health care reform proposal of U.S. President Barack Obama. At an open panel session that included Ezekiel Emanuel held  June 10, 2009, Chaitkin said:
 President Obama has put in place a reform apparatus reviving the euthanasia of Hitler Germany in 1939, that began the genocide there. ... Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel and other avowed cost-cutters on this panel also lead a propaganda movement for euthanasia... They shape public opinion and the medical profession to accept a death culture... to let physicians help kill patients whose medical care is now rapidly being withdrawn in the universal health-care disaster.  
In reporting the incident, journalist Max Blumenthal described it as "the opening volley of an orchestrated propaganda campaign designed to link Emanuel and the White House's health-care reform proposals to the T-4 mass euthanasia program of Adolph sic Hitler." See also Views of Lyndon LaRouche#Health care policy.

Books, articles, and pamphlets

Chaitkin authored Treason in America– from Aaron Burr to Averell Harriman. The basic premise of the book is that the American Revolution was not successfully concluded, because a significant Tory faction has persisted in US politics which is philosophically opposed to the ideas of the Revolution, and has sought to undermine them. According to Chaitkin, this faction has included Wall Street financiers, Boston Brahmins, and Confederate secessionists. Chaitkin describes the book as "a 600-page history of the struggle between the American nationalists and the tory-British-racist-imperialist faction from the Revolution to the Harriman-Dulles years."
With Webster Tarpley, Chaitkin co-authored The Unauthorized Biography of George Bush, which claimed to expose the ties of Prescott Bush and Averell Harriman with the Nazi Party of Germany.





