[[Cricket World Cup]]

CATEGORIES: Cricket World Cup, International Cricket Council events, Recurring sporting events established in 1975, World championships

The ICC Cricket World Cup is the international championship of One Day International (ODI) cricket. The event is organised by the sport's governing body, the International Cricket Council (ICC), with preliminary qualification rounds leading up to a finals tournament which is held every four years. The tournament is one of the world's most viewed sporting events, ranked behind only the FIFA World Cup and the Summer Olympics, and is considered the "flagship event of the international cricket calendar" by the ICC. Retrieved 30 June 2013.
The first World Cup was organised in England in June 1975, with the first ODI cricket match having been played only four years prior. However, a separate Women's Cricket World Cup had been held two years before the first men's tournament, and a tournament involving multiple international teams had been held as early as 1912, when a "triangular" tournament of Test matches was played between Australia, England and South Africa. Each of the first three World Cups were held in England. From the 1987 tournament onwards, hosting has been shared between countries under an unofficial rotation system, with fourteen ICC members having hosted at least one match in the tournament. Hosting of a single edition is often shared between neighbouring countries—the tournament's most recent edition (held in 2011 and won by India), was shared between Bangladesh, India, and Sri Lanka.
The finals of the World Cup are contested by all ten full members of the ICC (that is, Test-playing teams) and a number of teams (four at the 2011 tournament) made up from associate and affiliate members of the ICC, selected via the World Cricket League and a later qualifying tournament. A total of 19 teams have competed in the ten editions of the tournament, with 14 competing in the 2011 tournament. Australia has won the tournament a record four times, with the West Indies, India (twice each), Pakistan and Sri Lanka (once each) also having won the tournament. The best performance by a non-full-member team at the tournament came when Kenya made the semi-finals of the 2003 tournament.

History

Before the first Cricket World Cup

The first ever international cricket match was played between Canada and the United States, on the 24 and 25 September 1844. This was the only appearance of cricket at the Summer Olympics.
The first multilateral competition at international level was the 1912 Triangular Tournament, a Test cricket tournament played in England between all three Test-playing nations at the time: England, Australia and South Africa. The event was not a success: the summer was exceptionally wet, making play difficult on damp uncovered pitches, and attendances were poor, attributed to a "surfeit of cricket". In subsequent years, international Test cricket has generally been organised as bilateral series: a multilateral Test tournament was not organised again until the quadrangular Asian Test Championship in 1999.
The number of nations playing Test cricket increased gradually over the years, with the addition of West Indies in 1928, New Zealand in 1930, India in 1932, and Pakistan in 1952, but international cricket continued to be played as bilateral Test matches over three, four or five days.
In the early 1960s, English county cricket teams began playing a shortened version of cricket which only lasted for one day. Starting in 1962 with a four-team knockout competition known as the Midlands Knock-Out Cup,
In the late 1970s, Kerry Packer established the rival World Series Cricket (WSC) competition, and it introduced many of the features of One Day International cricket that are now commonplace, including coloured uniforms, matches played at night under floodlights with a white ball and dark sight screens, and, for television broadcasts, multiple camera angles, effects microphones to capture sounds from the players on the pitch, and on-screen graphics. The first of the matches with coloured uniforms was the WSC Australians in wattle gold versus WSC West Indians in coral pink, played at VFL Park in Melbourne on 17 January 1979. The success and popularity of the domestic one-day competitions in England and other parts of the world, as well as the early One-Day Internationals, prompted the ICC to consider organising a Cricket World Cup.

Prudential World Cups (1975–1983)

The inaugural Cricket World Cup was hosted in 1975 by England, the only nation able to put forward the resources to stage an event of such magnitude at that time. The 1975 tournament started on 7 June. The first three events were held in England and officially known as the Prudential Cup after the sponsors Prudential plc. The matches consisted of 60 six-ball overs per team, played during the daytime in traditional form, with the players wearing cricket whites and using red cricket balls. 5–9
One-day cricket was in its infancy when the first, 1975 World Cup, was played and players were still getting used to its faster pace - remember Gavaskar's 36 in 60 overs. But not the West Indians, who took to it like ducks to water. However, they nearly came unstuck against Pakistan before being rescued by their last-wicket pair, then hammered Australia and eased past New Zealand in the semis. The final, against Australia again, could have been close if it wasn't for Viv Richards' ability to keep running out the opposition batsmen. Eight teams participated in the first tournament: Australia, England, India, New Zealand, Pakistan, and the West Indies (the six Test nations at the time), together with Sri Lanka and a composite team from East Africa. 26–31 One notable omission was South Africa, who were banned from international cricket due to apartheid. The tournament was won by the West Indies, who defeated Australia by 17 runs in the final at Lord's. Glenn Turner was the top run getter with 333 runs and Gary Gilmour head the bowling charts with 11 wickets.
The 1979 World Cup saw the introduction of the ICC Trophy competition to select non-Test playing teams for the World Cup, with Sri Lanka and Canada qualifying. 32–35 West Indies steamrolled their way to a successive world title on the back of some destructive batting and bowling. Australia picked a team of mostly unknowns, thanks to the Packer affair, though West Indies and Pakistan included their rebels. The final featured a brilliant hundred from Richards, an even more brilliant 86 from Collis King, and a destructive five-for from Joel Garner, defeating the hosts, England, by 92 runs. At a meeting which followed the World Cup, the International Cricket Conference agreed to make the competition a quadrennial event. Gordon Greenidge was the top run getter with 253 runs and Mike Hendrick was the top wicket taker with 10 wickets.
The 1983 event was hosted by England for a third consecutive time. By this time, Sri Lanka had become a Test-playing nation, and Zimbabwe qualified through the ICC Trophy. A fielding circle was introduced,  away from the stumps. Four fieldsmen needed to be inside it at all times. 61–62 In this tournament teams faced each other twice, before moving into the knock-outs. India, an outsider quoted at 66–1 to win by bookmakers before the competition began, were crowned champions after upsetting the West Indies by 43 runs in the final. 105–110 This result that triggered the era of South Asian domination of cricket's finances. Roger Binny was the top wicket taker with 18 wickets and David Gower with 384 runs was the highest run getter.

1987–1996

The 1987 tournament, named the Reliance World Cup after their Indian sponsors, was held in India and Pakistan, the first time that the competition was held outside England. All the test sides along with Zimbabwe who qualified again through the ICC Trophy competed. The games were reduced from 60 to 50 overs per innings, the current standard, because of the shorter daylight hours in the Indian subcontinent compared with England's summer. 111–116 When India and Pakistan made it to the semi-finals, many thought a dream final between the old rivals would be the outcome. Unfortunately for the home fans, it was a face-off between two other old rivals - England and Australia - that came to pass. Australia won the championship by defeating England by 7 runs in the final, the closest margin in World Cup final history. 155–159 Graham Gooch was the top run getter with 471 runs, becoming the first cricketer to score more than 400 runs in a single edition. Craig McDermot took the maximum (18) wickets.
The 1992 World Cup, held in Australia and New Zealand, introduced many changes to the game, such as coloured clothing, white balls, day/night matches, and an alteration to the fielding restrictions. All the test nations competed including the South African cricket team who participated in the event for the first time, following the fall of the apartheid regime and the end of the international sports boycott. 160–161 Zimbabwe who for the third time qualified by winning the ICC Trophy also competed and would play their first Test match later in 1992. South Africa performed better than expectations and lost to England in the semi-final after the target came down to them needing 24 off 1 ball, from 24 in 13 balls, as per the rain rule in existence at that time. Pakistan overcame a dismal start to emerge as champioins, defeating England by 22 runs in the final and therefore winning the first white-ball world cup. 211–214 Martin Crowe scored the maximum, 456 runs and Wasim Akram was the top wicket taker with 18 wickets.
The 1996 championship was held in the Indian subcontinent for a second time, Pakistan and India with the inclusion of Sri Lanka as host for some of its group stage matches. 215–217 The 9 test nations including the newly appointed full member Zimbabwe participated in this World Cup, along with the top 3 performers in the ICC Trophy: Kenya, Netherlands and UAE. Sri Lanka revolutionised the one-day format with their manic hitting in the first 15 overs, even while chasing, and were deserved winners. The tournament was marred by controversy, though. There was the refusal by Australia and West Indies to play in Sri Lanka, and the Kolkata semi-final. In the semi-final, Sri Lanka, heading towards a crushing victory over India at Eden Gardens after their hosts lost eight wickets while scoring 120 runs in pursuit of 254, were awarded victory by default after crowd unrest broke out in protest against the Indian performance. Sri Lanka went on to win their maiden championship by defeating Australia by seven wickets in the final, courtsey a brilliant All Round performance by Aravinda DeSilva, which was held in Lahore. 264–274 Sachin Tendulkar was the highest run getter with 523 runs, becoming the first to cross the 500 run mark. Mark Waugh scored 3 centuries and became the first person to do so in a single edition. Anil Kumble was the top wicket taker with 15 wickets.

Australian treble (1999-2007)

In 1999 the event was hosted by England, with some matches also being held in Scotland, Ireland, Wales and the Netherlands. 274 The nine full members contested the World Cup along with three associate members: Kenya, and for the first time, Bangladesh and Scotland who qualified through the ICC Trophy. Australia qualified for the semi-finals after reaching their target in their Super 6 match against South Africa off the final over of the match. 229–231 They then proceeded to the final with a tied match in the semi-final (also against South Africa) where a mix-up between South African batsmen Lance Klusener and Allan Donald saw Donald drop his bat and stranded mid-pitch to be run out. In the final, Australia dismissed Pakistan for 132 and then reached the target in less than 20 overs, with eight wickets in hand. 232–238
South Africa, Zimbabwe and Kenya hosted the 2003 World Cup. The number of teams participating in the event increased from twelve to fourteen: the 10 Test playing nations including the recently appointed member Bangladesh, Kenya who also qualified automatically due to their full One Day International status and the top three teams in the 2001 ICC Trophy in Canada, which served as a qualifying tournament. These teams were, respectively, the Netherlands, Canada and for the first time Namibia. Kenya's victories over Sri Lanka and Zimbabwe, among others – and a forfeit by the New Zealand team, which refused to play in Kenya because of security concerns – enabled Kenya to reach the semi-finals, the best result by an associate. In the final, Australia made 359 runs for the loss of two wickets, the largest ever total in a final, defeating India by 125 runs.
In 2007 the tournament was hosted by the West Indies; the Cricket World Cup became the first such tournament to be hosted on all six populated continents. The field of sixteen teams, the largest ever for the Cricket World Cup, consisted of all sixteen teams which held One Day International status. This included the ten full members of the ICC (which all have Test and permanent ODI status). The other six (associate) ODI nations were Kenya and five further teams which qualified via the 2005 ICC Trophy (gaining ODI status until 2009, in the process): Netherlands, Canada, Scotland and for the first time Ireland and Bermuda.

2011

The 2011 Cricket World Cup was jointly hosted by India, Sri Lanka and for the first time Bangladesh. Pakistan were stripped of their hosting rights following the terrorist attack on the Sri Lankan cricket team, with the games originally scheduled for Pakistan redistributed to the other host countries.
The 2011 World Cup was the tenth edition of the tournament. Fourteen teams participated with all 10 full members including Zimbabwe who have given up their Test playing status until the standard of their team improves and the top 4 Associate nations: Kenya, Ireland, Netherlands and Canada. Split into two pools of seven teams each, the top four teams from each group qualified for the quarter-finals. India won their second World Cup title by beating Sri Lanka by 6 wickets in the final in Wankhede Stadium, Mumbai,thus becoming the first country to win the Cricket World Cup final on home soil. This is also the first time that a country has won the World Cup in all the formats, i.e. 60 overs (1983), Twenty20 (2007) and 50 overs (2011). India's Yuvraj Singh was declared the man of the tournament. This is first time in World cup history that two Asian teams appeared in final. This was also the first time since 1992 World Cup that the final match did not feature Australia. India and Sri Lanka between them have made it to the finals of all World Cup tournaments in this millennium2011 Cricket World Cup

Future

The next World Cups will be hosted by Australia and New Zealand in 2015, England and Wales in 2019 and India in 2023. Like 2011, 2015 will also feature 14 teams and the tournament will be played in exactly same format. Besides the ten test playing nations, Ireland and Afghanistan have qualified by the virtue their position in the World Cricket League. The other two positions were decided in the ICC World Cup Qualifier, where Scotland were the winners and UAE were the runners-up.

Format

Qualification

The Test-playing nations qualify automatically for the World Cup main event, while the other teams have to qualify through a series of preliminary qualifying tournaments. The One Day International playing nations automatically enter the final qualification tournament, the World Cup Qualifier, along with other nations who have qualified through separate competitions.
Qualifying tournaments were introduced for the second World Cup, where two of the eight places in the finals were awarded to the leading teams in the ICC Trophy. The number of teams selected through the ICC Trophy has varied throughout the years; currently, six teams are selected for the Cricket World Cup. The World Cricket League (administered by the International Cricket Council) is the qualification system provided to allow the Associate and Affiliate members of the ICC more opportunities to qualify.
Under the current qualifying process, the World Cricket League, all 91 Associate and Affiliate members of the ICC are able to qualify for the World Cup. Associate and Affiliate members must play between two and five stages in the ICC World Cricket League to qualify for the World Cup finals, depending on the Division in which they start the qualifying process.
Process summary in chronological order:

Tournament

The format of the Cricket World Cup has changed greatly over the course of its history. Each of the first four tournaments was played by eight teams, divided into two groups of four. The top four teams from each group progressed to quarter-finals and semi-finals.
A new format was used for the 1999 and 2003 World Cups. The teams were split into two pools, with the top three teams in each pool advancing to the Super 6. The "Super 6" teams played the three other teams that advanced from the other group. As they advanced, the teams carried their points forward from previous matches against other teams advancing alongside them, giving them an incentive to perform well in the group stages. The top four teams from the "Super 6" stage progressed to the semi-finals, with winners playing in the final.
The last format used in the 2007 World Cup, features 16 teams allocated into four groups of four. The top four teams from the "Super 8" round advance to the semi-finals, and the winners of the semi-finals play in the final.
The current format, approved by ICC to be used in 2011 World Cup, features 14 teams allocated. Within each group, the teams will play in a round-robin format. The top four teams from each group will proceed to the knock out stage playing quarter-finals. Winners of the quarter-finals will play semi-finals and the winning semi-finalists will play in the final.

Trophy

The ICC Cricket World Cup Trophy is presented to the winners of the World Cup finals. The current trophy was created for the 1999 championships, and was the first permanent prize in the tournament's history; prior to this, different trophies were made for each World Cup.  The trophy was designed and produced in London by a team of craftsmen from Garrard & Co over a period of two months.
The current trophy is made from silver and gild, and features a golden globe held up by three silver columns. The columns, shaped as stumps and bails, represent the three fundamental aspects of cricket: batting, bowling and fielding, while the globe characterises a cricket ball. It stands 60 cm high and weighs approximately 11 kilograms. The names of the previous winners are engraved on the base of the trophy, with space for a total of twenty inscriptions.
The original trophy is kept by the ICC. A replica, which differs only in the inscriptions, is permanently awarded to the winning team.

Media coverage

The tournament is the world's third largest (with only the FIFA World Cup and the Summer Olympics exceeding it), being televised in over 200 countries to over 2.2 billion television viewers.
Successive World Cup tournaments have generated increasing media attention as One-Day International cricket has become more established. The 2003 World Cup in South Africa was the first to sport a mascot, Dazzler the zebra. An orange mongooses known as Mello was the mascot for the 2007 Cricket World Cup. Stumpy, a blue elephant was the mascot for the 2011 World Cup.

Selection of hosts

thumb|Civic Centre, South Africa honours the 2003 World Cup.
The International Cricket Council's executive committee votes for the hosts of the tournament after examining the bids made by the nations keen to hold a Cricket World Cup.
England hosted the first three competitions. The ICC decided that England should host the first tournament because it was ready to devote the resources required to organising the inaugural event. India volunteered to host the third Cricket World Cup, but most ICC members believed England to be a more suitable venue because the longer period of daylight in England in June The 1987 Cricket World Cup was the first hosted outside England, held in Pakistan and India.
Many of the tournaments have been jointly hosted by nations from the same geographical region, such as South Asia in 1987, 1996 and 2011, Australasia in 1992, Southern Africa in 2003 and West Indies in 2007.

Tournament history

Performances by teams

Twenty nations have qualified for the finals of the Cricket World Cup at least once (excluding qualification tournaments). Seven teams have competed in every finals tournament, five of which have won the title. The West Indies won the first two tournaments, and Australia has won four, India has won two, while Pakistan and Sri Lanka have each won once. The West Indies (1975 and 1979) and Australia (1999, 2003 and 2007) are the only nations to have won consecutive titles. Australia has played in 6 of the 10 final matches (1975, 1987, 1996, 1999, 2003, 2007). England has yet to win the World Cup, but has been runners-up three times (1979, 1987, 1992). The best result by a non-Test playing nation is the semi-final appearance by Kenya in the 2003 tournament; while the best result by a non-Test playing team on their debut is the Super 8 (second round) by Ireland in 2007.
Sri Lanka, who co-hosted the 1996 Cricket World Cup, was the first host to win the tournament, though the final was held in Pakistan. India won the 2011 as host and was the first team to win in a final played in their own country. Other countries which have achieved or equalled their best World Cup results while co-hosting the tournament are New Zealand, semi-finalists in 1992; Zimbabwe, reaching the Super Six in 2003; and Kenya, semi-finalists in 2003. In 1987, co-hosts India and Pakistan both reached the semi-finals, but were eliminated by Australia and England respectively. Australia in 1992, England in 1999, South Africa in 2003, and Bangladesh in 2011 have been the host teams to get out in the first round.

Teams' performances

Comprehensive teams' performances of over the past World Cups:
†No longer exists.
Prior to the 1992 World Cup, South Africa was banned due to apartheid.
Number of wins followed by Run-rate is the criteria for determining the ranks till 1987 World Cup.
Number of points followed by, head to head performance and then  Net Run-rate is the criteria for determining the ranks for World Cup from 1992 onwards.
Legend

Debutant teams

†No longer exists.

Overview

The table below provides an overview of the performances of teams over past World Cups, as of the end of the 2011 tournament. Teams are sorted by best performance, then total number of wins, then total number of games, then by alphabetical order.
†No longer exists.

Awards

Man of the tournament

Since 1992, one player has been declared as "Man of the Tournament" at the end of the World Cup finals:

Man of the Match in the World Cup Final

Previously, there was no tournament award, although Man of the Match awards have always been given for individual matches. Winning the Man of the Match in the final is logically noteworthy, as this indicates the player deemed to have played the biggest part in the World Cup final. To date the award has always gone to a member of the winning side. The Man of the Match award in the final of the competition has been awarded to:

Tournament records

Main individual and team records





  | last = Browning
  | first = Mark
  | title = A complete history of World Cup Cricket
