[[U.S. Route 25 in Georgia]]

CATEGORIES: U.S. Route 25, U.S. Highways in Georgia (U.S. state), Transportation in Glynn County, Georgia, Transportation in Wayne County, Georgia, Transportation in Long County, Georgia, Transportation in Tattnall County, Georgia, Transportation in Evans County, Georgia, Transportation in Bulloch County, Georgia, Transportation in Jenkins County, Georgia, Transportation in Burke County, Georgia, Transportation in Richmond County, Georgia, Brunswick, Georgia, Transportation in Augusta, Georgia

U.S. Route 25 is a U.S. Highway that travels from Brunswick, Georgia to the Kentucky-Ohio state line, where Covington, Kentucky meets Cincinnati, Ohio at the Ohio River. In the U.S. state of Georgia, US 25 is as a  highway that travels south to north in the eastern part of the state, near the Atlantic Ocean, serving Brunswick, Statesboro, and Augusta on its path from Brunswick to South Carolina at the Savannah River. Its routing travels through portions of Glynn, Wayne, Long, Tattnall, Evans, Bulloch, Jenkins, Burke, and Richmond counties.
The segment of US 25/SR 121 from Interstate 16 (I-16) south-southwest of Statesboro north to Millen is the western segment of the Savannah River Parkway, a four-lane divided highway that roughly parallels the Savannah River. The segment from Millen north to I-520 in Augusta is the combined segment of the parkway. This highway is being considered for inclusion as part of I-3, which is ultimately planned to stretch from Savannah to Knoxville, Tennessee.

Route description

Glynn County

US 25 begins at an intersection with US 17/SR 25 (Glynn Avenue) in the southern part of Brunswick in Glynn County. This intersection also marks the southern terminus of SR 25 Connector. This intersection is west of the Marshes of Glynn Overlook Park and is north of Howard Coffin Park. US 25 and SR 25 Connector travel concurrently on Gloucester Street to the west-southwest. At the intersection with US 341/SR 27 (Oglethorpe Street), SR 25 Connector ends, and US 25 begins a nearly  later, they have an interchange with Interstate 95 (I-95; Purple Heart Trail). At Crispen Boulevard, the concurrency leaves the city limits of Dock Junction. They cross over Burnett Creek and travel through Pyles Marsh, before curving back to the north-northwest. Immediately after that curve, the three highways travel through Brobston. Just before entering Sterling, they pass east of Sterling Park. In town, they intersect SR 99, as well as the eastern terminus of SR 32. The highways travel through Pennick and Zuta, before passing to the southeast of Berry Lake. After traveling through Everett, they enter Wayne County.

Wayne County

When the concurrent routes pass Mt. Pleasant Cemetery, they curve back to the northwest, travel through Mt. Pleasant and cross over Alex Creek. After traveling through Grangerville, Pendarvis, and Gardi, they make a slight westward jog in Odessa; then, they cross over Ponholloway Creek, before entering Jesup. In town, US 25 splits off from US 341/SR 27 (East Cherry Street) to the north-northwest and intersects US 301/SR 23, with which US 25 begins traveling concurrently. The three highways travel to the north-northeast in the northeast part of the city. They curve to the north-northwest, before curving to the north and meeting US 84/SR 38, which join the concurrency. Immediately afterward, the five highways travel to the north-northeast and leave the city limits. The concurrency travels through rural parts of the county, before traveling through Doctortown, and curving to the northeast and crossing over the Altamaha River into Long County on the Dr. J. Alvin Leaphart, Sr. Memorial Bridge.

Long County

US 25/US 84/US 301/SR 23/SR 38 continue to the northeast and travel through rural areas of the county, crossing over Forrest Pond, Back Swamp (in two places), Corker Branch, Fountain Branch, Brickyard Branch, and Jones Creek on its way to Ludowici. In town, the concurrency intersects SR 57 south, which travels to the southeast. At this intersection, US 25/US 301/SR 23, as well as SR 57 north travel to the northwest, while US 84/SR 38 continue to the northeast. After a slight jog to the east, the roadway crosses through Wefanie. Just before leaving the county, they intersect the southwest terminus of former SR 261, today known as Marcus Nobles Road. Right after that, they curve to the north-northwest and cross over Beards Creek into Tattnall County.

Tattnall County

US 25/US 301/SR 23/SR 57 travel to the east of Kicklighters Pond. After an intersection with the western terminus of SR 196, the roadway curves to the north-northeast and enters Glennville. At an intersection with SR 144 (Barnard Street), SR 23/SR 57 depart the concurrency to the northwest. At this intersection, US 25/US 301 continue to the north-northeast, concurrent with SR 73, which begins here. Just after leaving the city limits, the highways pass the Georgia Veterans Memorial Cemetery – Glennville, Stricklands Pond, and Strickland Pond Dam. Alongside Smith State Prison, the concurrency begins to curve to the north. They curve back to the north-northeast and cross over Beards Creek just before intersecting the southern terminus of what used to be SR 250. After passing to the east of Durrence Pond, just west of Midway, US 25/US 301/SR 73 cross into Evans County.

Evans County

The concurrency passes to the east of Union Cemetery and then to the west of Evans Heights Golf Club. Approximately  later, they cross into Bulloch County.

Bulloch County

Almost immediately, the three highways curve to the north-northwest, passing Ephesus Cemetery, and curve back to the north-northeast and pass by Nevils Pond and Nevils Pond Dam. They again curve to the north-northwest and have an interchange with I-16 (Jim Gillis Historic Savannah Parkway). US 25/US 301/SR 73 curve to a nearly due north routing briefly before curving to the northeast and intersect SR 46, southeast of Register, just before crossing over Lotts Creek. The highways pass Riggs Lake and Riggs Lake Dam. Later on, they travel through Jimps, just before passing a campus of Ogeechee Technical College. They intersect the southern terminus of US 25 Bypass/SR 67 Bypass and US 301 Bypass/SR 73 Bypass (Veterans Memorial Parkway) and enter Statesboro. They pass just to the west of Georgia Southern University and skirt along the eastern edge of W. Jones Lane Memorial Park. They curve to the north-northeast and cross over Little Lotts Creek before intersecing SR 67 (Fair Road). In downtown, they curve to the north-northwest and intersect US 80/Georgia State Route 26 (Northside Drive East). At this intersection, US 301/SR 73 continue to the north-northwest, while US 25/SR 67 travel to the west-southwest, concurrent with US 80/SR 26. The four highway curve to the north-northwest before assuming a more northwestrly routing. After leaving the city limits, they intersect the northern terminus of US 25 Bypass/SR 67 Bypass. They provide access to William James Middle School. In Hopeulikit, the four highways curve to the north-northwest; then, US 80/SR 26 split off to the southwest. About  later, US 25/SR 67 enter Jenkins County.

Jenkins County

After continuing to the north-northwest, US 25/SR 67 pass just to the northeast of Paynes Chapel Cemetery and Clifton Cemetery, before they curve to the north-northeast. Then, they intersect SR 121, which joins the concurrency. Approximately  before leaving town, US 25/SR 121 curve to the north-northwest. On the northern edge of the city limits, they intersect the northern termninus of SR 21. The two highways pass the Magnolia Springs Country Club and travel through the southwestern part of Magnolia Springs State Park, in the community of Lawton. On the northwestern edge of the park, they pass Millen Airport and curve back to the north-northeast, passing Magnolia View Lake and travel to the west of Perkins; then they curve once again to the north-northwest and enter Burke County.

Burke County

The concurrency travels just to the west of Munnerlyn, passing Jenkins Lake, and make a slight westward jog, and curve to a due north routing before curving back to the north-northwest in Idlewood and passing Burke County Airport. They intersect the southern terminus of US 25 Bypass/SR 121 Bypass (Burke Veterans Parkway). The mainline highways turn to the right and curve back to the north-northwest and have an interchange with the bypass route. Just before entering Waynesboro the roadway passes to the west of the Burke County campus of Augusta Technical College. In town, they curve to the north-northeast and intersect SR 24, which joins the concurrency. The three highways travel to the northwest and pass Burke Medical Center and the Burke County Museum. They intersect SR 56/SR 80 (6th Street). At this intersection, SR 24 departs the concurrency to the southwest. Just past 9th Street, they pass Burkeland Garden. About  later, the highways cross over McBean Creek into Richmond County and the city limits of Augusta.

Richmond County

Just before passing the Pointe South Golf Club, US 25/SR 121 begin to travel along the Hephzibah–Augusta city line. They intersect the eastern terminus of SR 88. After curving to the north-northeast, they re-enter Augusta proper. They pass the Richmond Factory Pond and Richmond Factory Pond Dam and curve to the northeast. Then they pass by the East Central Regional Hospital–Gracewood. The two highways curve to the north and cross over Butler Creek and make a gradual winding path to an interchange with I-520 (Bobby Jones Expressway), passing to the west of Foss Park and the Charles B. Webster Detention Center and to the east of Rollins Elementary School and Sego Middle School along the way. US 25/SR 121 intersect Windsor Spring Road, which is also part of the I-520 interchange. The roadway curves to the north-northeast. At the intersection with Lumpkin Road, they pass Alleluia Community School and are just to the west of Elliot Park. The concurrency crosses over Rocky Creek just southeast of Lombard Pond. It curves to the northeast and intersects the southern terminus of Tubman Home Road and the northern terminus of SR 56 (Mike Padgett Highway). Approximately  later, they have an interchange with US 1/US 78/US 278/SR 10 (Gordon Highway) and begin to travel concurrently with those four highways. The six-highway concurrency continue to the northeast, to an intersection with the southern terminus of Molly Pond Road and the northern terminus of SR 56 Spur (Doug Barnard Parkway). Just before that intersection, the roadway begins to curve to the north-northeast. The highways pass just to the northwest of Magnolia Cemetery, Cedar Grove Cemetery, and May Park and southeast of James Brown Arena. A short distance later, they pass to the east of Old Medical College and the Old Government House, then an interchange with US 25 Business/SR 28 (Broad Street). Here, US 25 Business meets its southern terminus. Just after this interchange, the highway crosses over the Savannah River into South Carolina. At the state line, SR 10/SR 121 end, while US 1/US 25/US 78/US 278, concurrent with SC 121 curve to the northeast toward Schultz Hill.

National Highway System

From its southern terminus, in Brunswick, are included as part of the National Highway System.

History

1920s

The road that would later be designated as part of US 25 was established in 1920 as an unidentified road from Brunswick to about Sterling, SR 27 from that point to Jesup, SR 38 from Jesup to Ludowici, SR 23 from Statesboro to Millen, and SR 21 from Millen to Augusta.

1930s

By 1932, US 341/SR 27 were paved in Glynn County. Also, SR 73 was designated from Clayton to an intersection with SR 26 southwest of Statesboro, approximately where I-16 is today. Farther to the north-northwest, US 25 was designated from Hopeulikit to Augusta, and US 25/SR 21 were paved from Waynesboro to Augusta.

1940s

Between April and July 1941, US 25/SR 73, between the Evans–Bulloch county line and the intersection with SR 46, were paved.

1950s

By the end of 1953, US 301 was designated along SR 73 between Glennville and Claxton.

1960s

By the middle of 1960, US 25 was no longer routed on Broad and 13th Streets. It was re-routed to continue following US&nsbp;1/US 78 and SR 10, which had only recently joined the concurrency. In its place was the newly-commissioned US 25 Business.

1980s

In the early part of the decade, SR 21's concurrency with US 25 was truncated at Millen.

Major intersections








