[[Legacy Christian Academy]]

CATEGORIES: High schools in Jefferson County, Texas, Education in Beaumont, Texas, Private high schools in Texas, Private middle schools in Texas, Private elementary schools in Texas, Preparatory schools in Texas

Legacy Christian Academy is private, non-denominational school located in Beaumont, Texas.

Background

Formerly Cathedral Christian High School, Legacy Christian Academy is the largest non-denominational private school in Southeast Texas, and the only non-Catholic PK3 - 12 parochial school in southeast Texas, according to the Beaumont Enterpise.
In 2006, to encourage growth and expansion, Cathedral Christian School became Legacy Christian Academy, with the new name taking effect during the following school year. Legacy Christian Academy is operated by a private board of trustees. The Headmaster is Roger Pricer, PhD.
In the spring of 2011, Legacy's Board unanimously approved adopting and adding pre-kindergarten through fifth grade after the closing announcement of its feeder school, Cathedral Christian. Legacy Elementary opened its doors on August 23, 2011.
In recent years, Legacy has made several facility and equipment improvements including 20 modular classrooms with connecting boardwalks, Mobi Interwrite technology, two 14-passenger buses, elementary recreational facility, preschool/elementary playground, refurbished parking, renovated baseball field, sandpit for athletic strengthening, concession stand improvements, and football and softball practice fields.

Academics

Legacy Christian Academy is one of two college preparatory schools in Beaumont, accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS), serving grades Pre-Kindergarten for 3 years of age – 12th grade from Jefferson, Hardin, Orange and Jasper counties.  Strenuous academic curriculum are offered, including Advanced Placement courses (college accredited upon passing AP course exam) in Chemistry, Biology, US History, Government, Calculus, English Lit., and Language & Composition.  Foreign languages offered include Latin, French and Spanish.  Fine Arts offerings include Worship Team, One Voice Ensemble, Choir, Drama, Theatre Arts, Drawing, Art & Ceramics and Photography.    Religious education requirements are 4 years of Bible classes and weekly chapel attendance.
Legacy SAT scores are above the state and national averages.  99% of Legacy Christian Academy students are accepted into college.
In the 2011-2012 school year, 5 elementary students received "Excellent" and 1 student received "1st Place" at the ACSI Math Olympics.
Also, in the same school year, students competed at the ACSI Spelling Bee. The awards were:  1st Place in Third Grade, 2nd Place in Sixth Grade, with the Sixth Grade Student advancing to the Spell-Off for 5th-8th Grade Students, and placing 2nd at the Spell-Off, which in turn allowed the student to advance to the State Spelling Bee held in Dallas, Texas.
Legacy had a Middle School Student win a cash award in the "Young Audiences Writing Competition."  In the High School division of the "Young Audiences Writing Competition," students placed 1st and 2nd in Poetry, 1st in Short Story, and Honorable Mention in Poetry.
Middle School Students also participated in the BBB "Laws of Life Essay Competition."
Extra-curricular activities are encouraged at Legacy, such as the 4th Grade Texas History Field Trip to Austin and San Antonio and the Middle and High School trip to Washington D.C. and New York.
In Fine Arts, the One Voice Ensemble competed at state level TPSMEA in 2009 and received the highest rating of 1, singing "A Nightingale Sang in Berkeley Square" by Manhattan Transfer.  Two One Voice Ensemble members made the All Region Mixed Choir and advanced to Pre-Area Auditions.  One student made the "Women's Treble All-Region Choir."
The Theater Arts Department presented the musical, "Beauty and the Beast."
Students also placed 1st, 2nd, and 3rd, with 4 Honorable Mentions in the Dishman's Art Gallery's "Under 18 Year Old Comic Competition."
K5-2nd Grade students placed 1st, 2nd, and 3rd with one Honorable Mention and 3rd-6th Grade placed 1st, 2nd, and 3rd with one Honorable Mention in the Young Audiences of Southeast Texas "Go Green Competition."

Athletics

Legacy Christian Academy's mascot is the Warrior.  Through the Texas Association of Private and Parochial Schools (TAPPS), the school competes in several sports, including football, basketball, soccer, tennis, golf, volleyball, track, baseball, swimming and softball.
In the 2011-2012 academic year, the Football Team advanced to the State Play-Offs after placing 2nd in District.  
The Boys' Basketball Team advanced to the 2nd Round of the State Play-Offs after claiming the District Championship.  
The Girls' Basketball Team also advanced to the 2nd Round of the State Play-Offs.
Legacy had a student golfer advance to State Competition, and place in the Top 20 Players In The State.
Tennis claimed the District Title in both A-Singles and A-Doubles to advance to State, placing 3rd in both at the State Level.

Extra-curricular activities

Other extra-curricular opportunities include One Voice Dance Team, cheerleading, Key Club, Chess Club,  Channel 12 Challenge,  Constitution Bee, Student Council, National Honor Society and Fellowship of Christian Athletes.  Students are required to accomplish 20 ministry hours per year to graduate from Legacy.  Numerous ministry opportunities are provided, including, but not limited to: Last Days of Christ, Harvest of Lost Souls, Bikes & Bibles, Texas Trash-Off,  Some Other Place, Southeast Texas Food Bank, Samaritan's Purse Christmas Shoe Boxes,  and  The Hope Center.

Mission

Legacy Christian Academy provides a college preparatory culture of educational excellence wherein young men and women are trained spiritually, academically, physically, and artistically to reach their God-given destinies.  
The school's focus is CHRIST * CURICULUM * CHARACTER.
Legacy Students participate in many Ministries and Community Service.  The Elementary Students drew pictures for Wounded Marines, made drawings and visited local nursing homes and rehab facilities.  They also visited Some Other Place, as well as took gifts to Buckner's Childrens' Village.  The High School Students made 116 "shoeboxes" and collected $667.00 for postage for Samaritan's Purse, collected 3,167 cake mixes/frostings to give to Thanksgiving Store at Some Other Place, participated in Highway Trash Pickup, Bikes & Bibles, Shred It and Forget It at Parkdale Mall, collected money for UNICEF through the Key Club, Faces Ministry to the homeless which was started by an alum, bought and stuffed stockings for homeless, One Voice Ensemble sang at the Courthouse for Christmas Tree Lighting, sang and danced at Main Street Market, caroled and danced in community at Christmas, and sang at Faculty Christmas Party.  Legacy also hosts a Blood Drive for the LifeShare Blood Center.
Legacy Christian Academy's mascot is the Warrior. Through the Texas Association of Private and Parochial Schools, TAPPS, the school competes in several sports, including football, basketball, tennis, golf, volleyball, track, baseball, and softball.




