[[Murder of Liam Ashley]]

CATEGORIES: Murder in New Zealand, Murder in 2006

On 24 August 2006, George Charlie Baker, a prisoner from North Shore City, Auckland,"Liam Ashley parents praised." NZCity. 28 August 2006. Retrieved on 21 June 2009. fatally injured Liam Ashley, a 17-year old from North ShoreWall, Tony. "'It's my fault - I should have shut my mouth' THE LIAM ASHLEY MURDER." Sunday Star Times. 3 September 2006. Retrieved on 21 June 2009."Liam Ashley Report: Findings And PDF." Scoop. Monday 11 December 2006. Retrieved on 21 June 2009. in a New Zealand prison van. The murder led to criticism of the methods of transporting prisoners in New Zealand.

Background

Ian and Lorraine Ashley, Liam's parents, pressed criminal charges against their son after he used his mother's car without permission. The Ashleys denied bail so that their son would be sent to prison. They wished to correct the boy's behaviour, and prevent additional "minor misdemeanours." Liam had previously experienced "minor trouble" with New Zealand law, and his parents believed that the prison system would be the safest place for him."Dead teen "gentle and kind"." NewstalkZB. 28 August 2006. Retrieved on 21 June 2009.

Murder

The prison authorities placed Ashley in one of four compartments of a prison van operated by Chubb Security, a company operating under contract with New Zealand officials.

Aftermath

Baker said that he attacked Ashley because he believed the boy was a "nark." He freely admitted to killing Ashley and received a minimum 18 year life sentence. Damien O'Connor, the corrections minister, described the fatal injury as "senseless" and "preventable.""Liam Ashley's Death Preventable - O'Connor." Scoop. Tuesday 12 December 2006. Retrieved on 21 June 2009.
Chubb, the security company that operated the van, faced criticism in the aftermath of the attack. In June 2007 the company announced that it no longer wished to transport prisoners as contracted with New Zealand authorities.
In 2007, John Belgrave, New Zealand Chief Ombudsman, and Mel Smith, the ombudsman of the  Corrections Department, conducted an inquiry into the department's policy for transporting prisoners."Report into Liam Ashley's murder to be released today." TV3. Belgrave described the Corrections' prisoner transport policies as "inhumane", and ordered a review of the system. After publication of the report, Simon Power, a Justice & Corrections spokesman, asked O'Connor to resign due to the shortcomings in his department, though he stopped short of saying that O'Connor was directly responsible for Ashley's death. Power criticized the system for failing to keep Ashley, a first time offender, and Baker, a high-risk prisoner, separated."Report strengthens call for Minister to resign." Scoop. Monday 11 December 2006. Retrieved on 21 June 2009.
In response to Ashley's death New Zealand authorities began testing waist prisoner restraints.
Following his conviction, Baker has remained in the public spotlight after several further violent incidents inside Auckland Prison. In July 2008, while returning to Auckland Prison from Auckland City Hospital after being treated for self-inflicted injuries, Baker pulled a concealed shiv on a prison officer in an attempt to escape. The prison officer received minor injuries and Baker was returned to Auckland Prison.






