[[Arch Coal]]

CATEGORIES: Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Companies established in 1969, Companies established in 1997, Coal companies of the United States, Companies based in St. Louis, Missouri, 1969 establishments in Missouri

Arch Coal is an American coal mining and processing company. The company mines, processes, and markets bituminous and sub-bituminous coal with low sulfur content in the United States. Arch Coal is the second largest supplier of coal in the U.S.   behind Peabody Energy. The company supplies 15% of the domestic market. Demand comes mainly from generators of electricity. | Company profile from Hoover's
Arch Coal operates 32 active mines and controls approximately 5.5 billion tons of proven and probable coal reserves, located in Central Appalachia, the Powder River Basin, Illinois basin and the Western Bituminous regions. The company operates mines in Colorado, Kentucky, Utah, Virginia, West Virginia and Wyoming, and is headquartered in St. Louis, Missouri. The company sells a substantial amount of its coal to producers of electric power, steel producers and industrial facilities.

Key Facts

History

Arch Coal was formed in July 1997 through the merger of publicly traded Ashland Coal, Inc. and privately held Arch Mineral Corporation. Arch Mineral had its origins in 1969, when it was formed as a partnership between Ashland Oil (now Ashland Inc.) and the H.L. With the completion of the merger, Arch became the leading producer of low-sulfur coal in the eastern United States.Ashland Coal and Arch Mineral Are Set to Link
In June 1998, Arch Coal expanded into the western United States with the acquisition of the coal assets of Atlantic Richfield. Included in this transaction were the Black Thunder Coal Mine and Coal Creek mines in the Powder River Basin of Wyoming; the West Elk longwall mine in Gunnison County, Colorado; and a 65% interest in Canyon Fuel Company, which operates three longwall mines in Utah.Chicago Tribune - Arch Coal Expands: Atlantic Richfield Agrees to Sell
In October 1998, Arch added to its Powder River Basin reserves when it was the winning bidder on Thundercloud, a 412-million-ton federal reserve tract adjacent to the Black Thunder mine.Arch Coal Buys Coal Tract in Wyoming
In July 2004, Arch Coal solidified its position as a leading producer of high-Btu, low-sulfur western bituminous coal with the acquisition of the remaining 35% interest in Canyon Fuel Company and its 161-million-ton reserves.News Release - Arch Acquires Remaining 35% Interest in Canyon Fuel Company
In August 2004, Arch again expanded its position in the Powder River Basin with the acquisition of Triton's North Rochelle mine adjacent to Arch's existing Black Thunder operation. By integrating the North Rochelle mine with Black Thunder, Arch created the premier mine in the nation's fastest growing coal supply region.News Release - Arch Coal Completes Acquisition of Triton Coal Company
In September 2004, Arch again added to its Powder River Basin reserves when it was the winning bidder on Little Thunder, a 719-million-ton federal reserve tract adjacent to the Black Thunder Coal Mine. Successful Bidder for Federal Coal Lease in Powder River Basin
In December 2005, Arch Coal sold select eastern assets to Magnum Coal Company to unlock the value of some of its Central Appalachian holdings, sharpened its focus in that region, and strengthened its balance sheet in preparation for future growth.News Release - Arch Coal Sells Select Assets in Central Appalachia to Magnum Coal Company
In August 2006, Arch acquired a one-third interest in Knight Hawk Coal, a growing coal producer in the Illinois Basin.News Release - Arch Coal Acquires Interest in Knight Hawk Coal
In October 2009, Arch acquired Rio Tinto's Jacobs Ranch mine and blended it with Black Thunder Coal Mine in the southern Powder River Basin of Wyoming, creating the single largest coal mining complex in the world.News Release - Arch Coal Completes Acquisition of Jacobs Ranch
In November 2009, Arch acquired the rights to mine 731 million tons of Otter Creek coal reserves in the northern Powder River Basin of Montana.News Release - Arch Coal and Great Northern Properties Enter into Montana Coal Lease on Otter Creek Reserves
On June 15, 2011, Arch acquired International Coal Group (ICG) and cemented its place as a top five global coal supplier and a top 10 metallurgical coal producer and marketer.News Release - Arch Coal Completes Acquisition of International Coal Group
In December 2011, Arch Coal became the successful bidder for a 222 million ton federal coal lease known as the South Hilight tract in the southern Powder River Basin.News Release - Arch Coal Winning Bidder for South Hilight Coal Lease
In June 2013, Arch Coal announced the plan sale of its Canyon Fuel Company LLC subsidiary to Bowie Resources, LLC. Canyon Fuel includes the Sufco, Skyline and Dugout Canyon mines in Utah.Mining Weekly - Arch Coal sells Utah thermal coal minesNews Release - Arch Coal to Divest Non-Core Utah Operations to Bowie Resources for $435 Million in Cash

Politics

Arch Coal PAC is named, along with other major coal producers, as a donor to the 2004 election campaign in West Virginia. 2004 was a record-setting year for donations made by the coal industry.Coal companies are big political donors

Competitive Status

Arch is number 564 in the 2013 Fortune 1000 list.  They are the second largest coal producer in the United States.
Their top competitors include:

Environmental impact

Mountaintop removal in Appalachia

Arch Coal practices mountaintop removal mining, which is controversial because it reduces the height of mountaintops  EPA Environmental Impact Statement
Their West Virginia mining operations in the Appalachian Mountains were the subject of a critical documentary in 2002 on Now with Bill Moyers on PBS.S. News & World Report story "Shear Madness" by Penny Loeb. A 1999 lawsuit brought by the West Virginia Highlands Conservancy, Bragg v. Robertson was the first successful citizen lawsuit to stop Arch's proposed mountaintop removal valley fill. The fill would have buried several miles of stream at Pigeon Roost Hollow near Blair, West Virginia.tlpj.htm
In his ruling for the plaintiffs, Judge Charles H. Haden stated that "If there is any life form that cannot acclimate to life deep in a rubble pile, it is eliminated. No effect on related environmental values is more adverse than obliteration... Because there is no stream, there is no water quality."
As of 2012, the company reported that surface mining in Appalachian mountains accounted for roughly 4 percent of their annual coal production.

Environmental awareness

Arch Coal's subsidiary operations reported a water compliance rate of 99.9 percent over a 10-year period between 2002 and 2012.Arch Coal - Social Responsibility
In 2012, Arch Coal became the first energy company to earn the Conservation Legacy Award from the National Museum of Forest Service History. The Museum of Forest Service History awarded this honor "in recognition of Coal's commitment to the protection of natural resources, wildlife and water quality values during mining and restoration operations." National Museum of Forest Service History salutes Arch Coal - Conservation Legacy Award






