[[Turkish Canadian]]

CATEGORIES: Turkish Canadian, Turkish diaspora by country, Canadian people of Turkish descent, Asian Canadian, Ethnic groups in Canada

A Turkish Canadian ( According to the 2011 Census there were 55,430 Canadians who claimed full or partial Turkish descent.

History

Turks first began to immigrate to Canada in small numbers from the Ottoman Empire. However, significant migration initially began in the late 1950s and early 1960s when the Turkish government encouraged student education abroad..  Furthermore, there have been Turks fleeing from unrest and oppression from Bulgaria and Cyprus who have arrived in Canada as both political and economic refugees.

Ottoman migration

In 1901, Canada had between 300-400 Muslim residents, equally divided between Turks and Syrian Arabs..

Mainland Turkish migration

In the late 1950s and early 1960s the government of Turkey encouraged and financially supported Turkish students to study in Canada. Thus, the early 1960s consisted primarily of students and professionals, especially doctors and engineers. Significant Turkish immigration began during the 1960s and 1970s; most Turks went to Canada for educational and economic opportunities. According to the 1972 Canada census there was 9,342 Turkish-born persons living in Canada.

Bulgarian Turks migration

In 1989, Turks in Bulgaria were fleeing from the unrest and oppression of the Bulgarian government; many have arrived in Canada as political and economic refugees.

Turkish Cypriot migration

During the 1950s, Turkish Cypriots started to leave Cyprus for political reasons when the Greek Cypriots held a referendum in which 95.7% of Greek Cypriots  supported enosis, the union of Cyprus with Greece. By 1963, inter-ethnic fighting broke out in Cyprus, with Turkish Cypriots bearing the heavier cost in terms of casualties and some 25,000 Turkish Cypriots became internally displaced accounting to about a fifth of their population..

Demographics

According to the Canada 2006 Census, there was 43,700 Turks living in Canada; the majority were concentrated in Toronto (14,970), Montreal (10,345), Vancouver (3,380), Ottawa (2,455), Hamilton (1,590), Calgary (1,305), and Edmonton (1,250). However, the actual number of Turkish Canadians is believed to be considerably higher, as ethnic Turks have also immigrated to Canada via Bulgaria, Cyprus, and the Republic of Macedonia. Statistics on Bulgarian Turks, Turkish Cypriots, and Macedonian Turks present particular problems because it is unclear how many have immigrated to Canada; they are recorded by their citizenship (i.e. "Bulgarian", "Cypriot", and "Macedonian") rather than their ethnicity.

Turkish settlement

Culture

Religion

The vast majority of Turkish Canadians are Sunni Muslims, whilst the remaining people generally do not have any religious affiliation. Prior to 1980, Turkish Canadian immigrants were from both urban and secular backgrounds. Religion remained an affair of the private conscience. In May 1983, the "Canadian Turkish Islamic Heritage Association" (Kanada Türk Islam Kültür Derneği) was established, followed by the "Canadian Turkish Islamic Trust" (Kanada Türk Islam Vakfi) in April 1987.

Festivals

Media

Social Media

Turkish newspapers

Sports

The Federation of Canadian Turkish Associations, its members and democratically elected civil societies in Canada

Since the 1960s, many community organizations have appeared representing various groups of Turkish immigrants. The various associations across Canada are currently represented by the "Federation of Canadian Turkish Associations", an umbrella organization founded in the mid-1980s. The federation serves as a referral and communications centre for news of Turkey, local events, business and governmental inquiries, and intergroup relations.  More recently, a similar Turkish Cypriot umbrella group, the "Federation of Turkish Cypriot Associations of Canada", was established; the "Canadian Association for Solidarity of Turks from Bulgaria" also forms part of the federation.
The Federation of Canadian Turkish Associations is an umbrella organization representing 17 member associations from Victoria BC to Quebec, which include approximately 50,000 Canadians of Turkish origin. It supports and encourages activities that deal with important cultural, economic, educational, historical, social and religious issues that relate to the Turkish Community in Canada.
k-w Turkish cultural association

Notable people

File:Ennis Esmer cropped.jpg|Ennis Esmer
File:KARADEMIR 2008SA by Carmichael.jpg|Tuğba Karademir
File:Erdem.jpg|Erdem Moralıoğlu
File:Mtuncalinip.jpg|Murat Tuncali





Bibliography

|place=|publisher=BRILL|isbn=90-04-13322-4|ref=harv}}




