[[Ida Annah Ryan]]

CATEGORIES: 1873 births, 1960 deaths, American architects, Women architects, People from Orlando, Florida, Massachusetts Institute of Technology alumni

Ida Annah Ryan was a pioneering United States woman architect. She was born on November 4, 1873 at Waltham, MA, one of five children of Albert Morse Ryan and Carrie S. Jameson.  Albert Morse Ryan was a Waltham city employee and historian who also ran a milk business.  During her Waltham High School years, Ryan was first attracted to the study of architectural design.

Architecture Studies at MIT

Ida A. Ryan entered architecture studies at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), which offered the first collegiate architectural studies program in the United States. There she studied with the noted architecture professor Constant-Désiré Despradelle. In 1905, Ryan received the Rotch Prize of two hundred dollars for the regular student making the best record during their four years of studies."Against all Odds: MIT's Pioneering Women of Landscape Architecture". by Eran Ben-Joseph, Holly D. Ben-Joseph, Anne C. Dodge, November 2006  
At the end of her term at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Ryan's junior design received the first of the first four prizes.  Thereafter, she was invited to compete with only senior and fifth class men in the Junior Beaux Arts contest, in which she won second prize for a grand plan, elevation and section of a public market. L— NO. 2, Whole NO. 294. Page 200.  A photograph of Ida Annah Ryan accompanies the article.
In 1904, Ryan showed a project for "A Proposed City Hall" at the Boston Architectural Club's annual exhibition.Layout for a Model New England Town, by Ida Annah Ryan  In 1907, Ryan showed five examples of her work at the Boston Architectural Club Exhibition: Camp at Litchfield, NH, Cottage Made From a Stable, Sewage Pump House at Crescent Park, Cottage at Violet Hill, Waltham, and Inexpensive Two-Family House at Waltham Highlands. Cloud Florida; located at 228-240 Hammond Street the double-house is still in good condition more than a hundred years later.
Ryan became the first woman to earn a master of science degree from MIT and also the first woman in the United States to receive a masters degree in architecture.  In 1907 Ryan was awarded a traveling scholarship of $1200, the highest prize that the Architectural Department could confer on one of its graduates.   This enabled her to spend a year in Europe engaged in the study of architecture.  Ryan spent the greater part of the time in Spain and Italy, making her headquarters in Naples."The Tech" (MIT), Boston MA, October 7, 1907
While at MIT Ryan was a member of Cleophan a club for women students that also included Matilda A. Fraser and Harriet F. Locke (see below). 106

Architectural Practice in Waltham, Massachusetts

Ryan launched the first women's architectural practice in the United States in Waltham, showing a particular concern for the design of modest housing.  In 1909,The American Architect from the Colonial Era to the Present, by Cecil D. Elliott, p. 139 Ryan added fellow MIT graduate and women's rights activist Florence Luscomb to her practice, making this one of the first all-women's architectural practices in the United States."The Tech" (MIT), Boston MA, February 12, 1913  
Typical of her work during this time is the house that Ryan designed for her nephew as a wedding present in 1914, located at 19 Boynton Street, Waltham."Waltham", by Melissa Mannon, page 104  The -storey smooth stucco residence turns its gable-end to the street. A small, 1-storey covered porch at the entrance is distinguished by an arched roof reminiscent of the work of George Washington Maher in the Chicago suburbs.  Windows are placed singly, in pairs, or, as in the gable, in threes, while sill heights vary according to the interior needs.  Ryan would continue the use of many of these distinctive elements in her work in Florida.  During her Waltham practice Ryan also designed the spacious, well-appointed home of industrialist B. C. Ames (1917). Swett, page 217  Many of the most attractive Waltham homes of that era were said to have been designed by Ryan. Association of Class Secretaries, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Alumni Association, MIT Alumni/ae Association, p. 537  Also of note is the apartment building at 19 Hammond Street, Waltham; a Ryan remodeling of a barn once owned by David Smith.  Her address was, for a time, at this building.Waltham, by Melissa Mannon, page 55    
While associated with fellow MIT graduate Harriet F. Locke (1870–1919),Technology Architectural Record, Volumes 1-2, by Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Dept. of Architecture, p. 32 Ryan was responsible for the design of Memorial Hospital, Nashua, New Hampshire, circa 1915, a 3-storey stuccoed symmetrical building with recessed porches, of a simplified Grecian design, closely anticipating the Amherst Apartments in Orlando.  The intertwined "cross and x" used for the porch railings would appear later in the Veteran's Memorial Library windows and ventilation grills.  The hospital featured a roof parapet that prefigures Ryan and Roberts' work in Florida, as well.legendsofamerica.jpg
Ryan was active in the women's suffrage movement, a member of the Waltham Equal Suffrage League and the Political Equality Association of Massachusetts.  Her recreational activities included camping and traveling. 709  When the United States entered World War I, Ryan gave her services without charge in designing and decorating the Army and Navy Canteen on Boston Common. Association of Class Secretaries, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Alumni Association, p. 537  Ryan offered her services to the government in Washington, D.C., and was the first woman employed in the War Department (in the gun carriage section). Association of Class Secretaries, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Alumni Association, MIT Alumni/ae Association, p. 537
Ryan began an association with the Central Florida area while still in practice in Massachusetts, designing there the Atlantic Coast Line railroad depot in St. Cloud (1917)Railroad Depots of Central Florida, by Michael Mulligan, p. 46 and the Unity Chapel of Orlando (built in 1913, remodeled by Ryan and Roberts circa 1920).  Throughout this time, Ryan's many attempts to join the Massachusetts chapter of the American Institute of Architects were rebuffed solely because she was a woman.

Architectural Practice in Central Florida

As a result of this and of the building slump caused by the First World War, Ida A. Ryan moved to Central Florida and began an architecture practice based in Orlando, Florida.   She became Orlando's first female architect.  In 1918–1919, Frederick H. Trimble employed Ryan as designing architect in his firm. 482
Soon thereafter Ryan was joined by Isabel Roberts (1871–1955) who had been a designer-draftsman in the Oak Park Studio of Frank Lloyd Wright and the co-owner, with her mother Mary, of the Isabel Roberts House.  Ida Annah Ryan and Isabel Roberts formed an architectural practice called "Ryan and Roberts" which was among no more than twelve firms active in Orlando in the 1920s.  Their business is listed under the heading "Architects" as "Ryan and Roberts" in the 1926 and in the 1927 Orlando City Directories, at 240 S. Orange St. and the Kenilworth Terrace address. One of only 10 architectural firms listed in 1926, the others including: Frank L. Bodine, Fred E. Field, David Hyer, Murry S. King, George E. Krug, Howard M. Reynolds, Frederick H. Trimble and Percy P. Turner.  And one of 12 firms so listed in Orlando in 1927, which included Maurice E. Kressly.
Among the works of "Ryan and Roberts" are:Photos of their work may be seen at: 
Ida A. Ryan worked with builder Samuel (Sam) Stoltz who created fantasy architecture with original murals in story book settings in Orlando, Mount Plymouth, and Windermere, Florida.  Ryan lived in Orlando until her death, in mid-February 1950 after an illness of several years, during which she was cared for by Isabel Roberts.  According to her wishes, Ryan was buried in her hometown of Waltham, MA.





See also: Ryan, Ida Annah; MIT Museum biographical file contents: Images; biographical information; correspondence.


