[[Street Fighter EX3]]

CATEGORIES: 2000 video games, 3D fighting games, Arika games, PlayStation 2 games, PlayStation 2-only games, Street Fighter games, Video game spin-offs, Video games with 2.5D graphics

 is the third console installment in the Street Fighter EX series developed by Arika and published by Capcom. The game was released in 2000 for the PlayStation 2 as launch title in Japan and North America, and subsequently released in Europe in 2001.Street Fighter EX3 Info - Street Fighter EX3 Information - Street Fighter EX3 Release Date

Gameplay

Mechanics

Street Fighter EX3 follows a similar gameplay system to its predecessor Street Fighter EX2 Plus with characters being able to pull off similar moves like Super Combos and Meteor Combos. However, a difference here is that the "Guard Break" system from the previous installments has been removed and replaced with a similar system called the "Surprise Blow" ("Hard Attack" in Japan), which does not use up energy stored in "super bars," although the attack can be blocked (only when standing).
Other additions are the "Critical Parade" (calling out a tag-partner to simultaneously battle your opponent for a limited time) and "Momentary Combo" (following a special attack with another). Some characters received new moves, such as Skullomania having a vertical projectile.
The core gameplay is essentially the same as previous installments, however EX3 features tag battles, similar to Tekken Tag Tournament, allowing players to switch between characters, and allowing greater combination possibilities.

Modes

In the single-player mode, the player can assemble a team of up to four characters, and can choose the next opponent, as is possible in Street Fighter III. The bonus stage is a simplified version of the beat 'em up genre. In this mode, there are also incidental missions, which the player can complete in order to gain platinum, gold, silver and bronze trophies, which in turn unlock surprises.
In the Arena Mode, dramatic battles were possible, with 2-on-2 or 3-on-1, with flexibility via a multitap over each character being controlled by human or computer. Whereas the Original Mode uses new music based on the background stage, the VS and Team Battle Modes reuse themes from earlier games, which are based on the chosen characters.
In Character Edit Mode, the player can complete a series of challenges with the character Ace, and earn experience points, which can then be used to obtain new special moves and super combos for the character, which can then be applied to Ace to create a custom move list. A configuration example would be Sonic Boom, Shoryuken and Spinning Piledriver, as used by Seth in Street Fighter IV. This customized character could then be used in the other game modes.

Characters

Multiple costumes are available for each character, depending on the button used on the character select screen.
Initially available
Unlockables
Hidden
CPU - Controlled

Reception

Street Fighter EX3 received generally positive reviews from gaming critics. However it has gotten mixed reception among Street Fighter fans. Gamecritics gave the game 7.5/10, stating that it had "a group of pleasantly complex battlers that are very distinct in both visual and play design. Adding variety and flavor to the mix, the variances in philosophy and conceptualization are extremely refreshing", adding that the "interestingly offbeat touches are far superior to the dull and ugly side of the spectrum found in Street Fighter III"
cnet gave the game 7.4/10, acknowledging that the game was a launch title by stating "The tag-team fighting adds a nice new element that the previous game totally lacked. EX3 may feel a bit rushed in some spots, but overall it's a fun and great-looking fighting game that won't disappoint".
In Japan, Famitsu magazine scored the game a 32 out of 40.プレイステーション2 - ストリートファイターEX3. Weekly Famitsu. No.915 Pt.2. Pg.56. 30 June 2006. In its week of release, the game made the top 10 in the Japanese sales charts, with 207,000 copies.
Spong said it was "a game of skill, practice and timing", and that it had nice features and fantastic special effects. They summarised it as "one game that deserves taking a look at whether you are a fan of the series or not".
Negative criticism has come from ScrewAttack which ranked Street Fighter EX3 number 4 (along with Street Fighter: The Movie home video game) on ScrewAttack's "Top 10 Worst Fighting Games".

Notes


