[[Patrick Utomi]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, Living people, Igbo educators, Candidates for President of Nigeria, University of Nigeria, Nsukka alumni, Christ the King College, Onitsha alumni

Patrick Okedinachi Utomi (born February 6, 1956) One of Nigeria's prominent professors of political economy and management expert, and the African Democratic Congress party. He is presently a professor at Lagos Business School, He has served in Senior positions in Government, as an Adviser to the president of Nigeria, the Private Sector, as Chief Operating Officer for Volkswagen of Nigeria and in academia.

Background

Patrick Utomi was Born in Kaduna he hails from Ibussa in Oshimili North Local Government Area of Delta State. He had his primary education at St. Thomas, Kano 1960-62; Our Lady of Fatima, Gusau 1962-1966; Christ the King College, Onitsha and Loyola College, Ibadan, finishing his secondary education at the age of 15. The entry age for University education was 17, so he enrolled at the Federal School of Arts and Science in the interim. He later got admission into the University of Nigeria, Nsukka in 1973 to study Mass Communication. Patrick utomi graduated from university of Nigeria Nsuka in 1977, He attended Bloomington, USA, where he got his Ph.D. MPA, MA. Appointed professor of the social and Political Economy Environment of Business and Pioneer Entrepreneurship in 2003. he has been a scholar-in-residence at the Harvard Business School and the American University in Washington, D.C.

Career

Within a few months of his return to Nigeria from Bloomington, United States where he did graduate work, Pat got enlisted by the former Vice-president, Alex Ekwueme to provide consultancy on some public policy papers. Soon after, he was appointed Special Assistant by former president, Shehu Shagari a position he lost following the military coup of December 1983, which terminated the Second Republic .
Following the demise of the Second Republic, he became chairman/chief executive officer, Utomapp Holdings Limited, 1984–86,and assistant general manager, corporate affairs, Volkswagen of Nigeria Limited, Lagos, 1983-93.
Utomi co-founded the Lagos Business School, now Pan African University in 1993 with the Opus Dei, a Catholic religious group. He was scholar-in-residence, American University, Washington DC, USA, 1996 and research associate, the Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, 1996. (Lagos Business school started operating in 1991)
He also belongs to many professional bodies. He is a member, Nigerian Institute of Public Relations, NIPR, Institute of Directors, IOD, Nigeria Economic Summit Group and Nigeria Economic Society.
He coordinated the establishment of several civil society groups on good governance and accountability such as Transparency in Nigeria,The Centre for Values in Leadership, The Concerned Professionals, and the Restoration Group. In the business sphere, Utomi was the vice-chairman, Platinum–Habib Bank. He is an accomplished columnist, and chairman, BusinessDay Media Limited and creator of Patito's Gang, a television talk show.
He has served on the key apex private sector associations including the Lagos Chamber of Commerce and Industry (LCCI); The National Council of the Manufacturers Association of Nigeria; and the Nigeria Employers Consultative Association (NECA). He is active on the International speaking circuit, especially on the subjects of Growth economics, comparative development, Leadership, the Curse of Oil and China's Economic surge and growing influence in Africa.  He has collaborated fairly frequently with the center for strategic and international studies (CSIS) in Washington, and Chatham House, in the UK.  He has also written commissioned papers for the UKs DFID including the latest collaboration with Colleagues from Oxford on the Political Economy of growth in Nigeria. (2006).
Utomi also ran a failed attempt for presidency of Nigeria in 2011.

Honors and awards

Books and selected publications

Keynotes speeches

Keynote speaker at the Annual Conferences of the following:
Has been guest speaker at the annual Business Club meetings of the Africa Business Club at the Harvard Business School, Wharton, Kellogg School and the TedxEuston at the University of London.




