[[2008–09 Tottenham Hotspur F.C. season]]

CATEGORIES: Tottenham Hotspur F.C. seasons, English football clubs 2008–09 season

The 2008–09 season was Tottenham Hotspur 17th season in the Premier League, their 30th successive season in the top division of the English football league system and the 126th year of their history.
After finishing 11th in the 2007–08 season, Tottenham began the season under the leadership of Spaniard Juande Ramos, drafted in to replace Martin Jol mid-way through the previous season. However, after suffering the worst start of a league season in Tottenham's history, with no wins in eight league games and only two points, Ramos was sacked and replaced by seasoned manager Harry Redknapp, who quickly eliminated the continental structure that the club had established over the past seasons. Tottenham's league form improved and mainly remained positive with the final position of eighth a far cry from the relegation places Tottenham had occupied throughout the campaign. Spurs also reached the final of the League Cup, and, as the reigning champions, faced league leaders Manchester United but lost 4–1 on penalties. With an average attendance of 35,929, Tottenham had the ninth highest attendance in the Premier League.
Tottenham drafted in a total of 15 players through transfers and sold 19 players during the combined summer and winter transfer windows.

Season 2008–2009

Pre-season

=Transfers=

At the end of the 2007–08 season, which saw Tottenham finish 11th in the Premier League, the club announced the signing of Croatian playmaker Luka Modrić
Following comments made by Sir Alex Ferguson indicating confidence over signing Dimitar Berbatov even though negotiations were not yet underway, the club issued a press statement on 18 July 2008 on behalf of Daniel Levy, saying that both Manchester United and Liverpool had been reported to the Premier League over comments their respective managers had made which were seen as unsettling both Dimitar Berbatov and Irish striker Robbie Keane with a view of enticing them away from Tottenham. Levy said of United boss Alex Ferguson:
"Today's public comments by Manchester United's manager, announcing that he has made an offer for Dimitar and is confident that the deal will go through with time working in their favour, is a blatant example of sheer arrogance and interference with one of our players. It is also probably one of the worst offences by any manager in the Premier League to date and is unbelievably hypocritical given his recent comments in respect of Cristiano Ronaldo and Real Madrid.
I have absolutely no wish to sell either player and to date we have not accepted any offer for either. However, when a player's head is turned and their commitment is absent, particularly when they occupy key positions such as that of striker, they become a negative influence in a team dressing room in which they were once a positive addition and influence. This is the situation we now have on our hands, with both Dimitar and Robbie having made it clear that they wish to leave for Manchester United and Liverpool respectively."
Throughout July, Tottenham parted ways with many first team members of the squad, On 23 July 2008, it was announced that the club had sold the services of Teemu Tainio. The Finnish midfielder joined Sunderland on a three-year contract,
On 28 July 2008, Tottenham agreed to sell Robbie Keane to Liverpool for a
total that could amount to £20.3 million. With the sale, Tottenham also agreed to drop its official
complaint to the Premier League about Liverpool's pursuit of Keane after Liverpool issued a formal apology and made a donation to the Tottenham Foundation.
Levy issued a statement coinciding with the confirmation of the Keane transfer:
"I was incredibly disappointed when I first heard, not only that Liverpool had been working behind the scenes to bring Robbie to Anfield, but that Robbie himself wanted to go and he submitted a transfer request to this effect. I have already made my opinion clear on the nature of this transaction. I don't regard it as a transfer deal – that is something which happens between two clubs when they both agree to trade – this is very much an enforced sale, for which we have agreed a sum of £19m as compensation plus a potential further £1.3m in additional compensation."
On 30 July 2008, French midfielder Steed Malbranque became the third player in a week to leave, following Tainio and Chimbonda to Sunderland for a fee of £7.8 million. Later the same day, Tottenham announced they had reached agreement with Blackburn Rovers for the transfer of David Bentley to the club for £15 million.
Totttenham made their first transfer move in the month of August with the signing of veteran goalkeeper César Sánchez from Real Zaragoza on 8 August 2008. The deal was initially a season-long loan with the permanent signing being completed at the end of the 2008–09 season.

=Friendlies=

As part of their pre-season preparations, Tottenham held a training camp in Spain, along with numerous friendlies, in July.
Tottenham returned to England to play Norwich City, recovering from being a goal down to win 5–1, with Darren Bent netting four of the strikes.
Tottenham finished their pre-season preparations with a 5–0 victory over Serie A giants Roma, which ensured they stayed unbeaten throughout the period, scoring thirty-three goals and conceding five in a total of seven games, with Darren Bent scoring 13 times.

August

Tottenham Hotspur's league season got off to a bad start with a 2–1 loss to Middlesbrough at the Riverside Stadium,

September

Tottenham's first match in September led to another 2–1 loss, at home to Aston Villa.

October

October started with progression to the group stages of the UEFA Cup for Tottenham with a 1–1 draw in Poland against Wisła Kraków in their second leg tie,
On Saturday 25 October, the club announced the departure, with immediate effect, of Sporting Director Damien Comolli, Head Coach Juande Ramos and First Team Coaches, Marcos Álvarez and Gus Poyet, It was announced, within hours, that the club had agreed a deal worth £5 million with Portsmouth F.C, allowing manager Harry Redknapp to become the boss at Tottenham.
Redknapp was unveiled as Tottenham manager the same day before the home match against Bolton Wanderers F.C. and gave the team talk, although the team itself was selected by Clive Allen and Alex Inglethorpe. Tottenham eased to their first league win of the season, with Roman Pavlyuchenko scoring his first Premier League goal.
Tottenham then faced bitter rivals Arsenal in the latest installment of the North London derby, the match ended 4–4 and viewed as one of the best games in the long history of the North London derby. Tottenham took the lead with a stunning David Bentley volley from 35-yards, Arsenal then responded with a Mikaël Silvestre header and found themselves 3–1 ahead deep inside the second half, Darren Bent made it 3–2 before Robin Van Persie seemingly wrapped up the points making it 4–2 to Arsenal. With 5 minutes left, Jermaine Jenas made it 4–3 after capitalising on a Gaël Clichy slip, and then Aaron Lennon grabbed a point for Tottenham when he, four minutes into stoppage time, made it 4–4 with a tap-in.

November

Tottenham's revitalised form continued into November with a win over league leaders Liverpool,
The first away win for Tottenham's season came on 9 November 2008, with a 2–1 win over Manchester City and Darren bent scoring his 5th goal in two games,
Tottenham's six game unbeaten run ended with a 2–1 loss to Fulham, A mistake from Heurelho Gomes helped Fulham into a two goal lead before Fraizer Campbell pulled one back.
November ended with a 1–0 home loss to Everton, Steven Pienaar's deflected effort, later attributed as a Vedran Ćorluka own goal, was enough to get the victory for Everton.

December

Tottenham began December by putting themselves into the semi-finals of the League Cup with a 2–1 win over Watford F.C, Watford had taken the lead through a Tamas Priskin strike but a penalty from Roman Pavlyuchenko and a goal from Darren Bent earned Spurs a tie versus Burnley in the semi-final.
Spurs then faced defending league champions Manchester United in a home tie which ended in a 0–0 draw, which meant that Tottenham were now unbeaten against the Premier League Top Four, they proceeded to the next stage in runner up place to face Champions league drop-outs Shakhtar Donetsk.
Tottenham faced Newcastle United at St James' Park in a losing 2–1 effort, The match was heading for a 1–1 draw until Damien Duff scored in stoppage time to give Newcastle the three points, five days later,
December ended the same as November with a loss, this time to newly promoted West Brom. The 2–0 win was controversial however, as defender Michael Dawson claimed that he had been fouled by Albion striker Roman Bednar while the latter scored the opening goal. The goal stood and Tottenham ended the year still very much in a relegation battle.

January Transfer Window

With the January transfer window opening on 1 January, Tottenham made movement in the market straight away. On 6 January 2009, Jermain Defoe returned to the club from Portsmouth in a deal worth an initial £9million with extras and the writing off of past transfer fees in Pedro Mendes and Defoe himself meant the media announced the fee £15 million,
The departures in January saw Andy Barcham made his loan move to Gillingham permanent for an undisclosed fee,

January

January began well for Tottenham, advancing to the next round of the FA Cup with a 3–1 win over Wigan
Tottenham responded seven days later with a 1–1 draw against Portsmouth, at White Hart Lane, The match had massive publicity because of the return of Harry Redknapp and Jermain Defoe,
Tottenham, then, faced Burnley in the League Cup semi-final second leg. Burnley could only progress by winning by three clear goals and it was widely seen as unlikely that Burnley would offer much in terms of opposition, however after 90 minutes, goals from Robbie Blake, Chris McCann and Jay Rodriguez took the game to extra time and if they held on they would progress thanks to the away goals rule, but facing elimination with under three minutes left to play, goals from Pavlyuchenko and Defoe saw Spurs progress to the final 6–4 on aggregate.
Three days after the extra-time tie, Tottenham faced Manchester United in the FA Cup, losing 2–1, having taken the lead through Pavlyuchenko before a deflected goal from Paul Scholes and a strike from Dimitar Berbatov ended the FA challenge for the 2008–09 season.
Thre days later, Tottenham got their first league win in 6 games with a 3–1 home win over Stoke, brilliant play saw Spurs take a 3–0 lead in the first 30 minutes before James Beattie scored a consolation goal for the visitors,

February

February for Tottenham Hotspur started with a North London derby against fierce rivals, Arsenal. The highly anticipated match ended 0–0 with Spurs enjoying the dominant moments in the game thanks, in part, to the first half sending off of Arsenal midfielder, Emmanuel Eboué.
Tottenham ended the February set of fixtures only three days later with the return leg of Shakhtar Donetsk, Tottenham again fielded a severely weakened team, due in part to the 2009 Football League Cup Final being only three days away, and earned a valiant 1–1 draw, with Giovani Dos Santos scoring his first Tottenham goal before a late Fernandinho goal sealed the leg for Shakhtar in the dying moments to eliminate Spurs from the European competition.

March

March began with the 2009 League Cup Final against Manchester United, the frantic final ended 0–0 and resulted in a penalty shoot-out, which Manchester United won 4–1 to win the first major trophy of the 2008–09 season.
Tottenham rebounded from the heart-break of the final loss,
Tottenham faced Chelsea in the final match in March at White Hart Lane, In a thrilling London derby, Tottenham took maximum points, thanks to a second half goal from Croatian Luka Modrić and a much improved performance by goalkeeper Heurelho Gomes, putting Tottenham only three points behind a European place.
March ended with three call-ups into the England squad with Aaron Lennon in, thanks to being in mercurial form during the month of March and Ledley King earning a shock call-up, however with the constant injury situation surrounding the goliath defender, King had to pull out three days later. Darren Bent also received a call up, on 28 March, after an injury to Carlton Cole ruled him out of the world cup qualifier against Ukraine.

April

The penultimate month of the Premier League season began with a trip to Ewood Park, on 4 April, to face relegation-battlers Blackburn Rovers, Tottenham took the lead through a Robbie Keane penalty and led until the 80th minute, when the contentious sending off of Wilson Palacios swung the game back in Blackburn's favour and two late goals from Benni McCarthy and Andre Ooijer gave the three points to the home side.
Seven days later, Tottenham faced West Ham in a London Derby, the match ended 1–0 thanks to a solo effort from the returning Roman Pavlyuchenko.
April ended with a defeat to league leaders, Manchester United, At Old Trafford. Tottenham led 2–0 through two quick-fire strikes from Darren Bent and Luka Modrić, but in the second half, Manchester United were awarded a penalty by referee Howard Webb, and went on to win the game 5–2. Webb later admitted that he had got the penalty decision wrong. The loss damaged Tottenham's hopes of 7th place.

May

Against the norm, there were four Premier league fixtures in May. Tottenham took on relegation strugglers West Bromwich Albion at White Hart Lane, looking to bounce back from the heavy defeat at Old Trafford. The game was settled by a well placed Jermaine Jenas effort from just outside the area on the stroke of half time, and secured Spurs' fifth home win a row. It was their fourth 1–0 win at home in a row, and sixth consecutive home clean sheet, leaving them on the verge of a club record of the fewest goals conceded at home in a season.
A week later, Tottenham travelled to Goodison Park, The game was marred by the pre-match news that the brother of Wilson Palacios had been confirmed dead in his native Honduras, causing him to leave the team hotel hours before the game.
The following Saturday, Tottenham went into their final home game of the season against Manchester City, with a target of setting a new club record for goals conceded at home. They simply had to concede no more than a goal to break the record of eleven which had stood since 1920. Spurs could also end Manchester City's hopes of Europe next season, while increasing their own slender hopes. Tottenham took the lead in the 29th minute, when Jermain Defoe improvised with a back heel from close range from Tom Huddlestone's cross. In the second half Spurs were forced to rue their earlier missed chances when Valeri Bojinov grabbed an equaliser, in the process scoring the first away goal at the lane since James Beattie's consolation in January. A draw was looking increasingly likely until Fraizer Campbell was brought down to win a penalty, which was converted by Robbie Keane. The game finished 2–1 and Tottenham, having conceded just ten goals at home all season, broke their own club record and ensured ending the season with the best home defence in the 2008–09 season.
Tottenham went into the final game of the season at Anfield, with a small chance of making 7th place and Europe, needing to beat Liverpool, and hoping that Everton could get three points against Fulham at Craven Cottage. Everton won 2–0. Fernando Torres and an own goal by Alan Hutton had Liverpool 2–0 up. A goal from Robbie Keane on his return to Anfield gave Tottenham a glimmer of hope, but just three minutes later allowed Yossi Benayoun to sew the game up for the home team with Tottenham Hotspur finishing the season with a 3–1 loss.
Spurs finished the season in 8th place, a turnaround in form pushing them into higher reaches of the league, when they were as low as 19th place as recently as January and 20th for a part of the season. Having made their worst start to a league season in their 126 year history, Tottenham made a three place improvement on the 2007–08 season.

Premier League table

Transfers

In

|}

Out

|}

Trials

Loan arrivals

Loan departures

Season 2008–09 Long-term injury list

Match results

Pre-season

Premier League

FA Cup

League Cup

UEFA Cup

=UEFA Cup First Round=

=UEFA Cup Group Stage=

=UEFA Cup Group Table=

=UEFA Cup Round of 32=

Manager Statistics

Player statistics

Top scorer

Most appearances




