[[Call centre]]

CATEGORIES: Computer telephony integration, Marketing, Telephony

A call centre or call center is a centralised office used for the purpose of receiving or transmitting a large volume of requests by telephone.  An inbound call centre is operated by a company to administer incoming product support or information inquiries from consumers.  Outbound call centers are operated for telemarketing, solicitation of charitable or political donations, debt collection and market research. In addition to a call centre, collective handling of letter, fax, live support software, social media and e-mail at one location is known as a contact centre.
A call centre is operated through an extensive open workspace for call centre agents, with work stations that include a computer for each agent, a telephone set/headset connected to a telecom switch, and one or more supervisor stations. It can be independently operated or networked with additional centres, often linked to a corporate computer network, including mainframes, microcomputers and LANs. Increasingly, the voice and data pathways into the centre are linked through a set of new technologies called computer telephony integration (CTI).
A contact centre, also known as customer interaction centre is a central point of any organization from which all customer contacts are managed. Through contact centres, valuable information about company are routed to appropriate people, contacts to be tracked and data to be gathered. It is generally a part of company's customer relationship management (CRM). Today, customers contact companies by telephone, email, online chat, fax, and instant message.

Technology

Call centre technology is subject to improvements and innovations. Some of these technologies include speech recognition software to allow computers to handle first level of customer support, text mining and natural language processing to allow better customer handling, agent training by automatic mining of best practices from past interactions, support automation and many other technologies to improve agent productivity and customer satisfaction. both for inbound and outbound campaigns, whereby inbound calls are intended to quickly land with the appropriate agent to handle the task, whilst minimizing wait times and long lists of irrelevant options for people calling in, as well as for outbound calls, where lead selection allows management to designate what type of leads go to which agent based on factors including skill, socioeconomic factors and past performance and percentage likelihood of closing a sale per lead.
The concept of the Universal Queue standardizes the processing of communications across multiple technologies such as fax, phone, and email whilst the concept of a Virtual queue provides callers with an alternative to waiting on hold when no agents are available to handle inbound call demand. Note: no handset, phone is for headset use only.
Premise-based Call Centre Technology
Historically, call centres have been built on PBX equipment that is owned and hosted by the call centre operator. The PBX might provide functions such as Automatic Call Distribution, Interactive Voice Response, and skills-based routing. The call centre operator would be responsible for the maintenance of the equipment and necessary software upgrades as released by the vendor.
Virtual Call Centre Technology
With the advent of the Software as a service technology delivery model, the virtual call centre has emerged. In a virtual call centre model, the call centres operator does not own, operate or host the equipment that the call centre runs on. Instead, they subscribe to a service for a monthly or annual fee with a service provider that hosts the call centre telephony equipment in their own data centre. Such a vendor may host many call centres on their equipment. Agents connect to the vendor's equipment through traditional PSTN telephone lines, or over Voice over IP. Calls to and from prospects or contacts originate from or terminate at the vendor's data centre, rather than at the call centre operator's premise. The vendor's telephony equipment then connects the calls to the call centre operator's agents.
Virtual Call Centre Technology allows people to work from home, instead of in a traditional, centralised, call centre location, which increasingly allows people with physical or other disabilities that prevent them from leaving the house, to work. thumb|A predictive dialing system running out of phone numbers.
Cloud Computing for Call Centres
Cloud computing for call centres extends cloud computing to Software as a service, or hosted, on-demand call centres by providing application programming interfaces (APIs) on the call centre cloud computing platform that allow call centre functionality to be integrated with cloud-based Customer relationship management, such as Salesforce.
The APIs typically provide programmatic access to two key groups of features in the call centre platform:
Computer Telephony Integration (CTI) APIs provide developers with access to basic telephony controls and sophisticated call handling on the call centre platform from a separate application.
Configuration APIs provide programmatic control of administrative functions of the call centre platform which are typically accessed by a human administrator through a Graphical User Interface (GUI).

Dynamics

Calls may be inbound or outbound. Inbound calls are made by consumers, for example to obtain information, report a malfunction, or ask for help. In contrast, outbound calls are made by agents to consumers, usually for sales purposes (telemarketing). One can combine inbound and outbound campaigns.
Call centre staff are often organised into a multi-tier support system for more efficient handling of calls.  The first tier consists of operators, who initially answer calls and provide general information. If a caller requires more assistance, the call is forwarded to the second tier (in the appropriate department depending on the nature of the call). In some cases, there are three or more tiers of support staff. Typically the third tier of support is formed of product engineers/developers or highly skilled technical support staff for the product.
Some critics of call centres argue that the work atmosphere in such an environment is dehumanising.
Telephone calls are easily monitored, and the close monitoring of call centre staff is widespread. Most call centres provide electronic reports that outline performance metrics, quarterly highlights and other information about the calls made and received.

Varieties

Some variations of call centre models are listed below:

Criticism and performance

Criticisms of call centres generally follow a number of common themes, from both callers and call centre staff. From callers, common criticisms include:
Common criticisms from staff include:
The net-net of these concerns is that call centres as a business process exhibit levels of variability. The experience a customer gets and the results a company achieves on a given call are almost totally dependent on the quality of the agent answering that call., Coffman, C., Harter, J. (2005) Manage Your Human Sigma, Harvard Business Review Call centres are beginning to address this by using Agent-assisted Automation to standardise the process all agents use. Anton and Phelps have provided a detailed HOWTO to conduct the performance evaluation of the business,[ref]
</ref> whereas others are using various scientific technologies to do the jobs.<ref name = dmaa >
</ref><ref name=epcs>
</ref><ref name=pacc>
</ref> However, more popular alternatives are using personality and skill based approaches.<ref name=uppoc>
</ref><ref name=paaic>
</ref> The various challenges encountered by call operators are discussed by several authors.<ref name=wcie>
</ref><ref name=ircc>
</ref><ref name=istc>
</ref><ref name=wpmo>
</ref><ref name=drvda>
</ref>

Outsourced bureau contact centres

Outsourced bureau contact centres are a model of contact centre that provide services on a "pay per use" model. The overheads of the contact centre are shared by many clients thereby supporting a very cost effective model especially for low volumes of calls.
Bureau contact centres provide an opportunity for:

Unionization

Unions in North America have made some effort to gain members from this sector,

Mathematical theory

Queueing theory is a branch of mathematics in which models of service systems have been developed. A call centre can be seen as a queueing network and results from queueing theory such as the probability an arriving customer needs to wait before starting service useful for provisioning capacity.
Call centre operations have been supported by mathematical models beyond queueing, with operations research, which considers a wide range of optimisation problems seeking to reduce waiting times while keeping server utilisation and therefore efficiency high.

Media portrayals

Indian call centres have been the focus of two documentary films, the 2005 film Nalini by Day, Nancy by Night and the 2006 film Bombay Calling. An Indian call centre is also the subject of the 2006 film Outsourced (film) and a key location in the 2008 film, Slumdog Millionaire. BBC The Call Centre' is an often distorted although humorous view of life in a Welsh Call Centre.bbc.co.Call centre#Dynamics The Call Centre argues this point, and tries to illustrate that you can have high employee engagement within a call centre.callcentrehelper.htm





Further reading




