[[Contemporary slavery]]

CATEGORIES: Slavery

Contemporary, or modern, slavery refers to the institutions of slavery that continue to exist in the present day. Estimates of the number of slaves today range from 12 million
Modern slavery is a multi-billion dollar industry with estimates of up to $35 billion generated annually. The United Nations estimates that roughly 27 to 30 million individuals are currently caught in the slave trade industry.
Mauritania was the last nation to officially abolish slavery, doing so in 2007; yet 4.3% of the population still remains enslaved. Despite being illegal in every nation; slavery is still prevalent in many forms today.
Professor Deirdre Coleman, of the University of Melbourne said, 

Causes

Slaves can be an attractive investment because the slave-owner only needs to pay for sustenance and enforcement. This is sometimes lower than the wage-cost of free labourers, as free workers earn more than sustenance; in these cases slaves have positive price. When the cost of sustenance and enforcement exceeds the wage rate, slave-owning would no longer be profitable, and owners would simply release their slaves. Slaves are thus a more attractive investment in high-wage environments, and environments where enforcement is cheap, and less attractive in environments where the wage-rate is low and enforcement is expensive.
Free workers also earn Compensating differentials, whereby they are paid more for doing unpleasant work. Neither sustenance nor enforcement costs rise with the unpleasantness of the work, however, so slaves' costs do not rise by the same amount. As such, slaves are more attractive for unpleasant work, and less for pleasant work. Because the unpleasantness of the work is not internalised, being born by the slave rather than the owner, it is a negative externality and leads to over-use of slaves in these situations.
Modern slavery can be quite profitable The conscription of child soldiers by some governments is often viewed as a form of government-endorsed slavery.
Modern slavery is often seen as a by-product of poverty. Countries that lack education, economic freedoms and the rule of law, and which have poor societal structure can create an environment that fosters the acceptance and propagation of slavery.

Types of modern, or contemporary, slavery

Slavery by descent

This is the form most often associated with the word "slavery".  It stems historically from either conquest, where a conquered people is enslaved, as in the Roman Empire, or from slave raiding, as in the Atlantic slave trade.  The enslaved become their own social class, or caste, one that may suffer discrimination long after they've been freed.  This form of slavery is prevalent in the Sahel, particularly in Mauritania, where governments may deny that it exists.

Bonded labor

Millions of people today work as bonded laborers. The cycle begins when people take extreme loans under the condition that they work off the debt.  The "loan" is designed so that it can never be paid off, and is often passed down for generations.  This form of slavery is prevalent in South Asia.

Forced migrant labor

People may be enticed to migrate with the promise of work, only to have their documents seized and to be forced to work under the threat of violence to them or their families.  Illegal immigrants may also be taken advantage of; without legal residency, they often have no recourse to the law.  Along with sex slavery, this is the form of slavery most often encountered in wealthy countries such as the United States, in Western Europe, and in the Middle East.

Prison labor

Countries such as China, US, and North Korea use prison inmates as slave labor, and this labor may be a reason for their imprisonment.

Sex slavery

Along with migrant slavery, forced prostitution is the form of slavery most often encountered in wealthy countries such as the United States, in Western Europe, Israel, and in the Middle East. It is the primary form of slavery in Eastern Europe, Israel and Southeast Asia, particularly in Moldova and Laos. Many child sex slaves are trafficked from these areas to the West and Middle East.

Early/forced marriage

Mainly driven by the culture in certain regions, early or forced marriage is a form of slavery that affects millions of women and girls all over the world. When families cannot support their children, the daughters are often married off to the males of wealthier, more powerful families. These men are often significantly older than the girls. The females are forced into lives whose main purpose is to serve their husbands. This oftentimes fosters an environment for physical, verbal and sexual abuse.

Child labor

Children comprise the majority of slaves today. Most are domestic workers or work in cocoa, cotton or fishing industries. Many are trafficked and sexually exploited. In war-torn countries, children have been kidnapped and sold to political parties to be used as child soldiers.  Forced child labor is the dominant form of slavery in Haiti.

Trafficking

According to United States Department of State data, an "estimated 600,000 to 820,000 men, women, and children are trafficked across international borders each year, approximately 70 percent are women and girls and up to 50 percent are minors. The data also illustrates that the majority of transnational victims are trafficked into commercial sexual exploitation." However, "the alarming enslavement of people for purposes of labor exploitation, often in their own countries, is a form of human trafficking that can be hard to track from afar." It is estimated that 50,000 people are trafficked every year in the United States.

Wage Labour

The labour market, as institutionalised under the often criticised capitalist economic system, has been criticised as a pejorative for wage labour. Socialists draw parallels between the trade of labour as a commodity and slavery. Cicero is also known to have suggested such parallels."...''" – De Officiis 
For Marxists, labour-as-commodity, which is how they regard wage labour,. This Marxist objection is what motivated Nelson's essay, which argues that labour is not, in fact, a commodity.
As per anthropologist David Graeber, the earliest wage labour contracts we know about were in fact contracts for the rental of chattel slaves (usually the owner would receive a share of the money, and the slave, another, with which to maintain his or her living expenses.) Such arrangements, according to Graeber, were quite common in New World slavery as well, whether in the United States or Brazil. C. L. R. James argued that most of the techniques of human organisation employed on factory workers during the industrial revolution were first developed on slave plantations..
Some criticise wage slavery on strictly contractual grounds, e.g. David Ellerman and Carole Pateman, arguing that the employment contract is a legal fiction in that it treats human beings juridically as mere tools or inputs by abdicating responsibility and self-determination, which the critics argue are inalienable. As Ellerman points out, "the employee is legally transformed from being a co-responsible partner to being only an input supplier sharing no legal responsibility for either the input liabilities costs or the produced outputs profits of the employer's business.". As Pateman argues:





 • Free the Slaves
The Center of the Modern American Abolitionist Movement inspired by Kevin Bales' book, Disposable People, works to abolish slavery worldwide.
 • The CNN Freedom Project
is a year-long humanitarian news media campaign launched by CNN and CNN International in 2011 to "end modern-day slavery" and related illegal practices, including human trafficking.
 • The United Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR)
was a functional commission within the overall framework of the United Nations from 1946 until it was replaced by the United Nations Human Rights Council in 2006. It was a subsidiary body of the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), and was also assisted in its work by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCHR). It was the UN's principal mechanism and international forum concerned with the promotion and protection of human rights.




