[[Order of Military Merit (Canada)]]

CATEGORIES: Military awards and decorations of Canada, Recipients of the Order of Military Merit (Canada)



The Order of Military Merit ( Created in 1972 to replace a grouping within the Order of Canada, the order was established to recognize members of the Canadian Forces—either regular or reserve personnel—who have demonstrated dedication and devotion beyond the call of duty, achieving conspicuous merit and exceptional military service.[ref]
 The three tiers of the order are Commander, Officer, and Member; specific individuals may be given extraordinary and deserving non-Canadians granted with honorary appointment into each grade.

Grades and precedence

The Canadian monarch—presently Queen Elizabeth II—is seen as the fount of honour

Insignia

Upon admission into the Order of Military Merit, members are presented the appropriate insignia, though these remain property of the Crown. this is composed of a series of gold medallions, and supports an enamel rendition of the shield of the Royal Arms of Canada, from which the governor general's badge is suspended.
The badges for inductees are of a similar design to the sovereign's badge, though without precious stones, and slight differences for each grade. For Commanders, the emblem is gilt with a red enamel maple leaf in the gold central disk; for Officers, it is gilt with a gold maple leaf; and for Members, both the badge itself and the maple leaf are silver. The reverse bears only a serial number, and all are topped by a St. Edward's Crown,
With the patriation in 1988 of oversight of arms to Canada through the Canadian Heraldic Authority,in gold, and from which is suspended a rendition of the holder's Order of Military Merit badge.

Eligibility and appointment

For military ranks of colonel and above, recommendations for appointment to the Order of Military Merit are made by a commanding officer or military advisory committee to the Chief of the Defence Staff, who then forwards the name or names to the governor general; per the Queen's Regulations and Orders for the Canadian Forces, neither the nominee, nor any member of his or her family, can be notified or otherwise made aware that they have been suggested for induction into the order. the Secretary to the Governor General serves as the Secretary General of the Order of Military Merit.
Appointments take place annually and are limited to 0.1% of the previous year's total population of the Canadian Forces, Appointments are also not made posthumously, though members of foreign armed forces can be admitted as honorary members in any grade. Still, more than 3,000 individuals have been appointed to the Order of Military Merit since its inception, 2,300 into the rank of Member.



Notes






