[[Shenandoah Valley Academy]]

CATEGORIES: Secondary schools affiliated with the Seventh-day Adventist Church, Private high schools in Virginia, Boarding schools in Virginia, Schools in Shenandoah County, Virginia, Educational institutions established in 1908, Seventh-day Adventist Church, 1908 establishments in Virginia

Shenandoah Valley Academy (SVA) is a private, co-educational, boarding, high school in New Market, Virginia, United States. It has both boarding and day school programs. It is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS) and the Accrediting Association of Seventh-day Adventist Schools.

History

thumb|left|250px|The original building at Shenandoah Valley Academy pictured in 1924. The building had undergone significant add ons since it began its use in 1908. It has long since been replaced by the modern Administrative Building. Zirkle donated  In 1907, construction began on the main building of what was known as New Market Academy. The first students enrolled in 1908. In January 1908 New Market Academy assumed its current name, Shenandoah Valley Academy. The name was changed because New Market Academy duplicated an old private school in New Market, ironically, the new name was shared with another, now defunct, military school in Winchester, Virginia. Smith, State Board of Education, Commonwealth of Virginia to Richard E. Harris, December 6, 1965.  Letter from Forrest S. Racey to Richard E. Harris, October 20, 1965. At the time of its founding, Shenandoah Valley Academy was the seventh Seventh-day Adventist high school level academy in the United States. In 1911 SVA graduated its first four students. SVA students come from Virginia and Maryland across the United States to New York, Florida, or California and across national borders from places such as South Korea, Angola, the United Kingdom, and South America. By the time of its centennial in 2008 SVA had graduated over 6,000 students. During the 2009-2010 school year, SVA reached an enrollment of two hundred forty-four students.[ref]

</ref>

Campus

The school is located on a 

Curriculum

SVA's curriculum consists primarily of the standard courses taught at college preparatory schools across the world. All students are required to take classes in the core areas of English, Basic Sciences, Mathematics, a Foreign Language, and Social Sciences. In addition, religion classes are mandated on a yearly basis. In addition to its core curriculum, SVA offers three Advanced Placement (AP) classes and Concurrent Enrollment classes including Introduction to Computers, Spanish IV, Anatomy & Physiology, Physics, US History, Personal Finance, Psychology, Jesus and the Gospels, and Knowing and Sharing Christ.

Diploma options

SVA offers its students three diploma tracks, an Advanced Placement Diploma, an Basic College Preparatory Diploma, and a Basic Diploma. The Advanced Placement Diploma is designed for students expecting to apply to highly selective schools such as those in the Ivy League, Public Ivies or the Little Ivies. The College Preparatory Diploma is designed to gain acceptance into colleges with less demanding acceptance requirements. Towards the conclusion of their junior year, the school selects their senior classes based on their course selections and grade point average to prepare them for the appropriate diploma option.

Academic Honors

=International Academic Competition=

A Senior at SVA was a National Recognition Recipient of the International Academic Competitions's Math Challenge for the 2010-2011 school year. The International Academic Competition are a triad of competitions that recognize outstanding achievement in essay writing, mathematical problem solving and English Vocabulary sponsored by the Center for Future Global Leaders.

=Pacific Union College's Maxwell Scholarship=

In 2010, Pacific Union College selected a member of the Class of 2010 as one of its five Maxwell Scholar Program winners. The program, Pacific Union College's most prestigious based on "high academic achievement, a commitment to Christian service, and outstanding leadership skills" represents a renewable grant of $15,000 per year to each of its recipients.

National Honor Society

SVA has an active chapter of the National Honor Society, which has existed since at least the year 1974.

Student life

Performing arts

SVA has an active, award winning, performing arts program. Music groups that are currently active at SVA include the Shenandoans their elite touring choir, the Handbell Ensemble, which goes on tour with the Shenandoans, there is also the Concert Choir, a large choir for everyone, and a Gospel Choir, singing the popular Christian music of the day. Apart from the vocal and bell groups, there is also the Orchestra, Brass Band, and the String Ensemble which rounds out the official music groups at Shenandoah. The Shenandoans, Handbell Ensemble, and the Orchestra are the organizations which tour most frequently. Not under the direction of the music department are the Praise Teams who lead the school population in singing at its weekly worship events.Shenandoah Valley Academy - Spiritual Experience
There is also a small drama club on campus which writes and performs small plays for various elementary schools as well as for some school events. The drama club is primarily used as a recruitment tool, showcasing Shenandoah Students to middle school age students.One of the required events is a drama/music program put together by the school

Athletics

The athletic department plays a large part in campus life at SVA, a large percent of the student body participates in the eight varsity teams, and many participate in its intramural sports. Many of the players on its varsity teams go on to play in college athletics at various colleges. The school has won a number of conference awards as well as tournament awards. During the 2009-2010 basketball season, SVA junior guard Ivan Delacruz had the highest scoring average in the area at 25.1 points per game.

=Facilities=

Other sports meet on off campus locations such as the tennis courts in New Market, Virginia.

=List of teams=

Includes:

=Recent awards=

  | last =
  | first =
  | authorlink =
  | coauthors =
  | title = Boy's Soccer Schedule/Scores
  | work =
  | publisher = Wakefield Country Day School
  | date =
  | url = 
  | format =
  | doi =
  | accessdate = May 23, 2010
  | quote = }}</ref>

Community Service

=Annual Foreign Mission Trip=

The Campus Ministries Office at SVA plans a yearly mission trip that students are encouraged to participate in.[ref]
