[[1986 Hvalur sinkings]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 crimes, 1986 in Iceland, 1986 in law, Maritime incidents in 1986, Animal rights protests, Crime in Iceland, Eco-terrorism, Sea Shepherd Conservation Society, Whaling in Iceland, Acts of sabotage

The 1986 Hvalur sinkings occurred in Iceland's Reykjavík harbour in November 1986, when anti-whaling activists from the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society sank two unoccupied whaling vessels, Hvalur 6 and Hvalur 7, and sabotaged a whale processing station in Hvalfjörður. No one was injured in the incident.

Background

A moratorium on commercial whaling was implemented by the International Whaling Commission in January 1986; the ban allowed for scientific whaling to continue. The Sea Shepherd Conservation Society direct-action environmentalist group wished to intervene in the whaling continued by Iceland, Norway, the Soviet Union, Japan, and the Faroe Islands. The Iceland government stated that taking 120 whales in 1986 for research was vital to its fishing industry.

Operation

Sea Shepherd's Coronado and David Howitt flew into Reykjavík in either August or early October 1986. Howitt has also been named as David Howard, Nick Taylor or Martin Braidley. The pair stayed at a youth hostel and began covertly investigating the local whaling industry. It has been reported that they posed as tourists and took jobs at a fish factory. On 8 November, they traveled 50 miles to the nation's only whale processing station in Hvalfjörður, where they broke in at 8:00 pm. Sledgehammers, wrenches, and other common tools were used to systematically destroy computers, power generators, machinery, and windows. The large refrigeration unit used to freeze the season's catch was destroyed beyond repair. The facility's records were doused with acid. The main factory and two smaller buildings were left inoperable.
Coronado and Howitt then returned during the early hours of the 9 November to Reykjavík. There, three of the country's four whaling vessels were moored. The seacock of the first ship was opened at 5:20 am while the second was opened shortly after. The boats flooded with water and sunk within a half hour. The third whaler, Hvalur 8,  was not attacked since a watchman was aboard. Retrieved 15 May 2010. The police did not arrive to the harbor until 7:00 am, and the attackers were able to flee the country via a 7:45 am flight to Luxembourg. They were subjects of a routine traffic stop en route to the airport but the police did not suspect them of any wrongdoing and let them continue on their way. In November of the same year the two 430-ton whaling vessels were raised from the harbor floor by a salvaging company.[ref]
.[/ref] According to the whaling company, the attack caused $2 million worth of damage.
Coronado's first-person account of the events was later published in a militant activist magazine.[ref]
.[/ref]

Reaction

Shortly after, Watson took full responsibility for the operation, saying that he had planned it, had picked the team, and had seen that they did their job.  Prime Minister Steingrímur Hermannsson announced that Iceland was trying to find the men and criticised the police for their initial delay that allowed them to escape. Watson traveled to Iceland in 1988 to face prosecution as Sea Shepherd's leader. He was detained for 24 hours and deported without cause. Case Studies in Environmental Ethics (Rowman & Littlefield, 2003) p. 28. Retrieved 15 May 2010. 11 February 2005. Retrieved 15 May 2010. A spokesperson for Iceland's largest whaling company told The New Yorker that Watson is persona non grata in the country. With their escape, Coronado and Howitt have never been charged with any wrongdoing in Iceland. Both have admitted responsibility. According to Icelandic police authorities, the statute of limitations for the act has passed.
As a result of this incident, the International Whaling Commission revoked Sea Shepherd's observer status. Most environmentalists, though critical of Iceland's stand, distanced themselves from Sea Shepherd's violent tactics. The incident has been described as "an act of sabotage that many conservationists believe helped turn Icelandic public opinion against the cause of saving whales".
The international reactions were negative. The action was described as an act of vandalism, an act of terrorism or the act of madmen, depending on the media. At the time of the incident, Iceland,"Iceland Calls Saboteurs Terrorists, Lexington Herald-Leader, 12 November 1986, p. A5. Retrieved 15 May 2010. Greenpeace International,David Israelson, "Killing goes on despite whaling ban", Toronto Star, 15 November 1986, p. A2. and some media commentators in Iceland and North AmericaFrank Jones, "No cause can justify terrorist acts", Toronto Star, 13 November 1986, p. H1."Dockside Terror" (editorial), San Francisco Chronicle, 12 November 1986, p. 48. referred to the sabotage as "terrorism" or "terrorist". Coronado responded to these comparisons by arguing that the sabotage was "the farthest thing from terrorism" and that whaling itself constituted terrorism."Whaling Is Terrorism, Says Environmentalist Accused of Sinkings", Associated Press, 13 November 1986. In a Canadian newspaper the incident was also cited as one of the first steps taken by Coronado in becoming "a new breed of terrorist" who went on to wage a wide-ranging battle for animal rights as a member of the Animal Liberation Front. A1. Coronado has rejected the "terrorist" label as "garbage", because beginning with the Hvalur sinkings, "he says he has always taken care that no one is physically hurt by his acts of sabotage".




