[[Dow Jones & Company]]

CATEGORIES: Companies based in New York City, Companies established in 1882, Companies disestablished in 2007, News Corporation subsidiaries, Media companies of the United States, Dow Jones & Company, Financial data vendors

Dow Jones & Company is an American publishing and financial information firm.
The company was founded in 1882 by three reporters: Charles Dow, Edward Jones, and Charles Bergstresser. Like The New York Times and the Washington Post, the company was in recent years publicly traded but privately controlled.  The company was led by the Bancroft family, which effectively controlled 64% of all voting stock, before being acquired by News Corporation.
The company became a subsidiary of News Corporation after an extended takeover bid during 2007.
In 2010, the company sold 90% of Dow Jones Indexes to the CME Group, including the Dow Jones Industrial Average.

Consumer media

Its flagship publication, The Wall Street Journal, is a daily newspaper in print and online covering business, financial national and international news and issues around the globe. It began publishing on July 8, 1889. There are 12 versions of the Journal in nine languages, including English, Chinese, Japanese, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Bahasa, Turkish and Korean. The Journal holds 35 Pulitzer Prizes for outstanding journalism. 
Other consumer-oriented publications of Dow Jones include Barron's Magazine, a weekly overview of the world economy and markets and MarketWatch, the online financial news site. "Financial News", news on investment banking, securities, and asset management.  "BigCharts", provided by " stock charts, screeners, interactive charting, and research tools.  "Professor Journal", a "Journal" in education program for professors to integrate into curriculum. 
The monthly journal Far Eastern Economic Review closed in September 2009.

Local media

thumb|The Dow Jones news ticker in Times Square.S.

Enterprise media

Dow Jones serves corporate markets and financial markets clients with financial news and information products and services. Its products combine content and technology tools to help drive decisions. Dow Jones owns more than 20 products that combine content and technology to help drive decisions which include,
Dow Jones Newswires;
Dow Jones Factiva, a database that provides a curated basis for making decisions through search results, alerts, newsletters, and charts about companies, topics, and people.
Dow Jones FX Select, delivers real-time, breaking global FX news, expert trend analysis and in-depth policy commentary in 13 languages;
DJX VentureSource, helps find deal and partnership opportunities, perform comprehensive due diligence and examine trends in venture capital investment, fund-raising and liquidity. It provides data on venture-backed companies, including their investors and executives, in every region, industry and stage of development throughout the world.
Private Equity Analyst, timely news and critical analysis of private equity and venture capital activity. Offers exclusive insight and breaking news on developments in fund-raising, investment, deal finance, liquidity, returns, executive moves and more.
DJX Risk & Compliance, focused on risk management, regulatory compliance or corporate governance content for Anti-Corruption, Anti-Money Laundering, Payments & Sanctions and more.

Ventures

In 2009 Dow Jones Ventures launched FINS.

Broadcasting

In broadcasting, Dow Jones provides news content to CNBC in the U.S. It produces two shows for commercial radio, The Wall Street Journal Report on the Wall Street Journal Radio Network and The Dow Jones Report.
Dow Jones also launched WSJ Live an interactive video website that provides live and on demand videos from The Wall Street Journal Video Network.  Programs include "News Hub", "MoneyBeat", and "Lunch Break" among others.

Indices

Dow Jones sold a 90% stake in its Index business for $607.5M to Chicago-based CME Group, which owns the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, in February 2010. A few of the most widely used include:

Ownership

The company's foundation was laid by Charles Dow, Edward Jones and Charles Bergstresser who, over two decades, conceived and promoted the three products which define Dow Jones and financial journalism: The Wall Street Journal, Dow Jones Newswires and the Dow Jones Industrial Average.Dow Jones History
Dow Jones was acquired in 1902 by the leading financial journalist of the day, Clarence Barron.
In 2007 Dow Jones was acquired by News Corp., a leading global media company.
The Bancroft family and heirs of Clarence W. Barron effectively controlled the company's class B shares, each with a voting power of ten regular shares, prior to its sale to News Corp. At one time, they controlled 64% of Dow Jones voting stock.BBC News - Dow Jones family to consider sale - 1 June 2007

Buyout offer

On May 1, 2007, Dow Jones released a statement confirming that News Corporation, led by Rupert Murdoch, had made an unsolicited offer of $60 per share, or $5 billion, for Dow Jones.CNN. The halt lasted under 10 minutes while CNBC was receiving data. It has been suggested that the buyout offer is related to Murdoch's new cable business news channel Fox Business that launched in 2007. The Dow Jones brand brings instant credibility to the project.co.uk - Rupert Murdoch comes roaring back
On June 6, 2007, CEO Brian Tierney of Philadelphia Media Holdings L.L.C., owning company of The Philadelphia Inquirer, Philadelphia Daily News, and Philly.com expressing interest in "joining with outside partners to buy Dow Jones." Tierney said, "We would participate as Philadelphia Media Holdings, along with other investors. We wouldn't do it alone."
In June, MySpace founder Brad Greenspan put forth a bid to buy 25% of the Dow for $60 a share, the same price per share as News Corporation's bid. Greenspan's offer was for $1.25 billion for 25% of the company.Market Dispatches - MSN Money
On July 17, 2007, The Wall Street Journal, a unit of Dow Jones, reported that the company and News Corporation had agreed in principle on a US$5 billion takeover, that the offer would be put to the full Dow Jones board on the same evening in New York, and that the offer valued the company at 70% more than the company's market value.- "'Dow Jones, News Corp. Set Deal' - Wall Street Journal July 17, 2007

=Insider trading scandal=

Upon investigating suspicious share price movements in the run-up to the announcement, the SEC alleged that board member Sir David Li, one of Hong Kong's most prominent businessmen, had informed his close friend and business associate Michael Leung of the impending offer. Leung had acted on this information by telling his daughter and son-in-law, who reaped a US$8.2 million profit from the transaction.The News Corp-Dow Jones Insider Trading Case:  A Significant Settlement,  SEC Actions, 6 February 2008

Corporate governance

Prior to its sale to News Corp, the last members of the board of directors of the company were: Christopher Bancroft, Lewis B. Campbell, Michael Elefante, John Engler, Harvey Golub, Leslie Hill, Irvine Hockaday, Peter Kann, David Li, M. Peter McPherson (Chairman), Frank Newman, James Ottaway, Elizabeth Steele, and William Steere.








