[[Splenda]]

CATEGORIES: Johnson & Johnson brands, Sweeteners, 1999 introductions

Splenda Facts About Sucralose, American Dietetic Association, 2006. owned by the British company Tate & Lyle and American company Johnson & Johnson. Sucralose was discovered by Tate & Lyle and researchers at Queen Elizabeth College, University of London, in 1976. Tate & Lyle subsequently developed sucralose-based Splenda products in partnership with Johnson & Johnson subsidiary McNeil Nutritionals LLC.Tate and Lyle history
Since its approval by the United States government in 1998 and introduction there in 1999, sucralose has overtaken Equal in the $1.5-billion artificial sweetener market, holding a 62% market share.S. while Equal's totaled $48.7 million.B1
In April 2009, the International Trade Commission closed a patent infringement case that will permit Chinese manufacturers to produce copycat versions of Splenda products which will be sold under different brand names., Zueit.
Splenda is available in granular and tablet form. "Sucralose – all sweetness and light" PDF - British Nutrition Foundation. Retrieved February 18, 2011.

Energy (caloric) content

Sucralose has no caloric content, and Splenda products have a lower caloric content than sugar. The actual caloric content of a single-serving (1-gram packet) of Splenda is 3.36 calories, 31% of the calories of a single-serving (2.8-gram packet) of granulated sugar (10.8 calories). In the United States, it is legally labelled "zero calories";USDA Nutrient Data Laboratory Database United States Department of Agriculture U.S. FDA regulations allow this "if the food contains less than 5 calories per reference amount customarily consumed and per labeled serving". 95 – 101.60 U.S. Food and Drug Administration Further, Splenda contains a relatively small amount of sucralose, little of which is metabolized; virtually all of Splenda's caloric content derives from the dextrose or highly fluffed maltodextrin "bulking agents" that give Splenda its volume. Like other carbohydrates, dextrose and maltodextrin have 3.75 calories per gram.  

Cooking

Unlike other artificial sweeteners, sucralose is heat stable up to   However, "Cook's Illustrated" also found that desserts baked with Splenda were without "the artificial flavors that just about every other sugar substitute brings with it".

Health and safety regulation

Splenda usually contains 95% dextrose (D-glucose) and maltodextrin which the body readily metabolizes, combined with a small amount of mostly indigestible sucralose.  Sucralose is made by replacing three select hydrogen-oxygen groups on sucrose  (table sugar) molecules with three chlorine atoms. The tightly bound chlorine atoms create a molecular structure that is remarkably stable.
A repeated dose study of sucralose in human subjects concluded that "there is no indication that adverse effects on human health would occur from frequent or long-term exposure to sucralose at the maximum anticipated levels of intake".
Other studies have determined that sucralose is not a biologically inert compound, having possible toxic effects, including creation of dioxin-like compounds when sucralose is heated.

Marketing controversy

In 2006, Merisant, the maker of Equal, filed suit against McNeil Nutritionals in U.S. District Court, Philadelphia, alleging that Splenda's tagline "Made from sugar, so it tastes like sugar" is misleading.  McNeil argued during the trial that it had never deceived consumers or set out to deceive them, since the product is in fact made from sugar.  Merisant asked that McNeil be ordered to surrender profits and modify its advertising.  The case ended with an agreement reached outside of court, with undisclosed settlement conditions.  In 2004, Merisant filed a complaint with the Better Business Bureau regarding McNeil's advertising. McNeil alleged that Merisant's complaint was in retaliation for a ruling in federal court in Puerto Rico, which forced Merisant to stop packaging Equal in packages resembling Splenda's. McNeil filed suit in Puerto Rico seeking a ruling which would declare its advertising to not be misleading.  Following Merisant's lawsuit in Philadelphia, McNeil agreed to a jury trial and to the dismissal of its lawsuit in Puerto Rico.  However, on May 11, 2007, the parties reached a settlement on the case, the terms of which were not disclosed.  Currently, Splenda is advertised with the slogan, "It starts with sugar.  It tastes like sugar.  But it's not sugar."Splenda.com
In 2007, Merisant France prevailed in the Commercial Court of Paris against subsidiaries of McNeil Nutritionals LLC. The court awarded Merisant $54,000 in damages and ordered the defendants to cease advertising claims found to violate French consumer protection laws, including the slogans "Because it comes from sugar, sucralose tastes like sugar" and "With sucralose: Comes from sugar and tastes like sugar".Heller, Lorraine (May 14, 2007) Splenda ad slogans banned in France, Food Navigator
A Sugar Association complaint to the Federal Trade Commission stated that "Splenda is not a natural product. It is not cultivated or grown and it does not occur in nature."Splenda Ads Condemned as Misleading to Consumers by International Advertising Boards, Sugar Farmers and Processors, Sugar Association Press Release, November 2, 2006  McNeil Nutritionals, the manufacturer of Splenda, has responded that its "advertising represents the products in an accurate and informative manner and complies with applicable advertising rules in the countries where Splenda brand products are marketed."Sugar industry files complaint over Splenda, Reuters (MSNBC. 2, 2006  The U.S. Sugar Association created a web site to criticise  sucralose which cites an association-sponsored study."The Truth About Splenda" website by the Sugar Association






