[[Leonard Rossiter]]

CATEGORIES: 1926 births, 1984 deaths, Male actors from Liverpool, Cardiovascular disease deaths in England, English male film actors, English male television actors, People educated at Liverpool Collegiate Institution

Leonard Rossiter (21 October 1926 – 5 October 1984) was an English actor, best known for his roles as Rupert Rigsby, in the British comedy television series and film Rising Damp (1974–80), and Reginald Perrin, in The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin (1976–79). These roles followed a long and distinguished career in the theatre.

Early life and stage work

Rossiter was born in Liverpool, the son of Elizabeth (née Howell) and John Rossiter.com The family lived over the barber's shop owned by his father. He was educated at Liverpool Collegiate Grammar School (1939–46).R. However, his father, who served as a voluntary ambulanceman during the Second World War, was killed in an air raid in 1942 and Rossiter had to support his mother. He therefore could not take up the place he had been offered at Liverpool University. After being demobbed he worked for six years as an insurance clerk in the claims and accident departments of the Commercial Union Insurance Company.Interview on BBC R4 Desert Island Discs 12 April 1980
Rossiter joined the Wavertree Community Centre Drama Group and made his first appearance with the Adastra Players in Terence Rattigan's Flare Path. The local critic said that he "was particularly outstanding, his one fault being a tendency to speak too fast on one or two occasions". 8 He gave up his insurance job to enrol in Preston repertory theatre and became a professional actor at the comparatively late age of 27. He made his professional stage debut in Joseph Colton's The Gay Dog in Preston on 6 September 1954. He later became assistant stage manager there, and then went on to Wolverhampton and Salisbury repertory companies. In his first 19 months in the business he played some 75 roles. He said later: "There was no time to discuss the finer points of interpretation. You studied the part, you did it and then you studied the next part. I developed a frightening capacity for learning lines. The plays became like Elastoplast, which you just stuck on and then tore off. It was the perfect preparation for rehearsing situation comedy on television at the rate of one episode a week."Tanitch, p. 25
In 1957–58 he played in the musical Free as Air and then toured in Eugene O'Neill's The Iceman Cometh. He joined the Bristol Old Vic and was there for two years, from 1959 to 1961, a time he described as "the bedrock of his career", followed by other stage work, in, among other plays, The Strange Case of Martin Richter, Disabled, The Heretic, The Caretaker and Semi-Detached (in New York). His performance in the premiere of Michael Blakemore's stage production of Bertolt Brecht's The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui in 1969 met with critical acclaim:Tanitch, p. 47

Film and television career

Rossiter broke into film roles with Billy Liar (1963), in which he plays the title character's boss. He established himself as a respected actor in  films as well as on stage, and then began to make his presence felt on television as well, with an intermittent role as Detective Inspector Bamber in the police series Z-Cars, as well as guest roles in series as diverse as Steptoe and Son ("The Lead Man Cometh", 1964; "The Desperate Hours", 1972) and The Avengers episode "Dressed to Kill" (1963).
In 1968 he played Mr Sowerberry in the film version of Lionel Bart's musical Oliver! and took one of the few speaking supporting roles in 2001: A Space Odyssey as the Russian scientist Smyslov. He worked with Stanley Kubrick again in Barry Lyndon (1975), in which he appeared as Captain John Quin. In the same year as 2001 he appeared in Nigel Kneale's television play The Year of the Sex Olympics, part of BBC 2's Theatre 625, one of four appearances in the series.
In Rising Damp, on ITV, Rossiter played Rigsby, the lecherous landlord of a house converted into seedy bedsits, reprising the role from the successful stage version, The Banana Box. While he was in Rising Damp he also took the lead role in The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin, adapted by David Nobbs from his own  comic novels and aired on the BBC. Rossiter was given a surprise tribute on This Is Your Life in 1975. In 1979 he appeared in the Galton and Simpson scripted short film Le Pétomane.
From 1979 and into the early 1980s Rossiter took roles in commercials, dressing as a traffic warden for Parker Pens and starring with Joan Collins as her boorish companion in a series of Cinzano commercials. In the Channel 4 programme The 100 Greatest TV Ads (2000) Terry Lovelock, the director of several of these commercials, said that he had found Rossiter difficult to work with and that Rossiter used to refer jokingly to Collins as "The Prop".com. Retrieved 26 August 2012.
In the animated adaptation of The Perishers (1978) Rossiter provided the voice for Boot the dog. He reprised Rigsby for a film version of Rising Damp in 1980, thus achieving the distinction of playing the same role on stage, television and film. His last television role was as the supermarket manager in another ITV sitcom, Tripper's Day (1984). He continued to make a steady stream of film appearances, including a role in Lindsay Anderson's Britannia Hospital (1982).
Rossiter also played the title role in the BBC Television Shakespeare production of The Life and Death of King John (1984). His last film appearance was in Water (1985).

Writing

Rossiter displayed his acid wit in two books: The Devil's Bedside Book (1980),Leonard Rossiter, Devil's Bedside Book, Littlehampton: 1980; ISBN 0-600-20105-8 a collection of cynical dictionary definitions in the style of Ambrose Bierce's The Devil's Dictionary, and The Lowest Form of Wit (1981), a collection of biting bons mots, stinging retorts, and insults divided into six main sections, illustrated with cartoons by Honeysett and including a definitive guide and a history of sarcasm.

Personal life

Rossiter's first marriage was to the actress Josephine Tewson, with whom he had worked many times in repertory in the 1950s. The marriage ended in divorce in 1961. His second wife was the actress Gillian Raine, with whom he had a daughter, Camilla, and to whom he was still married at the time of his death.
After his death it was revealed that during the early 1980s Rossiter had had an affair with the broadcaster Sue MacGregor. His wife had not been aware of the affair until she received a letter from Sue MacGregor breaking the news that her memoirs, which were about to be published, would include an account of the affair.

Death

Rossiter died from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in 1984 while waiting to go onstage at the Lyric Theatre, London, where he was performing in Joe Orton's play, Loot. His funeral took place at St. Mary's Church, The Boltons, London.

Filmography






