[[Bookends]]

CATEGORIES: 1968 albums, Simon & Garfunkel albums, Columbia Records albums, Concept albums, Albums produced by Roy Halee, English-language albums, Albums produced by Paul Simon, Albums produced by Art Garfunkel

Bookends is the fourth studio album by American music duo Simon & Garfunkel. Produced by Paul Simon, Roy Halee and Art Garfunkel, the album was released on April 3, 1968 in the United States by Columbia Records. The duo had risen to fame in 1965 based on the strength of hit single "The Sound of Silence", and their previous two studio works — Sounds of Silence and Parsley, Sage, Rosemary and Thyme — had enjoyed commercial and critical acclaim. In 1967, Simon was approached by director Mike Nichols to write songs for his next film, the landmark film The Graduate. Released several weeks prior to the penultimate Bookends in 1968, the soundtrack album helped the band propel further into stardom.
Bookends, in contrast to the soundtrack album, follows a unified concept, exploring a life journey from childhood to old age. Side one of the album marks successive stages in life, the theme serving as literal bookends to the life cycle. Side two largely consists of unused material for The Graduate soundtrack. Simon's lyrics largely revolve around youth, disillusionment, relationships, old age, and mortality. 
Sales for Bookends were immense, premiering alongside The Graduate soundtrack and number one hit single "Mrs. Robinson". Bookends was considered a breakthrough for the duo, placing them on the same level as artists such as The Beatles, Bob Dylan and The Rolling Stones at the forefront of the cultural movement in the 1960s. The album has continued to see critical acclaim in recent years as one the duo's finest efforts.

Background

Simon, then 27, felt he had finally "made it" into an upper echelon of rock and roll, while most importantly retaining artistic integrity ("making him spiritually closer to Bob Dylan than to, say, Bobby Darin," wrote biographer Marc Eliot).
Meanwhile, director Mike Nichols, then filming The Graduate, had become fascinated with the duo's past two efforts, listening to them nonstop before and after filming.
In January 1968, the duo appeared on a Kraft Music Hall special, Three for Tonight, performing ten songs largely culled from their third album.

Recording and production

The record's brevity reflects its concise and perfectionistic production. The team spent over 50 studio hours recording "Punky's Dilemma," for example, and re-recorded vocal parts, sometimes note by note, until they were satisfied.
John Simon's work with the duo begat several tracks that ended up on Bookends, such as "Punky's Dilemma," "Save the Life of My Child," and "Overs." Her reportings were printed in the November edition of the magazine:

Work on Bookends slowed by the beginning of the new year, with John Simon's departure from Columbia.

Composition

Music

The "Bookends Theme" that opens and closes side one is played on the acoustic guitar, with no additional instruments. 
"Voices of Old People" is a sound collage, and was recorded on tape by Garfunkel at homes for the aged in New York and Los Angeles.
Side two consists of miscellaneous unrelated songs unused for The Graduate, with many possessing a more rock-based sound than the unified folk songs that precede it.

Lyrics

According to disc jockey and author Pete Fornatale, the album perhaps shares thematic qualities with another concept album, the Beatles' Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band, released ten months prior. He equates "At the Zoo" and "Old Friends" to "Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite!" and "When I'm Sixty-Four", respectively.
Bookends contains many of Paul Simon's major themes, including "youth, alienation, life, love, disillusionment, relationships, old age, and mortality."
According to rock journalist Bud Scoppa, "the record is a meditation on the passage of life and the psychological impact of live's irreversible, ever-accumulating losses." The song cycle also describes the life and death of the romantic ideal of the American Dream.

Song analysis

Bookends, originally released primarily on the vinyl LP, opens and closes side one of the disc with the "Bookends Theme," a brief acoustic piece (once compared to English rock band the Moody Blues) that evokes "a time of innocence." 
"Overs" includes themes regarding the disintegration of love and marriage.
"Mrs. Robinson" collects wide-ranging images to address social milieu, with a constant reassurance that Jesus loves the eponymous character, God will bless her, and heaven will welcome her.

Release

Bookends debuted on the Billboard Pop Album Chart in the issue dated April 27, 1968, climbing to number one and staying at that position for seven non-consecutive weeks; it remained on the chart as a whole for 66 weeks. Bookends received such heavy orders weeks in advance of its release that Columbia was able to apply for award certification before copies left the warehouse, a fact it touted in magazine ads.
Rather than implement Davis' price increase plan, Simon & Garfunkel signed a contract extension with Columbia that guaranteed them a higher royalty rate.

Critical reception

Reviews of Bookends upon its release in 1968 were largely positive. Rolling Stone reviewer Arthur Schmidt wrote that "The music is, for me, questionable, but I've always found their music questionable. It is nice enough, and I admit to liking it, but it exudes a sense of process, and it is slick, and nothing too much happens."

Accolades

"Mrs. Robinson" became the first rock and roll song to win Record of the Year at the 11th Annual Grammy Awards in 1969; it also nabbed the honor of Best Contemporary Pop Performance by a Duo or Group.
(*) designates unordered lists.

Legacy

The album, alongside The Graduate soundtrack, propelled Simon & Garfunkel to become the biggest rock duo in the world. 
Disc jockey and author Pete Fornatale writes that Bookends represents "a once-in-a-career convergence of musical, personal, and societal forces that placed Simon & Garfunkel squarely at the center of the cultural zeitgeist of the sixties."
In 2010, lyrics from the song "America" began appearing spray-painted on vacant buildings and abandoned factories in the town of Saginaw, Michigan, which is mentioned in the song. The group of artists, Paint Saginaw, decided to paint the phrases after the population had dwindled vastly, noting that the song became rather "homesick" for the town's residents.

Track listing

Chart positions

Charts


