[[Rail Baltica]]

CATEGORIES: Rail transport in Estonia, Rail transport in Latvia, Rail transport in Lithuania, Rail infrastructure in Poland, Proposed transport infrastructure in Europe, Higher-speed rail

Rail Baltica is one of the priority projects of the European Union: Trans-European Transport Networks (TEN-T). The project is supposed to link Finland, the Baltic States and Poland and also improve the connection between Central and Northern Europe and Germany. It envisages a continuous rail link from Tallinn (Estonia), to Warsaw (Poland), going via Riga (Latvia) and Kaunas (Lithuania). It will by-pass the Kaliningrad Oblast (Russia) and Hrodno (Belarus), which have historically hosted two Poland-Lithuania rail routes. The route is estimated to be completed by 2024.
The section from Helsinki to Tallinn will be operated by existing commercial ferries. In the future a proposed Helsinki to Tallinn Tunnel could provide a rail link between the two cities..

Route and standard

There are two options to build the Rail Baltica. Both options include an upgrade of the existing railway (with standard gauge) to  for the stretch that runs from Warsaw via Białystok and Ełk to Trakiszki, followed by a new railway with standard gauge Trakiszki-Kaunas.
For the remainder of the route to Tallinn there are two options.
Although there is an EU high-speed directive saying that new TEN-T lines should have a speed of 

Track gauge

Feasibility studies for 

Financing and the time horizon

The project will be financed by the member states and by the European Union TEN-T budget (€124 million), Structural and Cohesion Funds provided to the EU New Member States. The total cost is expected to be around €1.5 billion for option one and around €2.4 billion for option two.
The 
In Lithuania, the two parts Polish border-Marijampolė (using standard gauge) and Šiauliai-Latvian border (using broad gauge) will be new built, to be finished 2015, costing €270M. In Latvia the existing railway will be upgraded, to be finished 2015, costing €97M. The EU will contribute with about 25% of the cost for the three parts.
The EU also finances a technical study for a new standard gauge railway between Estonia and Poland.
According to Juhan Parts, the Estonian Minister of Economy and Communications, on 10 November 2011, the prime ministers of the Baltic countries agreed to form a joint venture to move the project forward. The timetable envisages construction starting in 2018 and completion in 2023.

Opportunities

Rail Baltica creates the possibility to shift the major freight transport in the regions from road to rail, which for the time being is transported towards Russia and then north by heavy trucks. In the case of Poland the trucks follow the local roads and directly cross the villages of Podlaskie Voivodeship (north-east Poland) creating danger to their inhabitants. Transporting the freight by rail would increase the safety of the local roads and also reduce the CO2 emissions and oil consumption. Furthermore, it would create a convenient passenger connection which does not exist at the moment.
Rail Baltica could be a sustainable sound alternative to the planned Via Baltica motorway which has proved controversial on environmental grounds. In contrast to Via Baltica, the implementation of the Rail Baltica project could become a good practical example of sustainable and efficient utilisation of the Cohesion and Structural Funds, bringing social and economical benefits, as well as environmental and climatic improvements.
Railways currently have a low number of passengers along the route, especially in Estonia and Latvia. International and regional travel is done by car, bus and air with very little by train.

Constraints to be resolved

One of the project's aspects is the conversion of the Baltic States' rail network to Standard Gauge (
If the north-south railways are converted to standard gauge, the west-east railways are still not likely to be converted, since they are used for freight and passenger trains to Russia. There is even a consideration to build a new west-east high-speed railway Riga–Moscow which will use Russian gauge.
Lithuanian railways are freight-oriented with little passenger traffic; the railways transport the largest proportion of goods by train in Europe (over 57 percent).








