[[Dracaena fragrans]]

CATEGORIES: Dracaena, Flora of Ethiopia, Flora of Sudan, Flora of Kenya, Flora of Tanzania, Flora of Uganda, Flora of Cameroon, Flora of the Central African Republic, Flora of Equatorial Guinea, Flora of Ghana, Flora of Guinea, Flora of Nigeria, Flora of Togo, Flora of Angola, Flora of Malawi, Flora of Mozambique, Flora of Zambia, Flora of Zimbabwe, House plants

Dracaena fragrans (cornstalk dracaena) is a flowering plant species that is native throughout tropical Africa, from Sudan south to Mozambique, west to Côte d'Ivoire and southwest to Angola, growing in upland regions at  altitude.JSTOR Plant Science: Dracaena fragransGermplasm Resources Information Network: Dracaena fragrans

Description

Dracaena fragrans is a slow growing shrub, usually multistemmed at the base, mature specimens reaching  diameter on old plants; in forest habitats they may become horizontal with erect side branches. Young plants have a single unbranched stem with a rosette of leaves until the growing tip flowers or is damaged, after which it branches, producing two or more new stems; thereafter, branching increases with subsequent flowering episodes., ed. (1992). New RHS Dictionary of Gardening 2: 96. Macmillan ISBN 0-333-47494-5.
The leaves are glossy green, lanceolate,  diameter, containing several seeds.

Cultivation and uses

thumb|Inflorescence of Dracaena fragrans CV Massangeana, sometimes just called Dracaena Massangeana. fragrans is widely grown as a hedge plant; it is suited to frost-free climates, in USDA zones 10-11. Elsewhere, it is primarily popular as a houseplant, valued for its tolerance of a wide range of indoor conditions from full sun to low light conditions. It is also very tolerant of neglect, and has been shown by the NASA Clean Air Study to help remove indoor pollutants such as formaldehyde, xylene and toluene.C. (1996). How to Grow Fresh Air. New York: Penguin Books. The plant is known as "masale" and is a holy plant to the Chagga people of Tanzania.
Several cultivars are available with variegated leaves. 'Massangeana' has a bright yellow central stripe on the leaves. 'Compacta' is more compact, for indoor locations. Other popular cultivars include 'Janet Craig' and 'Warneckii', which are often sold under the synonym D. deremensis.
The cultivars 'Lemon Lime' have both gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit.
In cultivation in the Neotropics, the flowers are visited by a few generalist hummingbird species like the Sapphire-spangled Emerald (Amazilia lactea). (2005). Beija-flores (Aves, Trochilidae) e seus recursos florais em uma área urbana do Sul do Brasil (Aves, Trochilidae) and their flowers in an urban area of southern Brazil. with English abstract Revista Brasileira de Zoologia 22 (1): 51–59.  PDF fulltext

Propagation

Dracaena fragrans is propagated by cutting segments of old stems  long. These are allowed to dry off, and then inserted into moist sand until they have rooted. New growth, typically two or three shoots, comes from old leaf scars at the top of the stem.

Etymology and synonymy

The species name refers to the fragrant flowers, while the English name derives from a perceived resemblance of the stem to a corn (Zea mays) stalk. Synonyms include Aletris fragrans L. (basionym), Cordyline fragrans (L.) Planch., Pleomele fragrans (L.) Salisb., Sansevieria fragrans (L.) Jacq., Dracaena deremensis Engl., Dracaena smithii Hook.f., and Dracaena ugandensis Baker. Other English names include striped dracaena (for variegated cultivars), corn plant (for the cultivar 'Massangeana';) and Chinese money tree.




