[[U.S. Route 78 in South Carolina]]

CATEGORIES: U.S. Route 78, U.S. Highways in South Carolina, Transportation in Aiken County, South Carolina, Transportation in Barnwell County, South Carolina, Transportation in Bamberg County, South Carolina, Transportation in Orangeburg County, South Carolina, Transportation in Dorchester County, South Carolina, Transportation in Charleston County, South Carolina

U.S. Route 78 (US 78) is a U.S. highway that travels from Memphis, Tennessee to Charleston, South Carolina. In the U.S. state of South Carolina, it runs from the Savannah River at North Augusta to its eastern terminus in Charleston; connecting the cities of Aiken, Summerville, and North Charleston.

Route description

US 78 enters South Carolina by crossing the Savannah River in North Augusta; sharing concurrences with US 1, US 25, US 278 and SC 121.  In the immediate  area, it sheds most concurrences, sharing only with US 1 towards Aiken; it also connects with I-540, which is a partial beltway around the Augusta metropolitan area.  In Aiken, it travels through the downtown area, where US 1 splits north towards Columbia.  West of Williston is SC 781, which connects back with US 278; the routing allows travelers to bypass Aiken all together between Williston and Augusta.
Traveling in a southeasterly direction, it goes through the cities and towns of Williston, Blackville, Denmark, Bamberg, Branchville and St. George, where connects with I-95.  Continuing east, it passes through Dorchester and begins to parallel with I-26 in a southeasterly direction through Summerville.  It crosses into Charleston County at Lincolnville, where the highway skirts just inches south of the Berkeley County line.  In North Charleston, US 78 shares a concurrency with US 52, as it connects with I-526.  Entering Charleston, it splits with US 52 and goes south along King Street; its eastern terminus at Line Street, a block away from US 52's eastern/southern terminus and nearby to I-26/US 17 interchange.
US 78 is a predominantly two-lane rural highway connecting much of the Lowcountry.  Widen sections (four-lanes or more) are found between North Augusta-Aiken, St. George and North Charleston.  Though it provides the most direct route between Augusta and Charleston (using US 278/SC 781 to bypass Aiken), it is not a busy route because of the many cities and towns it goes through.  

History

Established in 1927 as an original US highway, it traveled closely as it does today; from North Augusta to Charleston, connecting the cities and towns of Aiken, Bamberg, St. George, and North Charleston.
By 1931, US 78 was rerouted north of Summerville and Lincolnville, leaving Richardson Avenue/Lincoln Avenue. Around 1939, US 78 was realigned from Meeting Street to Rivers Street, south of Durant Avenue in the Charleston area. Also in 1939, US 78 was fully paved in the state, its last unpaved section was between St. George and US 178. By 1952, US 78 was placed on new four-lane highway bypassing Clearwater, Burnettown, and Gloverville; also by same year a new bridge was constructed over the Savannah River, leaving Fifth Street Bridge. By 1967, US 78 was adjusted to bypass south of mainstreet Blackville, leaving a secondary road, but was later upgraded as a connector (bannered as a business loop).

Major intersections

Bannered routes

Aiken truck route

U.S. Route 78 Truck (US 78 Truck) is a Truck route of the US 78 that bypasses north of downtown Aiken, via University Parkway and Rudy Mason Parkway.  It's routing is in complete concurrency of SC 118, and it also shares with other truck routes from U.S. and State routes.  The road is two-lane on both ends, with a four-lane stretches between Laurens Street-Willow Run Road and Old Wagener Road-Charleston Highway.  Though the routing is longer than going through the downtown area, it does provide a faster connection with US 1.

Blackville business loop

U.S. Route 78 Business (US 78 Business) is a short business loop in the central part of the town of Blackville, via Walker and Main Streets. Originally, US 78 traversed along the route until by 1967, when new road south was created, allowing it to bypass Main Street.  The old alignment was not made into a business route till at least 1981; however, though it is signed as a business loop, on state and county maps it is officially a connector route in disguise.








