[[Gaussian integer]]

CATEGORIES: Cyclotomic fields, Algebraic numbers, Lattice points

In number theory, a Gaussian integer is a complex number whose real and imaginary part are both integers. The Gaussian integers, with ordinary addition and multiplication of complex numbers, form an integral domain, usually written as . This integral domain is a particular case of a commutative ring of quadratic integers. It does not have a total ordering that respects arithmetic.
Formally, Gaussian integers are the set 
Note that when they are considered within the complex plane the Gaussian integers may be seen to constitute the -dimensional integer lattice.
The (arithmetic or field) norm of a Gaussian integer is the square of its absolute value (Euclidean norm) as a complex number and a natural number defined as 
where  is complex conjugation.
The norm is multiplicative, since the absolute value of complex numbers is multiplicative, i.e., one has 
The latter can also be verified  by a straightforward check. The units of 

As a principal ideal domain

The Gaussian integers form a principal ideal domain with units  is also a unique factorization domain.
The prime elements of .org/A002145#COMMENT, OEIS sequence A002145 "COMMENT" section
A Gaussian integer  is a Gaussian prime if and only if either:
The following elaborates on these conditions.
). It is the unique prime number with this property.
The necessary conditions can be stated as follows: if a Gaussian integer is a Gaussian prime, then either its norm is a prime number, or its norm is a square of a prime number. This is because for any Gaussian integer , notice 
Here .
Now  we have:
This gives only two options: either the norm of  is a prime number, or the square of a prime number.
If in fact . Neither can be a unit, and so 
where .
However, not every prime number .
Prime numbers of the form  is a Gaussian prime.
If  is a Gaussian prime, because the norm is multiplicative.

As an integral closure

The ring of Gaussian integers is the integral closure of  consisting of the complex numbers whose real and imaginary part are both rational.

As a Euclidean domain

Put another way, every complex number (and hence every Gaussian integer) has a maximal distance of 
units to some multiple of  into a Euclidean domain, where 

Historical background

The ring of Gaussian integers was introduced by Carl Friedrich Gauss in his second monograph on quartic reciprocity (1832) (see  The theorem of quadratic reciprocity (which he had first succeeded in proving in 1796) relates the solvability of the congruence . Gauss discovered that the law of biquadratic reciprocity and its supplements were more easily stated and proved as statements about "whole complex numbers" (i.e. the Gaussian integers) than they are as statements about ordinary whole numbers (i.e. the integers).
In a footnote he notes that the  Eisenstein integers are the natural domain for stating and proving results on cubic reciprocity and indicates that similar extensions of the integers are the appropriate domains for studying higher reciprocity laws.
This paper not only introduced the Gaussian integers and proved they are a unique factorization domain, it also introduced the terms norm, unit, primary, and associate, which are now standard in algebraic number theory.

Unsolved problems

Most of the unsolved problems are related to the repartition in the plane of the Gaussian primes.
There are also conjectures and unsolved problems about the Gaussian primes.  Two of them are:



Notes






