[[Charlton Heston]]

CATEGORIES: 1923 births, 2008 deaths, 20th-century American male actors, 20th-century American writers, 21st-century American male actors, 21st-century American writers, Academy Honorary Award recipients, African-Americans' civil rights activists, American anti–Vietnam War activists, American autobiographers, American Christians, American civil rights activists, American gun rights advocates, American male film actors, American male stage actors, American male television actors, American male voice actors, American military personnel of World War II, American people of English descent, American people of Scottish descent, American male Shakespearean actors, American television directors, Best Actor Academy Award winners, Broadway theatre people, Burials in California, California Democrats, California Republicans, Cecil B. DeMille Award Golden Globe winners, David di Donatello winners, Deaths from Alzheimer's disease, Deaths from pneumonia, Deaths from prostate cancer, Film directors from California, Film directors from Illinois, Film directors from Michigan, Film directors from New York City, Infectious disease deaths in California, Kennedy Center honorees, Male actors from Beverly Hills, California, Male actors from Illinois, Male actors from Michigan, Male actors from New York City, New Trier High School alumni, Northwestern University alumni, Paramount Pictures contract players, People from Roscommon County, Michigan, People from Wilmette, Illinois, Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients, Presidents of the National Rifle Association, Presidents of the Screen Actors Guild, United States Army Air Forces soldiers, Writers from Illinois, Writers from Los Angeles, California, Writers from Michigan, Writers from New York City

Charlton Heston (born John Charles Carter; October 4, 1923 – April 5, 2008) was an American actor and political activist.
As a Hollywood star he appeared in 100 films over the course of 60 years. He is best known for his roles in The Ten Commandments (1956); Ben-Hur, for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor (1959), El Cid (1961), and Planet of the Apes (1968). He also is well known for his roles in the films The Greatest Show on Earth (1952), Touch of Evil (1958), and The Agony and the Ecstasy (1965). The starring roles gave the actor a grave, authoritative persona and embodied responsibility, individualism and masculinity; he rejected scripts that did not emphasize those virtues. His media image as a spokesman for Judeo-Christian moral values enabled his political voice.Emilie Raymond, From My Cold, Dead Hands: Charlton Heston and American Politics, (2006) pp 4–5, 33
A supporter of Democratic politicians and civil rights in the 1960s, Heston eventually rejected liberalism, founding a conservative political action committee and supporting Ronald Reagan. Heston's most famous role in politics came as the five-term president of the National Rifle Association from 1998 to 2003.  After being diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease, Heston retired both from acting and being the NRA president in 2003, and died of complications of pneumonia in 2008. Wednesday, April 30, 2003

Early years

Heston was born John Charles Carter, the son of Lila (née Charlton; 1899–1994) and Russell Whitford Carter (1897–1966), a sawmill operator. Filmreference. Most sources state that he was born in Evanston, Illinois. Heston's autobiography,Heston, Charlton: In The Arena, Simon & Schuster, 1995. ISBN 0-684-80394-1. however, and some other sources, place his birth in No Man's Land, Illinois, which usually refers to a then-unincorporated area now part of Wilmette, a wealthy northern suburb of Chicago.
Heston said in a 1995 interview that he was not very good at remembering addresses or his early childhood.
Heston was of partly Scottish descent, including from the Clan Fraser. The majority of Heston's ancestry was English.
In his autobiography, Heston refers to his father participating in his family's construction business. When Heston was an infant, his father's work moved the family to St. Helen, Michigan. It was a rural, heavily forested part of the state, and Heston lived an isolated yet idyllic existence spending much time hunting and fishing in the backwoods of the area.
When Heston was 10 years old, his parents divorced. Shortly thereafter, his mother married Chester Heston. The new family moved back to Wilmette. Heston (his new surname) attended New Trier High School, in a rich Chicago suburb.[ref]
</ref>
He recalls living there:

Throughout Heston's life he was known by friends as "Chuck" although his wife always called him "Charlie." His stage name Charlton Heston is drawn from his mother's maiden surname (Charlton) and his stepfather's surname (Heston), and was used for his first film, an adaptation of Ibsen's Peer Gynt.

Career

Heston frequently recounted that while growing up in northern Michigan in a sparsely populated area, he often wandered in the forest, "acting" out the characters from books he had read. Tcm. Later, in high school, Heston enrolled in New Trier's drama program, playing in the amateur silent 16 mm film adaptation of Peer Gynt, from the Ibsen play, by future film activist David Bradley released in 1941.com, IMDB Film Biography. From the Winnetka Community Theatre (Or, the Winnetka Dramatist's Guild as it was then known) in which he was active, he earned a drama scholarship to Northwestern University; among his acting teachers was Alvina Krause.[ref]
  
</ref><ref>
  
