[[Republican Party presidential primaries, 1988]]

CATEGORIES: Republican Party (United States) presidential primaries, United States presidential primaries, 1988

The 1988 Republican presidential primaries were the selection process that Republican voters used to choose their nominee for President of the United States in the 1988 U.S. presidential election. Incumbent Vice President George H.W. Bush was selected as the nominee through a series of primary elections and caucuses culminating in the 1988 Republican National Convention held from August 15 to August 18, 1988 in New Orleans, Louisiana.

Primary race

Vice President George H. W. Bush had the support of President Ronald Reagan and pledged to continue Reagan's policies, but also pledged a "kinder and gentler nation" in an attempt to win over some more moderate voters. Bush faced some prominent challengers for the GOP nomination, despite his front runner status.
At the start of the primary election season in early 1988, televangelist Pat Robertson's campaign was attacked because of a statement he had made about his military service. In his campaign literature, he stated he was a combat Marine who served in the Korean War. Other Marines in his battalion contradicted Robertson's version, claiming he had never spent a day in a combat environment. They asserted that instead of fighting in the war, Robertson's primary responsibility was supplying alcoholic beverages for his officers. (See Education and military service).
Robertson's campaign got off to a strong second-place finish in the Iowa caucuses, ahead of Bush. Robertson did poorly in the subsequent New Hampshire primary, however, and was unable to be competitive once the multiple-state primaries like Super Tuesday began. Robertson ended his campaign before the primaries were finished. His best finish was in Washington, winning the majority of caucus delegates. However, his controversial win has been credited to procedural manipulation by Robertson supporters who delayed final voting until late into the evening when other supporters had gone home. He later spoke at the 1988 Republican National Convention in New Orleans and told his remaining supporters to cast their votes for Bush, who ended up winning the nomination and the election. He then returned to the Christian Broadcasting Network and has remained there as a religious broadcaster.
Bush unexpectedly came in third in the Iowa caucus (that he had won back in 1980), behind the winner Senator Bob Dole, and Robertson. Dole was also leading in the polls of the New Hampshire primary, and the Bush camp responded by running television commercials portraying Dole as a tax raiser, while Governor John H. Sununu stumped for Bush. These efforts enabled the Vice President to defeat Dole and gain crucial momentum. Bittered by his loss in New Hampshire, Dole told Bush directly, on live television that evening, to "stop lying about my record."
Once the multiple-state primaries began, Bush's organizational strength and fundraising lead were impossible for the other candidates to match, and the nomination was his. The Republican party convention was held in New Orleans, Louisiana. Bush was nominated unanimously.
In his acceptance speech, Bush made an energetic pledge, "Read my lips: No new taxes", a comment that would come to haunt him in the 1992 election.

Candidates

Image:George H. W. Bush, President of the United States, 1989 official portrait.W. Bush  of Texas
Image:Bob Dole bioguide. 29) (Endorsed George Bush)
File:Pat Robertson Paparazzo Photography.jpg|Televangelist Pat Robertson of Virginia (Withdrew May 16)
File:Jack Kemp official portrait.S. Congressman Jack Kemp of New York (Withdrew Mar. 11) (Endorsed George Bush)
File:Petedupont. du Pont, IV of Delaware (Feb. 18)
Image:Alexander Haig. 12) (Endorsed Bob Dole)
Image:Paul Laxalt (colorized).S. Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada (Withdrew Aug. 26, '87)
File:Harold Stassen 1980. Stassen of Minnesota

Declined to run

File:Sen William L Armstrong.S. Senator William L. Armstrong of Colorado
File:Howard baker jr.S. Senator Howard Baker of Tennessee (Feb. 27, 1987)
File:Pat Buchanan. Adviser Pat Buchanan of Virginia
File:Thomaskeansr.jpg|Governor Tom Kean of New Jersey
File:Od jeane-kirkpatrick-official-portrait 1-255x301. 26, 1987)
File:Donald Rumsfeld Defenselink. 2, 1987)
File:DonaldTrumpFeb09.jpg|Businessman Donald Trump of New York

Notable Endorsements

George H. W. Bush
Bob Dole
Jack Kemp

Results

Statewide

Nationwide

Popular vote results:Our Campaigns - US President - R Primaries Race - Feb 01, 1988

VP Selection

Bush selected U.S. Senator Dan Quayle of Indiana as his running mate.
Other politicians mentioned as possible GOP V.P. nominees before Quayle was selected included:








