[[Lark Rise to Candleford (TV series)]]

CATEGORIES: 2000s British television series, 2010s British television series, 2008 British television programme debuts, 2011 British television programme endings, BBC television dramas, Costume drama television series, Period television series, Television shows set in Oxfordshire

Lark Rise to Candleford is a British television costume drama series, adapted by the BBC from Flora Thompson's trilogy of semi-autobiographical novels about the English countryside, published between 1939 and 1943. The first episode aired on 13 January 2008 on BBC One and BBC HD in the UK. In the US, the series began airing on select PBS stations in the spring of 2009. A third series began airing in the UK on 10 January 2010.
It was announced on 22 January 2011 that the show would not be returning for a fifth series, despite good ratings.

Premise

The series is set in the small Oxfordshire hamlet of Lark Rise and the wealthier neighbouring market town of Candleford towards the end of the 19th century.  The series chronicles the daily lives of farm workers, craftsmen, and gentry, observing the characters in loving, boisterous, and competing communities of families, rivals, friends, and neighbours.
The narrative is seen through the eyes of a teenage girl, Laura Timmins (Olivia Hallinan), as she leaves Lark Rise to start a new life under the wing of her cousin, the independent and effervescent Dorcas Lane (Julia Sawalha), who is Post Mistress at the local Post Office in Candleford. Through these two characters, viewers experience the force of friendship as Laura and Dorcas see each other through the best and worst of times.

Cast

Main cast

Casting notes

From Series 1 to 3, the cast were credited alphabetically. Series 4 cast members were billed in the order of prominence within each episode.
Dawn French is credited as a main cast member in every episode in which she appears; in series 2 and series 4 she appears in one episode.
Although they appear in almost every episode, the actors playing the Timmins (Edmund, Frank and Ethel) and Arless (Lizzie, Archie and Sally) children as well as Sydney Dowland are not credited as main cast members.

Guest stars

Filming

Interior scenes were shot in a warehouse on Beeches Industrial Estate, in Yate, South Gloucestershire. The villages of Lark Rise and Candleford were both created from scratch on farms in Box and Neston Park, near Corsham in Wiltshire.'Lark Rise TV Locations' at Gloucestershire On Screen

Episodes

Series 1 (2008)

Series 2 (2008–2009)

Series 3 (2010)

Series 4 (2011)

Cancellation

It was announced on 22 January 2011 that the show would not be returning for a fifth series, despite impressive ratings. This decision led to many viewers complaining, prompting BBC One controller Danny Cohen to say, "Lark Rise to Candleford has been a truly wonderful part of the BBC One schedule and we are incredibly grateful to writer Bill Gallagher and the team. But we feel the time is right to make room for new dramas which we hope will be taken to the nation's hearts in the same way."BBC One boss defends 'Lark Rise' axe Digital Spy, 31 January 2011
Following that announcement, many viewers took to setting up and signing online campaigns to see the show recommissioned. The Bath Chronicle, 28 February 2011

Anachronisms

The original novels are set in the 1880s or shortly afterwards.  However, the TV series is set in 1894 and 1895. 
The first episode is set around the "eight mile rule" where telegrams had to be paid for if they had to be delivered more than 8 miles and the argument that Lark Rise is less or more than 8 miles from Candleford. The resolution was that Lark Rise was just short of 8 miles from Candleford. In nearly every subsequent episode the characters seem to travel the eight miles (or thereabouts) by foot at the drop of a hat (day or night), little worrying that such a trip would take 3 - 4 hours one way. The attitude of the characters in later episodes was as if the distance between the two communities was just a mile or so.
In the first series Mrs. Arless was imprisoned for debt, a practice which was abolished in 1869., c. 62  
In the Christmas Special, the final scene shows the villagers singing O Little Town of Bethlehem to Vaughan Williams' Forest Green, which was written for the English Hymnal in 1906.  In Episode 9 of the second series, Miss Ellison talks about marriage on Saturday 14 October, which, during the 1890s, only occurred in 1893.  In Episode 7 of the second series, Dorcas Lane is looking at her father's birth certificate and comments that he was born in 1825.  However, birth certificates were only issued in England from 1837, with the start of civil registration.  In the second series a ceremony said to be folk magic is performed, but using material from Gerald Gardner devised in the late 1940s or early 1950s. 
In the fifth episode of season three, Pearl Pratt is heard speaking of "the A-line skirt", a term coined by Christian Dior in 1955.
In one episode, Dorcus makes reference to the work of Ivan Pavlov and his 'Classical Conditioning' (Pavlov's Dogs) as if read in an accessible report of the day when in fact, Pavlov did not publish until just before winning the Nobel Prize in the early 20th Century.

DVD and Blu-ray releases






