[[Hugh Pigot (Royal Navy admiral)]]

CATEGORIES: 1722 births, 1792 deaths, Royal Navy personnel of the Seven Years' War, Royal Navy personnel of the American Revolutionary War, Royal Navy admirals, Lords of the Admiralty, Members of the Parliament of Great Britain for English constituencies, Members of the Parliament of Great Britain for constituencies in Cornwall, British MPs 1768–74, British MPs 1774–80, British MPs 1780–84

Admiral Hugh Pigot (28 May 1722 – 15 December 1792), of Wychwood Forest in Oxfordshire, was a officer of the British Royal Navy who served during the Seven Years' War and the American Revolutionary War, and also twice as a Member of Parliament (MP).

Biography

Hugh Pigot was the third son of Richard Pigot of Westminster, by his wife Frances, daughter of Peter Goode, a Huguenot who had come to England in the late seventeenth century.
Pigot entered the navy in around 1735, serving for four years as a captain's servant and able seaman aboard the 
In March 1744 he followed Grenville into   In 1758 he commanded York at the reduction of Louisbourg, and in 1759 commanded the 84-gun Royal William in the fleet of Sir Charles Saunders at capture of Quebec. He was employed in Royal William for the remainder of the war in the Channel; and in May 1760, chased the Diadem, a French third rate of seventy-four guns, bound for Martinique with stores and specie for the payment of the soldiery, into the Groyne.
He saw no further service at sea following the conclusion of the war in 1763, but in 1769 was appointed colonel of the second (or Portsmouth) division of Marines; shortly before he had been chosen as representative in parliament for the borough of Penryn, a government-dominated borough which frequently chose distinguished naval officers as its MPs. (Pigot succeeded Vice-Admiral Sir George Rodney.) Pigot was a close friend of the Prime Minister, the Duke of Grafton, and this connection was cemented when Grafton married Elizabeth Wrottesley, sister of Pigot's second wife, Frances. Pigot represented Penryn until 1774, but did not contest the general election that year.
In January 1771 he was appointed to command of the , one of the ships commissioned during the dispute with Spain over the the Falkland Islands. When the crisis was peaceably settled his ship was put out of commission, and Pigot held no subsequent commission as a captain. 
On 31 March 1775 he was promoted to rear-admiral, and to vice admiral on 7 December. In 1778, following the death of his brother, Lord George Pigot, he was elected to fill his seat in Bridgnorth.
By this time he was a consistent opponent of Lord North's government (he was a gaming crony of the Whig leader Charles James Fox), and seems to have been denied commands for political reasons. When Sheridan attacked the government in the Commons in February 1782 for driving the most distinguished naval commanders out of the service, it was Pigot who rose in answer to the invitation to give instances of the First Lord of the Admiralty's conduct towards officers who were his political opponents.
With the fall of the government the following month, on 30 March 1782 Pigot was appointed one of the Lords of the Admiralty in the Rockingham administration, and on 8 April 1782 was promoted to admiral and appointed to supersede Sir George Rodney as commander-in-chief in the West Indies. Pigot hoisted his flag on board the 50-gun , then sailed, as was customary at that time, to America during the hurricane months.
Pigot had little experience as a captain, with none as an admiral. His second-in-command, Samuel Hood, seems to have regarded him with mixed feelings of pity and contempt, and considered that the government had acted unwisely "in placing an officer at the head of so great a fleet who was unequal to the very important command, for want of practice". In any event Pigot's term of command was uneventful, and following the signing of the peace treaty in September 1783, he returned to England. Pigot retired from the Navy on 30 December 1783, and was defeated at Bridgnorth at the general election of 1784.
Admiral Pigot died at Bristol on 15 December 1792. 

Personal life

Pigot was twice married, firstly c.1749, to Elizabeth le Neve, by whom he had a son, General Sir Henry Pigot (1750–1840) and a daughter, and secondly c.1768 to Frances, the daughter of the Very Reverend Sir Richard Wrottesley, 7th Baronet, by whom he had a second son, Captain Hugh Pigot, RN, (1769–1797), and two daughters.




