[[Where Is the Love?]]

CATEGORIES: 2003 singles, Anti-war songs, Billboard Mainstream Top 40 (Pop Songs) number-one singles, Number-one singles in Australia, Number-one singles in Austria, Ultratop 50 Singles (Flanders) number-one singles, Number-one singles in Denmark, European Hot 100 Singles number-one singles, Number-one singles in Germany, Irish Singles Chart number-one singles, Dutch Top 40 number-one singles, Number-one singles in Norway, Number-one singles in Sweden, Number-one singles in Switzerland, Number-one singles in Romania, UK Singles Chart number-one singles, Pop ballads, Song recordings produced by will.i.i.am, The Black Eyed Peas songs, Justin Timberlake songs, Song recordings produced by Ron Fair, Interscope Records singles, Protest songs

"Where Is the Love?" is a song recorded by the American hip hop group The Black Eyed Peas. It was released in June 2003 as the lead single from their third album, Elephunk. It is the band's first record to feature Fergie. The song features uncredited vocals from Justin Timberlake.
It peaked at number eight on the Billboard Hot 100, and topped the charts in Australia and the United Kingdom. It became the biggest-selling single of 2003 in the latter country. The band received two nominations, Record of the Year and Best Rap/Sung Collaboration, for "Where Is the Love?" at the 46th Grammy Awards.

Background

Following the commercial failures of their previous albums and singles, there was doubt over whether the Black Eyed Peas would continue to record together. A&R executive Ron Fair approached them and suggested a crossover to a more mainstream pop sound. will.i. However, after discussions and some writing sessions, the idea was pursued.
Shortly after Christmas 2001, will.i. Taboo and apl.de. Justin Timberlake was allegedly introduced to the band by new band member Fergie, and got a chance to hear the track that will.i. Impressed with the music, Timberlake helped write and sing the chorus.
Timberlake was in the midst of promotion of his debut album, Justified, and his label Jive Records was concerned about possible overexposure. The Peas were worried about this, as getting some assistance from an established pop star like Timberlake had been the original point of this song. A compromise was reached eventually in which Jive gave clearance for the vocals of Timberlake to be released on the song, but he does not appear in the song's music video nor is he officially credited on the song as an artist. The song has so far sold 954,000 digital copies.
On May 12, 2013 after 10 years since the song's release, the song re-entered the official UK singles charts at 40, eventually peaking at 35. The apparent reason for the re-entry is the popularity of the song in airplay and purchase in the aftermath of the retirement of Manchester United football club's manager Alex Ferguson. He is known as Fergie, as is this song's co-vocalist and Black Eyed Peas member Fergie Duhamel.

Composition

The song was written by will.i.de. Board, G. Pajon Jr, M. Fratantuno, and J. Curtis, and co-produced by will.i. In this song, The Black Eyed Peas lament on various worldwide problems. Many issues are discussed, which include but are not limited to terrorism, U.S. government hypocrisy, racism, gang crime, pollution, war, intolerance, and greed.

Critical reception

The song was rewarded with nominations at the 46th Grammy Awards in 2004 for Record of the Year and Best Rap/Sung Collaboration.
The song was the biggest selling single of 2003 in the UK. It was also the 25th best-selling single of the 2000s (decade) in the UK.Radio 1 Chart of the Decade, as presented by Nihal on Tuesday December 29, 2009

Music video

The music video for "Where Is the Love?" was shot in East Los Angeles and features the Black Eyed Peas and various other people, including various young children, asking the world where the love really is. In the video, will.i.de. Justin Timberlake does not appear in the video, although several different people are seen mouthing the chorus as he sings it.
The video is similar to a 2002 British television advertisement for T-Mobile, in which a face of a young baby is presented in various forms around a large city, much like the question mark in this video. The Bon Jovi music video "Have a Nice Day" is also similar to both the advertisement and this video. The video features gameplay footage of the graphically explicit and controversial video game Postal 2, in which a group of young children are playing the game. This suggests that violence in the media and entertainment industry affects the morals of children.

Covers

English pop band Busted did a rock version of the song, which features on their live album, A Ticket for Everyone.
The Voice UK contestant Frances Wood sang the song at her audition and chose will.i.
Japanese pop singer Sho Sakurai (Arashi) re-wrote the rap lyrics in Japanese and performed his cover version at his solo concert in 2006.
At the Mnet Asian Music Awards (commonly abbreviated as MAMA) promotional held in Singapore in 2011, will.i.de.
The X Factor Israel contestant Inbal Bibi sang the song at the live shows and received positive reviews.

Formats and track listings

Personnel

Charts

Peak positions

Year-end charts

Decade-end charts

Certifications








