[[Cary Elwes]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, 20th-century English male actors, 21st-century English male actors, Male actors from London, British expatriate male actors in the United States, English male film actors, English male stage actors, English male television actors, English male voice actors, English people of Croatian descent, English people of Serbian descent, English people of Scottish descent, Living people, People educated at Harrow School, People from Westminster, People of Anglo-Irish descent, Sarah Lawrence College alumni

Ivan Simon Cary Elwes ( known professionally as Cary Elwes, is an English actor and voice actor.
He acted in off-Broadway plays during college and moved to the United States in the early 1980s. He is known for his roles as Westley in The Princess Bride, Arthur Holmwood in Francis Ford Coppola's Bram Stoker's Dracula, Robin Hood in Robin Hood: Men in Tights, Garrett in Quest for Camelot, and Dr. Lawrence Gordon in Saw and Saw 3D: The Final Chapter. 
He appeared in box office hits such as Days of Thunder, Hot Shots!, Twister, Liar, Liar and New Year's Eve. He has had recurring roles in television series such as  The X-Files playing Brad Follmer and Psych playing Pierre Despereaux.

Early life and education

Elwes was born in Westminster, London, the third and youngest son of portrait-painter Dominick Elwes (Elwes played five roles in the 2009 film adaptation of the novel).
He was brought up as a Roman Catholic and was an altar boy at Westminster Cathedral, although he did not attend denominational schools, unlike most of the men on his father's side of the family, including his own father. He discussed some of this background in an interview while he was filming the 2005 CBS television film, Pope John Paul II, in which Elwes played the young priest Karol Wojtyła, many years before he was elected pontiff in 1978.
His parents divorced when he was four years old, and in 1975 when Elwes was thirteen his father committed suicide. While living in New York, Elwes studied acting at both the Actors Studio and the Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute.
Elwes worked as a production assistant on the films Octopussy and Superman, where he worked for a week assigned to Marlon Brando. When Elwes introduced himself, Brando told him he was lying and that his (Elwes') name was actually Rocky.

Career

Film

Elwes made his acting debut in 1984 with Marek Kanievska's film Another Country. He played James Harcourt, a young and sentimental homosexual student from an English boarding school. He went on to play Guilford Dudley in the British film Lady Jane, co-starring Helena Bonham Carter. He was cast as a stable boy turned swashbuckler Westley in Rob Reiner's fantasy-comedy The Princess Bride, based on the novel of the same name by William Goldman. It was a modest box office success,
He continued working steadily, varying between dramatic roles, as in The Bride (1985) with Sting and Jennifer Beals, to the Academy Award-winning Glory (1989), and comedic roles, as in Hot Shots! (1991). In 1993, he starred as Robin Hood in Mel Brooks's comedy, Robin Hood: Men in Tights. Elwes also appeared in such films as Francis Coppola's adaptation of Bram Stoker's Dracula, The Crush, Rudyard Kipling's The Jungle Book, Twister, Liar Liar, Cradle Will Rock, The Cat's Meow and Kiss the Girls.
In 2004, he starred in the horror–thriller Saw which, at a budget of a little over $1 million, grossed over $100 million worldwide.
Elwes portrayed Dr. Clement in the psychological thriller Psych 9 (2010).
In 2012, Elwes appeared in the independent drama The Citizen. On 13 December 2012, The Hollwood Reporter announced that Elwes will make his directorial debut with an independent film about the life of Kit Lambert, manager of the iconic rock group The Who, working with a script by Pat Gilbert, a former editor of the British music magazine Mojo.com; accessed 4 March 2014. The film is based on interviews and recordings with Lambert made by journalist Jon Lindsay, and is being produced by Orian Williams.]

Television

In 1996, Elwes made his first television appearance as David Lookner on the sitcom Seinfeld. In 1998, he played astronaut Michael Collins in the Golden Globe Award-winning HBO miniseries From the Earth To the Moon. In 1999, he guest starred as Dr. John York in an episode of the television series The Outer Limits. He earned two Golden Satellite Award nominations for his performances in the television films The Pentagon Wars and Uprising. Elwes had a recurring role in the final season (from 2001 to 2002) of The X-Files as FBI Assistant Director Brad Follmer. In 2004, he played serial killer Ted Bundy in the A&E Network television film The Riverman, which was based on the book The Riverman: Ted Bundy and I Hunt for the Green River Killer written by Robert D. Keppel. In 2005, Elwes played the young Pope John Paul II in the CBS television film Pope John Paul II.
In 2007, he made a guest appearance on the Law & Order: Special Victims Unit episode "Dependent" as a Mafia lawyer. In 2009, he played the role of Pierre Despereaux, an international art thief, in the fourth season premiere of Psych. Elwes recently completed work on the USA Network pilot, Horizon, produced by Gale Anne Hurd.

Voiceovers

Elwes' voice-over work includes the narrator in James Patterson's audio book The Jester, The following year Elwes portrayed the part of Gremlin Gus in Disney's video game, Epic Mickey 2: The Power of Two.

Theatre

In 2003, he performed in Bob Balaban-directed Off-Broadway dramatic stage play The Exonerated in New York during its 18–23 March, week run.

Personal life

Elwes met still photographer Lisa Marie Kurbikoff in 1991 at a Malibu chili cook-off and became engaged in 1997.
In August 2005, Elwes filed a lawsuit against Evolution Entertainment, his management firm and producer of Saw. He said he was promised a minimum of one percent of the producers' net profits of the film and did not receive the full amount.

Filmography






