[[California (Mylène Farmer song)]]

CATEGORIES: 1995 songs, 1996 singles, Mylène Farmer songs, Songs with lyrics by Mylène Farmer, Songs with music by Laurent Boutonnat, Songs about California

"California" is a 1995 song recorded by the French artist Mylène Farmer. It was the third single from her fourth studio album, Anamorphosée, and was released on 26 March 1996. The song marked the only collaboration with American movie screenwriter and director Abel Ferrara, who directed the very expensive music video in which Farmer appears both as a bourgeois woman and a prostitute. A tribute to California, the song is generally deemed as one of Farmer's signature songs and has been performed during all the singer's tours. It has met with relative success in France and Belgium, and has become one of the biggest hits of all time in Russia.

Background, writing and release

Farmer wanted to release "California", one of the most daring songs of the album, from the marketing of Anamorphosée. However, it was released many months after, as the third single, but was widely aired on radio. Many fans regard this song as one of the most emblematic of Farmer. 184.
Among the different media for this single, there was a CD single distributed in a limited triptych digipack edition, and a CD maxi which contains six tracks - this one is the only CD maxi in Farmer's career still for sale because, seeing the number of tracks, it is referenced by Universal as a "mini-album" and is re-edited. The designer Henry Neu said he was particularly proud of having created it. 93.
The song is available on Anamorphosée in its original version, and on the best of Les Mots in the shorter radio version. It should be noted that, surprisingly, the song is placed at the beginning of the second CD, just before "XXL" and "L'Instant X", which does not comply with the chronological order. It was also remixed in 2003 by Romain Tranchart and Rawman for the compilation RemixeS.

Lyrics and music

"California" is the only song from the album Anamorphosée to refer to the singular name of this one and was the second of Farmer's songs with an English title, after "Beyond My Control". The song begins with different sounds evoking the street: a door that slams, an English voice in a loudspeaker, a siren of an ambulance. Farmer then referred to her desire to live in America to make a new start in her life. 59-67. 24-25. The song has a "nagging rhythm" and "Anglo-Saxon sonorities";Chuberre, 2007, p. 68. lyrics play with "anglicisms, sounds and onomatopoeia". According to the psychologist Hugues Royer, the song is "the symbol of the rebirth by the exile". 145.
It is a song with a highly elegant vocabulary where alternate puns and lyrics in French and English; it is a clear tribute to California. There are many literary references: for example, the phrase "Vienne la nuit et sonne l'heure et moi je meurs / Entre apathie et pesanteur où je demeure" alluded to the French poem Le Pont Mirabeau, written by Guillaume Apollinaire, in which there is the verse "Vienne la nuit sonne l'heure / Les jours s'en vont je demeure".

Music video

Production and plot

The video was directed by the American movie screenwriter and director Abel Ferrara. Producer Anouk Nora said that she first directly contacted the director. 157-58. Then Farmer tried to contact him, particularly after seeing his film on a similar theme, Snake Eyes, with Madonna. In interviews, Farmer stated she phoned Ferrara many times, then they met in New York. She told him she wanted to play the role of a prostitute in the video, and eventually, she wrote the screenplay in collaboration with him. 180. The video, a 5:18 Requiem Publishing production which cost about 600,000 euro,Khairallah, 2007, p. 44. 89,346. 62. making it the most expensive music video of the year,Chuberre, 2008, p. 185. was shot for three days and two nights in Los Angeles (Sunset Boulevard). Ferrara was surprised and puzzled by the insistence of Farmer. She proposed him 200,000 dollars to shoot a three-minute music video which eventually became a short film. Finally, Ferrara said he had a great respect for Farmer's professionalism.
The man who plays Farmer's lover is the American actor Giancarlo Esposito, and these are real prostitutes who appear in the video. Farmer said she discussed with these prostitutes before the shooting to learn more on the subject, and added: "Freedom, for me, it may be a bitch who prostitutes on Hollywood Boulevard. (...) We all have a vulgar side in us that we repress. Sex is an integral part of our lives". She confessed that she had loved that role.
At the beginning of the video, a young and rich couple (Farmer and Esposito) is preparing to attend a reception where they are invited. Meanwhile, a prostitute and a pimp (also played by Farmer and Esposito) are violently quarrelling. In her car, the rich woman looks at the prostitutes on the sidewalk and then sees her double threatened with a knife by her pimp who eventually murders her. After the society reception, the rich woman gets bored and therefore goes to the toilet where she disguises herself as a prostitute and joins those outside. She makes love with the pimp and savagely kills him to avenge the murdered prostitute. 203.

Comment and reception

The first images of the video were published by French magazine Voici which had managed to acquire illegally some shots during the filming. In an interview on Paris Première in 1996, Farmer explained that the video, which was analyzed on Arte in July 2002, does not reflect her perception of California, adding: "It is a little caricature I would say. It is still polarized or focused on prostitution. Los Angeles is not only prostitution. ... I always wanted to play a prostitute and I admit that for "California", it is spontaneously come. And so I called Abel Ferrara who often evokes prostitution in his films".
According to biographer Bernard Violet, the video provides the message that "women love to sometimes turn into a sexual object, but they still have their pride", and compares the end of the video to the film Basic Instinct. Florence Rajon criticized the video, saying that the collaboration between the two artists (Ferrara and Farmer) was "more disappointing than seducing" and that "we can not really consider "California" as a masterpiece": the subject was "too exploited" and "images of beautiful postcards of Hollywood are a bit too telephoned". 31. By contrast, Royer deemed the video as a "total success, in which are merging the dreamlike imaginary of Mylène and the brutal realism of Ferrara".

Live performances

"California" was performed in lip-sync by Farmer in a single television show: Les Années tubes, broadcast on TF1 on 18 May 1996. At this occasion, the singer used a lascivious choreography and she also sang "Sans contrefaçon".
The song was also performed at the time of the 1996 tour in a remixed techno version (the 'Wandering mix'). Images of Los Angeles by night were shown on the giant screens of the stage, and Farmer, entirely dressed in golden, performed first alone, then with two female dancers,Cachin, 2006, p. 66. a very suggestive choreography. 191. The song was also performed and in an acoustic and jazzy version during the 2000 tour. Farmer wore a white dress and white shoes; with her two female vocalists, she was sitting on the steps of the staircase, and then got up and do a few steps on the stage. Then Farmer went in front of the door at the top of the stairs, and at the end, she left the stage while it was in a full black. "California" was sung during the 13 concert at Bercy in 2006: while the screens and the central cross showed the words "Crime scene. Do not cross", Farmer slowly descended the stairs of the stage and performed a choreography with her hands during the musical bridge. The song was only performed in stadiums: Farmer wore a glittering short dress with red cape with hood and performed a choreography similar to the one during the 1996 tour. This version is only available on the video version of the album N°5 on Tour.

Critical reception

The author Erwan Chuberre considered "California" as "one of the best tracks of the album", and that the lyrics are "particularly exquisite and successful". Royer sees "California" as "an anthology piece, a musical gem all in subtility."
In France, the song debuted at a peak of number seven on 30 May 1996. It dropped the seven weeks after but regained a total of 16 places the two next weeks. After that, the song began again to fall but rather slowly, and managed to remain in the top 50 for 17 weeks. It was the third best-selling single from Anamorphosée.
In Belgium (Wallonia), the single entered the Ultratop 50 Singles Chart on 4 May 1996, then fell off and re-entered four times and reached number 22 on 3 August, which was nonetheless the lower peak position of the five singles from the album Anamorphosée. It fell off the chart on 7 September, after fourteen weeks

Cover versions

In 2004, Cedric, an unknown singer who participated in a programme on the radio station NRJ, covered the song in a R&B version. It was not released as a single.

Formats and track listings

These are the formats and track listings of single releases of "California":

Release history

Official versions

Credits and personnel

These are the credits and the personnel as they appear on the back of the single:

Charts

Peak positions

End of year charts

Sales



Notes




