[[Salt Lake City Intermodal Hub]]

CATEGORIES: Amtrak stations in Utah, Transit centers in the United States, Buildings and structures in Salt Lake City, Utah, Transportation in Salt Lake City, Utah, Railway stations opened in 1999, Railway stations opened in 2008, UTA TRAX stations, UTA FrontRunner stations, Union Pacific Railroad, Railway stations in Salt Lake City, Utah, 1999 establishments in Utah

The Salt Lake City Intermodal Hub (also known as Salt Lake Central on Utah Transit Authority UTA routes and SLC by Amtrak) is a multi-modal transportation hub in Salt Lake City, Utah, United States served by the Blue Line of UTA's TRAX light rail system that operates in Salt Lake County and by the FrontRunner, UTA's commuter rail train that operates along the Wasatch Front with service from Pleasant View in northern Weber County through Ogden, Davis County, Salt Lake City, and Salt Lake County to Provo in central Utah County.  Service at the intermodal hub is also provided by Amtrak (with the California Zephyr), Greyhound Lines, and U Car Share, as well as UTA local bus service.

Location

The Salt Lake Intermodal Hub has several official addresses, depending on the service provider:
However, passengers for all services at the intermodal hub can be dropped off in the cul-de-sac at the west end of 300 South off 600 West.

Services

Utah Transit Authority (UTA)

Salt Lake Central is the name of UTA portion of the Salt Lake Intermodal Hub and that is the station name used on all route maps and schedules (bus, the FrontRunner, and TRAX). The intermodal hub is in the Free Fare Zone of Downtown Salt Lake City which allows transportation patrons that both enter and exit bus or TRAX service within the Zone to ride fare free. The intermodal hub is also located within the Quiet Zone, so all trains (including Amtrak's) do not routinely sound their horns when approaching public crossings within this corridor. UTA indicates there there is "limited parking" available.
All of UTA's TRAX and FrontRunner trains and stations, as well as all fixed route buses, are compliant with Americans with Disabilities Act and are therefore accessible to those with disabilities.

=Local bus=

There are also multiple UTA Bus service routes that include Salt Lake Central as one of their stops. Local bus service is provided to all areas of Salt Lake City, as well as a few other cities within Salt Lake County. Additional service to Park City is provided through PC-SLC Connect. (See UTA bus connections below for more details.)

=The FrontRunner=

On weekdays the FrontRunner has about twenty-three round trips on weekdays between Ogden and Provo (through Salt Lake City) and about five more round trips between Ogden and Downtown Salt Lake City. On Saturdays there are only nineteen round trips between Odgen and Provo. Trains run hourly from about 4:30 am to just after midnight on weekdays (increasing to half hour runs for the morning and evening commutes). Saturdays have hourly runs from about 6:00 am to 2:30 am the next morning. As of August 2013 the FrontRunner does not run on Sundays or holidays. Each weekday there is service to Pleasant View with two trains picking up passengers (no dropping off) in the morning and two more trains picking up and dropping off passengers in the evening for the commute.

=TRAX=

Service by TRAX and the FrontRunner commenced on 27 April 2008, with the opening ceremony on 26 April at 12:30 pm. Salt Lake Central is the northern terminus of the TRAX Blue Line and the former northern terminus of the Green Line. There is not direct connection with the Red Line, nor the Green Line after 8 December 2012 following its reroute to the Salt Lake City International Airport). The Blue Line provides service to Draper in southern Salt Lake County as well as connections with the Green and Red lines (with the Red Line providing service between University of Utah and the Daybreak Community in South Jordan in southwest Salt Lake County and the Green Line providing service from West Valley City to the Salt Lake City International Airport (via Downtown Salt Lake City).

Amtrak

The intermodal hub is served by the California Zephyr, which provides once-daily service to Emeryville, California (in the San Francisco Bay Area), to the west and Chicago, Illinois, to the east on Union Pacific trackage in both directions. (The next westbound stop is Elko, Nevada and the next eastbound stop is Provo.)

Greyhound Lines

Greyhound Lines, in conjunction with its associate company, Greyhound Canada, provide bus service to points all across the United States and Canada. Some of its routes are operated in partnership with Amtrak's Thruway Motorcoach.

U-Haul Car Share

U-Haul Car Share is a for-profit carsharing service by U-Haul which launched in August 2009.  Members of U-Haul Car Share can rent cars by the hour (plus mileage). Reservations are made online and a code is given to unlock the vehicle. The keys are tethered in the vehicle.  The vehicle is returned to the same location where it was picked up.

Bicycle Transit Center

The Bicycle Transit Center (BTC) in located within the main intermodal hub building and is operated by UTA and Canyon Sports,  Memberships are available in daily, monthly, and yearly plans. The BTC opened 25 September 2010 and the majority cost of operations for the BTC for its initial five years have been funded through grants.

Greenbike

Greenbike In addition, members can start a "new trip" immediately after returning the bicycle to any docking station. The bicycles provided by Greenbike are equipped with GPS traking system that records and provides the member with the miles ridden (and calories burned). Greenbike is seasonal and, depending on weather conditions, shuts down operations in November–December and starts up again in March–April.  Other Greenbike docking stations are located near the City Center TRAX, Gallivan Plaza, and Library stations.

History

Before moving to the intermodal hub in 1999, Amtrak trains provided service at the Union Pacific Depot at 400 West and South Temple, and in 1986 moved to the Rio Grande Depot at 300 South Rio Grande Street.
Original plans did not have TRAX serving the intermodal hub, only Amtrak, Greyhound, the FrontRunner, and UTA buses.

Future Plans

Future expansion of the FrontRunner is anticipated to eventually include service north to Brigham City and south to Payson) and possibly Santaquin or maybe even Nephi.
There are ongoing studies regarding the feasibility of resuming Amtrak's Desert Wind and Pioneer routes, but so far there does not appear there would be sufficient riders to support the return of either route in the near future. Moreover, most of the current focus regarding the Desert Wind route is between Los Angeles, California and the Las Vegas Valley in Nevada. In addition, of the four possible routes considered for the Pioneer, two of them run from Denver, Colorado through southern Wyoming to Odgen, then north to Pocatello, Idaho and thereby entirely bypassing Salt Lake City.

Train schedules

The FrontRunner

On weekdays the first southbound FrontRunner train (to the Provo Station) leaves the Salt Lake Central Station at about 5:15 am and the first northbound train (to the Ogden Intermodal Transit Center) leaves at about 5:45 am. The last northbound train leaves at 11:30 pm and the last southbound train leaves at 11:50 pm. There is also a northbound train arriving, but terminating, at the station as late as about 12:15 am (early the next morning). The first, last, and only trains that go as far north as the Pleasant View Station leave at 5:20 pm and 6:20 pm.
On Saturdays the first southbound train leaves at about 6:00 am and the first northbound train leaves at about 8:45 am. The last northbound train leaves at 2:20 am (early Sunday morning). However, this train only goes as far as the next station (the North Temple Bridge/Guadalupe Station).  The last northbound train to the Ogden Intermodal Transit Center leaves at 11:50 pm. The last southbound train leaves at 12:11 am (early Sunday morning). There are also northbound trains arriving, but terminating, at the station as late as about 2:15 am (early Sunday morning).

Blue Line

On weekdays the first (southbound) Blue Line train (to the Draper Town Center Station) leaves the Salt Lake Central Station at about 5:45 am. The last train leaves at 11:28 pm.  However, the last train only goes as far south as the Fashion Place West Station. The last train to the Draper Town Center Station leaves at 10:43 pm.
On Saturdays the first train leaves at about 6:45 am and the last train leaves at 11:32 pm.  However, the last train only goes as far south as the Central Pointe Station.  The last train to the Draper Town Center Station leaves at 10:52 pm.
On Sundays the first train leaves at about 10:15 am and the last train leaves at 8:12 pm. However, the last train only goes as far as the Central Pointe Station.  The last train to the Draper Town Center Station leaves at 7:52 pm.
Blue Line trains run every fifteen minutes on weekdays and every twenty minutes on weekends.

California Zephyr

As of 15 July 2013, Amtrak's California Zephyr stops daily at the Salt Lake Intermodal Hub. Westbound trains (to Emeryville, California) arrive at 11:05 pm and depart at 11:30 pm. Eastbound trains (to Chicago, Illinois) arrive at 3:05 am and depart at 3:30 am.

UTA bus connections

Notes






