[[Charles Rivkin]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American television producers, The Jim Henson Company, Harvard Business School alumni, Yale University alumni, American media executives, Ambassadors of the United States to France, American Jews, 1962 births, Ambassadors of the United States to Monaco

Charles H. Rivkin currently serves as the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs.  He was confirmed by the U.S. Senate on February 11, 2014.nytimes.com/congress/votes/113/senate/2/29
Prior to his appointment, Rivkin served for more than four years as the United States Ambassador to France and Monaco.  He was the youngest Ambassador in nearly 60 years to serve as the senior U.S. representative in France, and his confirmation as Assistant Secretary marks the first time a non-career bilateral ambassador has led the Economic and Business Affairs Bureau.

Early life and education

Rivkin earned a B.A. from Yale University in 1984 where he graduated with distinction in political science and international relations.  At Yale he also sang with the famed Whiffenpoofs, America's oldest collegiate a cappella singing group.  He then earned an M.B.A. from Harvard University in 1988.
He speaks fluent French and spent years as a youth studying, traveling and working in France, including studying in Rennes with School Year Abroad and working as an intern at Renault. Business interests regularly brought him to Paris or Cannes prior to his appointment as ambassador.
Rivkin is one of four children of William R. Rivkin, the United States Ambassador to Luxembourg under President John F. Kennedy and United States Ambassador to Senegal and Gambia under President Lyndon B. Johnson;"Ms. Tolson Wed To Charles Rivkin" Aug. 5, 1990, The New York Times. and Enid Hammerman,Chicago Tribune: "Enid H. Long, 71 - Served on college board, medical relief missions" By James Janega January 29, 2002 who was the daughter of the owner of one of the largest children's clothing manufacturers at the time.thecable.com announcement The award was created in part with the help of Charles Rivkin's godfather, Hubert H. Humphrey, after the elder Rivkin's death at 47, in 1967.

Business career

Prior to entering government service, Rivkin worked in the media sector for over 20 years, serving as president and CEO of award winning entertainment companies such as The Jim Henson Company, home of the world-renowned "Muppets".  He also worked at Wildbrain where he won a BAFTA Award as Executive Producer of the hit TV series Yo Gabba Gabba.c21media.asp?area=79&article=46212  Rivkin helped engineer the sale of The Jim Henson Company to EM."Henson tab near $1 bil", Variety, 24 February 2000 His contribution to the television landscape has influenced generations of viewers and helped shape American popular culture.

Political activities

Rivkin served as an at-large California delegate for Senator John Kerry at the 2004 Democratic National Convention and for Barack Obama at the 2008 Democratic National Convention. Rivkin was the California finance co-chair for Obama's 2008 presidential campaign."New U.S. Envoy Takes Up Post" by Brian Knowlton, The New York Times, Aug. 16, 2009. Retrieved 8/16/09.

Ambassador to France

As Ambassador to France, Rivkin led America's first and one of its largest diplomatic missions, which has six constituent posts throughout France and represents as many as 50 federal agencies and departments. Ambassador Rivkin's service in France came at one of the bilateral relationship's strongest moments in recent history.euronews.  To honor the legacy of Franco-American friendship and to commemorate the 68th anniversary of the Allied invasion of mainland Europe during World War II, Ambassador Rivkin took part in a mass parachute jump over the coast of Normandy on June 3, 2012. In support of the US Navy, Rivkin became the first U.S. Ambassador to take off and land on a Navy aircraft carrier in an F-18 Super Hornet when he participated in a training exercise with naval aviators on the USS Eisenhower in March, 2013.lemeilleurdemarseille.fr/au-revoir/18722-marseille-likes-ike
According to the Department of State Office of Inspector General's report in May 2012, Ambassador Rivkin placed new emphasis on support for U.S. exports of goods and services into France.
As ambassador, Rivkin made youth outreach one of his key priorities and connected the embassy to the next generation of leaders throughout France, including in disadvantaged communities often referred to as the banlieues."How the U.S. Engages with French 'Banlieues'", Le Parisien, 26 January 2013.  Ambassador Rivkin organized a series of seminars for French youth, inviting them to meet with prominent American government officials, actors and musicians. Beginning with actor Samuel L. Jackson's April 2010 visit with students in Bondy, an economically depressed Parisian suburb, Ambassador Rivkin set up seminars with Attorney General Eric Holder and Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius, as well as Woody Allen, Jodie Foster, will.i. "Much of the embassy's outreach is meant to dispel 'mistruths' about the United States," Ambassador Rivkin said in an interview, adding, "It's easier to hate something you don't understand." In January 2012, Ambassador Rivkin broadened his outreach efforts by creating the Washburne Award for Innovation in Diversity, recognizing one French and one American company for their best practices in fostering diversity in hiring practices."Un plan coordonné en faveur de l'innovation | Nos amis américains | Prix Washburne", Le Monde, 30 May 2013.
On July 16, 2013, President Francois Hollande awarded Ambassador Rivkin the rank of Commander in the Légion d'honneur at the Elysée Palace.  Rivkin is the first U.S. Ambassador in half a century to receive the decoration from a sitting French president.

Personal life

In 1990, Rivkin married Susan M. Tolson.nytimes.html They live in Washington, D.C. and have two children, Elias and Lily.






