[[Nccu guitar club]]

CATEGORIES: Guitars

NCCU Guitar Club is one of the most popular and oldest clubs in National Chengchi University in Taiwan. The club have
already established for forty-eight years, and have more than two hundred
club members now.Lot of people
carrying a guitar on their backs forms a special scene around the campus. The guitar club holds regular activities and courses each year. There are guitar courses on Monday, Wednesday and Thursday nights in the classroom of Information Building. Also, there is routine practice on every Friday night in front of Administration Building. In addition, there are activities being held around the campus in each semester.  

History

Celebrities

NCCU guitar club has founded for 48 years, and during the long history, there are several 
outstanding club members who become celebrities in Taiwan. These famous people includes: 
Previous leaders===                                                                                
The previous leaders of the club are as following:
48th Xin Yi Huang (黃欣儀)
47th Xiao Ting Chen (陳曉亭)
46th Jia Wen Huang (黃嘉文)
45th Jian Min Xu (許建民)
44th Wen Shin Zhang (張文馨)
43rd Hui Yun Ji (紀慧筠)
42nd Shu Yu Xu (許書瑜)
41st Min Yu Qu (曲明玉)
40th Yue Jun Chen (陳岳俊)
39th Yi Qing Lin (林逸青)
38th Bo Yu Chen (陳伯宇)
37th Yu Lun Ma (馬玉倫)
36th Fen Ying (芬英)
35th Yi Fen (怡芬)
34th Xing Yu Wang (王星渝)
33rd Ji Yan (吉宴)
32nd
31st Qiao Pei Chen (陳巧佩)
30th Ran Zhi Xie (謝然之)
29th Yi Jie Wang (王義傑)

Working Groups

The cadre are separated into seven departments, including Art Designing and
Advertising, equipment affairs, publicist, financial affairs, teaching
affair, activity affair, photographing affairs.

Art Designing and Advertising

This group is in charge of art designing work including making posters,
songbooks, name cards, decoration of performing stages, and other art works.

Equipment affairs

This group is in charge of Setting up and keeping the equipment which are
used on performing such as guitars, bass, keyboard and jembe. They also
adjust the public addressing system before performance.

Publicity

This group is in charge of asking for donation from shop owners. They also connect 
with seniors or guitar clubs from other school.

Financial affairs

This group is in charge of keeping the record of income and expense, and
making budget in the beginning of semesters.

Curriculum designing

This group is in charge of designing the curriculum and selecting materials
for basic and intermediate course, and the group members are also be the
teachers of those courses.

Activity affair

This group is in charge of designing all of the activities that will be held
during the whole year (The detail information of activities will be explained
below), and the group members are also emcees during performance.

Photographing affairs

This group is in charge of taking photos and recording videos during
activities and performance, making record on routine staff meeting, as well
as keeping document and digital information.

Course

There are numerous members in NCCU Guitar Club and their degrees of guitar are different; therefore, the club has developed three different levels of courses for guitar learners' needs, and Students are divided into several groups which are supervised by the teaching assistants. The courses are as following: 

Basic Guitar Course

In this course, the teachers, who are often seniors in the club, focus on the basic skills of rhythm, chord, and finger style. There are several primary types of rhythm which are introduced and practiced in this class, includes Slow Soul, Folk Rock, Rumba, and Slow Rock. Chord is also important for beginners, so this course covers some simple major and minor chords. In addition, a few types of finger style are included in the course.    

Intermediate Guitar Course

This course is for the learners who have had the basic skill of playing guitar. The course contains more guitar playing skills, such as Staccato, Mute, Slide-on, and Bending. Also, music theory is included, like major scale or minor scale. More chords like component notes of chords, major 7, and minor 7 are important as well in intermediate guitar learning.   

Advanced Guitar Course

The Advanced Guitar Course focuses on more music style because learners have had the sufficient ability of playing guitar. Punk, Jazz, Blues, Bossa Nova are introduced and the teacher will demonstrate how they work.
In addition, to urge the club members to practice what they've learned, routine practices are held on every Friday night at the Administration Building of NCCU.

Activities

Performance to greet to arrivals

The performance is held on the begging of each semester to attract new members. It is considered as the most important activity in the first semester. The orientation will be held in the campus to introduce the club to the freshmen. (Other students are also welcomed.) After the orientation, a performance is carried out for the purpose of promoting the club.

Guitar Day

Guitar day, in the middle of the first semester, is a day for presentation. The purpose of the Guitar day is to gather the club members in the club to enjoy the music and atmosphere in this small concert. Friendship between club members are also reinforce by this activity.

Guitar Week

Guitar Week is the collaborative activity with the office of student affair. This activity also is called Outdoor Performance. Outdoor performance is hosted by the office of student affair; it includes the performances from artistic clubs such as Wind Band club, String Orchestra club and Guitar club. This activity is usually hosted in front of the Shi-Wei Hall, and the guitar club are going to present their show in 12/27 this year. Besides, the Guitar club has the other activity, which is sending love for couples by playing love songs during the Guitar Week.

Musical Night

Musical Night is the last activity in the first semester. The new members of this year are going to present what they've learned during the whole semester. Also, they will have a lottery game at the end of this musical night, and some guitar accessories are given to the lottery winners.

Winter Camp

In winter vacation, a camp will be hosted by the staffs of the club for new members. They not only learn other advanced guitar skills, but also meet more friends who are music lovers in this camp. Through playing lots of fun activities, the friendship between the members would become stronger. And the club staffs can also learn how to cooperate with each other effectively by working together.

Sports Day

In the second semester of the year, club members will have little games such as basketball game, dodge ball game, and other fun games. Besides playing guitar, club members think they need more outdoor activities, so the activity is set up two years ago and being held annually till now.

Annual Performance

The activity is regarded as the most important one every year. The staffs will present their efforts of the whole year by performing more difficult guitar playing skill and setting up a better stage for the performance. The staffs will be divided into six groups and each group has important function on supporting the leader to host the annual performance. The six groups are listed below:
(To check on every song they are going to present and make sure the performance will be perfect)
(To advertise the activity to more people, such as sticking the posters or set up the propagandistic blog)
(To raise funds for preparing the annual performance)
(To be in charge of all the equipment of the stage)
(To Design the clothes for the crew, the posters, cool card and the performing stage)
(To be responsible for all the money and control the budget)

Exhibition of historical stuff

The purpose of this activity is to gather the elder members of NCCU Guitar Club. Usually most of the elder members would perform in front of the younger members and share their own experiences with them. Members also chat with each other and glance at the historical stuff such as old pictures. Unlike other activities, the exhibition is only opened for the club members. Just like a party for the members, everybody feel very easy and have no pressure when they perform.

Other performances

Pao Chung Tea Festival
Anniversary celebrations of NCCU
Other commercial performances




