[[Sidney Poitier]]

CATEGORIES: 1927 births, Living people, Male actors from Miami, Florida, Actors awarded British knighthoods, Actors Studio members, Best Foreign Actor BAFTA Award winners, American male film actors, American agnostics, American people of Bahamian descent, Best Actor Academy Award winners, Best Drama Actor Golden Globe (film) winners, Cecil B. DeMille Award Golden Globe winners, Grammy Award-winning artists, Kennedy Center honorees, Knights Commander of the Order of the British Empire, Commandeurs of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres, People from Nassau, Bahamas, Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients, Academy Honorary Award recipients, Ambassadors of the Bahamas to Japan, Permanent Delegates of the Bahamas to UNESCO, African-American male actors, United States Army soldiers, American military personnel of World War II, Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors, Silver Bear for Best Actor winners, African-American military personnel, African-American film directors, African-American diplomats, Bahamian film directors, Bahamian male film actors, American autobiographers, African-American writers, Disney people, Male actors from New York City, African-American agnostics, Bahamian agnostics, African-American deists, Bahamian deists, American male stage actors, American male television actors

Sir Sidney Poitier, KBEBecause Poitier is a citizen of The Bahamas, a Commonwealth realm, this is a substantive (as opposed to honorary) knighthood, which entitles him to the style "Sir". However, Poitier employs the title only in connection with his official ambassadorial duties. (; born February 20, 1927), is a Bahamian-American actor, film director, author, and diplomat.
In 1964, Poitier became the first black person to win an Academy Award for Best Actor,James Baskett won an Honorary Academy Award, for his performance in Walt Disney's Song of the South (1946). The award was not competitive. See Awards for James Baskett, Internet Movie Database for his role in Lilies of the Field. In 1999, the American Film Institute named Poitier among the Greatest Male Stars of All Time, ranking 22nd on the list of 25.
Poitier has directed a number of popular movies, such as A Piece of the Action, Uptown Saturday Night, Let's Do It Again, (with friend Bill Cosby), Stir Crazy (starring Richard Pryor and Gene Wilder) and Ghost Dad (also with Cosby). In 2002, thirty-eight years after receiving the Best Actor Award, Poitier was chosen by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to receive an Honorary Award, designated "To Sidney Poitier in recognition of his remarkable accomplishments as an artist and as a human being."Sidney Poitier awards: Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences awards database Since 1997, he has been the Bahamian ambassador to Japan. On August 12, 2009, Sidney Poitier was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the United States of America's highest civilian honor, by President Barack Obama.article 12 August 2009  Washington Post

Early life

Sidney Poitier's parents were Evelyn (née Outten) and Reginald James Poitier,Sidney Poitier Film Reference biography  Bahamian farmers who owned a farm on Cat Island and traveled to Miami in the U.S.A. to sell tomatoes and other produce. Reginald worked as a cab driver in Nassau, Bahamas. His birth was two months premature and he was not expected to survive, but his parents remained three months in Miami to nurse him to health.8. Poitier grew up in the Bahamas (then a British colony) but because of his birth in the U.S., he automatically gained U.S. citizenship.
Poitier lived with his family on Cat Island until he was ten, when they moved to Nassau.
At the age of 15 he was sent to Miami to live with his brother. At the age of 17, he moved to New York City and held a string of jobs as a dishwasher.  A Jewish waiter sat with him every night for several weeks helping him learn to read the newspaper.Poitier, Sidney.  The Measure of a Man.  (2000).  New York:  HarperCollins Publishers

Hollywood

Acting career

Poitier joined the American Negro Theater, but was rejected by audiences. Contrary to what was expected of black actors at the time, Poitier's tone deafness made him unable to sing. On his second attempt at the theater, he was noticed and given a leading role in the Broadway production Lysistrata, for which he received good reviews. By the end of 1949, he had to choose between leading roles on stage and an offer to work for Darryl F. Zanuck in the film No Way Out (1950). His performance in No Way Out, as a doctor treating a white bigot (played by Richard Widmark), was noticed and led to more roles, each considerably more interesting and more prominent than those most black actors of the time were offered. Poitier's breakout role was as a member of an incorrigible high school class in Blackboard Jungle (1955).
Poitier was the first male black actor to be nominated for a competitive Academy Award (for The Defiant Ones, 1958). He was also the first black actor to win the Academy Award for Best Actor (for Lilies of the Field in 1963). (James Baskett was the first black male to receive an Oscar, an Honorary Academy Award for his performance as Uncle Remus in the Walt Disney production of Song of the South in 1948, while Hattie McDaniel predated them both, winning as Best Supporting Actress for her role in 1939's Gone with the Wind, making her the first black person to be nominated for and receive an Oscar). His satisfaction at this honor was undermined by his concerns that this award was more of the industry congratulating itself for having him as a token and it would inhibit him from asking for more substantive considerations afterward.
He acted in the first production of A Raisin in the Sun on Broadway in 1959, and later starred in the film version released in 1961. He also gave memorable performances in The Bedford Incident (1965), and A Patch of Blue (1965) co-starring Elizabeth Hartman and Shelley Winters. In 1967, he was the most successful draw at the box office, the commercial peak of his career, with three popular films, Guess Who's Coming to Dinner; To Sir, with Love and In the Heat of the Night. The last film featured his most successful character, Virgil Tibbs, a Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, detective whose subsequent career was the subject of two sequels: They Call Me MISTER Tibbs! (1970) and The Organization (1971).
Poitier began to be criticized for being typecast as over-idealized black characters who were not permitted to have any sexuality or personality faults, such as his character in Guess Who's Coming To Dinner. Poitier was aware of this pattern himself, but was conflicted on the matter: he wanted more varied roles, but also felt obliged to set a good example with his characters to defy previous stereotypes, as he was the only major black actor in the American film industry at the time. For instance, in 1966 he turned down an opportunity to play the lead in an NBC production of Othello with that spirit in mind. On March 2, 2014, Poitier appeared with Angelina Jolie at the 86th Academy Awards, to present the Best Director award. He was given a standing ovation.

Directorial career

Poitier directed several films, the most successful being the Richard Pryor-Gene Wilder comedy Stir Crazy which for years was the highest grossing film directed by a person of African descent.  Poitier replaced original director Joseph Sargent. The trio of Poitier, Cosby, and Belafonte reunited again (with Poitier again directing) in Uptown Saturday Night. Poitier also directed Cosby in Let's Do It Again, A Piece of the Action, and Ghost Dad.  Poitier also directed the first popular dance battle movie Fast Forward in 1985.
From 1995 to 2003 he served as a Member of the Board of Directors of The Walt Disney Company."Actor Takes Center Stage as Disney Trial Grinds On"  New York Times article 12 August 2004

Recording career

Poitier recorded an album with the composer Fred Katz called Poitier Meets Plato, in which Poitier recites passages from Plato's writings.Goudsouzian, Aram; Sidney Poitier: Man, Actor, Icon, The University of North Carolina Press, 200, page 395

Diplomatic career

In April 1997, Poitier was appointed Ambassador of the Bahamas to Japan, a position he currently holds. He is also the Ambassador of the Bahamas to UNESCO.

Personal life

Poitier was first married to Juanita Hardy from April 29, 1950, until 1965.  He has been married to Joanna Shimkus, a Canadian-born former actress of Lithuanian and Irish descent, since January 23, 1976. He has four daughters with his first wife and two with his second: Beverly,Poitier-Henderson Holds Book Signing - WLBT 3 - Jackson, MS: Pamela,The New York Times > New York Region > Hundreds Mourn Ossie Davis in Harlem Sherri,Daughters of King, Malcolm X Also Have a Message Gina,Atlanta News, Sports, Atlanta Weather, Business News | ajc.Advice For Upn: Get Rid Of 'Abby' - New York Daily News

Honors and awards

Filmography

Actor

Director

Television

Works about Poitier

Autobiographies

Poitier has written three autobiographical books:
Poitier is also the subject of the biography Sidney Poitier: Man, Actor, Icon (2004) by historian Aram Goudsouzian. 
Poitier wrote the novel Montaro Caine, released in May 2013.

Movies about Poitier








