[[Railjet]]

CATEGORIES: High-speed rail in Austria, High-speed trains in Austria, Railway lines in Austria, Passenger train running at least at 200 km/h in commercial operations

The Railjet is a high-speed train of the Austrian Federal Railways (ÖBB), which was introduced with the timetable change of 2008-2009 and operates at speeds of up to .  The railjet is the premier service of the ÖBB and operates both domestically within Austria and on international services to adjacent countries.

History

Rather than choose electrical multiple units (EMUs) such as ICE 3 or Shinkansen, ÖBB opted for locomotive-hauled push-pull high-speed trains, which could be hauled by its existing fleet of Taurus high-speed Siemens EuroSprinter electric locomotives.ÖBB railjet : Eine neue Fahrzeuggeneration für die ÖB, Slide 5
In September 2011 Siemens agreed the sale of sixteen Railjet trainsets to the Czech State Railways (České Dráhy); the sets should have been originally built for an uncompleted order for ÖBB,

Introduction and operations

The first unit was produced on 15 September 2008, and put on display at Graz, then Innotrans in late September and then at Salzburger Verkehrstage on 15 October.17
The first railjet trains began test runs in late 2008. Commercial services started on 14 December 2008 between Munich, Vienna and Budapest. rész), Summary, p.11 In December 2009 service started between Vienna and Zurich and Bregenz.5
Operations on the routes Vienna to Graz, Ljubljana and/or Zagreb, and from Vienna to Villach and Venice and for an increased service between Vienna and Bregenz/Zurich via Salzburg and Innsbruck were also planned from the end of 2010 onwards.2
Following the completion of the track improvement works on the Westbahn, running at speeds between  (from 2012) the journey time between Salzburg and Vienna is now about 2hr20min.Stefan Wehinger, railjet to take off next year, section: "Acceleration on the Westbahn"

Design

A Railjet train set consists of seven individual coaches that are permanently coupled with airtight interconnections, but with buffer and hook couplings on the outer ends of the set of coaches suitable for buffer and chain screw couplingÖBB railjet : Eine neue Fahrzeuggeneration für die ÖB, Slide 8  Two complete train sets with two locomotives can be run as a pair giving a train of fourteen carriages. The number of carriages per train can be extended up to ten in a single train unit.Marl, Pettauer, railjet, Slide 4
The industrial design company Spirit Design was contracted to provide an exterior and interior design,

Passenger accommodation

Railjet trains have three levels of service; economy, business and premium classes.Marl, Pettauer, railjet, Slides 10-16
Premium class has the highest level of service, premium seating for 16 premium passengers is located in the front part of the control car at the opposite end of the train to the locomotive. The seating plan is in an 'open compartments' style,Similar to a Corridor coach layout, but open plan and doorless and intended to be a considerable improvement over previous first class accommodation. A galley separates the premium and business class compartments.
Business class seating occupies the remainder of the control car, the second coach and half of the third coach which also contains spaces and facilities for wheel chair users. 76 seats are provided in 2+1 formation. The remainder of the third coach contains the restaurant which provides an at seat service. The remaining four coaches provide 316 economy class seats in 2+2 formation, the fourth coach also contains an area for families and children.
From the thirty eighth set of trains onwards the galley is replaced with a seated restaurant area.

Passenger vehicles' construction

The bodies of the vehicles are constructed from ribbed, cold-rolled steel, with the driving trailer deriving its forward end shape from the Taurus locomotives.
The passenger cars are equipped with electropneumatic disc brakes (3 per axle in SF400 bogiesMarl, Pettauer, railjet, Slides 29-33), as well as electromagnetic track brakes (eddy current brakes), and a parking brake. The driving trailer also has a manually operated brake using the disc brakes. rész), section: 2.12 to 2.12.6 Primary bogie suspension is by coil spring, and secondary suspension is pneumatic. The driving trailers are designated 'Afmpz', the premium and business class vehicle 'Ampz', the 'bistro' or restaurant car 'ARbmpz' and the economy class cars 'Bmpz'.ÖBB railjet : Eine neue Fahrzeuggeneration für die ÖB, Slide 10
The intermediate passenger wagon bodyshells of the first units were manufactured by Siemens in Maribor, Slovenia. Final assembly takes place at the rail works at Simmering, Vienna; the first three trains were assembled by Siemens, the remainder by ÖBB Technische Services.
Siemens is the main contractor for the vehicles and markets the coach design as Viaggio Comfort.ÖBB railjet : Eine neue Fahrzeuggeneration für die ÖB, Slide 2 Brake equipment is supplied by Knorr-Bremse, air-conditioning by Liebherr, and doors, carriage connections, toilets and seats are manufactured by other subcontractors.

Traction

The railjet vehicles are designed to be propelled in push pull mode by standard locomotives, specifically the Taurus locomotives already owned by the Austrian Federal Railways, but can also be hauled by any other electric or diesel locomotives.
The first twenty three ÖBB 1116 locomotives used on the railjet services were given a number of modifications; a third pantograph and the relevant train safety systems for operating outside Austria (Hungary and Switzerland) were fitted, and were fitted with a silver coloured side skirt below the floor level was fitted on the locomotives giving a more streamlined appearance. A second set of twenty locomotives were equipped only for work in Austria and Germany, and did not receive the side panels, or extra systems for international working.



Notes



Sources

Further information




