[[The Unthanks]]

CATEGORIES: British folk music groups, English folk musical groups, Real World artists, Northumbrian music, EMI Records artists

The Unthanks (until 2009, Rachel Unthank and the Winterset)[ref]
"They may call themselves folk musicians, but it is the strains of jazz, foreign scales and other unlikely influences that set The Unthanks apart from the rest of the Neo-folk movement."[/ref]

Career

Rachel Unthank and the Winterset

=Cruel Sister=

Originally an all-female band, Rachel Unthank and the Winterset made their debut performance at Towersey Village Festival in August 2004 and, on 11 May 2005, launched their debut album Cruel Sister at Holmfirth Folk Festival.     
=The Bairns==== 
Their follow-up album, The Bairns, released on 28 August 2007,
Reviewing The Bairns for BBC Music, Mel Ledgard described it as "an album with a cinematic quality, huge in dramatic atmosphere". 
The band were nominated for three further BBC Radio 2 Folk Awards in 2008 (Best Band, Best Live Act, Horizon Award), and were successful in one category, receiving the Horizon Award at the ceremony in The Brewery, London.

The Unthanks

=Here's the Tender Coming==== 
In 2009 the band became The Unthanks, and their manager Adrian McNally and his childhood friend Chris Price joined the group. Their third album (the first under The Unthanks moniker), Here's the Tender Coming, released on 14 September 2009, was Folk Album of the Year for The Guardian and also for MOJO magazine. Sid Smith, of BBC Music, described it as an "astonishing record", "beautiful", "haunting", and "beguiling".
=Last==== 
Their fourth album, Last, was released on 14 March 2011, reaching number 40 in the UK albums chart, and was well received by the critics. Sid Smith, for BBC Music, said that "Proving once again that sad songs are very often the best, their fourth album is brimming with material that is as haunting as it is beautiful."
Writing in NME, Anthony Thornton said that the album "proves the mix of Rachel and Becky's voices to be one of the true wonders of 21st-century music"."Perhaps the most surprising version on here is a cover of King Crimson's "Starless" from their 1974 album "Red" which is one of their greatest tracks but transformed on here from a song which in the primary version ends with a blistering sax jazz rock workout into in a slow ballad now based around trumpet and strings and half its original size. Rachel and Becky remain true to Robert Fripp's latent melody but infuse it with a vocal depth, which is astonishing." and Alex Glasgow ("Close the Coalhouse Door").
=The Songs of Robert Wyatt and Antony & The Johnsons==== 
In a departure from their usual practice of showcasing material from their studio albums, the Unthanks performed two concerts at London's Union Chapel on 8 and 9 December 2010 consisting entirely of material written by Robert Wyatt and by Antony Hegarty of Antony and the Johnsons."..."

=The Unthanks with Brighouse and Rastrick Brass Band=

In July 2011, starting with concerts at Durham Cathedral and at London's Barbican Hall, they began a UK tour with the Brighouse and Rastrick Brass Band, performing new brass arrangements of songs from all four Unthanks albums, as well as new material. The album is designated Vol. 2 in The Unthanks' Diversions series and follows on from Vol. 1 (The Songs of Robert Wyatt and Antony & The Johnsons).

=Songs from the Shipyards=

Songs from the Shipyards, Vol. 3 in The Unthanks' Diversions series, was released in November 2012. This is a studio-recorded album of songs from a soundtrack, compiled by The Unthanks, which was first performed live in February 2011 at Newcastle upon Tyne's Tyneside Cinema to accompany the showing of a documentary film by Richard Fenwick about the history of shipbuilding on the Tyne, Wear and Tees.

=Other work=

On 16 December 2012 the Unthanks presented a television programme on BBC Four called  A Very English Winter: The Unthanks. This showed the customs that people celebrated on different days of the later autumn and winter, and ended with information about the famous Pancake Race at Olney.
Rachel and Becky Unthank are featured on Sting's 2013 album, The Last Ship.

Personal lives

Rachel and Becky Unthank are sisters, born seven and a half years apart, who grew up in Ryton, Tyne and Wear. Rachel graduated from Glasgow University and Becky went to Manchester Metropolitan University. Their father, George Unthank, is a well-known local Northumberland folk singer in a group called the Keelers, named after the boatmen who sailed the Tyne.[ref]"The Keelers: George Unthank"
The Keelers official website. Retrieved 24 May 2011.[/ref]
Rachel is married to group member Adrian McNally who is also the group's manager, musical arranger and producer. They have two sons: George, born in 2011; and Arthur, born in 2013. 

Discography






