[[Víctor J. Montilla]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, Loyola University New Orleans alumni, Living people, Puerto Rican businesspeople

Víctor Montilla (born May 26, 1970) is a Puerto Rican businessman, publishing senior executive, and former president of the Puerto Rico Corporation for Public Broadcasting (CPB). He received his B.A. in Communications in 1992 from Loyola University New Orleans and is the first Puerto Rican recipient of the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences' Governor's Award.

Early life

Víctor Montilla Torres was born on May 26, 1970 and graduated from high school (Colegio Marista Guaynabo) in 1988.

Career

Publishing

In 2010, Montilla was named as Executive Vice President  for Casiano Communications, a private Puerto Rico-based company mostly known for its publishing of various periodicals and magazines which are distributed in Puerto Rico, the Caribbean, the continental United States and in 20 other countries. With total global circulations reaching over 10,302,700 annually, it is the largest U.S. Hispanic-owned publisher of periodicals, magazines and websites in the United States.
He was key in the upgrade of the online version of Caribbean Business, and the launch of the application the digital version of the site, and interactive advertising.

Television Production

Beginning in 1990, Montilla participated in several communications-related internships, as Public Relations Assistant for Triple S, floor director for NBC Sports in New Orleans, editor at Guastella Films, and production assistant at Cordero Teleproducciones, among others. By 1992 he had established himself back in Puerto Rico and begun his career, working at Cordero Teleproducciones with television pioneer Paquito Cordero.  Working under the tutelage of Cordero, Montilla was general producer for several comedy and variety productions such as El Show de las Doce, Musicomedia, and the gossip show X-Clusivo.
In 2000, Montilla founded Montilla Television Group, under which he created Los Del Barrio, the first animated sitcom in Puerto Rico.  Later on that same year, he created and produced En Casa de Luis Raúl, a late-night talk show that marked the return to the local screen of comedian Luis Raúl and integrated the use of the Internet.

Presidency of WIPR

In 2005, Montilla ceased laboring as a television producer and assumed the position as President of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, which harbors two television stations (WIPR-TV and WIPM-TV), two radio stations (Allegro 91.3, or WIPR-FM, and 940 am, or WIPR (AM)) and an Internet portal. Goals of his presidency included the expansion of the local production workshops and the development of the Corporation on the road to economic independence.
As president, Montilla was immediately confronted by the 2006 Puerto Rico budget crisis, which included the government shutdown. Montilla established a Fund Raising Department within the Corporation in order to make it possible to allocate better resources, keep the local talent working aid in the development of larger scale local productions, acquire better resources, and support the Corporation's move towards self-sufficiency and the permanence of production opportunities in Puerto Rico.  In addition, he established a sales department aimed at servicing advertising agencies, public and private corporations and businesses, offering marketing and Communications services through television, radio, internet, theater and other media.
Through initiatives such as these and the intense lobbying with people from the public and private sector, Montilla was successful  in keeping open the Communications Project, or PROCOM, which is geared towards teaching television and radio production, photography and other media to low income communities through workshops that are provided directly in their communities.  Projects from these workshops are exhibited annually at a local showcase.  Additionally, the projects have been recognized globally in Mexico, Spain, New York and Australia.  In 2007, the documentary Cabo Rojo: Mucho Más Que Playa, earned an Emmy Award nomination from the National Academy of Televisión Arts and Sciences Suncoast Chapter.Untitled Page

=WIPR's 50th anniversary=

In July 2008, Montilla celebrated TUTV's (formerly WIPR-TV) 50th Anniversary.  The celebration was commemorated by the production of the documentary WIPR-50 Años. became the first station in the island to produce and broadcast in high definition format. At a cost of US$28 million, the new facilities—which include an electronic room, master controls, three studios, studio controls, antennas, and cameras in Hato Rey and Mayagüez—set a new technological standard for production and broadcasting in Puerto Rico and the Caribbean.
On July 7, 2008, Montilla held a press conference at the station, where he inaugurated WIPR-TV's high definition facilities. At the inaugural ceremony, which also launched the beginning of Television Week, an annual celebration of television media in the island, Montilla, accompanied by President of the Board of Directors Carlos Ríos, pressed the symbolic button that launched TUTV into the digital era.

Taking Puerto Rican television beyond the shores

=Road to the Emmy's=

In 1998, while he was working as a producer with Paquito Cordero, Montilla set out on a quest to take Puerto Rican television to a new level and allow excellence to be recognized. It was then that he came across National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences' homepage only to find out that only four of the Academy's chapters evaluated Spanish-speaking entries, which was source of great concern.  But even more so, Puerto Rico did not belong to any chapter and so could not compete amongst other productions in the US and was not eligible for the coveted Emmy Award.San Juan City Magazine, People to Watch in the Arts: Victor Montilla Dec/Jan 2004
Montilla then contacted the Academy's Suncoast Chapter.  The process of lobbying for Puerto Rico's acceptance was an uphill battle, which included a formal petition to the Academy.
In 2000, Bob Behrens, chairman of the board, formally announced that Puerto Rico had been granted a one-year trial.  Great press coverage followed this announcement encouraging Puerto Rican producers to submit, for the first time ever, their productions for consideration. This feat led to Montilla being unanimously elected as vice-president of the Chapter and re-elected in 2005.

=Historical alliance=

As part of his goal to expand the reach of Puerto Rican programming beyond the island's shores, Montilla announced in 2006 an alliance with Televicentro-WAPAmerica to broadcast TUTV's shows in key Hispanic markets to reach Puerto Rican residents of the United Status through WAPA América, the channel of Televicentro's local productions."WAPA & Puerto Rican Public TV reach deal for U.S. Market." Apr-25-2006. Through this agreement, TUTV, agreed to provide 16 hours of local programming weekly, that were added to the 78 hours that Televicentro de Puerto Rico had been transmitting through WAPA América, a major economic move towards exporting productions and generating additional income to TUTV.
At the press conference, where Montilla was accompanied by Juan José Valentín, VP Marketing TUTV, Margarita Millán VP of Programming of Televicentro and Joe Ramos President of Televicentro, Montilla spoke as to the importance of exporting Puerto Rico's programming in this global era: "It's an excellent opportunity that allows us to export our varied programming, as well as our local talent. Our programming will be the door through which our Hispanic friends, especially the Puerto Ricans living abroad, can enjoy the best of our Caribbean culture. This alliance sets the precedent that public television programming can result attractive and marketable to commercial stations.""HISTORICAL TELEVISION ALLIANCE TUTV AND TELEVICENTRO Transmit through WAPA AMERICA" Apr-18-2006.

Awards

In 2006, the Board of Governors of the Suncoast Chapter of the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences (NATAS), voted unanimously to give the Governor's Award to Montilla.  This was only the second Governor's Award to a representative of Spanish-language television; the first was presented to Univision and Telemundo networks in 1991. It was also the first time the Governor's award was given to a Puerto Rican broadcaster."Source: NATAS Suncoast Chapter Emmy Award Ceremony 2006." Montilla was also named Television Executive of the Year by AdNotas."Los Ejecutivos del Año de ADnotas." 16 Oct. 2006.






