[[Moving Wallpaper]]

CATEGORIES: 2000s British television series, 2008 British television programme debuts, 2009 British television programme endings, British comedy-drama television programmes, English-language television programming, ITV television programmes, Television series about television

Moving Wallpaper is a British satirical comedy-drama television series set in a TV production unit. It ran on ITV for two series in 2008–2009. The subject of the first series was the production of a soap called Echo Beach, each episode of which aired directly after the Moving Wallpaper episode about its production. The second series was based around the production of a "zombie show" called Renaissance. Ben Miller confirmed in May 2009 on his Twitter account that no further series will be made.com/bennylicious
The title, "Moving Wallpaper", is a disparaging term applied to uninspiring TV shows, or to television in general, referring to the perception that modern television viewers are "mindless absorbers of images", as if staring at wallpaper. 175, Dan Fleming, Henry A. Giroux and Lawrence Grossberg, Manchester University Press, 2000

History

The show was created by Tony Jordan and produced by Kudos for ITV. Filming for series one started in July 2007 and the show began airing on ITV on 10 January 2008, continuing at 9 pm on Fridays thereafter for twelve weekly episodes.30 pm.
A six-episode second series of Moving Wallpaper was commissioned and began airing on ITV on 28 February 2009, again in the Friday 9 pm slot. The companion soap Echo Beach was cancelled, however, and the storylines of series two instead revolved around a "zombie show" called Renaissance. screened after the conclusion of the second series only on the ITV website, itv.
In Australia, season one of Moving Wallpaper aired back-to-back with Echo Beach on ABC2 each Friday at 8:30pm from 30 May 2008.

Premise

Moving Wallpaper storylines revolve around a crazed producer, Jonathan Pope (played by Ben Miller), trying to hold together an assortment of egotistic and neurotic writers and actors through the vicissitudes of Echo Beach production (series one), while simultaneously fighting off his bitchy boss.
Series one ended with the producer on the verge of learning whether a second series of Echo Beach had been commissioned. Series two picked up from this point with the news that the network had cancelled Echo Beach (mirroring the real-life circumstance). However, a clause in Pope's contract compels the network to allow him to make a pilot for a new show, which largely by accident turns out to be the "zombie show" Renaissance. After rejection by the network, Pope forces a website editor to upload the pilot to the itv.

Cast

 Characters in Renaissance  Characters in Echo Beach

Reception

The first episode of series one of Moving Wallpaper attracted 5 million viewers on average with a 21% audience share,
Viewing figures fell again at the start of series two, with the first episode watched by 2.1 million viewers"Moving Wallpaper outstripped by Six Nations rugby", Guardian, 2 March 2009 and the third attracting just 1.39 million, although it was up against Comic Relief on the BBC."Comic Relief peaks with 12.8 million", Digital Spy, 15 March 2009
Media reviews for Moving Wallpaper were largely positive (though the series one companion show Echo Beach was received less favourably). The Telegraphs reviewer described Moving Wallpaper as "sharply written and cleverly characterised","Review: Margaret (BBC Two) - Moving Wallpaper (ITV1)", Telegraph, 2 March 2009 and a review in The Times called it "joyously and uproariously funny"."Friday's Top TV", The Times, 21 February 2009 The Mirror was less enthusiastic, however, saying "Moving Wallpaper remains a laboured in-joke at its own expense","Moving Wallpaper is a laboured in-joke at its own expense", Mirror, 28 February 2009 and celebrity website Hecklerspray agreed describing it as being "merely millimetres away from being the epitome of mediocre, easy watch television.""TV Review: Moving Wallpaper", Hecklerspray.com, 10 March 2009
The episode of Moving Wallpaper broadcast on 20 March 2009, in which a transsexual script writer was made the butt of a series of jokes, was described by groups representing transgendered people as transphobic and likely to encourage hate-crime and discrimination against transgendered people. "Moving Wallpaper in 'transphobia' row". Broadcastnow (Emap Media). Retrieved on 1 April 2009. Ofcom, the UK broadcast media watchdog, received 100 complaints over the episode and launched an investigation to see if any broadcasting codes were breached. ITV and the programme were cleared by Ofcom in June 2009.chortle.co.uk/news/2009/06/08/9036/itv_cleared_over_tranny_gags

DVD release

The complete first series was released on Region 2 DVD on 24 March 2008, combined with the Echo Beach series. It was also released separately.






