[[Casey Borer]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, Albany River Rats players, American ice hockey defencemen, Carolina Hurricanes draft picks, Carolina Hurricanes players, Charlotte Checkers (2010–) players, Eisbären Berlin players, Ice hockey people from Minnesota, Living people, Sportspeople from Minneapolis, Minnesota, St. Cloud State Huskies men's ice hockey players, USA Hockey National Team Development Program players, HC Pardubice players, Thomas Sabo Ice Tigers players

Casey Patrick Borer (born July 28, 1985 in Minneapolis, Minnesota) is an American ice hockey player who is currently playing for the Eisbären Berlin of the Deutsche Eishockey Liga (DEL).

Playing career

Borer grew up in Brooklyn Park. As a junior he was selected to play in the USA Hockey National Team Development Program in Ann Arbor before recruited to play collegiate hockey with St. Cloud State University of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association. He was drafted in the 3rd round, 69th overall in the 2004 NHL Entry Draft by the Carolina Hurricanes. 
Borer was recalled to the Hurricanes to play his first career game on January 2, 2008 against the Atlanta Thrashers.  At the time, the Hurricanes were playing a home-and-home series against the Thrashers, and Borer scored his first NHL goal a game later, on January 4 against Kari Lehtonen of the Thrashers.
Borer, 24, has played a total of 11 NHL games for the Hurricanes this season, scoring three points (1 goal, 2 assists), recording four penalty minutes and averaging 15:17 of ice time per game. Recalled to Carolina on February 14 for the second time this year, the Minnesota native played in three games for the Hurricanes during his most recent call-up, averaging almost 29 shifts and 17:58 of ice time per game. Borer ranks third amongst Albany defensemen with 19 points (6 goals, 13 assists) and leads the team with a +19 plus/minus rating.
February 21, 2008 Casey was returned to Albany River Rats of the American Hockey League (AHL).  He was on loan for the injured Bret Hedican who was cleared for play earlier in the week.
Casey sustained a season-ending injury of his own in the March 28, 2008 match with Syracuse Crunch.  He collided with Crunch Center, Trevor Frischmon.  He recalls the incident, "It was the start of the period, and they didn't let the ice freeze," Borer said. "I was carrying the puck up and it got stuck in the water, and I kind of twisted back for it with my torso, and my knees didn't come with me. The guy was already lining up to hit me, and I was in a vulnerable position. My knee must have been exposed, and we just got twisted up weird."  The injury led to surgery on his right knee April 7, 2008 in Raleigh, NC by team doctors of the Carolina Hurricanes.
In late February 2009, he again suffered a season-ending injury when his C5 cervical vertebra was broken in a team bus accident in Albany.
Prior to the 2010–11 season he signed with the Carolina Hurricanes organization,
On July 7, 2013, Borer left the Thomas Sabo Ice Tigers and signed a one-year contract to remain in Germany with Eisbären Berlin.

Career statistics

Regular season and playoffs

International

Awards and achievements

Served as team captain for two consecutive seasons for St. Cloud State, which finished the season ranked No. 7 in the country his senior year.
Attended Shattuck-St. Mary's prep school and Huron High School, winning the Midget AAA national title while at Shattuck-St. Mary's … Was part of the U.S. National Team Development Program before attending St. Cloud State, and has twice represented the United States in international competition: at the 2003 Under-18 World Junior Championships and the 2005 World Junior Championships … Was twice chosen as a WCHA All-Academic selection

Personal

Born to John and Raven Borer, Casey has three siblings - two brothers, Brady and Riley, and a sister, Mollie.






