[[Respiratory therapy]]

CATEGORIES: Rehabilitation team, Respiratory therapy

A Respiratory Therapist is a specialized healthcare practitioner who has graduated from a college or a university and passed a national board certifying examination.  Respiratory therapists work under the general supervision of a primary provider, such as a physician or nurse practitioner most often in intensive care and operating rooms, but also in outpatient clinics.
Respiratory therapists are specialists and educators in cardiology and pulmonology.  Respiratory therapists are also advanced-practice clinicians in airway management; establishing and maintaining the airway during management of trauma, intensive care, and may administer anaesthesia for surgery or conscious sedation.
Respiratory therapists often are in charge of initiating and managing life support for people in intensive care units and emergency departments, stabilizing, treating and managing pre-hospital and hospital-to-hospital patient transport by air or ground ambulance.
In the outpatient setting Respiratory Therapists are often educators in asthma clinics, ancillary clinical staff in pediatric clinics, and sleep-disorder diagnosticians in sleep-clinics.  They also serve as clinical providers in cardiology clinics and cath-labs.

Clinical practice

Respiratory therapists educate, diagnose, and treat people who are suffering from heart and lung problems.  Specialised in both cardiac and pulmonary care, Respiratory Therapists often collaborate with specialists in pulmonology and anaesthesia in various aspects of clinical care of patients. Respiratory therapists provide a vital role in both medicine and nursing. A vital role in ICU is the initiation an maintenance of mechanical ventilation and the care of artificial airways.
Respiratory therapists are also primary clinicians in conducting tests to measure lung function and teaching people to manage asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder among many other cardiac and lung functions.
Internationally, Respiratory Therapists that provide lung function testing are termed respiratory scientists, but in North America, they may be a Respiratory Therapist or may also be a certified pulmonary function technician in the United States.
Outside of clinics and hospitals, Respiratory Therapists often manage home oxygen needs of patients and their families, providing around the clock support for home ventilators and other equipment for conditions like sleep apnea.
In the clinic or outpatient setting Respiratory Therapists assist with diagnosis and serve as an educator for patients suffering from cardiac and respiratory illness.
In other settings Respiratory Therapists are found in schools as asthma educators, working with teachers and coaches about childhood symptoms of asthma and how to spot an emergency. In the United States, legislation has been introduced several times to allow Respiratory Therapists certified as asthma specialists with registered Respiratory Therapist certification to prescribe and manage previously diagnosed respiratory patients in physician clinics.
Pulmonary rehabilitation may be initiated as a treatment as a source for continuity of improvement after a hospital stay or as a therapeutic way to increase quality of life.   Pulmonary rehabilitation is intended to educate the patient, the family, and improve the overall quality of life and prognosis for the patient.   Pulmonary Rehabilitation involves therapies and evaluations by Respiratory Therapists, Occupational Therapists and Physical Therapists.

Credentialing and licensure

United States and Canada

In the United States and Canada, Respiratory Therapists are healthcare practitioners who after receiving at least an associate's degree in cardio-pulmonary science, complete a credentialing process.
After satisfactorily completing the required examinations and added to a registry, the practitioner is then eligible to apply for a license to practice in the region governed by their respective licensing body.
In the United States, specialist Respiratory Therapists are clinicians who hold National Board for Respiratory Care specialty credentials, which may include neonatal/pediatric specialist (CRT-NPS or RRT-NPS), adult critical care specialist (RRT-ACCS), sleep disorder specialist (CRT-SDS or RRT-SDS), and pulmonary function technologist (CPFT or RPFT). The NBRC's RRT-ACCS examination is the newest NBRC examination that was launched in 2012.
Professional credentials denoted as a certified Asthma Educator (AE-C) may also be earned by passing the National Asthma Educator Certification Board (NAECB).
In some parts of Canada, one may practice as a Provisional Respiratory Therapist after graduating, until writing and passing the CBRC exam.  In Canada, similar credentialing and advanced training exists.

International respiratory care

Except for the United States and Canada, very few countries have a dedicated professional role for respiratory health. In these countries, respiratory care is provided by physiotherapists, nurses and physicians that have chosen to specialize in this field.  In many countries this recognition is in a transition stage; as an example, in 2011, hospitals in Beijing, China began a recruitment drive to acquire Respiratory Therapists for their intensive care units where previously nurses were the only clinician.

Canada

Upon graduation from an accredited school of respiratory therapy, the graduate is then eligible to write the national exam administered by the Canadian Board for Respiratory Care.
Success on this examination will then allow the Respiratory Therapist to register with any licensing body in Canada.  Alberta, Manitoba, New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, Ontario, Quebec and Saskatchewan are the Canadian provinces with provincial licensing bodies; in these provinces, it is illegal to practice the profession of Respiratory Care without first being licensed as a full or provisional member with the provincial licensing body.
These provinces are so-called regulated provinces.  In some provinces, one may work provisionally upon graduating, until writing and passing the exam. In all other jurisdictions, the licensing body for the profession of Respiratory Care is the Canadian Society for Respiratory Therapy.
Registration as a full member is optional for Respiratory Therapists living in regulated provinces, however, for Respiratory Therapists living in non-regulated provinces, registration as a full member with the CSRT is compulsory.  Registration with the provincial regulatory body or the CSRT (in non-regulated provinces) confers upon the Respiratory Therapist the title of Registered Respiratory Therapist (RRT). Canada and the United States recognize each their cardio-pulmonary education structure as equal, however a qualifying exam must be written in order to practice in either nation.
There is pressure for the program to become a degree, as other therapies (Physical Therapy, Occupational Therapy) now require a Master's Degree or greater.  However, in some places such as Alberta, Canada the cardio-pulmonary course work are only offered at technical schools which are unable to grant a formal degree.

France

Respiratory therapy is a sub-specialty of physical therapy in France. Federation Francaise des Masseurs Kinesitherapeutes Reeducateurs   Respiratory care as a specialty is regulated by the Fédération Française des Masseurs Kinésithérapeutes Rééducateurs.

Germany

The German Respiratory SocietyDeutsche Gesellschaft für Pneumologie und Beatmungsmedizin e. V. (DGP) first issued a resolution to develop the dedicated Respiratory Therapist (RT) role in 2004 as a means to increase the quality of patient care, delegate physician duties and respond to the observed increase in respiratory conditions and diseases. In 2006-2006, a year-long pilot training program was offered to established nurses and physiotherapists. Respiratory Therapist. Pneumologie. 2008;62(11):685-9.  Researchers report that significant
additional work is necessary to define and position the role of the Respiratory Therapist within the current healthcare system., Bubulj, C., Esche, B., Geiseler, J., Bonnet, R., Mader, I., 2008. Karg, O., Bonnet, R., Magnussen, H., Kohler, D., 2008

Philippines

In Philippines Respiratory Therapists are clinicians who have been awarded at minimum a Bachelor of Science in Respiratory Care degree.

United Arab Emirates

In United Arab Emirates Respiratory Therapists must have been awarded a Bachelor of Science in Respiratory Care.   An additional two-years of experience is required for foreign applicants.   Licenses are maintained and awarded by the Dubai Health Authority.   The Dubai Health Authority restricts Respiratory Therapists to working only in physical medicine and rehabilitation Centers, in hospitals, in surgical clinics with cardio-thoracic surgeons and with physicians in family/general practice or pulmonology.

Saudi Arabia

Saudi Arabia utilizes Respiratory Therapists in a similar fashion to Canada and the U.S.  In fact, many Respiratory Therapists from North America travel to Saudi Arabia for temporary need.

United States

In the United States a Respiratory Therapist is a clinician who has at a minimum completed an Associate of Science in Respiratory Care degree along with a certification process.   After satisfactorily completing required examinations either administered by the National Board for Respiratory Care or directly by the individual state licensing board (either the medical examiners board or a special state  respiratory care board).
There are two recognized governing bodies in the United States; the State Board of Respiratory Care in the state in which a Respiratory Therapist is licensed to practice and the other is the National Board for Respiratory Care (NBRC) a non-profit organization which regulates two levels of certification along with some additional specialist certifications.
The Certified Respiratory Therapist (CRT) and the Registered Respiratory Therapist (RRT).   The CRT is the certification given after successfully passing the entry-level examination NBRC-ELE; The RRT certification is given after first becoming a CRT and then passing the NBRC-WRE and NBRC-CSE.
Most state boards of respiratory care require proof of the appropriate NBRC credential and award various license titles; including (but not limited to) Respiratory Care Practitioner, Licensed Registered Respiratory Therapist, and Licensed Certified Respiratory Therapist.
There has been a substantial push to standardize the state licensure by the American Association for Respiratory Care.  The NBRC credential is renewed every 5 years for a fee in addition to fees assessed by the state boards of respiratory care.

United Kingdom

Respiratory therapy in the UK is not a recognized specific profession, but a specialization route available to physicians, nurses, physiotherapists and occupational therapists.
Common titles include Respiratory Nurse, Clinical Respiratory Physiologist, Cardio-Respiratory Physiotherapist and Cardio-Respiratory Occupational Therapist.
Physical therapists in training may either pursue a diploma or bachelor's degree from an accredited post-secondary institution. At the diploma level, an individual receives a Diploma of Higher Education in Respiratory Care or Respiratory Disease Management.
At the degree level, a Bachelor of Science in Clinical Physiology is issued with a specialist option in respiratory physiology. Beyond the diploma and degree level, Master of Science programs in Respiratory Care, Respiratory Disease Management, Advanced Cardiology and Clinical Respiratory Physiology are available.

Specialist Respiratory Therapists

Anesthesia assistants

The traditional role of the operating room Respiratory Therapist has included providing technical support to the anesthesiologist for the proper use and maintenance of the anesthetic gas machine, in addition to also providing airway management.  This role in the operating room has evolved to include a more advanced and specialized role with increasing responsibilities to the Respiratory Therapist.  Respiratory Therapists are academically prepared to perform activities such as sedation by administration of anesthetic gases and medications, insertion and management of vascular (arterial and venous) access and assessment of the depth of anesthesia under the guidance of an anesthesiologist or nurse anesthetist.crto.on.pdf  This role is similar to the nurse anesthetist, except that an Anaethestia Assistant must have an anesthesiologist supervising them and a nurse anesthetist, does not.F.R. § 482.52 Condition of participation: Anesthesia services)

Asthma specialists

Asthma specialists work with clinics, hospitals and schools as an educator for teachers, parents, patients and practitioners on asthma and allergies.   Respiratory Therapists in the role as an Asthma Educator additionally help diagnose and treat asthma and other respiratory illness.childrenshospital.org/interior. In the United States, Certified Asthma Educators (AE-C) are credentialed by the National Asthma Education Certification Board (NAECB).naecb.org National Asthma Education Certification Board (NAECB)
In Canada, the Canadian Network for Respiratory Care administers two certifications for the specialization as Respiratory Therapist Asthma Educator, the Certified Asthma Educator (CAE) (preferred by practitioners with a pediatric focus) and the Certified Respiratory Educator (CRE), which comprises the CAE program with additional training in COPD.cnrchome.html Canadian Network for Respiratory Care Certification for Asthma and Respiratory Educators (CAEs and CREs)

Cystic fibrosis

Respiratory Therapists work with people suffering from cystic fibrosis in clinics and hospitals Vanderbilt Children's Hospital Cystic Fibrosis Clinic by educating them about their disease and working with them on a treatment plan.   While admitted to a hospital, patients with cystic fibrosis have their treatment schedule modified and maintained by Respiratory Therapists.   Maintaining a healthy schedule for pharmokonetic and physical therapeutic airway clearance typically more frequent than home treatment plans because admissions are usually due to an increased need for therapy during the stay.

Cardiovascular perfusionist

Respiratory Therapists are able to fulfill the role of Perfusionist with appropriate training.   The perfusionist is a highly trained member of the cardiothoracic surgical team (often time an RT with extra training) which consists of cardiac surgeons, anesthesiologists, physician assistants, surgical technicians, other Respiratory Therapists, and nurses.  The perfusionist's main responsibility is to support the physiological and metabolic needs of the cardiac surgical patient so that the cardiac surgeon may operate on a still, unbeating heart.   Perfusionist certifications are maintained and awarded by The American Academy of Cardiovascular Perfusion.

Extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation

Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is a modified cardiopulmonary bypass technique used for the treatment of life threatening cardiac or respiratory failure.  An ECMO Clinical Specialist is a technical specialist trained to manage the ECMO system including blood pump, tubing, artificial oxygenator, and related equipment.
The ECMO Specialist, under medical direction and supervision, is also responsible for the clinical needs of the patient on ECMO which may include bedside management of oxygenation and carbon dioxide removal, maintenance of normal acid-base balance, administration of medications, blood and blood products, and maintenance of appropriate anticoagulation therapies for the blood. or physicians with training as ECMO clinical specialists.

Neonatal & pediatric intensive care

Much like adult intensivist Respiratory Therapists, neonatal and pediatric specialists deal primarily with managing life support for the pediatric or neonatal patient.

Sleep disorder specialist

thumb|A pediatric patient prepared for a polysomnogram by a Respiratory Therapist. Respiratory Therapists monitor, interpret and diagnose findings from a sleep study, as well as the medical history and physical exam to make the diagnosis and decide on treatment related to sleep-disorders.  A sleep study can also help diagnose narcolepsy.
In the United States a sleep disorder specialist can be a Registered Respiratory Therapist with the sleep disorder specialist certification (RRT-SDS) whom performs sleep disorders testing and therapeutic intervention along with diagnosis of sleep related disease such as Obstructive Sleep Apnea or Central Apnea. In Canada it is often an RT with additional training to become a Registered Polysomnography Teghnician (RPSGT)

Case management

Case management is a collaborative process that assesses, plans,  implements, coordinates, monitors, and evaluates the options and services required to meet the client's health and human  services needs.  It is characterized by advocacy, communication, and resource management and  promotes quality and cost-effective interventions and outcomes.   Eligibility and certification is maintained by the Commission for Case Management Certification, a body certifying healthcare professionals in the United States.ccmcertification.php?section=About Commission for Case Management Certification

Surface & air transport specialist

thumb|A premature infant on ECMO, a form of heart/lung machine, is being transferred between hospitalsRespiratory Therapists work with nurses, physicians, and paramedics in emergency flight and ground transport.azdhs.pdf. (Accessed on June 18, 2013).vanderbilthealth.   In the United States certification for transport (C-NPT) is currently awarded by The National Certification Corporation.nccwebsite.

Pulmonary research and science

Respiratory Therapists are sometimes referred to as Respiratory Scientists who are specialists in pulmonary function.

History of respiratory care

The profession of respiratory care was officially established over 60 years ago;Weilacher RR.  History of the respiratory care profession.  In: Hess DR, MacIntyre NR, Mishoe SC, Galvin WF, Adams AB, Saposnick AB, editors.  Respiratory care: principles and practice.  Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002.
Today the profession hardly resembles what it was in the 1940s.  Respiratory Therapists provide direct care, patient education, and care coordination.   They are academically trained in respiratory nursing and respiratory medicine.   They practice in acute care facilities, long-term acute care facilities, skilled nursing facilities, assisted-living centers, subacute care units, rehabilitation centers, diagnostics units, and in the home.  Position statement.  Definition of respiratory care.  December 2006.    Accessed January 7, 2009  Respiratory Therapist training has also dramatically changed.  Current accreditation standards require Respiratory Therapists to have, at minimum, an Associate of Science in Respiratory Care degree from an accredited program.  Standards and guidelines for the profession of respiratory care.  2003.    Accessed January 7, 2009.  Legal requirements to practice respiratory therapy have also dramatically changed.   49 states now legally recognize Respiratory Therapists."Hawaii Revised Statutes Chapter 466D-RespiratoryTherapists"  July 2011  Limited permits or state licenses are now required in all states except Alaska, which has no statutory authority over the practice of respiratory care.   Most states that have a licensure requirement also require continuing education.
In 2007 the American Association for Respiratory Care (AARC) began developing recommendations for the promotion of the field of respiratory care in the United States in response to increased concern regarding licensure and credentialing issues as well as international recognition of those practicing in the United States. 1111






