[[Littleton, Spelthorne]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Surrey, Spelthorne

Littleton is a village in the borough of Spelthorne, Surrey, England, its amenities being Shepperton Studios, a place of worship that is an Anglican church and green.  It covers the narrow east-west strip of land between the centre of Shepperton Green to the southeast and the Queen Mary Reservoir to its north, having contributed most of the land to the reservoir in 1931 and having historically reached to the River Thames at Chertsey Bridge.  
Very much contiguous with Shepperton Green which has a parade of shops, the divide is the River Ash, a stream.  It borders Laleham to the west and Charlton which is also in the post 'town' of Shepperton, centred 800 metres to the north-east and which has one of the nearest inns.  London Heathrow Airport is centred  south.  Sunbury Golf Course is beyond the M3 motorway past a very narrow strip of Charlton, all of which once lay within Sunbury.  That land and Upper Halliford is however since the early 20th century also within Shepperton's postal boundaries.  
For centuries Littleton covered about  until the construction of the reservoir and ecclesiastical expansion of Shepperton – either way it covers no more than a fifth of its former land.  The decision to name Shepperton Studios by that name rather than Littleton and the fact of Shepperton railway station being a terminus of a commuter line and being a borderline town make some people omit the word 'Littleton' from their address altogether, a notice board advertises events in adjoining villages.  Littleton recreation ground is immediately across the stream to the south-west which was once part of the village. The village has a well-documented history.  The parish church is a listed building in the highest of the three categories (Grade I).

History

Early recorded history

Court rolls such as manorial rolls and Letters Patent give early versions Lutleton and Litlinton in the 13th century; Lutlyngton, Littelyngton, Littelton in the next, and Lytelyngton in the 16th century.
In 1341 the parish was rated at £9 6s. 8d., but because the land was sandy, and the inhabitants were unable to sow it on account of their poverty - only £6 could be raised.

Ownership of the manorial land

Littleton is first mentioned by name and it was mentioned as such as a manor in 1165-67, when it was held as one knight's fee in among the barony of William Blunt, Baron of Ixworth, whose father Gilbert had also held it.  In the Second Barons' War, his namesake and heir died at the Battle of Evesham in 1265.  For the following three centuries right up to the Dissolution of the Monasteries a mesne lordship, providing intermediate revenues in the hierarchical structure was a right belonging to Westminster Abbey.  Seated elsewhere, the Blunts let the manor to the (de) Littleton then (de) Leveland families.  The latter briefly became the de Grendon family before reverting name and whose descendants by a sole female heir's marriage became Sench.  In 1351 Roger Sapurton succeeded, as with the Leveland heir his father having been custodian of Westminster Palace and the Fleet Prison.  By marriage, William Venour acquired it, keeper of the Fleet in 1440 before seemingly passing to Ellen Markham née Sapurton, who conveyed it (sold it) with her husband Robert in 1528 to Anthony Windesore or Windsor, of the landed Windsor family of Stanwell.  In 1573 it was sold to Thomas Newdigate whose family married Anne Seymour, the Duchess of Somerset and whole offspring, the Earls of Hertford held it until sale in 1627.  Later owners included Moore, Goodlad, and Lambell before selling it to Thomas Wood MP, owners of the second manor in the parish, that of Astlam (or Astleham) in 1783.  This family held it until at least 1911.  One such owner was General Sir David Wood (1812-94), the son of Colonel Thomas Wood of Littleton. He served in the Boer campaign of 1842-3, and commanded the Royal Artillery at Balaclava, Inkerman, and Sebastopol, and the Horse Artillery in the Indian Mutiny.
First mention is in 1600, when Katharine Ryse, widow, conveyed the manor to Francis Townley. Nicholas Townley held it in 1650-1 but sold it in 1660 to the Wood family.  An extent of that year reveals a brick-built manor house, outhouses, barns, stables, dovehouse, mill-houses, orchards, gardens and tenants' private back lots.
Other land, in particular, tenements belonged to early Lord Beauchamps, early 15th century co-heirs, Elizabeth Beauchamp (married Urias Seymour) and Cicely Beauchamp (married Sir Roger Seymour), with these smaller holdings thus owned by the Seymour family, devolving to combined heir Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset before the 1573 purchase of the manor outright.
The rectory with associated land (glebe) was never sold to an acquisitive monastery, abbeys or college of Oxford and Cambridge.  As such it passed per the whim of the person holding the advowson (right to appoint the rector, here mostly through family lines however, twice seized by the monarch).  The advowson alone passed to the Priory of Hounslow between 1372 and 1537.  In 1610 the advowson was granted by James I to William Hughes, it seems who was a fishing grantee. Later in the same year he and his father Reginald  conveyed their right to Francis Townley, but the Earl of Hertford, a Seymour, presented in 1616 and 1617.  Litigation ensued and Francis Townley recovered his right of presentation from the Earl: the rector, who had been inducted in 1617, was admitted a second time (in 1619) on Townley's presentation.  As there is still a continuous rector, this negates the possibility of chancel repair liability in the historic parish.

19th century to date

In 1848, based on the most recent census there were 111 inhabitants who mostly farmed its 
Church charities operated in 1911, endowed historically by:
Littleton House, destroyed, was built for Thomas Wood, ranger of Hampton Court under William III in the 1820s and burnt down in 1874, thereby destroying also Actors Dressing, a painting by William Hogarth.  Although a small replacement was built this was divided into, in the 20th century, a staggered terraced estate and the front studios of Shepperton Studios.OS Map with Listed Buildings and Parks marked
Littleton was in 1860 a parish of inverse shape to Shepperton (which held in all but Shepperton Green close to the Thames), by forming roughly an inverse triangle.  Its main area was where the reservoir is north of a narrow strip which tapered down to the Thames - to Chertsey Bridge.
Littleton contributed most of the 
In 1911 the historian William Page in his county guide to Middlesex says:

Littleton saw three radical changes in the middle of 20th century: agriculture being limited to two farms (one run from beyond the village boundary), the surrender of most of its land to build the reservoir, and the construction of more homes.  The village is for most purposes a residential, somewhat inseparable, very green-buffered part of Shepperton.

Landmarks

Shepperton Studios covers most of the west of Littleton, and has used some of the River Ash and adjoining woodland in certain feature films. 
Littleton Manor is listed at Grade II* and was home to the Wood family: Thomas Wood was elected to Parliament in the 18th century.Astleham Manor Cottage 
Astleham Manor Cottage in large grounds survives by the Ash with remaining woodland to its north and is listed at Grade II.

Grade I listed church

The centuries old church of St Mary Magdalene in the village is the most important category architecturally and in terms of heritage, at Grade I.  The chancel and south aisle are 13th century, on 12th century foundations.  The other aisle dates to the 14th century.  The remaining parts date to the 16th and 18th centuries, including its tower.  The bells date to the year of the Great Fire of London.St Mary Magdalene's Church, Grade I 
Fittings include 15th century choir stalls with cusped ogee arches and panelling in the spandrels said to have come from Winchester, a complete set of late medieval pews, restored, and very restored rood screen of circa 1500, fine Flemish altar rails with C-scroll carving on the newels, very deep rich carving depicting the 10 commandments and eagles in chancel of circa 1700, an early Georgian wooden pulpit with arcaded tracery and small narrow high window into the south-east angle between nave and chancel to provide light, an Octagonal stone font with elaborate quatrefoil pierced and crocketed font cover of ogee domed section above, on a square pier, a hatchment on North tower wall.
On two nave walls is an Italian Trecento painting of six panels with six saints.   Tattered colours of the Grenadier Guards may still hang in the church, placed there by the Wood family.
Its chantry was founded in 1324 by Thomas de Littleton, then rector of Harrow, and formerly rector of Spaxton.  By his agreement with the Abbot and Convent of Chertsey, they bound the Abbey to pay 5 marks yearly to a chaplain to celebrate divine service daily at the altar of St. Mary in the church of Littleton, in honour of the saint, and for the souls of the founder, of his parents, and of Simon de Micham. The chaplain was to be appointed by Thomas de Littleton, and after his death by Sir Geoffrey de Perkelee, the rector of Littleton, and his successors. In 1547-8 the chantry was last served by a French priest, Sir Philip Lyniard, who had a house, an orchard, and a little croft or close.  However the 1547 Act of Dissolution of Chantries preceded the Dissolution of the Monasteries the following year and split between the lord of the manor and rector.

Demography and housing

The average level of accommodation in the region composed of detached houses was 28%, the average that was apartments was 22.6%.  
The proportion of households in the settlement who owned their home outright compares to the regional average of 35.1%.  The proportion who owned their home with a loan compares to the regional average of 32.5%.  The remaining % is made up of rented dwellings (plus a negligible % of households living rent-free).
The most relevant super output area is Spelthorne 012B.  Land in and around the film studios, and slopes of the reservoir which still figure as the Littleton side of it, whether within the ward of Shepperton Green and Laleham or parish is excluded from the output area, but is replaced with Littleton's gravel pit and the west of Charlton.

Notes and references

External Links


