[[Largemouth bass]]

CATEGORIES: Micropterus, Fly fishing target species, Fish of the United States, Animals described in 1802, Symbols of Georgia (U.S. state), Invasive fish species, Symbols of Mississippi

The largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides) is a freshwater gamefish in the sunfish family, a species of black bass native to North America. It is also known by a variety of regional names, such as the brown bass, widemouth bass, bigmouth bass, black bass, bucketmouth, Potter's fish, Florida bass, Florida largemouth, green bass, green trout, gilsdorf bass, linesides, Oswego bass, southern largemouth and (paradoxically) northern largemouth. The largemouth bass is the state fish of Alabama (official sport fish).

Physical description

The largemouth is an olive green fish, marked by a series of dark, sometimes black, blotches forming a jagged horizontal stripe along each flank. The upper jaw (maxilla) of a largemouth bass extends beyond the rear margin of the orbit.Fresh water fish identification Largemouth bass.com/wildlifehabitats/Freshwaterfish_LargemouthBass. June 23, 2010 The largemouth is the largest of the black basses, reaching a maximum recorded overall length of 

Forage

The juvenile largemouth bass consumes mostly small bait fish, scuds, small shrimp, and insects. Adults consume smaller fish (bluegill, banded killifish), snails,  crawfish (crayfish), frogs, snakes, salamanders, bats and even small water birds, mammals, and baby alligators. It also consumes younger members of larger fish species, such as pike, catfish, trout, walleye, white bass, striped bass, and even smaller black bass. Prey items can be as large as 50% of the bass's body length or larger.
Studies of prey utilization by largemouths show that in weedy waters, bass grow more slowly due to difficulty in acquiring prey. Less weed cover allows bass to more easily find and catch prey, but this consists of more open-water baitfish. With little or no cover, bass can devastate the prey population and starve or be stunted. Fisheries managers must consider these factors when designing regulations for specific bodies of water. Under overhead cover, such as overhanging banks, brush, or submerged structure, such as weedbeds, points, humps, ridges, and drop-offs, the largemouth bass uses its senses of hearing, sight, vibration, and smell to attack and seize its prey. Adult largemouth are generally apex predators within their habitat, but they are preyed upon by many animals while young.In-Fisherman – Largemouth Bass Forage

Angling

Largemouth bass are keenly sought after by anglers and are noted for the excitement of their fight. The fish will often become airborne in their effort to throw the hook, but many say that their cousin species, the smallmouth bass, can beat them pound for pound. A recent trend is the use of large swimbaits to target trophy bass that often forage on juvenile rainbow trout in California. Live bait, such as nightcrawlers, minnows, frogs, or crawfish can also be productive. In fact, large golden shiners are a popular live bait used to catch trophy bass, especially when they are sluggish in the heat of summer or in the cold of winter. The current world record largemouth bass weighed 22 pounds 4 ounce and was 32 inches in length and 29 inches in girth; the fish was caught by George W. Perry in 1932. The bass was landed in a small oxbow off the Ocmulgee River in Telfair County Georgia, USA. A bass rivaling that of Perry's catch was caught in Japan, but relocated to a tie since the fish was weighed to be only one ounce heavier than Parry's fish, and, according to IGFA record standards, a freshwater game fish record contender must exceed the previous catch by two ounces.
The peak fishing times are spring and summer but large bass are caught all year long.  Fly- fishing for Large Mouths can be exceptionally fun.  It's best to fish over thick weed banks and shallow creeks in larger bodies of water.  The best flies to use are streamers, wooly buggers, crawfish patterns, and even some bonefish flies such as the Bahama Mama. 6 and 7wt rods will cover any situation that you'll encounter.
Strong cultural pressure among largemouth bass anglers encourages the practice of catch and release, especially the larger specimens, mainly because larger specimens are usually breeding females that contribute heavily to future sport fishing stocks.  Largemouth bass, if handled with care, respond well to catch and release. They have a white, slightly mushy meat, lower quality than that of the smallmouth bass, bluegill, yellow perch, crappie or walleye. Small largemouth, 10-14 inches, can be quite delicious when the water temperature is low but the large fish should be released. 
Although it is most popular in the southeastern states, many varieties of the largemouth bass can be found in the north and western regions. They are an invasive species in the Canadian province of New Brunswick, and are a danger to native fish fry.New Brunswick Invasives

Invasive species

The largemouth bass has been introduced into many other countries due to its popularity as a sport fish. It causes the decline, displacement or extinctions of species in its new habitat,Leppakoski, Erkki. Invasive aquatic species of Europe: distribution, impacts, and management. Kluwer Academic Publishers. 1998. The Netherlands. 156-162. for example in Namibia.




