[[Hamid Reza Sadr]]

CATEGORIES: Iranian writers, Iranian film critics, Sports journalists, People from Tehran, 1956 births, Living people

Hamid Reza Sadr حمیدرضا صدر born 19 March 1956, is an Iranian film critic and football critic. He is well known for his columns in Film Magazine on cinema and his appearances on television for analyzing football. 
He married Mehrzad Dolati in 1983. She is an artist who studied in the United States and then returned to Iran and attended  Alzahra University. She has been teaching painting for many years. They have a daughter, Ghazaleh, born in 1990. She studies at Shahid Beheshti University for getting her MA in English Literature. He currently lives in Tehran, Iran and lectures in different Iranian and European universities besides his professional engineering work. He is mainly working on new books.

Early life and education

Hamid reza is the oldest son of Zahra Karimi a housewife and General Gholamhossein Sadr who served in the army. His father died right after the big Iranian revolution from cancer in the early 1980. His death impacted the
children for life in many ways, especially his oldest son. The father knew that his cancer was terminal; even though his oldest son got a scholarship to go abroad and study, the father insisted that he would stay to be with the family. So Hamid stayed. During the war between Iran and Iraq when universities and colleges were closed. Hamid a student at the time, took advantage of the opportunity and taught himself English, photography and made many eight millimeter short films. He also explored other hobbies and activities. These passions and interests during the time, that many young people were trying to figure out what happens to the country helped him later on and turned into a career. The one that his brothers and him liked the most was soccer. The youngest brother Shahin played for Homa for a few years. Later Hamid became a well known soccer commentator. Many of his books on this subject are dedicated to his brothers who share the same passion for this sport as well. Hamid has four younger siblings. Mahshid Sadr who is based in London UK, Amir Hossein Sadr who resides in Amsterdam, Netherlands, Shahin Sadr who lives in Vancouver B.C. and Mehrnaz Sadr who is near Philadelphia, USA with her family. Interestingly, the family is scattered all over the world and Hamid who had the opportunity to be the first to leave, is still living in Iran. He entered Tehran University in 1974 and gained BA in Economics, and MA in Urban Planning in Faculty of Fine Arts, Tehran University. His thesis title was Location Modeling of Persian Gulf Cities. He got his PhD in Urban Planning from Leeds University in UK.

Career

Hamid Sadr movie reviews are published in many Iranian journals since 1981 including Zan-e Rooz, Soroush, Film Magazine, Film International, and Haft or Seven magazine. Sadr has explained his critical approach to films as "relative, not unconditional"; he analysis a film for what he feels will be its likely audience, yet he usually approaches movies emotionally, with a strongly touching writing style. He was especially cruel to some films that had been roasted by many critics, such as Bahram Beizai and Masoud Kimiai films. The originality of his opinions, as well as the vigorous way in which he spoken them, won his eager supporters as well as angry critics.'
He translated "From Reverence to Rape: The Treatment of Women in the Movies", the influential book by Molly Haskell which published in Zan-e Rooz magazine.
He has  written a book on politics and Iranian cinema, called Iranian Cinema: A Political History. The comprehensive analysis provided in this book gives refreshing, up-to-date introduction to those interested in Iranian cinema and its socio-political dimensions and history, observing recurrent themes and genres as well as giving lights to lesser-known thematic concerns and figures. Sadr, while acknowledging the lack of imaginative expression in mainstream Iranian cinema: the weak scripts, the poor performances, the repetitive and conservative nature and content and poor performances, argues for and analysis the political contexts and its constant shifts embedded within the apparently least noteworthy of Iranian films.
Sadr was known for his monthly column called "Shadow of Imagination" {سایه خیال} appearing in Film  Magazine and his reports on international film festival particularly on London Film Festival. He interviewed many famous actors, directors and film critics including: Anthony Hopkins, Peter O'Toole, Mike Leigh, Jim Jarmusch, Carlos Saura, Andrei Konchalovsky, Peter Wollen, Laura Mulvey, Jeffrey Noel Smith, John Gillett, Sohrab Shahid-Sales and Farokh Ghafari.
He is a co-producer of Looking for Scheherazade movie, a documentary directed by Safi Yazdanian in 2003.
He is a football lover and has written several features on sociology, politics and football. His book   Once Upon a Time Football is about politics and football but it also tells the story of the Sadr's relationship with football and sometimes relates them to his own personal life. It has been years now that he appears on the Iranian national television to talk about football matches and thus has become famous among people. 

Books

Sadr's books include:




