[[Tripartite Pact]]

CATEGORIES: 1940 in Germany, 1940 in Italy, 1940 in Japan, 20th-century military alliances, Anti-communism, Foreign relations of Yugoslavia, Germany–Japan relations, Italy–Japan relations, Military alliances involving Bulgaria, Military alliances involving China, Military alliances involving Hungary, Military alliances involving Italy, Military alliances involving Japan, Military alliances involving Nazi Germany, Military alliances involving Romania, Military alliances involving Yugoslavia, Treaties concluded in 1940, Treaties entered into force in 1940, Treaties of Croatia, Treaties of Nazi Germany, Treaties of Slovakia, Treaties of Thailand, Treaties of the Empire of Japan, Treaties of the Kingdom of Bulgaria, Treaties of the Kingdom of Hungary (1920–46), Treaties of the Kingdom of Italy (1861–1946), Treaties of the Kingdom of Romania, Treaties of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, World War II treaties, Germany–Italy relations

The Tripartite Pact, also the Three-Power Pact, Axis Pact, Three-way Pact or Tripartite Treaty was a pact signed in Berlin, Germany on September 27, 1940, which established the Axis Powers of World War II. The pact was signed by representatives of Nazi Germany (Adolf Hitler), Fascist Italy (foreign minister Galeazzo Ciano), and Imperial Japan (Japanese ambassador to Germany Saburō Kurusu).

Background and the agreement

The three nations agreed that for the next ten years they would "stand by and co-operate with one another in... their prime purpose to establish and maintain a new order of things... to promote the mutual prosperity and welfare of the peoples concerned." They recognized each other's spheres of interest and undertook "to assist one another with all political, economic and military means when one of the three contracting powers is attacked" by a country not already involved in the war, excluding the Soviet Union.
The pact supplemented the Anti-Comintern Pact of 1936 and helped heal the rift that had developed between Japan and Germany following the 1939 Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact between Germany and the Soviet Union.
The Tripartite Pact was subsequently joined by Hungary (November 20, 1940), Romania (November 23, 1940), Slovakia (November 24, 1940), Bulgaria (March 1, 1941, prior to the arrival of German troops), Yugoslavia (March 25, 1941), and Croatia (June 15, 1941). 

Text of the pact

The Tripartite Treaty was immediately named by the Italian press Roberto based on the first syllables of Rome, Berlin and Tokyo.

Other signatories

Hungary

The Austro-Hungarian Empire had sided with Imperial Germany during World War I and had collapsed following the defeat by the Allies. Following the Treaty of Trianon, the Kingdom of Hungary was reduced greatly in size and this caused much resentment. To assuage this resentment, Germany and Italy implemented the Vienna Awards in 1938 and 1940 and this was subsequently followed by Hungary joining the Tripartite Pact on November 20, 1940. Collusion was further heightened when the Fascist Arrow Cross Party later came to power.

Romania

The Kingdom of Romania had joined the Allied Powers in World War I and had received Transylvania from Austria–Hungary. After Germany and Italy awarded parts of Transylvania back to Hungary and Southern Dobruja back to Bulgaria and after the Soviet Union had taken Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina, the Fascist Iron Guard party came to power and Romania joined the Tripartite Pact on November 23, 1940.  This was due to the Romanian desire for protection against the Soviet Union.

Slovakia

On March 14, 1939, after the Munich Agreement, the Slovak Republic was formed from a portion of the dismembered Czechoslovakia. Hitler invited Monsignor Jozef Tiso to be the new nation's leader. Soon after it was formed, Slovakia was involved in a war with neighboring Hungary. Although Slovakia had signed a "Protection Treaty" with Nazi Germany, Germany refused to help Slovakia in direct violation of that treaty. The war resulted in territorial gains by Hungary at Slovakia's expense. Even so, Slovakia supported the German invasion of Poland. Slovakia joined the Tripartite Pact on November 24, 1940.

Bulgaria

The Kingdom of Bulgaria had been on the losing side in World War I, losing territory to Serbia and Greece. During World War II, Germany needed military access through Bulgaria in order to attack Greece.  Adolf Hitler promised the Bulgarian Tsar Boris III that Bulgaria would receive all the territory she had lost in return for Bulgaria joining the Axis. Boris agreed and prime-minister Bogdan Filov signed the Pact on March 1, 1941.

Yugoslavia

On March 25, 1941 in Vienna, Dragiša Cvetković, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, signed the Tripartite Pact. On March 27, the regime was overthrown by a military coup d'état with British support, and the 17-year old King Peter II of Yugoslavia seized power. General Dušan Simović became Peter's Prime Minister and the Kingdom of Yugoslavia initially tried to dissolve the Pact but later declared adherence to it.
The initial agreement of the document also regarded Yugoslavia's acceptance of the free movement of German troops around the country; this was unsatisfactory to the Führer, and resulted in the Invasion of Yugoslavia.
Postponing Operation Barbarossa, the Germans simultaneously attacked Yugoslavia and Greece. Starting on April 6, the German Air Force (Luftwaffe) bombed Belgrade for three days and nights. German ground troops (Wehrmacht Heer) moved in, and Yugoslavia capitulated on April 17.

Croatia

The Independent State of Croatia (Nezavisna Država Hrvatska, or NDH) signed the Tripartite Pact on June 15, 1941.

Unoffical signatories

Thailand

The Kingdom of Thailand became an unofficial signatory of the Tripartite Pact at the suggestion of Japan. Thai forces contributed to the Japanese war effort, helping out in the invasion of Burma 1942–1943.

Manchukuo

The Great Manchu Empire became an unofficial signatory of the Tripartite Pact at the suggestion of Japan, Zhang Jinghui the Prime Minister of Manchukuo signed the Tripartite Pact by himself on 15 February 1942 along with Thailand and the Nanking Government.

China

The Reorganized National Government of China (Nanking Government) became an unofficial signatory of the Tripartite Pact.

Other nations involved

Soviet Union

Just prior to the formation of the Tripartite Pact, the Soviet Union was informed of its existence, and the potential of its joining. A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II, .
For the Soviets, they considered joining the Tripartite Pact to be an update of existing agreements with Germany.  On Molotov's visit, he agreed in principle to the Soviet Union joining the pact so long as some details, such as Soviet annexation of Finland, could be worked out. A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II, .  To demonstrate the benefits of partnership, the Soviet Union made large economic offerings to Germany. A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II, p. 201. ISBN 978-0-521-61826-7
Regardless of the talks however, the Germans had no intention of allowing the Soviets to join the pact.  They were already in the preparation stages for their invasion of the Soviet Union and were committed to doing so regardless of any action the Soviets took.
When they received the Soviet offer in November, they simply did not reply.  They did, however, accept the new economic offerings, and signed an agreement for such on January 10, 1941. A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II, p. 202. ISBN 978-0-521-61826-7

Finland

Military co-operation between Finland and Nazi Germany started in late 1940 after Finland had lost a significant amount of her territory to Soviet aggression in the Winter War. Finland joined Operation Barbarossa on June 25, 1941, starting the Continuation War. In November, Finland signed the Anti-Comintern Pact (an anti-communist agreement directed against the Soviet Union) with many other countries allied with Germany. Soon after this Germany suggested Finland sign the Tripartite Pact. However, the Finnish government refused, because Finland saw its war as a "separate war" from the Second World War, and it saw its objectives as different from those of Nazi Germany. Finland also wanted to maintain diplomatic relations with the Allied Powers, the United States in particular. During the Second World War, Germany asked Finland several times to sign the pact, but always the Finnish government declined the offer. Diplomatic relations between Finland and the United States were maintained until June 1944, although  the US ambassador had already been recalled earlier. The United Kingdom, however, declared war on Finland on December 6, 1941 in support of its ally, the Soviet Union.

End of the Pact

The Kingdom of Italy surrendered to the Western Allies in 1943, marking the beginning of the end for the Tripartite Pact. While dictator Benito Mussolini's Italian Social Republic (Repubblica Sociale Italiana, or RSI) continued to maintain its alliance with Germany until the end of the war, the RSI was never more than a puppet state. In 1944, both Bulgaria and Romania changed sides and became military allies of the Soviet Union. After the Slovak National Uprising in mid-1944, the Germans ended what little was left of the independence of Slovakia. Hungary was the last minor member of the pact aside from the major two (Germany and Japan). However, by early April 1945, Hungary was completely overrun and its pro-German dictator Ferenc Szálasi and his Fascist government were forced to flee. While technically still in operation until Japan's surrender, the defeat of Germany brought an end to any effective meaning of the treaty.








