[[Focus on the Family]]

CATEGORIES: Focus on the Family, 1977 establishments in Colorado, Evangelicalism in Colorado, Political organizations in the United States, Evangelical parachurch organisations, Intelligent design advocates, Non-profit organizations based in Colorado, Organizations that oppose same-sex marriage, Organizations based in Colorado Springs, Colorado, American pro-life organizations, Religion in Colorado Springs, Colorado, Organizations that oppose LGBT adoption

Focus on the Family (FOTF or FotF) is a non-profit organization founded in 1977 by 
psychologist James Dobson, based in Colorado Springs, Colorado. It is active in promoting an interdenominational effort toward its socially conservative views on public policy.   Focus on the Family is one of a number of evangelical parachurch organizations that rose to prominence in the 1980s.
Focus on the Family's stated mission is "nurturing and defending the God-ordained institution of the family and promoting biblical truths worldwide."[ref]
 creationism; school prayer; and traditional gender roles. It opposes abortion; divorce; gambling; LGBT rights, particularly LGBT adoption and same-sex marriage; SPLC on anti-gay groups pornography; pre-marital sex; and substance abuse. Psychologists, psychiatrists, and social scientists have criticized Focus on the Family for misrepresenting their research to bolster FOTF's political agenda and ideology.
The core promotional activities of the organization include a daily radio broadcast by its president, Jim Daly, and his colleagues, providing free resources according to Focus on the Family views, and publishing magazines, videos, and audio recordings.  The organization also produces programs for targeted audiences, such as Adventures in Odyssey for children, dramas, and Family Minute.

History and organization

thumb|Focus on the Family's Visitor's Welcome Center in Colorado Springs, Colorado. From 1977 to 2003, James Dobson served as the sole leader of the organization. In 2003, Donald P. Hodel became president and chief executive officer, tasked with the day-to-day operations. This left Dobson as chairman of the Board of Directors, with chiefly creative and speaking duties. Focus on the Family aims to equip families "through radio broadcasts, websites, simulcasts, conferences, interactive forums, magazines, books, and counseling."
In March 2005, Hodel retired and Jim Daly, formerly the Vice President in charge of Focus on the Family's International Division, assumed the role of president and chief executive officer.
In November 2008, the organization announced that it was eliminating 202 jobs, representing 18 percent of its workforce. The organization also cut its budget from $160 million in fiscal 2008 to $138 million for fiscal 2009.
In February 2009, Dobson resigned his chairmanship,Dobson steps down as FOF chairman. Washingtontimes. Retrieved May 21, 2012. and by early 2010 he was no longer the public face of Focus on the Family, nor hosting the daily radio program.

Ministries

Marriage and family

Focus on the Family sees its primary ministry as the strengthening of what it considers traditional marriages and families, based on an evangelical view of Biblical teachings.

Love Won Out

Focus on the Family formed Love Won Out, an ex-gay ministry, in 1998 and sold it to Exodus International in 2009. (Exodus ceased activities in June 2013, issuing a statement which repudiated its aims and apologized for the harm their pursuit has caused to LGBT people.)

Wait No More

Focus on the Family's Wait No More ministry works with adoption agencies, church leaders and ministry partners to recruit families to adopt children from foster care.17-year-old beats the odds and finds a home | year, amanda, last . Colorado Springs Gazette (November 9, 2011). Retrieved May 21, 2012. The program co-sponsors several adoption conferences throughout the country each year.  Since November 2008, more than 1,700 families have started the adoption process through Wait No More.focusonthefamily.aspx In Colorado, the number of children waiting for adoption dropped from about 800 to 350, due in-part to the efforts of Wait No More. Colorado Springs Gazette (May 15, 2010). Retrieved May 21, 2012. Focus on the Family's efforts to encourage adoption among Christian families is part of a larger effort by Evangelicals to, in their perception, live out what they see as the "biblical mandate" to help children.. (2010-09-24) "Adoption Season for Evangelicals: A Biblical Mandate to Help Chilrdren, Especially Those in Foster Care". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved May 21, 2012. Focus on the Family supports laws to prevent couples from adopting who are cohabiting together outside of marriage as well as homosexual couples.focusonthefamily.aspx FotF on Adoption

Option Ultrasound Program

Focus on the Family's Option Ultrasound Program (OUP) provides grants to qualifying crisis pregnancy centers to cover 80 percent of the cost of an ultrasound machine or sonography training. As of February 2012, the program has provided 536 grants to centers in all 50 states and Bucharest, Romania. Focus on the Family began OUP in 2004 with the goal of convincing women not to have abortions. FOTF officials said that ultrasound services help a woman better understand her pregnancy and baby's development, creating an important "bonding opportunity" between "mother and unborn child"."Focus: Donations of ultrasound equipment stopped 100,000 abortions since 2004". The Denver Post. Retrieved May 21, 2012.
The Option Ultrasound Program reported in 2012 that it has helped prevent more than 120,000 abortions since 2004. A study released in February 2012 shows that ultrasounds do not have a direct impact on an abortion decision. In 2011, FOTF President Jim Daly announced that while FOTF will continue to fight for the overturn of Roe v. Wade, in the meantime he would like to work with pro-choice groups like Planned Parenthood who state they want to make abortion "safe, legal and rare" towards the shared goal of making abortion less common.com | Colorado Springs | Pueblo |. koaa. Retrieved May 21, 2012. Rep. Michele Bachmann (R-Minn.) introduced a sonogram bill in 2011 and — citing Focus on the Family — told Congress that "78 percent of women who see and hear the fetal heartbeat choose life." She was later corrected by Focus on the Family, which released a statement saying they did not release such data. Los Angeles Times(October 23, 2011). Retrieved May 21, 2012.

Radio Theatre

Focus on The Family Radio Theatre is a series of audio dramas adapting classic literature, mystery mini-series and biographical productions, extending its reach to the mainstream as well as the Christian audience. The endeavor began through the efforts of former Adventures in Odyssey producers Dave Arnold and Paul McCusker, along with casting director Philip Glassborow based in England.
Radio Theatre began in 1996 with a 90-minute radio drama based on Charles Dickens' A Christmas Carol, which was produced and aired as a broadcast special.
The drama continued with historical biographies of Squanto ("The Legend of Squanto"), Jesus ("The Luke Reports") and Dietrich Bonhoeffer ("Bonhoeffer: The Cost of Freedom").
In 2003, Focus on the Family Radio Theater released an audio dramatization of C. S. Lewis' epic novel series The Chronicles of Narnia, with David Suchet providing the voice of Aslan, and over 100 English actors rounding out the cast.  Lewis' stepson, Douglas Gresham, serves as host—sharing his personal stories at the beginning of each audio drama.
Radio Theatre also released an original miniseries, the Father Gilbert Mysteries, which tells of the spiritual mysteries encountered by Louis Gilbert, a cop-turned-Anglican-priest, who lives in Stonebridge, Sussex, and ministers to the people of the town from St. Mark's Church. Nine episodes have been produced in four volumes available on cassette and CD.
FOTF also produces a children's radio drama entitled Adventures in Odyssey. It began in 1987 as Family Portraits, starring John Avery Whittaker (aka "Whit"). It was renamed "Odyssey USA" in November 1987 and took on its present name, Adventures in Odyssey, in April 1988.
FOTF also produced a radio miniseries based on their videos, The Last Chance Detectives.
In 2009, FOTF's Radio Theatre produced an audio drama of C.S. Lewis' The Screwtape Letters, starring Andy Serkis (who played Gollum from the Lord of the Rings movies) as the voice of Screwtape. The audio drama was also accompanied by the release of www.com, the only site authorized by the C.S. Lewis estate to represent The Screwtape Letters. Screwtape. Retrieved May 21, 2012.

Boundless

Boundless is Focus on the Family's podcast for young adults in response to the increasing number of single adults in today's society.( Boundless promotes what they call a biblical model for marriage, including that men and women should adhere to distinct roles within marriage. Christianity Today (July 31, 2009). Retrieved May 21, 2012. Boundless also recommends online dating as one of the ways Christian singles can find a potential spouse.(3)

Day of Dialogue

The Day of Dialogue is a student-led event which takes place April 16. Founders describe the goal of the event, created in opposition to the anti-bullying Day of Silence, as "encouraging honest and respectful conversation among students about God's design for sexuality." It was previously known as the Day of Truth and was founded by the Alliance Defense Fund in 2005. Colorado Springs Gazette, November 11, 2010. Retrieved May 21, 2012.

National Day of Prayer

The National Day of Prayer Task Force is an American evangelical conservative Christian non-profit  organization which organizes, coordinates, and presides over Evangelical Christian religious observances each year on the National Day of Prayer. The main office of the NDP Task Force is located at the headquarters of Focus on the Family in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The website of the NDP Task Force states that "its business affairs are separate" from those of Focus on the Family, but also that "between 1990 and 1993, Focus on the Family did provide grants in support of the NDP Task Force" and that "Focus on the Family is compensated for services rendered."National Day of Prayer Task Force website - FAQs. Nationaldayofprayer. Retrieved May 21, 2012. Shirley Dobson, wife of James Dobson, has been chairwoman of the NDP Task Force since 1991. Nationaldayofprayer. Retrieved May 21, 2012.

Other ministries

Focus on the Family has a number of additional ministries. Many are aimed at specific demographics including teenage boys and girls, children, college students, families, young adults, parents, while others are aimed at specific concerns, such as sexual problems, entertainment, and politics. Many have their own regular publications.

Political positions and activities

Focus on the Family's 501(c)(3) status prevents them from advocating any individual political candidate. In its radio broadcast, it often discusses political issues and current events, usually from a Christian conservative point of view. Dobson is among the Christian conservative leaders who met with and advised former President George W. Bush. Focus on the Family's magazine Citizen is exclusively devoted to politics. FOTF also has an affiliated group, Focus on the Family Action (a.k.a. Focus Action), though the two groups are legally separate. As a 501(c)(4) social welfare group, Focus Action has fewer political lobbying restrictions.  FOTF's revenue in 2005 was USD $142 million, and that of FOTF Action was $14.7 million. Eri-nonprofit-salaries. Retrieved May 21, 2012. Eri-nonprofit-salaries. Retrieved May 21, 2012.
Focus on the Family supports teaching of what it considers to be traditional family values. It advocates school sponsored prayer and supports corporal punishment.
Focus on the Family maintains a strong pro-life stand against abortion, and provides grant funding and medical training to assist crisis pregnancy centers (CPCs; also known as pregnancy resource centers) in obtaining ultrasound machines. The organization has been staunchly opposed to public funding for elective abortions. According to the organization, this funding, which has allowed CPCs to provide pregnant women with live sonogram images of the developing fetus, has led directly to the birth of over 1500 babies who would have otherwise been aborted. Heartlink. Retrieved May 21, 2012.The New York Times > National > Church Groups Turn to Sonogram to Turn Women From Abortions
Focus on the Family broadcasts an eponymous national talk radio program hosted by Dobson or his aides. The program has a range of themes, such as Christian-oriented assistance for victims of rape or child abuse; parenting difficulties; child adoption; husband/wife roles; family history and traditions; struggles with gambling, pornography, alcohol, and drugs. Listeners often respond to programs dealing with civic issues by contacting political leaders.
Focus on the Family has been a prominent supporter of intelligent design, publishing pro-intelligent design articles in its Citizen magazine and selling intelligent design videos on its website. The American Prospect Online, September 2005Expert Witness Report Barbara Forrest. Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District. (PDF file) Focus on the Family co-published the intelligent design videotape Unlocking the Mystery of Life with the Discovery Institute, hub of the intelligent design movement. Meyer and W. Peter Allen. Center for Science and Culture July 15, 2004 Focus on the Family employee Mark Hartwig is also a fellow of the Discovery Institute's Center for Science and Culture, a connection which has helped to publicize intelligent design extensively; James Dobson often featured intelligent design proponents on his Focus on the Family radio program. Focus on the Family's Family.Feature Articles Focus On Social Issues - Origins. CitizenLink, Focus on the FamilyRecommended Reading List Focus On Social Issues - Origins. CitizenLink, Focus on the Family

2008 Presidential campaign

In the 2008 U.S. presidential election, Focus on the Family shifted from support of Mike Huckabee to not supporting any candidate, to finally accepting the Republican ticket once Sarah Palin was added to the ticket. Prior to the election, a television and letter campaign was launched predicting terrorist attacks in four U.S. cities and equating the U.S. with Nazi Germany. This publicity was condemned by the Anti Defamation League.
Focus on the Family Action supported Senator Saxby Chambliss (R-Ga.) in his successful December 2, 2008, runoff election win. The organization, according to the Colorado Independent, donated $35,310 in radio ads to the Chambliss runoff campaign effort. As the Independent reports, the Focus-sponsored ads were aired in about a dozen Georgia markets. The commercials were produced in the weeks after Focus laid off 202 employees — some 20 percent of its workforce — because of the national economic crisis. Coloradoindependent. Retrieved May 21, 2012.

Opposition to same-sex marriage

Focus on the Family works to preserve its interpretation of the biblical ideals of marriage and parenthood, taking a strong stance against LGBT rights, including same-sex marriage. Dobson expressed great concern for the institution of marriage in a 2003 letter to the Christian community. In reference to the same-sex marriage movement, Dobson says that the institution of marriage "…is about to descend into a state of turmoil unlike any other in human history." Focus on the Family believes that marriage should be defined as only being between a man and a woman. Dobson supported the failed Federal Marriage Amendment, which would have defined marriage as a union between one man and one woman, preventing courts and state legislatures from challenging this definition.
In the same letter, Dobson says that traditional marriage is the cornerstone of society, and he states that the goal of the gay and lesbian movement is not to redefine marriage but to destroy the institution itself. "Most gays and lesbians do not want to marry each other…the intention here is to destroy marriage altogether." Dobson argues that, without the institution of marriage, everyone would enjoy the benefits of marriage without limiting the number of partners or their gender. Focus on the Family views allowing same-sex marriage as "…a stepping-stone on the road to eliminating all societal restrictions on marriage and sexuality."
Focus on the Family asserts that the Bible lays out the correct plan for marriage and family. Dobson says that "God created Eve to complement Adam physically, spiritually, and emotionally". Dobson also uses the biblical figure Paul to affirm his views on marriage.  He states that Paul maintained that men and women mutually complete each other, and to exchange a "natural relationship for an unnatural one is sinful".
In reference to same-sex marriage and same-sex couples with children, Dobson states, "Same-sex relationships undermine the future generation's understanding of the fundamental principles of marriage, parenthood, and gender." He also stated that the alleged destruction of what it considers to be the traditional family by permitting same-sex marriage will lead to "unstable homes for children".
Focus on the Family became more active in the same-sex marriage opposition movement after the Supreme Court of Canada declared that restricting marriage to opposite-sex couples is a violation of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms in 2003.
Dobson spoke at the 2004 rally against gay marriage called Mayday for Marriage. It was here for the first time that he endorsed a presidential candidate, George W. Bush. Here he denounced the Supreme Court rulings in favor of gay rights, and he urged rally participants to get out and vote so that the battle against gay rights could be won in the Senate.
In an interview with Christianity Today magazine, Dobson also explained that he was not in favor of civil unions. He stated that civil unions are just same-sex marriage under a different name. The main priority of the opposing same-sex marriage movement is to define marriage on the federal level as between a man and a woman and combat the passage of civil unions later.
Civil rights advocacy groups identify Focus on the Family as a major opponent of gay rights.  The Southern Poverty Law Center, a civil rights and hate group monitoring organization,. Southern Poverty Law Center. Retrieved May 21, 2012.
Focus on the Family is a member of ProtectMarriage. Schwarzenegger, with the ruling currently stayed by the 9th Circuit Court.

Misrepresentation of research

Social scientists have criticized Focus on the Family for misrepresenting their research in order to bolster its own perspective.
James Dobson cited the research of Kyle Pruett and Carol Gilligan in a Time Magazine guest article in the service of a claim that two women cannot raise a child; upon finding out that her work had been used in this way, Gilligan wrote a letter to Dobson asking him to apologize and to cease and desist from citing her work, describing herself as "mortified to learn that you had distorted my work....."
After Elizabeth Saewyc's research on teen suicide was used by Focus on the Family to promote conversion therapy, she said that "the research has been hijacked for somebody's political purposes or ideological purposes and that's worrisome", and that research in fact linked the suicide rate among LGBT teens to harassment, discrimination, and closeting.

Football advertisements

In 2010, Focus on the Family bought ad time during Super Bowl XLIV to air a commercial featuring Heisman Trophy winning Florida Gators quarterback Tim Tebow and his mother, Pam. Prior to becoming pregnant with Tim, Pam had contracted amoebic dysentery and fell into a coma. She discovered she was pregnant while recovering. Because of the medications used to treat her, the fetus experienced a severe placental abruption. Doctors expected a stillbirth and recommended an abortion. The Tebows decided against it, citing their strong faith—however, in the Philippines, where the family was serving as Baptist missionaries, abortion is a criminal offense).
The then-unseen ad drew criticism from some women's rights groups, who asked CBS to pull the ad because they argued that it was divisive. Planned Parenthood released a video response of its own featuring fellow NFL player Sean James.
Focus on the Family produced another commercial which ran during the second quarter of the January 14, 2012 Denver Broncos-New England Patriots AFC Divisional Playoff broadcast on CBS,Electra Draper, "The Denver Post", January 14, 2012, " January 24, 2012 featuring children reciting the Bible verse John 3:16.webconnex.Post Staff Writer, "New York Post", January 17, 2012 "Tebow-Brady tiff sets soft ratings record", January 24, 2012 The ad did not generate nearly the amount of controversy that surrounded the Super Bowl commercial. It did get some national media attention, though, with Jim Daly telling USA Today its purpose was to "help everyone understand some numbers are more important than the ones on the scoreboard."Cathy Grossman, "USA Today", "Focus on Family has another Tebow-related commercial", January 24, 2012

Recognitions and awards

In 2008, Dobson's "Focus on the Family" program was nominated for induction into the National Radio Hall of Fame.

International associates and regional offices

New Zealand

Focus on the Family New Zealand is an organisation promoting a conservative Christian ideology. It has a similar agenda to the Focus on the Family organisation in the United States. Focus on the Family supported a Citizens Initiated Referendum on the repeal of section 59 of the Crimes Act 1961.

Other countries

Headquarters

The Focus on the Family headquarters is a four building, Martin, Claire. "Fun is the focus Three-story slide gives kids a thrill." Denver Post. April 23, 2000. F-07. "Focus on the Family's sprawling headquarters four buildings on 47 acres of land..." complex located off of Interstate 25 in northern Colorado Springs, Colorado, with its own ZIP code (80995). "God's own ZIP Code" Salon, July 9, 1998."How do I contact Focus on the Family?." Focus on the Family. The buildings consist of the Administration building, International building, Welcome Center and Operations building (currently unused), and totals 526,070 square feet. " "What is the square footage of your buildings?"
Focus on the Family moved to its current headquarters from Pomona, California, in 1993, with 1200 employees. In 2002, the number of employees peaked at 1,400. By September, 2011, after a number of years of layoffs, they had 650 employees remaining. " Denver Post. September 16, 2011. "Focus on the Family announces more layoffs" Christopher Ott of Salon said in 1998 that the FOTF campus has "handsome new brick buildings, professional landscaping and even its own traffic signs" and that "The buildings and grounds are well-maintained and comfortable. If there is any ostentatious or corrupt influence here, it is nowhere in sight."
While visiting the Focus on the Family complex, a couple had asked the staff if handling the sightseers in the main building was a distraction. The staff told the couple that it was a distraction; afterwards the couple donated $4 million to have a welcome center built. A visiting family donated  of wood trim from the family's Pennsylvania lumber business so FOTF could build its administration building. As of 1998, James Dobson, in his welcome center film, compares his decision to build the headquarters in Colorado Springs to the founding of the temple in Jerusalem.






