[[Tony Sparano]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, Living people, American football centers, Boston University Terriers football coaches, Cleveland Browns coaches, Dallas Cowboys coaches, Jacksonville Jaguars coaches, Miami Dolphins head coaches, New Haven Chargers football coaches, New Haven Chargers football players, New York Jets coaches, Oakland Raiders coaches, Washington Redskins coaches, National Football League offensive coordinators, People from West Haven, Connecticut, American people of Italian descent

Anthony "Tony" Sparano III (born 

Playing career

College

Sparano was a four-year letterman for Division II University of New Haven, starting at center for the New Haven Chargers and graduating in 1982.

Coaching career

NCAA

=Assistant coach=

Sparano began his coaching career at his alma mater, serving as New Haven's offensive line coach for four seasons before joining the staff at Division I-AA Boston University. After one year as the team's offensive line coach, Sparano served five seasons as the Terriers' offensive coordinator.

=Head coach=

Sparano was named New Haven's head coach in 1994, and led the Chargers to two playoff appearances in five seasons. In 1997, New Haven led Division II in offense (42.8 points per game) and finished second in defense (11.6 points allowed per game) en route to a 12–2 record, losing to Northern Colorado in the championship game.

National Football League

=Assistant coach=

Beginning his NFL career in 1999, Sparano was fired in three staffing purges after brief stints with the Cleveland Browns, Washington Redskins and Jacksonville Jaguars.

=Head coach=

After firing Cam Cameron following a franchise-worst 1–15 season, the Miami Dolphins and new executive vice president of football operations Parcells hired Sparano to a four-year contract worth $2,500,000 per year on January 16, 2008.
In his first season, Sparano led the Dolphins to an 11–5 record and the AFC East division title, securing the franchise's first playoff berth in seven seasons before losing to the Baltimore Ravens in a wild-card game. The 10-win turnaround tied an NFL record
In 2009 and 2010 each, Sparano led the Dolphins to a 7-9 record and third place in the AFC East. Sparano's Dolphins went 1-7 at home in 2010.  The Dolphins were the subject of much gossip at the end of the 2010 season when team owner Stephen Ross flew across the country with General Manager Jeff Ireland to interview then Stanford University coach Jim Harbaugh.  At the time of the interview with Harbaugh, Sparano was still the team's head coach.  It was also reported by numerous media sources that Ross also spoke with former NFL coaches Jon Gruden and Bill Cowher about the not yet open position. According to reports Bill Cowher told Ross he would not talk to him while he had a head coach in place.
On January 8, 2011, the Dolphins gave Sparano a two-year extension worth $4,500,000 dollars, with Ross saying he was the perfect man for the job. However, on December 12, 2011, hours after a week 14 loss to the Philadelphia Eagles, Sparano was fired; secondary coach Todd Bowles finished out the season.  The Dolphins bought out his contract for $9 million.

=Return to assistant coaching=

==New York Jets==

Sparano was hired as the new offensive coordinator for the New York Jets on January 11, 2012, signing a three-year deal worth $500,000.

==Oakland Raiders==

On January 23, 2013, Sparano was hired to the dual roles of assistant head coach and offensive line coach by the Raiders. He is expected to work closely with new offensive coordinator Greg Olson and head coach Dennis Allen to restore the angle-blocking scheme favored by star running back Darren McFadden, following the Raiders' disappointing 2012 offensive showing.

Head coaching record

Coaching tree

NFL head coaches under whom Tony Sparano has served:

Personal

Sparano and his wife, Jeanette, have two sons: Tony, Andrew, both members of the University at Albany (N.Y.) football teamUniversity at Albany football roster and a daughter, Ryan Leigh.




