[[Quantum suicide and immortality]]

CATEGORIES: Consciousness studies, Quantum measurement, Suicide, Thought experiments, Thought experiments in quantum mechanics

In quantum mechanics, quantum suicide is a thought experiment, originally published independently by Hans Moravec in 1987 and independently developed further by Max Tegmark in 1998. Quantum immortality refers to the subjective experience of surviving quantum suicide regardless of the odds.
Keith Lynch recalls that Hugh Everett took great delight in paradoxes such as the unexpected hanging. Everett did not mention quantum suicide or quantum immortality in writing, but his work was intended as a solution to the paradoxes of quantum mechanics. Lynch said "Everett firmly believed that his many-worlds theory guaranteed him immortality: His consciousness, he argued, is bound at each branching to follow whatever path does not lead to death",See Eugene Shikhovtsev's Biography of Everett: Keith Lynch remembers 1979–1980 Tegmark explains, however, that life and death situations do not normally hinge upon a sequence of binary quantum events like those in the thought experiment.

Quantum suicide thought experiment

Unlike the Schrödinger's cat thought experiment which used poison gas and a radioactive decay trigger, this version involves a life-terminating device and a device that measures the spin value of protons. Every 10 seconds, the spin value of a fresh proton is measured. Conditioned upon that quantum bit, the weapon is either deployed, killing the experimenter, or it makes an audible "click" and the experimenter survives.
The theories are distinctive from the point of view of the experimenter only; their predictions are otherwise identical.
The probability of surviving the first iteration of the experiment is 50%, under both interpretations, as given by the squared norm of the wave function. At the start of the second iteration, if the Copenhagen interpretation is true, the wave function has already collapsed, so if the experimenter is already dead, there's a 0% chance of survival. However, if the many-worlds interpretation is true, a superposition of the live experimenter necessarily exists, regardless of how many iterations or how improbable the outcome. Barring life after death, it is not possible for the experimenter to experience having been killed, thus the only possible experience is one of having survived every iteration.

Max Tegmark's work

In response to questions about "subjective immortality", Max Tegmark made some brief comments: He acknowledged the argument that "everyone will be immortal" should follow if a survivor outcome is possible for all life-threatening events. The flaw in that argument, he suggests, is that dying is rarely a binary event; it is a progressive process. The quantum suicide thought experiment attempts to isolate all possible outcomes for the duration of the thought experiment. That isolation delays decoherence in such a way that the subjective experience of the superposition is illustrated. It is only within the confines of such an abstract quantum scenario that an observer finds they defy all odds. Another possibility is that although an observer does not die, they nevertheless continue to suffer the effects of aging, bringing to mind the legend of Tithonus.

In fiction

Authors of science fiction have used themes involving both quantum suicide and immortality.  The basic idea is that a person who dies on one world may survive in another world or parallel universe.

Quantum suicide

Quantum suicide themes have been explored in the following works:

Quantum immortality

Quantum immortality themes have been explored in several works:

=Books=

=Television and film=

=Video games=

=Webcomics=








