[[The Battle of the Labyrinth]]

CATEGORIES: 2008 novels, Percy Jackson & the Olympians, Children's fantasy novels, Young adult fantasy novels, American adventure novels, American fantasy novels, American young adult novels, 2000s fantasy novels, Sequel novels

The Battle of the Labyrinth is a 2008 fantasy-adventure novel based on Greek mythology; it is the fourth novel in the Percy Jackson & the Olympians series by Rick Riordan. Fictional demigod Percy Jackson, who is fifteen years old by the end of the book, tries to stop Luke Castellan and his army from invading Camp Half-Blood through Daedalus's labyrinth by trying to find Daedalus and convince him not to give Luke Ariadne's string, which would help Luke through the Labyrinth. It was released on 6 May 2008 in the US and Canada.  It was received positively overall.

Prophecy

 You shall delve in the darkness of the endless maze, 
 The dead, the traitor and the lost one raise. 
You shall rise or fall by the ghost king's hand, 
The child of Athena's final stand. 
Destroy with a hero's final breath, 
And lose a love to worse than death.
1. Annabeth, Grover, Percy and Tyson enter the Labyrinth to find Daedalus. The Labyrinth goes on forever, ever changing and expanding.
2. Nico, son of Hades, raised the dead; Ethan Nakamura, the traitor, was spared; and Pan's spirit and message is spread into the world.
3. 'The Ghost King' was Nico (since he is a son of Hades, god of the Underworld), who decided to help Annabeth and the rest of the campers. If he had refused, the rest of the questers wouldn't have survived.
4. A child of Athena's final stand refers to Daedalus, one of Athena's children, because he dies during the Battle of the Labyrinth.
5. The Labyrinth was destroyed with Daedalus' last breath, as he and the maze's life force were tied together. Daedalus asked Nico to free his soul, in order to destroy his creation.
6. Annabeth loses Luke to Kronos, since he becomes Kronos' host body. This is worse than if she would have lost him if he died.

Plot Summary

On his first day at his new school, Percy Jackson is attacked by two empousai disguised as cheerleaders named Tammi and Kelli. Percy kills Tammi but misses Kelli, escapes and returns to Camp Half-Blood, meeting the camp's new sword master, Quintus, as well as his hellhound, Mrs. O'Leary. He later learns about the Labyrinth, a colossal underground maze designed by Daedalus in ancient times.
During a battle drill with giant scorpions at the camp, Annabeth and Percy accidentally find an entrance into the Labyrinth. Percy soon learns that Luke had used this entrance before and will try and lead his army through the Labyrinth straight into the heart of Camp Half-Blood. To do so, he will use Princess Ariadne's magical string, which will lead them through the maze to their desired destination. Annabeth hears the quest's prophecy from the Oracle and comes back out of the Big House with a feeling of dread. She tells the camp most of the prophecy, leaving out the last line. She then chooses Grover, Percy, and the cyclops Tyson to accompany her on the quest. Chiron warns her that not all of them may come back from the quest, given that the best number of questers is three, but Annabeth insists.  
Later that night, Percy looks into an Iris message in his new fountain, and learns that Nico plans to bring back his late sister, with the soul of one who has cheated death. Percy fears Nico will come after him.
The next morning, the four leave to start the quest. Beforehand, Quintus pulls Percy aside and gives him a dog whistle made of Stygian ice, warning Percy that it can only be used once to call Mrs. O'Leary in times of trouble. Percy is suspicious of Quintus, due to the fact that he was seen poking around the Labyrinth entrance, but takes the whistle with him. They descend into the Labyrinth, intending to persuade Daedalus to give them the string before Luke gets it, and run into Janus, who bullies Annabeth before Hera shows up. She offers to grant the questers a single wish, in which Annabeth wishes for a way to navigate the Labyrinth. Hera is somewhat disappointed, telling them that they already have that; she says Percy knows the answer, yet he does not. She disappears, and the quest continues. 
The quartet later stumble into Alcatraz Jail, where the monster Kampe is keeping the Hekatonkheire Briares prisoner. Tyson breaks Briares out. The giant is reluctant to escape, but later agrees when he is beaten in a game of rock-paper-scissors. Kampe almost catches them, destroying half of the island in the process, but they escape back into the Labyrinth just in time. Briares and the others part ways, much to Tyson's grief.
Some time later, they find Geryon's dude ranch in Texas, where they are captured by Eurytion and his two-headed dog Orthus. Nico is also present, stating that he is making a deal with Geryon, but won't reveal his intentions. Geryon then holds them all hostage, agreeing to let them all go on one condition; Percy would clean out the fire-breathing horses' stables, which is four feet deep in horse dung, or Geryon would turn them all over to the Titans. Percy sets out to perform the task and gives up in despair. The nymph of the nearby river helps him, advising him to throw seashells in the stables. Percy does this, and a spring of water pops up. Afterwards, the entire stableyard is clean, and the horses are tamed. Percy then finds that Geryon double-crossed him, and fights Geryon to the death. With Hera's help, Percy shoots Geryon through all three hearts, killing him. He sets his friends and Nico free. Nico performs a ritual to raise the dead in an old septic tank, conjuring the ghost of Bianca, Nico's sister. Bianca helps Nico forgive Percy for failing to protect her and he lets go of his grudge against him. Percy finds that the ghost who was guiding Nico all along was in fact Minos, the evil king of Crete who commanded Daedalus to build the Labyrinth. Percy has a dream that night of Daedalus murdering his nephew Perdix, by making him fall off a tower. Percy witnesses Athena's punishments, and wakes up.
The next day, however, Percy and his friends (without Nico) depart to find Hephaestus, hoping he would know the location of Daedalus. While traveling, the group gets separated, with Percy and Annabeth searching for Hephaestus and  Tyson and Grover searching for Pan, the god of the wild.
After a meeting with Hephaestus, Annabeth and Percy go to Mt. St. Helens to find out who was using Hephaestus's forge. It also turns out that it is the very same mountain that is trapping Typhon. The perpetrators are actually telkhines, also known as sea demons. Percy and Annabeth later have a short argument during which Percy tells Annabeth to flee. Annabeth kisses Percy, believing that she might never get the chance again, tells him to be careful, and leaves. Percy confronts the telkhines and is almost killed, but summons a wave of water that reacts with the lava, shooting him out of the volcano and into an ocean.
When Percy awakens after the eruption of Mt. St. Helens, he finds himself on the island of Ogygia, inhabited by Calypso, who is revealed to be a daughter of the Titan, Atlas. Calypso then tells Percy of the curse she has: The Fates send a hero to her island every thousand years; a hero she cannot help falling in love with, but then has to leave. Percy is surprised, because it's him she's talking about, but then refuses her love. After being treated for burns by Calypso, he is visited by Hephaestus, who assures him that Annabeth is safe, but doesn't know about Tyson and Grover. He also informs Percy that the eruption he caused inflicted much damage on the surrounding environment. During the conversation, Percy suddenly realizes that Hera was right about him knowing the answer to navigating the Labyrinth. When he finally returns to the mortal world, Percy finds the campers burning his shroud, believing he is dead. Annabeth suddenly notices him standing at the back of the crowd, and he is welcomed enthusiastically. Annabeth gets an Iris message from Eurytion, telling her that Nico had left the ranch the previous night, and he was back in the Labyrinth. 
Annabeth and Percy go to Manhattan to find Rachel Elizabeth Dare, who is able to see through the Mist(a magical veil that shields the vision of mortals and demigods, preventing them from seeing the true nature of the supernatural) and saved Percy from the empousai. Rachel, being clear-sighted, is able to see the path through the Labyrinth. About halfway through, they are captured by Luke Castellan's minions, who take them to Antaeus. Antaeus challenges Percy to fight. At first, Percy has some difficulty defeating him, given the fact that his mother is the goddess Gaea, so he is always being healed by the earth. Percy takes advantage of this and, by entangling the giant in chains, is able to kill Annaeus. Luke sends the audience of monsters after them, and Percy blows the ice whistle, summoning Mrs. O'Leary, who saves them from the deadly crowd. They eventually reach Daedalus's workshop, where Quintus shows up and reveals that he is actually Daedalus himself. Quintus was his fifth automaton body, home to the inventor's animus, or soul. Daedalus sadly admits that Luke already has the string, and they are too late. Suddenly they are discovered by part of Luke's army, Kelli and King Minos in the lead. Minos had only been helping Nico find Daedalus so the soul would bring himself back instead of his sister. They had captured Nico and bound him in chains. A battle inside the workshop ensues, with Annabeth killing Kelli and Nico disposing of Minos himself, announcing himself as the "ghost king". Rachel, Percy, Annabeth, and Nico escape from the workshop using Daedalus's wing inventions, forced to leave the inventor behind.
The quartet later find another entrance to the Labyrinth, this time ending up at Mt. Othrys, the location of the Titan's palace. There Percy finds that Kronos is possessing Luke. Ethan Nakamura, an enemy demigod, and two telkhines wake Kronos, who nearly kills them as they flee. Nico, however, uses his geokinetic powers to collapse part of the palace, and they all escape. They run until they encounter Grover and Tyson, who are still searching for Pan. They follow a tunnel until they come to an enormous cavern full of life, the resting place of the old god. Pan speaks to each of them, Nico excluded, and tells Grover to set him free and have everyone help to preserve the wild. Grover sets Pan free, and the old god dies in peace.
The group heads back to New York with the help of Rachel, and ride pegasi to camp. When they arrive, the camp is getting ready for battle. The enemy army floods out of the Labyrinth, followed by Kampe. At the climax of the battle, the entire camp is either injured or killed, but Daedalus, Mrs. O'Leary, and a giant Briares intervene. Briares kills Kampe by throwing stones, and the inventor and hellhound give the campers an added edge. Grover rescues Camp Half-Blood by causing a Panic, which Pan had used once before, to scare away the enemy. Percy leaves camp for the school year with Grover being an outcast to the Council of the Cloven, Kronos, now with a body, planning on taking on Olympus, and Percy on off turns with Annabeth and wishes that things would go back to the way they were before that summer, when things were simpler.
When Percy returns home he gets a visit from his dad, Poseidon, on his fifteenth birthday. Poseidon then tells Percy of evil at work with Kronos now in Luke's body, and also gives him a sand dollar, saying to "spend it wisely". Percy is later on the fire escape, where Nico appears to tell him the secret to defeating Luke once and for all.

Main characters

Critical reception

The Battle of the Labyrinth received generally positive reviews.
Publishers Weekly praised Riordan by saying, "One of Riordan's strengths is the wry interplay between the real and the surreal", and adding that "The wit, rousing swordplay and breakneck pace will once again keep kids hooked."
School Library Journal wrote that "like many series, the "Percy Jackson" books are beginning to show the strain of familiarity and repetition",  before adding "However, the overarching story line remains compelling, and the cliff-hanger ending will leave readers breathless in anticipation of the fifth and final volume."
Kirkus Reviews adjudged the book to be the best in the series and said, "The often-philosophical tale zips along with snappy dialogue, humor and thrilling action, culminating in a climactic battle between gods and Titans."
The Los Angeles Times gave a positive review, calling it "a glorious, no-holds-barred adventure with great plot twists, a melding of ancient and bionic technology and a cliffhanger ending that will have fans eagerly awaiting the fifth and final showdown between gods and monsters next year."

Audiobook

The Battle of the Labyrinth was adapted in a 10 hour 32 minutes audiobook
AudioFile Magazine  praised the audiobook, saying that Bernstein was "skillful at wringing humor from the witty dialogue and from the contrasts between the modern and ancient worlds."

Sequel

The Battle of the Labyrinth was followed by The Last Olympian, the final book in the series, which was released 5 May 2009. In The Last Olympian, Percy and his friends defend Olympus from Kronos's army.

Film adaptation

Fox has bought the rights to the entire series from author Rick Riordan, so it is possible that The Battle of The Labyrinth will be adapted for film.








