[[CRLX101]]

CATEGORIES: Experimental cancer drugs

CRLX101 is a novel approach to cancer chemotherapy that is under investigation in human trials. It is an example of a nanomedicine.
The agent represents a nanoparticle conjugate that consists of a drug delivery molecule, namely a cyclodextrin-based polymer (CDP) and an anti-cancer compound (camptothecin). It was developed by Mark E. Davis, professor of Chemical Engineering at the California Institute of Technology, and associates at Insert Therapeutics, Inc., now Calando Pharmaceuticals, Inc., hence the original name "IT-101". Its novel delivery mode allows the agent, and thus the toxic anti-cancer component, to be preferentially accumulated in cancer tissue. In turn, toxic side effect are expected to be reduced. The technology was licensed by Calando and Caltech to Cerulean Pharma Inc., in June, 2009.

Rationale

Camptothecin (CPT), an alkaloid extract with poor water solubility from plants such as camptotheca acuminata, exhibits anti-cancer activity possibly due, at least in part, by the inhibition of DNA topoisomerase I resulting in cell death. In CRLX101, CPT is linked covalently through a glycine link to the linear copolymer CDP, which in turn consists of alternating subunits of beta-cyclodextrin and polyethylene glycol (PEG). The CRLX101 nanoparticle is water soluble. After intravenous injection, active CPT is slowly released as the linkage is hydrolysed. The size of the nanoparticle (20-50 nm in diameter) facilitates its extravasation in the more leaky vessels of tumors via the enhanced permeability and retention effect and as a result, the anticancer drug is enhanced and retained in the tumor tissue.

Animal studies

CRLX101 (formerly IT-101) was studied in mouse xenografts using different cancer models and showed good tolerability and anti-cancer effectiveness in a variety of tumors.

Clinical trials

The Phase 1/2a clinical trial was conducted at the City of Hope National Medical Center, the Translational Genomics Research Institute and San Juan Oncology Associates. Patients who were entered had refractory and resistant solid tumor cancer of various types, including pancreatic cancer, ovarian cancer and non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). A total of 62 patients received treatment. Bi-weekly dosing was generally well tolerated with myelosuppression being the dose-limiting toxicity. A Phase 2 study of CRLX101 in combination with the angiogenesis inhibitor bevacizumab  in recurrent ovarian/tubal/peritoneal cancer is underwayCRLX101 in Combination With Bevacizumab for Recurrent Ovarian/Tubal/Peritoneal Cancer (clinicaltrials.CRLX101 Plus Bevacizumab in Advanced RCC (clinicaltrials.Neoadjuvant Chemoradiotherapy With CRLX101 and Capecitabine for Rectal Cancer (clinicaltrials.Cyclodextrin-Based Polymer-Camptothecin CRLX101 in Treating Patients With Advanced or Metastatic Stomach, Gastroesophageal, or Esophageal Cancer That Cannot be Removed by Surgery (clinicaltrials.gov)

Alternate drug name

CRLX101 was originally named "IT-101" and was changed to CRLX101 after licensing to Cerulean Pharma Inc. CRLX101 is the official name in clinical trials.

Media

IT-101 and Dr. Mark E. Davis were included in the PBS documentary titled "Survival."






