[[Mark Pigott]]

CATEGORIES: American businesspeople, 1954 births, Living people, Commanders of the Order of the Crown (Belgium), Stanford University School of Engineering alumni, Businesspeople from San Francisco, California, Honorary Knights Commander of the Order of the British Empire, Officers of the Order of Orange-Nassau, American philanthropists, Commanders of the Order of St John

 
Mark Pigott, (born February 6, 1954), is an American businessman and philanthropist. He has been Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Paccar, Inc. since January 1997.  on the Business Council in Washington, D.C.businesscouncil.com/

Education

Mark Pigott was born in San Francisco and raised in Seattle. He has lived in many cities in North America, studied in Italy, and worked in the United Kingdom from 1984 to 1989.  He graduated from Stanford University receiving his B.S. in Industrial Engineering (1976), an M.S. in Business (1984),  and a B.A. in Humanities (1998). D.) from Trinity College, Dublin (2007), and a D.H.L. from Seattle University, WA (2012).seattleu.aspx?id=86431

Business career

Mark Pigott's successful career with Paccar began in 1978.  He is the fourth generation of the Pigott family to lead the company. Paccar, a Fortune 150 company, celebrated its 106th year in 2011 and has earned 73 years of consecutive profitability.  Paccar (revenues $16.4 billion) (Nasdaq:PCAR) is publicly traded and is a global technology leader in the capital goods and financial services industries.  Paccar's major brands are DAF Trucks, Kenworth and Peterbilt trucks, Paccar Financial, PacLease, Paccar Parts and Paccar Information Technology.
Under Mark Pigott's leadership Paccar has delivered a 290 percent total return to shareholders over the last decade (through 12/31/11).  Pigott's focus on quality and innovation has resulted in Paccar receiving many J.D. Power and Associates Awards for highest customer satisfaction as well as International Truck of the Year Awards.
Paccar has earned the distinction of being one of the nation's leading companies by Forbes, Barron's (newspaper), BusinessWeek, Industryweek,Industryweek and InformationWeek Magazine.  
Pigott has been Chairman of the DAF Supervisory Board since 1996, serves on the Business Council (Washington, D.C.) and on the Washington State Business Roundtable Executive Committee (retired).
Harvard Business Review (January 2010) named Pigott as one of the top 50 global CEO's based on long term shareholder returns.

Environmental leadership

Mark Pigott has been a strong supporter of environmental stewardship.  He promotes a spirit of innovation and quality control throughout the workplace and invests in new cutting-edge technology, which has led to the development of aerodynamic designs and hybrid vehicles that promote fuel efficiency.  As a result of this commitment and leadership, Paccar has been recognized by the EPA SmartWay Transport Partnership program. Every Paccar manufacturing facility has earned environmental certification ISO 14001. Paccar's brands Kenworth and Peterbilt are leaders in Diesel-Electric Hybrid technology installed in medium duty trucks.

Philanthropy

Mark Pigott is President of the Paccar Foundation, which annually donates $5–$10 million in support of education, social services and the arts.  Beneficiaries included University of North Texas (2006), Stanford University (2006), Mississippi State University (2007), Gonzaga University (2006), East Mississippi Community College (2007),  University of Washington (2008) and Seattle University (2009). Pigott established the prestigious Paccar Award for Teaching Excellence at the University of Washington in 1997.  This is the highest honorarium teaching award for MBA professors in the United States.  Pigott's strong support of corporate giving is demonstrated by the fact that in 2010, Paccar was ranked fifth on a list of 25 top large corporate philanthropists in the state of Washington by the Puget Sound Business Journal Book of Lists.
On a personal basis, Pigott has funded professorships and scholarships at Stanford University, Trinity College, Dublin, the University of Washington, Gonzaga University, Kings College, Cambridge, 
Cambridge UniversityWhy Mark Pigott Supports Cambridge, Cambridge University Development Office. and Trinity College, Dublin.
He serves on the Board of the Royal Shakespeare Company America, The British Library Foundation, National Science & Technology Medals Foundation, St. George's Society (New York) Advisory Board and Trinity College Foundation.  He is a life member of the National Gallery London, The British Library,Royal Society for the encouragement of Arts, Manufacture Commerce (RSA), and the Royal National Theatre, UK.  Major philanthropy also includes strategic planning and implementation of capital projects at St Paul's Cathedral, London,American millionaire Mark Pigott lavishes gifts on UK, Muckety.  An avid bibliophile, Mark Pigott is involved in numerous projects benefiting the British Library and the Folger Shakespeare Library.  For over a decade, his dedication to educating the next generation of leaders is evidenced by his participation as a lecturer at numerous graduate schools of business, including the University of Washington, Seattle University, Gonzaga University, Stanford, and Trinity College Dublin.

Honors

For his business and philanthropic leadership he was awarded Knights Cross of the Order of Merit, (Hungary) (2009), Honorary Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (KBE, UK, 2012), Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE, UK, 2003), Commander of the Order of the Crown (Belgium) (2006),  Officer of the Order of Orange-Nassau (Netherlands) (2008), Commander of the Order of St. John (2009)  and Guild of Benefactors (Cambridge University, UK) (2009).  Pigott's many business honors include being recognized as Washington State CEO of the Year (2003).  He received the Ellis Island Medal of Honor (2006) and is an honoree of the Ireland Chamber of Commerce (ICCUSA, 2005) and was selected for the Irish America Magazine "Business 100" list (2005).  In addition, Pigott received the Albert Schweitzer Leadership Award (HOBY 2007) and Stanford University Governors' Award (2007) for over 30 years' of dedicated service to the university.
He received the 2010 Medal of Honor from the St George's Society of New York.

Quotes

"Paccar has over 23,000 employees worldwide and is committed to supporting leading educational institutions in the communities in which our employees reside," said Mark Pigott, chairman and chief executive. "Paccar has been committed to supporting educational excellence through donations to universities, independent college funds and various scholarship programs for 107 years – always focused on the betterment of students and society.  Children are the future leaders and investing in their growth and development is our finest legacy." Paccar has provided many educational grants and donations. Paccar was honored by the Independent Colleges of Washington (ICW) for being a leading contributor for 50 years.






