[[Eurasian Avars]]

CATEGORIES: Eurasian Avars, Ancient peoples, History of the Turkic peoples, Late Antiquity, Bulgarian Empire, Ancient peoples of Russia, Romania in the Early Middle Ages, Moldova in the Early Middle Ages, Late Roman-era tribes in the Balkans, 6th century in the Byzantine Empire, Migration Period, Turkic peoples, Turkic tribes

The Avars  having formed as a mixed band of warriors in the Pontic-Caspian steppe wishing to escape Göktürk rule. Their linguistic affiliation may be tentatively deduced from a variety of sources, betraying a variety of languages spoken by ruling and subject clans. Oghur, a distinct branch of the Turkic languages, figures prominently for the original Avar language.Róna-Tas, András. Hungarians and Europe in the Early Middle Ages (1999) p 116. In any event, Slavic ultimately became the lingua franca in the Avar Khaganate.

Early literary sources

The earliest clear reference to the Avar ethnonym comes from Priscus the Rhetor who accounts that, c. 463, the Saraghurs, Onoghurs and Ughors were attacked by the Sabirs, who had been attacked by the Avars. In turn, the Avars had been driven off by people fleeing "man-eating griffins" coming from "the ocean" (Priscus Fr 40).
The next late antique author to discuss the Avars was Menander Protector, who details Gokturk embassies in Constantinople in 565 and 568 CE. Each time, the Turks appear angered at the Byzantines for having made an alliance with the Avars, whom the Turks saw as their subjects and slaves. Turxanthos, a Turk prince, calls the Avars "Varchonites" and "escaped slaves of the Turks", who numbered "about 20 thousand" (Menander Fr 43).
Much greater, but somewhat confusing, details are provided by Theophylact Simocatta, who wrote c. 629, but detailed the final two decades of the 6th century. In particular, he (claims to) quote a triumph letter from Turk Khan Tardan.

According to the interpretation of Dobrovits and Nechaeva, the Turks insisted that the Avars are only pseudo-Avars, so as to boast that they were the only formidable power in the Eurasian steppe. The Gokturks claimed that the 'real Avars' remained loyal subjects of the Turks, farther east.
Furthermore, Dobrovits has questioned the authenticity of Theophylact's account. As such, they have argued that Theophylact borrowed information from Menander's accounts of Byzantine-Turk negotiations to meet political needs of his time – i.e. to castigate and deride the Avars during a time of strained political relations between the Byzantines and Avars (coinciding with Emperor Maurice's north Balkan campaigns). By calling the Avars "Turkish slaves" and "pseudo-Avars", Theophylact undermined their political legitimacy.

Postulated links with the Juan-Juan, Hephthalites and other Inner Asian peoples

The French historian Deguignes postulated a link between the Avars of European history with the Juan-Juan of Inner Asia based on a coincidence between Tardan Khan's letter to Constantinople and events recorded in Chinese sources, notably the Wei-shi and Pei-shi.
The Chinese sources state that T'u-men (=Bumin) khan, founder of Turkic dynasty and son of the legendary Ashina, defeated the Juan-Juan. Some of the Juan-Juan fled to the Chinese Western Wei. Later, according to another Chinese source, Mu-han khan, Bumin's successor, defeated the "I-ta" (interpreted as Hephthalites) as well as the Tieh-le, who were also known as Oghuz. Thus the events contained in the various Chinese sources, recording victories over the Tiehle, Juan-Juan and Ita (Hephthalites), seem to coincide with the narrative in the Turk envoy's letter (in Theophylact above), boasting of Tardan's victories over the Hephthalites, Avars and Oghurs. However, the two series of events are not synonymous. The events of the letter took place during Tardan's rule, c. 580-599, whilst Chinese sources referring to the Turk defeat of the Juan-Juan and other inner Asian peoples occurred 50 years earlier, at founding of Turk khanate by Bumen.
Thus Harmatta rejects the association of Avars with Juan-Juan. Further hypotheses linking them with the Hephthalites are based on the Avars being called Varchonites by the Turks, i.e. being led by Var and Chunni factions. For, according to some Chinese transliterations, the term Var is rendered Hua, a term used by some Chinese sources when referring to the Hephthalites. This appeared to be supported by the name of a Hephthalite town, Varvaliz. However, this has rather been interpreted to mean "upper Fortress" in various Iranic languages.

Steppe Empire dynamics and ethnogenesis

Contemporary scholars are less inclined to view the tribal groupings mentioned in historical texts as monolithic and long-lived 'nations', but were rather volatile and fluid political formations whose dynamic depended on the sedentary civilizations they bordered as well as internal power struggles within the barbarian lands.
Walter Pohl recently summarized the formation of nomadic empires:

Such views are mirrored by Csanad Balint. "The ethnogenesis of early medieval peoples of steppe origin cannot be conceived in a single linear fashion due to their great and constant mobility", with no ethnogenetic "point zero", theoretical "proto-people" or proto-language.
Moreover, Avar identity was strongly linked to Avar political institutions. Groups who rebelled or fled from the Avar realm could never be called "Avars", but were rather termed "Bulgars". Similarly, with the final demise of Avar power in the early 9th century, Avar identity disappeared almost instantaneously.

Anthropological evidence

Anthropological research has revealed few skeletons with Mongoloid-type features, although there was continuing cultural influence from the Eurasian nomadic steppe. The late Avar period shows more hybridization, resulting in higher frequencies of Euro-Mongoloids.[ref]
"Acta archaeologica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae", Magyar Tudományos Akadémia, 1 Jan 1967, Page 86 
[/ref] Mongoloid and Euro-Mongoloid types compose about one-third of the total population of the Avar graves of the eighth century... - Page 21 
According to Pál Lipták the early Avar anthropological material was almost exclusively Europoid in the 7th century, while grave-goods indicated Middle and Central Asian parallels. On the other hand, cemeteries dated for the 8th century contained Mongoloid elements among others. He analysed population of the Danube-Tisza midland region in the Avar period and found that 80% of them showed Europoid characteristics.[ref]
Erzsébet Fóthi, Anthropological conclusions of the study of Roman and  Migration periods, Acta Biologica Szegediensis, Volume 44(1–4):87–94, 2000[/ref]

Social and tribal structure

The Carpathian basin was the centre of the Avar power-base. The Avars re-settled captives from the peripheries of their empire to more central regions. Avar material culture is found south to Macedonia. However, to the east of the Carpathians, there are next to no Avar archaeological finds, suggesting that they lived mainly in the western Balkans. Scholars propose that a highly structured and hierarchical Avar society existed, having complex interactions with other "barbarian" groups. The khagan was the paramount figure, surrounded by a minority of nomadic aristocracy.
A few exceptionally rich burials have been uncovered, confirming that power was limited to the khagan and a close-knit class of "elite warriors". In addition to hoards of gold coins that accompanied the burials, the men were often buried with symbols of rank, such as decorated belts, weapons, stirrups resembling those found in central Asia, as well as their horse. The Avar army was composed from numerous other groups: Slavic, Gepidic and Bulgar military units. There also appeared to have existed semi-independent "client" (predominantly Slavic) tribes which served strategic roles, such as engaging in diversionary attacks and guarding the Avars' western borders abutting the Frankish Empire. Yet other tribes were equals and allies of the Avars, such as Khan Zabergan's Kutrigur Bulgars and Ardagastus' Slavs, which often conducted autonomous offensives into Byzantine land.
Initially, the Avars and their subjects lived separately, except for Slavic and Germanic women who married Avar men. Eventually, the Germanic and Slavic peoples were included in the Avaric social order and culture, itself Persian-Byzantine in fashion. Paul Fouracre notes, "There appears in the seventh century a mixed Slavic-Avar material culture, interpreted as peaceful and harmonious relationships between Avar warriors and Slavic peasants. It is thought possible that at least some of the leaders of the Slavic tribes could have become part of the Avar aristocracy". Paul Fouracre
[/ref] Apart from the assimilated Gepids, a few graves of west Germanic (Carolingian) peoples have been found in the Avar lands. They perhaps served as mercenaries.

Language

Although there is sparse knowledge about the Avar language, scholars generally posit that the extinct language of the Eurasian Avars belonged to the Oghur branch,Price, Glanville. Encyclopedia of the Languages of Europe (2000) p 68. The Uralic Language Family (2002) p 24. of the Turkic language family. Today, Chuvash is thought to represent the last remaining branch of Oghuric. How well modern Chuvash represents archaic Oghuric remains speculative. Chuvash itself is not intelligible by speakers of other Turkic branches, despite having undergone significant degrees of Kipchakization in recent centuries. ''Linguistic Convergence in the VOlga Area, L Johanson. p 165-178
In contrast, it has also been suggested that the original language of the Avars was Tungusic
Whatever the original Avar language was, Slavic eventually became the dominant language of the Avar Khaganate.



Notes



  | last = Curta
  | first = Florin
  | title = Southeastern Europe in the Middle Ages, 500–1250.
  | publisher = Cambridge Medieval Textbooks
  | year = 2006
  | isbn = 0-521-81539-8}}
  | last = Fine, Jr
  | first = John V.A
  | title = [ The Early Medieval Balkans; A critical survey from the sixth to the late twelfth century]
  | publisher = The University of Michigan Press
  | year = 1991
  | isbn = 0-472-08149-7}}
|last = Jarnut |first=Jorg|last=Pohl|first=Walter|year=2003|publisher=Brill|isbn=90 04 12524 8}}
|publisher=Blackwell|year=1998|isbn=9781577180081}}
Webfestschrift Marshak 2003|year=2003}}
|year=2011|publisher=Ashgate|editor=Ralph W. Mathisen, Danuta Shanzer|chapter= The "Runaway" Avars and Late Antique Diplomacy|author= Ekaterina Nachaeva}}

