[[Accuracy in Media]]

CATEGORIES: Media analysis organizations, Media analysis websites, Organizations established in 1969, 1969 establishments in the United States

Accuracy In Media (AIM) is an American, politically conservative[ref]

History

At its inception, Accuracy In Media was run primarily by Reed Irvine and then-executive secretary Abraham Kalish. The two sent letters to the editors of many newspapers and magazines they identified as skewed, calling out slanted news stories. If the newspaper rejected the letter, AIM bought space and printed the letter in that newspaper. Beginning in 1975, Accuracy In Media began purchasing stock in major media companies, allowing Irvine to attend annual shareholder meetings. He used these opportunities to express AIM's concerns to the various companies' owners. Don Irvine, son of the elder Irvine, chairs the organization. Don Irvine referred to Reed Irvine as a "die-hard anti-communist."Obituary of Reed Irvine, 82 Washington Post. November 18, 2004
In 1972, Accuracy In Media began publishing the AIM Report,  a twice-monthly newsletter originally edited by Reed Irvine. Cliff Kincaid and Roger Aronoff, AIM Senior Editor and AIM Executive Secretary and Media Analyst, respectively, continue to handle the publication, as well as daily online updates. The AIM Report often calls on its subscribers to contact newsmakers, reporters and news corporations to end perceived liberal media bias.

AIM's work

Human rights

In 1982, New York Times reporter Raymond Bonner broke the story of the El Mozote massacre. This report was strongly criticized by AIM and the Reagan White House, and Bonner was pressured into business reporting, later deciding to resign.  Although the report was embarrassing to the Reagan administration, who was heavily aiding the right-wing junta at the time, skeletons unearthed a decade later confirmed the original story's veracity.consortiumnews.html AIM was critical of journalist Helen Marmor, who in 1983 produced a documentary for NBC concerning the Russian Orthodox Church.

Vincent Foster conspiracy theory

AIM received a substantial amount of funding from Richard Mellon Scaife who paid Christopher W. Ruddy to investigate allegations that President Bill Clinton was connected to the suicide of Vincent Foster. The Vincent Foster Factory. Columbia Journalism Review, April 1996. AIM contended that "Foster was murdered",AIM Report: Evidence Proving Foster Was Murdered July 1, 2001 which is contrary to three independent reports including one by Kenneth Starr. Foster, Jr., compiled by Whitewater independent counsel Kenneth Starr. After an exhaustive three-year investigation, Starr reaffirmed that Foster's death was a suicide AIM faulted the media for not picking up on the conspiracy. The organization even went to court for documents and recordings linked to the case.
AIM credited much of its reporting on the Foster case to Ruddy. Riady, Accuracy in Media 2001. Yet, his work was called a "hoax" and "discredited" by conservatives such as Ann Coulter,"Even if Christopher Ruddy's The Strange Death of Vincent Foster was considered a conservative hoax book, it was also conservatives who discredited it." Chapter Six Endnote 105, pp. 224–225, Slander, Ann Coulter. it was also disputed by the American Spectator, which caused Scaife to end his funding of the Arkansas Project with the publisher.Report: Starr Rules Out Foul Play In Foster Death CNN Feb. 23, 1997
Ruddy operates a conservative news website, NewsMax, that, as of 2004, continued to assert there was a conspiracy and faulted the media.Supreme Court Shields Photos of Vince Foster's Death Scene NewsMax March 30, 2004

United Nations

AIM has been critical of the United Nations and its coverage by the media. In February 2005, AIM alleged that United Nations correspondents, including Ian Williams, a correspondent for The Nation had accepted money from the UN while covering it for their publications. AIM also asserted that the United Nations Correspondents Association may have violated immigration laws by employing the wife of Williams.N. Reporters Group May Have Violated U.S. Immigration Law", February 22, 2005Cliff Kincaid, "Journalists Exposed on the U.N. Payroll; George Soros, Ted Turner Pay for Journalism Prizes" Accuracy in Media, February 15, 2005 Williams and The Nation denied wrongdoing...", February 24, 2005Ian Williams, "Confessions of a Payola Pundit", Mediachannel. Lappen, "Another U.N. Scandal", FrontPage Magazine, March 16, 2005 and the allegation concerning Williams receiving UN cash was picked up by Brit Hume and the Fox News Channel.

Cliff Kincaid and Fox News Channel

In November 2005, AIM columnist Cliff Kincaid criticized Fox News for broadcasting a program The Heat is On, which reported that global warming represents a serious problem (the program was broadcast with a disclaimer). Kincaid argued the piece was one-sided and stated that this "scandal" amounted to a "hostile takeover of Fox News".Cliff Kincaid, "Hostile Takeover of Fox News", November 21, 2005
On October 20, 2006, Accuracy in Media released a list of 27 questions to pose at the Fox News Executive meeting that was attended by AIM editor Cliff Kincaid. Of these 27 questions, 8 dwell on Rupert Murdoch's relationship with the Clintons and how that may have affected Fox News coverage. Moreover, AIM wrote "News Corporation hired the Glover Park Group, a public relations firm run by friends of Bill and Hillary Clinton, to block changes in the TV ratings system", and asks, "Was this part of News Corporation's move to the left?"
In May 2007, Accuracy in Media raised questions about a conflict of interest in Fox News' co-sponsorship of the May 15 Republican Presidential Candidates debate, pointing out that News Corporation, the parent company of Fox News, is as a client of presidential candidate Rudy Giuliani.

Funding

Only three donors of the remainder are given by name: the Allied Educational Foundation, Shelby Cullom Davis, and billionaire Richard Mellon Scaife. Scaife gave $2 million to Accuracy in Media between 1977 and 1997.Arkansas Project Led to Turmoil and Rifts Washington Post May 2, 1999; Page A24






