[[Content-control software]]

CATEGORIES: Content-control software, Web browsers, Internet censorship, Digital rights management

Content-control software, content filtering software, secure web gateways, censorware, Content Security and Control, web filtering software, content-censoring software, and content-blocking software are terms describing software designed to restrict or control the content a reader is authorised to access, especially when utilised to restrict material delivered over the Internet via the Web, e-mail, or other means. Content-control software determines what content will be available or perhaps more often what content will be blocked.
Such restrictions can be applied at various levels: a government can attempt to apply them nationwide (see Internet censorship), or they can, for example, be applied by an ISP to its clients, by an employer to its personnel, by a school to its students, by a library to its visitors, by a parent to a child's computer, or by an individual user to his or her own computer.
The motive is often to prevent access to content which the computer's owner(s) or other authorities may consider objectionable; when imposed without the consent of the user, content control can be characterised a form of as internet censorship. Some content-control software includes time control functions that empowers parents to set the amount of time that child may spend accessing the Internet or playing games or other computer activities.
In some countries, such software is ubiquitous. In Cuba, if a computer user at a government controlled Internet cafe types certain words, the word processor or browser is automatically closed, and a "state security" warning is given.

Terminology

This article uses the term "content control", a term also used on occasion by CNN,
Companies that make products that selectively block Web sites do not refer to these products as censorware, and prefer terms such as "Internet filter" or "URL Filter"; in the specialized case of software specifically designed to allow parents to monitor and restrict the access of their children, "parental control software" is also used. Some products log all sites that a user accesses and rates them based on content type for reporting to an "accountability partner" of the person's choosing, and the term accountability software is used. Internet filters, parental control software, and/or accountability software may also be combined into one product.
Those critical of such software, however, use the term "censorware" freely: consider the Censorware Project, for example.
In general, outside of editorial pages as described above, traditional newspapers do not use the term censorware in their reporting, preferring instead to use less overtly controversial terms such as content filter, content control, or web filtering; the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal both appear to follow this practice. On the other hand, Web-based newspapers such as CNET use the term in both editorial and journalistic contexts, for example "Windows Live to Get Censorware."

Types of filtering

Filters can be implemented in many different ways: by software on a personal computer, via network infrastructure such as proxy servers, DNS servers, or firewalls that provide Internet access.
Browser based filters: Browser based content filtering solution is the most lightweight solution to do the content filtering, and is implemented via a third party browser extension.
E-mail filters: E-mail filters act on information contained in the mail body, in the mail headers such as sender and subject, and e-mail attachments to classify, accept, or reject messages. Bayesian filters, a type of statistical filter, are commonly used. Both client and server based filters are available.
Client-side filters:  This filter can typically be managed, disabled or uninstalled by anyone who has administrator-level privileges on the system.
Content-limited (or filtered) ISPs: Content-limited (or filtered) ISPs are Internet service providers that offer access to only a set portion of Internet content on an opt-in or a mandatory basis. Anyone who subscribes to this type of service is subject to restrictions. The type of filters can be used to implement government, or parental control over subscribers.
Network-based filtering: This type of filter is implemented at the transport layer as a transparent proxy, or at the application layer as a web proxy.  Filtering software may include data loss prevention functionality to filter outbound as well as inbound information.  All users are subject to the access policy defined by the institution.  The filtering can be customized, so a school district's high school library can have a different filtering profile than the district's junior high school library.
Search-engine filters: Many search engines, such as Google and Alta Vista offer users the option of turning on a safety filter. When this safety filter is activated, it filters out the inappropriate links from all of the search results. If users know the actual URL of a website that features explicit or adult content, they have the ability to access that content without using a search engine. Engines like Lycos, Yahoo, and Bing offer kid-oriented versions of their engines that permit only children friendly websites.

Reasons for filtering

Internet service providers (ISPs) that block material containing pornography, or controversial religious, political, or news-related content en route are often utilised by parents who do not permit their children to access content not conforming to their personal beliefs. Content filtering software can, however, also be used to block malware and other content that is or contains hostile, intrusive, or annoying material including adware, spam, computer viruses, worms, trojan horses, and spyware.
Most content control software is marketed to organizations or parents. It is, however, also marketed on occasion to facilitate self-censorship, for example by people struggling with addictions to online pornography, gambling, chat rooms, etc. Self-censorship software may also be utilised by some of the more extreme conservatives in order to avoid viewing content they consider 'immoral' or 'inappropriate'.  A number of accountability software products are marketed as self-censorship or accountability software. These are often promoted by religious media and at religious gatherings.

Criticism

Filtering errors

Overblocking: Utilising a filter that is overly zealous at filtering content, or mislabels content not intended to be censored can result in over blocking, or over-censoring. Over blocking can filter out material that should be acceptable under the filtering policy in effect, for example health related information may unintentionally be filtered along with porn-related material because of the Scunthorpe problem.  Filter administrators may prefer to err on the side of caution by accepting over blocking to prevent any risk of access to sites that they determine to be undesirable.  Content-control software was mentioned as blocking access to Beaver College before its name change to Arcadia University. As well, over-blocking may encourage users to bypass the filter entirely.
Underblocking: Whenever new information is uploaded to the Internet, filters can under block, or under-censor, content if the parties responsible for maintaining the filters do not update them quickly and accurately, and a blacklisting rather than a whitelisting filtering policy is in place.

Morality and opinion

Many[ref]
