[[Father's Day]]

CATEGORIES: Fatherhood, Family member holidays, June observances, March observances, November observances, Observances in the United States by presidential proclamation, September observances, Secularism, Sunday observances, Generic types of holidays

Father's Day is a celebration honoring fathers and celebrating fatherhood, paternal bonds, and the influence of fathers in society. Many countries celebrate it on the third Sunday of June, but it is also celebrated widely on other days. Father's Day was created to complement Mother's Day, a celebration that honors mothers and motherhood.

History

Father's Day was inaugurated in the United States in the early 20th century to complement Mother's Day in celebrating fatherhood and male parenting.
After the success obtained by Anna Jarvis with the promotion of Mother's Day in the US, some There were other persons in the US who independently thought of "Father's Day",Myers, 1972, p. 185Larossa, 1997. pp. 172-173 but the credit for the modern holiday is often given to Sonora Dodd, who was the driving force behind its establishment.
Father's Day was founded in Spokane, Washington at the YMCA in 1910 by Sonora Smart Dodd, who was born in Arkansas. Its first celebration was in the Spokane YMCA on June 19, 1910. Her father, the Civil War veteran William Jackson Smart, was a single parent who raised his six children there. After hearing a sermon about Jarvis' Mother's Day in 1909, she told her pastor that fathers should have a similar holiday honoring them. Although she initially suggested June 5, her father's birthday, the pastors did not have enough time to prepare their sermons, and the celebration was deferred to the third Sunday of June.
It did not have much success initially. In the 1920s, Dodd stopped promoting the celebration because she was studying in the Art Institute of Chicago, and it faded into relative obscurity, even in Spokane. p. 278 In the 1930s Dodd returned to Spokane and started promoting the celebration again, raising awareness at a national level. p. 279 She had the help of those trade groups that would benefit most from the holiday, for example the manufacturers of ties, tobacco pipes, and any traditional present to fathers. pp. 275, 283–284, 286, 288, 290, 292 Since 1938 she had the help of the Father's Day Council, founded by the New York Associated Men's Wear Retailers to consolidate and systematize the commercial promotion. p. 275,288-290 Americans resisted the holiday during a few decades, perceiving it as just an attempt by merchants to replicate the commercial success of Mother's Day, and newspapers frequently featured cynical and sarcastic attacks and jokes. pp. 280–283; Larossa, 1997. p. 174 But the trade groups did not give up: they kept promoting it and even incorporated the jokes into their adverts, and they eventually succeeded. p. 283–290 By the mid-1980s the Father's Council wrote that "(...) Day has become a Second Christmas for all the men's gift-oriented industries."Schmidt, 1997. p. 286
A bill to accord national recognition of the holiday was introduced in Congress in 1913. In 1916, President Woodrow Wilson went to Spokane to speak in a Father's Day celebrationMyers, 1972. pp. 186-187 and wanted to make it official, but Congress resisted, fearing that it would become commercialized. In 1957, Maine Senator Margaret Chase Smith wrote a proposal accusing Congress of ignoring fathers for 40 years while honoring mothers, thus "singling out just one of our two parents". In 1966, President Lyndon B. Johnson issued the first presidential proclamation honoring fathers, designating the third Sunday in June as Father's Day. Six years later, the day was made a permanent national holiday when President Richard Nixon signed it into law in 1972. pp. 275-276
In addition to Father's Day, International Men's Day is celebrated in many countries on November 19 for men and boys who are not fathers.

Similar celebrations

A "Father's Day" service was held on July 5, 1908, in Fairmont, West Virginia, in the Williams Memorial Methodist Episcopal Church South, now known as Central United Methodist Church. Grace Golden Clayton was mourning the loss of her father when, on December 1907, the Monongah Mining Disaster in nearby Monongah killed 361 men, 250 of them fathers, leaving around a thousand fatherless children. Clayton suggested her pastor Robert Thomas Webb to honor all those fathers. Clayton chose the Sunday nearest to the birthday of her father, Methodist minister Fletcher Golden.
Clayton's event did not have repercussions outside of Fairmont for several reasons, among them: the city was overwhelmed by other events, the celebration was never promoted outside of the town itself and no proclamation was made in the City Council. Also two events overshadowed this event: the celebration of Independence Day July 4, 1908, with 12,000 attendants and several shows including a hot air balloon event, which took over the headlines in the following days, and the death of a 16-year-old girl on July 4. The local church and Council were overwhelmed and they did not even think of promoting the event, and it was not celebrated again for many years. The original sermon was not reproduced in press and it was lost. Finally, Clayton was a quiet person, who never promoted the event or even talked to other persons about it.
Clayton also may have been inspired by Anna Jarvis' crusade to establish Mother's Day; two months prior, Jarvis had held a celebration for her dead mother in Grafton, West Virginia, a town about 15 miles (24 km) away from Fairmont.
In 1911, Jane Addams proposed a city-wide Father's Day in Chicago, but she was turned down.
In 1912, there was a Father's Day celebration in Vancouver, Washington, suggested by Methodist pastor J. J. Berringer of the Irvingtom Methodist Church. They believed mistakenly that they had been the first to celebrate such a day. They followed a 1911 suggestion by the Portland Oregonian.
Harry C. Meek, member of Lions Clubs International, claimed that he had first the idea for Father's Day in 1915. Meek claimed that the third Sunday of June was chosen because it was his birthday (it would have been more natural to choose his father's birthday). The Lions Club has named him "Originator of Father's Day". Meek made many efforts to promote Father's Day and make it an official holiday.

Spelling

In the United States, Dodd used the "Fathers' Day" spelling on her original petition for the holiday,Schmidt, 1997, p. 276. but the spelling "Father's Day" was already used in 1913 when a bill was introduced to the U.S. Congress as the first attempt to establish the holiday,

Dates around the world

The officially recognized date of Father's Day varies from country to country. This section lists some significant examples, in order of date of observance.
Officially, as the name suggests, the holiday celebrates people who are serving or were serving the Russian Armed Forces (both men and women). But the congratulations are traditionally, nationally accepted by all fathers, other adult men and male children as well.

In China during Republican period prior to 1949, Father's Day on August 8 was first held in Shanghai in 1945.

International history and traditions

In a few Catholic countries, it is celebrated on the Feast of St. Joseph, and in western European countries, though the name often is changed.

Argentina

Father's Day in Argentina is celebrated on the third Sunday of June, but there have been several attempts to change the date to August 24, to commemorate the day on which the "Father of the Nation" José de San Martín became a father.
In 1953 the proposal to celebrate Father's Day in all educational establishments on August 24, in honor of José de San Martín, was raised to the General Direction of Schools of Mendoza Province. The day was celebrated for the first time in 1958, on the third Sunday of June, but it was not included in the school calendars due to pressure from several groups.
Schools in the Mendoza Province continued to celebrate Father's Day on August 24, and, in 1982, the Provincial Governor passed a law declaring Father's Day in the province to be celebrated on that day.
In 2004, several proposals to change the date to August 24 were presented to the Argentine Chamber of Deputies as a single, unified project. After being approved, the project was passed to the Senate of Argentina for final review and approval. The Senate changed the proposed new date to the third Sunday of August, and scheduled the project for approval. However, the project was never addressed during the Senate's planned session, which caused its ultimate failure.

Aruba

In Aruba, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday.

Australia

In Australia, Father's Day is celebrated on the first Sunday of September, which is the first Sunday of Spring, and is not a public holiday.
YMCA Victoria continues the tradition of honouring the role fathers, and father figures play in parenting through the annual awarding of Local Community Father of the Year in 32 municipalities in Victoria. The Father's Day Council of Victoria annually recognise fathers in the Father of the Year Award.fathersdaycouncil.au

Austria

In Austria, Father's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday of June and it is not a public holiday.

Belgium

In Belgium, Father's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday of June and it is not a public holiday.

Brazil

In Brazil Father's Day (Dia dos Pais, in Portuguese) celebrated 3 months after Mother's Day, on the second Sunday of August. A publicist Sylvio Bhering in the mid-1950s selected the date in honor of Saint Joachim, patriarch of family (as well as the Catholic day of godfathers). It is not an official holiday (see Public holidays in Brazil), but it is widely observed and typically involves spending time with and giving gifts to one's father.

Canada

In Canada, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday. Father's Day typically involves spending time with one's father or the father figures in one's life. Small family gatherings and the giving of gifts may be part of the festivities organized for Father's Day.

China

In China, the official Father's Day is celebrated on the 3rd Sunday of June and is not a public holiday. This date was set according to international norms.
Prior to the People's Republic; however, Father's Day was celebrated on August 8 when the Republic of China governed from Beijing. This is determined by the fact that the Eighth(ba) day of the Eighth(ba) month makes two "eight"s (八八, ba-ba), which sounds similar to the colloquial word for "daddy" (ba-ba，爸爸).

Costa Rica

In Costa Rica the Unidad Social Cristiana party presented a bill to change the celebration of the day from the third Sunday of June to March 19, the day of Saint Joseph. That was in order to give tribute to this saint, who gave the name to the capital of the country San José, Costa Rica, and so family heads will be able to celebrate the Father's Day at the same time as the Feast of Saint Joseph the Worker. The official date is still third Sunday of June.

Denmark

In Denmark, Father's Day is celebrated on June 5.  It coincides with Constitution Day.

Estonia

In Estonia, Father's day ("Isadepäev"), is celebrated on the second Sunday of November. It's an established Flag day and a National Holiday.

Finland

In Finland, Father's Day (Isänpäivä) is celebrated on the second Sunday of November. It's an established Flag day.

Germany

In Germany, Father's Day (Vatertag) is celebrated differently from other parts of the world. The tradition of getting drunk is especially prevalent in Eastern Germany.
These traditions are probably rooted in Christian Ascension Day's processions to the farmlands, which has been celebrated since the 18th century. Men would be seated in a wooden cart and carried to the village's plaza, and the mayor would award a prize to the father who had the most children, usually a big piece of ham. In the late 19th century the religious component was progressively lost, especially in urban areas such as Berlin, and groups of men organized walking excursions with beer and ham. By the 20th century it had evolved into a holiday for getting drunk. Most German fathers control their alcohol intake and simply take relaxed walks with friends, but the minority of people who get very drunk are very noisy and troublesome, and they give a bad name to the holiday. Many modern fathers opt to spend the day with their families instead and refrain from getting drunk. Many people will take the following Friday off at work, and some schools are closed on that Friday as well; many people then use the resulting four-day long weekend for a short vacation.

Haiti

In Haiti, Father's Day (Fête des peres) is celebrated on the last Sunday of June and is not a public holiday. Fathers are recognized & celebrated on this day with cards, gifts, breakfast,lunch brunch or early Sunday dinner; whether enjoying the day at the beach or mountains, spending family time or doing activities that make Dad happiest, its all about Dad.
Children exclaim "Bonne Fête Papa!", while everyone wishes all fathers "Bonne fête des Pères" (Happy Father's Day)

Hong Kong

In Hong Kong, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday.

Hungary

In Hungary, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday.

India

Though Father's Day is not an Indian tradition, it is celebrated in India on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday. However, Pitru Amavasya is the day when Hindus honour their familial elders during Pitru Paksha (fortnight of the ancestors). It occurs in Bhadrapada masam (month) of the Hindu calendar.

Ireland

In Ireland, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday.

Iran

Father's day in Iran is celebrated on the 13th of Rajab, on the birth anniversary of Imam Ali, the first Imam of Shia Muslims; which looks more like a Muslim religious day than ancient Persia founded by real Persian ancestors. It is an occasion to complement mother's day and to celebrate fatherhood.

Italy

In Italy, according to the Roman Catholic tradition, fathers are celebrated on Saint Joseph's Day, commonly called Feast of Saint Joseph ("Festa di San Giuseppe"), March 19. It is not a public holiday.

Japan

In Japan, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday.

Kenya

In Kenya, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday.

Korea

In Korea, Parents' day is celebrated on 8 May and is not a public holiday.

Latvia

In Latvia, Father's Day (Tēvu diena) is celebrated on the second Sunday of September and is not a public holiday. In Latvia people didn't celebrate this day because of the USSR's influence with its own holidays. This day in Latvia was 'officially born' in 2008 when it was celebrated and marked in the calendar for the first time on 14 September(Second September Sunday) to promote the idea that man as the father must be satisfied and proud of his family and children, also, father is important to gratitude and loving words from his family for devoted to continuous altruistic concerns. Because this day is new to the country it doesn't have established any unique tradition, but people borrow ideas from other country's father's day traditions to congratulate fathers in Latvia.

Macau

In Macau, Father's Day (Dia do Pai) is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday.

Malaysia

In Malaysia, Father's Day is on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday.

Mexico

In Mexico, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday.

Seychelles

In Seychelles, Father's Day is celebrated on the 16th of June and is not a public holiday.

Nepal

The Newar population (natives of Kathmandu valley) in Nepal honors fathers on the day of Gokarna Aunsi, which occurs in late August or early September, depending on the year, since it depends on the lunar calendar. The Western-inspired celebration of Father's Day that was imported into the country is always celebrated on the same day as Gokarna Aunsi.
The rest of the population has also begun to celebrate the Gokarna Aunsi day while Buddhists go to Jan Bahal (Seto Machhendranath or white Tara) temple in Kathmandu.
Traditionally, in the Kathmandu Valley, the South-Western corner is reserved for women and women-related rituals, and the North-Eastern is for men and men-related rituals. The worship place for Mata Tirtha Aunsi ("Mother Pilgrimage New Moon") is located in Mata Tirtha in the South-Western half of the valley, while the worship place for Gokarna Aunsi is located in the North-Eastern half. This division is reflected in many aspects of the life in Kathmandu valley.

Netherlands

In the Netherlands, Father's Day (Vaderdag) is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday. Traditionally, as on Mother's Day, fathers get breakfast in bed made by their children and families gather together and have dinner, usually at the grandparents' house. In recent years, families also started having dinner out, and as on Mother's Day, it is one of the busiest days for restaurants. At school, children handcraft their present for their fathers. Consumer goods companies have all sorts of special offers for fathers: socks, ties, electronics, suits, and men's healthcare products.

New Zealand

In New Zealand, Father's Day is celebrated on the first Sunday of September and is not a public holiday.

Norway

In Norway, Father's day (Farsdag), is celebrated on the second Sunday of November. It is not a public holiday.

Pakistan

Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June. The Rutgers WPF launched a campaign titled 'Greening Pakistan-Promoting Responsible Fatherhood' on Father's Day (Sunday 16, 2013) across Pakistan to promote active fatherhood and responsibility for the care and upbringing of children.
Fathers' Day is not a public holiday in Pakistan.

Peru

In Peru, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday. People usually give a present to their fathers and spend time with him mostly during a family meal.

Philippines

In Philippines, Father's Day is not an official holiday, but it is widely observed on the 3rd Sunday of June.

Poland

In Poland, Father's Day is celebrated on June 23.

Portugal

Father's Day is celebrated on March 19 (see Roman Catholic tradition below) in Portugal. Father's Day is not a bank holiday.

Roman Catholic tradition

In the Roman Catholic tradition, Fathers are celebrated on Saint Joseph's Day, commonly called Feast of Saint Joseph, March 19, though in certain countries Father's Day has become a secular celebration.

Romania

Beginning with 2010, in Romania, Father's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday of May and it is recognized officially by the state. Out of the 27 states in the European Union, it was the only one without an official Father's Day. Law 319/2009 made both Mother's Day and Father's Day official in Romania, and it was passed thanks to the campaigning from the Alliance Fighting Discrimination Against Fathers (TATA) Romanian Father's day for 2012 was celebrated on May 13.

Russia

Russia continues the USSR tradition of celebrating Defender of the Fatherland Day instead of Father's Day. It is usually called "Men's Day" and it is considered the Russian equivalent of Father's Day.

Singapore

In Singapore, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June but is not a public holiday.

South Africa

In South Africa, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June.

Spain

Father's Day, El Día del Padre, is observed on the Feast day of Saint Joseph, which is March 19.

Sweden

In Sweden, Father's day (Fars dag), is celebrated on the second Sunday of November, but is not a public holiday.

Taiwan

In Taiwan, Father's Day is not an official holiday, but is widely observed on August 8, the eighth day of the eighth month of the year. In Mandarin Chinese, the pronunciation of both the number 8 and the month of August is bā. This pronunciation is very similar to the character "爸" "bà", which means "Pa" or "father". The Taiwanese, therefore, sometimes refer to August 8 as "Bābā Holiday" (爸爸節)or" (父親節).

Thailand

In Thailand, Father's Day is set as the birthday of the king. December 5 is the birthday of the current king, Bhumibol Adulyadej (Rama IX). Traditionally, Thais celebrate by giving their father or grandfather a Canna flower (ดอกพุทธรักษา Dok Buddha Ruksa), which is considered a masculine flower; however, this is not as commonly practiced today. Thai people will wear yellow on this day to show respect for the king, because yellow is the Color of the day for Monday, the day King Bhumibol Adulyadej was born. Thais flood the Sanam Luang, a massive park in front of the palace, to watch the king give his annual speech, and often stay until the evening, when there is a national ceremony. Thais will light candles and show respect to the king by declaring their faith. This ceremony happens in almost every village in Thailand, and even overseas at Thai organizations.
It first gained nationwide popularity in the 1980s as part of a campaign by Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda to promote Thailand's royal family. Mother's Day is celebrated on the birthday of Queen Sirikit, (online version) August 12.

Trinidad and Tobago

In Trinidad and Tobago, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday in June and is not a public holiday.

Turkey

In Turkey, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday in June and is not a public holiday.

United Kingdom

In the United Kingdom, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday in June and is not a public holiday.

United States

Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June. Typically, families gather to celebrate the father figures in their lives.
In recent years, retailers have adapted to the holiday by promoting greeting cards and traditionally masculine gifts such as electronics and tools. Schools and other children's programs commonly have activities to make Father's Day gifts.

Venezuela

In Venezuela, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday. Traditionally, as on Mother's Day, families gather together and have lunch, usually at the grandparents' house. In recent years, families also started having lunch out, and as on Mother's Day, it is one of the busiest days for restaurants. At school, children handcraft their present for their fathers. Consumer goods companies have all sorts of special offers for fathers: electronics, suits, and men's healthcare products.





Bibliography




