[[Rhynia]]

CATEGORIES: Prehistoric plants, Devonian life

Rhynia is a single-species genus of Devonian vascular plants. Rhynia gwynne-vaughanii was the sporophyte generation of a vascular, axial, free-sporing diplohaplontic embryophytic land plant of the Lower Devonian that had anatomical features more advanced than those of the bryophytes. Rhynia gwynne-vaughanii was a member of a sister group to all other eutracheophytes, including modern vascular plants.

Description

R. gwynne-vaughanii was first described as a new species by Robert Kidston and William H. Lang in 1917. 
Rhynia is thought to have had deciduous lateral branches, which it used to disperse laterally over the substrate and stands of the plant may therefore have been clonal populations.
Evidence of the gametophyte generation of Rhynia has been described in the form of crowded tufts of diminutive stems only a few mm in height, with the form genus name Remyophyton delicatum.H. Kerp, N.H. Trewin and H. Hass (2004) New gametophytes from the Early Devonian Rhynie chert. Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Earth Sciences, 94, 411–428 Like those of Aglaophyton major,

Taxonomy

Two species of Rhynia were initially described by R. Kidston and W. H. Lang from the Rhynie chert bed: R. gwynne-vaughnii in 1917, and R. major in 1920.
A study of the vascular tissue of the two by David S. Edwards in 1986 lead to the conclusion that the cell structure of R. major lacked secondary thickening bars seen in the xylem of R. gwynne-vaughanii, and was more like the water-conducting system (hydrome) of moss sporophytes. His conclusion was that R. gwynne-vaughanii belongs in the vascular plants, while R. major belongs among the bryophytes. Accordingly he transferred it to a new genus as Aglaophyton, leaving R. gwynne-vaughnii as the only species of Rhynia. but since treated at various ranks.

Phylogeny

In 2004, Crane et al. published a cladogram for the polysporangiophytes, in which Rynia and the other Rhyniaceae are placed as basal vascular plants (tracheophyes).





