[[Hurricane Lester (1998)]]

CATEGORIES: Category 3 Pacific hurricanes, 1998 Pacific hurricane season, 1998 in Mexico

Hurricane Lester was the fifteenth tropical cyclone, twelfth named storm and eighth hurricane of the 1998 Pacific hurricane season. Lester originated from a tropical wave that emerged off the coast of Africa on September 29. Under favorable conditions, the storm was classified as a tropical depression on October 15. The depression was upgraded to a tropical storm later that day and a hurricane on October 16. After undergoing fluctuations in intensity, Lester reached peak winds of , a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale. After several days, it degenerated into a tropical storm on October 26, and dissipated shortly after. The hurricane made its closest approach to land on October 18, producing moderate winds and heavy rainfall. A mudslide triggered by the precipitation killed two children, although damage is unknown.

Meteorological history

A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on September 29, 1998 and on October 5, an area of convection along the wave developed into Atlantic Hurricane Lisa. The wave axis continued westward, and after crossing Central America a low-level circulation developed on October 13, about 170 miles (275 km) south of the border between El Salvador and Guatemala. The system drifted northwestward, and as convection increased around the center a banding featured began to develop. At 0000 UTC on October 15, the National Hurricane Center designated it as Tropical Depression Fourteen-E. and by 1800 UTC the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Lester.
Shortly thereafter, the storm took a slight jog to the west,
Vertical wind shear associated with a mid-to-upper-level low pressure system developed and began to affect the storm's circulation on October 19, thus weakening it slightly. and at 0000 UTC on October 16, Lester had degenerated into a tropical depression, about 500 miles (805 km) southwest of the southern tip of Baja California Peninsula, shortly before dissipating.

Preparations and impact

In anticipation of the storm, the government of Mexico issued a hurricane warning from Puerto Arista to Punta Maldonaldo and later from Salina Cruz to Acapulco. A tropical storm warning was also issued from Sipacate, Guatemala to Puerto Arista, Mexico. The threat of the hurricane prompted officials to order the evacuation of 3,000 people along the southern coast of Mexico to 500 emergency shelters.
The storm dropped heavy rainfall across southwestern Guatemala. Up to 9 inches (228 mm) of rainfall was reported in localized areas along the Pacific coast of the country. Moisture brought around the northeast periphery of the Sierra Madre Occidental led to a narrow band of heavy rainfall along the upslope side of the mountain range, with a local precipitation maximum exceeding 14 inches (360 mm). Hurricane Lester. Retrieved on 2007-02-12. It is reported that tropical-storm-force winds occurred along coastal areas of southern Mexico. The rainfall destroyed some houses and killed numerous livestock, and triggered a mudslide which killed two children. Heavy rainfall was reported in  Chiapas, causing moderate river flooding though no reported damage.








