[[Kuru Kuru Kururin]]

CATEGORIES: 2001 video games, Eighting games, Game Boy Advance games, Game Boy Advance-only games, Puzzle video games

 is a puzzle video game developed by Eighting and published by Nintendo for the Game Boy Advance handheld video game console. It was first released in Japan on March 21, 2001 and in Europe and Australia on June 22, 2001 as a launch title. Kuru Kuru Kururin is the first title in the Kururin series and was followed by two Japan-only sequels, Kururin Paradise and Kururin Squash!

Gameplay

The player controls a slowly spinning stick called the Helirin, and must manoeuvre it through a series of mazes without touching the walls. The player controls the direction and speed of movement (there are 3 levels of speed), but the task is made difficult as the stick rotates continuously. Once the player has successfully completed a level, there are bonuses to collect, record times to beat, and a gold star for completing the level without any accidents. The game also features multiplayer support that enables four-players to participate in the action with the use of a single cartridge.
Kuru Kuru Kururin was released in Japan and Europe but not in North America. However, as the GBA has no region lockout, a North American GBA unit can be used to play either the Japanese or European version. The menus in the Japanese version are simple enough that they are easily navigable by a player who knows no Japanese.
The game starts off with simple training levels, where you are told how to play and how to get around the first corners. After that there are three levels in each stage that get progressively harder and longer. The stage determine the look of the levels (ice, caves, machine) and the different obstacles to avoid. For beginners the levels can be played on Easy mode, where the stick is only half size.
There is a mode called Challenge mode, which is a collection of smaller levels, usually involving only one or two corners or objects to dodge.

Plot

The story begins when Kururin's brothers and sisters go missing, and it is up to him to find them. Kururin is initially unsure that he is up to the task because he has never left his home world before. Being the adventurous and helpful fellow he is, Kururin agrees to rescue his lost family. Teacher Hare trains Kururin in the art of controlling the Helirin, a stick-shaped helicopter that has a slow-spinning propeller. Piloting the Helirin through the different worlds will be a difficult task, but using Teacher Hare's valuable lessons, Kururin bravely sets out on his adventure to rescue his lost family.

Development

Kuru Kuru Kururin was developed by the Japanese company Eighting and first announced at the Nintendo Space World 2000.

Reception

Kuru Kuru Kururin received mostly positive reviews from critics. It was praised for its simple yet addictive gameplay. Eurogamer rated the game a score of 9 out of 10 points. The reviewer lauded the game's learning curve and stated that there would be no other puzzle game on the Game Boy Advance at the time that can "rival Kuru Kuru Kururin for its sheer addictiveness and fun-value."

Legacy

The first sequel entitled Kururin Paradise came out in 2002 for the Game Boy Advance. It was released in Japan only, even though Kururin Paradise was previously showcased at E3 2002, the first time a Kururin game had been announced for the American market.
Several references to the Kururin series are made in the Super Smash Bros. series. The Helirin makes a cameo appearance as a trophy in Super Smash Bros. Melee, but is incorrectly referred to as "Heririn" in the American version. The Helirin later appears in Super Smash Bros. Brawl as an Assist Trophy. Unlike most Assist Trophies, it doesn't attack, but it becomes part of the stage, and can be used as a platform or a wall.






