[[Guyanese in the United Kingdom]]

CATEGORIES: Peoples of the African diaspora, Black British people, British people of Guyanese descent, Caribbean British, Guyanese diaspora, Immigration to the United Kingdom by country of origin

'''

Guyanese in the United Kingdom are citizens or residents of the United Kingdom whose origins lie in the South American nation of Guyana.

Demographics

Population

At the time of the 2001 UK Census there were 20,872 Guyanese-born people in the UK.

Culture and community

Literature

Guyanese immigrants have had an influence on recent literature in the UK, and significant numbers of writers and poets have made their footprint on current British culture and have became everyday household names. Other writers, including Roy Heath and Michael Abbensetts, have helped create a greater knowledge of Guyanese culture in the UK, and they are among the most successful literary diaspora communities as a whole in recent British history. Other UK-based writers of Guyanese origin include Fred D'Aguiar, Mike Phillips, Dennis Adonis and Jan Shinebourne.
The pioneering black publishing company Bogle-L'Ouverture was founded in London in the late 1960s by Jessica and Eric Huntley from Guyana, their first publication being Walter Rodney's The Groundings with My Brothers (1969).

Music

The music of Guyana is a mix of Indian, African, European and native elements. It is similar to the music of various other Caribbean nations, where reggae, soca and calypso prove the most popular. These forms of music have worked their way into British life by the Guyanese community of the UK and even by several famous Guyanese musicians who have migrated to the UK. The influence of Caribbean music in the United Kingdom is evident in many walks of life; the work of many contemporary artists is based in the reggae and calypso styles. Eddy Grant, a Guyanese-born immigrant to the UK, helped popularise such genres as reggae through his global hits such as "Electric Avenue" and "I Don't Wanna Dance". Reggae has proven the most successful sub-category of Guyanese music (and Caribbean music in general) in the UK and Grant himself is noted as saying: "in my heart, I know that Soca and Ringbang have the same potential as reggae to achieve great popularity… but there has never been any proper commitment to marketing these artists and their music. We are not Sony, and the artists on board realise it will take time. It is an upliftment process." Despite this, as the Guyanese community in the UK has advanced into its second and third generations, evidence of traditional Guyanese elements in the music has begun to decrease. British-born individuals of Guyanese origin have in particular become more mainstream and modernised. The most recent success story of a British singer of Guyanese origin is Leona Lewis, the Londoner whose music is largely Pop and R&B won series three of the talent contest The X Factor."Winner Leona proud to be Hackney girl". Hackney Gazette, 22 December 2006. She has attained three number one hits in the UK and it the only solo British female in over two decades to have reached the top spot on the Billboard Hot 100. Traditional Guyanese acts and British acts influenced by such genres as reggae, soca and calypso can be found in festivals across the country, the most famous being the Notting Hill Carnival (the world's second largest street festival).

Notable individuals








