[[The New York Sun]]

CATEGORIES: Defunct newspapers of New York City, Publications established in 2002, Publications disestablished in 2008, 2002 establishments in New York

The New York Sun was a politically conservative weekday daily newspaper published in New York City from 2002 to 2008. When it debuted on April 16, 2002, adopting the name, motto, and masthead of an otherwise unrelated earlier New York paper, The Sun (1833–1950), it became the first general-interest broadsheet newspaper to be started in New York City in several decades. Since 2009 The Sun has operated as an online-only publisher of political and economic opinion pieces, as well as occasional arts content.

History

The Sun was founded by a group of investors including publishing magnate Conrad Black. The goal was to provide an alternative to The New York Times, featuring front page news about local and state events, in contrast to the Times emphasis on national and international news. It began business operations, prior to first publication, in October 2001.
The newspaper's president and editor-in-chief was Seth Lipsky, former editor of The Forward. Managing editor Ira Stoll also served as company vice-president. Stoll had been a longtime critic of the Times in his media watchdog blog smartertimes. When smartertimes.
Published from the Cary Building in Lower Manhattan, it ceased print publication on September 30, 2008. Its website resumed activity on April 28, 2009, but only contains a small subset of the original content of the paper, mostly focusing on editorials rather than news content.
The paper's motto, which it shared with its predecessor and namesake, was "It Shines For All".

Editorial perspective and reception

Editor-in-chief Lipsky remarked that the paper's prominent op-ed page would champion "limited government, individual liberty, constitutional fundamentals, equality under the law, economic growth ... standards in literature and culture, education". Another goal, said Lipsky, was "to seize the local beat from which The New York Times was retreating as it sought to become a national newspaper". Unsigned editorials in the paper advocated prosecuting Iraq War protestors for treason (2003), nominating Dick Cheney for the presidency (2007), and lowering, rather than raising, the debt ceiling in response to the debt ceiling crisis (2013).
The Sun's roster of columnists included many prominent conservative and neoconservative pundits, including William F. Buckley, Jr., Michael Barone, Daniel Pipes, and Mark Steyn.
The Sun supported President George W. Bush and his decision to launch the Iraq War in 2003. The paper also urged strong action against the perceived threat of the Islamic Republic of Iran
and was also known for its forceful coverage of Jewish-related issues[ref]
 [/ref] and advocacy for Israel's right of self-defense as evidenced in articles by pro-Israel reporter Aaron Klein.
The Sun established a readership niche for itself foremost in New York.
According to Scott Sherman, writing in The Nation in April 2007, The Sun was "a broadsheet that injects conservative ideology into the country's most influential philanthropic, intellectual and media hub; a paper whose day-to-day coverage of New York City emphasizes lower taxes, school vouchers and free-market solutions to urban problems; a paper whose elegant culture pages hold their own against the Times in quality and sophistication; a paper that breaks news and crusades on a single issue; a paper that functions as a journalistic SWAT team against individuals and institutions seen as hostile to Israel and Jews; and a paper that unapologetically displays the scalps of its victims."Sherman, Scott (2007-4-30). "Sun-rise in New York". The Nation.
In the same article, Mark Malloch Brown, Kofi Annan's chief of staff at the United Nations, described The Sun as "a pimple on the backside of American journalism." According to Sherman, Brown "accepts that the paper's obsession with the UN translates into influence ... he admitted the Sun "does punch way above its circulation number, on occasion". He goes on to say, "Clearly amongst its minuscule circulation were a significant number of diplomats. And so it did at times act as some kind of rebel house paper inside the UN. It fed the gossip mills and what was said in the cafeterias." Brown's insult was in the context of the Sun's reporting of the UN's central role in the Saddam Hussein Oil-for-Food scandal.
In May 2007, Adweek columnist Tom Messner called the Sun "the best paper in New York", noting that "The New York Sun is a conservative paper, but it gets the respect of the left. The Nation's April 30 issue contains an article on the Sun's rise by Scott Sherman that is as balanced an article as I have ever read in the magazine (not a gibe; you don't read The Nation for balance)."[ref]
 [/ref]
Catholic commentator Richard John Neuhaus, writing in First Things, described the Sun as a paper that had, "made itself nearly indispensable for New Yorkers".

Features

The New York Sun was particularly well known for its educated, serious, but still accessible arts coverage, It also published the first regular wine column in a New York newspaper, "Along the Wine Trail", written by G. Selmer Fougner. Prial, ''Decantations: Reflections on Wine by the New York Times Wine Critic, St. Martin's Griffin, 2002, p. 16
In its first edition, the paper carried the solution to the last crossword puzzle of the earlier Sun published in 1950.

Financial problems, circulation, and end of print run

The Sun was started anew in 2002 in the face of a long-term decline of newspapers in the United States, loss of advertising revenue to the Internet and the rise of new media. From the beginning it struggled for existence. "The Sun" was the first new daily newspaper launched in New York since 1976, when News World Communications, a company controlled by the Unification Church, launched The News World (which was renamed the New York City Tribune in 1983 and folded in 1991).
At the time of its creation, one media financial analyst said the Sun's chances of survival were "pretty grim", while another media commentator characterized it as "the unlikeliest of propositions".
It was underfunded from the start, with ten investors putting up a total of about $15 million - not enough for long-term running. Beyond Conrad Black, who pulled out in 2003, these included hedge fund managers Michael Steinhardt and Bruce Kovner, private equity fund manager Thomas J. Tisch, and financier and think tank figure Roger Hertog.
The Suns physical plant, in the Cary Building at Church Street and Chambers Street in Lower Manhattan, was antiquated, with malfunctioning telephones and computers, a trouble-prone elevator and fire alarm system, as well as dubious bathroom plumbing. Nevertheless, Lipsky had hopes of breaking even within the first year of operation.
The Audit Bureau of Circulations confirmed that in its first six months of publication The Sun had an average circulation of just under 18,000. By 2005 the paper reported an estimated circulation of 45,000. In December 2005, The Sun withdrew from the Audit Bureau of Circulations to join the Certified Audit of Circulations, whose other New York clients are the free papers The Village Voice and amNewYork, and began an aggressive campaign of free distribution in select neighborhoods.
While The Sun claimed "150,000 of New York City's Most Influential Readers Every Day", The Sun (The New York Daily News sold about 700,000 copies a day during that period.) It offered free subscriptions for a full year to residents in advertiser-desired zip codes; indeed, this and other uses of controlled circulation made it more attractive to advertisers but further diminished its chances of ever becoming profitable.
Similarly, The Suns online edition was accessible for free since August 2006.
The Sun acquired the web address www.com in 2007.(requires registration to access)
In a letter to readers published on the front page of the September 4, 2008, edition, Lipsky announced that the paper had suffered substantial losses and would "cease publication at the end of September unless we succeed in our efforts to find additional financial backing."Perez-Pena, Richard (September 4, 2008), New York Sun May Close if Millions Aren't Found. The New York Times. In particular, the paper's existing backers would not put forward more money unless new backers with capital were found. Whatever chance that funding had of materializing was negated by the rapid onset of the late-2000s financial crisis, and The Sun ceased publication on September 30, 2008. It had about 110 employees at that time, and also made use of many freelance writers. Mayor of New York Michael Bloomberg commented that "The Sun shone brightly, though too briefly," and that its writers were "smart, thoughtful, provocative".

Online version 2009–present

Despite the closure of the newspaper, The New York Sun website renewed activity on April 28, 2009,
Since that time, the website has continued to publish editorials at irregular intervals and frequent contributions from economist and noted television commentator Lawrence Kudlow. Some new arts content has also been produced, but there is virtually no straight news reporting.

Related publication

Starting in March 2009, a group of former contributors to The Sun's arts section, including Lance Esplund, Brice Brown, Jay Nordlinger, Joel Lobenthal, and Marion Maneker, spearheaded a new paper, CityArts, published by Manhattan Media. CityArts began as a monthly arts supplement in other Manhattan Media papers (including New York Press, West Side Spirit, and Our Town), but soon changed to a stand-alone, twice-monthly free publication. A notice from 2009 claimed a distribution of 50,000 print copies.manhattanmedia.php. Accessed 24 October 2012. The paper's contents are published online at cityarts.
Due to low advertising revenue, CityArts reverted to a supplement in late 2012.artsjournal.html

Footnotes




