[[Richard C. Cook]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, College of William & Mary alumni, 1946 births, American critics, American Social Crediters

Richard C. Cook (born October 20, 1946) is a former U.S. federal government analyst, who was instrumental in exposing White House cover-ups regarding the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster of 1986. As a witness to the incident and a participant in the subsequent investigations, Cook provided key documents Richard C. Cook to Michael Mann, "Problem with SRB Seals," memorandum, 23 July 1985, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, reproduced in Presidential Commission, Report 4:391-92 to The New York Times 
As a Policy Analyst for the U.S. Government from 1970 until 1986, Richard Cook's career included service with the U.S. Civil Service Commission, the Food and Drug Administration, the White House Consumer Office, and NASA. From 1986 until 2007, Cook served as a Project Manager for the U.S. Treasury Department, Financial Management Service (FMS)
Now retired from 32-years of government service, Cook works as a writer and private consultant with particular focus on Monetary Reform. His articles on economics, politics, and space policy have been published in numerous magazines, newspapers and websites, and have been translated into several languages. A leading spokesman for Economic Democracy, Cook's most recent book, We Hold These Truths: The Hope of Monetary Reform was published in 2009. He is also author of In the Footsteps of the Yogi: The 1999 U.S. Tour of Sri Sri Sri Shivabalayogi Maharaj, and was recently named the U.S. director for White Light Books, a company based in Australia that focuses on the merging of public affairs with world spiritual currents.

Challenger

As a Resource Analyst at NASA's Comptroller's Office, Richard C. Cook was responsible for assessing the budgetary implications of the Solid Rocket Boosters (SRBs), External Tank, and Centaur Upper Stage of the Space Shuttle program. In July 1985, Cook performed background research on the SRBs to determine whether any engineering questions would require additional funding that should be included in NASA's next budget. After consulting with engineers in the Office of Space Flight in Washington, D.C., Cook wrote a memo to Michael Mann which summarized some problems with the SRB O-rings:
NASA officials ignored the memo which detailed engineering concerns and warnings from the shuttle builders at Morton Thiokol regarding a potentially catastrophic flaw in the SRB O-rings. On January 28, 1986, Space Shuttle Challenger disintegrated 73 seconds into its launch, killing all seven of its crew members.
Despite their certainty of O-ring joint inadequacies as early as 1977, NASA launched an investigation to "discover" the cause of the disaster. According to Richard C. Cook, the Reagan administration appointed the Rogers Commission to perpetrate the same cover-up. In response, Cook provided the original O-ring warning documents to the New York Times.
Richard C. Cook received the Cavallo Foundation's Award for Moral Courage in Business and Government for helping to uncover the facts about the faulty O-ring seals that led the shuttle's solid rocket boosters to fail. He concludes that rather than an accident, the disaster was the result of NASA's autocratic management style and closed-door decision-making process. Documentation further suggests the Rogers Commission was conceived as part of a cover-up effort, including collusion by some NASA managers, White House operatives and commission head William P. Rogers.
In his memoir and personal investigation, Cook documents technical evidence about violations of launch criteria, and telephone calls between NASA and the White House. He suggests that by focusing solely on equipment malfunctions and internal NASA decision making, the Rogers Commission evaded the most important question: Why was it so important to those in power to launch the shuttle on that particular day?
Though the Rogers Commission denied it, Cook maintains the Reagan Administration pushed hard for NASA to launch shuttle mission 51L against engineers' recommendations so that "Teacher-in-Space" Christa McAuliffe would be aloft in time for the president's 1986 State of the Union Address.

Monetary Reform

As a former U.S. Treasury Department analyst, Richard C. Cook has authored We Hold These Truths: The Hope of Monetary Reform proposing a series of measures to transform the dominance of a debt-based monetary system into one aligned more closely with the physical economy's productive values.

Published works





Notes


