[[Jessica Chastain]]

CATEGORIES: 1977 births, Living people, Actresses from Sacramento, California, Juilliard School alumni, Sacramento City College alumni, American film actresses, American stage actresses, American television actresses, Best Drama Actress Golden Globe (film) winners, Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture Screen Actors Guild Award winners, 21st-century American actresses, American film producers, Film producers from California

Jessica Michelle Chastain (born March 24, 1977) is an American actress. Chastain played guest roles in several television shows before making her feature film debut in the 2008 independent film Jolene. In 2011, she gained wide public recognition for her starring roles in seven film releases; her performance in The Help was particularly well received and she earned an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress nomination, as well as Golden Globe, Screen Actors Guild Award  and  BAFTA nominations in the same category. For her lead performance in the controversial 2012 military thriller film Zero Dark Thirty, Chastain received wide critical acclaim and won the Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama, and received an Academy Award nomination for Best Actress.
In 2012, Time magazine featured her as one of the "100 Most Influential People in the World". Chastain's performances in Zero Dark Thirty and in the 2013 horror film Mama led film critic Richard Roeper to describe her as "one of the finest actors of her generation"."Reviews: Mama". Chicago Sun-Times. January 16, 2013. Retrieved January 27, 2013.

Early life and education

Chastain was born in Sacramento, California. She was raised by her mother, Jerri, a vegan chef, and her stepfather, a fireman. Chastain has two brothers and two sisters.
She graduated from El Camino High School in Sacramento in 1995

Career

2004–2009

Shortly before her drama school graduation, Chastain attended a showcase for final-year students in Los Angeles, and was promptly signed to a holding deal by television producer John Wells. Directed by P. J. Hogan, the pilot did not live up to the network's expectations and the series was eventually not picked up for broadcast. Chastain later appeared in a guest stint on the medical drama series ER, which marked a professional watershed as she subsequently found a niche playing eccentric characters in television. "I did a job on ER as a psychotic woman, and after that got a lot of jobs in TV where I wasn't the normal one," she later said. "I played a lot of girls who had something off. Maybe they'd been the victim of some horrible accident. Or they were crazy."
From 2004 to 2006, she also appeared in television series such as Veronica Mars, Close to Home, and Law & Order: Trial By Jury. While working at Playwrights Horizons, she was recommended by her director to Al Pacino, who was looking for an unknown actress to star in his new production of Salome and hired her on the spot. The success of the play at Wadsworth Theatre, which sold out after getting positive reviews, helped bring her to the attention of several casting directors.
In 2008, she made her film debut as the title role in Dan Ireland's drama film Jolene which was based on the short story Jolene: A Life by E. L. Doctorow, itself inspired by Dolly Parton's song "Jolene", and follows her life over the course of ten years, as an abused 15-year-old foster child up until her life as a 25-year-old woman. It was later released in the United States on October 29, 2010 and Chastain won the Seattle International Film Festival Award for Best Actress.
In 2009, Chastain appeared in Stolen, a mystery–thriller film directed by Anders Anderson. It was universally panned by critics and not released as video on demand and in a limited theatrical release until March 2010.

2010–2011

In 2011, Chastain showed a wide variety in her roles, including: Terrence Malick's The Tree of Life and the crime thriller Texas Killing Fields.
Chastain's biggest commercial success of 2011 was The Help, which was based on Kathryn Stockett's novel of the same name. Her performance received praise from critics and gave her an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress nomination, which she lost to her co-star Octavia Spencer. Chastain continued to receive positive reviews for her performance in the 2011 film Take Shelter playing the wife of a small town man plagued by apocalyptic visions.
In John Madden's drama-thriller film The Debt, she portrayed a young Mossad agent sent to East Berlin in the mid-1960s to capture a former Nazi doctor who carried out medical experiments in concentration camps. Chastain shared her role with Helen Mirren, both actresses portraying the character at different phases of her life. The actresses worked together before shooting started, creating a consistent voice and mannerisms for their character, while Chastain also took classes in krav maga and German, and studied books about Josef Mengele and Mossad history to prepare herself for the film. Premiering at the 2010 Toronto International Film Festival in September 2010, the film was released on August 31, 2011 and Chastain received positive reviews from critics and viewers.
On November 29, 2011, Chastain was awarded the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actress for her performances in The Help, Take Shelter and The Tree of Life,

2012–present

Chastain played Virgilia in the adaptation and Ralph Fiennes's directorial debut, Coriolanus, which was released in January 2012 and was met with generally positive reviews from the critics.
Chastain played Salomé in a film adaptation of Wilde Salomé with Al Pacino and Maggie Beauford in John Hillcoat's prohibition era drama, Lawless''.
In April 2012, Chastain entered the list of Time 100 most influential people of the world. She was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in June 2012.
In 2012, she appeared in Tar as C.K. Williams' mother. She reunited with Terrence Malick in the romantic drama film To the Wonder, but her performance was later cut from the film.
In 2013, it was announced that Chastain played the female lead and title character in The Disappearance of Eleanor Rigby with James McAvoy, about a two-part drama told from his and her perspectives, and was released.
On July 16, 2013, Chastain was cast in J. C. Chandor's film, A Most Violent Year.
In the fall of 2013 it was announced that Chastain would star in Guillermo Del Toro's horror film titled Crimson Peak alongside Mia Wasikowska, Tom Hiddleston and Charlie Hunnam. The film is set to start shooting in February 2014 with an April 2015 release date.

Personal life

Chastain is a vegan.

Filmography

Theatre

Awards and nominations






