[[Mark McKinnon]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Year of birth missing (living people), American political consultants, Texas Democrats, Texas Republicans, University of Texas at Austin alumni, Harvard Institute of Politics

Mark McKinnon is an American political advisor. He is Global Vice-Chairman of Hill & Knowlton Strategies, an international communications consultancy, and the President of Maverick Media. He is a co-founder of No Labels and also is on the Board of Advisors of Americans Elect. McKinnon switched from the Democratic Party to the Republican Party after meeting then Texas Governor George W. Bush. He has worked for many causes, companies and candidates, including former President George W. Bush, 2008 Republican presidential candidate Senator John McCain, late former Governor Ann Richards, Congressman Charlie Wilson, Lance Armstrong and Bono.

Career

Mark McKinnon began his career as a songwriter in Nashville, Tennessee, working alongside country music's legendary songwriter Kris Kristofferson.  After returning to Texas, he joined Public Strategies, Inc. in 1990 and in 1996, McKinnon announced in the Texas Monthly that he was shifting gears and leaving partisan politics in an article entitled, "The Spin Doctor is Out".
McKinnon returned to politics after meeting then Governor George W. Bush at a dinner at the governor's mansion.  Following this encounter, McKinnon and Bush developed a personal relationship. According to Karl Rove, "Bush and McKinnon clicked from moment one.  In a bow to McKinnon's cool image, Bush dubbed him "M-Kat."Rove, K: Courage and Consequence, page 119. Threshold Editions, 2010.  Of his relationship with Bush, McKinnon said,  "We had a personal relationship before we had a professional relationship.  And when Texas' Democratic lieutenant governor Bob Bullock endorsed Bush over the Democratic gubernatorial nominee — his own god-son — well that's when I crossed the bridge.  But it was not an easy decision."Bush Consultant Mark McKinnon: Obama hasn't gotten all ideological"/> In his autobiography, Karl Rove says that Bob Bullock actually recommended McKinnon to handle Bush's advertising. Threshold Editions, 2010.  During a Frontline interview describing the former president's ascendance into the national political arena, McKinnon said, "this Governor Bush was doing some things that really got my attention. He was talking about education reform. He was talking about immigration reform. He was talking about issues that had typically been Democratic issues. He was talking about them in a really compassionate way.'' McKinnon said that he was particularly "impressed with how he'd gotten ahead of the Republican Party."
Shortly after this initial meeting, McKinnon joined President Bush's first presidential campaign as the chief media advisor, directing the advertising effort in 2000, a role he would reprise in the 2004 elections. President Bush appointed McKinnon to serve as a member of the Broadcasting Board of Governors, the independent, autonomous entity responsible for all U.S. government sponsored, non-military, international broadcasting.
On August 27, 2008, the Dallas Morning News reported that McKinnon helped Cindy McCain in her preparation for her GOP convention speech.
Although it was also reported by Vanity Fair that McKinnon had returned to the McCain campaign to prep Sarah Palin for the United States vice-presidential debate, 2008,
McKinnon currently co-chairs for Arts+Labs 
In 2010, McKinnon became a founding leader of No Labels, a 501(c)(4) citizens movement of Republicans, Democrats and Independents
In June, 2011, McKinnon was in favor of Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA)/Protect IP Act. On the 15th, Arts + Labs co-chair McKinnon sponsored the "CREATE -- A Forum on Creativity, Commerce, Copyright, Counterfeiting and Policy" conference with members of Congress, artists and information-business executives."Arts+Labs Presents: CREATE -- Protecting Creativity from the Ground Up", Arts+Labs blog, June 1, 2011 12:11 pm. Retrieved 2011-11-30.
In 2011-12, he served as an informal advisor to Buddy Roemer's presidential campaign.Governor Charles "Buddy" Roemer Suspends Campaign
On November 8, 2012, McKinnon admitted on National Public Radio that he voted for Gary Johnson in the 2012 U.S. Presidential election.npr.org/2012/11/08/164722734/after-election-day-defeats-whats-next-for-gop
In 2013, McKinnon was a signatory to an amicus curiae brief submitted to the Supreme Court in support of same-sex marriage during the Hollingsworth v. Perry case.thedailybeast.html

Personal life

McKinnon attended the University of Texas at Austin and served as editor of the award-winning college newspaper, The Daily Texan.




