[[Daigo Kobayashi]]

CATEGORIES: 1983 births, Living people, Japanese footballers, Japan youth international footballers, Japan international footballers, J. League players, Norwegian Premier League players, Superleague Greece players, Major League Soccer players, Tokyo Verdy players, Omiya Ardija players, Shimizu S-Pulse players, Stabæk Fotball players, Iraklis Thessaloniki F.C. players, Vancouver Whitecaps FC players, New England Revolution players, Japanese expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in Norway, Expatriate footballers in Greece, Expatriate soccer players in Canada, Expatriate soccer players in the United States, People from Shizuoka Prefecture, Japanese expatriates in Norway, Japanese expatriates in Greece, Japanese expatriates in Canada, Japanese expatriates in the United States

Daigo Kobayashi (born 19 February 1983) is a Japanese football player, who plays for New England Revolution of Major League Soccer.

Career

He started up his professional career at Tokyo Verdy where he won the Emperor's Cup in 2004 and the Super Cup in 2005. In the same year they were relegated from the J-League, which marked his end in Tokyo. He signed for Omiya Ardija at the start of the 2006 season and quickly became their star player. After the 2006 FIFA World Cup he played his first and only international match.
The club's successes were limited and after the 2008 season, he was offered the chance to go on trial at Norwegian club Stabæk. His trial was a success, and in February 2009 he was loaned out to the Norwegian champions. He was given the number 10 shirt, which had recently been worn by Veigar Páll Gunnarsson.
On 8 March, he made his official debut for Stabæk in the 2009 Super Cup where the league champions won 3–1 against cup champions Vålerenga, with Kobayashi playing an important part, getting on the score-sheet with a free kick and showing trickery with the ball. Stabæk decided to not to buy him at the end of the season.
On 27 January 2010, Kobayashi signed on a free transfer to the Greek team Iraklis for 18 months. Kobayashi only appeared in 15 matches for Iraklis. At the end of the 2010–11 season he returned to Japan, signing a deal with Shimizu S-Pulse.
During January 2013 he went on trial with Vancouver Whitecaps FC in the MLS. He impressed during his trial stint and signed with the club for the 2013 season. The club declined to offer him a contract for the 2014 season and his rights were traded to New England Revolution before the start of the season.

National team

He represented Japan U20 at the FIFA World Youth Championship in 2003, where they reached the quarter-finals before being beaten by eventual champions Brazil. He did not start their first group game, a loss against Colombia, but he started the next two which they won to secure a top spot, including a win against England. He further played in the round of 16 win against South Korea, but had to be replaced early in the quarter finals. He also represented Japan U20 at the AFC Youth Championship in 2002, where they came second, after losing 1–0 in against South Korea in the final.
He made his first cap for Japan in a friendly match against Trinidad and Tobago on 9 August 2006, coming on as a 56th minute substitute for Koji Yamase

Career statistics

As of 5 February 2013


International



Honours

Individual






