[[Cello (web browser)]]

CATEGORIES: Windows web browsers, Gopher clients, Cornell University, 1993 software, 1994 software, Discontinued web browsers, OS/2 web browsers

Cello was an early  graphical web browser for Windows 3.1, developed by Thomas R. Bruce of the Legal Information Institute at Cornell Law School, and released as shareware in 1993.
Cello was created because of a demand for Web access by lawyers, who were more likely to use Microsoft Windows than the Unix operating systems supporting earlier Web browsers, including the first release of  Mosaic. The lack of a Windows browser meant many legal experts were unable to access legal information made available in hypertext on the World Wide Web.
Cello was first publicly released on 8 June 1993. A version 2.0 was announced, but development was abandoned. Version 1.01a, 16 April 1994, was the last public release.
The browser is no longer available from its original homepage.law.edu/cello/cellotop. The original ftp site at ftp://ftp.cornell. The original gopher server at gopher.cornell. However, it can still be downloaded from mirror sites.evolt.

Development and history

The development of Cello started in 1992, with beta versions planned for June 1993 and a release for July 1993.
The Legal Information Institute at Cornell Law School created the first law site on the
Internet in 1992 and the first legal website in 1993. However, at the time, there were no web browsers for the Microsoft Windows operating system, which was used by most lawyers. Thus, to allow lawyers to use their website, the Legal Information Institute developed the first Windows-based Web browser. This was made possible by a grant from the National Center for Automated Information Research. It is also stated in the "Notices, Acknowledgments, Disclaimers" section of the included .
Although other browsers at the time were based on CERN's WWW libraries called libwww, PCs of the time were not powerful enough to run the UNIX-oriented code. As a result, Thomas Bruce had to rewrite most of the WWW libraries to work on Microsoft Windows. It should also be noted that unlike most commercial browsers at that time, Cello didn't utilize any of Mosaic's source code and thus had a different look and feel.
Steven Sinofsky, president of the Windows division at Microsoft wrote in a June 1994 email: We do not currently plan on any other client software the upcoming release of Windows 95, especially something like Mosaic or Cello. Nonetheless, on 11 January 1995, Microsoft announced that it had licensed the Mosaic technology from Spyglass, which it would use to create Internet Explorer. On 15 August 1995, Microsoft debuted its own web browser Internet Explorer 1 for Windows 95. While it did not ship with the original release of Windows 95, it shipped with Microsoft Plus! for Windows 95.

Usage

When released in 1993, Cello was the only browser for the Microsoft Windows platform. Shortly after launch, Cello was being downloaded at a rate of 500 copies per day.
By 1995, Cello, like the Mosaic browser, was overshadowed by two newer browsers: Netscape and Internet Explorer and fell into disuse.
Cello is considered to be one of the early casualties of the Browser wars.

Features

Cello had the following features:

 
Unlike Mosaic, Cello did not have toolbar buttons, and instead commands were accessed through pull-down menus.
Cello supported the following protocols: HTTP 1.0, Gopher (not Gopher+), read-only FTP,
Cello supported the following FTP servers: most Unix servers(including SunOS, System V, and Linux),IBM VM, IBM VM, VMS systems, Windows NT, QVTNet, NCSA/CUTCP/Rutgers PC servers,FTP Software PC server, HellSoft NLM for Novell.
Cello works best with a direct Ethernet connection, but it also supports SLIP and PPP dialup connections through the use of asynchronous sockets. Cello has an integrated TCP/IP runtime stack.

Release history

The following versions were released:
Although Cello 2.0 had been announced, development ceased before a public release.
IBM released a fix for their TCP/IP V2.0 stack so that Cello would work with OS/2 WinOS/2 on 9 February 1994.

Browser Comparison Table

The following table shows how Cello compared to browsers of its time.

Derivatives

Technical

The user agent for Cello is:  LII-Cello/  libwww/2.5 so the latest one is LII-Cello/1.0  libwww/2.5

DDE support

Cello featured DDE support. OLE support and DDE client support were planned, but never released.
An example of how to invoke Cello from a Microsoft Word macro.

System requirements

Cello has the following system requirements:


Criticism

Cello was not very stable and its development halted early.
Cello did not render graphics well and required that the user reload the webpage when resizing the window. Like most browsers at the time, Cello also did not support any web security protocols. It was also said that Cello rendered html "crudely" and pages would appear jaggedly.
Cello also had sub-par performance in accessing the Internet and processing hypermedia documents.



Annotations



Bibliography

Further reading




