[[Jape (band)]]

CATEGORIES: Irish rock music groups, Musical groups from Dublin (city), Electronic rock musical groups, Musical groups established in 2003, Electronic music groups, Irish pop music groups

Jape are an Irish electronic–rock band from Dublin. Formed as a side project by Richie Egan whilst part of The Redneck Manifesto, they have released four albums to date; Cosmosphere (2003), The Monkeys in the Zoo Have More Fun Than Me (2004), Ritual (2008) and Ocean of Frequency (2011). Jape's wider discography includes the EP, Jape is Grape (2007), as well as a number of singles, including "Floating" and "Phil Lynott". The band have performed at festivals and events such as Glastonbury, Electric Picnic, Lovebox and Hard Working Class Heroes and provided support for The Flaming Lips at Belsonic in Belfast in August 2008.
The first and second albums received airplay on alternative national radio in Ireland. The Monkeys in the Zoo Have More Fun Than Me's opening track, "Floating", became a popular single on late night alternative music radio shows and attracted the attention of Brendan Benson during a visit to Dublin. Benson now covers the track whilst performing live with his band The Raconteurs, as do the Belgian bastard pop duo Soulwax during their DJ sets.
Jape's third album, Ritual, was released in June 2008, later winning the Choice Music Prize for Irish Album of the Year 2008. The album features the singles "I Was a Man", "Strike Me Down" and "Phil Lynott", the latter of which was subject to an unsuccessful petition by fans to have it named Ireland's Christmas number one single in December 2008.
The album Ocean of Frequency was released in 2011 and won Jape their second Choice Music Prize in March 2012.

Background

Richie Egan is the principal songwriter but refers to the overall band as Jape. This came about following his first few solo performances when he realised he did not wish people to consider him a singer-songwriter but as part of a band.   "I've been playing in bands since I was really young but I've always been messing around on the side with four-track tape recorders, experimenting with sounds".  "The chance to turn this "messing around" into something concrete came about when he was given the opportunity to decamp to Avoca, where fellow Redneck, Niall's family own a house. Richie used it as a studio for a week."   "I listen to a lot of different styles of music, so I try to keep my finger in as many pies as possible. It keeps me interested," he laughs."

Style

Egan has said that he started listening to music during puberty. He was initially influenced by 1960s melodic pop such as Simon & Garfunkel, later listened to American hardcore punk such as the Dead Kennedys, Minor Threat, Black Flag but listens to many styles of music overall. The single "Strike Me Down" has been compared to MSTRKRFT and the French synthpop quartet Phoenix. Memories of a childhood show by heavy metal band Mastodon led him to write the song "Phil Lynott". He also enjoys newer Irish acts such as Villagers.

Career

Jape's debut album, Cosmosphere, was released on the Volta Sounds label in 2003. National broadcaster RTÉ suggested in its review that Jape was not a "convincing electronic producer" and that Egan did not have the voice of a singer-songwriter, indicating its desire to see him remain with The Redneck Manifesto and refrain from any further activities under the pseudonym Jape. However, the album received airplay on national radio on shows such as Donal Dineen's Here Comes the Night on Today FM."Artist: Jape". Trust Me I'm a Thief. Accessed 7 March 2009.
Jape's second album, The Monkeys in the Zoo Have More Fun Than Me was released by Trust Me I'm A Thief Records in 2004. It enjoyed much more success than its predecessor and contains the well-known single "Floating" which was given much airplay on late night alternative radio shows. The lead single "Floating" was famously overheard being played in Whelan's in Dublin by the musician Brendan Benson. Benson immediately requested a copy of the album and then praised Jape in The Guardian – however, the newspaper spelt it "Jabe". He also rang Egan personally to inform him he would be covering "Floating" with his band The Raconteurs. However, Egan has stated that he did not give Benson personal permission to cover the song. He did witness the cover live at the Olympia Theatre and was later to describe it as "a great moment". The single is also covered by Soulwax during their DJ sets. Kitt was co-producer of "Floating". The band went on to perform at prominent Irish festivals such as Electric Picnic and Hard Working Class Heroes.
A collection of remixes of the "Floating" single were released in June 2007.
Ritual, Jape's first album in four years, was released under the Co-op label on 4 June 2008. It entered the Irish album charts at number fifteen, while the Irish Independent
As of March 2009, Jape had six songs written for a fourth album. An appearance at Electric Picnic 2009 occurred,
Jape released the album Ocean of Frequency in 2011. Jape performed at the Eurosonic Festival in 2012 when Ireland was the "Spotlight Country".

Discography

Studio albums

Extended plays

Awards

Choice Music Prize

The nomination of Jape's third album, Ritual, for Ireland's Choice Music Prize was announced on 14 January 2009.
Ritual's victory was announced at a live ceremony held at Vicar Street, Dublin on 4 March 2009.
When Lisa Hannigan was nominated for the Mercury Prize, Ed Power, writing in the Irish Independent, wondered how close Jape had come to receiving a Mercury nomination—"Or, for that matter, how many of the judges had even heard of him".
Ocean of Frequency was nominated for the Choice Music Prize in January 2012 and was announced as winner on 8 March 2012, making Jape the first act to have won the award more than once.
|-
| 2009 || Ritual || Irish Album of the Year 2008 || 
|-
| 2012 || Ocean of Frequency || Irish Album of the Year 2011 || 
|-

Meteor Music Awards

Richie Egan received one nomination at the 2009 Meteor Awards for his band Jape.
|-
| 2009 || Jape/Richie Egan || Best Irish Male || 
|-

UK Music Video Awards

"Floating" was nominated for Best Budget Video at the UK Music Video Awards in 2008. Autamata, another Irish band, were also nominated for their video "Need You Sunshine" as were Example's video for "Me and Mandy", Lise Westzynthius's video for "Childlike Curves" and These New Puritans's video for "Elvis". The awards ceremony took place on 14 October 2008 in the Odeon West End in Leicester Square, London.
|-
| 2008 || "Floating" || Best Budget Video || 
|-






