[[Educate Together]]

CATEGORIES: Education in the Republic of Ireland, Charities based in the Republic of Ireland, Child education non-governmental organizations

Educate Together is an educational charity in the Republic of Ireland which is the patron body to multidenominational, coeducational schools. It was founded in 1984 to act as the patron body for the new multidenominational schools that opened after the successful establishment of the Dalkey School Project.
Educate Together is now the patron of 68 national schools in the Republic of Ireland.
In 2014 three Educate Together Second Level Schools will open in Blanchardstown, Drogheda and Lucan.educatetogether.

History

Educate Together has its roots in the Dalkey School Project founded in 1975. Before multi-denominational education, some of those involved in education in Ireland, such as Aine Hyland, Michael Johnston and Florrie Armstrong, questioned the denominational nature of the system and the need to have students of different faiths in different schools.
This committed group of educationalists and parents established the organisation with the stated aim:    
"To develop and support in Ireland the establishment of schools which are multi-denominational (i.e. with equal right of access for the children of Catholic, Protestant and other parents, and with the cultural and social background of each child held in equal respect), co-educational and managed under a system which is predominantly democratic in character, wherever and whenever there is viable local support for such a school."
The organisers of the school met opposition from a conservative Catholic group that circulated a leaflet in the Dalkey area alleging that the new school was "atheistic", "divisive", "hostile to religion" and "a precedent for major trouble in other areas".
Even today, the majority of primary schools in the Republic of Ireland are owned by religious communities (or boards of governors). Of the 3,200 primary schools in Ireland, only 2% are multidenominational.

Teaching of Atheism

In 2011 Fionnuala Ward the Primary Education Officer for Educate together wrote in the INTO (Teachers Union) monthly newsletter InTouch about teaching AtheismTeaching of Atheism by Fionnuala Ward, InTouch Magazine, Page 37, March 2011 Issue, INTO Publications. to educate together pupils, and the challenges about presenting Atheism to children.  Atheism Ireland and the Irish Humanist Association strongly support Educate Together.

Dalkey School Project

The Dalkey School Project was founded in 1975. The school opened at the start of the 1978–79 school year in temporary premises with Florrie Armstrong as the school principal.

Established

By 1984 two other multi-denominational schools had been started and Educate Together was established as a co-ordinating umbrella body. The organisation became a company limited by guarantee in 1998 and from the year 2000, all new Educate Together schools operate with the patronage of the national company.

Growth

The number of schools run by the organisation has grown: in 2007 it was 40, in 2008 it was 44 and today it is 68. Three new primary schools opened in Portobello, Firhouse and Rochestown in September 2013.educatetogether.ie/media/national-news/three-new-schools
By 2009 Educate Together had become the fastest-growing patron of schools in the Republic of Ireland.

Ethos

Educate Together schools guarantee equality of access and esteem to children irrespective of their social, cultural or religious background.educatetogether.url=

Learn Together Curriculum

Educate Together schools teach the Irish Primary School Curriculum, which includes 30 minutes a day to be spent on faith formation.into.pdf, INTO In an Educate Together school this time is spent teaching their Learn Together Ethical Education Curriculum rather than the religious instructions programmes taught in denominational schools.educatetogether. 

Secondary schools

Educate Together second-level schools aim not to 'teach to the test' but to instead develop their students' skills in creative and critical thinking, communication, teamwork, research and leadership.educatetogether.ie/our-schools/second-level
Educate Together first applied to be patron of a new second-level school to be opened in Lucan in 2008, but patronage was awarded to County Dublin Vocational Education Committee. This decision was reviewed in 2010 and the then Tánaiste Mary Coughlan, invited Educate Together to enter into discussion with CoDubVEC on the joint management of the school. The school will open as a joint venture in September 2014.
Educate Together was also involved in the public consultation pilot scheme the Department of Education and Skills initiated to award patronage of the new second level school planned for Gorey, Co Wexford. Following a successful submission to the Department, local parent preferences were invited through a Departmental survey and though Educate Together received 957 preferences, patronage was awarded to Co Wexford VEC which scored 1,900.
 Research published by Trinity College in 2008 showed that 90 per cent of parents who sent their children to an Educate Together school would send their children to a secondary school based on the same model if it was available.  In January 2011 the Department of Education and Skills published its plans to build post-primary schools in nine new areas between 2012 and 2016.education.jsp?maincat=10861&pcategory=10861&ecategory=10876&sectionpage=12251&language=EN&link=link001&page=2&doc=52050 Educate Together applied for patronage of five second-sevel schools in these areas. These applications were supported by active Second Level Support Groups across the country – the Drogheda group, for example, had over 700 expressions of interest from local parents.
In June 2012 The Minister for Education and Skills Ruairi Quinn announced that Educate Together's applications for second-level patronage were successful in Blanchardstown and Drogheda. These schools, along with the Lucan Educate Together school will open in September 2014.
In November 2013 the patronage of a further five second level was awarded to Educate Together in Cork, Celbridge, Co. Kildare, North Wicklow, and Balbriggan and Ballinteer in Dublin.

Colleges of education

In the Irish system, student teachers complete their initial teacher education in state-funded, religiously-run Colleges of Education, where a substantial amount of time is set aside for Religious Education and the study of either the Catholic or Church of Ireland religious instruction programmes. At present Educate Together is working in four of the five state-funded Colleges of Education. Educate Together is currently lobbying for sustained access to full-year groupings at least twice in the undergraduate and post-graduate cycle.
Educate Together offers a one year, part-time postgraduate Certificate in Ethical and Multi-denominational Education in partnership with St Patrick's College of Education from October 2012.educatetogether.ie/our-schools/colleges-of-education
List of Primary Schools== 









