[[Mouchette.org]]

CATEGORIES: Net.artists, Computer art, Digital art

Mouchette. With her innocent salutation and claims to be "nearly thirteen"[ref]
[/ref] greeting us from the introduction page, what initially appears as a personal website of a pre-pubescent female artist, evolves into darker themes in the subsequent pages.
Mouchette is loosely based on a 1937 book by Georges Bernanos and the 1967 Robert Bresson movie, Mouchette. The storyline is about a French teenager who commits suicide after she is raped. An online quiz comparing the  "Neo-Mouchette"
The creator of the website has been a closely guarded secret, though the piece has somewhat recently been claimed by artist Martine Neddam.  While the use of taboo subject matters are what initially "provokes heated reactions", the manipulation of cyber identity and the ability of the creator to maintain anonymity for so long are the significant reasons this website has garnered its "international reputation"  in the Internet art community.

Summary and themes

This simple and "deceptively innocent" participants of the website are often left wondering whether "a website this sophisticated could really be the work of a 13 year old girl".

Suicide, death, and violence

Just like the film Mouchette, one of the many themes running throughout Mouchette. The recurring image of a fly is present on many of the pages. The word "mouchette" translates into English as "little fly". The comparable lives between the Mouchettes – the fly and the girl – are intersected when it revolves around the death of the fly. On one page, Mouchette refers to herself as the fly and blames the web visitor for killing her when he/she pressed a button on the previous webpage.
As stated in Internet Art, "in early iterations of the site, the virtual persona Mouchette was obsessed with suicide". One page asks the viewer on what they think the best way to kill yourself when you're under 13.

Sex

"Sexually suggestive" themes are present throughout the site. One the opening page of the section named "***digital flesh&blood***" the background image is of a close up of a young girl's face, sticking out her tongue. The text accompanying this image reads: "Want to know what my tongue tastes like? Try it on your screen and tell me." Many pages of this website have interactive web forms that include multiple-choice questions asking your email address. Days or weeks later the viewer might get unexpected flirtatious email messages from Mouchette.

Manipulating identity

Participants are given the opportunity to "become Mouchette", when they become a member of the "Mouchette Network". Members can "create true Mouchette webpages" and are given "a unique opportunity to become a great artist."
The interactive questionnaires often will ask you to post your name and email address if you answer one of the questions. But the anonymity of the creator and the unsettling topics makes a participant wonder how seriously he/she should answer the questions, including question about  their name and identity.
The website's exploration of manipulating identity has been compared to conceptual photographer, Cindy Sherman.

Criticism and controversy

With its taboo subject matter, Mouchette. An interactive forum allows participants to  state why they hate Mouchette.
In an early version of Mouchette. Images taken from the film were used in this quiz. In 2002, the Robert Bresson estate "threatened legal action against the artist" responsible for Mouchette. According to Toni Sant, "This case brought the online piece to the attention of many who might have overlooked it in the plethora of Net Art that has emerged over the past few years". In a letter from the SACD (Société des Auteurs et Compositeurs Dramatiques) (the French Society of Dramatic Authors and Composers) addressed to the creator of Mouchette..." According to Sant, "this copyright issue raises the question of ownership over fictional identities..."
After the forced removal of the quiz from Mouchette."





Recent art exhibits


