[[Truus Schröder-Schräder]]

CATEGORIES: 1889 births, 1985 deaths, People from Deventer

Truus Schröder-Schräder (1889-1985) was a Dutch socialite and trained pharmacist who was closely involved with avant-garde artists and architects of the De Stijl movement. With her design plan in mind, Gerrit Rietveld built a house for her and her three kids—the Rietveld Schröder House—which is today UNESCO World Heritage Site.

Biography

Truus Schröder-Schräder was born in Deventer in the east of the Netherlands in 1889. Her father owned a textile factory and her mother died when she was four. Her father remarried two years later and Truus did not get along with her stepmother.
The marriage turned to be a confrontation of two worlds where both conflicted ideas about social status, independence, and the upbringing of children. Truus's husband let her change one room of their home to her own liking and that is where her partnership with designed Gerrit Rietveld started. Truus' room was designed by Rietveld and it was something very plain to her friends in that it did not show the social status of Truus, but she was very content with it.

Rietveld Schröder House

In her mid 30s, Truus became a widow and had to raise her children on her own. While she still lived in Biltstraat where she had lived with her husband, Truus found it necessary to leave her home in Biltstraat and look for a more convenient house  She had very definite ideas in what she wanted.
Truus had always been interested in the arts and in 1924, she commissioned the Rietveld Schröder House. The architect that would work for the building of this house was Gerrit Rietveld. While Truus had no experience or training as an architect or designer she had a clear vision in the way that she wanted to live her life and her surroundings  This partnership between Truus and Gerrit proved that both of them worked well together. Truus and Gerrit became lovers and he lived with Truus at the Rietveld Schröder House towards the end of his life.
For Truus Schröder, the Rietveld Schröder House was a declaration of how an independent modern woman intended to live her life.
Truus' daughter, Han Schröder, became a notable architect and educator. She was one of the first registered female architects in the Netherlands and taught interior decoration in the United States."Han Schroeder: Architectural Papers, 1926–1998", International Archive of Women in Architecture. Retrieved 28 February 2012.




