[[Hooliganism]]

CATEGORIES: Hooliganism

Hooliganism is disruptive or unlawful behavior such as rioting, bullying, and vandalism.

Etymology

There are several theories regarding the origin of the word hooliganism. The Compact Oxford English Dictionary states that the word may have originated from the surname of a fictional rowdy Irish family in a music hall song of the 1890s. Clarence Rook, in his 1899 book, Hooligan Nights, claimed that the word came from Patrick Hoolihan (or Hooligan), an Irish bouncer and thief who lived in London.

Early usage

The first use of the term is unknown, but the word first appeared in print in London police-court reports in 1894 referring to the name of a gang of youths in the Lambeth area of London—the Hooligan Boys,
In August 1898 a murder in Lambeth committed by a member of the gang drew further attention to the word which was immediately popularised by the press.
Arthur Conan Doyle wrote in his 1904 novel The Adventure of the Six Napoleons, "It seemed to be one of those senseless acts of Hooliganism which occur from time to time, and it was reported to the constable on the beat as such". H.G. Wells wrote in his 1909 semi-autobiographical novel Tono-Bungay, "Three energetic young men of the hooligan type, in neck-wraps and caps, were packing wooden cases with papered-up bottles, amidst much straw and confusion".
According to Life magazine (30 July 1941), the comic strip artist and political cartoonist Frederick Burr Opper introduced a character called Happy Hooligan in 1900; "hapless Happy appeared regularly in U.S. newspapers for more than 30 years," a "naive, skinny, baboon-faced tramp who invariably wore a tomato can for a hat." Life brought this up by way of criticizing the Soviet U.N. delegate Yakov A. Malik for misusing the word. Malik had indignantly referred to anti-Soviet demonstrators in New York as "hoolgans." Happy Hooligan, Life reminded its readers, "became a national hero, not by making trouble, which Mr. Malik understands is the function of a hooligan, but by getting himself into it."

Modern usage

Later, as the meaning of the word shifted slightly, none of the possible alternatives had precisely the same undertones of a person, usually young, who belongs to an informal group and commits acts of vandalism or criminal damage, starts fights, and who causes disturbances but is not a thief.
More recently, the term hooligan has started to be used in a constructive sense, to describe people who are dissatisfied with the status quo and decide to challenge it through radically innovative efforts to either disrupt or re-invent the models that guide our lives, in collaboration with like-minded individuals across traditional boundaries.

Violence in sports

The word hooliganism and hooligan began to be associated with violence in sports, in particular from the 1970s in the UK with football hooliganism. The phenomenon, however, long preceded the modern term; for example, one of the earliest known instances of crowd violence at a sporting event took place in ancient Constantinople. Two chariot racing factions, the Blues and the Greens, were involved in the Nika riots which lasted around a week in 532 CE; nearly half the city was burned or destroyed in addition to tens of thousands of deaths.

In the Soviet Union and Russia

In the Soviet Union the word khuligan was used to refer to scofflaws and political dissenters. Hooliganism (rus. Хулига́нство) was listed as a criminal offense, similar to disorderly conduct in some other jurisdictions, and used as a catch-all charge for prosecuting unapproved behavior.
Olympic medalist Vasiliy Khmelevskiy was convicted of hooliganism for lighting a masqueraded person on fire during a celebration in 1979 and sentenced to five years imprisonment.Вечно третий или бронза тоже благородный металл. bmsi. More recently, the same charge has been leveled against members of the feminist punk group Pussy Riot for which three members have each received a two-year sentence on 17 August 2012. Hooliganism charges have also been levelled against the Greenpeace protestors in October 2013.Russia drops piracy charges against Greenpeace group

Hooliganism in film






