[[Thom Wolf]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American non-fiction writers, Baylor University alumni, Harvard University people, New York University people, 1944 births

Thom Wolf is international president and professor of global studies of University Institute, New Delhi, India,Professor of Global Studies
Wolf is a social entrepreneur, author and educator in the fields of international education and leadership.  He has the B.A. Sociology, Baylor University, M.A. Cross-Cultural Studies, Fuller Graduate School; been awarded an honorary D.  Humanities Grand Canyon University; and has earned a PhD (Global Leadership) Andrews University
Wolf designed several Master of Arts programs for US universities. Leadership engagement and lectures globally include the Universidad Autónoma del Estado de México3, Harvard University, New York University, Indiana University, UCLA, the UC Berkeley, Princeton University, Stanford University, Kunming University (Yunan Province China), Delhi University, Lucknow, and UniversityAmerican University of Dubai.  Kunming University (Yunan Province China).
His teachings have centered on the social, educational, and ethical dimensions of comparative worldviews. Informed by the "culture matters" school of thinking Sardar, Lall, Andrade and others) exploring the significance of the voice of Mahatma Jotirao Phule and wife Savitribai Phule, for the full development of contemporary India.
Wolf is author of India Progress-Prone,India Progress-ProneThe Baliraja Proposal of Mahatma Phule (2008) 2nd edition ISBN 978-81-904351-3-04 translated into Hindi and Marathi. 
His ideas have been published in the Far Eastern Economic Review, Journal of AC Leadership and elsewhere., and is co-author of Phule in His Own Words (2007) 2nd Edition ISBN 989-81-904351-5-4 (with Sunil Sardar), and of "Savitribai and India's Conversation on Education" (2008) (with Suzana Andrade).
His explorations of worshipviews/worldviews/worldvenues linkages have been published in Hindu/Buddhist and Hebrew/Christian Meditation: A Gender Studies Comparison (2006); Buddhism and the Contemporary World,Buddhism and the Contemporary World "Three Challenges for Buddhism in the 21st century" (2007)5; and Buddhism in the 21st century, "Mahayana Buddhism: TippingPoint Buddhism" (release date 2009).

Articles and Lectures

Publications




