[[Tourism in the Republic of Macedonia]]

CATEGORIES: Tourism in the Republic of Macedonia, Tourism in Europe

Tourism in the Republic of Macedonia is a large factor of the nation's economy. Macedonia's large abundance of natural and cultural attractions make it suitable for tourism.
In 2012, Macedonia received 663,633 tourist arrivals.

Statistics

The Republic of Macedonia experiences a constant increase of visitors. The number of domestic tourists in the period from January to March 2008 compared to the same period of the previous year, increased 23.5%. While the number of foreign tourists in March 2008 compared to March 2007 increased 44.7%.Southeast European Times
In February 2009, nearly 28,000 tourists, or 3.2% more than the same month last year, visited Macedonia. There was also an 8% increase in the number of foreign visitors to the country.MINA
The summer of 2009 was the city of Dojran's best tourist season with 135,000 overnight visitors, an increase of 12.5% compared to the previous year.Mina
The number of tourists in Macedonia in May 2010 increased by 0.8% from the same month in the previous year.State Statistical Office of Macedonia
The number of foreign tourists visiting Macedonia between the months of January and July increased by 25% in 2011 compared to the same period in 2010. The average amount of nights spent in the country by these tourists also rose, by 33.2%.MIA
In the first four months of 2012, the number of tourists in Macedonia was 130,083, an increase of 4.6% from the previous year.
The Macedonian region receiving the most tourist arrivals in 2012 was the Southwest with 251,462, followed by the Skopje (164,077) and the Southeastern (106,978) regions. The Pelagonia region received 72,054 arrivals, while the remaining regions each received under 30,000.
Among foreign tourists in 2012, the most common country of origin was Turkey with 50,406 arrivals, followed by Greece with 43,976 and Serbia with 36,530. The most common non-Balkan country of origin was the Netherlands with over 27,000 tourist arrivals.

Destinations

Cities

Skopje, the capital and largest city, is situated in the northern part of the country on the Vardar River. Skopje has a long history that is evidenced by its many archaeological sites, such as Scupi and the Skopje Aqueduct, and the large number of Ottoman buildings and monuments, particularly in the Old Bazaar, such as Mustapha Pasha Mosque.  Today, Skopje, with over 500,000 inhabitants, is becoming a modern city with museums and many cultural and sporting events.
Ohrid, an UNESCO World Heritage Site, is located in the southwestern part of the country on the eastern shore of Lake Ohrid. The town is perhaps the most popular tourist destination in the country, which is largely due to the beaches and atmosphere. However, Ohrid also has many historical monuments, such as Samuil's Fortress and the Antique Theatre.
Bitola, the second largest city, is situated in the southern part of the country. Like many cities in the country, Bitola has also had a rich history. Heraclea Lyncestis, one of the Republic of Macedonia's largest archaeological sites, is located in Bitola. The long history of Bitola is also exemplified by the town's many neo-classical buildings, Ottoman buildings and monuments, and old churches. The town is also a shopping destination; Širok Sokak, a pedestrian street, is filled with an endless amount of stores and restaurants.
Štip, the largest city east of the Vardar River, is located in the eastern part of the country. Štip has existed for at least 2,000 years which is showcased by its many archaeological sites, such as Astibo, Bargala, and Estipeon. The city is also home to the healing waters of the Kežovica Mineral Spa. Today, Štip is the main cultural and economical centre of eastern Macedonia.
Other cities and towns in the country, such as Kratovo, Kruševo, Prilep, Strumica, and Struga, have many attractions of their own.

National parks and natural reserves

The Republic of Macedonia has three national parks and 33 natural reserves:

Other places

Festivals

Gallery

Image:Black Drim wells.jpg|Black Drin River
File:Sv. Kliment i Pantelejmon Plaošnik 015. Panteleimon at Plaošnik
Image:Aladja Moschee01.JPG|Ishak Beg Mosque in Skopje
File:Stonebridge-skopje.JPG|Stone Bridge of Skopje
Image:Wild beach-selo Ljubanista Ohrid.jpg|Beach near Ohrid
Image:KoleshinoWaterfall.JPG|Waterfall in Kolešino near Strumica
Image:Kozyak-ot-foynik.jpg|Kozjak Hydro Power Plant, Poreče
Image:Lake Ohrid by Ohrid old city.JPG|Lake Ohrid
Image:KorabMountain2.jpg|Mount Korab
Image:Luboteni.JPG|Ljuboten
Image:Radika-Dolno-Kosovrasti.jpg|Radika River
Image:Svetinaum. Naum monastery over Lake Ohrid
Image:Kalishtafrescoes. Kalište in Struga
Image:Galichnik-View-Northern-Slope.jpg|Galičnik
File:Heraclea.jpg|Mosaic at Heraclea Lyncestis
File:505 OldAqueductSkopje.jpg|Aqueduct outside of Skopje








