[[Marathon, Greece]]

CATEGORIES: 1896 Summer Olympic venues, 2004 Summer Olympic venues, Olympic athletics venues, Olympic cycling venues, Ancient Greek cities, Marathon, Greece, Populated places in East Attica, Battle of Marathon, Demoi

Marathon (Demotic Greek: Μαραθώνας, Marathónas; Attic/ Katharevousa: ) is a town in Greece, the site of the battle of Marathon in 490 BC, in which the heavily outnumbered Athenian army defeated the Persians. The tumulus or burial mound (Greek Τύμβος, tymbos, i.e. tomb), also called the "Soros," for the 192 Athenian dead that was erected near the battlefield remains a feature of the coastal plain. I p. 34. The Tymbos is now marked by a marble memorial stele and surrounded by a small park.

History

Marathon's name ( comes from the legend of a Greek runner, who was sent from the town of Marathon to Athens to announce that the Persians had been miraculously defeated in the Battle of Marathon. It is said that he ran the entire distance without stopping, but moments after proclaiming his message Nenīkēkamen ("We have won!") to the city, he collapsed from exhaustion. The account of the run near Marathon to Athens first appears in Plutarch's On the Glory of Athens in the 1st century AD, which quotes from Heraclides Ponticus' lost work, giving the runner's name as either Thersipus of Erchius or Eucles. Lucian of Samosata (2nd century AD) also gives the story but names the runner Philippides (not Pheidippides). The Greek historian Herodotus, the main source for the Greco-Persian Wars, mentions Pheidippides as the messenger who ran from Athens to Sparta asking for help. In some manuscripts of Herodotus the name of the runner between Athens and Sparta is given as Philippides. (Penguin Books: New York, 1977) p. 425.
In Ancient Greece, the messengers (day-runners) who carried the news of war from one city to another, enjoyed great esteem and respect; the roads were problematic, they had to pass through hostile territory, and traveling posed great dangers at that time. The states would assign specially trained "messengers" or "runners" or "road-heralds", with great stamina and strength of character to carry messages in times of war as well as peace.
The sport of Marathon was established during the first modern Olympics held in Athens in 1896. The idea to include the event in the program of the Olympic Games was of French philosopher and professor at the Sorbonne, Michel Breal, a friend of Pierre de Coubertin, the man who contributed decisively to the founding of the modern Olympic Games. He proposed the introduction of an endurance road race under the name "Marathon" which would start from the region where in 490 BC the battle of the Greeks against the Persians occurred and would end at the Pnyx of Ancient Athens, where, presumably, the messenger arrived bringing the good news of victory to the Athenians. The International Olympic Committee (IOC) accepted his proposal. "Track & Field (Men): Marathon". In The Complete Book of the Olympics: 2008 Edition. London: Aurum Press Limited. p. 133.1896 Summer Olympics official report. Volume 2. pp. 86-90.
Michel Breal did not know exactly what the distance was and how difficult the sport would be - the first marathon was 40,000 meters long. In 1924, the 42,195 meters long Marathon became the standard that is today, based on the distance for the 1908 London Marathon from Windsor Castle to the White City stadium in London.
There are two roads out of the battlefield of Marathon towards Athens, one more mountainous towards the north whose distance is about . It has been successfully argued that the ancient runner took the more difficult northern road because at the time of the battle there were still Persian soldiers in the south of the plain.
Marathon () is the Greek word for fennel.  It is believed that the town was originally named so because of an abundance of fennel plants in the area. After Miltiades (the general of the Greek forces) defeated Darius' Persian forces, the Persians decided to sail from Marathon to Athens in order to sack the unprotected city. Miltiades ordered all his hoplite forces to 'Double-time' march back to Athens. So by the time Darius' troops arrived, they saw the same Greek force waiting for them.
In the 19th century and beginning of twentieth century  the village was inhabited by an Arvanite (Albanian) population. Thomas Chase, an English traveller, describes his meeting with 'an old Albanian' in Marathon and also says that they 'accosted some Albanian children playing near a well, but they did not understand modern Greek'. At the Internet Archive.
The sophist and magnate Herodes Atticus was born in Marathon. In 1926, the American company ULEN began construction on the Marathon Dam in a valley above Marathon, in order to ensure water supply for Athens.  It was completed in 1929. About 10 km² of forested land were flooded to form Lake Marathon.  
The beach of Schinias is located southeast of the town and it is a popular windsurfing spot and the Olympic Rowing Center for the 2004 Summer Olympics is also located there. At the 1896 and 2004 Summer Olympics, Marathon was the starting point of the marathon races (for both women and men in 2004).2004 Summer Olympics official report. Volume 2. p. 242. The area is susceptible to flash flooding, because of forest fires having denuded parts of the eastern slopes of Mount Penteli especially in 2006.

Municipality

The municipality Marathon was formed at the 2011 local government reform by the merger of the following 4 former municipalities, that became municipal units:Kallikratis law Greece Ministry of Interior 

Population

The other settlements in the municipal unit are Agios Panteleimonas (pop. 1,591), Kato Souli (2,142), Vranas (1,082), Avra (191), Vothon (177), Ano Souli (232), and Schinias (264).

Points of interest

Sister cities



Notes and references




