[[Bung Mokhtar Radin]]

CATEGORIES: 1959 births, Members of the Dewan Rakyat, Living people, Kadazan-Dusun people, Political scandals in Malaysia

Datuk Buang Mokhtar bin Radin (born 15 September 1959) is a Malaysian politician. He is currently serving as a member ofUnited Malays National Organisation (UMNO) and also Member of the Malaysian Parliament for the constituency of Kinabatangan, Sabah.

Education

Bung Mokhtar despite never finishing his university degree had made several failed attempts at running a local grocery in Sabah. His rise in politics has been predominantly attributed to having close ties with senior United Malays National Organisation officials despite the lack of education.

Controversial remarks in Parliament

Kuantan Floods Remark

Bung Mokhtar made spiteful remarks at the subject and prevented repeated calls by Kuantan's Pakatan rakyat MP Fuziah's motion to table a state of emergency declaration of flood affected states. 

"Bocor" remark

Bung Mokhtar became known as the MP who uttered sexist comments in Parliament during the 11th Malaysian Parliament sitting on 9 May 2007. During a heated argument with Fong Po Kuan, the MP of Batu Gajah at that time, over ceiling leakages in the Parliament Houses, Bung Mokhtar, following Jasin MP at that time Mohammad Said bin Yusof, suggestively referenced menstruation in Malay:

Both Mohd Said and Bung Mokhtar's remark led to an uproar among women's groups, leading to their formal apology to all Malaysian women on 18 May 2007, following the script given by Sharizat Abdul Jalil, the Minister of Women, Family and Community Development at that time. But their apology was rejected by Fong Po Kuan because she found the apology not sincere, as they apologised under pressure.

Karpal Singh

Bung Mokhtar came into the spotlight again as early as the first day of the 12th Malaysian Parliament sitting on 30 April 2008 after being called the "Bigfoot of Kinabatangan" by Karpal Singh. Bung Mokhtar retaliated by calling Karpal a "Big Monkey".
During another 12th Malaysian Parliament sitting in May, Bung Mokhtar became involved again in another controversy involving disabled people. He and Ibrahim Ali, the MP of Pasir Mas at that time, have asked Karpal Singh, who uses a wheelchair, to stand up and show respect to the speaker.

Sexist remarks about women drivers

Bung Mokhtar also made sexist remarks claiming that most women drivers were slow and paid little attention while on the road. "When you honk at them, they get agitated with some even showing hand gestures to other drivers", he said in Parliament.  These remarks were widely panned by women's groups in Malaysia.
Bung Mokhtar said that he was being sexually harassed due to the fact that at the time, he was the focus of criticism from women's rights groups.

Bung Mokhtar wants AirAsia's Azran to leave country for criticising Utusan

On 2 July 2013, Bung Mokhtar Radin urged AirAsia X chief executive Azran Osman Rani to leave the country for criticising Utusan Malaysia. Calling Azran "melayu biadap" while debating the royal address in Parliament, Bung Mokhtar said Azran should move if he was not happy in Malaysia.

Polygamy Conviction

On 20 April 2010, Bung Mokhtar pleaded guilty to committing polygamy. He was then sentenced to a one-month's jail by the East Gombak lower Syariah Court on 19 May 2010. He was also slapped with a RM1,000 fine or one month's jail in default on a second charge of abetting actress Zizie Izette Abdul Samad to marry without the consent of a Syariah registrar. It was reported during the court hearing, Bung Mokhtar and his illegitimate wife, Zizie Izette, did not show any remorse, were generally gay and casually chatted with journalists. They then subsequently drove off in a Porsche Cayenne. Malaysian politicians are required to use only nationally-produced Proton cars. 
The issue of Bung Mokhtar entering into an illegal polygamous marriage without fulfilling the required procedures and conditions under the Islamic Family Law (Selangor) Enactment 2003, generated a chorus of criticism from women's groups, who demanded his resignation.
On 11 August 2010, Bung Mokhtar was let off with a RM1,000 fine in lieu of the jail sentence while Zizie was fined RM1,000 or one month's jail in default for marrying without the consent of a Syariah registrar.




