[[Nasrollah Entezam]]

CATEGORIES: 1900 births, 1980 deaths, Iranian diplomats, Ambassadors of Iran to the United States, Ambassadors of Iran to France, Presidents of the United Nations General Assembly, Permanent Representatives of Iran to the United Nations

Nasrollah Entezam (16 February 1900 – 19 December 1980) was an Iranian diplomat. He held the position of the President of the United Nations General Assembly during the fifth session, in 1950.
Nasrollah Enterzam, fifth President of the General Assembly and leader of the Iranian delegation, has been the permanent representative of his country to the United Nations since 1947.

Birth and early diplomatic career

Nasrollah Enterzam was born in Teheran in 1900, he graduated in law and political science at the University of Teheran and Paris University.
Like his elder brother, Abd-Allah Entezam, he joined the Ministry of Foreign Affairs upon completion of his education at the German Technical School and the School of Political Science.
Between 1926 and 1929, he was Secretary to the Iranian Legations in Paris, Warsaw, and London. He represented his Government at the World Economic Conference in London in 1933, and at the League of Nations; from 1934 to 1938 he was Iran's Chargé d'Affaires at Berne.
During the Anglo-Persian Oil Company dispute 1932-1933  he served as secretary to the Iranian  delegation and accompanied Ali-Akbar Davar and Hosayn Ala to Geneva to present the Iranian case at the League of Nations.
On his return to Iran  Entezarn was Director of the Political Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
In 1942, he was appointed Grand Master of Ceremonies at the Imperial Palace, and the next year became Minister of Public Health. Subsequently, he held the positions of Minister of Posts and Telegraph, Minister of Communications, and, in 1944-45, Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Entezam represented his country at the San Francisco Conference in 1945 and at the first session of the General Assembly. He was a member of the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine in 1947. At the third session of the General Assembly, he was chairman of the United Nations Trusteeship Council  and of the Special Committee on Methods and Procedures which the Assembly established at that session. At the fourth session, he served as chairman of the ad hoc Political Committee of the Assembly. He is also Ambassador Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of his country to the United States.

After Reza Shah years

Following the Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran and the abdication of the Reza Shah in  September 1941 and until the appointment of Mohammed-Ali Forughi  as Court Minister in  on March 1942, Nassrollah was "fully in charge of the court" and developed close ties with Mohammad-Reza Shah.
His ministerial career began in  January 1943 with an appointment as Health minister  in the Cabinet of the Prime Minister Ahmad Qavam.
Thereafter he successively served first as Minister of Post, Telegraph, and Telephones and as Minister of Roads in the second cabinet of the Prime Minister Ali Soheili from February 1943 to March 1944.
He owed his ministerial position to royal favor and to the desire of Prime Ministers to placate the Shah
He was reappointed  Minister of Roads and soon made Minister of Foreign Affairs in the Prime Minister Morteza-Qoli Bayat's cabinet from November 1944 to April 1945, but he resigned in March 1945, joining the Iranian delegation at the San Francisco Conference, which established the United Nations.
He served as a member and later head of the Iranian delegation at the United Nations in New York.
From 19 June 1950 until 22 September 1952 he was Iran ambassador to the United States. He also served as the President of the fifth session of the United Nations General Assembly in 1950.
He was, however, eventually removed from his Ambassadorial post in Washington D.C., and replaced by  Allah-Yar Saleh because he did not fully enjoy the confidence of then Prime Minister Mohammad Mosaddegh

Other duties

Following the Iran coup of August 1953   he was reappointed Ambassador to the United States and served until his replacement by the cabinet  of the Prime Minister Ali Amini  who was  lobbying a little too obviously for the premiership.
In February 1958 Nasrollah was appointed Ambassador to France, where he stayed until April 1962.
In July 1962 he was appointed Minister without Portfolio in the cabinet of the Prime Minister Asadollah Alam with whom he had maintained close ties.
He was elected Chairman of the Inaugural Congress of the Rastakhiz Party that the Shah had created, as the single permissible party—a development interpreted as a sign of the declining power of Alam's rival, Prime Minister Amir-Abbas Hoveida.
According to a 1963 report by the United States Embassy, the Entezam brothers were active members in an informal gathering  which was formed around Amini and met every Wednesday for over twelve years.
Like other members of Amini's Cabinet, the Entezam brothers were active participants in a number of other such gatherings. The two brothers were, however, very different in character and disposition. The flamboyant and sartorially elegant bachelor, Nasrollah  also considered to be a capable official but devoid of those qualities which accounted for the prestige and respect accorded to his brother

Retirement

Entezam retired from public office in the late 1960s but was continually serving the Shah in one capacity or another. His final duties were the chairman of the United States Bicentennial celebration and co-chair of the  Rastakhiz Party.
In 1979 after the Islamic revolution he decided to return to Iran from his trip to Geneva, his beloved city.
Upon his return was arrested and jailed. In the notorious Evin prison he was subjected to physical and mental torture.
His head was bashed against the wash basin in his cell which prompted a heart attack.
His cell mate   Sheikhol Eslam, Shah's Minister of Health and Human Services, came to his rescue and asked that he be taken to a hospital.
Fearing his death, they released him to his next of kin, Ali Ghaffari.
He expired a few days later in the house of his beloved sister Farok Lagha Entezam-Saltaneh. His house, personal property much of which were gifts and memorabilia from his extended years of service to Iran and the Pahlavi Dynasty, were looted. The two served Iran long and with dignity.




