[[Ryan Tandy]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 births, 2014 deaths, 21st-century Australian criminals, Australian people of Irish descent, Australian rugby league players, Ireland national rugby league team players, St. George Illawarra Dragons players, South Sydney Rabbitohs players, Wests Tigers players, Hull Kingston Rovers players, Melbourne Storm players, Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs players, Doncaster RLFC players, Western Suburbs Rosellas players, Whitehaven RLFC players, Rugby league props, Rugby league second-rows, Rugby league controversies, People from Wollongong

Ryan Tandy (20 September 1981 – 28 April 2014) was an Australian professional rugby league footballer of the 2000s and 2010s. An Ireland national representative forward, he played in the National Rugby League for the St. George Illawarra Dragons, South Sydney Rabbitohs, Wests Tigers, Melbourne Storm and Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs, and in Super League for Hull Kingston Rovers. He was banned from playing professional rugby league in Australia after being found guilty of match-fixing and a died a few years later.

Playing career

Tandy played Junior Rugby League for the Kincumber Colts on the Central Coast of New South Wales. His career covered stints with the St. George Illawarra Dragons, South Sydney Rabbitohs, Wests Tigers, Melbourne Storm and the Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs in the NRL. He also played for Hull Kingston Rovers in the European Super League. 
Tandy debuted for the Wests Tigers first grade team against the Brisbane Broncos in Round 15 2008.
Tandy was selected in the Ireland national team for the 2008 Rugby League World Cup, which lead to a contract with Melbourne Storm for 2009. 
He played for Melbourne in the 2009 NRL Grand Final victory against Parramatta. However this title was later stripped from the Storm due to salary cap breaches.
He signed with the Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs on 12 June 2010,

Betting scandal

After the 21 August 2010 Canterbury match against the North Queensland Cowboys Tandy became embroiled in a betting scandal. The Totalisator Agency Board (TAB) announced that 95 per cent of bets placed on the first scoring play of this match were for the unusual option of a Cowboys penalty goal. Tandy is alleged to have placed some of these bets himself,  and then taken action in the match to allow the opposing side to score a penalty goal. Tandy gave away possession to the Cowboys in the opening moments of the match by knocking on, and then gave away a penalty. These actions put the Cowboys in a position where a penalty goal was a likely outcome. However, the Cowboys decided on an attacking option and scored a try instead.
Tandy strongly denied the accusations of deliberately giving away possession and a penalty to allow the exotic option on the bets to be successful. Despite this, he was arrested on 2 February 2011 He received an intensive correction order for six months. It required: community service, supervision and curfew, but he could have been jailed for 2 years.
Tandy was found to be guilty of manipulating the first scoring point of the game on 6 October 2011. 
Tandy received a lifetime ban from NRL rugby league over the match fixing.

Death

On 28 April 2014 Tandy was found dead at his parents' home in Saratoga, New South Wales.






