[[Damon Knight]]

CATEGORIES: 1922 births, 2002 deaths, American science fiction writers, American short story writers, Clarion Workshop, Futurians, Hugo Award winning writers, Writers from Eugene, Oregon, SFWA Grand Masters, Science fiction critics, Science fiction editors, Science fiction fans, Science Fiction Hall of Fame inductees, Worldcon Guests of Honor, 20th-century American novelists, Writers from Oregon

Damon Francis Knight (September 19, 1922 – April 15, 2002) was an American science fiction author, editor, critic and fan.  His forte was short stories and he is widely acknowledged as having been a master of the genre.[ref]
[/ref] He was married to fellow writer Kate Wilhelm.

Life and career

Damon Knight was born in Baker, Oregon in 1922, and grew up in Hood River, Oregon. He entered science-fiction fandom at the age of eleven and published two issues of a fanzine entitled Snide.
Knight's first professional sale was a cartoon drawing to a science-fiction magazine, Amazing Stories. Aldiss & Harry Harrison, Hell's Cartographers, Orbit Books, 1976, p. 105. His first story, "The Itching Hour," appeared in the Summer 1940 number of Futuria Fantasia, edited and published by Ray Bradbury. "Resilience" followed in the February 1941 number of Stirring Science Stories, edited by Donald Wolheim. An editorial error made the latter story's ending incomprehensible;Pohl, SFWA Grand Masters Volume Three, p. 202. it was reprinted in a 1978 magazine in four pages with a two-page introduction by Knight. He is a Hugo Award winner,
At the time of his first story, he was living in New York, and was a member of the Futurians. One of his short stories describes paranormal disruption of a science fiction fan group, and contains cameo appearances of various Futurians and others under thinly-disguised names: For instance, non-Futurian sf writer H. Beam Piper is identified as "H. Dreyne Fifer".
In a series of reviews for various magazines, he became famous as a science fiction critic, a career which began when he wrote in 1945 that A. E. van Vogt "is not a giant as often maintained. He's only a pygmy who has learned to operate an overgrown typewriter." After nine years, he ceased reviewing when a magazine refused to publish one review exactly as he wrote it. These reviews were later collected in In Search of Wonder.
The SFWA officers and past presidents named Knight its 13th Grand Master in 1994 (presented 1995). After his 2002 death the associated award was renamed in his honor, the Damon Knight Memorial Grand Master Award. The Science Fiction Hall of Fame inducted him in 2003.
To the general public, he is best known as the author of "To Serve Man", a 1950 short story that was adapted for The Twilight Zone. 51. It won a 50-year Retro Hugo in 2001 as the best short story of 1950, which predated the Hugo Awards. His only Hugo Award was the "Best Reviewer" in 1956.
Knight is also known for the term "idiot plot", a story that only functions because almost everyone in it is an idiot; the term was probably invented by James Blish, but became well-known through Knight's frequent use of it in his reviews. Wolfe, "Coming to Terms", in Gunn & Candelaria, Speculations on Speculation, p. 18.
His papers are held in the University of Oregon Special Collections and University Archive.uoregon.edu/story/academics/celebrating-csws-40th-le-guin-feminist-science-fiction-fellowship

Selected works

Novels

Short stories and other writings

Literary criticism and analysis

Short story collections



Notes






