[[Oakmont High School]]

CATEGORIES: Public high schools in California, International Baccalaureate schools in California, High schools in Placer County, California, Roseville, California

Oakmont High School is located at 1710 Cirby Way, in Roseville, California, United States. The school is surrounded by the communities of Citrus Heights, Rocklin, Granite Bay, and Antelope. It is one of five comprehensive high schools in the Roseville Joint Union High School District. Oakmont opened in September 1966. In the past ten years the campus has been updated with additional technology capacity, a new performing arts building and a modern field turf athletic stadium. In addition to serving roughly 1,600 students, the school exists as a center of activity for a growing community. Recently, Oakmont High School has undergone drops in student enrollment due to the opening of nearby Antelope High School. Nevertheless, it has continued to have strong athletic programs and numerous academic routes for its diverse student population.

Administration

School Leadership

Mr. Rob Hasty is in his third year serving Oakmont High School as principal. He previously worked at nearby Antelope and Granite Bay High Schools as assistant principals. 
Oakmont also has three supplementary assistant principals to Mr. Hasty: Mrs. Sybil Healy, Mr. Mark Werlein, and Mrs. Zimmerman.

Academics

Advanced Placement Classes

Oakmont High School encourages students to continue their education after high school. Oakmont High offers Advanced Placement (AP) courses as one option for those students seeking to qualify for college credit or enrollment. Students that achieve a score of three, four, or five on the final AP exams qualify for college credit at most of the nation's colleges. During the 2008-2009 school year, 200 students participated in taking the exams. According to the California Department of Education, approximately 47% of the exams taken that year were scored a "3" or better.

International Baccalaureate Program

After having undergone a formidable application process, beginning with the 2008-2009 school year, the International Baccalaureate (IB) Diploma Programme was an option offered to local students. 
According to its website, the IB program is a challenging two-year curriculum, primarily aimed at students aged 16 to 19. It leads to a qualification that is widely recognized by the world's leading universities.
The program is often compared to the AP program. The primary difference between the IB and AP programs is the emphasis placed on different ways of "knowing." IB is centered around the idea of a global-perspective in its courses, and challenges students to be more creative and "well-rounded." In the Diploma Programme, students are required to take specific classes in addition to completing CAS (creativity, action, and service) hours and an Extended Essay.
The Diploma Programme prepares students for university and encourages them to: ask challenging questions, learn how to learn, develop a strong sense of their own identity and culture, and develop the ability to communicate with and understand people from other countries and cultures.
In its first few years, Oakmont's IB program has proven to be successful and beneficial to the school.

Health Careers Academy

Another notable program at Oakmont High School is the Health Careers Academy. 
According to its website, the Oakmont Health Careers Academy is a voluntary three year college preparatory program. The Academy provides highly rigorous and relevant curriculum that stresses real world application for students interested in medical careers. Freshman students interview for admission, commit to improving their academic standing and demonstrate strong motivation to explore a future in healthcare. 
While the AP and IB programs at Oakmont High School are based on a student's willingness to attend college, the Health Careers Academy is no exception. All graduation requirements are still met by students, and a high emphasis is put on college-bound education.

Viking Printing Press and ViTech

The Viking Printing Press and ViTech are both courses of study at Oakmont High School centered around a business and technological support environment, respectively. 
Viking Printing Press (VPP) offers students a series of classes that essentially creates an on-campus business that allows students to learn in a fast-paced, high-pressure atmosphere. It prepares them for business careers with an emphasis on organization and leadership. It has proven to be highly relevant and highly successful to students who which to take advantage of its opportunities.

Other Programs

In addition to the other major academic programs, construction technology, a very popular culinary program, a child development program (Tiny Vikes), dance program, choir, competitive band, and an extremely successful theater program are all options for students at Oakmont High School.  

Extracurriculars

A large amount of student-run clubs are offered at Oakmont High School. Some active clubs include Interact Club (community service), Ski/Snowboard Club, CSF, IB Club, O-Zone(school-spirit), Speech and Debate, and Mock Trial.
Oakmont High School's Mock Trial club has gone to state competitions for the past three consecutive years. It offers students the ability to participate in simulated, highly-realistic court cases in various courtroom-career positions. 
Interact Club has been a prolific community service group, organizing fundraisers for natural disasters, helping at local functions and community improvement projects, and offering students many leadership opportunities. 
Due to a recently successful basketball program, O-Zone re-emerged from its "Blue-Crew" past. The group of students mainly supports the basketball teams, and is characterized by its members' all-white ensembles and fervent school-spirit.

Some Notable Alumni






