[[Neanderthal Museum]]

CATEGORIES: Museums in North Rhine-Westphalia, Archaeological museums in Germany, Archaeological parks, Neanderthals, Fossil museums, Paleontology in Germany

Neanderthal Museum is a museum in Mettmann, Germany. Located at the site of the first Neanderthal man discovery in the Neandertal, it features an exhibit centered on human evolution. The museum was constructed in 1996 to a design by architect Arno Brandlhuber and draws about 170,000 visitors per year. The museum also includes an archaeological park on the original discovery site, a Stone Age workshop, as well as an art trail named "human traces". All signs in the museum as well as the audio guide offered by the museum are available in German and English.

History

The architectural plan for the museum was chosen through a competition held in the spring of 1993 in which 130 participants from Germany and other countries participated. The design submitted by Professor Günter Zamp Kelp, Julius Krauss and Arno Brandlhuber was chosen as it represented the importance of the location. Its multimedia exhibition was upgraded in 2006. Continuing donations, endowment or testamentary of funding are helpful for further development of the museum and for acquisition of many more exhibits.
The former hotel Neanderthaler Hof was demolished to make room for the museum's extension.

Exhibits

The museum gives a background of the migration of people from the savannas to the modern cities with emphasis of Neanderthals. Their life size models are cast and exhibited on the basis of fossils excavated from archaeological sites.
The museum has a unique collection of casts of the original human fossils which represent the evolution of the hominids in general and that of the Neanderthals in particular. This cast collection, prepared on the basis of finds from various excavated sites in the world, was facilitated by the donations given by Alfred Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach Foundation.
The museum also houses the NESPOS Society e.V. (Pleistocene People and Places) which provides an interactive database on all anthropological and archaeological data connected with the Neanderthals in the form of "3D–images of CT-Scans and surface scans, as well as high-resolution photographs of human fossils and artifacts". Software, developed digitally by NESPOS on the basis of all fossil collections, is distributed freely, which includes scans of 600 fossils and artifacts from Belgium, Croatia, France and Germany.

Special exhibitions

The museum houses special exhibitions. The last exhibition on monkeys finished in October 2012 was developed by the museum at a cost of €120,000. A total of 43,000 visitors saw this exhibition, which makes it one of the more popular ones, and it will next be able to be seen at the Naturhistorisches Museum in Braunschweig.

Services

Research

The Neanderthal Museum Foundation apart from its present museographic exhibits also supports research with an interdisciplinary academic approach with particular emphasis on research of the early history of humanity. International excavations and research projects are also its actively pursued programmes. The museum also encourages common people to facilitate investigations on local prehistory. The Museum has the world's largest database on glacial archaeology under the title "NESPOS". Its activities include holding of International conferences and symposiums at a regular basis, which "generate interdisciplinary contacts and spark new ideas and perspectives"; proceedings of which are published in scientific series published by the museum.

Education programmes

The museum specifically operates a programme to disseminate knowledge to teachers (including pre-school teachers) through its Permanent Exhibition and Stone Age Workshop. Children are also encouraged to learn from the exhibits which are not part of the school curriculum. In this regard the display areas in the garden such as the Discovery Site, the "Human Traces" art trail and the Ice Age Game Reserve are very topical for children in particular.

Grounds

In the garden area, which is developed in the precincts of the museum to represent the Neander Valley, there are many attractions along the labelled paths labelled such as Art trail "Human Traces". Further, towards the Game reserve, the aurochs and the wild horses can be seen. The original excavated site where fossils of Neanderthal man were found is also close to the museum.

Awards

The museum has received many appreciation medals for architecture, exhibits, its website and tourism, between 1997 and 2009, and these are:






