[[Lancaster Priory]]

CATEGORIES: Austin and Paley buildings, Churches in Lancaster, Church of England churches in Lancashire, Diocese of Blackburn, English Gothic architecture in Lancashire, Grade I listed buildings in Lancashire, Grade I listed churches, Gothic Revival architecture in Lancashire, Paley and Austin buildings


Lancaster Priory, formerly St Mary's Church, Lancaster, is the Church of England parish church of the city of Lancaster, Lancashire, England. It is near Lancaster Castle and since 1953 has been designated a Grade I Listed building.

History

Pre-construction

It is likely that a Roman building existed on the site prior to others, possibly around the year 200.

Construction to 17th century

In 1094 Roger de Poitou established a Benedictine priory, dedicated to St Mary, as a cell of the Abbey of Saint Martin of Sées in Normandy, France. Around 1360 the nave was widened to about . In 1431 the church was transferred from Sées to Syon Abbey near London, and following this there was a major reconstruction in Perpendicular style. In 1539 this Catholic monastic institution was abolished by Henry VIII and the following year the priory became a parish church. A restoration of the church occurred in 1558.572

18th to 20th centuries

In 1743 it was decided to raise the steeple 10 yards higher so that the bells could be heard better, and the bells were also to be re-cast.36 In 1753, the tower was determined to be in danger of falling down, so the bells were removed from it. Henry Sephton was commissioned to demolish and rebuild the tower. In 1759 a new tower was erected, which still stands.5
An organ was installed between 1809 and 1811 by George Pike England for a cost of £672.523, but see the Addenda for the correct cost. Between 1868 and 1871 the local architects Paley and Austin restored the chancel, and added a new organ chamber and vestry. and in the same year the choir and clergy vestries were converted into a refectory.

Architecture

Exterior

The church is built in sandstone with roofs of slate and lead. Its plan consists of a west tower, a four-bay nave and a four-bay chancel with a clerestory under a continuous roof, a north and south aisles and a south porch. At the east end of the north aisle is St Nicholas' chapel and at the east end of the south aisle is St Thomas' chapel. To the north of the north aisle, occupying the west four bays, is the King's Own Regiment Memorial chapel and to the east of this is the refectory and kitchen. The tower is in four stages surmounted by corner pinnacles and an embattled parapet. In the first stage is a south doorway and above this in the second stage is a four-light window. The third stage has a round window above which is a clock face. The bell openings in the fourth stage have four lights. The parapets of the aisles and nave are embattled. The south porch has two storeys with a staircase turret to the east, and crocketed pinnacles. The east window has five lights and Perpendicular tracery.

Interior

The carved choirstalls are of oak and, dating from 1340, are the third oldest in England. Pevsner states that they are "about the most luxuriant canopies in the country". The seats have misericords, some of which have carvings. At the back of the stalls are modern embroidery panels. The three brass chandeliers are dated 1717. The stained glass in the east window was designed by Edward Paley and made by Wailes. The church plate includes four flagons, a chalice and two breadholders dated 1678–79, a small chalice presented in 1728 and a cup dated 1757.

Cynibald's cross

In 1807 a runic cross was found while digging in the churchyard. The cross is 3 feet in length, and 1 foot 9 inches across. The Anglo-Saxon Runic inscription translates to "Pray ye for Cynibald Cuthburuc".72-73.32 Following a meeting of the British Archaeological Association in Lancaster, the cross was moved to the British Museum in 1868.581 A replica of the cross is now on display near the south west door of the priory.

External features

In the churchyard is a sandstone sundial dating from the late 18th century which was restored in 1894 and which is listed at Grade II.

Present day

The church holds the usual services of an Anglican church,





Citations
Sources




