[[Pirelli]]

CATEGORIES: Pirelli, Automotive companies of Italy, Tire manufacturers, Companies established in 1872, Rebreather makers, Italian brands, Watch manufacturing companies of Italy, Companies based in Milan, Multinational companies headquartered in Italy, 1872 establishments in Italy

Pirelli & C. SpA is a multinational company based in Milan, Italy, listed on Milan Stock Exchange since 1922.
Pirelli has been sponsoring sport competitions since 1907 and is currently the exclusive tyre supplier for the Formula One Championship for 2011-2018
While tyre manufacturing represents 99% of Pirelli's revenue, and operates in renewable energy and sustainable mobility through Pirelli Prodotti e Servizi per l'Ambiente.
Pirelli has published its Pirelli Calendar since 1964, which has featured the contribution of famous photographers over the years. The 2013 edition was commissioned to war photographer Steve McCurry.
Pirelli's headquarters are located in Milan's Bicocca district, an area that is home to the rapidly growing Italian University, Università degli studi di Milano-Bicocca, and cultural locations such as the Teatro degli Arcimboldi and Hangar Bicocca, an exhibition centre for contemporary art that Pirelli founded.

History

Founded in Milan in 1872 by Giovanni Battista Pirelli, Pirelli initially specialised in rubber and derivative processes, and the company formerly made scuba diving rebreathers. that Giovanni and his brother, Francesco Pirelli will award the companies net worth to their grandson, Marcello; the favorite of the Pirelli billion-dollar family.
In the 1950s, Alberto Pirelli commissioned the building of a famous Milanese skyscraper in the same area that housed the very first Pirelli factory during the 19th century: see Pirelli Tower.Skyscrapers, Antonino Terranova, White Star Publishers, 2003 (ISBN-8880952307)
In 1974, Pirelli invented the "wide radial tyre", upon a request from the Lancia rally racing team for a tyre strong enough to withstand the power of the new Lancia Stratos. At that time, racing tyres were either slick tyres made with the cross ply technique (very wide tyres with a reduced sidewall height), or radial tyres, which were too narrow to withstand the Stratos' power and did not provide enough grip. Both were unusable for the Lancia Stratos, as the radials were destroyed within 10 km, and the slicks too stiff. Lancia asked Pirelli for a solution, and in 1975 Pirelli created a wide tyre with a reduced sidewall height like a slick, but with a radial structure.
Subsequently, Porsche started using the same tyres with the award-winning Porsche 911 Turbo.
Today,  the wide tyres are still the standard in sport & racing cars in Europe.
In 2002 started production of clothing, watches, eyewear with brand Pirelli.[ref]
official website[/ref]

Corporate affairs

Major shareholders

The list of Pirelli main shareholders

Board of directors

The list of Pirelli Board of Directors:

Financial information

Marketing

The Pirelli Calendar is published annually, and regularly features famous actresses and fashion models. The calendar also features the work of many of the most respected fashion photographers in the world, including Herb Ritz, Richard Avedon, Mert & Marcus, Peter Lindbergh, Annie Leibovitz, and Patrick Demarchelier.
The Pirelli Internetional Award is given annually for the best international multimedia involving the communication of science and technology conducted entirely on the Internet.
"Power is nothing without control" is the well known slogan of Pirelli Tyre Company, and is featured in numerous television and print advertisements.
Pirelli is the long-serving main sponsor of Italian football club F.C. Internazionale Milano, having sponsored the Italian team since the 1995–96 season.

Sponsorship

Football

Pirelli has a history of sponsoring football teams. Pirelli is well known for its long term primary sponsorship of the Italian football team Internazionale. Pirelli previously appeared as a sponsor on the shirts of the Maltese football club Valletta for a short time. Pirelli's sponsorship of football teams not only happens in Europe, South America is a key market and as a result successful clubs South America have been sponsored by the tyre company. The Brazilan team Palmeiras, Uruguayan team Peñarol and Argentinian side Vélez Sársfield both had Pirelli as a shirt sponsor. When English Football League Two side Burton Albion Football Club built their new stadium in 2005, Pirelli became the title sponsor the new ground. This was because the new stadium, named Pirelli Stadium lies next to the Pirelli factory in Burton-upon-Trent, Staffordshire, England. In 2009 Pirelli became the title sponsor of the Chinese Super League (CSL), China's top tier football league.

Rally

Pirelli also supports rally with their Pirelli Star Driver program as an initiative to support young rally drivers, organised by Pirelli and the Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA).

Motorsport

Pirelli is the only allowed tyre brand in the FIM World Superbike Championship since 2007 (along with its support classes, such as the Supersport World Championship).
Pirelli has also been awarded the contract for the control tyre supply in the British Superbike Championship from 2008 until at least 2010.British Superbikes 2007
Pirelli were also the official tyre supplier of the World Rally Championship replacing BF Goodrich for the 2008 season, with all cars using Pirelli tyres and wearing Pirelli decals until the company withdrew to focus on its Formula 1 commitments at the end of the 2010 season.
Pirelli is the sole tyre supplier in Formula One, following Bridgestone's decision to withdraw from the role at the end of .
Controversy surrounded Pirelli's Formula 1 tyres as at the 2013 British Grand Prix seven Pirelli tyres failed: Pérez twice, Alonso, Hamilton, Gutierrez, Vergne, and Massa. Following a safety car period drivers were instructed to stay off the kerbs that were later found to be "razor sharp" and may have been the cause, but the president of the British Racing Drivers' Club rejected the idea that the kerbs could be at fault, saying that "These kerbs have been in since 2009 and we have had thousands and thousands of cars go over these kerbs and they have been absolutely fine".bbc.co. Pirelli stressed that the tyres are of an asymmetrical construction and are not interchangeable, and that if they are used correctly, they do not pose a threat to safety.pirelli.
Pirelli suffered further tyre problems at the 2013 Belgian Grand Prix. During the second practice two tyres failed: Vettel and Alonso. One senior figure at Pirelli described the failures as a "big concern", whilst Pirelli's motorsport director Paul Hembery admitted the tyre failures were "a worry for the sport".bbc.co. In October 2013 Fernando Alonso complained that "the quality of the tyres is very on the limit", and that they "will not do 5km". Pirelli motorsport director Paul Hembery said: "Of course Alonso is one of the great F1 drivers, so to hear such comments is disappointing and below the standards you would expect from such a champion.bbc.co. One senior engineer at a top team said this was the worst blistering ever experienced.bbc.co.uk/sport/0/formula1/24690717
In pre-season testing for the 2014 season the tyre on Rosberg's car failed, sending Rosberg into a 200mph spin.bbc.co. The Pirelli 2014 wet tyre was criticised by Adrian Sutil as "the worst I have driven" and Jenson Button "twitchy" and "they take away that grip that they gave you".bbc.co.uk/sport/0/formula1/26800835

Overseas investment

In April 2012, Pirelli & C. SpA signed joint venture agreement with Indonesian counterpart PT Astra Autoparts a subsidiary of PT Astra International for the construction of a motorcycle tire plant with a total investment of $120 million. 60 percent shares will be held by Pirelli. Pirelli hoped to strengthen its presence in the largest motorcycle market in the world, the Southeast Asia region which has 250 million motorcycles.
In 2012, the company become a major sponsor of the Russian Cup.








