[[Nicolas Berggruen]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, American billionaires, American investors, American businesspeople, American people of German-Jewish descent, German people of Albanian descent, German people of Austrian descent, Giving Pledgers, Living people, New York University alumni, American people of Austrian descent, American people of Albanian descent

Nicolas Berggruen (born 10 August 1961) is a philanthropist and investor. A dual American and German citizen,Jeremy Kahn (October 25, 2011), Billionaire Living Out of Tote Bag Amasses Fortune to Give Away Bloomberg he is the founder and president of Berggruen Holdings, a private investment company and the Berggruen Institute on Governance, a think tank that works on addressing governance issues. Through the Berggruen Institute he is also a co-founder with the Huffington Post of The WorldPost, a media publication dedicated to global issues. The press has sometimes referred to Berggruen as "the homeless billionaire" because he lives in hotels and does not own a home.

Education and  Business Career

Berggruen was born in Paris, the son of art collector Heinz Berggruen,Businessweek: "Deep Thoughts With the Homeless Billionaire" By Devin Leonard September 27, 2012 and actress Bettina Moissi. His father was of German-Jewish descent and his mother a CatholicDer Spiegel: "Seinen Geist am Leben erhalten" by Ulrike Von Knöfel and Martin Doerry (in German) "Meine Mutter ist katholisch, mein Vater jüdisch" / My mother is Catholic, my father is Jewish of Austrian and Albanian descent. His maternal grandfather was Albanian-Austrian actor Aleksandër Moisiu and his maternal grandmother, Maria, was from Vienna. Berggruen attended the École Alsacienne in Paris and Le Rosey in Switzerland, before completing a baccalauréat in Paris as a candidat libre in 1978.Jori Finkel (March 18, 2012), Nicolas Berggruen explains why he intends to give art to LACMA Los Angeles Times. That same year, at the age of 17, he worked as a trainee at London Merchant Securities in London, known today as LMS Capital Plc. He subsequently obtained a Bachelor of Science in Finance and International Business from New York University in 1981. He later worked for the investment company Bass Brothers Enterprises, in its real estate group. Between 1983 and 1987, Berggruen was a Principal at Jacobson and Co.
In New York, he began building his fortune, based on a trust fund worth about $250,000, by buying real estate before moving on to stocks, bonds and a portfolio of private equity and venture funds as well as hedge funds. He founded Berggruen Holdings, Inc. in 1984 to act as investment adviser to a Berggruen family trust that has made over 50 direct investments in businesses since its inception. In 1988, he and Julio Mario Santo Domingo, Jr. co-founded Alpha Investment Management, a hedge fund that was reportedly sold to Safra Bank in 2004.

Political Interests

In 2010, Berggruen founded the Berggruen Institute on Governance, a think and action tank through which he aspires to develop and implement more effective systems of governance.sfgate.cgi?f=/c/a/2011/09/25/MNK21L6IF8.  Through the institute, he has launched several government reform projects including the 21st Century Council which is focused on global governance challenges, the Council for the Future of Europe, to support work on European integration and the Think Long Committee for California a bi-partisan effort focused on reforming California's system of governance.sacbee.html
The 21st Century Council was formed in 2011 to address gaps in global governance. The group, chaired by Ernesto Zedillo, includes political leaders such as Fernando Henrique Cardoso, Gerhard Schröder, Gordon Brown, George Yeo, Pascal Lamy, and Zheng Bijian. The council also includes several Nobel laureates and leading thinkers such as Joseph Stiglitz, Michael Spence, Lawrence Summers, and Francis Fukuyama as well as business and technology leaders Eric Schmidt, Jack Dorsey, and Pierre Omidyar among many others.NBI 21ST CENTURY COUNCIL MISSION STATEMENT
The Council for the Future of Europe, was formed in 2011. In a statement released by the group in September 2011, the group advocated for a stronger, more integrated Europe suggesting that Europe's economic crisis can only be solved by a political solution.org/files/press/future_of_europe_statement_090511.
His project in California, the Think Long Committee for California also includes members from politics, industry, and labor from both Democrats and Republicans, such as George Schultz, Condoleezza Rice, Willie Brown, Gray Davis, Eric Schmidt, Eli Broad and Laura Tyson.
He has in the past funded the campaigns of U.S. Democrats, including Senator Charles Schumer of New York and President Barack Obama.
Berggruen is a co-author (with Nathan Gardels) of a book on political governance: Intelligent Governance for the 21st Century: A Middle Way Between West and East, written with Nathan Gardels (Polity, 2012).com/ The Financial Times named it as one of their "Best Books of 2012."Financial Times: "Best books of 2012" December 3, 2012 In addition to English it has been translated into French, Spanish, Portuguese, German, Chinese, and is due to appear in Korean and Arabic. Berggruen is a dual United States and German citizen.Businessweek: "Deep Thoughts With the Homeless Billionaire" By Devin Leonard September 27, 2012

Institutional Affiliations

Berggruen is a member of the Council on Foreign Relations,  In 2013 he was appointed by Harvard's Center for European Studies as its first non-resident Senior Fellow, and was named a member of the Brookings International Advisory Council and the NYU President's Global Council. 

Arts

Berggruen is the head of the Board of the Berggruen Museum in Berlin, the Los Angeles County Museum (LACMA), the International Councils of the Tate Gallery in London, and the Museum of Modern Art in New York. He is  also a member of the Beyeler Foundation, the International Council of the Serpentine Gallery,
In close cooperation with LACMA he has been making acquisitions intended for the museum, including artworks by Ed Ruscha, John Baldessari, Paul McCarthy, Mike Kelley, Charles Ray, Chris Burden, Bruce Nauman, Joseph Beuys, Gerhard Richter, Sigmar Polke, Martin Kippenberger, and Thomas Schütte.
Berggruen is interested in architecture and has collaborated on development projects with Richard Meier, Shigeru Ban, and David Adjaye.

Philanthropy

Berggruen has committed to give the majority of his wealth through the Nicolas Berggruen Charitable Trust






