[[Goblini]]

CATEGORIES: Serbian punk rock groups, Serbian alternative rock groups, Musical groups from Šabac, Musical groups established in 1992, Musical groups disestablished in 2001, Musical groups reestablished in 2010

Goblini (Serbian Cyrillic: Гоблини; trans. The Goblins) are a Serbian punk rock band from Šabac.

History

Formation, rise to prominence (1992–1999)

Guitarist Alen Jovanović and Vladislav Kokotović "Vlada", who lived in Karlovac, played in the band Lorelei until 1991 when they disbanded. Having played with numerous bands from Zagreb, the two moved to Šabac, and in March 1992, with the vocalist Branko Golubović, formed Goblini. The band changed several drummers until Nenad Divnić came to the band. The lineup recorded the first album Goblini (The Goblins), released on compact cassette only, and released in small printing in April 1994. The A-side of the cassette included songs from the Lorelei period and the B-side featured new material.
A few months later Divnić went to the army and was replaced by Nedeljko Nedić "Meketa" with whom the band recorded the second album Istinite priče I deo (True Stories Part I), also released on cassette only. The album featured "Ciponjka", "eLeSDi se vraca kući" ("LSD Is Returning Home") and "Za Lorenu" ("For Loreena") and five rerecorded tracks from the first album. Divnić recorded drum sections for a part of the material. Later that year, the band was joined by Džukele guitarist Leonid Pilipović, also known as Leo fon Punkerstein, since his band took a work-break, as the band members went to serve the army. In May 1995, Nedić left for Cyprus and was replaced by Zoran Jević "Fric".
During the same year, the band released their first live album, KST Live 31.08.'95, a live cassette of their performance at the Belgrade KST on August 31, 1995. Among the songs, the band played cover versions of KUD Idijoti songs "Pisma o ribaru Marinu, Mari i moru" ("Song about the Fisherman Marin, Mara and the Sea") and "Minijatura" ("A Miniature"), Ramones songs "Sheena Is a Punk Rocker" and "Commando" and a version of The Clash cover of "I Fought the Law", with lyrics in Serbian language entitled "Ne mogu više" ("I Cannot Bear It"), which were regularly performed on concerts. "Ne mogu više" was dedicated to the president Slobodan Milošević and the last part of the song featured the chorus of the Talking Heads's track "Road to Nowhere". The band also played Boris Novković's song "Tamara" since Jovanović was for a time a part of Novković's backing band, and the cover of Demolition 23 track "Same Shit, Different Day", featuring Pilipović on lead vocals.
With the producer Aca Radosavljević the band recorded the CD U magnovenju (In the Flash) and during the promotional tour for the album Plipović returned to Džukele, being replaced by Saša Šetka. The album featured "On je ona je" ("It Is Him It Is Her"), "Ima nas!" ("There is a Lot of Us"), "Petra", "Vođa" ("The Leader") and a cover of Videosex song "Kako bih volio da si tu" ("How I Wish You Were Here"), renamed "Anja, volim te" ("Anja, I Love You"), dedicated to the Videosex vocalist Anja Rupel. During May 1996, with the bands Svarog, Love Hunters and Ništa Ali Logopedi, Goblini went on a Slovenian tour. In June, they got the call to perform at the Zgaga Rock festival at the place Hotič pri Litiji near Ljubljana, after which they toured Slovenia again during Autumn 1996. 
Live versions of their three songs were included on a various artists compilation Paket Aranžman - Svi protiv svih (Package Deal - Everybody Against Everyone) recorded at the Belgrade KST performance held to celebrate the fifth birthday of the TV Politika show Paket Aranžman. On June 1997, the band toured Slovenia and performed at the second Zgaga Rock festival with a new drummer, Vladimir Cinkocki "Cina", a former Generacija Bez Budućnosti and Obojeni Program member. The band's live recordings were also included on a double live various artists compilation No Border Jam 4 & 5 released in 1997, featuring "Ona misli da zna" ("She Thinks that She Knows"), "U magnovenju" and "eLeSDi se vraca kuci" recorded at Ilirska Bistrica performance in 1996. On August 1997, the band performed as an opening act for Motörhead in Budapest. 
In 1998, twenty recordings from thirteen cities made in Serbia and Slovenia from 1996 and 1997 were released on a double CD Turneja u magnovenju 96/97 (In the Flash Tour 96/97). Beside the live recordings, the first CD featured a new studio track "Punk's Not Dead". The second CD was a reissued version of Istinite priče I deo, featuring a five-track bonus material released on the first studio album. On November of the same year, Cinklocki left the band when they were about to enter the studio to record the fourth studio album. The album Re Contra was finished on the day 1999 NATO bombing of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia started, which was the reason why the album was not released until December 1999. In the meantime, the band went on a nine-date Italian tour including Milan, Rome, Bologna and Turin.

Breakup and post-breakup (2000–2009)

From January 2000 until the Spring of 2001, the band toured Serbia. After the tour, the band took a break and started preparing their next album, but the economic situation in the country lead Branko Golubović, Alen Jovanović, Saša Šetka, Vlada Kokotović and drummer Milan Arnautović to perform their last concert at the Zagreb club Močvara on June 7, 2001, before parting their ways.
In 2003, Alen Jovanović formed the band Starfuckers featuring members from Plexus, Midgard and CBS. 
In 2004, Multimedia Records released Najbolje priče (The Best Stories) a greatest hits compilation featuring live versions of songs performed at the band's peak. The compilation also featured the recording of "Pričaš" ("You Are Talking"), an unreleased track recorded in 1997. Promotional videos for the "Pričaš" and "Voz" ("Train") were also included on the release.
In 2006, Živko Ivković from Šabac released a book called Od Čivija do Goblina (From The Machine Heads to The Goblins) with a subtitle "Illustrated Rock History of Šabac 1963-1999-2006", featuring the band's biography and a CD compilation featuring the band's song "Daleki put". and Težina Okova.
In 2009 Golubović released a book of his Afghanistan memoirs Pisma iz Avganistana (Letters from Afghanistan). During the same year, Multimedia Records released a various artists compilation Groovanje devedesete uživo featuring a live version of "Cipjonka" recorded at the Belgrade club Prostor on November 11, 1995.

Reformation (2010–present)

On June 21, 2010, the band announced the reunion of the lineup which nine years before had performed the last concert,
The band held their comeback concert at the Šabac Summer Festival on August 13, 2010. The performance featured a song selection spanning the whole career. During the performance of the song "Daleki put", a visitor had thrown a rock to the stage, hitting Golubović in the face and causing him minor injuries.
In November 2010, the single "Luna" appeared on the sixth place of the Jelen Top 10 list
In 2011, the band held a fifteen date tour (including performances at the Belgrade Beer Fest, Vila! La Pola Fest in Pula and Koncert godine in Novi Sad)Goblini official website and released the single "U odbrani zla" ("In Defense of Evil"), featuring guest appearances by Grate and Plug'n'play member Goran Beg, Grate member Dragan Alimpijević "Pik" and Pero Defformero member Goran Biševac "Biške" on backing vocals, available for free digital download at the Nocturne magazine official website."Goblini: novi koncerti i pesma", balkanrock."Leo fon Punkerstein ponovo sa Goblinima", nocturnemagazine."Prodigy spektakl pred 20.000 ljudi", b9.net
In November 2013, the band released their comeback album, entitled Roba s greškom (Faulty Merchandise), through Long Play. The album features 13 songs."Goblini, Roba s greškom (Long Play, 2013.)", zlihadzo."Goblini trailerom najavili novi spot i povratnički album" On March 8, 2014, the band held a concert in Belgrade's Hala sportova, as a part of Roba s greškom promotional tour. The concert featured numerous guests: Partibrejkers vocalist Zoran Kostić "Cane" and guiatrist Nebojša Antonijević "Anton", Atheist Rap vocalist Aleksandar Popov "Dr Pop" and guitarist Vladimir Radusinović "Radule" and the brass section consisting of Eyesburn member Nemanja Kojić "Kojot", Deca Loših Muzičara momber Borislav Veličković and Eyesburn and Plejboj member Dušan Petrović.03. 2014., "zlihadzo.com"

Discography






