[[Cox's theorem]]

CATEGORIES: Probability theorems, Probability interpretations, Statistical theorems

Cox's theorem, named after the physicist Richard Threlkeld Cox, is a derivation of the laws of probability theory from a certain set of postulates. This derivation justifies the so-called "logical" interpretation of probability. As the laws of probability derived by Cox's theorem are applicable to any proposition, logical probability is a type of Bayesian probability. Other forms of Bayesianism, such as the subjective interpretation, are given other justifications.

Cox's assumptions

Cox wanted his system to satisfy the following conditions:
The postulates as stated here are taken from Arnborg and Sjödin.nada.se/pub/documents/Theory/Stefan-Arnborg/06arnborg.nada.se/pub/documents/Theory/Stefan-Arnborg/06arnborg.nada.se/pub/documents/Theory/Stefan-Arnborg/fobshle.nada.se/pub/documents/Theory/Stefan-Arnborg/fobshle.nada.se/pub/documents/Theory/Stefan-Arnborg/fobc1.nada.se/pub/documents/Theory/Stefan-Arnborg/fobc1.pdf
"Common sense" includes consistency with Aristotelian logic when
statements are completely plausible or implausible.
The postulates as originally stated by Cox were not mathematically
rigorous (although better than the informal description above), e.g.,
as noted by Halpern. Halpern, "A counterexample to theorems of Cox and Fine," Journal of AI research, 10, 67–85 (1999) —  Halpern, "Technical Addendum, Cox's theorem Revisited," Journal of AI research, 11, 429–435 (1999) —   However it appears to be possible
to augment them with various mathematical assumptions made either
implicitly or explicitly by Cox to produce a valid proof.
Cox's axioms and functional equations are:
Cox's theorem implies that any plausibility model that meets the
postulates is equivalent to the subjective probability model, i.e.,
can be converted to the probability model by rescaling.

Implications of Cox's postulates

The laws of probability derivable from these postulates are the following. —  preprint version (1996) at 
[/ref] Here w(A|B) is the "plausibility" of the proposition A given B, and m is some positive number. Further, AC represents the absolute complement of A.
It is important to note that the postulates imply only these general properties. These are equivalent to the usual laws of probability assuming some conventions, namely that the scale of measurement is from zero to one, and the plausibility function, conventionally denoted P or Pr, is equal to wm. (We could have equivalently chosen to measure probabilities from one to infinity, with infinity representing certain falsehood.) With these conventions, we obtain the laws of probability in a more familiar form:
Rule 2 is a rule for negation, and rule 3 is a rule for conjunction. Given that any proposition containing conjunction, disjunction, and negation can be equivalently rephrased using conjunction and negation alone (the conjunctive normal form), we can now handle any compound proposition.
The laws thus derived yield finite additivity of probability, but not countable additivity. The measure-theoretic formulation of Kolmogorov assumes that a probability measure is countably additive. This slightly stronger condition is necessary for the proof of certain theorems.

Interpretation and further discussion

Cox's theorem has come to be used as one of the justifications for the
use of Bayesian probability theory.  For example, in Jaynes it is
discussed in detail in chapters 1 and 2 and is a cornerstone for the
rest of the book.  Probability is interpreted as a formal system of
logic, the natural extension of Aristotelian logic (in which every
statement is either true or false) into the realm of reasoning in the
presence of uncertainty.
It has been debated to what degree the theorem excludes alternative models for reasoning about uncertainty.  For example, if certain "unintuitive" mathematical assumptions were dropped then alternatives could be devised, e.g., an example provided by Halpern. However Arnborg and Sjödin suggest additional
"common sense" postulates, which would allow the assumptions to be relaxed in some cases while still ruling out the Halpern example. Other approaches were devised by Hardy Michael Hardy, "Scaled Boolean algebras", Advances in Applied Mathematics, August 2002, pages 243–292 (or  preprint); Hardy has said, "I assert there that I think Cox's assumptions are too strong, although I don't really say why. I do say what I would replace them with." (The quote is from a Wikipedia discussion page, not from the article.) or Dupré and Tipler., Tipler, Frank T. New Axioms For Bayesian Probability, Bayesian Analysis (2009), Number 3, pp. 599-606
The original formulation of Cox's theorem is in 






