[[Canadian raising]]

CATEGORIES: Canadian English, English phonology, Languages of Canada

Canadian raising refers to either of two similar sound changes that occur in a number of North American varieties of the English language, in which certain diphthongs are "raised" before voiceless consonants (e.g., , and results in differing pronunciations of the first vowel in the words rider and writer.
The raised variant of .
Those speakers with either variant will pronounce the words rider and writer as , respectively).
This phenomenon preserves the recoverability of the phoneme  before unstressed vowels.

Geographic distribution

Despite its name, the phenomenon is not restricted to Canada. "Classic" Canadian raising, affecting both the  or vice versa.

Varieties

For many speakers, in "spider" does not, and for these speakers "rider" does not rhyme with "spider".  Similarly, "pilot" gets raised because 'l' is non-final, but the 'l' in "pile it" stops the raising—although in such circumstances (before resonant consonants, it seems), the raising may be optional for some speakers. There are many other dialect-specific complexities: For example, even the speakers just described, for whom "rider" and "spider" do not rhyme, may differ on whether raising applies in "hydrogen", although unquestionably it does apply to "nitrogen".
Canadian raising can also apply across word boundaries in idiomatic expressions.  Hence, high school  with the literal meaning "a school that is high (e.g. in elevation)" is unaffected. (The two terms are also distinguished by the position of the stress accent, as shown).

Possible origins

Some, whereas Canadian raising is not limited in this fashion; thus, it may represent a sort of merging of the Scots Vowel Length Rule with the general English rule lengthening vowels before voiced consonants of any sort.
The most common understanding of the Great Vowel Shift is that the Middle English vowels . Given its prevalence in areas of North America first settled by native English speakers, it is possible this is not an innovation of "raising" from an underlying vowel quality to another in the least, but, rather, of the preservation of an older vowel quality in a restricted environment.

Bibliography






