[[Nero Wolfe (1981 TV series)]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 American television series debuts, 1981 American television series endings, American crime television series, English-language television programming, NBC network shows, Nero Wolfe, 1980s American television series, Television programs based on novels, Television series by CBS Paramount Television

Nero Wolfe is a television series based on the characters in Rex Stout's classic series of detective stories that aired January 16 – August 25, 1981, on NBC. New York: Ballantine Books, 1988 (fourth edition), ISBN 0-345-35610-1 p. 557 William Conrad fills the role of the detective genius Nero Wolfe, and Lee Horsley is his assistant Archie Goodwin. Produced by Paramount Television, the series updates the world of Nero Wolfe to contemporary New York City and draws few of its stories from the Stout originals.

Plot

Nero Wolfe (William Conrad) enjoys a life of refined self-indulgence in his comfortable Manhattan brownstone — reading, dining, spending regular hours in his rooftop plant rooms, and only reluctantly involving himself in the detection of crime. Famously sedentary, Wolfe relies on his legman Archie Goodwin (Lee Horsley) to collect the clues and the suspects in any case at hand, while he spars with his live-in chef Fritz Brenner (George Voskovec) and bickers with his resident orchid nurse Theodore Horstmann (Robert Coote, in his final role). Often assisted by freelance detective Saul Panzer (George Wyner), Wolfe and Archie customarily gather the suspects in Wolfe's office and present the solution to the exasperated Inspector Cramer (Allan Miller) of Manhattan Homicide.

Production

In March 1980, Nero Wolfe was one of half-a-dozen new series being considered by the team of Brandon Tartikoff and Fred Silverman at NBC, according to Peter Boyer of the Associated Press. "The idea has been tried unsuccessfully on TV before, most recently by ABC," Boyer reported. "But NBC has an angle going that will certainly make this Nero Wolfe worthy of notice — the distinct possibility that Orson Welles will play the lead role."Boyer, Peter J., "NBC Fall Schedule," Associated Press, March 24, 1980 The pilot episode was to be written by Leon Tokatyan (Lou Grant). Deeb also reported, "William Conrad probably will return to weekly TV in an NBC series called 'Battles'. He'll play a retired police chief who teaches criminology at a college."
When filming the TV series was under way later that year, columnist Marilyn Beck wrote that Nero Wolfe had been planned as a starring vehicle for Welles until he decided that he wanted NBC to change the concept from a one-hour weekly series to a series of 90-minute specials, and that he wanted his scenes filmed at his Los Angeles home.Bawden, Jim, "Fiddling with Nero," Toronto Star, April 14, 2002. In September 2010 Bawden named his then-unidentified source, Anne Baxter, whom he had previously interviewed on the set of Nero Wolfe for an October 1977 Films in Review profile of the actress. Other reports had it that Welles had refused to work with Paramount's producers, who wanted to "make Nero Wolfe more human."The Nero Wolfe Files (Wildside Press 2005, edited by Marvin Kaye), transcript of a 2001 address by Michael Jaffe, executive producer of A Nero Wolfe Mystery, ISBN 0-8095-4494-6 pp. 87–88 Welles and Paramount had already had creative differences over the Rex Stout adaptations; Paramount had purchased the entire set of Nero Wolfe stories for Welles in 1976, but in 1977 Welles had bowed out of Paramount's first effort to bring Nero Wolfe to television, in an ABC-TV movie., I Wake Up Screening. Carbondale, Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press, 1993, ISBN 0-8093-1856-3  p. 147. Orson Welles was a great fan of the Stout books; in 1967 Rex Stout told author Dick Lochte that Welles had once wanted to make a series of Nero Wolfe movies, and Stout had turned him down.
On June 30, 1980, the Associated Press reported that William Conrad would play the title role in NBC's Nero Wolfe.
"I've loved the novels for 25 years," Conrad said. "And I love his life-style. I don't have to run any more. My poor feet are still aching from all the running I had to do in Cannon."Kahana, Yoram, "The Wolfe Man in His Lair." The Australian Women's Weekly, January 29, 1982, pp. 95–96. Retrieved from the National Library of Australia, March 27, 2011
In December 1980 NBC announced that Nero Wolfe would being airing in January 1981, as "an ideal alternative to the competition in this time period" — The Dukes of Hazzard. Gerald, "NBC will introduce 5 programs next month," The New York Times, December 27, 1980 The Dukes of Hazzard was then ranked #2 in the Nielsen ratings.Classic TV Hits TV ratings 1980; retrieved October 2, 2011
"American Nero Wolfe fans had their dreams come true in 1981, when the NBC network allowed viewers on a weekly, prime time visit to the infamous New York brownstone on West 35th Street," wrote Brian Sheridan in the Spring 2008 issue of The Gazette: The Journal of the Wolfe Pack. Sheridan interviewed Lee Horsley, who found his first major role when he was cast as Archie Goodwin. Horsley recalled an enjoyable relationship with William Conrad, whose off-screen demeanor was a perfect fit for the character. "He was definitely Nero Wolfe down to the toes," Horsley said.
Horsley spoke of his love for Rex Stout's books and characters, and credited the care taken with the production's art direction, set design and wardrobe in creating the atmosphere of the stories. "It was so great to go into work," he said. 29–33
The sets for Nero Wolfe were designed by John Beckman, whose  credits include Casablanca, Lost Horizon and The Maltese Falcon."John Beckman Is Dead; Designer of Sets Was 91"; The New York Times, October 31, 1989  The plant rooms were stocked by Zuma Canyon Orchids of Malibu, California, which on the eve of the series registered the hybrid Phalaenopsis Nero Wolfe with the Royal Horticultural Society.Phalaenopsis Nero Wolfe was registered January 11, 1981

Cast

Guest stars included Richard Anderson, Ramon Bieri, Delta Burke, Linden Chiles, Charles Cioffi, Patti Davis, John de Lancie, John Ericson, Mary Frann, David Hedison, Katherine Justice, Robert Loggia, Darren McGavin, Barry Nelson, John Randolph, Russ Tamblyn and Lana Wood.

Episodes

Although the series was titled Rex Stout's Nero Wolfe, the scripts departed considerably from the Stout originals. Only seven of the 14 episodes are credited as being based upon Stout stories. All episodes were set in contemporary New York City. "Booby Trap" is credited as the basis of "Gambit," but the episode has no discernible relationship to the story. The episode "Death on the Doorstep" incorporates plot elements from The Doorbell Rang, although the novel is not specifically cited as a source.

Broadcast history

First telecast January 16, 1981, Nero Wolfe aired Fridays from 9 to 10 p.m. ET — as NBC's challenge to the hit CBS show, The Dukes of Hazzard. In April 1981 Nero Wolfe was moved to Tuesdays from 10 to 11 p.m. ET,Brooks, Tim, and Earle Marsh, The Directory to Prime Time Network TV Shows 1946–Present. New York: Ballantine Books, 1988 (fourth edition), ISBN 0-345-35610-1 p. 557 where it continued to air until August 25, 1981.
Nero Wolfe was victim to an NBC programming strategy that was changed not long after the series left the air. Brandon Tartikoff was named president of the network's entertainment division in 1981, and he began to turn around the fortunes of the last-place network. "In the past, a series thought to have 'breakout' potential has been scheduled in a depressed timeslot," Tartikoff told the Associated Press in December 1981. "So Gangster Chronicles was played off against Love Boat, Nero Wolfe against Dukes of Hazzard, Hill Street Blues against Fantasy Island." Tartikoff implemented a new approach — programming to strengthen an entire evening's primetime schedule rather than challenging another network's hit show.Jory, Tom, "'Fame' and the Future at NBC," Associated Press, December 10, 1981
In April 1996, when the TV Land network made its debut, Nero Wolfe was featured in its "Saturday Cavalcade" lineup of great detectives."Nick-at-Nite's TV Land joins U.S. Satellite Broadcasting Lineup"; Business Wire, April 30, 1996 In 1999 the series was part of an afternoon block of TV Land's counterprogramming to network soap operas, and it also aired in the wee hours of the morning.Dempsey, John, "It's Boom(er) Time for TV Land"; Variety, March 8–14, 1999
Nero Wolfe has not received an official release for home video; the rights are held by Paramount Home Entertainment.TV Shows on DVD

Awards and nominations

Reviews and commentary






