[[Lilia Luciano]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, People from San Juan, Puerto Rico, People from Santurce, Puerto Rico, Puerto Rican television journalists, Puerto Rican television personalities, American television talk show hosts, Tufts University alumni, University of Miami alumni, 1984 births

 
Lilia Luciano was a television journalist and was a national news correspondent for NBC News's The Today Show, Nightly News with Brian Williams and MSNBC. She is a TEDx speaker 
On May 2, 2012 it was announced that Luciano was no longer with NBC News, after it was found that the audio portion of the Trayvon Martin 9-1-1 call was edited in a manner that did not reflect the nature of the conversation and had the appearance of George Zimmerman making an unprompted statement that Martin was black instead as his direct answer to the 911 dispatcher's questions. NBC subsequently dismissed several employees. 

Education

Born in San Juan, Puerto Rico, Luciano attended Tufts University in Massachusetts to study pre-medicine. In 2003, she transferred to the University of Miami, where she graduated in 2007 with a bachelor's degree in economics and broadcast journalism.

Early years

While at the University of Miami, Luciano interned with Telemundo where she produced and anchored a finance and economics segment for Telemundo Internacional. After graduating from The University of Miami, Luciano was hired by Univision Networks as correspondent and co-anchor for evening newscast En Vivo y Directo.

Television

Luciano joined NBC News in December 2010 from Univision network where she served as co-host of a live daily program and as a correspondent for the top-rated show 'Aquí y Ahora'.
Previously, she was a co-host from 2006 to 2010 at Escandalo TV (Scandal TV), a spicy Spanish gossip show at TeleFutura Network.

Major assignments

Hurricane Irene

Casey Anthony trial

Joran Van der Sloot trial

University of Virginia lacrosse murder trial

Trayvon Martin shooting

Dismissal

On 2 May 2012, it was reported that Luciano was no longer with NBC News. It was initially unclear if she was dismissed or resigned, but it was reported later she was fired.
All of Luciano's reports on the Trayvon Martin story which contained the misleading edit were removed from the Today website.
NBC News president Steve Capus told Reuters that the edit, made by a Miami-based producer, was "a mistake and not a deliberate act to misrepresent the phone call." The network claimed that it was done in order to meet a maximum time requirement for the piece, a common pressure in morning television. The producer was subsequently fired and NBC News apologized for the error stating it was an "editing error in the production process."
On December 6, 2012, Luciano was named as a defendant in a defamation lawsuit filed against NBC by George Zimmerman with regard to the selective editing of Zimmerman's 911 call.

Non-profit work

In 2009, she founded a non-profit organization and media campaign called "aprende más!", which seeks to promote education and the importance of reading among children in Ibero-American countries. Luciano also hosts a video blog "Una Voz", which tackles current events and issues affecting Hispanics today. Lilia is also the executive editor of "Opina Magazine", an annual online publication that promotes the arts.
In 2010 she served as spokesperson to the Univision and Bill Gates Foundation's Education Campaign, "Es El Momento", as well as a supporter and collaborator with St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, and Walk Now for Autism.

Documentaries

Luciano has produced, directed and narrated two short documentary films: "Nueva Orleans," which focuses on the efforts of the Hispanic community in rebuilding the city of New Orleans, and "Pikininis," a story about the challenges of a South African woman aiding orphans in Johannesburg.

Other facts

Luciano is a member of the National Association of Hispanic Journalists
In 2010, Cosmopolitan Magazine featured Luciano on their November 2010 Cover. 
In 2009, People en Español selected Luciano in their 50 Most Beautiful people issue.







