[[Pune F.C.]]

CATEGORIES: Pune F.C., Football clubs in India, Association football clubs established in 2007, I-League clubs, Sport in Pune

Pune Football Club is an Indian professional football club based in Pune, Maharashtra. The club participates in the I-League, India's top-tier football league. The club is one of the most professional clubs in Indian football history, known mainly for there focus on fanfare, professional playing set-up, and focus on youth development.
Founded in 2007, the club managed to gain promotion to the I-League in 2009. before having their best ever season during the 2012–13 season in which they finished in second place.
Pune currently has a rivalry with fellow Maharashtra club Mumbai, with whom it contests the Maha derby.

History

Foundation

In 2007, Indian football was in the process of a renovation, mainly with the start of the I-League replacing the old National Football League.
Ashok Piramal Group, a company based in Maharashtra, however did the opposite. Despite the city of Pune not having much history when it comes to football or much support for the sport, which is overshadowed by cricket, Ashok Piramal Group still created Pune Football Club in 2007. In creating the club they created one of the first clubs in India named after the city they were playing in and representing.

I-League 2nd Division (2008–2009)

In preparation for their first ever season in the I-League 2nd Division, the club signed mainly a bunch of unknown players and also signed on Stewart Hall as the first head coach of the club. The club finished in third place in Group A and thus failed to advance further that campaign.
The club then participated the next year in the 2009 I-League 2nd Division where there were now four promotion spots up for grabs instead of the usual two as the I-League was going to expand. Before the season began the club re-hired former coach Stewart Hall to coach the club.

Early I-League and Derrick Pereira Era (2009–2013)

Pune Football Club's first season in the I-League was the 2009–10 season. Pune selected the Balewadi Sports Complex in Balewadi, a suburb of Pune, as their home stadium.
Pune played their first I-League match against East Bengal, which was also their first home match in the I-League, on 3 October 2009 in which the final score was 0–0. At the end of the season Pune finished in third place which was called a success by the club due to their weak start in the league.
The summer of 2011 would be an important time for Pune. On 23 June 2011 it was announced that Pune would start the Pune F.C. Academy team which would make Pune the first team in I-League with an academy team.
The club then finished the 2012–13 season with their best finish yet in the I-League by finishing in 2nd place, just behind Churchill Brothers S.C. for the I-League crown.

Mike Snoei Era (2013–)

After the 2012–13 season finished it was announced that coach Derrick Pereira had resigned as Pune FC coach to return to his former club Salgaocar. The club also signed current Equatorial Guinea international, Raúl Fabiani, who also played for his adopted country in the 2012 Africa Cup of Nations.
The first tournament the club took part in was the 2013 Durand Cup in which the club sent a mix of players from the first-team and the Pune F.C. Academy with the three senior players being Caitano Costa, Shahinlal Meloly, and Prakash Thorat.
Then, on 29 January 2014, Pune played their first ever international club match when they took on Vietnamese side Hanoi T&T in the 2014 AFC Champions League qualifier first round at the Balewadi Sports Complex. The club however suffered a 3–0 defeat in that match, meaning that they would have to play in the 2014 AFC Cup that season.

Stadium

Since Pune made their debut in the I-League they have always played at the Balewadi Sports Complex which is located in Balewadi, a suburb of Pune.
The club also trains on the outskirts of Pune in an area called Mamurdi on their own training ground.

Ownership

The club is currently owned overall by the Ashok Piramal Group.

Players

First-team squad



Out on loan

 

Notable former players

This list of former players includes those who received international caps while playing for the team, made significant contributions to the team in terms of appearances or goals while playing for the team, or who made significant contributions to the sport either before they played for the team, or after they left. It is clearly not yet complete and all inclusive, and additions and refinements will continue to be made over time.

Current technical staff

Coaches history

Record



Footnotes




