[[David H. Adams]]

CATEGORIES: American surgeons, Living people, Duke University alumni, Harvard Medical School alumni, Cardiac surgeons, Mount Sinai School of Medicine faculty


David H. Adams is an American cardiac surgeon and the Marie-Josée and Henry R. Kravis Professor and Chairman of the Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery at Mount Sinai Medical Center.Profile", Mount Sinai Hospital retrieved March 13, 2013
Dr. Adams is a recognized leader in the field of heart valve surgery and mitral valve reconstruction. As Program Director of the Mount Sinai Mitral Valve Repair Center, he has set national benchmarks with >99% degenerative mitral valve repair rates,near 100% repair rate for mitral valve prolapse is achievable in a reference center: implications for future guidelines", PubMed retrieved March 19, 2013 while running one of the largest valve repair programs in the United States.
Dr. Adams is the co-inventor of 2 mitral valve annuloplasty repair rings (the Carpentier-McCarthy-Adams IMR ETlogix RingLifesciences", Edwards Lifesciences retrieved March 13, 2013 and the Carpentier-Edwards Physio II Annuloplasty Ring,Lifesciences", Edwards Lifesciences retrieved March 13, 2013 and is a senior consultant with royalty agreements with Edwards Lifesciences. He is also the inventor of the Tri-Ad Adams Tricuspid Annuloplasty ring with a royalty agreement with Medtronic.Reconstructive Valve Surgery", Elsevier Health retrieved March 13, 2013 He is also the National Co-Principal Investigator of the upcoming FDA pivotal trial of the Medtronic-CoreValve transcatheter aortic valve replacement device.FDA Trial retrieved March 13, 2013

Biography

Adams is a cardiac surgeon at the Mount Sinai Hospital, specializing in mitral valve repair. He is the author of over 200 publications,"PubMed" retrieved March 13, 2013 holds three patents(Patent number 7.959.673, 6.660.265 and 6.540.781) and is recognized as a leading surgeon scientist and medical expert, serving on the Editorial Boards of several medical journals, including the Annals of Thoracic Surgery and Cardiology.
Adams is a much sought after speaker both nationally and internationally,Events", Mitral Valve Repair Reference Center retrieved March 13, 2013 and has developed one of the world's largest video libraries of techniques in valve reconstruction.Conclave", AATS retrieved March 13, 2013
He received his undergraduate and medical education at Duke University and completed his internship and residency in general and cardiothoracic surgery at Brigham and Women's Hospital and at Harvard Medical School. Adams followed that with a fellowship in the Cardiothoracic Unit at Harefield Hospital in London under Professor Sir Magdi Yacoub. In addition, he completed a two-year research fellowship under Professor Morris Karnovsky in the Department of Pathology at Harvard Medical School. He later served at Brigham and Women's Hospital as the Associate Chief of Cardiac Surgery and Director of the Brigham Primate Xeno-transplant Laboratory. He has been Chairman of the Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery at Mount Sinai Hospital since 2002.H. Adams CV", Mount Sinai

Scientific investigator

Adams' clinical interests include all aspects of heart valve surgery, with a special emphasis on mitral valve reconstruction.

Areas of research

Adams' major research interests include:of David Adams", Mitral Valve Repair Reference Center retrieved March 13, 2013
Past research honors include the Alton Ochsner Research Scholarship from the American Association for Thoracic Surgery and the Paul Dudley White Research Fellowship from the American Heart Association. He has also received honorary Professorships from Capital University in Beijing and Keio University in Tokyo.

Partial publications list

Inventor

Medical miracle

In 2005 New York Magazine featured Adams as having performed  "Medical Miracle #7" when, in 2004, he performed mitral valve surgery on actress Liana Pai, who was then six months pregnant with her first child.
Immediate surgery was required to address Pai's aggressive bacterial infection. A conventional surgical procedurethereby eliminating the need for pregnancy-prohibiting anti-clotting drugs post-surgery.
"I was glad to be alive, of course, but until my baby was born, I wouldn't believe everything was okay... Ima came out perfect and healthy. She's healthy, headstrong, independent. Adams saved two lives at once."

Awards and honors






