[[Thomas Broich]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 births, German footballers, Germany B international footballers, Germany under-21 international footballers, German expatriate footballers, SV Wacker Burghausen players, SpVgg Unterhaching players, Borussia Mönchengladbach players, 1. FC Köln players, 1. FC Nürnberg players, Bundesliga players, 2. Bundesliga players, A-League players, Brisbane Roar FC players, Expatriate soccer players in Australia, Footballers from Bavaria, German expatriates in Australia, Sportspeople from Munich, Living people

Thomas Broich (born 29 January 1981) is a German football player who plays for Brisbane Roar in the A-League as an attacking midfielder. A documentary film about Broich titled Tom Meets Zizou was released to German cinemas in 2011, after eight years in the making.

Club career

Germany

Broich played in several Bavarian youth teams such as ASV Rott am Inn, TSV 1860 Rosenheim and SpVgg Unterhaching. Later he played for the U23 team of Unterhaching and could have earned promotion to the Regionalliga Süd (Then Germany's 3rd league), but the manager did not include him in the first squad so he decided to leave. He signed a contract with SV Wacker Burghausen of the Regionalliga Süd and earned promotion to the 2. Bundesliga in 2002. During this time, he gained the reputation of a "thinking-man's player", being dubbed "Mozart" by his teammates, who often spotted him reading classic German literature and listening to classical music. With Burghausen, he became a standout midfielder and caught the eye of several top Bundesliga teams, including FC Bayern Munich.
In January 2004, he decided to sign with Borussia Mönchengladbach in the Bundesliga. Alongside Bastian Schweinsteiger and Lukas Podolski, Broich was considered to be the "bearer of hope" for the German national team and many media sources predicted that he would be a future player for the national team. However, he injured his foot in May 2004 and was unable to participate in the 2004 UEFA European Under-21 Football Championship with the German team. During his injury, he struggled with the pressure to represent his country, drawing comparisons between himself and Sebastian Deisler, another German national team player who in 2003 suffered depression as a result of enormous national pressure, eventually retiring from football.Tom Meets Zizou
At the start of the 2004–05 season, Mönchengladbach fired manager Holger Fach and hired Dutch coach Dick Advocaat. Broich became a fan favorite and his jersey surged to the top-sold in the club's fan shop. However, Broich clashed on and off the field with his new manager, Advokaat criticising "Mozart's" lack of physicality and free-spirited style, even going as far to sending him down to play with the club's second team. Despite this tough period in the Bundesliga, Broich was called up to participate in the preliminary team for the 2006 World Cup, and after a standout match against Scotland, caught the attention of the national media, including future national team coach Jogi Löw. Advocaat was eventually fired, and Broich, under new trainer Horst Köppel, returned to the starting rotation, playing a large role in helping the team avoid relegation.
During the season hiatus, Broich found out that his contract with Mönchengladbach would not be extended. Borussia Dortmund were very interested in signing Broich as a replacement for Tomáš Rosický, who had signed with Arsenal But it was rivals 1. FC Köln, hoping to bolster their squad to gain promotion from the second league to the Bundesliga, who were also strongly interested, who Broich signed with for the 2006–07 season. It was a season of ups and downs, with the highlight being a 4–2 DFB-Pokal win over Schalke 04, who at that time were ranked first in the Bundesliga. Broich scored the deciding goal in the 89th minute. However, back in the Second Bundesliga, he clashed with newly recruited coach Christoph Daum, whom he felt was not giving him enough playing time. Köln gained promotion to the Bundesliga, but the relationship between player and coach never improved.
Broich again started to think about playing abroad, attempting to move to the Australian A-League with Adelaide United. However, he was convinced by former Mönchengladbach assistant manager and Broich-fan Michael Oenning, who now had a head coach position with 1. FC Nürnberg, to join him on his new team. Broich signed a one-year contract on 9 June 2009, but, after an early season-injury, he had a slow start and considered giving football in Germany up for good. After only seven season caps, he completed his contract with Nürnberg and again began to look south to Australia.

Brisbane Roar

On 11 May 2010, Broich signed a three. Broich assisted both of Brisbane's goals in the grand final. It was his corner kick that assisted Erik Paartalu's last minute equaliser to send the final to a penalty shootout.
Broich won the Gary Wilkins Medal,
On 10 September 2012, it was announced that Broich had signed a four-year contract extension with the Roar, which means he is contracted to Brisbane until the end of the 2016–17 campaign.

Style and influence

Broich has exceptional footwork and vision.

International career

From 2002 to 2004, Broich played seven times for the Germany U-21. In 2004 and 2005, he was a member of the "Team 2006", a team that gives players a chance to play international friendlies to gain experience for a future in the national squad.

Career statistics

1 - includes A-League final series statistics 
2 - includes FIFA Club World Cup statistics; AFC Champions League statistics are included in season commencing after group stages (i.e. ACL and A-League seasons etc.)

Honors






