[[Parity of a permutation]]

CATEGORIES: Group theory, Permutations, Parity, Articles containing proofs

The sign of a permutation can be explicitly expressed as
where N(σ) is the number of inversions in σ. 
Alternatively, the sign of a permutation σ can be defined from its decomposition into the product of transpositions as
where  is the number of transpositions in the decomposition. Although such a decomposition is not unique, the parity of the number of transpositions in all decompositions is the same, implying that the sign of a permutation is well-defined. 50.

Example

Consider the permutation σ of the set  which turns the initial arrangement 12345 into 34521.
It can be obtained by three transpositions: first exchange the places of 1 and 3, then exchange the places of 2 and 4, and finally exchange the places of 1 and 5. This shows that the given permutation σ is odd. Using the notation explained in the Permutation article, we can write
There are many other ways of writing σ as a composition of transpositions, for instance
but it is impossible to write it as a product of an even number of transpositions.

Properties

The identity permutation is an even permutation. An even permutation can be obtained as the composition of an even number and only an even number of exchanges (called transpositions) of two elements, while an odd permutation be obtained by (only) an odd number of transpositions. 
The following rules follow directly from the corresponding rules about addition of integers:
From these it follows that
Considering the symmetric group S}, we can conclude that the map
that assigns to every permutation its signature is a group homomorphism. 
Furthermore, we see that the even permutations form a subgroup of S
If  is even; the two maps are inverse to each other.
A cycle is even if and only if its length is odd. This follows from formulas like
In practice, in order to determine whether a given permutation is even or odd, one writes the permutation as a product of disjoint cycles. The permutation is odd if and only if this factorization contains an odd number of even-length cycles.
Another method for determining whether a given permutation is even or odd is to construct the corresponding Permutation matrix and compute its determinant. The value of the determinant is same as the parity of the permutation.
Every permutation of odd order must be even.  The permutation (12)(34) in A4 shows that the converse is not true in general.

Equivalence of the two definitions

Proof 1

Every permutation can be produced by a sequence of transpositions (2-element exchanges): with the first transposition we put the first element of the permutation in its proper place, the second transposition puts the second element right etc. Given a permutation σ, we can write it as a product of transpositions in many different ways. We want to show that either all of those decompositions have an even number of transpositions, or all have an odd number.
Suppose we have two such decompositions:  
We want to show that k and m are either both even, or both odd.  
Every transposition can be written as a product of an odd number of transpositions of adjacent elements, e.g.
If we decompose in this way each of the transpositions T1.....Qm above
into an odd number of adjacent transpositions, we get the new decompositions:
where all of the T1′.....
Now compose the inverse of T1' with σ. T1' is the transposition (i, i + 1) of two adjacent numbers, so, compared to σ, the new permutation σ (i, i + 1) will have exactly one inversion pair less (in case (i, i + 1) was an inversion pair for σ) or more (in case (i, i + 1) was not an inversion pair). Then apply the inverses of T2', T3', ... Tk' in the same way, "unraveling" the permutation σ. At the end we get the identity permutation, whose N is zero. This means that the original N(σ) less k' is even and also N(σ) less k is even.
We can do the same thing with the other decomposition, Q1'... 
Therefore, m − k is even, as we wanted to show.
We can now define the permutation σ to be even if N(σ) is an even number, and odd if N(σ) is odd. This coincides with the definition given earlier but it is now clear that every permutation is either even or odd.

Proof 2

An alternative proof uses the polynomial 
So for instance in the case  = 3, we have
Now for a given permutation σ of the numbers {1, ..., }, we define
Since with this definition it is furthermore clear that any transposition of two elements has signature −1, we do indeed recover the signature as defined earlier.

Proof 3

Other definitions and proofs

Remarks:

Generalizations



Notes




