[[Jakarta Mass Rapid Transit]]

CATEGORIES: Infrastructure in Indonesia, Rapid transit in Indonesia, Transport in Jakarta, Proposed public transport in Indonesia, Proposed transport infrastructure in Indonesia

The Jakarta Mass Rapid Transit (Jakarta MRT) is a rapid transit system under construction in Jakarta, the capital city of Indonesia.
A groundbreaking ceremony was held on October 10, 2013, with Phase 1 of the project (Lebak Bulus to Hotel Indonesia Circle) to be opened to the public by the first quarter of 2018.

Background to the project

Jakarta is the capital city of Indonesia, harboring over 9 million inhabitants. It is predicted that over four million residents of the surrounding Jabodetabek area commute to and from the city each working day.  Transport issues have increasingly begun to attract political attention and it has been foreseen that without a major transportation breakthrough, traffic jams will overwhelm the city by 2020.  Since 1980 more than twenty-five general and special subject studies have been conducted related to possible Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) systems in Jakarta. One of the major reasons for the delays in tackling the problem was the economic and political crises of 1997-99.  Before the crisis, a Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) scheme was considered as part of a new MRT calling for private sector involvement.  After the crisis, the plan to rely on a BOT to provide financing proved unfeasible and the MRT project was again proposed as a government-funded scheme.
Current public transportation in Jakarta mainly consists of various types of buses, starting from the very small bemo and pickup sized mikrolet, to slightly larger minibuses and full sized city buses. There are also both two and four wheeled taxis. Current transport systems include the widely used MetroMini and Kopaja minibuses, the TransJakarta bus rapid transit system, and the Jabodetabek Commuter Railway system.

Lines

The rail-based Jakarta MRT is expected to stretch across over 108 kilometres, including 21.7 km for the North-South Corridor (From Lebak Bulus to Kampung Bandan) and 87 km for East-West Corridor(From Balaraja to Cikarang).Extensive details are available at the PT Mass Rapid Transit project website

North-South corridor

The North-South corridor will be built in two phases.
|accessdate=2010-10-05
|title=Urban rail news in brief
|date=2010-10-03
|publisher=Railway Gazette International
}}[/ref]
After completion of MRT Phase I and II, together with TransJakarta will serve 60 percent total trips made by Jakartans. 

=Phase I=

The first phase is 
Elevated stations
Underground stations
|}

East-West corridor

This corridor is currently in pre-feasibility study phase. The line is targeted to operate in 2027.

Project Progress

Progress of the first phase was funded through a loan by the Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC), now merged into the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA). The loan number IP is 536 (signed November 2006) for engineering services. The engineering services loan is a pre-construction loan to prepare the construction phase. It consists of:
On March 31, 2009, Loan Agreement 2 (LA2) for the amount of 48,150 billion Yen to build the Jakarta MRT System was signed by the Indonesian Government (represented by the Indonesian Ambassador for Japan) and JICA in Tokyo, Japan. After the signing of the granting agreement for LA2, city administration will propose another two loan agreements for LA3 and LA4 to the central government. These proposals will become a lending agreement for the local government. The total amount of LA3 and LA4 addressed as a loan by the local government is about 71867 billion yen. This amount is based on the progress, outcome and absorbance of LA2. The total loan package from JICA for the development of the Jakarta MRT system is worth a total of 120 billion yen.
Work on the basic design for the first phase of the current version of the project began in late 2010.  The tender process was underway in late 2012 when the new governor of Jakarta, Joko Widodo, unexpectedly said that he wanted a review of the project. After several months of uncertainty governor Joko Widodo announced that the project would go ahead. He listed it as one of the priority projects in the Jakarta city budget for 2013. Arditya, 'Jakarta finally goes ahead with MRT plan', The Jakarta Post, 21 December 2012.
In September 2012, DMRC of Delhi Metro announced that it had been awarded the work of 'Management Consulting Services' of the Jakarta Mass Rapid Transit system by the Indonesian government. This will be DMRC'S first project outside India.Delhi Metro Rail Corporation goes global with Indonesian Metro job : North, News - India Today DMRC has stated that its main responsibilities in the JV will be the "finalisation of the organisational structure of the Jakarta Metro, recruitment of personnel, development of training facilities and the training of the employees for various categories required for commencing the operations". Dewi, 'MRT board given month to begin', The Jakarta Post, 25 March 2013. and the line is expected to be operational by 2017.
On 1 June 2013, the first 3 civil contracts for the 9.2km underground section were signed. The 3 contracts were won by 2 separate consortium's of Japanese and Indonesian companies.'Jakarta metro civil works contracts signed', Rail Journal, 13 June 2013. 3 civil work contracts for the elevated section of the line are expected to be signed in the 3rd quarter of 2013. Work is expected to begin in October 2013. 'Jakarta metro contracts signed', Railway Gazette, 13 June 2013.

PT Mass Rapid Transit Jakarta

PT Mass Rapid Transit Jakarta (PT MRTJ) is a limited liability (Perseroan Terbatas) company founded by the Jakarta Provincial Government. Its establishment was approved by the provincial parliament (DPRD) on 10 June 2008 and final establishment was by notary act on 17 June 2008. Its purpose is to operate the Jakarta MRT System. The shares are made up from 99% Jakarta Provincial Government and 1% PT Pasar Jaya (another Jakarta Regional-Government-Owned Company). PT MRTJ is classed as a Regional-Government-Owned-Company (Badan Usaha Milik Daerah-BUMD). The BUMD form for PT MRTJ is designed not to create profits for the shareholders, but instead to create flexibility in accessing alternative financing, which would otherwise be impossible if the company was directly part of the government. With this, the cost of tickets sold to clients will be reduced with some of the operational cost being subsidised by other sources. The BUMD form also ensures transparency and accountability through the shareholders' General Meeting, Decision Making and Reporting System which will be publicly available.






