[[Kalaymyo]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places in Kale District, Kale Township, Township capitals of Burma

Kalaymyo (Kalemyo), also known as Karlaymyo, is a town in the Sagaing Division of Burma. It is located upstream from Mandalay and Monywa on the Myittha River, a tributary of the Chindwin River. The town is the district headquarters of the Kalay District.

Etymology

The earlier name of the town 'Karlaymyo,' renamed now as 'Kalaymyo,' means "a town surrounded by four satellite towns" in the Burmese language. "Kalaymyo" means "a child/kid town" in Burmese Language.

History

According to tradition, Kalaymyo was established as a town on a Sunday in the 5th of waning moon of Tabotwe month 328, as per the traditional Burmese calendar.
During the Second World War, Kalaymyo was an important regrouping point for the British during their retreat from Burma in 1942 because of the relatively easier access to India along the Manipur River (the alternative was to march through malarial forests from Kalewa to Tamu).
A votive tablet was unearthed in Kalaymyo in 1983, with a Mon language inscription referring to the Aniruddha.
On September 19, 2007, 200 monks marched through the streets of Kalaymyo as a part of the 2007 Burmese anti-government protests. Over the next few days, the monks were joined by thousands of people of the Chin ethnic group. On September 24, students marched from Kalay University with posters and protested, demanding the release of Aung San Suu Kyi and two other political prisoners.
Kalaymyo has several notable prisons, to which people from all across the region are transported.

Geography

Geographically, the distinctive feature of the town is that the Tropic of Cancer passes through it. This point has been marked by the milepost 55/56 near KyanSitKone village. Set in terrain that has an average elevation of above mean sea level, the town has a picturesque backdrop of the LayThar Hill in the east and the Chin Hill in the west.
The city is drained by the Myitthar River that flows in a south–north direction, the Nayyinzayar River that flows in a north–south direction, and the MaNePuRã River (also called the NunKaThel River) from across the international border with India; the last-named river has its origin in Manipur state of the Northeast India.

Climate

A tropical monsoon climate dominates the town. Temperature variations are significant, with summer months from March to May recording .

Demographics

The population of Kalaymyo is estimated to be 400,000, comprising 35% Bamar, 55% Chin and 10% other nationalities and foreigners. The valley town, with its tranquil atmosphere, is inhabited in equal numbers by the Chin community (95% Christians) and Bamars. The original settlers are Shans.

Economy

The economy of Kalaymyo is dependent upon agriculture but it is also an industrial town. Cars, jeeps, trucks, fire engines, trailers, three-wheeled motorcycles are manufactured in the Kalay Industrial Estate. The town is the hub of trading activity with India across the border.
Kale Township is unable to meet its own food requirements, although it exports food to neighbouring towns and cities. It has  under cooking oil crops. The irrigation dam in RāZāJo village will provide water to grow more crops under irrigated conditions.
Kale Township has teak, ironwood (Pterocarpus indicus), the large timber tree Shorea obtusa, Shorea robusta and many other species of tree.

Religion

The religious composition of Kalaymyo and the surrounding township is listed as 55 percent Buddhist (mainly Theravada Buddhists),40 percent Christian (mainly Baptist) and the remaining 5 percent follow other religious practices. The district has 116 Buddhist monasteries, 508 churches, a mosque, two Hindu temples, two Buddhist seminaries for nuns, five Buddhist nunneries and a joss house (Chinese communal temple).

Social infrastructure

The basic social services of education (primary to high school level, and universities within close commutable distances from the town), health services (general hospital, military hospital and traditional medicines' hospital), modern telecommunication network (telephone, Internet, telecommunication satellite network etc.), Media network of news papers (simultaneous coverage of news with Yangon), TV and radio services are well established in the town. The town's electricity needs are met from the MāNePu Hydroelectric Project, which also helps promote industries.

Transportation

The strategic road between India and Myanmar, built with assistance from the Government of India, is the  Tamu Kalayamyo road. The Border Roads Organization, a parastatal organization of the Government of India, started construction of this road in 1997, which was opened by the Foreign Minister of India in 2001. This road has facilitated trans-border movement between India and Myanmar. Apart from this road, the town is well connected by a network of roads with Kalay, GantGaw, Monywa, Yarje and Mandalay. The important road route during the rainy season is the Kalay-GuntGaw-MonYwar-Mandalay road and during winter it is the Kalay-Myoma-Yarje-Monywar-Mandalay Route.
Rail services also operate between Kalayamyo and GuntGaw. This line passes through the PounTaun Poun Nyar Tunnel.
Inland water transport is also available up to Kalaywa, which is short of Kalaymyo. On this route, Morlike, Homalin, Khunte, Mingin and Monywar are also accessible.
There is an airport at Kalaymyo, an extension of a British-built Second World War airstrip that was used to ferry troops and supplies into Burma during the British reconquest of Burma in 1945. The airport is located in the middle of the town. Myanma Airways, Bagan Airways, Mandalay Airways and Air KBZ operate regular air services to and from Yangon, Mandalay and Kalaymyo. The airport is at an elevation of 




