[[Dégénération]]

CATEGORIES: 2008 singles, Mylène Farmer songs, Songs with lyrics by Mylène Farmer, Songs with music by Laurent Boutonnat, Music videos directed by Bruno Aveillan, Ultratop 50 Singles (Wallonia) number-one singles, Number-one singles in France, LGBT-related songs

"Dégénération" (English: "Degeneration") is a 2008 song by French singer-songwriter Mylène Farmer. It was the first single from her seventh studio album Point de Suture, and was released first digitally and on radio in June 2008, then in a CD in August 2008. The song marked an important musical change in the singer's career. Despite cold critical and public reception, the single achieved success, peaking at number one in France on both physical and digital sales charts.

Background and release

On 21 May, Thierry Suc, one of Farmer's producers, announced that the first single from the album would be "Dégénération" On 14 June, the whole song was available to the Internet. At the time, as the origins of this song were, however, unclear, it had thus led many to believe that this leaked song was actually a remix due to its lack of lyrics.
Surprisingly, on the night from 13 to 14 June, the e-compil site, the official platform for downloading of Universal Music, proposed, for a few hours only, to legally download the song, probably by mistake. 149-50. On 16 June, "Dégénération" was aired for the first time on Radio Jeune Reims, at 8:20 pm, although it was announced that NRJ should have the exclusivity of the first broadcast, on 19 June, at 7:00 am. As scheduled, on 19 June, several radio stations broadcast "Dégénération", including NRJ, Delta FM and RTL. The song was then also available digitally on musicMe, virginmega. A few days later, an unofficial CDR promo (unknown remix) of "Dégénération" was circulated and received attention from high profile DJs. Finally, it was announced that the song would be released as a physical single on 18 August. On 4 July, certain French radio stations began to broadcast the radio edit version of the remix produced by Martin Solveig.
On the occasion of the single release, Farmer formed for the first time a partnership with a mobile phone company. So, the SFR subscribers received two SMS announcing first when the song would be available digitally on its site, then when the three excerpts of the music video would be broadcast on its site. 50. On 11 July, the newspaper Info Music Hebdo said that the CD single would be released in a limited edition (50,000 copies) and that the CD maxi would contain remixes by Tomer G and Manhattan Clique who had previously worked with Farmer for "Slipping Away (Crier la vie)". In early September, TF1 promoted the song airing some excerpts between the programmes and the fully music video in the night.

Lyrics, music and title

The song has an electro  It can be assimilated to "Psychiatric", "La Ronde triste" or "Alice"Chuberre, 2009, p. 223. because of "its short text and its rather dub". The song "amounts to a couplet repeated in buckle, a spoken bridge, and many choirs". The text "remains partially incomprehensible without reading official lyrics". The electronic sound has a "more metallic rhythmic" than Farmer's previous singles and constitutes "a remarkable artistic experiment". Psychologist Hugues Royer said that the message of the song is to "shake the boredom to find again the desire", to "promote sex therapy" to "reset the appetite for life". 258.
Interviewed by Claire Chazal in the news broadcasting of 31 August, 8:00 pm, on TF1, Farmer explained that the title of the song was a reference to "Désenchantée", her 1991 number-one hit, in which the word "génération" is mentioned.* Chuberre, 2011, pp. 104,105.

Music video

The music video was shot over two days (9 and 10 June) in Prague, Czech Republic. Polydor The photographer Claude Gassian attended the shooting of the video. 91-92.
The video shows Farmer lying on an operating table in a laboratory, surrounded by scientists. When the music begins, she wakes up, unties her strips, gets up, and throws blue laser beams from her palms to the doctors and the militaries. Suddenly, they begin to perform choreographied sexual intercourses (men with men, women with women, women with men) which eventually end as an orgy, while Farmer goes out of the laboratory. 221.
On 26 June, SFR site revealed an excerpt from the music video for "Dégénération". Two other excerpts were broadcast on 1 and 2 July. The video was eventually fully aired on television on 10 July
This video was generally well received in the media. For example, Musique. (...) The production is impeccable and the greatest attention was paid to lighting, the texture of the bodies and the special effects". Royer said this video is "peppered with special effects worthy of the early career Farmer"Royer, 2008, p. 89. and conveys a message "which invites its listeners to come out of coma where they languish sex to engage in sexual intercourses without taboo. (...) The singer achieves the challenge of updating of the message of "Libertine" without giving the feeling of repetition."Royer, 2008, pp. 101-02.
In January 2009, when the third single from the album was released, it was revealad that the music video for "Dégénération" as well as that of "Si j'avais au moins...", were part of a short film named The Farmer Project. The action takes place in a country in Eastern Europe in the 1950s or 1960s. It begins with Farmer, who portrays a creature with supernatural powers, who is captured by two policemen and studied in a laboratory. At this point, the music video for "Dégénération" starts. 334-35.

Critical reception

Reviews

"Dégénération" received generally negative reviews from the media and the public. Indeed, many Farmer's fans have criticized the lack of lyrics, and the radio stations have not taken to the song. On 29 July, Yahoo! proposed on its homepage a very critical analysis of "Dégénération", both at the level of music and video.

Chart performances

Although it received negative reviews, the single, after just a few hours, climbed to number one on the French singles download chart, very far ahead of the number two in terms of sales. It fell off the top 50 after 13 weeks.
In France, the single went straight to number one on the SNEP chart on 23 August, selling 27,401 units, which was the highest weekly sales of 2008 for a number-one single in France, and it marked return to number-one single since last single "XXL", released in 1995. It dropped to number two the week after with 8,495 sales,
On 5 July, "Dégénération", then only available digitally, entered the Belgian (Wallonia) Singles Chart at number six before dropping quickly and remaining in low positions. However, on 30 August, when the physical formats were released, "Dégénération" jumped directly from number 33 to number one, thus becoming Farmer's third number-one hit in Belgium. It dropped rather quickly the next weeks and remained for a total of 14 weeks in the top 40.
The single was first ranked for a sole week on the Swiss Singles Charts, at number 58, on 6 July, thanks to the downloads, but re-entered at number 26 on 23 August when the physical formats were available, then dropped and fell off the chart after six weeks.

Promotion and live performances

The song was never performed on television. It was performed during the 2009 tour Mylène Farmer en tournée, as sixteenth song of the show. Farmer wore a black leather jacket with a golden cross in the back, and her dancers a beige jacket with a black cross in the back. The song was accompanied by a choreography: Farmer appeared standing on a cockroach-shaped chair, while the dancers performed a dynamic modern choreography; she then stood up and walked to a platform which then raised in the airs.

Formats and track listings

These are the formats and track listings of single releases of "Dégénération":

Release history

Official versions

Credits and personnel

These are the credits and the personnel as they appear on the back of the single:

Charts and sales

Peak positions

Year-end charts

Sales

Chart successions and processions



Notes




