[[Khloé Kardashian]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 births, American people of Armenian descent, American people of Dutch descent, American people of English descent, American people of Scottish descent, 21st-century American actresses, 21st-century American businesspeople, 21st-century American writers, 21st-century American novelists, 21st-century women writers, Actresses from Los Angeles, California, American businesspeople in retailing, American cosmetics businesspeople, American fashion businesspeople, American female models, American film actresses, American jewelry designers, American socialites, American television actresses, American television hosts, American television personalities, American women in business, American women novelists, Businesspeople from Los Angeles, California, Kardashian family, Models from California, Radio personalities from Los Angeles, California, The Apprentice (U.S. TV series) contestants, The X Factor (U.S. TV series), Writers from Los Angeles, California, American women writers, Living people

Khloé Kardashian Odom (born Khloé Alexandra Kardashian; June 27, 1984) is an American television personality. In 2007, she and her family were commissioned to star in the reality television series Keeping Up with the Kardashians. Its success has led to the creation of spin-offs including Kourtney and Khloé Take Miami and Khloe & Lamar. In September 2009, Kardashian married basketball player Lamar Odom one month after they first met. However, she filed for divorce in December 2013.
With sisters Kourtney and Kim, Kardashian is involved in the retail and fashion industries. They have launched several clothing collections and fragrances, and additionally released the book Kardashian Konfidential in 2010. In 2012, she co-hosted the second season of the American version of The X Factor with Mario Lopez.

Early life

Khloé Alexandra Kardashian was born in Los Angeles, California on June 27, 1984, to parents Robert and Kris (née Houghton). In 1994, her father garnered public attention as the primary defense lawyer for football player O.J. Simpson during his murder trial.
As a teenager, Kardashian attended Marymount High School, a Roman Catholic all-girls school in Los Angeles.

Career

2007–09: Career beginnings

In February 2007, a sex tape made by Kim Kardashian and her former boyfriend Ray J in 2003 was leaked, which largely contributed to her rise to prominence.
In April 2009, Kardashian and her sister Kourtney announced that they were contracted to star in a spin-off, which followed their move to launch a D-A-S-H store in Miami, Florida. The series, Kourtney and Khloé Take Miami, debuted on E! on August 16, 2009.
Khloé has a business interest in D-A-S-H, a clothing boutique in Calabasas, Miami and SoHo, with her sisters Kourtney and Kim.

2010–present: Television and other ventures

The sisters also released a book, Kardashian Konfidential, in November 2010. "Kardashian Konfidential", St. Martin's Press (November 23, 2010). ISBN 0-312-62807-2
Kardashian's radio show, The Mix Up With Khloé Kardashian Odom, was a "one-hour, commercial-free show where Khloe will take requests, chat with her celebrity friends, and more during the Mavericks' season while she's in Dallas with her husband Lamar Odom." It aired on January 30, 2012. 

Legal issues

On March 4, 2007, Kardashian was arrested for driving under the influence.
In 2009, Kardashian was sued by a transsexual woman who claimed she assaulted her outside a nightclub.
In March 2012, Kardashian and her sisters Kourtney and Kim were named in a $5 million class action lawsuit against QuickTrim, the weight loss supplement they endorse.

Personal life

On September 27, 2009, Kardashian married NBA basketball player Lamar Odom, who was a member of the Los Angeles Lakers at the time.

Filmography

Acting credits

As herself








