[[UWA School of Music]]

CATEGORIES: University of Western Australia, Music schools in Australia

The UWA School of Music is part of the Faculty of Arts at the University of Western Australia. It is located at the North-East corner of the Crawley campus and teaches predominately Classical music, with focus in the undergraduate curriculum on performance, as well as overall strength in musicology, composition and ethnomusicology.

History

The school started life as part of the education faculty under the foundation Professor Sir Frank Callaway. It was the fourth Australian university to establish courses in music (after Adelaide, Melbourne and Sydney). The first graduates to include a significant study of music in their degrees were two Music Education students in 1957. This followed shortly thereafter with the appointment of Frank Callaway as the foundation professor, concurrently with the establishment of the department of music in 1959.
First graduates followed in 1960 (one being the noted composer Jennifer Fowler) with a BA in Music, and the first graduates from the Bachelor of Music degree emerged in 1965. The first students to graduate with post-graduate qualifications emerged in 1971, and the late seventies saw the beginning of the Bachelor of Music Education - the department now having come full circle from its roots.
In 1991, the Department of Music became a School in its own right, as part of the change of structure across the university that reduced the number of faculties.

Faculty & ensembles

The School of Music has several notable members of staff in the fields of Musicology, Performance and Composition such as Dr. David Symons, Dr. Victoria Rogers, Winthrop Professor Paul Wright, as Head of Voice.
Former Faculty include pianist Emeritus Professor Dr. Geoffrey Lancaster AM FAHA, composer Emeritus Professor Dr. Roger Smalley AM FAHA, musicologist Emeritus Professor Dr. David Tunley AM FAHA, Winthrop Professor Jane W Davidson, John Exton,
The school has a number of important performing ensembles. The UWA Orchestra is one of Australia's notable student ensembles, is an occasional ensemble formed for special events.
As a signatory to the constitution of the Australian Music Education Board (AMEB), the Head of Keyboard Studies, Graeme Gilling, holds a seat on the AMEB Federal Board.
Honorary Research Fellows include composers Iain Grandage, Richard Mills, AM, and Carl Vine, early music specialist and administrator Emeritus Professor Margaret Seares Guitarist Craig Ogden,
The School also hosts Festival Baroque Australia, Australia's first Baroque Music festival.

Undergraduate courses

In 2012, UWA adopted a new set of standard degrees, similar to other universities in Australia who have been examining the "Melbourne Model"
The school has an enviable reputation in performance, evidenced by the list of alumni below that represent professional members of all major Australian orchestras (see below). In composition, there are large number of outstanding alumni. In 2011, James Ledger's (both an Alumni and member of the music faculty) work Chronicles was voted as a "Classical Masterpiece", and the best Australian Masterpiece since 2000.

Entry

Entry to the School of Music is a two stage process that requires both an audition for the school of music, and admission to the university. Auditions are held towards the end of the year, and require students to undertake both performance and aural activities.
Admission to the university usually requires an ATAR of 80 or more.

Post graduate degrees

The UWA School of Music graduated its first postgraduate student in 1967, and its first PhD student in 1971. Currently, the School offers the following postgraduate qualifications:

Music buildings

Located on the North Eastern corner of the Crawley campus, the School of Music overlooks the Swan River. The current buildings were opened in 1978. In a contemporary report discussing the large number of towering pine trees in the adjacent outdoor auditorium, the architects noted "the retention of the present special qualities of Sommerville Auditorium and its unique character is considered a priority in the total solution". The most recent work (2012) has been the addition of a large elevator on the northern edge.
Within the School of Music are a number of specialist facilities. The Wigmore Music Library,
The Callaway auditorium, dedicated to the foundation Professor of Music, is an oft-used small concert venue, and houses most of the large scale lectures. The Tunley Lecture Theatre, named for a former long serving faculty member and Head of School, is a small lecture theatre. In 2012, both the Callaway Auditorium and the Tunley Lecture Theatre received upgraded IT infrastructure to allow for lecture control from the podium, and the digital recording and broadcasting of lectures and performances.

Notable alumni






