[[Central Colleges of the Philippines]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 1954, Educational institutions in Quezon City, Universities and colleges in the Philippines, Higher education in the Philippines, 1954 establishments in the Philippines, Universities and colleges in Metro Manila

The Central Colleges of the Philippines (CCP) is a coeducational private university located in Quezon City, Philippines. Formerly known as the Polytechnic Colleges of the Philippines, CCP was established on January 18, 1954 with an enrollment of 300 students. CCP has eleven academic programs or colleges at present.

History

CCP started its operations upon its establishment on January 18, 1954 with an enrollment of 300 students. It was then known as the Polytechnic Colleges of the Philippines. It was established by a group of educators with Gonzalo T. Vales as its first President. In 1960, the College of Arts and Sciences and the College of Business Administration was established.
In 1969, the chairman of the school's Board of Trustees Dr. Hermenegildo R. Reyes changed the name of the school from "Polytechnic Colleges of the Philippines" to "Central Colleges of the Philippines". More programs were added, with courses like Secretarial Administration, Agricultural Business Management, and a degree in Doctor of Optometry being offered during the tenure of Dr. Reyes. He was the dean of the school for 13 years until his death in 1982. His son Crispino P. Reyes succeeded his position.

Accreditation

Central Colleges of the Philippines is accredited by the Commission on Higher Education (CHED),

Academics

Majors in the Central Colleges of the Philippines include Accountancy, Architecture, Arts and Sciences, Business Administration, Computer Studies, Education, Engineering, Nursing, Office Administration, and Optometry.

Undergraduate studies

=Architecture=

Architecture was first offered as a major in 1953 as a part of the College of Engineering.  In 1975 it was separated from College of Engineering into its own program. The program is open to a maximum of 500 students.  It is housed in a building that was completed in 1995.  Sixteen faculty members teach the program.  The degree earned is a Bachelor of Science in Architecture.

=Accountancy=

The degree earned at the College of Accountancy is a Bachelor of Science in Accountancy.

=Business Administration=

The College of Business Administration grants Bachelor degrees in Computer Management, Banking and Finance, Marketing, Economics, and Management.

=Computer Studies=

The College of Computer Science prepares students for employment in a computer intensive field or graduate study. Three  Bachelor degrees and one Associate degree are offered including Computer Science, Information Technology, Information Management and Associate in Computer Technology.

=Education=

The College of Education offers majors in English, Filipino (Tagalog), History, and Mathematics. Dr. Fernando Tugay Omadto was a former Professor in Physics and Mathematics in this College.Dr. Omadto was Born in Burgos Viga Catanduanes son of Magencia Tusi Tugay and Jesus Olesco Omadto, he finished Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering, Masters Degree in Physics and he holds a Doctorate Degree in Educational Management. He is a member of CLASS 07-2006 ECNS at the National Defense College of the Philippines, academic row, Camp Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City.Dr. Fernando Tugay Omadto, is a Filipino international researcher and education specialist. The most significant research that he conducted was the Philippine vs. Japan International Public Administration which was done in 2007.  Most of his researches were written when he was still working in Trace Computer and Business College as the Dean of College of Education, Arts and Sciences.  His research works were all published in the Philippine National Library when he was still serving as Graduate School Research Director at the National College of Business and Arts in 2006.

=Engineering=

The College of Engineering offers five Bachelor degrees: Civil, Computer, Electronics and Communications, Electrical, Industrial, and Mechanical.

=Nursing=

Students receive a Bachelor of Science in Nursing.  CCP has a five-storey nursing building that includes a nursing skills laboratory, mini hospital, and public health settings.  There are classrooms and laboratories to facilitate the academic and hands on skills needed to learn anatomy, physiology, microbiology, parasitology, chemistry and physics.

=Office Administration=

The College of Office Administration has two levels of study.  The two-year course provides the student with general knowledge of business principles and computer fundamental techniques to gain an entry-level position in office management. The degree obtained is Associate in Office Administration.
The four-year course provides the student with business principles geared toward an office management position.  The degree earned is a Bachelor of Science in Office Administration.

Graduate studies

The Graduate School of CCP was established in 1979. It offers four graduate programs: MBA, MPA, MAED and MAT, and has its own library. The School for Graduate Studies is headed by Dean Christopher Macabuhay, who holds three doctorates: EdD, DPA and DBA. He is a banker, financial consultant and chairman of the board of Peoples Bank. Faculty members include Dr. Rodolfo John Teope. He has three doctorates (PhD, EdD and DM), is a public administrator and legislator, was a municipal councilor of San Mateo, Rizal, and assistant secretary of the Office of the President of the Philippines.

Campuses

CCP has two campuses, the main campus and the extension campus.
The Main Campus houses the PR Hall, GV Hall, HR Hall, CyberPort, and AR Hall.
The Extension Campus or Consorcia Reyes Hall houses the High School Department, College of Nursing, gym, and ELC (English Learning Center). It will house the College of Hotel and Restaurant Management and the College of Tourism in the future.

Athletics

 Athletics includes badminton, basketball, cheerleading, chess, karate, table tennis, and volleyball.
The men's volleyball team won the 2005-2006 CUSA Volleyball Championship.  They defeated St. Jude College 3-1 in a best of 3 finals.  CCP has won 6 championships (1997-1998, 1998-1999, 1999-2000, 2002-2003, and 2005-2006)
CCP Karate Club works under the Shotokan Karate International Federation (SKIF).  The Karate team has been associated with SKIF since 1994.  In 1992 the Karate Club won their first IWABUCHI CUP.   From 1993-1994 the Karate Club won consecutive championships of the Private Schools Athletic Association.
CCP Cheering Squad won the back to back (2007 and 2008) at the National Cheerleading Championship held at the Philsports Arena. CCP won with just 0.5 advantage against the University of the Philippines. CCP Cheering Squad won the 2009 World Cup Cheerleading Champions held in Brisbane, Australia. CCP Cheering Squad won second place 2010 World Cup Cheerleading held in Australia.
CCP plans to join NCAA this coming 2010 waiting affirmations.

Library

There are three libraries in CCP: the Main Library (Antonino Hall), Graduate Studies Library (Antonino Hall), and the Nursing Library (Consorcia Reyes Hall or the Extension Campus).



Further reading


