[[Prostitution in Indonesia]]

CATEGORIES: Prostitution by country, Indonesian society, Prostitution in Indonesia

Prostitution in Indonesia is legally considered a "crime against decency/morality", although it is widely practiced, tolerated and regulated. Some women are financially motivated to become prostitutes, while others may be forced by friends, relatives or strangers. Traditionally, they have met with customers in entertainment venues or special prostitution complexes, or lokalisasi. There are 4 (four) types of prostitution in Indonesia: (a) Prostitutes who come from particular areas, (b) prostitution in their workpalce. (c) prostitution and life style, and (d) prostitution and the ritual beliefs (Koentjoro, 2011). However, recently internet forums and Facebook have been used to facilitate prostitute-client relations. Approximately 30 percent of prostitutes in Indonesia are children, and child sex tourism has become an issue at the resort islands of Batam and Bali.

Causes

In Indonesia, one of the main reasons for a prostitute to enter the business is the attractiveness of earning money quickly. The Jakarta Post reported that high-end prostitutes in Jakarta could earn Rp 15 million - Rp 30 million (USD 1,755 to 3,510) monthly, able to charge more than Rp 3 million (USD 350) per session for their services. Those entering prostitution for money come from both middle-class and poor families.
Another major cause is coercion (see "Forced prostitution" for general discussion). Young women are offered employment opportunities in major cities, then raped and forced to prostitute themselves while paying money to their pimps.
Based on the Koentjoro Study (1998), the main cause why a woman becomes a prostitute is because of the role material aspiration and instigators play.

Forms

Prostitutes can be found working in brothels, some containing over 200 prostitutes. Prostitutes can be found in discotheques, massage parlours, Beauty Salon's, and karaoke rooms.
They can also be booked via telephone.
Online prostitution is also common. In internet forums, prostitutes and pornography are offered to registered members of good standing, as measured by their activity on the forum. A senior member of the forum posts a "free report" offering a description of the member's experience with a prostitute; contact information is provided upon request by private message. Prostitution rings on Facebook have also been reported.

Legal status

Prostitution is interpreted as a "crime against decency/morality" and against the law.
UNICEF estimates that 30 percent of the female prostitutes in Indonesia are below 18 years of age.

History

Little is known about precolonial Indonesia's prostitution, although the purchase of sex slaves and "quasi-contractual" sexual relations are thought to have occurred. Following the spread of Islam in Indonesia, prostitution is thought to have increased due to Islam's disapproval of contractual weddings.
During the early Dutch colonial period, European men wishing to find sexual gratification began hiring native prostitutes or concubines; this was accepted by financially motivated local women as well as some families, who volunteered their daughters. Because interracial marriage was discouraged or outright forbidden, this arrangement was accepted by Dutch leaders.
Widespread prostitution began in the early 1800s, when the number of concubines kept by the Royal Netherlands East Indies soldiers and government officials declined; native men leaving their wives to look for work in other areas also contributed to its rise.
The 1852 law was later replaced by another, more stringent, public morality law in 1913, which criminalized "purposely bringing about the fornication of others with a third party and make this his profession", or pimping; no mention was made of prostitutes. Enforcement of these laws proved more nearly impossible, and for a period of time investigation of brothels required a permit from the governor.
During the Japanese occupation of Indonesia, existing prostitutes were selected to serve the Japanese army in special brothels. Other women and girls, both native and Dutch, were forced to become "comfort women". After World War II, the migration of women from remote villages to cities, coupled with a high divorce rate, caused another increase in prostitution.

Response

Government response to prostitution in Indonesia has been varied. A common response is to attempt banning it and closing brothels.

Effects

Prostitution has been blamed for the increasing HIV/AIDS rates in various parts of Indonesia, including Central Java
Prostitutes themselves may fall victim to psycho-socio problems, such as multiple personality disorder. When servicing customers or dealing with their pimps, they may be physically and mentally abused. They are also at risk of catching HIV/AIDS.



  | url=
  | title=US Department of State: Indonesia 
  | accessdate=21 February 2010
|ref=
}}


