[[Diosdado Cabello]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, Living people, Vice Presidents of Venezuela, Governors of Miranda (state), Venezuelan soldiers, People from Monagas, Venezuelan Ministers of Interior, Fifth Republic Movement politicians, United Socialist Party of Venezuela politicians, Andrés Bello Catholic University alumni

Diosdado Cabello Rondón (born April 15, 1963Vicepresidencia de la República Bolivariana de Venezuela, Diosdado Cabello Rondón, accessed 19 April 2010) is a Venezuelan politician, President (Speaker) of the National Assembly of Venezuela and active member of the Venezuelan armed forces. He was involved in Hugo Chávez's return to power after the 2002 coup d'état. He became a leading member of Chavez's Movimiento V República (MVR), and remains a leading member of the United Socialist Party of Venezuela into which MVR was merged in 2007. Governor of Miranda from 2004 to 2008, he lost the 2008 election to Henrique Capriles Radonski, and was subsequently appointed Public Works & Housing Minister. In November 2009 he was additionally appointed head of the National Commission of Telecom, a position traditionally independent from Ministry of Public Works and Housing."Chavez eliminates autonomy of broadcasting commission," Informe21, Nov 11, 2009. In 2010, he was elected a member of parliament by his home state of Monagas. In 2011, President Hugo Chávez named him Vice-President of Venezuela's ruling party, the PSUV.

Background

Diosdado Cabello was born in El Furrial, Monagas State. His background is in engineering. He has an undergraduate degree in systems engineering from the Instituto Universitario Politécnico de las Fuerzas Armadas Nacionales and a graduate degree in engineering project management from the Andrés Bello Catholic University. A ?former member of the armed forces, he was involved in Chávez's abortive coup d'état of February 1992, for which he was jailed. President Rafael Caldera pardoned him, like the rest of the coup participants and he was released after only two years without any charges.

Political career

|}
Following Chávez's 1998 electoral victory, he helped set up the pro-Chávez grassroots civil society organizations known as "Bolivarian Circles". He was head of telecoms regulator Conatel during the time the market was opened to competition. In May 2001 he became Chavez' chief of staff, and was appointed Vice President by President Hugo Chávez on January 13, 2002, replacing Adina Bastidas.blythe. As such, he was responsible to both the president and the National Assembly, and for the relations between the executive and legislative branches of the government.
On April 13, 2002, he took on the duties of the presidency on a temporary basis, replacing Pedro Carmona, head of the Venezuelan Chamber of Commerce, as interim president during the coup d'état attempt when Chávez was kept prisoner and was consequently absent from office.  Upon taking office, Cabello said that "I, Diosdado Cabello, am assuming the presidency until such time as the president of the republic, Hugo Chávez Frías, appears." A few hours later, Chávez was back in office. This made Cabello's presidency the world's second briefest, after that of Mexican President Pedro Lascuráin.
On April 28, 2002, Cabello was replaced as Vice President by José Vicente Rangel. Cabello was named interior minister in May 2002,"Venezuela president names new cabinet", BBC News, May 6, 2002. and then infrastructure minister in January 2003.
In October 2004, Cabello was elected to a four-year term as Governor of Miranda State. He lost the 2008 election to Henrique Capriles Radonski, and was subsequently appointed Public Works & Housing Minister. In November 2009 he was additionally appointed head of Conatel.
In 2011 Cabello was installed as the Vice-President of the United Socialist Party (PSUV), thus becoming the second most powerful figure in the party after Hugo Chávez.
Cabello was appointed president of the National Assembly in early 2012 and was re-elected to that post in January 2013.
Cabello's current status after the death of Hugo Chávez is disputed.  Some argue that Cabello is constitutionally the acting President while the power remains in the hands of Nicolás Maduro.
His wife, Marlenys Contreras de Cabello, also serves as a member of the National Assembly. His brother, José David Cabello, previously minister of infrastructure, is in charge of the nation's taxes as head of SENIAT, Venezuela's revenue service.

Allegations

Derwick Associates bribes

Information presented to the United States State Department by Stratfor claimed that Cabello was "head of one of the major centers of corruption in Venezuela." In 2014, Cabello was charged by a court in Miami, Florida of accepting bribes from Derwick Associates including a $50 million dollar payment. These bribes were reportedly made so Derwick Associates could get public contracts from the Venezuelan government.

Organizing colectivos

Cabello, along with Freddy Bernal and Eliezer Otaiza, have been accused of directing colectivos by organizing and paying them with money from the funds of Petróleos de Venezuela.




