[[Jameel Dumas]]

CATEGORIES: American football linebackers, Rhein Fire players, Undrafted National Football League players, Berlin Thunder players, Living people, 1981 births, People from Roselle, New Jersey, Sportspeople from the New York metropolitan area, Players of American football from New Jersey

Jameel Dumas (born February 18, 1981) is a former American football linebacker.  He played for Syracuse University from 2000 to 2003, where he made 179 tackles and earned All-American honors.  After suffering a knee injury in the first game of his fifth-year senior season, Dumas missed the remainder of the year.  After recovering from knee surgery, he played with the Albany Conquest in 2005 as a two-way player.  He also played in the NFL Europa with the Rhein Fire in 2006 and Berlin Thunder in 2007.

Early years

Dumas attended Abraham Clark High School in Roselle, New Jersey, where he was a star linebacker for the football team and hurdler for the track team.

Recruiting

Dumas was a highly touted recruit in his senior year of high school.  He was 6 feet, 3 inches tall, weighed 215 pounds, and had excellent speed.  He received scholarship offers from Rutgers, Ole Miss, West Virginia, North Carolina State, Wisconsin, Indiana, and Minnesota, but he chose Syracuse University.  Dumas explained his choice of Syracuse, "I came to Syracuse because I'm a Jersey guy, and it's kind of close. I came up and visited the campus, liked what I saw, liked the coaching staff."

Syracuse University

Dumas played college football at Syracuse from 2000 to 2003. In his first start as a weak-side linebacker, Dumas helped lead Syracuse to a victory over Temple when he intercepted a pass in the second quarter and returned it to the Temple 16-yard line to set up the go-ahead touchdown.
As a sophomore in 2001, Dumas played in all 13 games, made 67 tackles and helped Syracuse to a 10-3 record. 
As a junior in 2002, Dumas suffered a badly sprained ankle early in the season and injured his groin when he continued to play with the injury.  Despite the injuries, Dumas recorded 92 tackles in 2002,
In January 2003, Dumas announced that he was leaving school for undisclosed reasons to return home to Roselle, New Jersey.  In a feature story about Dumas, The Post-Standard covered his comeback.
As a senior in 2003, Dumas suffered a knee injury in the season opener against the University of North Carolina.  However, he insisted that he would not give up on his football career: "It's all about the love of the game. If you've got a strong love for something, it's always going to prevail. I went through too much stuff. The game keeps calling me."
In December 2003, Dumas petitioned the NCAA for a sixth year of eligibility after missing most of the 2003 season.  Syracuse coach Paul Pasqualoni noted at the time, "He played only a very short period of time in the North Carolina game. So you'd say the NCAA would be sympathetic towards a sixth year. There is no precedents set for someone in Jameel's circumstances being granted. We're going to explore it. We're going to do everything we can do. The likelihood is, we'd be blazing new territory if we got it, and the likelihood of that happening is probably very slim."
Dumas finished his college football career at Syracuse with 179 tackles and earned All-America honors.

Professional football

In 2005, Dumas played for the Albany Conquest in the AF2 arena football league.




