[[Rye Rye]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, 1990 births, African-American dancers, African-American female rappers, American electro musicians, American female dancers, East Coast hip hop musicians, Rappers from Baltimore, Maryland, Synthpop musicians, American hip hop singers, American television actresses, African-American actresses, American film actresses



Ryeisha Berrain (born November 25, 1990), known by her stage name Rye Rye, is an American rapper, dancer and actress. Signed to N.E.E.T. Recordings, she released Go! Pop! Bang! on May 15, 2012. In early 2009, MSNBC listed Rye Rye as one of the "5Top: Top of the pops! Up-and coming young singers." Rye Rye made her acting debut in the 2012 film 21 Jump Street.

Career

Early career

Rye Rye began performing at the age of 16.
She met the musician Blaqstarr, a friend of her sister's, and worked with him on her early material after leaving a rap verse on his answering machine. On this process she notes "I used to like to write poetry and stories. One day I was home, bored, and started to compose songs."
Her song "Shake It To The Ground,"  produced in collaboration with Blaqstarr, was a club hit in 2006, leading to local speculation that Rye Rye could be a fresh, new female success within hip hop music. They both appeared in M.I.A.'s 2007 music video for the song "Paper Planes."

Go! Pop! Bang!

Rye Rye is the first artist signed to M.I.A.'s record label N.E.E.T., imprint of Interscope Records.
Rye Rye is featured on the Crookers debut album, Tons of Friends, rapping on the track, "Hip Hop Changed". Rye Rye also appears on a track by Tel-aviv based Soulico called "Exotic On The Speaker". Rye Rye is featured on the track "Have You Heard?" by Ceci Bastida. She song "X Girl" for the electro-duo Teenage Bad Girl's second album "Backwash". Rye Rye's single "Bang" (featuring M.I.A.) appeared on the Fast & Furious motion picture soundtrack, and she released her M.I.A.-directed video for the track in 2009. Rolling Stone called the track "gloriously showoffy". Rye Rye's performance at SXSW  in 2010 was well received by critics and festival goers. She performed at the Winter Music Conference in Miami before opening for indie rock band The Gossip in April 2010.
On February 9, 2011 at midnight, Rye Rye put up her highly anticipated pre-album mixtape, RYEot PowRR for download, along with a video to her remix of Miley Cyrus' "Party in the U.S.A.."
On June 7, 2011, she released a second single "Never Will Be Mine" featuring Robyn. The video featuring the two artists premiered on June 15, 2011 and after two days, had been viewed 2,740,998 times. The song reached number 12 on the US Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs.
Rye Rye released her single "New Thing" in 2011, which showcases and soundtracks fashion designer Prabal Gurung's collection and the 2011 "Women Go All In" Adidas advert. In April 2012, her single "Boom Boom" reached number 8 on the US Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs.rye|chart=all}} Rye Rye Songs | Billboard

Acting

Rye Rye appeared in the film 21 Jump Street and recorded its main theme with Esthero.

Artistry

Style and inspiration

The LA Times described her music as a "hardcore club sound."
Speaking of the ease at which writing her lyrics comes to her, Rye Rye notes that listening to her songs' beats repeatedly in the studio helps her to focus. Rye Rye has spoken of her intention to work with Chris Brown, Lil Wayne, Rihanna and Jay-Z as well as a Disney Channel artist to reach out to child audiences. She says, "Of course I want to work with artists that can dance so in saying that I have to say that Ciara is someone I really want to work with, as that girl have moves. Not forgetting Ms. Missy Elliott of course as I think her videos are crazy."

Influence

Rye Rye is the muse of fashion designer Prabal Gurung.

Personal life

Discography

Albums

Mixtapes

Singles

As featured artist






