[[Australian Idol (season 5)]]

CATEGORIES: Australian Idol, 2007 television seasons, 2007 in Australian television

The fifth season of ''Australian Idol'' premiered on 5 August 2007 on Network Ten. It concluded on 25 November.



Format changes

The series was again hosted by Andrew G and James Mathison, with Ian "Dicko" Dickson returning to the show as one of the judges, along with Mark Holden, Marcia Hines and Kyle Sandilands. The show continued with the new format from Season 4, where contestants were permitted to perform original material for their audition and throughout the season, and play instruments as part of their performances.

Ratings

The premiere episode of the 2007 series had 1.65 million viewers, making it the show's second highest rating series opener and 270,000 ahead of last year. The show was in the top ten most viewed shows for the early part of the series and eventually dropped to around number eighteen and nineteen for quite some time due to hot competition from Channel 7's "Kath and Kim". The season was on a low compared to Season 4. The Top 5 performance show marked the re-commencement of higher ratings for the program and it reached number nine.

Auditions

The auditions"Audition Locations", Australian Idol official site, 2007 for Australian Idol (season 5) were run from March to May 2007. They were held in:

Theatre Week (Seymour Centre)

As in previous years, the theatre week, held at Sydney's Seymour Centre, consisted of three gruelling elimination rounds. For the first round, each contestant singing a cappella one song of their choice in front of the judges, before being told, based on that performance, whether they would be moving onto the next round.
The second round, (for the first time in Australian Idol history), the group rounds consisted of two boys and two girls, instead of a same gender group, as in previous seasons. Contestants were once again told whether they would be moving onto the next round based on these performances.
In the third and final round, each contestant was then to perform a song choice of their own choosing, in a solo performance in front of the judges and every other contestant. Based on these performances, each contestant was told, one at a time, whether they would become a part of the Top 24, or if their journey would end.

Semi-Finals

The Semi Finals were run to the same format as the fourth season, with four groups of six performing solo in a live studio on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday night. On the Thursday night, the first eight finalists through to the Top 12 were announced, along with another eight of the remaining 24 chosen for the Wildcard show. These eight would be given a second chance to prove themselves worthy of one of the four remaining spots in the Top 12. The following Sunday night the wildcards would perform again with the results revealed on the Monday night.
The semi finalists for 2007 were:

The Top 12 Finalists

Natalie Gauci

Matt Corby

Carl Riseley

Carl Riseley (born 21 December 1982) was a 25-year-old from Sydney, New South Wales. He was advanced by the four judges to the Final 12 through the Wildcard show. He has been awarded one "touchdown" from Mark Holden. Before Idol, Carl was a member of the Royal Australian Navy, where he plays the trumpet in the Navy Band. Carl was the final eliminee on 12 November 2007 when Natalie Gauci and Matt Corby proceeded into the Grand Final. He has a younger brother called Anthony. He is currently signed to Universal Records and will release his debut album The Rise in April 2008. Carl Riseley vocally supported axed judge Mark Holden on his departure in March 2008. Carl is referred to as the "swing king" and has been marketed in a Tom Jones type way.

Marty Simpson

Marty Simpson is a 21-year-old from the Central Coast, New South Wales. He plays guitar, writes his own songs and has been described as a "bloke's bloke" by Mark Holden. Before Idol, he worked with his father as a bricklayer. He was eliminated on 5 November 2007. Marty was described by judges as lazy, something which he himself acknowledged. He finished in 4th place, and was in the bottom appearance four times before being eliminated. Although not initially named by Today Tonight as vote-rigging, he was later named and subsequently became the 4th in a row named that was eliminated. On leaving, Marty Simpson stated that he had been approached by Sony BMG in relation to a recording contract.

Tarisai Vushe

Tarisai Vushe (born 23 March 1987) is a Zimbabwe born, 23-year-old who auditioned in Sydney, New South Wales. Before Idol, she worked in her family store and studied psychology at university, whilst attending Hillsong Church affiliate Shirelive Church . She was eliminated on 29 October 2007. She was known for her powerful vocals, which were described by the judges at audition and throughout the series as "sending shivers down the spine" when she sang. She was awarded one touchdown by Mark Holden. She was criticised by judges the last few weeks before eviction. She was briefly the favourite to win the competition, the only person other than Matt Corby to be favourite in the whole series. She was evicted amidst claims that she was "fake", which led to great controversy. She sang at the Sydney New Year's Eve concert, performed an original song at a Sydney Martial Arts contest in January 2008 and in March 2008 she went on tour with South African band
Malaika and toured in Macao (China) in September 2008. The debut single "Head Over Heels" was released in March 2010 which got nominated at the AFRO-AUSTRALIAN MUSIC AND MOVIE AWARDS for the Best single of the year and the best vocalist 2010 where she won both awards. In 2011 she starred on an American TV show Killer instinct as Muggy. In 2013 she starred on American's deadly women.

Daniel Mifsud

Daniel Mifsud is a 23-year-old from Sydney, New South Wales. He was advanced by the public to the Final 12 through the Wildcard Show. He has been awarded one "touchdown" from Mark Holden. Before Idol, Daniel was a music teacher in a primary school. Daniel was eliminated on 22 October 2007.

Ben McKenzie

Ben McKenzie (born 24 July 1990) is from Gosford, on the Central Coast of New South Wales. Ben was a favourite to win the competition until he was eliminated on 15 October 2007 which led to judge Marcia Hines threatening to quit the show in relation to his eviction and the treatment of him by the other 3 judges. Ben was falsely named by Today Tonight as being involved in "vote-rigging" and was the first of 4 in a row who were eliminated. He had never been in the bottom 3 until his elimination night. Ben performed at Sydney's New Year's Eve concert to end 2007. Ben has composed many original songs which he has been performing at small shows around Sydney & the Central Coast of NSW. He has also traveled to perform in Melbourne. Ben's film production company Dreams Unleashed Productions has completed filming and editing his first feature-length film, 'Submerged (Feature Film)(2011)'. The film is a unique combination of horror and supernatural thriller, drawing influences from The Ring and Silent Hill and was released on YouTube January 2012. The soundtrack includes music written by Ben.

Jacob Butler

Jacob Butler first auditioned for Australian Idol in 2005, but failed to made it past the Top 100 Group Performances. Jacob reached sixth place in the Australian version of The X Factor television series in the same year. Jacob tried out for Idol again at the 2007 auditions, singing "Don't Look Back In Anger" by Oasis. The Judges were impressed by his improvement in both his songwriting and musicianship. He was soon placed into the Top 24. Australia made him their second top 12 finalist after his rendition of Snow Patrol's "Chasing Cars". Jacob was eliminated on 8 October 2007. His last performance on Idol was on Brit Pop night. He performed The Beatles hit "Let It Be". At the end of 2007, Jacob performed at the Sydney New Years Eve Concert alongside fellow Idol contestants Ben McKenzie and Tarisai Vushe. Since Idol, Jacob has released his debut album "Reason" in Germany and other countries across Europe. The album was released in Australia and New Zealand in August 2013.

Mark Da Costa

Mark Da Costa is a 28-year-old from Sydney, New South Wales, thus was the oldest finalist. He was advanced by the public to the Final 12 through the Wildcard show. He was eliminated on 1 October 2007, finishing in 9th place. Although already eliminated, Mark was named by Today Tonight as being involved in vote-rigging. Since leaving Idol, Mark da Costa has gone back to performing regularly, and has been on tour with his band for most of 2008.

Lana Krost

Lana Krost is a 17-year-old student from Western Australia. She auditioned in Perth. She is adopted and her birth mother was a Vietnamese opera singer who travelled around China singing with her grandparents. The Sun Herald. Retrieved on 24 September 2007. She was eliminated on 24 September 2007. Since leaving Idol, Lana graduated from her high school St Hilda's Anglican School for Girls and is currently attending WAAPA doing a contemporary music course.

Brianna Carpenter

Brianna Carpenter is a 21-year-old from Brisbane, Queensland. Before Idol, Brianna was studying music production at the Conservatorium. She was eliminated on 17 September 2007.

Holly Weinert

Holly Weinert (born 23 April 1987) is a 20-year-old from Mildura, Victoria. Before Idol, Holly worked in a bar in Mildura. She was eliminated on 10 September 2007, finishing in 12th place.

Elimination chart

Elimination chart

Doing It For The Kids

On 19 October 2007, there was a special Australian Idol telecast, "Doing It For The Kids", to raise money for Ronald McDonald House and Telstra Child Flight. Based on the American Idol special "Idol Gives Back", the Top 6 performed, as well as other artists.
Top 6:
Special Guests:

Results show performances

Grand Finale performances

Commercial Releases

The day following the Grand Finale, Australian Idol Season 5 Winner Natalie Gauci released the winner's single "Here I Am". The single debuted at #2 on the ARIA Charts behind hugely popular international act Timbaland. The single was considered to have sold not as well as expected with only 8,000 copies sold in its first week. Its second week it stayed put at #2 and sales proved better with close to 11,000 copies sold making a total of 19,000 copies sold. Also in its second week the single was certified with Gold status. In its third week it dropped to #7 and its fourth week dropped down to #18. It fell into even greater obscurity in its fifth week dropping down to #29. Its sixth week fared better with #27.
Natalie's debut album, The Winner's Journey, was released on 8 December 2007. In its first week it debuted on the charts at #12 and sold just over 11,000 copies. It was also certified with Platinum status meaning 70,000 units were shipped off, but going by sales figures the album did not meet these expected sales. In its second week it moved up to #11 and total sales figures bumped up to just over 18,000. In its third week Natalie's album stayed at #11 and sales reached just under 20,000 copies. Its fourth week was a disappointing week with the album dropping down to #18. In its fifth week it reached #19.






