[[Kern County Fire Department]]

CATEGORIES: County government agencies in California, Fire departments in California, Government of Kern County, California

The Kern County Fire Department (KCFD) provides fire protection and emergency response services for the unincorporated areas of Kern County, California, and for multiple cities within the county. The department covers an area which spans over .
In addition to the unincorporated areas of Kern County, the department also services the cities of 

Equipment

Helicopters

The KCFD has two helicopters in their air operations unit, H-407 and H-408. Both helos are Bell UH-1H "Huey"s and are fitted for both hoisting of personnel for a rescue as well as for dropping of water during a fire.  The underside can also be fitted with water dropping tanks that carry 320 gallons of water and have the ability to pump water from a reservoir or other water source or they can be filled on the ground with fire 
hose.

Fixed-wing

In addition to their helicopters, Kern County also has a fixed-wing Aero Commander 690A at their disposal.

Emergency Operations

Battalion 1 - Tehachapi

Battalion 1 comprises the southeastern portion of Kern County. It is divided by Highway 58 that runs east and west and by Highway 14 that runs north and south. A portion of the California Aqueduct, which runs north and south, serves as the eastern boundary of the State Responsibility Area (SRA) for Battalion 1. The western edge of the SRA in Battalion 1 is established by the southeastern edge of the San Joaquin Valley. Battalion one provides fire protection services for the incorporated cities of 

Battalion 2 - Western Kern

Battalion 2 makes up most of the west side of the County of Kern, specifically areas west of Highway 33 and the area surrounding Highway 166. There are no large incorporated cities within Battalion 2.

Battalion 3 - North Kern

Battalion 3 includes the north central portion of the county with Highway 65 serving as the western boundary.

Battalion 4 - Valley

Battalion 4 comprises the unincorporated parts of Bakersfield to the West and South. 

Battalion 5 - Mt. Pinos

Battalion 5 is located in the South and South West portion of the County bordering it is bordering Los Angeles County and Ventura County. Included in Battalion 5's coverage area are the cities of 

Battalion 6 - Foothill

Battalion 7 - Kern River Valley

Battalion 7 is located in the northeast portion of the county. Within the coverage area are the towns of  

Other Fire Departments in Kern County




