[[Glass Candy]]

CATEGORIES: American indie rock groups, American musical duos, Dance-punk musical groups, Electronic music duos, Electronic music groups from Oregon, Electronic rock musical groups, Italo disco groups, Musical groups established in 1996, Musical groups from Portland, Oregon, Post-punk revival music groups, Synthpop groups, 1996 establishments in Oregon

Glass Candy is an American electronic music duo that formed in 1996 in Portland, Oregon by vocalist Ida No and producer and guitarist Johnny Jewel. While the band's early work blends elements of no wave, indie rock, and glam rock, their later work incorporates  disco, electronic rock, hip-hop, and industrial.
The band has evolved consistently through the years since their original collaboration, and experimenting with various musical styles. They have released a number of albums since the early 2000s, their most recent full-length being the B-side compilation album Deep Gems (2008). The band's upcoming studio album, Body Work, is set to be released sometime in the future.

History

Beginnings

Glass Candy was formed by Ida No, from Vancouver, Washington, and Johnny Jewel (born John Padgett), from Austin, Texas, in 1996. They soon began producing music under the name Glass Candy and the Shattered Theatre.
No describes their early work as "droney and weird." Nonetheless, their early releases show a heavy glam and new wave influence, as evidenced in their self-released first three singles, "Brittle Women" (1999), "Metal Gods" (2001) and a cover of Josie Cotton's "Johnny Are You Queer" (2002). They toured with The Convocation Of... in 2001, and released a live album that year on Vermin Scum.

Love Love Love and B/E/A/T/B/O/X

Their debut studio album, Love Love Love, was issued on Troubleman Unlimited Records in 2003. In 2006, Jewel founded Italians Do It Better with Mike Simonetti as a subsidiary of Troubleman. In November 2007, Glass Candy released their second studio album B/E/A/T/B/O/X on Italians Do It Better to considerable critical praise. A compilation album titled Deep Gems was released in late 2008, containing rarities, B-sides, and remixes. In a review of Deep Gems, Spin magazine referred to the band as an "eccentric Portland pair" that "spook the dance floor".
Glass Candy's songs were used for a Chloé runway show,
Glass Candy's song "Digital Versicolor" was featured prominently in Nicolas Winding Refn's 2008 film Bronson, partially in a pair of scenes, and in full over the closing credits. An unofficial music video was made for the song in 2005 and starred Australian actress Rose Byrne.

2011–present: Body Work

The band's third studio album Body Work is scheduled for release sometime in the future.
On November 20, 2012, Glass Candy was invited to perform at a private Chanel party in Berlin to celebrate the release of Karl Lagerfeld's book The Little Black Jacket. Symmetry, Jewel's instrumental project with Nat Walker, opened the evening with an atmospheric 80-minute set leading up to Lagerfeld's arrival.
In 2013, Glass Candy will be performing at a variety of private fashion/runway events in South America, North America, Europe, and Asia. Glass Candy will also be performing worldwide at a variety of music festivals, including Pitchfork and Primavera Sound.
On August 5, 2013, Glass Candy released the music video for the song "Redheads Feel More Pain", which appears on the Italians Do It Better compilation album After Dark 2.

Characteristics

No's vocals have been likened to '60s German singer Nico and "a frightened Debbie Harry or a pissed-off Lene Lovich in a haunted disco". Their work as of 2008 borrows from Italo disco, freestyle music, Krautrock, hip hop, and new wave.
Jewel has cited Marilyn Monroe films, 1980s cop show soundtracks, Goblin, and John Carpenter soundtracks as inspirational. The Rolling Stones, and Queen. The group has also said that stores could appropriately file their music "between Olivia Newton-John, Suicide and Schoolly D".

Members

Discography

Studio albums

Albums sold during tours

Compilation albums

Extended plays

Singles






