[[Matthew Gray (archer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 births, Living people, Archers at the 1996 Summer Olympics, Archers at the 2000 Summer Olympics, Archers at the 2008 Summer Olympics, Olympic archers of Australia, Australian archers, Commonwealth Games gold medallists for Australia, Australian Institute of Sport archers, Archers at the 2010 Commonwealth Games, Australian police officers

Matthew Gray is an Australian archer.  His day job is being a water policeman. He has participated in three Olympic Games and won a gold medal at the 2010 Commonwealth Games.

Personal

Gray is a water policeman.  He has two daughters. He has a nursing degree.  While training for the 2010 Commonwealth Games, he was also doing shift work at John James Hospital in Canberra.

Archery

Gray competes in archery. His father bought him his first bow at a garage sale, and he has been competing in archery for over thirty years.  He attributed becoming a cop with making him more aggressive as a competitor. He was an Australian Institute of Sport archery scholarship holder.
Gray has won several medals. At the 1988 World Field Championships in Bolzano, Italy, he won a bronze medal in the junior men's recurve event.
At the 1992 World Field Championships in Margraten, Netherlands, he was part of the Australian gold medal winning men's team alongside  Clint Freeman and Tony Pitt Lancaster. He won a bronze medal in the men's recurve event at the 1994 World Field Championships in Vertus, France. He won a gold in the men's recurve event at the 1998 European Grand Prix in Czech Republic.  His teammates included  Simon Fairweather, and Scott Hunter-Russell. In 1999, he won a team gold medal at the world indoor championships.  At the 2008 World Cup in Santo Domingo Dominican Republic, he was part of the Australian silver medal winning recurve team that.
In March 2003, he was ranked the fourth best male Australian archer in recurve, ahead of Robert Turner.  That month, he  had 2520 points.
In preparation for the 2010 Commonwealth Games, he trained in his garage. He represented Australia at the 2010 Commonwealth Games.  He was Australia's oldest competitor at the Games. In 2010, he was hoping his Commonwealth Games experiences would prepare him for Olympic selection for 2012 in London.
He has participated in three Olympic Games in the archery event.
In one of the early rounds of the 2008 Games, he lost to Chu Sian Cheng of Malaysia.




