[[Pakistan–Russia relations]]

CATEGORIES: Pakistan–Russia relations, Bilateral relations of Russia, Bilateral relations of Pakistan

Pakistan–Russian relations or Russo-Pakistan relations refers to the bilateral, historical, cultural, and international relations between the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the Russian Federation. The Soviet Union and Pakistan first established the diplomatic and bilateral relations on 1 May 1948.E. Mr. Sergey Peskov, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Russian Federation to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan at the Jubilee Function on the occasion of celebration of the 60th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Russia and Pakistan - Official Website of the Embassy of the Russian Federation in the Islamic Republic of Pakistan
For the most of the Cold War, the Soviet Union relations with Pakistan have seen ups and downs during the different periods of Pakistan. In 1947-50s, Soviet Union enjoyed relatively healthy and strong relations with Pakistan when it was under the civilian control but the relations went ultimately cold soon after the U.S.-backed 1958 military coup d'état, although attempts to warm the relations were made after the 1965 Indo-Pakistan war and in midst of 1970s, the relations were quickly improved and warmed.
In response to ongoing Soviet support to communist Afghanistan regarding the Durand Line issue during the late 1970s and 1980s, Pakistan began to support Mujahideen rebels attempting to overthrow the Soviet-backed communist regime and was later supported by the United States, United Kingdom, China and Saudi Arabia. This later led to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan.
Due to rapidly shifting global geopolitical interests spurred by the end of the Cold War and the ongoing U.S.-led War on Terror, Pakistani public opinion towards Russia has fluctuated in recent years, with 18% viewing Russia favorably in 2007, falling to 11% in 2011 and rising to 20% in 2012,Pakistani Opinion of Russia Pew Research Global Opinion Project and according to the BBC World Service Poll, 9% of Pakistanis view Russian influence positively in 2010,2010 BBC World Service Poll BBC  14% in 2011,2011 BBC World Service Poll BBC falling to 12% in 2012,2012 BBC World Service Poll BBC and increasing to 18% in 2013.2013 BBC World Service Poll BBC
However, Pakistanis have generally rated Vladimir Putin's leadership poorly, with 7% expressing confidence in him in 2006, and only 3% in 2012,Pakistani Confidence in Putin and for the most part, a plurality of Russians have consistently rated Pakistan's influence negatively, with 13% expressing a positive view in 2008,2008 BBC World Service Poll BBC increasing slightly to 14% in 2010, and falling to 8% in 2013.

Historical relations

Soviet relations with Pakistan dated back to 1922 after the Bolshevik Revolution. From 1922-27, people who entered from Soviet Union into territory (now Pakistan) hold by British Indian Empire, attempted to start a communist revolution against the British Empire. The series of coups known as Peshawar Conspiracy Cases; the British Empire was terrified after the intelligence on attempted communist revolution in India were revealed to authorities. From 1947-50 and 1965–69, the trade, educational, and cultural exchanges between two countries increased. But the Soviet efforts were undermined by Soviet Union by itself when Soviet criticism of Pakistan's position in the 1971 war with India weakened bilateral relations, and many people of Pakistan believed that the August 1971 Indo-Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Peace and Cooperation encouraged India invasion of East Pakistan. Subsequent Soviet arms sales to India, amounting to billions of dollars on concessional terms, reinforced this argument. The USSR also kept vetoing every resolution regarding the East Pakistan situation that Pakistan brought to the United Nations.

Relations with Superpower: 1947-1991

Democratic governments (1947-1958)

The Soviet Union-Pakistan relations (Russian: Союз Советских Социалистических Республик -Пакистан) dated back to 1948 when Moscow directed a farewell message to then-Prime minister Liaquat Ali Khan. Pakistan gained independence during the penultimate times of cold war, and the Soviet influence on Imperial Iran had deepened, and the Russian military involvement in Afghanistan had a long history, going back to Tsarist times in the so-called "Great Game" between Russia and Great Britain. 

According to the studies conducted by the Institute of Strategic Studies (ISS), the Soviet Union did not welcomed the partition of Bengal and Punjab, fluctuating from cool to antagonistic and hostile relations. Moscow gave vehement criticism to United Kingdom for partitioning the region, regarded as the "Divide and rule strategy of foreign policy of Great Britain, and had earlier labeled the Muslim League as a tool of the British, from its very inception. Joseph Stalin and officials at Moscow did not send any congratulatory message to Governor-General Jinnah— founder of Pakistan. "Pak-Russia Relations and Terrorism" The Frontier Post Newspaper, June 05, 2013 Rather the Soviet Union extended relations after the death of Jinnah, after sending the invitation to Prime minister Liaquat Ali Khan on April 1948. During the 1947 war, Soviet Union remained neutral non-committal attitude, while the Western countries moved the Kashmir dispute to United Nations Security Council, to settle the dispute. The Status quo was more acceptable to India, not by Pakistan, initially influence Moscow to vote in favor of India in 1947. During 1947-53, Pakistan was an early member of Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) facing the challenging issues involving the economic default, internal unrest, challenges in foreign policy, constitutional crises, and the problems at the Constituent Assembly after the death of Jinnah. Initially, Pakistan waited to see if any nation was willing to help the country to re-build its massive military and economical aid, and leading bureaucrat at this time, Sir Firoz Ali Khan had revealed that:

In April 1948, at the UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and Far East, Pakistan's foreign officers of Pakistan announced that "she (Pakistan) would accept aid from any source", but the Soviets did not respond to that request. In 1948, Prime minister Ali Khan made several attempts to Soviet Union to established the relations, but Soviet remained quiet. On April 1948, Foreign minister Sir Zafarullah Khan held talks with Deputy Foreign minister Andrei Gromyko, subjecting the diplomatic relation. During this time, Pakistan saw relations with the Soviet Union from the prism of relations with India just as these days it sees ties with the United States.
However, the policy was changed after Soviet Union witnessed two events particularly forcing them to respond to Pakistan when India decided to remain within the Commonwealth Nations, it was a clear sign that India was leaning towards the Western countries under the U.S. auspices. The second event was the Indian premier Jawaharlal Nehru's announcement to pay the state visit to the United States on May 7, 1949. To a reaction, Soviet Union extended an invitation to Prime Minister, Liaquat Ali Khan, in 1949 to visit Moscow, becoming the first prime minister from the Commonwealth of Nations to visit the communist country, but Soviet Union herself did not materialized the dates or the plans. Instead, Prime minister Ali Khan went onto paid a state visit to United States, taking the largest diplomatic and military convey with him, a clear rebuff to Soviet Union. According to studies completed by Pakistan Institute of International Affairs (PIIA), the real motives, goals and objectives, were to an economic and technical assistance. "There are important divergences of outlook between Pakistan, with its Islamic background, and the Soviet Union with its background of Marxism which is atheistic...... Furthermore, there was the question whether Russia could supply the aid, both material and technical, which Pakistan so urgently needed..." PIIA noted.
The relations suffered setback when members of Communist Party led by communist Faiz Ahmad Faiz, sponsored by Major-General Akbar Khan, hatched a coup d'état against Prime minister Liaquat Ali Khan in 1950 (See Rawalpindi conspiracy case). Soon, three years after, Prime minister Liaqat Ali Khan assassinated while campaigning for his electoral term. During 1954-58, the relations were strained and hostility against each other as time passes. In 1954, Pakistan became a member of SEATO and CENTO in 1955, which Soviet Union did not welcomed, overtly opting the Pro-Indian policy and regarding the Kashmir as part of India.
As a result of 1954-55 elections, Prime minister Huseyn Suhrawardy, a left-wing prime minister, made deliberate attempts to improve relations. On March–April 1954, a delegation of the Soviet cultural troupe toured Pakistan and a festival of the Soviet films was held in Karachi. To reciprocate this, the Pakistan Government also sent a delegation to study the Soviet industrial and agricultural development In 1956, Soviet premier Nikolai Bulganin offered technical and scientific assistance to Prime minister Suhrawardy for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, offering Soviet contribution after Suhrawardy submitted the plan to established the nuclear power against India. In 1958, Soviet Union agreed to give Pakistan an handful in aid in agriculture, economic, science, control of pest, flood control, desalination, soil erosion and technical assistance to Pakistan. In 1958, Pakistan and Soviet Union finally established an oil consortium, Pakistan Oilfields, and expressing interests in establishing the country's first steel mills.

Military dictatorships (1958-1971)

In July 1957, Prime minister Suhrawardy approved the leasing of the secret ISI installation, Peshawar Air Station, to CIA.  After commencing the military coup d'état against President Iskander Mirza, Army Commander Ayub Khan visited United States, further enhancing relations with the U.S. while at same time, trying establishing link with Soviet Union through Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. 
In 1959, Ayub Khan permitted the flights of reconnaissance and covert surveillance flights of U-2, giving the authorization of final U-2 flight, piloted by USAF Captain Francis Gary Powers. This operation ended violently when Soviet Air Defence Forces shot down the U-2, capturing its pilot near at the vicinity. Overall, Ayub Khan knew of this operation, understanding the consequences and aftermath, and shuddered his shoulders when he was notified in London, by the USAF and the CIA.
The U-2 incidentMujtaba Haider Zaidi The Frontier Post Newspaper, June 05, 2013--~~~~ severely compromised Pakistan security and worsened relations between the Soviet Union and Pakistan, with Soviet now backing India.  During this time, the Indian nuclear programme expanded and progressed at very exponential level. As an attempt to put up a bold front, former chief of army staff General Khalid Mahmud Arif while commenting on the incident stated that, "Pakistan felt deceived because the U.S. had kept her in the dark about such clandestine spy operations launched from Pakistan's territory".
A great Soviet ire was on Pakistan, and the Soviets threatened to bomb the base if future missions were flown from it. Soviet Union paid back its revenge on Indo-Pakistani war of 1965, emerged as the biggest supplier of military hardware to India.

=Relations with West and East Pakistan=

The Soviet Union had far more better relations with East-Pakistan(Now Bangladesh), and had strong ties with Communist Party after successfully staging the protest (see Bengali Language Movement) to give national recognition to the language as compare to Urdu in 1956 constitution. When the mutual defence treaty, following the arrival of military advsers from the MAAG group, which was announced in February 1954, there was a great outcry in East-Pakistan. Many demonstrations, led by communist party were held and the 162 newly elected members of East-Pakistan Parliament signed a statement, which denounced Pakistan's government for signing a military pact with United States.
In West-Pakistan,  the Soviet relations with West-Pakistan was improved after the formation of leading democratic socialist Pakistan Peoples Party. The tendency of socialism was greater in West Pakistan, in contrast to East Pakistan were the tendency of communism was at its height. After the 1965 war, Soviet relations with socialist mass, Awami National Party, Pakistan People's Party, and the Pakistan Socialist Party, impulsively improved. In 1972, the West-Pakistan Parliament passed the resolution which called for establishing ties with Soviet Union. During the 1980s when the purged took place under the Zia regime, the socialists members escaped to Soviet Union through Afghanistan, seeking the political asylum there.

=Role in Indo-Pakistani war of 1971=

The Soviet Union played a decisive role in the 1971 Winter war, first signing the Indo-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation. The Soviet Union sympathized with the Bangladeshis, and supported the Indian Army and Mukti Bahini during the war, recognizing that the independence of Bangladesh would weaken the position of its rivals—the United States, Saudi Arabia, and China.
On 6 December and 13 December 1971, the Soviet Navy dispatched two groups of cruisers and destroyers and a nuclear submarine armed with nuclear missiles from Vladivostok; they trailed U.S. Task Force 74 into the Indian Ocean from 18 December 1971 until 7 January 1972. The Soviets also had a nuclear submarine to help ward off the threat posed to India by USS Enterprise task force in the Indian Ocean. Indianexpress. Retrieved on 2011-04-14. The Soviet Navy's presence was threatening for Pakistan, with the Soviet nuclear submarines' K-320 and Charlie, movements were picked up by the Pakistan Navy's submarines. The Pakistan Navy's submarines Ghazi, Hangor, and Mangor had sent solid evidence of Soviet Navy's covert involvement helping the Indian Navy, and Soviet Navy's own secret operations against the Pakistan Navy.  Pakistan Navy avoided aggressive contacts with the Soviet Navy due to possible nuclear retaliation by Soviet nuclear submarines in Karachi. In 2012, in an official press release in Russian Consulate-General in Karachi, the Russian ambassador remarked that former Soviet stance against Pakistan in 1971, was a "somewhat embarrassed our relations".

=Democratic government (1971-1977)=

The democratic socialist alliance led by then-Prime minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto made an effort to improve relations with the Soviet Union, and the for the first time in the history of Pakistan, Soviet Union's ties with Pakistan began to warm and relations were quickly improved. Reviving his foreign policy, Bhutto relieved Pakistan from SEATO and CENTO, breaking off the relations with the United States under the President Jimmy Carter. In 1974, Bhutto paid a tiring and lengthy state visit to Soviet Union, becoming the first prime minister since the independence of Pakistan in 1947. Bhutto and his delegation was met with great jubilation, a warm-heated celebration took place after Bhutto was received by Alexei Kosygin in Moscow.
While there, Bhutto succeeded to convince the Soviet Union to establish the integrated steel mills, which prompted the Soviet Union to provide funds for the billion dollar project.[ref]
