[[Commission on Scottish Devolution]]

CATEGORIES: 2008 establishments in Scotland, 2008 in politics, Political organisations in Scotland, Scottish commissions and inquiries, Devolution in the United Kingdom, Constitution of the United Kingdom, Constitutional commissions, Public finance of Scotland, Scottish Parliament

The Commission on Scottish Devolution, (), also referred to as the Calman Commission, Scottish Parliament Commissionholyrood.The Scottish Parliament - Official Report The governing Scottish National Party opposed the creation of the commission.
Its terms of reference were: "To review the provisions of the Scotland Act 1998 in the light of experience and to recommend any changes to the present constitutional arrangements that would enable the Scottish Parliament to serve the people of Scotland better, improve the financial accountability of the Scottish Parliament and continue to secure the position of Scotland within the United Kingdom."
The Commission held its first full meeting at the Scottish Parliament on 28 April 2008 and met at roughly monthly intervalsCommission on Scottish Devolution - Minutes of 1st Meeting during its period of work.
It issued a first report on 2 December 2008, and a final report on 15 June 2009.  It was accountable to both the Scottish Parliament and the UK Government.
The Commission on Scottish Devolution should not be confused with the Scottish Constitutional Commission, which is an independent think-tank.
Calman Plus (also called devolution plus, Devo Plus or Devo 2.0) as the next step in deepening devolution. Calman Plus should not be confused with full fiscal autonomy, although neither concept has been definitively defined.

Membership

The Commission has 15 members,Members of the Commission on Scottish Devolution including nominees of the three Unionist parties, representatives of business, trade unions, academia and community organisations.

Task groups

The Commission established five task groups to assist it in its work.  These met in between meetings of the full Commission.  The task groups and their chairs are as follows:

Independent expert group

There is also an independent expert group established to advise the Commission on financial accountability.  This is chaired by Professor Anton Muscatelli, Vice-Chancellor and Principal of Heriot-Watt University, and includes academics from Scotland, the rest of the UK and overseas.  It produced a detailed report for the Commission in November 2008, examining different models for funding sub-national parliaments, and suggesting that a mixture of grant funding, tax devolution and tax assignment was likely to be necessary in a Scottish context.  In June 2009, the IEG published further reports on borrowing and on natural resource taxation, plus a response to some of the Commission's consultation questions.

First report

The Commission's first report, released in December 2008The Future of Scottish Devolution within the Union: A First Report declared that devolution had been a success, while making the case for Scotland's continued place within the United Kingdom.  On funding, it endorsed the view of the independent expert group that full fiscal autonomy is incompatible with the continuation of the United Kingdom.

Final report

The Commission's final report was published on 15 June 2009.
The main conclusions and recommendations are:

Calman Review white paper

Responding to the findings of the review, the British Government announced on 25 November 2009, that new powers would be devolved to the Scottish Government, notably on how it can raise tax and carry out capital borrowing, and the running of Scottish Parliament elections. These proposals were detailed in a white paper setting out a new Scotland Bill, to become law before the 2015 Holyrood elections. The proposal was criticised by the British Parliament opposition parties for not proposing to implement any changes before the next general election. Scottish Constitution Minister Michael Russell criticised the white paper, calling it "flimsy" and stating that their proposed Referendum (Scotland) Bill, 2010, whose own white paper was to be published five days later, would be "more substantial". According to The Independent, the Calman Review white paper proposals fall short of what would normally be seen as requiring a referendum.

2010 UK coalition government

The United Kingdom Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition government which was elected in 2010 pledged to implement the findings of the Calman CommissionPolicy-by-policy: The coalition government's plans and subsequently used them as the basis for the Scotland Act 2012. In 2014 the UK government announced that in 2015 the Scottish Parliament would also be given direct access to capital funds and the ability to issue bonds.








