[[Daniel]]

CATEGORIES: Daniel, Hebrew Bible people, Angelic visionaries, Jewish writers, Iranian Jews, People celebrated in the Lutheran liturgical calendar, Prophets in Christianity, Prophets of Islam, Year of death missing, Book of Daniel, Year of birth unknown, Old Testament Apocrypha people



Daniel (, Hebrew "God is my Judge") is the protagonist in the Book of Daniel of the Hebrew Bible. In the narrative, Daniel was one of several children taken into Babylonian captivity where they were educated in Chaldean thought. However, he never converted to Neo-Babylonian ways. Through instruction from "the God of Heaven" (Dan.2:18), he interpreted dreams and visions of kings, thus becoming a prominent figure in the court of Babylon. He also had apocalyptic visions concerning the Four monarchies. Some of the most famous events in Daniel's life are: Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, The writing on the wall and Daniel in the lions' den.

Hebrew Bible

In the book of Daniel

=Induction into Babylon=

In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim (606 BC), Daniel and his friends Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah were among the young Jewish nobility carried off to Babylon. The four were chosen for their intellect and beauty to be trained as advisers to the Babylonian court (). Daniel was given the name Belteshazzar, i.e. prince of Bel or Bel protect the king, not to be confused with the neo-Babylonian king Belshazzar. Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah were given the Babylonian names Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego respectively. A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.

=Nebuchadnezzar=

In the narrative of Daniel Chapter 2, it was the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar and the king was distressed by his dreams,v.1 so he summoned his interpreters.v.2 However, they were unable to relay or interpret the dreams.v.10-11 The king was furious and demanded the execution of all the wise men in Babylon.v.12 When Daniel learned of the king's order, he asked the captain of the guard, Arioch, to let him see the king.v.13-16 Daniel prayed for God's mercy to receive a revelation from the king's dream.v.15-18 God then revealed the mystery to Daniel in a vision that same night.v.19 Daniel praised God with a doxology.v.20-23 After meeting with Arioch again, Daniel was granted access to the king,v.24-30 and relayed the description of the dream,v.31-36 followed by its interpretation.v.37-45 With Daniel's successful interpretation of the dream, the king expressed homage,v.46 followed by his own doxology that affirmed that Daniel's God is God of gods for revealing this mystery of his dream.v.47 Daniel was then promoted to chief governor over the whole province of Babylon.v.48 At Daniel's request, his companions were also promoted, so that they remained at the king's court.v.49

=Nebuchadnezzar's madness=

Nebuchadnezzar recounted his dream of a huge tree that was suddenly cut down at the command of a heavenly messenger. Daniel was summoned and interpreted the dream. The tree was Nebuchadnezzar himself, who for seven years, lost his mind and became like a wild beast. All of this came to pass until, at the end of the specified time, Nebuchadnezzar acknowledged that "the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men"4:25 and his sanity and kingdom were restored to him.

=Belshazzar=

In Daniel's later years, king Belshazzar held a great feast for all his nobles. In a drunken state, the king called for the sacred vessels captured from the Jerusalem temple and profanely drank from them. Suddenly, the fingers of a man's hand appeared before the king and wrote on the wall of the palace.5:1–5 When none of his wise men were able to interpret the message, Daniel was called in at the suggestion of the queen.5:10–15 After reprimanding the king for his impiety, Daniel interpreted the words "MENE MENE TEKEL UPHARSIN"5:25 to mean that Belshazzar was about to lose his kingdom to the Medes and the Persians. For successfully reading the cryptic handwriting, Daniel was rewarded with a purple robe and proclaimed that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom.5:17–29 "¶ In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain. )

=Darius the Mede=

After the Persian conquest of Babylon, Daniel was the first of three presidents over parts of the kingdom during the reign of Darius the Mede.6:1–2 When the king decided to set Daniel over the whole kingdom, the other officials plotted his downfall. Unable to uncover any corruption, they used Daniel's religious devotion to try to defeat him. The officials tricked the king into issuing an irrevocable decree that "whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or man for thirty days, save of thee, O king, he shall be cast into the den of lions."6:3–7 When Daniel continued to pray three times a day toward Jerusalem, he was thrown into a lions den, much to the distress of Darius.6:8–17 After an angel shut the lions' mouths, Daniel was delivered, and Daniel's accusers, with their wives and children, were thrown into the den and they were devoured. ()

=Visions and dreams=

Daniel's ministry as a prophet began late in life. Whereas his early exploits were a matter of common knowledge within his community, these same events, with his pious reputation, served as the basis for his prophetic ministry. The recognition for his prophetic message was that of other prophets like Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel whose backgrounds were the basis for their revelations.
From Chapter 7 to the end of the book of Daniel, an apocalyptic vision is being described, supposedly from the perspective of Daniel. This marks a change in the narrative from Daniel interpreting to messengers of God interpreting for Daniel. Daniel dreamed of four beasts that came out of the sea: a lion with eagles wings, a bear with three tusks, a leopard with four wings and four heads, and a beast with iron teeth, ten horns and one little horn and human eyes.() This introduction leads into a series of dreams and visions where these events are expressed in greater detail.
Scholars argue that each of these beasts represent an emperor or kingdom that ruled over the Israelites. The vast majority of scholars). The final message of the second half of Daniel is that God will deliver the people from oppression, the latest of which is Antiochus IV.

=Daniel's final days=

The time and circumstances of Daniel's death have not been recorded. However, tradition maintains that Daniel was still alive in the third year of Cyrus according to the Tanakh ( posit that he possibly died at Susa in Iran. Tradition holds that his tomb is located in Susa at a site known as Shush-e Daniyal.  Other locations have been claimed as the site of his burial, including Daniel's Tomb in Kirkuk, Iraq, as well as Babylon, Egypt, Tarsus and, notably, Samarkand, which claims a tomb of Daniel (see "The Ruins of Afrasiab" in the Samarkand article), with some traditions suggesting that his remains were removed, perhaps by Tamerlane, from Susa to Samarkand (see, for instance, Itinerary of Benjamin of Tudela, section 153).

In the book of Ezekiel

The prophet Ezekiel, with whom Daniel was a contemporary, describes Daniel as a "pattern of righteousness" in the Book of Ezekiel 14:14, 20 and "wisdom" (28:3). In the Hebrew sections of the Book of Daniel the name is spelled Dânîê'l whereas in the Book of Ezekiel that name is spelled Dânîyê'l.
A number of scholars have proposed that Ezekiel is referring to another Daniel, possibly the "Danel" ("Judgment of God") known from Caananite Ugaritic literature (such as the Epic of Aqhat and Anat.

Pseudepigrapha

Bel and the Dragon

In the Deuterocanonical portion of Daniel known as Bel and the Dragon, the prophet Habakkuk is supernaturally transported by an angel to take a meal to Daniel while he is in the lions' den. In response, Daniel prays, "Thou hast remembered me, O God; neither hast thou forsaken them that seek Thee and love Thee".

Views of Daniel

Judaism

According to Rabbinical tradition, Daniel was of royal descent; and his fate, together with that of his three friends, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, was foretold by the prophet Isaiah to King Hezekiah in these words, "and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon".
According to this view, Daniel and his friends were eunuchs, and were consequently able to prove the groundlessness of charges of immorality brought against them, which had almost caused their death at the hands of the king.

Christianity

The prophet is commemorated in the Coptic Church on the 23rd day of the Coptic month of Baramhat.
On the Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendar, the feast days celebrating St. Daniel the Prophet together with the Three Young Men, falls on December 17 (during the Nativity Fast), on the Sunday of the Holy ForefathersSergei Bulgakov, Manual for Church Servers, 2nd ed. (Kharkov, 1900) pp. 453-5.  December 11–17: Sunday of the Holy Forefathers Translation: Archpriest Eugene D. Tarris (the Sunday which falls between 11 and 17 December), and on the Sunday before Nativity. 461-2. December 18–24: Sunday before the Nativity of Christ of the Holy Fathers Daniel's prophesy regarding the stone which smashed the idol () is often used in Orthodox hymns as a metaphor for the Incarnation: the "stone cut out" being symbolic of the Logos (Christ), and the fact that it was cut "without hands" being symbolic of the virgin birth. Thus the hymns will refer to the Theotokos (Virgin Mary) as the "uncut mountain"
Daniel is commemorated as a prophet in the Calendar of Saints of the Lutheran Church - Missouri Synod together with the Three Young Men (Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego), on December 17.
The Roman Catholic Church commemorates St. Daniel in the Roman Martyrology on July 21.  However, his commemoration at Mass occurs only on local calendars of particular dioceses, sometimes on July 21 and sometimes on another day.  For example, the archdiocese of Gorizia celebrates the feast of St. Daniel, prophet and confessor, on September 11.  The reading of the Mass is taken from the Book of Daniel, chapter 14; the Gradual from Psalm 91; the Alleluia verse from the Epistle of James 1; and the Gospel from Matthew 24.Jewish Encyclopedia

Islam

Muslims traditionally consider Daniyal (Arabic: دانيال, Danyal) as an Islamic prophet, alongside the other major prophets of the Old Testament. Although Daniel is not mentioned in the Qur'an, there are accounts of Daniel's life which feature in later Muslim literature. Daniel is listed as a prophet in all major versions of Stories of the Prophets.Historical Dictionary of Prophets in Islam and Judaism, B. M. Wheeler, Daniel
Muslim exegesis, including Tabari's History of the Prophets and Kings narrates that Daniel was carried off to Babylon after Nebuchadnezzar's attack on Jerusalem. It goes on to state that there he was thrown into the den of the lions, but was later rescued. In one such account, Daniel is aided by Jeremiah, who comes to Babylon to help Daniel in the lions' den. Food in the Lions Den In the apocryphal Bel and the Dragon, however, there is a very similar tale which states that the Hebrew prophet Habbakuk was miraculously transported to the den of the lions, to give a meal to Daniel.
All sources classical and modern, describe Daniel as a saintly and spiritual man. Abdullah Yusuf Ali, in his Qur'anic commentary says:

Baha'i

Daniel is considered a minor prophet in the teachings of the Baha'i Faith. The Bahá'í Principle of Religious Unity and the Challenge of Radical Pluralism. University of North Texas, Denton, Texas. p. 102. Some Baha'i converts introduced the principle of reincarnation, specifically that of Daniel and John. I. Cole, Moojan Momen - 1984

Six tombs of Daniel

There are six different locations claiming to be the site of the tomb of the biblical figure Daniel: Babylon, Kirkuk and Muqdadiyah in Iraq, Susa and Malamir in Iran, and Samarkand in Uzbekistan. Tomb of Daniel at Susa is most agreed tomb .Jewish Encyclopedia







 | url=
 | journal=Biblical Chronology
 | title=Daniel: Historical & Chronological Comments (II)
 | year=1995
 | volume=7
 | issue=1
 | author=James B. Jordan
 | format= &ndash; <sup>[ Scholar search]</sup>
}} 
 | url=
 | title=Catholic Encyclopedia on CD-ROM
 | publisher=New Advent
 | chapter=Daniel
 | author=Francis E. Gigot
 | year=1889
}}
 | title=Historical Issues in the Book of Daniel
 | publisher=Taanathshiloh
 | author=T. E. Gaston
 | year=2009
}}



