[[Jürgen Klopp]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, Sportspeople from Stuttgart, German footballers, 2. Bundesliga players, Eintracht Frankfurt II players, 1. FSV Mainz 05 players, German football managers, Bundesliga managers, 2. Bundesliga managers, 1. FSV Mainz 05 managers, German Lutherans, Borussia Dortmund managers, Living people

Jürgen Norbert Klopp (; born 16 June 1967) is a German football manager and former player. He is currently the manager of Borussia Dortmund in the Bundesliga.
With Klopp as a manager, Borussia Dortmund won the Bundesliga in 2011 and 2012, the DFB-Pokal in 2012, and the DFL-Supercup in 2008 (unofficially) and 2013. Klopp won the German Football Manager of the Year in 2011 and 2012.

Playing career

Klopp played his entire senior career for Mainz 05 from 1989 to 2001. He originally played as a striker, before switching to play as a defender in 1995. He scored 52 league goals.

Managing career

1. FSV Mainz 05

Upon his retirement playing for 1. FSV Mainz 05, Klopp was appointed as the club's manager. He remained as manager for seven years, during which time he led the team to its first appearance in the Bundesliga, and qualification for the 2005–06 UEFA Cup. At the end of the 2006–07 season, Mainz 05 were relegated, but Klopp chose to remain with the club. However, due to the fact that they were not able to achieve promotion, he resigned at the end of the 2007–08 season.

Borussia Dortmund

In May 2008, Klopp was approached to become the new manager of Borussia Dortmund, eventually signing a two-year contract at the club, which had finished in a disappointing 13th place under previous manager Thomas Doll. In his first season in charge, Klopp guided Borussia Dortmund to win the DFB-Supercup, defeating German champions Bayern Munich.
During the 2011–12 Bundesliga season, the 81 points accrued by Borussia Dortmund was the greatest points tally ever amassed in Bundesliga history and the 47 points earned in the second half of the season also set a new record. Borussia Dortmund's 25 league wins equalled Bayern Munich's 1972–73 milestone, while their 28-league match unbeaten sequence was the best ever recorded in a single German top-flight season.
Borussia Dortmund's league form during the 2012–13 season was not as impressive as in the previous campaign, with Klopp insisting that his team would focus on the Champions League to make up for their disappointing run in that competition in the previous season. Klopp's team were drawn against Manchester City, Real Madrid and Ajax in the coined 'Group of Death'. However, they did not lose a game, topping the group with some impressive performances, especially against José Mourinho's Madrid side. Borussia Dortmund progressed all the way to the final, meeting Real Madrid again in the semi final stages of the competition. After an excellent result against them at home in the first leg, a 4–1 victory, a 2–0 loss meant Dortmund only narrowly progressed to the final.
In the beginning of the 2013–14 season, Klopp extended his contract until June 2018. Deniz Aytekin, who was the referee, stated that Klopp's "behavior was rude on more than one occasion." Borussia Dortmund vorstand chairman Hans-Joachim Watzke stated that "I have to support Jürgen Klopp 100 percent in this case" because he saw no reason for a fine and denied that Klopp insulted the fourth official.

Media career

From 2005, Klopp appeared as a regular expert commentator on the German television network ZDF, giving his views on games of the German national football team. On 20 October 2006, he received the Deutscher Fernsehpreis in the category of best sports show. His term ended after UEFA Euro 2008. He was succeeded by Oliver Kahn. During the 2010 World Cup in South Africa, he worked with RTL alongside Günther Jauch.

Advertisement activities

Klopp's popularity is used in advertisements by, among others, the footwear-, athlete clothing- and sporty fashion-company Puma, the carmaker Opel and the German cooperative banking group Volksbanken-Raiffeisenbanken. According to Horizont, trade magazine for the German advertising industry, and the business weekly Wirtschaftswoche, Klopp's role as "brand ambassador" for Opel successfully helped the struggling carmaker to increase sales.

Personal life

Klopp is currently married for the second time. He has two sons, one of whom played for Borussia Dortmund II before he retired due to injuries. Since 2009, Klopp has lived in Herdecke, where many Borussia Dortmund players also live.
In 1995, Klopp successfully finished his studies of Sports science by obtaining a Diplom at the Goethe University Frankfurt. He wrote his diploma thesis about walking (Walking – Bestandsaufnahme und Evaluationsstudie einer Sportart für alle).
Klopp is a Protestant Christian who frequently confesses his faith in public. In a number of interviews and evangelical publications he refers to Jesus Christ as the basis of his life.
Klopp metaphorically compared his approach and style of football to Heavy Metal music.

Managerial statistics

Honours

Manager

Individual





 




