[[José Ramos-Horta]]

CATEGORIES: 1949 births, Columbia University alumni, East Timorese Christian socialists, East Timorese lawyers, East Timorese Nobel laureates, East Timorese people of Portuguese descent, East Timorese politicians, East Timorese refugees, East Timorese Roman Catholics, Fellows of St Antony's College, Oxford, Grand Crosses of the Order of Liberty, Hague Academy of International Law people, Honorary Companions of the Order of Australia, Living people, Nobel Peace Prize laureates, People from Dili, Presidents of East Timor, Prime Ministers of East Timor, Revolutionary Front for an Independent East Timor politicians, Shooting survivors, Recipients of the Order of Timor-Leste

José Manuel Ramos-Horta GCL AC (
As a founder and former member of the Revolutionary Front for an Independent East Timor (FRETILIN), Ramos-Horta served as the exiled spokesman for the East Timorese resistance during the years of the Indonesian occupation of East Timor (1975 to 1999). While he has continued to work with FRETILIN, Ramos-Horta resigned from the party in 1988, becoming an independent politician.
After East Timor achieved independence in 2002, Ramos-Horta was appointed as the country's first foreign minister. He served in this position until his resignation on 25 June 2006, amidst political turmoil. On 26 June, following the resignation of prime minister Mari Alkatiri, Ramos-Horta was appointed acting prime minister by then president, Xanana Gusmão. Two weeks later, on 10 July 2006, he was sworn in as the second prime minister of East Timor. On 11 February 2008, Ramos-Horta was injured when he was shot during an assassination attempt.

Early history and family

Of mestiço ethnicity,Dr. José Ramos-Horta Ramos-Horta was born in 1949 at Dili, capital of East Timor, to a Timorese mother and a Portuguese father who had been exiled to what was then Portuguese Timor by the Salazar dictatorship. He was educated in a Catholic mission in the small village of Soibada, later chosen by FRETILIN as headquarters after the Indonesian invasion. Of his eleven brothers and sisters, four were killed by the Indonesian military.
Ramos-Horta studied Public International Law at the Hague Academy of International Law (1983) and at Antioch College in Yellow Springs, Ohio where he completed a Master of Arts degree in Peace Studies (1984). He was trained in Human Rights Law at the International Institute of Human Rights in Strasbourg (1983). He completed Post-Graduate courses in American Foreign Policy at Columbia University in New York (1983).worldleaders.edu/participants/jos%C3%A9-manuel-ramos-horta He is a Senior Associate Member of the University of Oxford's St Antony's College (1987) and speaks fluently in five languages: Portuguese, plus English, French, Spanish and the most commonly spoken East Timorese language, Tetum.etan.org
He is divorced from Ana Pessoa Pinto, East Timor's Minister for State and Internal Administration, with whom he had a son, Loro Horta, born in exile in Mozambique.YaleGlobal Online

Political career

He was actively involved in the development of political awareness in Portuguese Timor, which caused him to be exiled for two years in 1970–71 to Portuguese East Africa. His grandfather, before him, had also been exiled, from Portugal to the Azores Islands, then Cape Verde, Portuguese Guinea and finally to Portuguese Timor.
A moderate in the emerging Timorese nationalist leadership, he was appointed Foreign Minister in the "Democratic Republic of East Timor" government proclaimed by the pro-independence parties in November 1975. When appointed minister, Ramos-Horta was only 25 years old. Ramos-Horta left East Timor three days before the Indonesian troops invaded to plead the Timorese case before the UN.
Ramos-Horta arrived in New York to address the UN Security Council and urge them to take action in the face of the Indonesian occupation during which an estimated 102,000 East Timorese would die.A detailed statistical report prepared for the Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation in East Timor cited a lower range of 102,800 conflict-related deaths in the period 1974–1999, namely, approximately 18,600 killings and 84,200 'excess' deaths from hunger and illness. ( Ramos-Horta was the Permanent Representative of FRETILIN to the UN for the next ten years. His friends at that time mentioned that he arrived in the United States with a total of twenty-five dollars in his pocket. His pecuniary situation was often straitened in that period; he survived partly by grace of Americans who admired his politics and his determination. Further, he was obliged to travel worldwide to explain his party's position.
In 1993, the Rafto Prize was awarded to the people of East Timor. Foreign-minister-in-exile José Ramos-Horta represented his nation at the prize ceremony. In May 1994, Philippine President Fidel Ramos, bowing to pressure from Jakarta, tried to ban an international conference on East Timor in Manila, blacklisting Ramos-Horta, and the Thai government followed suit later that year by declaring him persona non grata.Sonny Inbaraj Asean's commitment to East Timor faces tough test Asia Times
In December 1996, Ramos-Horta shared the Nobel Peace Prize with his fellow countryman, Bishop Ximenes Belo. The Nobel Committee chose to honour the two laureates for their "sustained efforts to hinder the oppression of a small people", hoping that "this award will spur efforts to find a diplomatic solution to the conflict of East Timor based on the people's right to self-determination". The Committee considered Ramos-Horta "the leading international spokesman for East Timor's cause since 1975". The Nobel Peace Prize 1996. Retrieved 26 June 2006.
Ramos-Horta played a leading role in negotiating the institutional foundations for independence. He led the Timorese delegation at an important joint workshop with UNTAET on 1 March 2000 to tease out a new strategy, and identify institutional needs. The outcome was an agreed blueprint for a joint administration with executive powers, including leaders of the National Congress for Timorese Reconstruction (CNRT). Further details were worked out in a conference in May 2000. The Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General in East Timor, Sérgio Vieira de Mello, presented the new blueprint to a donor conference in Lisbon, The revamped joint administration successfully laid the institutional foundations for independence, and on 27 September 2002, East Timor joined the United Nations. Ramos-Horta was its first Foreign Minister.
On 3 June 2006, Ramos-Horta added the post of Interim Minister of Defense to his portfolio as Foreign Minister, in the wake of the resignations of the previous minister. Nobel laureate takes security posts. He resigned as both Foreign and Defence Minister on 25 June 2006, announcing, "I do not wish to be associated with the present government or with any government involving Alkatiri."Australian Associated Press (2006). Timor's foreign minister resigns. Retrieved 25 June 2006. Prime Minister Alkatiri had been under pressure to resign his position in place of President Xanana Gusmão, but in a 25 June meeting, leaders of the FRETILIN party agreed to keep Alkatiri as Prime Minister; Ramos-Horta resigned immediately following this decision. Alkatiri to remain as PM. Retrieved 25 June 2006. Foreign Minister of Australia Alexander Downer expressed his personal disappointment at Ramos-Horta's resignation. Downer disappointed by Horta resignation. Retrieved 26 June 2006. Following Alkatiri's resignation on 26 June, Ramos-Horta withdrew his resignation to contest the prime ministership and served in the position on a temporary basis until a successor to Alkatiri was named. Jose Ramos-Horta to be East Timor prime minister. Retrieved 8 July 2006. On 8 July 2006, Ramos-Horta himself was appointed Prime Minister by President Gusmão. Ramos-Horta named E Timor's new PM. Retrieved 8 July 2006. He was sworn in on 10 July.
Before his appointment as Prime Minister, Ramos-Horta was considered a possible candidate to succeed Kofi Annan as United Nations Secretary-General.org (2006). Spec growing on Ramos-Horta. Retrieved 27 September 2006. He dropped out of the race in order to serve as East Timor's Prime Minister, but he has indicated that he might run for the UN position at some time in the future: "I can wait five years if I am really interested in the job in 2012. I would be interested in that."The Courier Mail (2006). Ramos Horta 'on PM shortlist'. Retrieved 27 September 2006.
In an interview with Al Jazeera broadcast on 22 February 2007, Ramos-Horta said that he would run for president in the April 2007 election."East Timor PM to run for president", Al Jazeera, 22 February 2007. On 25 February 2007, Ramos-Horta formally announced his candidacy. He received the support of Gusmão, who was not running for re-election."Nobel laureate Jose Ramos-Horta to run for president in East Timor", Associated Press (International Herald Tribune), 24 February 2007.
In the first round of the election, held on 9 April, Ramos-Horta took second place with 21.81% of the vote; he and FRETILIN candidate Francisco Guterres, who took first place, then participated in the second round of the election in May."Two set to square off for presidency", AAP (news.au), 18 April 2007. The full results of the runoff elections were made public by East Timor's National Electoral Committee spokeswoman, Maria Angelina Sarmento, on 11 May, and Ramos-Horta won with 69% of the vote."Guterres congratulates Horta as new president of Timor-Leste", Xinhua (People's Daily Online), 11 May 2007.
He was inaugurated as President of East Timor in a ceremony at the parliament house in Dili on 20 May 2007."Ramos-Horta sworn in as E Timor president", 20 May 2007.  He had resigned as Prime Minister the day before and was succeeded by Estanislau da Silva.
During the first round of the presidential elections of 2012, held on 17 March, Ramos-Horta, who was eligible for a second and final term as president, took third place with 19.43% of the vote behind the presidential candidates Francisco Guterres with 27.28% and Taur Matan Ruak 24.17% of the vote. He admitted defeat,East Timor President Jose Ramos-Horta admits poll defeat BBC News, 19 March 2012 and his term as president ended on 19 May, with the inauguration of Taur Matan Ruak as his successor.Kingsbury, Damien Timor election a key test of stability Sydney Morning Herald, 17 April 2012Powles, Anna Nationalism and nostalgia win in Timor Leste Asia Times, 27 April 2012

Assassination attempt

On 11 February 2008, José Ramos-Horta was shot in an assassination attempt. In the gun skirmish, one of Ramos-Horta's guards was wounded, and two rebel soldiers, including rebel leader Alfredo Reinado, were killed.  A message from Ramos-Horta, still recovering in Darwin, was broadcast on 12 March. In this message, he thanked his supporters and Australia and said that he had "been very well looked after". A spokesman said that his condition was improving and that he had started taking short daily walks for exercise.com, 12 March 2008.
Ramos-Horta was released from the Royal Darwin Hospital on 19 March, although he said that he would stay in Australia for physical therapy for "a few more weeks". He also said on this occasion that he had remained conscious following the shooting and "remembered every detail", describing how he was taken for treatment."Timorese president leaves Australian hospital after treatment following Feb. attack", Associated Press (International Herald Tribune), 19 March 2008. On 17 April, Ramos-Horta returned to Dili from Darwin. He gave a press conference at the airport in which he urged the remaining rebels in the mountains to surrender.com.

Post-presidency

Following the 2012 Guinea-Bissau coup d'état, he offered to mediate the conflict. As of 31 January 2013 he is the UN special envoy to the country.

Other activities

Ramos-Horta is a frequent speaker, along with other Nobel Peace Prize Laureates, at Peacejam conferences. and has spearheaded other peace initiatives with his fellow Nobel Laureates.
Ramos-Horta supported the U.S. invasion and occupation of Iraq and condemned the anti-American tone of its detractors as "hypocritical".U.S. Soldiers Are The Real Heroes In Iraq Wall Street Journal 17 October 2005  In the 1990s he had supported the cause of Kurdish people in Iraq.Jose Ramos Horta, Nobel Peace Laureate, Speaks for Leyla Zana 28 May 1997
In May 2009 Ramos-Horta stated that he would ask the International Criminal Court to investigate the ruling junta of Myanmar if they continue to detain fellow Nobel Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi.
Ramos-Horta is an early signatory of the International Simultaneous Policy (SIMPOL) which seeks to end the usual deadlock in tackling global issues. Lucas became a signatory in 2006.simpol.org -  About Simpol-UK
On 5 August 2009, he attended the funeral of the late former president of the Philippines Corazon Aquino. He was the only foreign head of state to attend.
Ramos-Horta is a Member of the Global Leadership Foundation, an organization which works to support democratic leadership, prevent and resolve conflict through mediation and promote good governance in the form of democratic institutions, open markets, human rights and the rule of law. It does so by making available, discreetly and in confidence, the experience of former leaders to today's national leaders. It is a not-for-profit organization composed of former heads of government, senior governmental and international organization officials who work closely with Heads of Government on governance-related issues of concern to them.

Awards

The Roman Catholic priest Carlos Belo of East Timor and Ramos-Horta were jointly awarded the 1996 Nobel Peace Prize for their efforts. Both men also received the Order of Liberty, the Grand Cross, from Portugal in 1996.
On 25 November 2013, the Governor-General of Australia appointed Ramos-Horta an Honorary Companion of the Order of Australia (AC) for eminent service to strengthening Australia and Timor-Leste bilateral relations and for his outstanding leadership to bring independence to Timor-Leste. Retrieved 28 January 2014

Depictions

The 2000 documentary The Diplomat, directed by Tom Zubrycki, follows Ramos-Horta in the period from 1998 to his return to East Timor in 2000.







|-
|-


