[[Olivet University]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in San Francisco, California, Seminaries and theological colleges in California, Evangelicalism in California, Evangelical seminaries and theological colleges, Education in San Francisco, California, Educational institutions established in 1992, IBT Media

Olivet University is a private Christian institution of biblical higher education that is accredited by the Association for Biblical Higher Education (ABHE) to award Certificates, Bachelor's, Master's, and D. Min. degrees.

History

Olivet was founded by evangelical pastor Rev. Dr. David J. Jang. officially launched Olivet Theological College & Seminary (OTCS). The bible college was intended to train the denomination's ministers. OTCS eventually functioned more as a "seedbed" for mission, offering multiple study fields and distance learning to ministry-bound students.
Olivet's flagship college, Olivet Theological College & Seminary, developed, necessitating several major changes to accommodate the school's diverse student body. It was broken into separate institutions, each offering different degree programs. In addition to OTCS, there is the Jubilee College of Music, Olivet College of Art & Design, Olivet College of Business, Olivet College of Information Technology, Olivet College of Journalism, and Olivet College of Language Education.
Currently, Olivet University's main campus is located in the heart of San Francisco, where it has been since 2005.
Dr. Tracy J. Davis is the current university President.

Campus

Olivet University's campus is located in San Francisco.

Organization and administration

Link to IBT Media

IBT Media says it has an ongoing "working relationship" with Olivet University which includes the school providing design assistance and computer resources, and IBT Media providing internships for students. It characterizes it as similar to the relationships Silicon Valley companies have with local universities.

Academics

Olivet University is divided into 8 colleges: Olivet Theological College & Seminary, Jubilee College of Music, Olivet College of Journalism, Olivet College of Arts & Design, Olivet Institute of Technology, Olivet College of Language Education, Olivet College of Business, and Zinzendorf School of Doctoral Studies.
The school is approved by the BPPE (Bureau for Private Postsecondary Education) to grant the following Bachelorette, Master's, Doctoral degrees and certificates.
The Ralph D. Winter Library was named for missiologist and Olivet University Honorary Chairman, the late Dr. Ralph D. Winter in July 2007, the Ralph D. Winter Library currently features 150,000 physical and electronic items for Biblical higher education and research.
The Ralph D. Winter Library is a repository for academic and theological resources in multiple formats and languages in service for world mission. Its collection of educational resources are distributed throughout the University's main library, the William L. Wagner Mission Library, the Asian library, and seven specialized libraries supporting Olivet's educational programs.

Student life

Students at Olivet have no on-campus housing, but housing is located nearby for interested students. Students are also kept to a strict moral standards, according to the school's website.






