[[The Speaker's House]]

CATEGORIES: Historic house museums in Pennsylvania, Museums in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, Houses in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, 18th-century architecture

The Speaker's House is a museum located in Trappe, in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania that preserves the home of Frederick Muhlenberg, the First and Third Speaker of the United States House of Representatives.

History

1764–1781

The first settlers in the Trappe region were German immigrants John Jacob Schrack (1679–1742) and his wife Eva Rosina Lang Schrack (1688–1756). In 1717, they constructed a log cabin as their residence. The Schracks had five children while they spent their years living in Trappe. These children were John Joseph, twins Maria Sabina and Anna Maria; Christian, Philip, Elizabeth, and John Jacob Jr. John Jacob Schrack Sr. purchased  of territory that was located at the southern end of the Trappe. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 4
John Jacob Schrack was hailed as a valuable member of the community. Within the German Lutheran Church, he was in charge of the establishment that was called "the Trap", a local tavern. This bar's name was later chosen as the name of the town. In 1742, Henry Melchior Muhlenberg, a minister in the German Lutheran Church, arrived in the Trappe. From approximately 1750 to 1755, he lived in a house John Jacob II constructed, which Henry Muhlenberg acquired and stayed in in 1776. Living with him in his home was his mother, who had lost her husband some time prior. John Joseph Schrack remained in the family house so that he could look after her. He also ran the family tavern. By the year 1738, John Joseph married a woman from New England, Silence (1712–1777). They had two boys and five girls. They decided to sell it on February 24, 1772. James Diemer bought it for 725 pounds. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 5
Before James Diemer bought the  property in 1772, he had married Elizabeth Currie on December 5, 1759, within Philadelphia's Swedes' Church (Gloria Dei). The historical records that are available show that a James Diemer who resided in Reading had a busy life in public service. Prior to the American Revolution, he held the position of Justice of the peace. He was also a judge in Berks County from duration of 1791 to 1819, and died in 1820/ It has not been ddetermine whether the James Diemer coming from Reading, Pennsylvania and the James Diemer who was in possession of the Muhlenberg House property were the same man or not.
The contract that James Diemer signed to own the property ended on 6 November 1775 when  of it was acquired by a man hailing from the city of Philadelphia, Michael Connor, bought it for 905 pounds. When Michael Connor gained possession of the house, his job during that period was a merchant. He was married on 9 January 1774 to Mary Cottringer, or whose last name might have been Gatringer. Connor and his wife lived in the house that would one day be that of Frederick Muhlenberg's. We know this as the minister Henry Muhlenberg kept a diary which he wrote in often. In some notations that he entered, he wrote of "the Connors as his Neighbors".
The lease that the Connors had on the cabin ended on March 1, 1777 when John Patton (1745–1804) purchased it from them for 1,500 pounds. After he had made this transaction, he then married Jane Davis (1752–1832) on 7 March 1777. With the information that the deed offers us, we know that Connor held the job of a merchant. Historical records show us that he was an Irish native, who left his native country and entered into Colonial America, specifically in the city of Philadelphia in 1745. While we don't know if he stopped being a merchant, he did in March 1776 join the ranks of the Continental Army as "a Major in the 9th Pennsylvania Regiment." We know that he did very well as on 11 January 1777 he was rewarded for his service and thus was given the rank of Colonel within the army, and was given commanded of 1 out of 16 Additional Regiments that were headed by General George Washington. However, it seems that he wasn't destined to remain a military man, as he quit the military's ranks in November 1777. Given this information presented, it is plausible to assume that the reason why he went to the trouble of buying the house, was so that his wife would have a residency that she could stay in. This would be a good way for him to know that she would be safe and secure while he was performing his different duties during his time in the army. A preserved letter in historical records that was written by Peter Muhlenberg in 1799, we learn detailed information from him, including that the home that the Swaines inhabited as also being "the house below him where Col. Patton had lived. John and Jane had eleven to twelve children; the oldest, Benjamin, possibly was born while they were living in the Muhlenberg House." For reasons that aren't known, but perhaps to make some money, John Patton relinquished his ownership of the home that he and his wife had lived in on September 1778. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 6
Isaac Connely (1747–1823) was the last owner of the house before it would become Frederick Muhlenberg's. Isaac Connely acquired it on September 4 of 1778 for a cost 2350 pounds. This was short lived however, as he then put it up for sale again, where after 22 days it was bought by John Reed (1723–1790). The money that he brought in from this, increased his wealth by 60 pounds. According to the deed that he signed on September 26, 1778 for the  property, Reed was described by it "as an Innkeeper". According to historical records John Reed apparently moved there and purchased the property first, because he then in 1774 transferred his wife Dorothy and his entire family into the Trappe to live there. While he was living there, his job was as a farmer. His second job there was also as being in charge of "the Providence Township tavern and the local grist mill". According to the preserved diary of Henry Melchior Muhlenberg, John Reed was mentioned a lot by him. Muhlenberg would usually refer to John Reed as being "Neighbor Reed." John Reed was apparently very nice to Muhlenberg as during 1776–1783, he gave him "a horse and wagon for haulage, and sold him firewood, beef, veal, salt, pork, rye and oats." During May 1781, Henry Muhlenberg who knew a physician who was thinking about transferring over and living in the Trappe asked John Reed about whether he would be able to give him a place of residence within his home to reside it while he was there. John Reed was fine with do this favor and gave Muhlenberg's physician friend "2 large rooms in his big house, half of the cellar, adequate firewood, and fodder for his horse at 20 pounds silver money a year." Due to absences in historical records, we don't know completely that the home that John Reed provided to the physician was the home that would later be Frederick Muhlenberg's, for as it would turn out, the physician decided not to take up either Reed's of Muhlenberg's offer to rent out the cabin. However, we do know that John Reed in the end decided to put it up on the market and that he was able to find a buyer for "the Frederick Muhlenberg House 5 months after that," and it is very plausible that it was the house that would come to belong to Frederick Augustus Conrad Muhlenberg.

Frederick Augustus Conrad Muhlenberg (1781–1791)

This history of Frederick Muhlenberg begins with his birth in 1750 and he lived until 1801. Frederick was one son who was born out of eleven other children to Henry Melchior Muhlenberg and his wife Anna Maria Weiser. Henry Muhlenberg lived from 1711 to 1787 and his wife Anna Maria Weiser lived from 1727 to 1802. Before coming to America, Henry Muhlenberg had lived in Germany, and it wasn't until he was 32 that he left. After he arrived in America, he took charge of the Lutheran Church for over 40 years. He was also in charge of the German American Community in America. Before coming to America, Frederick had received his schooling in Germany, though he was destined to leave Germany and "would eventually become the first and third Speaker of the United States House of Representatives, and the first person to sign the Bill of Rights". and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 7 Later in his life, Frederick became married to Anna Catherine Schaeffer who was born and lived from 1750 to 1835. Their marriage took place on October 15, 1771. While they were married, she bore seven children; Henry William; Maria; Elisabeth; Margaret; Ann Catherine; Frederick; and John Peter David. After his marriage, Frederick returned to Germany, most likely by his father. While there he studied and was accepted into the church. When he returned to America, he was 23 and had become an ordained minister in the Church. The first job that he took was becoming an assistant to his brother-in-law, Rev. Christopher Emmanuel Schulze who resided in Tulpehocken, Pennsylvania. In 1773 Frederick and Catherine left at the behest of the German Lutheran Church who wanted him to come and work with them in New York City. At that time the "German Lutheran church was still called the Christ or Swamp Church." Before moving to Trappe, Frederick and his family resided in the city of Philadelphia for a short time. When Frederick and his family did move back to the Trappe, he returned to the residence of his parents on August 16. The next job that Frederick had was by helping his father with his Church duties.
Their stay in Henry Muhlenberg's house didn't last for too much longer. Before the year was over, Frederick and Catherine left for New Hanover, Pennsylvania. While they lived there they were living with three children, a maid, a nurse; brother Henry Ernst and his wife and child; and sister Mary Swaine and her husband Francis. Despite the times he lived in, Frederick didn't stay with the Church for long. He left it in 1779, when he was 29. After he had left the church, he decided to embark on a career in politics. Though his father, Henry, was mad that he abandoned the Church, as it would turn out, his father in law was the one who helped him with the political ambitions that he had. Eventually his hopes for a political life paid off when in 1779 he was elected to become a delegate to the Continental Congress to fulfill the term of Edward Biddle. He remained in this position until 1780. By 1780, he was then chosen to be part of the Pennsylvania Assembly. His first moment in history came when on November 3, 1780 during the opening session he was elected to be the Speaker of the Assembly.
Frederick Muhlenberg did two things next on December 19, 1781. After stepping into the public spotlight, he bought the house next to his fathers, which was made from stone, for a cost of 800 pounds. The point of buying this home was so that his family would have a place to reside. Th reason why he chose this specific house was because it was in a region that was safe and settled, close to extended family,  and where he could leave his wife and children during the long absences necessitated by his new career. Frederick Muhlenberg received this house from Christopher Wegman, who was his business partner. Apparently still not satisfied, Frederick bought. on May 5 of 1783, another 5 acres from Jacob and Elisabeth Miller. This transaction was finally completed on March 18, 1785. On that date, Christopher Wegman and his wife Margaret put their half of their property up for sale, it was bought by Frederick for the cost of 450 pounds. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 7-8
Frederick's political career continued during the 1780s. During that time he was elected again to the Pennsylvania Assembly in 1781 and 1782. He also at that time chosen to be a Speaker again. Another high moment came in 1783 when he was chosen to be President of the Council of Censors for Philadelphia County. And during September 1784, he was chosen to be in the Register of Wills and Recorder of Deeds for the newly formed Montgomery County. His Trappe home came two serve two purposes. It was both his home and then the site of businesses. Among them that were there were real estate sales. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 8 It seems as though even being a politician wasn't enough for Frederick. According to historical records he also started in the 1780s a mercantile business. He formed a business, known as Muhlenberg and Wegman, which he ran with Christopher Wegman. At the same time while running the store with Wegman, he also ran a store that was situated on his residence at the Trappe. When in 1787 his father in law died, Frederick go into the business of sugar refining. He created a business with Jacob Lawersyler. However, this wasn't meant to be as the firm closed down in 1800. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 9
History recorded that one of the most important moments in Frederick's life as a politician was in 1789. This is because in that year, he was chosen to the House of Representatives in the First United States Congress. For Frederick, the good thing about being a Speaker was that he got paid twice the amount that the other Congressmen were paid. The only downside was that he had to undertake a certain amount of entertaining. On September 1789, due to the importance of being a Speaker, Frederick Muhlenberg was the first man to sign the Bill of Rights. At the start of December 6 of 1790, he put his property from the Trappe up for sae. This took place while the third session of the First Congress was at work until March 1791 which occurred three months after the Congress had transferred back to the city of Philadelphia. From the historical records that are available, he probably did this as because he would be staying in the city of Philadelphia from that moment onward, he didn't actually have the use for a seat in the Trappe. This meant to him that he could finally move his family over to live with him in the city of Philadelphia permanently. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 9-10
Before Frederick Muhlenberg had left permanently for Philadelphia and was still living in the Trappe he was elected as the President of the Pennsylvania Convention. During this time he was very important as helped to ratify the new federal constitution in 1787. During this period he became a Trustee of the University of Pennsylvania, which at that point in history was still under the name of the University of the State of Pennsylvania. This appointment lasted from 1779 until 1786. He was Speaker of the Pennsylvania Assembly from 1780 to 1783 as well as being an ex-officio trustee during some other years, though historical documents aren't specific as to when. The last moment of his career at this stage was in December 1790 when he was chosen as the president of the German Society of Pennsylvania. His term went until the year 1797. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 10
Now residing in Philadelphia, Frederick's political life continued to go very well. During the 1790s the following happened for Frederick. He was chosen to be in the Second United States Congress during 1791; the Third in 1793, when he was again elected Speaker of the House of Representatives; and the Fourth in 1795. During the Fourth Congress, Muhlenberg became the chairman of the Committee to the Whole and was in charge and watched over the debate regarding an appropriation to support the provisions of the Jay Treaty with Great Britain. The Federalists supported this agreement, however the Jeffersonians were against it. As chairman, Muhlenberg was vital in giving the vote that decided for the appropriated funds. According to historical records, he apparently regretted it and went with the Jeffersonians on the issue instead. It was obvious that how he had decided to vote was so unpopular with the different constituents, that he actually drove his own brother-in-law, Bernhard Schaeffer, to stab him because he was so upset/
Frederick Muhlenberg decided that it was for the best not to run again, and so he didn't try for a position in the Fifth Congress. During the year of 1800, Governor Thomas McKean appointed him Receiver General of the Pennsylvania Land Office. Because of this appointment Frederick and his family left their residence and went to Lancaster as that was where the seat of state government was located. It was in this spot, that as history shows, Frederick Muhlenberg died from a stroke on the fourth of June 1801.

After Frederick Muhlenberg

After living in the home that he had for so long, Frederick Muhlenberg on February 28 of 1791 put his property, including the land next to it up for sale. It was bought by his sister and brother-in-law Mary and Francis Swaine. Though historical evidence on this subject isn't complete, it is very possible that the Swains resided in the Muhlenberg house and managing the farm and store as early as 1790. While the Swaines were living on the property, they had four children, who all died at an early age. The historical records do indicate that all of these children did spend some part of their lives within this home.
According to historical records for the 1798 Direct Tax, the house was assessed at 800 dollars and the property, at 1,380 dollars. The two story 30 by . and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 11
Even as late as the fourth of January 1799, Peter Muhlenberg's brother in law, Francis wrote a letter which may have been to Taverner Beale, though historical records are obscure on this area. In the letter, he described how he was still occupying Henry Muhlenberg's house in the Trappe. He also wrote that Mr. Swaine lived in the first house below him where Col. Patton lived. He also noted that Swain managed a store and as well as being a magistrate.
The house was placed on the market on November 24, 1803. It was then bought by Charles Albrecht of the city of Philadelphia. The sale included 3 tracts of land: the  and 9 perches purched from Magargel (on the 1803 deed the Magargel tract was measured at 10 acres 89 perches).

=The 19th century=

==Early 19th century==

The first man to next be in possession of Frederick Muhlenberg's house at the start of the 19th century was Charles Albrecht. Charles Albrecht was born in either 1759 or 1760 and lived until 1848. According to the house deed, Albrecht held a job as a musical instrument maker. Albrecht became one of the very first people in America to manufacture pianos. Charles Albrecht was born in Germany and spent nearly 30 years living there before he decided to move to the city of Philadelphia in 1787. He married Maria Fuchs, who later became Mary Fox after she had been anglicized. According to information from a 1797 deed Maria Fuchs is identified as the widow of John Fox who was remarried to Charles Albrecht. Charles Albrecht became an American citizen on February 15, 1798. He took up his residency in the home that he acquired from the Swains family, Frederick Muhlenberg's home. This information is authenticated as according to local historical records he is listed in the Philadelphia directories from 1791 through 1802, and again after 1809, but is absent from the directories for 1805 through 1808, coinciding with his ownership of the property in Trappe. The records also detail him on the annual tax rolls for Montgomery County as an instrument maker.
The historical records on the area tell us that Muhlenberg's home also functioned for them as a store. Charles and Mary continued to stay in the home until April 1, 1808. On that date, they put the house of , 49 perches up onto the market. It was bought by Abraham Gotwals, Esquire, who resided in Upper Providence Township, for $1,750. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 12
Abraham Gotwals (1764-19th century) was born to John Adam Gotwals (1719–1795), also from Germany. When he was 20 years old in 1739, he decided to move to Pennsylvania using the ship Samuel. Later in 1785, he wed Magdalena Detweiler (1764–1830). Abraham and Magdelena were from Montgomery County. They had a total of 12 children. According to records available the family appears in the Upper Providence roll in the 1810 United States Census with a household of eleven people: three under ten, three between ten and fifteen, and three between sixteen and twenty five, in addition to the two parents who were then both forty six.
On April 29, 1811, Abraham and Magdalena put the property up for sale. It was bought by Sarah Bartleson for $5,600. Apparently, Abraham and his family hadn't lived in Trappe for a while, as according to the deed, he lived in Perkiomen.
The husband of Sarah Bartleson who bought the house was Dr. William Johnson (1785–1831), the son of Henry Johnson (1764–1811). The records show that on June 11, 1811, Dr. William Johnson wed Sarah Bartleson (1790–1838). Their wedding occurred 43 days after she had bought the property, but it was just before her father died on May 23. According to records, when Sarah bought the farm, according to the deed, the $5,600 was paid for by Israel Bartleson. In 1820, the household consisted of William and Sarah, the three children, all then under 10 years old, and one male aged between 16 and 26 years old, probably a farm hand. 10 years afterwards, according to the records, there was one male between ten and fifteen (son William), one male between 40 and 50 (Dr. Johnson), one male between 50 and 60 (identity unknown), one female between 10 and 15 (daughter Sarah), one female between 15 and 20 (daughter Mary), two females between 40 and 50 (Sarah, and an unknown woman) and one female between 60 and 70 (identity unknown). and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 13
A man named David Williams came to stay in some part of Frederick Muhlenberg's home and paid rent to Sarah Johnson at the time that she died, because according to records he who owed Sarah Johnson rent. According to historical documents this was at the same house from David Williams' appearance in the 1840 United States Census, who had been the next door neighbor of Dr. William Johnson in the 1840 census.
From what stories that are found in historical records illustrate to us "Henry A. Hunsicker remembered a one story wing attached to the east side of the house, fronting the turnpike, which was used for store purposes, and which was at one time occupied by Felty Fitzgerald, who sold watermelons and trucks." While we don't know because of gaps in the records, we think that Sarah Johnson may have decided to rent out the store to others after her husband died. While again we don't know because of gaps in records, it is likely that the store in Frederick Muhlenberg's house was being occupied by Dr. Johnson who used it as an office while he was practicing as a doctor in the area.
Valentine Fitzgerald (born 1795) was given the nickname of "Felty". At an unknown point, he was wed to a woman named Magdalena. During their marriage, they had four children. They were Valentine, Sophia, David, and an unnamed child who was born on August 31, 1827, but who died two weeks afterwards. Their three youngest children received their baptisms within Augustus Lutheran Church that was in the Trappe. In 1820, his household consisted of himself, his wife (between 16 and 26), an unknown female over the age of 45, and two children, a boy and a girl, both under 10. In 1830, the household consisted of himself, a female between 20 and 30, and two boys, one between 5 and 10, and one between 10 and 15. In 1860, when Valentine was 65 years old, he decided to stay and eventually to board with the family of Jacob Markley. At that point, during the day, he was employed as a laborer.
In 1831, Dr. William Johnson died. On that date, his widow was given the ability to claim about $88 in household goods, with the remaining $221 in possessions, which included furniture as well as surgical instruments, medical books and a "Shower Bath," being sold to satisfy creditors. According to historical records, at the time that their daughter Sarah died 10 years late when she was 25, she owned the following; piano, furniture, silverware, jewelry and other items valued at $595, in addition to a dower fund. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 14
Israel Bartleson had purchased the farm in 1811. Although Sarah Johnson had left her grandmother the farm, she did on July 4, 1840 put it in her will, which took place five months later, on December 18, 1840, she sold  and 53 perches, which included the Frederick Muhlenberg House, to her uncle Wright Bringhurst.
When it came to deciding how the estate should be split, Wright Bringhurst decided to split Frederick Muhlenberg's home into two equal tracts. The tract of  perches was then put on the market on February 24, 1845. It was bought by George Hagy. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 15
According to records, Enos Lewis was wed Margaret Dewees, who never had children. In order to complete his transaction fully, Enos Lewis bought the other portion of the Frederick Muhlenberg farm that Wright Bringhurst had subdivided, from George Hagy, reuniting the farm in March 1849. Five years later in 1850, Enos who was 68 years old at the time, and his Margaret who was 50 years old at that time, were still residing within Frederick Muhlenberg's home, along with three other people. According to records they were Ann Hess, aged 17; Susanna Clemmens, a mulatto girl aged 12; and Joshua Davis, a black laborer aged 40. Enos and Margaret Lewis ended their stay in the house on April 2, 1855 when they put both tracts of land up for sale. It was purchased by Samuel Townsend who came from the city of Philadelphia. The Lewises then constructed a home for themselves which was located on the corner lot east of Bringhurst's Manion, fronting the Reading Turnpike. They apparently put the farm up on the market.

==Late 19th century==

Samuel Townsend (1817–1860) was 38 when he acquired property. He purchased it from the Lewis', the Hagys', and the Clemens'. The acquisitions not mentioned but which did occur included: an unspecified tract from Eleanor Shupe on April 2; 5 tracts totaling  from Edward Evans and D. Morgan Casselberry. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 16
During either 1854 or 1855, Thomas, Samuel's brother came to the property in Montgomery County so that he could labor there. The time Samuel and Thomas spent together was not always peaceful before Thomas decided to leave the property—records show that Thomas had refused to leave the farm unless Samuel would secure him according to promises made to him prior to this. Thomas had nothing to live on excepting three ground rents. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 16-17
After Samuel Townsend, the house moved rapidly from owner to owner. After he was divorced from his first wife and then remarried, Samuel lived most of his life in the Trappe area. While he was there he resided in a property east of the Frederick Muhlenberg House purchased at auction on February 15, 1864 by James Hamer, M.D., for $10,532.80. In March 1860, the property was put on the market. It was then purchased by Henry Shuler. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 17
Henry Shuler (1817–1864) acquired the home on March 17, and moved his family into it. After spending four years there, Henry died on May 3, 1864. His family went into disarray without its breadwinner. According to the census of 1870, six years afterwards, Elizabeth Shuler, the mother of Henry had already started boarding with another Trappe family. Also at this time, Maria, Henry's wife was renting a home elsewhere. We also know from historical records available, that she owned no real estate, though her personal property was valued at $5,100. The increase in the family's personal property most likely resulted from the sale of the Frederick Muhlneberg House. The property was put on the market by the Montgomery County Orphan's Court. It was later purchased on September 20 of 1867 by a Dr. Lewis Royer. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 18
When Lewis Royer acquired the home, he had already been residing in it. After he bought it, he set about remaking it so that when he was finished it was very different from the 18th-century farmhouse property that it had once been. According to records available now, he added the rear section, transformed the front and center sections into a Second Empire residence, demolished the store on the east side of the front section, possibly demolished a wing on the west side, and built the one-story addition on the west side as a doctor's office on the foundations of an earlier wing. His stay in the now remade property ended on April 10, 1884, when Royer put the property except for four small lots totaling a little over  that had already been put on the market and bought by Aaron D. Wagner, onto the housing market. In 1890, he decided to repurchase the home which then made up of 30 acres 40 perches, and remained in possession of it until the end of the 19th century. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 19-20
The first person of the 20th century to buy the home was Andrew Heyser Detwiler. He was born in 1863 and lived until 1933. When he bought the home from Lewis Royer's estate on March 31 of 1908, it was totaling  and 92 and 22/100 perches. He kept the property for roughly 15 years, and then in October 1924, he put the property up on the market. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 20
Brothers Henry W. and Percy W. Mathieu then bought the home on October 2, 1924 from Andrew Heyser Detwiler. However, they put the home on the market barely four weeks afterwards, on October 28, 1924. On October 28, the home and  was bought by Ursinus College which would use it, on and off, many times, throughout the 20th century. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 21

Ursinus College (1924–1944)

In 1924 Ursinus College bought the property and  to alleviate a campus housing shortage. The house was renamed "Highland Hall". It was positioned on a slightly elevated hill along Main Street, and it was estimated that it would take about 8 minutes to walk there from the main campus. The records show that it was used for student housing before Ursinus purchased it—the 1924-25 college catalog described it as a dormitory for men that provided every comfort and convenience and which accommodated 28 students. At that time, Dertwiler would still have controlled it.
In order to make the house fit the standards for an Ursinus dormitory, renovations were made in order for it to hold 26 to 28 freshmen boys, and quarters for a houseman and caretaker. A new  artesian well was drilled and fitted with a pump, additional bathing and toilet facilities were installed, and clothes closets were constructed in several rooms. And lately, a new Freed Heater was also installed to supply steam heat.
As of the 1925 academic year, in the fall, the home was Ursinus College's Athletic Club. Thus it functioned both as a dorm and as a training club for the male varsity players. It was also during its time as the Athletic Club, which lasted for six years, that the house had its highest profile while it was in Ursinus' possession. In 1929, it was chosen by the annual football banquet as its site in December of that year. Its time as an Athletic Club ended by the 1930 to 1931 academic year. In 1930, Ursinus' began to bring athletics back to the main campus area, and according to the Ursinus College Bulletin, it noted that the Athletic Club property in Trappe couldn't be run to meet expenses, and in the fall of 1931, athletes were once again living on the main campus.
The dormitory was then transformed back into a private residence for Russell Conwell Johnson (1894–1950). He was at that time the first athletic director for Ursinus College. He resided in the home with his family. This included his wife Mary Siez and son Donald. Russell "Jing" Johnson was an Ursinus alumnus, an honors graduate in chemistry with the class of 1916, and was also a star of the baseball team. According to historical records, the Johnson family resided in the house from roughly 1931 to 1937, although it seems that Russell Johnson did carry on being a coach for Ursinus College through till 1941. After that, records indicate that he became involved in the war and ended up becoming a trained officer at the Philadelphia Navy Yard. He died in 1950. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 21-22
According to records available, when the home was in Ursinus College's possession as a dormitory in 1932, the college valued Highland Hall at $22,294.05. The barn had been demolished, this probably explains why the outbuildings had depreciated to a value of $13,363.63. Faced once again with the problem of more students than dormitory beds, Ursinus College pressed Highland Hall into service for student housing for the 1937–1938 school year. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 22 In 1932, Ursinus said that although seventeen men were residing in Highland Hall, it was going to put the house on the market. This was because it was very old, it was too far away from the main campus, and the cost to keep it going was hurting Ursinus financially. In 1933, Ursinus while keeping it as a dorm for male students, made major renovations to it. Among them were that the front porch and a portion of the side porch were completely removed and were replaced with a flagstone terrace, and a cornice was erected around two sides of the building at the 2nd floor level, which harmonized with the third story mansard effect. The one story frame addition at the rear of the building was removed and appropriate architectural treatments of both the front and rear entrances were provided. The interior was completely renovated during the summer, all the old wallpaper was moved, the walls and ceilings were covered with a light enamel paint, and the woodwork and floors were repaired and repainted. Highland hall was soon one of the best looking of all the male housing dormitories on campus.
By 1942, Ursinus was using the house again. During that summer, the residence was transformed into a women's residence hall. In order to make women students want to stay there, the tuition and board bill was $50 less than the regular fee for women. The dormitory underwent necessary painting, papering and repair and could accommodate seventeen girls. This project was in the end a bust. The doors closed on July 13, 1944. Ursinus put the house up for sale because of its remoteness from the campus. It was bought then by Andrew and Myrtle Rihl. Prior to that, the college had put the .
Andrew Hoover Rihl, bought the home with Myrtle, his wife. For nearly his entire career he was a salesman and inspector for the Keystone Blue Paper Co., a leader in the development of the process of blueprinting.

1950-21st century

On July 6, 1950, the home was purchased by Henry L. Haas (1908-1894) along with . He had purchased the property with his first wife at the time, Anna, who died shortly afterwards. He then later wed. Henry and his wife lived in every part of the home for many years. By the 1960s, they had converted the second and third floors to rental apartments, and they came to only reside on the first floor of the house. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 22-23

21st century and the creation of Save the Speaker's House

In 1991, a national drugstore chain expressed interest in Frederick Muhlenberg's house and acreage. They hoped to get rid of the property in order for them to build a business store there, mostly likely a drugstore. The community didn't want this historical landmark to be destroyed and so they gathered together to save the house. As a result of this movement, Save the Speaker's House, Inc was created. The organization was incorporated as a 501(c)3 non-profit in September 2001 and purchased the property on April 1, 2004. In 2005, Save the Speaker's House, Inc. obtained a grant from the Institute of Museum and Library Services that provided the group with funds for researching the property and operating the organization. and Henry, Michael C. Historic Structure Report for the Frederick Muhlenberg House 151 West Main Street Trappe, Pennsylvania. Volume 1 of II. Watson & Henry Associates. December 2007. Page 23
In order to give the public a good history of Frederick Muhlenberg's house, Save the Speaker's Housein the last few months of 2005, hired the nationally renowned historic preservation firm Watson & Henry Associates of Bridgeton, N.J. to prepare a Historic Structure Report (HSR) on the Frederick Muhlenberg House. The purpose of the HSR was to document the house and make recommendations for its preservation and restoration. This was the first step taken in an effort to bring the property back to its former glory, through rebuilding and refurnishing it. The Historic Structure Report included a study of the house's construction and modifications over time, as well as an assessment of the building's structural, mechanical, plumbing, electrical, and HVAC systmes. Scientific analysis of paint, wood, plaster, and mortar samples was used to help with the study. The report would provide recommendations for restoration and ongoing preservation of the house with the goal of operating it as a historic house museum interpreting Frederick Muhlenberg's political accomplishments and family life. The Speaker's Gazette: A periodic publication of Save the Speaker's House, Inc. featuring news and articles of interest. Volume 1, Number 1. Spring 2007. Page 4
Ursinus College has helped to Save the Speaker's House. One of the fraternities, Sigma Pi, undertook a fall clean-up project, organized by the fraternity's social chair, Stever Ordog. The men removed trash and debris from the garage, did general yard clean-up, and removed modern cabinets and appliances from the house to allow architectural teams to continue their investigations. In the previous spring, about two dozen fraternity members spent an afternoon cleaning trash and debris out of the house. Starting in 2006, Save the Speaker's House started having archeological work done on the property surrounding the house. Early work done in May 2006 by the Millbrook Society, a Hatboro-based non-profit organization did much of the work. They brought in teams that were able to excavate a total of nine test pits which were chosen on the basis of being within areas that had previously seen great success in terms of high artifact deposits. The first survey conducted showed that in that area there were over 1,200 artifacts and located the remains of a former cellar entrance, bake oven foundation, and a stone-lined well. One of the most important finds discovered there were fragments of a white salt-glzed stoneware dinner plate which was manufactured in Great Britain from the 1760s until the 1780s. This kind of ceramic dish would most likely have been a popular one during that period and would have always been on Frederick Muhlenberg's table during meal times. Save the Speaker's House aims to find and document the foundations of missing outbuildings. It is hoped by this process that ultimately the public can learn a great deal about Frederick Muhlenberg family's household.
In 2006, the house  and its acreage became the first in the Borough of Trappe to be registered as an official state archaeological site. The Speaker's Gazette: A periodic publication of Save the Speaker's House, Inc. featuring news and articles of interest. Volume 1, Number 1. Spring 2007. Page 5 Kise, Straw and Kolodner of Philadelphia did another archaeological survey of the site that unvcovered the remains of a general store to the east of the house. The Speaker's Gazette: A periodic publication of Save the Speaker's House, Inc. featuring news and articles of interest. Volume 1, Number 2. Fall 2007. Page5
During 2006 Save the Speaker's House Inc. paid off its mortgage with a grant from the Montgomery County Green Fields/Green Towns Open Space Program. The house and its acreage are now placed under a conservation easement to ensure that it be permanently preserved as open space.
Since opening, Save the Speaker's House has received many groups of volunteers who aided them in doing research in the past and who are continuing to research the history of the Frederick Muhlenberg property and its owners by means of newspapers, diaries, tax and estate records, maps, photographs, deeds, and family correspondence. The Speaker's Gazette: A periodic publication of Save the Speaker's House, Inc. featuring news and articles of interest. Volume 1, Number 1. Spring 2007. Page 6
During the fall of 2007, Save the Speaker's House started having a tree-ring analysis, or dendrochronology occurring around the property. The specimens that were taken were sent to the Tree Ring Laboratory at Columbia University, where they were carefully examined to compare them with known dated samples. The study showed that the wood that came from the trees that constructed the home were cut from 1763 to 1764, and that the home would have been ready to live in mostly likely as late as in  1764. This was surprising to historians and Save the Speaker's House, as it was thought for some time that the cabin was constructed in 1745 by Johannes Ried (John Reed). The report issued thus shows that it might have instead been constructed by John Joseph Shrack who owned the property until 1772. The Speaker's Gazette: A periodic publication of Save the Speaker's House, Inc. featuring news and articles of interest. Volume 1, Number 2. Fall 2007. Page 3
Since Save the Speaker's House was created, Frederick Muhlenberg's home has had an "Open House". The organization hopes to have the site opened on a regular basis for pre-restoration tours to educate the public. Ursinus College continues to help the organization through its History Department that sends its History majors to work with the organization. The Speaker's Gazette: A periodic publication of Save the Speaker's House, Inc. featuring news and articles of interest. Volume 1, Number 2. Fall 2007. Page 4
The purpose of Save the Speaker's House, Inc. is to restore, preserve, and interpret the home of Frederick Augustus Muhlenberg, first and third Speaker of the U.S. House, and to promote an understanding of leadership and American history and culture through research and educational programming. The Speaker's Gazette: A periodic publication of Save the Speaker's House, Inc. featuring news and articles of interest. Volume 1, Number 1. Spring 2007. Page 2. The first and still current director of Save the Speaker's House is Ms. Allison Weiss of the city of Philadelphia.
Since 2008 Save the Speaker's House, Inc. officially became The Speaker's House. This was done to show that the estate could no longer be destroyed through demolition or commercial development. A descendent of Frederick Muhlenberg gave a portrait of the man to The Speaker's House. This portrait is a 19th-century copy of an original portrait painted in 1790 by Joseph Wright, now owned by the National Portrait Gallery. The portrait is in the possession of Ursinus College and it will soon be put up in its Myrin Library. The portrait will be included in a project to commemorate the upcoming 100th anniversary of the 1910 Muhlenberg Album, a book which includes photographs of family heirlooms. The Speaker's Gazette: A periodic publication of Save the Speaker's House, Inc. featuring news and articles of interest. Volume 2, Number 1. Spring 2008. Page 1 The Historic Structure Report that was started earlier, has now been completed on the home in December 2007. It has thorough documentation of the house's complex history and change over time, and an analysis of its existing conditions. The Speaker's Gazette: A periodic publication of Save the Speaker's House, Inc. featuring news and articles of interest. Volume 2, Number 1. Spring 2008. Page 4 With the help of the former State Representative Raymond Bunt, Jr., The Speaker's House was given a grant of $15,000 by the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development to help fund restoration work on the house. The grant will be used to remove the stucco from the facade of the building, which was applied sometime after 1925, and repair and repoint the masonry. The pent roofs, constructed by Ursinus College when the house was being remodeled for a dormitory, will also be removed. When the stucco is removed, visitors will be able to see the masonry once more. The Speaker's Gazette: A periodic publication of Save the Speaker's House, Inc. featuring news and articles of interest. Volume 2, Number 1. Spring 2008. Page 6 On April 12, 2008, a Pennsylvania Historical Marker was placed on the site of Frederick Muhlenberg's house to celebrate the life and accomplishments of Frederick Muhlenberg while he lived at 151 W. Main Street in the Trappe area. The Speaker's Gazette: A periodic publication of Save the Speaker's House, Inc. featuring news and articles of interest. Volume 2, Number 1. Spring 2008. Page 7
The history of Frederick Muhlenberg's house and the activities of the Speaker's House have been covered in The Philadelphia Inquirer, The Mercury, and the Valley Item.








