[[Ten Sessions]]

CATEGORIES: 2008 television episodes, Britney Spears, How I Met Your Mother (season 3) episodes

"Ten Sessions" is the 13th episode of the third season of How I Met Your Mother, and the 57th episode overall of the series. It originally aired on March 24, 2008 on CBS. The episode was written by series co-creators Carter Bays and Craig Thomas, and directed by Pamela Fryman. In the episode, Ted is repeatedly rejected by his dermatologist Stella for a date, so Stella's receptionist, Abby, becomes interested in him.
In March 2008, it was announced that American recording artist Britney Spears would make a guest appearance on the show as Abby. Alongside Spears, "Ten Sessions" featured guest appearances from Sarah Chalke and Marshall Manesh. Television critics reacted positively to the episode, who praised the storyline and Spears' performance. According to the Nielsen ratings, "Ten Sessions" was watched by 10.62 million viewers, which was the show's highest rating for the third season of the series.

Plot

Ted (Josh Radnor) is at the clinic to remove his tattoo, where he is attracted to his doctor, Stella (Sarah Chalke). They agree to go to a movie, but Ted does not realize Stella had brought her friends along with her, and it was not a date. At the next session, Ted suggests waiting till his ten sessions are over before asking her out, but Stella tells him she will still say no. Ted still feels that over ten weeks, she will start to like him, so decides to keep trying. Even though the first five sessions go well, Stella confirms her answer is still no. Ted decides that being nice to the receptionist, Abby (Britney Spears), would be a good way to let Stella see his good side, but instead, Abby starts to show interest in him. Upset that this didn't work, Ted tries using a self-help book he saw in Stella's clinic. When he tries talking to her about this, she reveals it isn't her book, and she detests it, while Abby confirms that Ted was reading the book in the reception.
Robin (Cobie Smulders) suggests Ted give up on Stella and instead focus on Abby. Barney (Neil Patrick Harris) agrees, as he made an appointment with Stella to check what she was like, and discovered she had a condition where she is only attracted to men with mustaches. Although Ted does not believe him, he still tries to grow a mustache, which Stella laughs at (a year earlier, Barney had made a ten-dollar bet with Ted that he could get him to grow a mustache). Upset, Ted says he gives up, but Lily (Alyson Hannigan) tells him to try again, as Stella is interested in him, though she says she has not been to see her. It is then revealed that Marshall (Jason Segel) had gone to see Stella to talk up Ted, and found out Stella had a crush on him. Happy that Stella is interested in him, Ted asks her out after his last session, but she says she does not have a time for dating because she has a daughter.
After a while, Ted realizes she didn't actually say the word 'no', just that she didn't have time, and so decides to take her out on a "two-minute date" - to dinner at a table at the café next door to her practice and a "movie" in clips at the electronics store two doors down, with help from Ranjit (Marshall Manesh). The date goes well, and Stella promises to call if she ever has time. Finally, Abby sees Ted outside the clinic holding flowers he tried to give to Stella, and chases him down the street. She is then seen at the reception telling Barney about how he toyed with her emotions, after which they go out to have sex.

Production

"Ten Sessions" was written by series co-creators Carter Bays and Craig Thomas, and directed by Pamela Fryman. In early March 2008, it was confirmed that singer Britney Spears would guest star on the show. Co-creators Carter Bays and Craig Thomas "love" Silverstone and hoped she would eventually guest star on the show, although she never did.
Alyson Hannigan said that Spears "was so funny" and that she had "no idea she Spears had such great comic timing".

Reception

In its original broadcast in the United States, "Ten Sessions" was watched by 10.62 million viewers according to the Nielsen ratings.
Spears' apearance was critically acclaimed by most critics. Linda Stasi of the New York Post asserted that Spears looked "slim ... trim and gorgeous" and that "her acting was nothing short of adorably believable".
Similarly, "Ten Sessions" as a whole was well received by television critics. Bowman gave the episode a 'B' grade, and was more critical of "Ten Sessions". She expressed: "the timing wasn't spot-on all the way through 'Ten Sessions'. The episode was slow starting, and as with many of the series' 'Ted is a master of romance' attempts, the two-minute date seemed as likely to be annoying-quirky as endearing-quirky, if you were the one being wooed. I wanted to like it more than I did. Maybe it almost works because Elliot on Scrubs would have really liked it, ditzy romantic that she is. But no — it's just an ounce heavy on the trying-too-hard scale." In contrast, Zoromski gave the episode an 8.9 out of ten, signifying a "great" rating. He thought that the episode was superior to the previous episode, adding that the show returned to full form.






