[[Carl M. Kuttler, Jr.]]

CATEGORIES: American university and college presidents, Florida State University alumni, St. Petersburg College alumni, Honorary consuls of Russia, People from Daytona Beach, Florida, 1940 births, Living people, People from St. Petersburg, Florida, American Presbyterians

Carl Martin Kuttler, Jr. (born 31 January 1940, Daytona Beach, Florida) is the former president of St. Petersburg College in St. Petersburg, Florida, which he headed from 1978 to 2009.

Early life and education

Kuttler was born in Daytona Beach, Florida, to Carl Martin Kuttler and Rema Winona Ellis.

Career

He began his career at St. Petersburg Junior College in 1966 as assistant to the vice president for administration. From 1967 to 1978 he served as dean of administrative affairs. Upon the retirement of college president Michael M. Bennett in 1978, and an increase in enrollment from 13,300 to 36,133 students.
Kuttler was known as an "entrepreneurial" college president He also raised money in the public arena. In his first year as president, he put a referendum on the Pinellas County ballot seeking a temporary hike in property taxes to raise $500,000 for college improvements, which passed voter approval. The college also petitioned for and received $6.5 million from the Florida state legislature to purchase and remodel three retail buildings for college use.
Kuttler was known for calling and sending a card to each of the college's 1,000 full-time employees on their birthdays. He also sent birthday gifts to Florida legislators – "ties for the men and scarves, pins, or Kmart crystal for the women" – and sent a potted plant to every new community college and university president in Florida. He instituted an employee recognition program and dispatched a congratulatory letter to every St. Petersburg College student who placed in the top 3% of academic achievement.

International relationships

Kuttler formed international relationships and joint educational ventures with Russia, China, Ecuador, Estonia, Guatemala, Greece, Italy, and other countries. Music, dance, and ballet performances have been part of the U.S.-Russian cultural exchange. St. Petersburg College's police training academy has trained 6,000 of Puerto Rico's 18,000 police officers.
Beginning in 1989, Kuttler established a 20-year relationship with the Russian government, supporting educational, political and business initiatives. In 1989 Kuttler hosted his first Russian delegation at St. Petersburg College and embarked on a 10-day exchange program in which Vladimir Putin, then an associate vice president at Saint Petersburg State University in St. Petersburg, Russia, was his daily host. Kuttler made another two visits to Russia over the years, giving interviews on Russian national television and receiving invitations and several awards from Russian universities and institutions.
For two weeks in the fall of 1990, Kuttler served as honorary rector of Leningrad State University (formerly Saint Petersburg State University) as part of an exchange that brought that university's rector, Stanislav P. Merkuriev to St. Petersburg College, where Merkuriev was named honorary president. In May and June 1993, Kuttler was sent to Russia by the United States Information Agency to be the technical advisor for the creation of a national community college system. After that he was named "Father of the Russian Community College System".
Kuttler welcomed a total of 300 Russian leaders to the United States during his presidency, including heads of automobile manufacturing companies and airlines, journalists, state Duma officials, and judges. He met with President Putin and Russian ambassador Yuri Ushakov during Putin's visit to Washington, D.C. in October 2001; one result of that visit was Kuttler's establishment of a scholarship fund named after Putin and Ushakov to benefit Russian students in the United States. In April 2003 Kuttler was invited by Putin to attend an international law panel in St. Petersburg, Russia together with 25 world leaders, including French President Jacques Chirac and German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder. In June 2004, he was named Honorary Consul of the Russian Federation to the State of Florida upon the recommendation of Russia's Prime Minister and the Russian ambassador to the U.S.; the appointment was approved by the United States State Department.

Other activities

In 1974, Kuttler ran for the office of state education commissioner. He was defeated by Ralph Turlington by a 2–1 margin.
In the 1980s, in partnership with the American Association of Community and Junior Colleges, Kuttler developed a series of annual Presidential Leadership Seminars on current issues, first with former President Jimmy Carter at the Carter Center in Atlanta and then with former President Gerald Ford at the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Museum in Grand Rapids, Michigan.
In 1988 Kuttler was nominated by President Ronald Reagan to be a member of the National Advisory Council on Educational Research and Improvement,

Honors and awards

Kuttler has been honored by many prominent organizations as an outstanding community college president, including the Florida Association of Community Colleges, Phi Theta Kappa, the National Institute for Staff and Organizational Development, the National Association of Community College Trustees in America, and the School of Education at the University of Texas at Austin.
Other awards include the American Bar Association's Liberty Bell Award; the 1997 Werner O. Kubsch Award for Achievement in International Education;

Retirement

Kuttler surprised his staff and trustees at the end of a routine board of trustees meeting in July 2009 by announcing his retirement.

Personal

Kuttler married Evelyn Elise Flathmann, also an alumna of Stetson University College of Law, on 29 June 1963. She is an estate planning attorney at Harris Barrett, Mann and Dew in St. Petersburg. The couple had three children: Cindy Kuttler Mercer, Carl M. Kuttler III, and Erika Kuttler Shannon.
In September 2010, Kuttler filed for divorce, citing "unhappy differences" that had arisen between himself and his wife of 47 years, and providing the judge with a statement of division of property which he and his wife had worked out.
In April 2011, the Kuttlers' 43-year-old son, Carl M. Kuttler III, founder of Kuttler Kitchens in Pinellas Park,
In November 2011, Kuttler married St. Petersburg College staff member, Violetta Sweet.

Selected bibliography

Books

Articles, book chapters






