[[Hydronium]]

CATEGORIES: Acids, Cations, Water chemistry

The hydronium cation, also known as hydroxonium is the positively charged polyatomic ion with the chemical formula 

Determination of pH

It is the presence of hydronium ions relative to hydroxide that determines a solution's pH. Water molecules auto-dissociate into hydronium and hydroxide ions in the following equilibrium:
In pure water, there is an equal number of hydroxide and hydronium ions. At 25 °C and atmospheric pressure their concentrations are approximately equal to 1.0 mol∙dm−3  (or mol/L). For these conditions, H3O+ = 10−pH so pH = 7 is defined as neutral. A pH value less than 7 indicates an acidic solution, and a pH value more than 7 indicates a basic solution.

Nomenclature

According to IUPAC nomenclature of organic chemistry, the hydronium ion should be referred to as oxonium."oxonium ions" in IUPAC. Compendium of Chemical Terminology, 2nd ed. (the "Gold Book"). Compiled by A. D. McNaught and A. Wilkinson. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford (1997). ISBN 0-9678550-9-8  Hydroxonium may also be used unambiguously to identify it. A draft IUPAC proposal also recommends the use of oxonium and oxidanium in organic and inorganic chemistry contexts, respectively.
An oxonium ion is any ion with a trivalent oxygen cation. For example, a protonated hydroxyl group is an oxonium ion, but not a hydronium.

Structure

Since  molecule's symmetric top configuration is such that it belongs to the C3v point group. Because of this symmetry and the fact that it has a dipole moment, the rotational selection rules are ΔJ = ±1 and ΔK = 0. The transition dipole lies along the c axis and, because the negative charge is localized near the oxygen atom, the dipole moment points to the apex, perpendicular to the base plane.
Clusters including more than one water molecule have been detected. At high pressures, liquid phase clusters can include up to 6 water molecules.B. R. Turner, J. A. Rutherford, J. Geophys. Res. Space Phys. 73, 6751 (1968)

Acids and acidity

Hydronium is the cation that forms from water in the presence of hydrogen ions. These hydrons do not exist in a free state: they are extremely reactive and are solvated by water. In general, an acidic solute is the source of these hydrons; however, hydroniums exist even in pure water. This special case of water reacting with water to produce hydronium (and hydroxide) ions is commonly known as the self-ionization of water. The resulting hydronium ions are few and short-lived. pH is a measure of the relative activity of hydronium and hydroxide ions in aqueous solutions. In acidic solutions, hydronium is the more active, its excess proton being readily available for reaction with basic species.
Hydronium is very acidic: At 25 °C, its pKa is −1.74. It is also the most acidic species that can exist in water (assuming sufficient water for dissolution)(see leveling effect): Any stronger acid will ionize and protonate a water molecule to form hydronium. The acidity of hydronium is the implicit standard used to judge the strength of an acid in water: strong acids must be better proton donors than hydronium, otherwise a significant portion of acid will exist in a non-ionized state. Unlike hydronium in neutral solutions that result from water's autodissociation, hydronium ions in acidic solutions are long-lasting and concentrated, in proportion to the strength of the dissolved acid.
pH was originally conceived to be a measure of the hydrogen ion concentration of aqueous solution.) can be used interchangeably with the H+ ion; choosing one over the other has no significant effect on the mechanism of reaction.

Solvation

Researchers have yet to fully characterize the solvation of hydronium ion in water, in part because many different meanings of solvation exist. A freezing-point depression study determined that the mean hydration ion in cold water is approximately  on average, each hydronium ion is solvated by 6 water molecules, which are unable to solvate other solute molecules.
Some hydration structures are quite large: The   Further, several disparate features of these simulations agree with their experimental counterparts suggesting an alternative interpretation of the experimental results.
thumb|Zundel cationTwo other well-known structures are the Zundel cations and Eigen cations. The Eigen solvation structure has the hydronium ion at the center of an 
Isolation of the hydronium ion monomer in liquid phase was achieved in a nonaqueous, low-nucleophilicity superacid solution (
A 2007 calculation of the enthalpies and free energies of the various hydrogen bonds around the hydronium cation in liquid protonated water at room temperature and a study of the proton-hopping mechanism using  molecular dynamics showed that the hydrogen-bonds around the hydronium ion (formed with the three water ligands in the first solvation shell of the hydronium) are quite strong compared to those of bulk water.
A new model was proposed by Stoyanov ion.  The positive charge is thus delocalized over six water molecules.
Higher-solvation deuteronium ions have been detected by mass spectrometry. M. Paz, J.J. Leventhal, J. Chem Phys. 51, 3748,1969

Solid hydronium salts

For many strong acids, it is possible to form crystals of their hydronium salt that are relatively stable.  Sometimes these salts are called acid monohydrates.  As a rule, any acid with an ionization constant of 109 or higher may do this.  In general, acids whose ionization constant is below 109 cannot form stable  salts.  For example, hydrochloric acid has an ionization constant of 107, and mixtures with water at all proportions are liquid at room temperature.  However, perchloric acid has an ionization constant of 1010, and, if liquid anhydrous perchloric acid and water are combined in a 1:1 molar ratio, solid hydronium perchlorate forms.
The hydronium ion also forms stable compounds with the carborane superacid ·(benzene)3 cation is completely separated from the anion. In the cation, three benzene molecules surround hydronium, forming pi-cation interactions with the hydrogen atoms. The closest (non-bonding) approach of the anion at chlorine to the cation at oxygen is 348 pm.
There are also many examples of hydrated hydronium ions known, such as the 

Atmospheric 

The hydronium ion has been found in higher atmospheric layers.C. E. Young, W. F. Falconer, J. Chem. Phys, 53, 4295, (1970)

Interstellar 

Motivation for study

Hydronium is an abundant molecular ion in the interstellar medium and is found in diffuse Interstellar sources of hydronium observations include the regions of Sagittarius B2, Orion OMC-1, Orion BN–IRc2, Orion KL, and the comet Hale-Bopp.
Interstellar hydronium is formed by a chain of reactions started by the ionization of  This leads to hydronium playing a very important role in interstellar ion-neutral chemistry.
Astronomers are especially interested in determining the abundance of water in various interstellar climates due to its key role in the cooling of dense molecular gases through radiative processes. is not known very accurately.
Hydronium, on the other hand, has several transitions that make it a superior candidate for detection and identification in a variety of situations. This information has been used in conjunction with laboratory measurements of the branching ratios of the various 

Interstellar chemistry

's chemical interactions under these conditions. More about these reactions were observed and recorded regarding Hale-Bopp data. Finally, it should also be noted that all three destruction mechanisms in the table below are classified as dissociative recombination reactions.
It is also worth noting that the relative rates for the formation reactions in the table above are the same for a given reaction at both temperatures. This is due to the reaction rate constants for these reactions having β and γ constants of 0, resulting in k=α\alpha$, which is independent of temperature.
Since all three of these reactions produce either H2O or OH, these results reinforce the strong connection between their relative abundances and that of H3O+. The rates of these six reactions are such that they make up approximately 99% of H3O+'s chemical interactions under these conditions.

Astronomical detections

As early as 1973 and before the first interstellar detection, chemical models of the interstellar medium (the first corresponding to a dense cloud) predicted that hydronium was an abundant molecular ion and that it played an important role in ion-neutral chemistry. which was followed by other, higher-resolution spectroscopy experiments. Once several lines had been identified in the laboratory, the first interstellar detection of H3O+ was made by two groups almost simultaneously in 1986. The first, published in June 1986, reported observation of the JKvt = 11− – 21+ transition at 307192.41 MHz in OMC-1 and Sgr B2. The second, published in August, reported observation of the same transition toward the Orion-KL nebula.
These first detections have been followed by observations of a number of additional H3O+ transitions. The first observations of each subsequent transition detection are given below in chronological order:
In 1991, the 32+ – 22− transition at 364797.427 MHz was observed in OMC-1 and Sgr B2. One year later, the 30+ – 20− transition at 396272.412 MHz was observed in several regions, the clearest of which was the W3 IRS 5 cloud.
The first far-IR 43− – 33+ transition at 69.524 µm (4.3121 THz) was made in 1996 near Orion BN-IRc2.








