[[Communist Party of the Soviet Union]]

CATEGORIES: Political parties disestablished in 1991, Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Parties of single-party systems, Political parties established in 1912, Soviet internal politics, Eastern Bloc, 1912 establishments in Russia, Communist parties in the Soviet Union

The Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU){{#tag:ref|Sometimes referred to as the Soviet Communist Party (SCP). Note, the party had four different names during its existence;
The CPSU was organized around the idea of democratic centralism, a principle conceived by Lenin that entails democratic and open discussion of policy issues and the requirement of unity in upholding agreed upon policies. The highest body within the CPSU was the party Congress, convened every five years. When the Congress was not in session, the Central Committee was the highest body, but since the body met twice a year, most day-to-day duties and responsibilities were vested in the Politburo, the Secretariat, and the Orgburo (until 1952). The party leader was the head of government and held the office of either General Secretary, Premier or head of state, or some of the three offices concurrently (but never all three at the same time). The party leader was the de facto chairman of the CPSU Politburo and the chief executive of the country.
The CPSU was committed to communist thought, and according to its party statute the CPSU adhered to Marxism–Leninism, an ideology based on the writings of Lenin and Karl Marx, and formalized under Joseph Stalin. The party pursued state socialism, meaning all industries were nationalized, and state planning. Before central planning was enacted in 1929, Lenin had introduced a mixed economy (commonly referred to as the New Economic Policy) in the 1920s. When Mikhail Gorbachev took power, the general sentiment within the party and society was that the planned economy had failed and there was a need to introduce a market economy. Gorbachev and some of his allies envisioned introducing an economy similar to Lenin's New Economic Policy through a program of perestroika, or rebuilding, but the results of their reforms contributed to the fall of the entire system of government.
A number of causes contributed to CPSU's loss of control and the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Some historians have characterized Gorbachev's policy of democratization as the root cause, noting that it weakened the party's control over society. Others have pointed to the economic stagnation and loss of faith by the general populace in communist ideology. The Communist Party of China expressed their view that the cause of the fall tracks back to Joseph Stalin, criticizing him for the "bastardization of Leninism", turning Marxism into dogma, creating a one-man rule, and introducing an inefficient economic system.

History

From Lenin to Stalin (1912–1953)

The Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic, the world's first constitutionally socialist state, was established in the aftermath of the October Revolution.
In 1921, Lenin proposed the New Economic Policy, a system of state capitalism that started the process of industrialization and recovery from the Civil War. He was succeeded by Joseph Stalin.
In the 1930s, Stalin initiated the Great Purge, a period of widespread paranoia and repression culminating in a series of show trials and the purging of nearly all original Party members. With the rise of fascism in Italy and Germany, the Party actively sought to form "collective security" alliances with western powers. Unable to do so, the USSR established non-aggressive relations with Germany, which were ultimately broken in 1941 when Germany invaded the Soviet Union and began the Great Patriotic War. After the Allied victory, the Party held to a doctrine of establishing pro-Stalin governments in the post-war occupied territories and of actively seeking to expand their sphere of influence, using proxy wars and espionage, and providing training and funding to promote Communist elements abroad.

Post-Stalin years (1953–1985)

After Stalin's death, Khrushchev was able to rise to the top post by overcoming political adversaries including Lavrentiy Beria and Georgy Malenkov in a power struggle.
Khrushchev's foreign policies led to the Sino-Soviet split, in part a consequence of his public denunciation of Stalin.
Khrushchev was ousted on 14 October 1964 in a Central Committee plenum which officially cited his inability to listen to others, his failure in consulting with the members of the Presidium, his establishment of a cult of personality, his economic mismanagement, and his anti-party reforms as the reasons he was no longer fit to remain as head of the party.
The Brezhnev era began with a rejection of Khrushchevism in virtually every arena, with the exception of one: continued opposition to Stalinist methods of terror and political violence.
At the 23rd Congress (held in 1966), the names of the office of First Secretary and the body of the Presidium reverted to their original names: General Secretary and Politburo, respectively.
During his rule, Brezhnev supported detente, a passive weakening of animosity with the West with the goal of improving political and economic relations.
Andropov, a staunch anti-Stalinist, chaired the KGB during most of Brezhnev's reign.
Andropov was in office briefly, but was able to appoint a number of reformers to important positions, including Yegor Ligachev, Nikolay Ryzhkov and Mikhail Gorbachev. He also championed a crackdown on absenteeism and corruption. When Andropov died on 9 February 1984, he was succeeded by Chernenko in office.


Gorbachev and the CPSU's demise (1985–1991)

Gorbachev was elected CPSU General Secretary on 11 March 1985, one day after Chernenko's death.
Gorbachev conducted a significant personnel reshuffling of the CPSU leadership, forcing old party conservatives out of office. 
In reaction to these changes, a conservative movement gained momentum in 1987 in response to Boris Yeltsin's dismissal as First Secretary of the Moscow Communist Party.
Gorbachev convened the 19th Party Conference in June 1988. He criticized leading party conservatives Ligachev, Andrei Gromyko and Mikhail Solomentsev.
Despite the deep-seated opposition for further reform, the CPSU still remained hierarchical, and the conservatives ultimately bowed to Gorbachev's demands because he was the CPSU General Secretary.
The CPSU's demise began in March 1990, when party elements were eclipsed in power by state bodies. In reaction to this, conservative elements within the CPSU launched the August coup, which overthrew Gorbachev, but ultimately failed in their attempt to preserve the Soviet Union.


Governing-style

Collective leadership

Cult of personality

Democratic centralism and vanguardism

Democratic centralism is an organizational principle conceived by Lenin.
Lenin believed that democratic centralism safeguarded both party unity and ideological correctness.
A central tenet of Leninism was that of the vanguard party.

Organization

Congress

The Congress, nominally the highest organ of the party, was convened every five years. 
Despite delegates to Congresses losing their powers to criticize or remove party leadership, the Congresses functioned as a form of elite-mass communication.
The Congresses also provided party leadership with formal legitimacy by providing a mechanism for the election of new members and retirement of old members who had lost favor. a position later retracted.

=Conference=

A party Conference, officially referred to as an All-Union Conference, was convened between Congresses by the Central Committee to discuss party policy and make personnel changes within the Central Committee. Throughout the CPSU's existence, 19 conferences were convened. The 19th Congress (held in 1952), removed the clause in the party's Statute which stipulated that a party Conference could be convened. The clause was reinstated at the 23rd Congress (held in 1966).

=Central Committee=

The Central Committee was a collective organ elected at the annual party congress.
Under Lenin, the Central Committee functioned much like the Politburo would during the post-Stalin era, serving as the party's governing body.

=Central Auditing Commission=

The Central Auditing Commission (CAC) was elected by the party Congresses, and reported only to the party Congress. It had about as many members as the Central Committee. It was responsible for supervising the expeditious and proper handling of affairs by the central bodies of the Party, and audited the accounts of the Treasury and the enterprises of the Central Committee. It was also responsible for supervising the Central Committee apparatus, making sure that its directives were implemented and that Central Committee directives complied with the party Statute.

=Statute=

The Statute, also referred to as the Rules, Charter and Constitution, were the party's by-laws, and controlled life within the CPSU.

Central Committee apparatus

=General Secretary=

=Politburo=

The Political Bureau (Politburo), known as the Presidium from 1952 to 1966, was the highest party organ when the Congress and the Central Committee were not in session.
The Politburo was "abolished" and replaced by a Presidium at the 19th Congress (held in 1952).
Until 1990, the CPSU General Secretary acted as the informal chairman of the Politburo.
To be elected to the Politburo, a member had to serve in the Central Committee.

=Secretariat=

The Secretariat headed the CPSU's central apparatus and was solely responsible for the development and implementation of party policies.
The powers of the Secretariat were weakened under Mikhail Gorbachev, and the Central Committee Commissions took over the functions of the Secretariat in 1988.

=Orgburo=

The Organizational Bureau (Orgburo) existed from 1919 to 1952, and was one of three leading bodies of the party when the Central Committee was not in session.

=Control Commission=

The Central Control Commission (CCC) functioned as the party's supreme court.
CCC members could not concurrently be members of the Central Committee.

=Departments=

The leader of a department was usually given the titles "head".(

=Pravda=

Pravda (translates to The Truth) was the leading newspaper in the Soviet Union.

=Higher Party School=

The Higher Party School (HPS) was the organ responsible for teaching cadres in the Soviet Union.

Lower-level organization

=Republican and local organization=

The lowest organ (above the primary party organization) was the district-level.
Day-to-day responsibility of the raikom were handed over to a Politburo, usually composed of 12-members.
This system remained identical at all other levels of the CPSU hierarchy. Until 1990, the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic was the only republic which did not have its own republican branch, being instead represented by the CPSU Central Committee.

=Primary party organizations=

The primary party organization (PPO) was the lowest level in the CPSU hierarchy.

=Membership=

Membership in the party was not open. To become a party member, one had to be approved by various committees and one's past was closely scrutinised. As generations grew up never having known anything but the USSR, party membership became something one generally achieved after passing a series of stages. Children would join the Young Pioneers, and then, at the age of 14, might graduate to the Komsomol (Young Communist League). Ultimately, as an adult, if one had shown the proper adherence to party discipline or had the right connections one would become a member of the Communist Party itself. However, membership also had its obligations. The Party expected Komsomol and CPSU members not only to pay dues but also to carry out appropriate assignments and "social tasks" (общественная работа).
In 1918 Party membership stood at approximately 200,000. In the late 1920s under Stalin, the Party engaged in a heavy recruitment campaign (the "Lenin Levy") of new members from both the working class and rural areas. This represented both an attempt to "proletarianize" the Party and an attempt by Stalin to strengthen his base by outnumbering the Old Bolsheviks and reducing their influence in the Party. In 1925 the Party had 1,025,000 members in a Soviet population of 147 million. In 1927, after an intensive recruitment campaign, membership rose to 1,200,000. By 1933, the party had approximately 3.5 million members, but as a result of the Great Purge of 1936–1939 party membership reduced  to 1.9 million by 1939. (Nicholas DeWitt gives 2.307 million members in total in 1939, including candidate members, compared with 1.535 million in 1929 and 6.3 million in 1947.) In 1986, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union had over 19 million members or approximately 10% of the USSR's adult population. Over 44% of party members were classified as industrial workers, and 12% as collective farmers. The CPSU had party organizations in 14 of the USSR's 15 republics. The Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic itself had no separate Communist Party until 1990 as the CPSU controlled affairs there directly.

Komsomol

The All-Union Leninist Communist Youth League, commonly referred to as Komsomol, was the party's youth wing.

Ideology

Marxism–Leninism

Marxism–Leninism was the cornerstone of Soviet ideology.
Despite having evolved over the years, Marxism–Leninism had several central tenets.

=Leninism=

In Marxist philosophy, Leninism is the body of political theory for the democratic organisation of a revolutionary vanguard party, and the achievement of a dictatorship of the proletariat, as political prelude to the establishment of the socialist mode of production, developed by Lenin.
Leninism was by definition authoritarian.

=Stalinism=

Stalinism, while not an ideology per se, refers to Stalin's thoughts and policies.
 We stand for the strengthening of the dictatorship of the proletariat, which represents the mightiest and most powerful authority of all forms of State that have ever existed. The highest development of the State power for the withering away of State power —this is the Marxian formula. Is this "contradictory"? Yes, it is "contradictory." But this contradiction springs from life itself and reflects completely Marxist dialectic." 
The idea that the state would wither away was later abandoned by Stalin at the 18th Congress (held in 1939), in which he expressed confidence that the state would exist, even if the Soviet Union reached communism, as long as it was encircled by capitalism.

Concepts

=Dictatorship of the proletariat=


Lenin, supporting Marx's view of the state, believed democracy to be unattainable anywhere in the world before the proletariat seized power.
Marx, similar to Lenin, did not care if a bourgeoise state was ruled accordance with a republican, parliamentary or a constitutional monarchial system since in essence this did not change the overall situation.

In early Bolshevik discourse, the term dictatorship of the proletariat, was of little significance, and the few time it was mentioned, it was likened to the form of government which had existed in the Paris Commune.
 "Dictatorship means nothing more nor less than authority untrammelled by any laws, absolutely unrestricted by any rules whatever, and based directly on force. The term 'dictatorship' has no other meaning but this." 
Lenin justified these policies by claiming that all states were class states by nature, and that these states were maintained through class struggle.

=Imperialism=


The Marxist theory on imperialism was conceived by Lenin in his book, Imperialism: the Highest Stage of Capitalism (published in 1917).
Lenin did not know when imperialist stage of capitalism began, and claimed it would be foolish too look for a specific year, however he does assert it began at the beginning of the 20th century (at least in Europe).

=Peaceful coexistence=


"Peaceful coexistence" was an ideological concept introduced under Khrushchev's rule.
The concept was steeped in Leninist and Stalinist thought.
The emphasise on peaceful coexistence did not mean that the Soviet Union accepted a static world, with clear lines.

=Socialism in One Country=

The concept of "Socialism in One Country" was conceived by Stalin in his struggle against Leon Trotsky and his concept of permanent revolution.
In late 1925, Stalin received a letter from a party official which stated that his position of "Socialism in One Country" was in contradiction with Friedrich Engels own writings on the subject.

Reasons for demise

Western view

There were few, in any, who believed that the Soviet Union was on the verge of collapse by 1985. In the words of Archie Brown;
 "The expectations of, again most notably, Lithuanians, Estonians and Latvians were enormously enhanced by what they saw happening in the 'outer empire' Europe and they began to believe that they could remove themselves from the 'inner empire'. In truth, a democratised Soviet Union was incompatible with denial of the Baltic states' independence for, to the extent that those Soviet republics became democratic, their opposition to remaining in a political entity whose centre was Moscow would become increasingly evident. Yet, it was not preordained that the entire Soviet Union would break up." 
However, Brown argues that the system didn't need to collapse, or collapse in the particular way it did. The democratization from above weakened the party's control over the country, and put it on the defensive. A different leader, Brown adds, would in all probability have oppressed the opposition, and moved forward with economic reform. Nonetheless, Gorbachev accepted that the people sought a different road, and consented to the Soviet dissolution in 1991. He claims that because of its peaceful fall, the fall of Soviet communism is "one of the great success stories of 20th century politics." According to Lars T. Lih, the Soviet Union collapsed because people stopped believing in its ideology, claiming;
 "When in 1991 the Soviet Union collapsed not with a bang but a whimper, this unexpected outcome was partly the result of the previous deenchantment of the narrative of class leadership. The Soviet Union had always been based on fervent belief in this narrative in its various permutations. When the binding power of the narrative dissolved, the Soviet Union itself dissolved." 

According to the Communist Party of China

The first researches on the collapse of the Soviet Union, and the Eastern Bloc in general, were in many ways vey simple, and did not take into account several factors.

While the majority of CPC researchers criticize the CPSU's economic policies, many have criticized what they see as "Soviet totalitarianism".
While the CPC concur with Gorbachev's assessment that the CPSU needed internal reform, they do not agree on how it was implemented, criticizing his idea of "humanistic and democratic socialism", of negating the leading role of the CPSU, of negating Marxism, of negating the analysis of class contradictions and class struggle, of negating the "ultimate socialist goal of realizing communism" etc.
Other criticism of the CPSU was not taking enough care in building the primary party organization, and not having inner-party democracy.

Notes



Footnotes

Bibliography




