[[Barack the Magic Negro]]

CATEGORIES: 2007 songs, Parodies, Political satire, Political songs, Politics and race in the United States, Songs about Barack Obama, The Rush Limbaugh Show

"Barack the Magic Negro" is a song by American political satirist Paul Shanklin who wrote and recorded it for the Rush Limbaugh Show as satire after the title phrase was first applied to presidential candidate Obama by movie and culture critic David Ehrenstein in a Los Angeles Times op ed column of March 19, 2007. It was played numerous times in 2007 and 2008 by Rush Limbaugh and appeared on the 2008 album We Hate the USA. It is sung by Shanklin to the tune of "Puff, the Magic Dragon". Shanklin impersonates black activist Al Sharpton, who regretfully sings that white people will vote for Barack Obama for President instead of Sharpton, because Obama is a magical Negro (a term previously popularized by Spike Lee), not a real black man from the "hood".
Limbaugh was criticized and accused of racism for playing the song. The controversy was reignited in December 2008, when Chip Saltsman, a candidate for chairman of the Republican National Committee, sent out CDs containing the song to 168 other RNC members as a Christmas gift, hoping to bolster his 2009 campaign for RNC chair. The move backfired, Saltsman dropped his bid to head the RNC, and ultimately African American Republican Michael Steele won the chairmanship.

Background

The magical Negro is an archetype which was first applied to presidential candidate Obama by movie and culture critic David Ehrenstein, in a Los Angeles Times op ed column of March 19, 2007. According to Ehrenstein, the magical Negro is a non threatening black hero in the popular media, usually the cinema, who was invented to ease feelings of white guilt over slavery and racial injustice. He is noble and devoid of sexual motives, and appears suddenly, out of nowhere, to magically solve the problems of white people.
Ehrenstein opined that "Obama's fame right now has little to do with his political record or what he's written in his two books, or even what he's actually said". Rather, Obama was a popular contender for the presidency because whites were projecting their "fantasies of curative black benevolence" on him.
Limbaugh began discussing Ehrenstein's op ed on the day it was published. He declared that "The term 'Magic Negro' has been thrown into the political presidential race in the mix for 2008" and sang a brief rendition of "Barack the Magic Negro" to the tune of "Puff, the Magic Dragon", anticipating the Shanklin song, which he began to air the following day. He said he would "own" the term by the end of the week. Limbaugh played the song numerous times throughout the 2008 presidential election season.

Composition

The song's lyrics, sung in a voice impersonating black activist and former presidential candidate Al Sharpton explicitly refer to Ehrensteins' article:
In the song, Sharpton's impersonated voice is made to sound as if coming from a bullhorn, a satirical nod to his well-known participation in street protests.

Reception

In response to criticisms that the song had racist overtonesWashington Post: RNC Rivals Discuss Racial Song.  December 28, 2008., Limbaugh noted that he was not the first person to apply the magic Negro moniker to Obama, David Ehrenstein was. Limbaugh also argued that Ehrenstein had not been criticized for his op ed because he was a black man and a member of the liberal media establishment, therefore, double standards were being applied to conservative commentary.
Political analyst Earl Ofari Hutchinson called the song "crass, tasteless, and race tinged, but ... accurate."
Al Sharpton discussed the song with a New York Times reporter and stated: "Limbaugh puts things in a way that he can't be blamed for easy bigotry. Some of the songs he does about me just make me laugh. But he's the most dangerous guy we have to deal with on the right".
Peter Yarrow, who co-wrote the original song "Puff the Magic Dragon" condemned the parody as "shocking and saddening in the extreme," stating that "taking a children's song and twisting it in such vulgar, mean-spirited way, is a slur to our entire country and our common agreement to move beyond racism…  Puff, himself, if asked, would certainly agree.".

Distribution of CDs by Chip Saltsman

In December 2008, Chip Saltsman, who was campaigning for the chairmanship of the Republican National Committee mailed the song on a "Christmas CD" to fellow RNC members who would soon be selecting their new national chairman.
On December 29, 2008, comedian Andy Borowitz posted on his web site a spoofed apology by the Republican National Committee for Chip Saltsman's CD.








