[[Joseph Hardin, Sr.]]

CATEGORIES: 1734 births, 1801 deaths, People from Henrico County, Virginia, American Presbyterians, Hardin family, People from Washington County, Tennessee, People from the State of Franklin, People from Knox County, Tennessee, Signers of the Tryon Resolves, People of Virginia in the French and Indian War, North Carolina colonial people, People of North Carolina in the American Revolution, North Carolina militiamen in the American Revolution, People of Tennessee in the American Revolution, Members of the North Carolina House of Representatives, Members of the Southwest Territorial Legislature, Pre-statehood history of Tennessee, People of pre-statehood Tennessee

Colonel Joseph Hardin, Sr. (April 18, 1734 – July 4, 1801) Hardin was an Assemblyman (Provincial Congressman) for the North Carolina Colony. During the War for Independence, as a member of the militia from Tryon County, Hardin fought the Cherokee allies of Britain along the western frontier and was a signatory of the Tryon Resolves. Later in the war, having taken his family over the Appalachian Mountains to the Washington DistrictCounty Formation Ani-Maps for safety against the advance of the Red Coats out of South Carolina, Hardin joined the Overmountain Men. He saw action at the Battle of Ramsour's Mill and the decisive Battle of Kings Mountain. Following the peace with Britain, Hardin was a co-founder and second Speaker of the House for the State of Franklin; and an Assemblyman in the Southwest Territory before its statehood as Tennessee.

Early and family life

Joseph Hardin was born the spring of 1734 in Henrico Co., Virginia Colony in an area several years later to be encompassed by the fledgling town of Richmond at the Falls (now Richmond), Virginia Colony.Virginia County Formation Ani-Maps"Evolution of the Virginia Colony, a 1610-1630 Timeline"
Hardin was the second son, and fourth child, of Benjamin Hardin II and Margaret Hooper.; pp. 1-5  He was older brother to Captain John Hardin (1736–1802) (noted as the hero who turned the tide of battle for the patriots at the Battle of Ramsour's MillLincoln County History and Sarah Hardin, wife to Lt. Col. Frederick Hambright.
Hardin married Jane Gibson (1742–1817) on July 8, 1762 in Virginia. They moved to the 'Salisbury District' of the North Carolina Colony, settling in the newly formed Tryon County, where he became Justice of the Peace in 1772.; p. 1-5
Hardin's children were: Rebecca; twins Joseph Jr. and John; Jane Ann; James W.; Benjamin I; Robert I; Elender; Mary Easter; Margaret; Amos; Benjamin II; Gibson; and Robert II.  "Ben-two" and "Robert-two", as they were called, were both named after older brothers who had been lost in battle with Native Americans.; p. 1-5
Hardin was a great-grandfather of Texas outlaw, John Wesley Hardin.

Civil service

Hardin served several stints as a local Justice of the Peace: first in Tryon County, NC (April 1772 – 1778); then Washington Co., NC (Tennessee East District) (1783); and finally Greene Co. (1796).   He served as an Assemblyman (Representative) for Tryon Co., NC (1774–1779); for Washington County (Washington District, North Carolina) (1782) and, Greene Co., Tennessee East District, NC (1788). Hardin became a signer of the Tryon Resolves in September 1775.
During the period of 1784-1785, Hardin, John Sevier, and several others were instrumental in organizing the extra-legal State of Franklin. He was elected its second Speaker of the House in June 1785.  A few years after the failure of Franklin, he served as a representative for the First Territorial Assembly of the Southwest Territory (also known as the Territory South of the Ohio River)Acts of the Southwest Territory; An Act for the Enumeration of the Inhabitants of the Territory of the United States of America South of the River Ohio"; July 11, 1795 held at Knoxville, Tennessee in the summer of 1794.   Later that same year, Hardin became a trustee of the newly chartered Greeneville (later Tusculum) College.; p. 1-5  He was elevated to Speaker of the House in the territorial assembly in 1795. 566.

Military service

Hardin's first documented military service shows his appointment as a major of the 2nd North Carolina Minute Men (of the Salisbury District) in 1775.  That same year, he appears in the rolls as a captain in the Tryon County Colonial Light Horse Rangers. Hardin took part in Moore's Cherokee Expedition into the Washington District late the following year. Pg. 553  Beginning in 1777, Hardin carried a captain's commission in Locke's Battalion (part of General Allen Jones' Brigade) seeing action against Britain and its Native American allies.Picture
It was during this time that Hardin moved his family to the western settlements for safe keeping. As a member of the Overmountain militia, he fought in the Battle of Ramsour's Mill, between the Tories (Loyalists to the Crown) and the Whigs (American Patriots) on June 20, 1780 and later that year at the Battle of Kings Mountain, on Oct 7.
After the cessation of the ground war with Britain (1783), Hardin was appointed colonel of the North Carolina Militia for "The Western Counties" (Re.: Tennessee) due to the continuing hostilities with the Chickamauga Indians.

Land grants

As was the custom of the time, he was awarded land grants totaling 

Later life and legacy

Although he himself never set foot in that region, on March 11, 1786 the land along the far western reaches of the Tennessee River was surveyed by Isaac Taylor and warrants were drawn on behalf of Hardin for ; pp. 829-841
Hardin died July 4, 1801.  He is interred at the Hickory Creek Cemetery, Hardin Valley, Knox Co., TN.  The inscription reads:

The Hardin Expedition

Two parties of settlers (totaling 26) struck out of Knoxville, Tennessee in late spring of 1816 bound for the general area which would eventually become Savannah, Tennessee. The first party came by boat down the Tennessee River, landing in May at "the easteward curve of the Tennessee" at Cerro Gordo.  The second, and larger, party had travelled overland and suffered from many delays.  Upon the arrival of the second group, the parties finally rejoined at Johnson Creek, near present day Savannah, Tennessee. It was now July, and the pioneers set about the laying down of the first permanent settlement by non-Native Americans in the area.
This second party was led by Joseph Hardin, Jr., son of Col. Joseph Hardin, who had, before his death, accumulated several land grants to the area as rewards for his Revolutionary War service. Joseph, Jr. was accompanied on the trip by his brother, James Hardin (known as the founder of the settlement of Hardinville;  a failed endeavor that would be created in 1817 on nearby Hardin's Creek). Both men executed land grants in the area.  They had fought alongside their father in the war and had been likewise rewarded with their own land patents, and had inherited some of their father's remaining unclaimed grants. About this same time, other settlers from the initial expedition established a community further down river at Saltillo.
Other relatives of Col. Joseph's were to eventually settle in the area, including sons: Gibson, Ben II and Robert II, and daughter, Margaret (wife of Ninian Steele), all having arrived there by 1818.
The county was named posthumously for Joseph Hardin, Sr. in November 1819, at the first meeting of the county assembly which took place at the home of his son, James Hardin.  Today, the courthouse in the county seat of Savannah is dedicated to him.






