[[AirClic]]

CATEGORIES: Articles with inconsistent citation formats, Software companies based in Pennsylvania, Internet companies, Companies established in 2000

AirClic, Inc. is a web-based software and mobile information services company founded in 2000. AirClic offers fully
hosted solutions including a workflow-based mobile application framework.

History

Airclic was founded in 2000. The company has gone through several shifts in strategic direction. It originally planned to use its technology to enable consumers with specially equipped mobile phones and handheld devices to scan bar codes in print ads and posters to get information and make purchases. Its proprietary bar codes were called "Scanlets."
In its early days, the company announced ambitious partnerships with a variety of companies. At one point Motorola, Symbol Technologies, Connect Things and Airclic announced they would invest $500 million "to form a new company that will drive e-commerce growth through one-scan access to the Internet."Motorola, Symbol Technologies, Connect Things and Airclic Form New Company to Drive the Growth of E-Commerce Through One-scan Ac – Symbol Technologies  A partnership with R.R. Donnelly & Sons, announced in June 2001, was to incorporate Airclic technology into phone books.R.R. Donnelley Forms Interactive Media Partnership With Airclic; Agreement enables directory publishers to create interactive print advertisements. | Marketing & Advertising >... Another involving HometownGrocers.InternetRetailer.com – Daily News for Wednesday, February 6, 2002
After the Internet bubble burst the company regrouped, gradually shifting to its current focus on automating mobile and field processes for businesses. Its solutions still rely on bar codes and scanner-equipped mobile phones. Philadelphia Business Journal reports that "Airclic has grown its revenue tenfold over the past three years, from $1 million in 2004 to nearly $10 million last year 2007." Philadelphia Business Journal, Friday, September 26, 2008.
Until early 2010 the company was headquartered in Trevose, Pennsylvania, with operations in Bloomington, Minnesota. With the appointment of Rick Pontin as CEO in April 2010 the Bloomington office was closed and all operations were relocated to the headquarters location.
On July 13, 2010, Airclic announced it had merged with AirVersent, an $8.1 million company based in Owings Mills, Maryland. The Baltimore Sun reported the merger would create "a profitable company with revenue of $22 million a year."

Funding

It is unclear how much funding privately owned Airclic has received over the years, but news accounts and the company's own communications would seem to put the figure at at least $340 million:
The company also announced an investment in November 2004 from Motorola and "several individual investors."AirClic Mobile Business Process Solutions: Press Release The amount was not disclosed.

Management

Airclic has had a series of management shakeups since its founding. In March 2000 it announced a "management coup"
Months later, Klatt was lured away to become president of Rubbermaid. Wireless Week announced Airclic had hit the "management jackpot" when former American Express CEO Harvey Golub was named chairman and Phillip Reise, the former president of the American Express consumer card services group, was named CEO.[ref]Airclic Hits Funding, Management Jackpot,
Wireless Week, January, 2001[/ref]
Also in January 2001, Suren Gupta, an IT executive at GMAC Residential, was appointed head of global operation and information services.
Tim Bradley, a former sales executive with Cognos and Adaytum, was named CEO in March 2005. In April 2010 the company announced the appointment of Rick Pontin as CEO. Previously, Pontin was executive chairman of Tangoe and CEO of its predecessor company TRAQ Wireless.

Products

Like its management team, AirClic's product lineup has undergone numerous transformations over the years. The company's current product line is called Perform.






