[[St Wilfrid's Church, Melling]]

CATEGORIES: Church of England churches in Lancashire, Grade I listed churches in Lancashire, English Gothic architecture in Lancashire, Gothic Revival architecture in Lancashire, Diocese of Blackburn, Churches in Lancaster


St Wilfrid's Church, Melling, is located in Main Street, Melling, Lancashire, England.  It is designated by English Heritage as a Grade I listed building,

History

The earliest fabric in the church dates from around 1300 or earlier but, as it is near the earthworks of a motte-and-bailey castle, it is possible that a church has been present on the site since the 10th century.  A chapel known as the Morley chapel had been created as a chantry from a pre-existing chapel by John Morley who fought at Agincourt in 1415.  This was heavily re-modelled in 1841 when the altar was removed, and was restored as a chapel in 1994–95.

Architecture

The church is built in sandstone rubble with a stone slate roof.  Its plan consists of a west tower, a nave and chancel under a continuous roof with a clerestory, north and south aisles, a south porch and a south chapel.  The tower has diagonal buttresses and an embattled parapet.  The west window of the south aisle dates from around 1300.  This window includes a fragment of medieval stained glass.  Internally, the aisle pews date from the 18th century but the nave pews, the screens, the pulpit, and the communion rails are from the late 19th century.  In the chapel is an aumbry without a door and a squint.  There are numerous memorial wall tablets.  Discovered during the restoration and built into the vestry wall is a piece of Norman chevron ornament, part of a crucifix, and part of a grave slab.  The stained glass in the east window was designed by Henry Holiday.  The organ was built in 1891 by J. W. Walker of London.  There is a ring of six bells which were recast in 1754 from three bells made in the 15th century by Rudhall of Gloucester.

External features

In the churchyard is a sandstone sundial dating probably from the 18th century with a brass plate and gnomon which is listed Grade II.






