[[The Dark Knight (soundtrack)]]

CATEGORIES: 2008 soundtracks, Batman soundtracks, Film scores, Hans Zimmer albums, Warner Bros. Records soundtracks

The Dark Knight: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack is the soundtrack album to the 2008 film of the same name, which is a sequel to Christopher Nolan's 2005 film Batman Begins. The soundtrack was released on July 15, 2008, in three editions: CD, limited edition CD digipak, and digital download. The 2-CD Special Edition was released on December 9, 2008, along with the DVD. A limited edition 180-gram vinyl LP was released on August 12, 2008. The soundtrack was composed by Batman Begins collaborators Hans Zimmer and James Newton Howard and recorded in April 2008.
The score won the Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media.

Composition

Zimmer originally said the main Batman theme was purposely introduced at the end of Batman Begins, and would be fleshed out in the sequel as the character develops. which was played by a cello.
The nine-minute suite for the Joker ("Why So Serious") was based around two notes played by Electric cello, solo violin, guitars and a string section. Zimmer compared its style to the band Kraftwerk, who come from his native Germany, as well as his work with bands like The Damned. Throughout the piece, Zimmer used razor blades on string instruments to achieve the tortured, twisted sound to accompany the character on the screen. When Ledger died, Zimmer stated that he felt like scrapping his original material and composing a new theme, but decided that to do so would compromise the "evil performance projects". James Newton Howard composed the "elegant and beautiful" themes for Harvey Dent/Two-Face, to work as an aural contrast.
The heroic brass theme which plays when Batman leaves Ra's al Ghul to die in Batman Begins makes a reappearance when Batman hurls the Joker off the building in the film's climax. It also makes its third and final appearance in "The Dark Knight Rises" when Batman fires a missile at Miranda Tate, while her truck driver was killed, sending her and the truck to a crashing halt.  The cue was released on the two-disc special edition, and can be found on the track "We Are Tonight's Entertainment". The second disc can also be found for digital download under the album name The Dark Knight (Bonus Digital Release) with artwork featuring the Joker instead of Batman.

Sales

The soundtrack debuted on the Billboard 200 list at 
During its second week in release, the track fell to  192 selling 2,100. On its fourth week it fell out of the Top 200.
A 2-CD Special Edition of The Dark Knight soundtrack was released on December 9, 2008. In addition to the 14 tracks on the regular release, an additional 10 tracks of score were added to the second disc, along with four remixes by The Crystal Method, Paul van Dyk, Mel Wesson, and Ryeland Allison, packaged as a digibook in a semi-artificial leather slipcase with the Batsign cut out. The Digibook features several movie scenes, production details and a few words from Christopher Nolan on the collaboration with Hans Zimmer and James Newton Howard. The first disc is exactly the same as the original release, with additional tracks and remixes on the latter disc. Between the two of them, the two discs of the special edition form most of the film's score, though the tracks are arranged in an order different from the scenes in the film.

Reception

The score received favorable responses. Websites like scorenotes.com and Soundtrack.

Awards

On February 8, 2009, the soundtrack was awarded the Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media. In May 2009, the soundtrack won a Classical BRIT Award for Best Soundtrack.

Track listing

Disc One
Disc Two- (Bonus Special Edition)
Tracks not included within the release of the soundtrack:The Dark Knight End Credits

Chart positions






