[[High-speed rail]]

CATEGORIES: High-speed rail, Japanese inventions


High-speed rail  is a type of rail transport that operates significantly faster than traditional rail traffic, using an integrated system of specialized rolling stock and dedicated tracks. The first such system began operations in Japan in 1964 and was widely known as the bullet train. High-speed trains normally operate on standard gauge tracks of continuously welded rail on grade-separated right-of-way that incorporates a large turning radius in its design.
Many countries have developed high-speed rail to connect major cities, including China, France, Germany, Italy, Taiwan, Turkey, South Korea and Spain.
While high-speed rail is usually designed for passenger travel, some high-speed systems also offer freight service.  For instance, the French mail service La Poste owns a few special TGV trains for carrying postal freight.

Definitions

Multiple definitions for high-speed rail are in use worldwide.
The International Union of Railways states that high-speed rail is a set of unique features, not merely a train travelling above a particular speed. Many conventionally hauled trains are able to reach  in commercial service but are not considered to be high-speed trains. These include the French SNCF Intercités and German DB IC.

History

Railways were the first form of rapid land transportation and had an effective monopoly on passenger traffic until the development of the motor car and airliners in the early-mid 20th century. Speed had always been an important factor for railroads and they constantly tried to achieve higher speeds and decrease journey times. Rail transportation in the late 19th Century was not much slower than non high-speed trains today and many railroads regularly operated relatively fast express trains which averaged speeds of around .org/Museum/Books/I_ACCEPT_the_User_Agreement/Official_Rail_Guide_1910.pdf

Early research

=First experiments=

High-speed rail development began in Germany in 1899  when the Prussian state railway joined with ten electrical and engineering firms and electrified  of military owned railway between Marienfelde and Zossen. The line used three-phase current at 10 kilovolts and 45 Hz.
The Van der Zypen & Charlier company of Deutz, Cologne built two railcars, one fitted with electrical equipment from Siemens-Halske, the second with equipment from Allgemeine Elektricitäts-Gesellschaft (AEG), that were tested on the Marienfelde–Zossen line during 1902 and 1903.
On 23 October 1903, the S&H-equipped railcar achieved a speed of . Accessed 23 January 2013. These trains demonstrated the feasibility of electric high-speed rail however regularly scheduled electric high-speed rail travel was still more than 30 years away.

=Early German high-speed network=

On May 15, 1933, the Deutsche Reichsbahn-Gesellschaft company introduced the diesel-powered "Fliegender Hamburger" in regular service between Hamburg and Berlin (286 km), thereby establishing the fastest regular service in the world, with a regular top speed of . This train was a streamlined multi-powered unit, albeit diesel, and used Jakobs bogies some 47 years before the advent of the TGV.
Following the success of the Hamburg line, the steam-powered Henschel-Wegmann Train was developed and introduced in June 1936 for service from Berlin to Dresden, with a regular top speed of . 
Further development allowed the usage of these "Fliegenden Züge" (flying trains) on a rail network across Germany. 
The "Diesel-Schnelltriebwagen-Netz" had been in the planning since 1934 but it never reached its envisaged size.
And in August 1939, shortly before the breakout of the war, all high-speed service stopped.

=The American Streamliners=

On 26 May 1934, one year after Fliegender Hamburger introduction, the Burlington Railroad's set an average speed record on long distance with their new streamlined train, the Zephyr, at  as commercial speed.
The new service was inaugurated at the end of year, 11 November 1934, between Kansas City and Lincoln, but at lower speed than the record, with an average speed of .Pioneer Zephyrs, Official Guide, September 1938
In 1935, Milwaukee Road company introduced the Morning Hiawatha service, hauled at .Twin Zephyrs, Official Guide, September 1938

=The Italian electric and the last steam record=

The German high-speed service was followed in Italy in 1938 with an electric-multiple-unit ETR 200, designed for  near Milan in 1938.
In Great Britain in the same year, the streamlined steam locomotive Mallard achieved the official world speed record for steam locomotives at . The external combustion engines and boilers on steam locomotives were large, heavy and time consuming to maintain, and the days of steam for high speed were numbered.

=The birth of Talgo system=

In 1945, a Spanish engineer, Alejandro Goicoechea, developed a streamlined articulated train able to run on existing tracks at higher speeds than contemporary passenger trains. This was achieved by providing the locomotive and cars with a unique axle system that used one axle set per car end, connected by a Y-bar coupler. Amongst other advantages, the centre of mass was only half as high as usual."Low Slung Train Travels Fast" Popular Science, February 1945, p. 70 This system became famous under the name of Talgo (Tren Articulado Ligero Goicoechea Oriol), and for half a century was the main Spanish provider of high-speed trains.

=The first very-high-speed records=

In the early 1950s, the French National Railway started to receive their new powerful CC 7100 electric locomotives, and began to study and evaluate running at very high speeds. In 1954, the CC 7121 hauling a full train achieved a record , again on standard track.D'où viens tu TGV? (in French), by Jean François Picard and Alain Beltran 
For the first time,  was surpassed, allowing the idea of regular very high-speed services to be developed.
New engineering studies began for this purpose. Especially, during the 1955 records, very dangerous hunting oscillation, the swaying of the bogies which at high speed leads to dynamic instability and potential derailment, was discovered, which led to the use of yaw dampers to solve this problem, enabling safe running speeds above  today. Important research was also made about "current harnessing" at high-speed by the pantographs, that was solved 20 years later by the Zébulon TGV's prototype.

Breakthrough: The Shinkansen

=Japanese research and development=

With some 45 million people living in the densely populated Tokyo-to-Osaka corridor, congestion on road and rail became a serious problem after World War II, and the Japanese government began thinking seriously about a new high-speed rail service. 
Japan in the 1950s was a populous, resource-limited nation that for security reasons did not want to import petroleum, but needed a way to transport its millions of people in and between cities.
Japanese National Railways (JNR) engineers then began to study the development of a high-speed regular mass transit service. In 1955, they were present at the Lille's Electrotechnology Congress in France, and during a 6-month visit, the head engineer of JNR accompanied the deputy director Marcel Tessier at the DETE (SNCF Electric traction study department). JNR engineers returned to Japan with a number of ideas and technologies they would use on their future trains, including alternating current for rail traction, and international standard gauge.

=The first narrow-gauge Japanese high-speed service=

In 1957, the engineers at the private Odakyu Electric Railway in Greater Tokyo area launched the Odakyu 3000 series SE EMU. This EMU set a world record for narrow gauge trains at , giving the Odakyu engineers confidence they could safely and reliably build even faster trains at standard gauge. The original Japanese railways generally used narrow gauge, but the increased stability offered by widening the rails to standard gauge would make very high-speed rail much simpler, and thus standard gauge was adopted for high-speed service.

=A new train on a new line=

The new service, named Shinkansen (meaning new trunk line) would run on new, 25% wider standard gauge, continuously welded rails between Tokyo and Osaka using new rolling stock, designed for .
After initial feasibility tests, the plan was fast-tracked and construction of the first section of the line started on 20 April 1959.. Five years after the beginning of the construction work, in October 1964, just in time for the Olympic Games, the first modern high-speed rail, the Tōkaidō Shinkansen, was opened between the two cities.
The first Shinkansen trains, the 0 Series Shinkansen, built by Kawasaki Heavy Industries—in English often called "Bullet Trains", after the original Japanese name  with stops at Nagoya and Kyoto.

=A great success=

But the speed was only a part of the Shinkansen revolution: the Shinkansen offered high-speed rail travel to the masses. The first Bullet trains had 12 cars and later versions had up to 16,
After three years, more than 100 million passengers had used the trains, and the milestone of the first one billion passengers was reached in 1976. In 1972, the line was extended a further 
Since their introduction, Japan's Shinkansen systems have been under relentless development, not only increasing line speeds.  Dozens of models have been produced, addressing diverse issues such as tunnel boom noise, vibration, aerodynamic drag, lines with lower throughput ("Mini shinkansen"), earthquake and typhoon safety, braking distance, problems due to snow, and energy consumption (newer models consume half the initial ones despite greater speeds).asahi.com/article/behind_news/social_affairs/AJ201309190078

Revival in Europe and North America

=First demonstrations at 200 km/h=

In Europe, high-speed rail began during the International Transport Fair in Munich in June 1965, when Dr Öpfering, the director of Deutsche Bundesbahn (German Federal Railways), performed 347 demonstrations at  within days of operation.

=Le Capitole=

After the success of the Japanese Shinkansen in 1964, at .
In 1966, French Infrastructure Minister Edgar Pisani consulted engineers and gave the French National Railways twelve months to raise speeds to . Some improvements were set, notably the signals system, development of on board "in-cab" signalling system, and curve revision.
The next year, in May 1967, a regular service at  was inaugurated by the TEE Le Capitole between Paris and Toulouse, with specially adapted SNCF Class BB 9200 locomotives hauling classic UIC cars, and a full red livery.
At the same time, the Aérotrain prototype 02 reached .

=American Metroliner trains achieve 200km/h=

In the United States, immediately following the creation of Japan's first high-speed Shinkansen, U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson as part of his Great Society infrastructure building initiatives asked the U.S. Congress to devise a way to increase speeds on American railroads. September 30, 1965,  The new service was inaugurated in 1969, at speeds reaching  along the route, faster than even Acela Express trains operated between the cities of New York and Washington in 2012.5 hours because it did not make any intermediate stops, Metroliner Timetable, Penn Central, October 26, 1969, 

=The HST: a diesel high-speed train at 200 km/h=

Great Britain followed Japan, France and U.S. in 1976 with the introduction by British Rail of a new high-speed service, able to reach  forerunners, in speed and acceleration.
Like the Shinkansen, and future TGV, the train was built as a reversible multi-car set, having driving power-cars at both ends, and a fixed formation of passenger cars between them. Journey times were reduced, sometimes by an hour on the East Coast Main Line, and passenger numbers soared.

=Europe at 200 km/h=

The next year, in 1977, Germany finally introduced a new service at . This year also saw the abandonment for political reasons of the Aérotrain project, in favour of the TGV.

The French TGV

=Active research=

Following the 1955 records, two divisions of the SNCF began to study high-speed services. In 1964, the DETMT (petrol-engine traction studies department of SNCF) planned the use of gas turbines : a diesel-powered railcar is modified with a gas-turbine, and is called "TGV" (Turbotrain Grande Vitesse). It reached  in 1967, and served as a basis for the future Turbotrain and the real TGV. In the same time, the new "SNCF Research Department", created in 1966, was studying some projects, especially a project code-named "C03": "Railways possibilities on new infrastructure (tracks)".

=The gas-turbine=

In 1969, the "C03 project" was transferred to the public administration while a contract with Alsthom is ratified for the building of two gas-turbine high-speed train prototypes, that will be named "TGV 001". The prototype consisted of an undividable set of 5 cars and 2 power-cars at both end, each power-car powered by two gas-turbine engine. The notable particularity of the set is the use of Jakobs bogies, shared by two cars, that reduce drag and increase safety.
The next year, in 1970, the DETMT's Turbotrain, gas-turbine powered multiple-elements, designed for  began operations on Paris-Cherbourg line. It allowed to experiment future TGV services, especially regular high rate schedules, shuttle services, etc.

=The C03 Project=

In 1971, the "C03" project, now known as "TGV Sud-Est", was validated by the government, against the Bertin's Aerotrain. Until this date, there was a rivalry between the French Land Settlement Commission (DATAR), supporting the Aérotrain, and the SNCF and its ministry, supporting conventional rail. The "C03 project" included a new High-Speed line between Paris and Lyon, with new multi-engined trains running at . At that time, the classic Paris-Lyon line was already congested and a new line was required; this busy corridor, not too short (where car is preferred) nor too long (where planes are better), was the best choice for the new service.

=Turnaround: electricity=

The 1973 oil shock substantially increases oil prices. In the continuity of the De Gaulle "energy self-sufficiency" and nuclear-energy policy, a ministry decision switched the future TGV from now costly gas-turbine to full electric energy in 1974. An electric railcar named Zébulon was developed for testing at very high speeds, reaching a speed of .

=The TGV: the first service above 250 km/h=

After intensive tests with the gas-turbine "TGV 001" prototype, and the electric "Zébulon", in 1977, the SNCF placed an order to the group Alsthom-Francorail-MTE for 87 TGV Sud-Est trainsets. 
They used the "TGV 001" concept, with a permanently coupled set of eight cars, sharing "Jakobs bogies", and hauled by two electric power-cars, one at each end.
In 1981, the first section of the new Paris-Lyon High-Speed line was inaugurated, with a .

Evolution in Europe

Following the French TGV, in 1991 Germany was the second country in Europe to inaugurate a high-speed rail service, with the launch of the Intercity-Express (ICE)  on the new Hannover-Würzburg high-speed railway, operating at a top speed of .
In 1992, just in time for the Barcelona Olympic Games and Seville Expo '92, the Madrid–Seville high-speed rail line opened in Spain with 25 kV AC electrification, and standard gauge, differing from all other Spanish lines which used Iberian gauge. This allowed the AVE rail service to begin operations using Class 100 train sets built by Alstom, directly derived in design from the French TGV trains. The service was very popular and development continued on high-speed rail in Spain.
In 2005, the Spanish Government announced an ambitious plan, (PEIT 2005–2020)

Evolution in North America

In 1992, the United States Congress authorized the Amtrak Authorization and Development Act to focus on Amtrak's service improvement on the segment between Boston and New York City of the Northeast Corridor. The primary objectives were to electrify the line north of New Haven, Connecticut and replace the then 30-year-old Metroliners with new trains to achieve shorter travel time.
Amtrak started testing two trains, the Swedish X2000 and the German ICE 1, in the same year along its fully electrified segment between New York City and Washington DC. The officials favored the X2000 as it had a tilting mechanism. However, the Swedish manufacturer never bid on the contract as the burdensome United States railroad regulations required them to heavily modify the train resulting in added weight among other things. Eventually, a custom-made tilting train derived from TGV, manufactured by Alstom and Bombardier, won the contract and was put into service in December 2000.
The new service was named "Acela Express" and linked Boston, New York City, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Washington DC. The service did not meet the 3-hour travel time objective, between Boston and New York City. The time was 3 hours and 24 minutes as it partially ran on regular lines, limiting its average speed, with a maximum speed of 

Expansion in East Asia

For four decades from its opening in 1964, the Japanese Shinkansen was the only high-speed rail service outside of Europe. In the 2000s a number of new high-speed rail services started operating in East Asia.

=The South Korean KTX=

In South Korea, Korea Train Express (KTX) services were launched on 1 April 2004, on the Seoul-Busan corridor, Korea's busiest traffic corridor, between the two largest cities. In 1982, it represented 65.8% of South Korea's population, a number that grew to 73.3% by 1995, along with 70% of freight traffic and 66% of passenger traffic. With both the Gyeongbu Expressway and Korail's Gyeongbu Line congested as of the late 1970s, the government saw the pressing need for another form of transportation.
Construction began on the high-speed line from Seoul to Busan in 1992 with the first commercial service launching in 2004. Top speed for trains in regular service is currently .

=The Chinese CRH=

State planning for China's high-speed railway began in the early 1990s, and the country started construction of its first high-speed rail line, the Qinhuangdao–Shenyang Passenger Railway, in 1999, which subsequently opened in 2003 with a design speed of .
The original goal of the Chinese Ministry of Railways (MOR) was to research and develop domestic technology to reach a world standard. The new high-speed rail line was used to test several Chinese developed prototypes. Although they were successful at creating a train set that operated at , the trains performed poorly in regular service. Realizing that domestic high-speed technology was not sufficiently developed, the MOR purchased high-speed trains from French, German, and Japanese manufacturers with technology transfer contracts to improve its ability to build high-speed trains.  In 2007 the first high-speed service using foreign high-speed trains, called China Railways Highspeed (CRH) or "和谐号" (lit. Harmony) was introduced.
In 2008, the China opened the "Wuhan – Guangzhou" high-speed line at , it was the fastest line in the world.

On 26 December 2012, the world's longest high-speed line opened in China; the Beijing–Guangzhou–Shenzhen–Hong Kong High-Speed Railway at 

=Taiwan (THSR)=

Taiwan High Speed Rail's first and only HSR line opened for service on 5 January 2007, using Japanese trains with a top speed of 

Introduction into Near East/Middle East

In 2009, Turkey inaugurated a high-speed service between Ankara and Eskişehir, becoming the first rail line outside East Asia and Europe to operate a regular high-speed passenger rail service.com/news-167998-high-speed-train-to-make-8-trips-daily-between-ankara-eskisehir. (Lines shown on map of Europe below, though in West Asia). Besides Turkey, Saudi Arabia is also in an advanced stage of project completion for their HSR line, due for revenue service in 2016.

Network

Maps

Technologies

=Dedicated tracks=

As defined by Europe and UIC, generally the high-speed rail is a set including a high-speed rolling-stock and a dedicated high-speed line.
Japan was the first nation to build a totally new and dedicated lines and network for its Shinkansen. It was followed by France, then Germany, Spain, etc. Most countries today with high-speed rail have dedicated high-speed tracks. Notable exceptions are the USA and Russia. In certain cases, in particular in England in the 1970s for the HST, and in China recently, classic old lines have been upgraded to support new high-speed trains, often up to . For unconventional trains, such as Aérotrains and Maglev, the use of viaduct-dedicated tracks is necessary.

=Tracks design=

Continuous welded rail is generally used to reduce track vibrations and misalignment. Almost all high-speed lines are electrically driven via overhead cables, have in-cab signalling, and use advanced switches using very low entry and frog angles.
Constrictions, such as at-grade crossings, where lines intersect other lines and/or roadways are eliminated. For this reason, Japan and China typically build their high-speed lines on elevated viaducts. 
High-speed lines avoid tight curves, which reduce speed. Curve radius is typically above . The lines may rest on traditional sleeper and ballast or on concrete tiles and fences prevent access to the tracks on foot.

=Road-rail parallel layout=

Road Rail Parallel Layout uses land beside highways for railway lines. Examples include Paris/Lyon and Köln - Frankfurt in which 15% and  70% of the track runs beside highways, respectively.

=Track sharing=

High-speed lines may be exclusive or open to standard speed trains.
Sharing a line between fast and slow traffic reduces its maximum carrying capacity by a very large factor, by forcing much longer intervals between trains at the two different speeds.

=Construction costs=

Japanese systems are often more expensive than their counterparts, because they run on dedicated elevated guideways, avoid traffic crossings and incorporate disaster monitoring systems. The largest part of Japan's cost is for boring tunnels through mountains, as was also true in Taiwan.
In France, the cost of construction (which was €10 million/km (US$15.1 million/km) for LGV Est) is minimized by adopting steeper grades rather than building tunnels and viaducts. 
However, in mountainous Switzerland, tunnels are inevitable. Because the lines are dedicated to passengers, gradients of 3.5%, rather than the previous maximum of 1–1.5% for mixed traffic, are used. 
More expensive land may be required in order to minimize curves. This increases speed, reduces construction costs and lowers operating and maintenance costs. In other countries high-speed rail was built without those economies so that the railway can also support other traffic, such as freight.
Experience has shown however, that running trains of significantly different speeds on one line substantially decreases capacity. As a result, mixed-traffic lines usually reserve daytime for high-speed trains and run freight at night.

Rolling stock

Key technologies include tilting trainsets, aerodynamic designs (to reduce drag, lift, and noise), air brakes, regenerative braking, engine technology and dynamic weight shifting.

Comparison with other modes of transport

Optimal distance

While commercial high-speed trains have lower maximum speeds than jet aircraft, they offer shorter total trip times than air travel for short distances. They typically connect city centre rail stations to each other, while air transport connects airports that are typically farther from city centres.
High-speed rail (HSR) is best suited for journeys of 1 to 4½ hours (about 
HSR eliminated most air transport from between Paris-Brussels, Cologne-Frankfurt, Madrid-Barcelona, Nanjing-Wuhan, Chongqing-Chengdu, Tokyo-Nagoya, Tokyo-Sendai and Tokyo-Niigata. 
China Southern Airlines, China's largest airline, expects the construction of China's high-speed railway network to impact

Market shares

European data indicate that air traffic is more sensitive than road traffic (car and bus) to competition from HSR, at least on journeys of  and more – perhaps because cars and buses are far more flexible than planes. TGV Sud-Est reduced the travel time Paris–Lyon from almost four to about two hours. Market share rose from 49 to 72%. Air and road market shares shrunk from 31 to 7% and from 29 to 21%, respectively. On the Madrid–Sevilla link, the AVE connection increased share from 16 to 52%; air traffic shrunk from 40 to 13%; road traffic from 44 to 36%, hence the rail market amounted to 80% of combined rail and air traffic.aerlines.pdf, p. 3 This figure increased to 89% in 2009, according to Spanish rail operator RENFE.S., The New York Times, 29 May 2009.
According to Peter Jorritsma, the rail market share s, as compared to planes, can be computed approximately as a function of the travelling time in minutes t by the formulaPeter Jorritsma: Substitution Opportunities of High Speed Train for Air Transport,  4
According to this formula, a journey time of three hours yields 65% market share. However, market shares are also influenced by ticket prices.

Energy efficiency

Travel by rail is more competitive in areas of higher population density or where gasoline is expensive, because conventional trains are more fuel-efficient than cars when ridership is high, similar to other forms of mass transit. Very few high-speed trains consume diesel or other fossil fuels but the power stations that provide electric trains with power can consume fossil fuels. In Japan and France, with very extensive high-speed rail networks, a large proportion of electricity comes from nuclear power. France will run trains free from fossil fuel, says Chirac. On the Eurostar, which primarily runs off the French grid, emissions from travelling by train from London to Paris are 90% lower than by flying.

Automobile and buses

High-speed rail can accommodate more passengers at far higher speeds than automobiles.
Generally, the longer the journey, the better the time advantage of rail over road if going to the same destination. However, high-speed rail can be competitive with cars on shorter distances, , for example for commuting, given road congestion or expensive parking fees.
Moreover, typical passenger rail carries 2.83 times as many passengers per hour per metre width as a road.  A typical capacity is the Eurostar, which provides capacity for 12 trains per hour and 800 passengers per train, totaling 9,600 passengers per hour in each direction. By contrast, the Highway Capacity Manual gives a maximum capacity of 2,250 passenger cars per hour per lane, excluding other vehicles. Assuming an average vehicle occupancy of 1.57 people. The Tokaido Shinkansen line in Japan, has a much higher ratio (with as many as 20,000 passengers per hour per direction). Similarly commuter roads tend to carry fewer than 1.57 persons per vehicle (Washington State Department of Transportation, for instance, uses 1.2 persons per vehicle) during commute times.

Comparisono with air travel

Although air transit moves at higher speeds, its total time to destination  in increased by check-in, baggage handling, security, boarding, and taxiing. Furthermore, rail stations are typically closer to urban centers than airports. After accounting for both processing time and travel to airport or station, air travel needs longer distances to have an overall speed advantage.
Rail travel also has less weather dependency than air travel. A well-designed and well-operated rail system is only affected by the most severe weather conditions, such as heavy snow, heavy fog, and major storm; flights generally face cancellations or delays under less severe conditions.
High-speed trains also have comfort advantages, since train passengers can move freely about the train at any point in the journey. The seats are also less subject to weight restrictions than on planes, and as such may have more padding and legroom. Technology advances such as continuously welded rail have minimized the vibration and jerking found on slower railways, while air travel remains affected by turbulence when adverse wind conditions arise.
Trains can also accommodate intermediate stops at lower time and energetic costs than planes, though  this applies less to HSR than to the slower conventional trains.

Safety

HSR is much simpler to control due to its predictable course. High-speed rail systems reduce (but do not eliminate) collisions with automobiles or people, by using non-grade level track and eliminating grade level crossings.

Accidents

Notable accidents involving high-speed trains include the following.

The 1998 Eschede accident

In 1998, after over thirty years of high-speed rail operations worldwide without fatal accidents, the Eschede accident occurred in Germany: a poorly designed ICE 1 wheel broke at 

The 2011 Wenzhou accident

On 23 July 2011, 13 years after the Eschede train accident, a Chinese CRH2 traveling at  collided with a CRH1 which was stopped on a viaduct in the suburbs of Wenzhou, Zhejiang province, China. The two trains derailed, and four cars fell off the viaduct. 40 people were killed, at least 192 were injured, 12 of which were severe injuries.xinhuanet: Death toll from China's train crash rises to 39, including two Americans
The disaster led to a number of changes in management and exploitation of high-speed rail in China. Despite the fact that high speed was not a factor in the accident, one of the major changes was the lowering by  becoming 160.chinadaily :  Decision to slow trains met with mixed responsechinadaily : More high-speed trains slow down to improve safety

The 2013 Santiago de Compostela accident

In July 2013, a high-speed train in Spain attempted to round a curve which had a speed limit of , leading to 78 fatalities. Two days after the accident, the driver was provisionally charged with homicide by negligence. This is the first accident that occurred with a Spanish high-speed train, but it occurred in a section that was not high speed.Not high speed, Spanish

Maximum speed

There are several definitions of "maximum speed":

Absolute speed record

=Conventional rail=

Since the 1955 record, France has nearly continuously held the absolute world speed record. The latest record is held by a SNCF TGV POS trainset, which reached  in 2007, on the newly constructed LGV Est high-speed line. This run was for proof of concept and engineering, not to test normal passenger service.
Unlike the unconventional records, the TGV records have been made by heavily tuned trains, modified from commercial service trains.

=Unconventional rail=

Speed record for experimental unconventional passenger train was set by the MLX01 manned "magnetic-levitation" train at  in 2003.
The record for rail vehicles is  by an unmanned rocket sled by the United States Air Force.

Maximum speed in service

=Conventional rail=

The fastest operating conventional trains are the French TGV POS, German ICE 3, and Japanese E5 and E6 Series Shinkansen with a maximum commercial speed of 
In Spain, on the Madrid–Barcelona HSL, maximum speed is 
Since July 2011, in China, the maximum speed is officially  on some lines (Beijing–Tianjin Intercity Railway, Wuhan–Guangzhou High-Speed Railway).
Due to high costs and safety concerns the top speeds in China were reduced to 

=Unconventional rail=

The Shanghai Maglev Train reaches 

Markets

The early target areas, identified by France, Japan, Spain, and the U.S., were between pairs of large cities. In France, this was Paris–Lyon, in Japan, Tokyo–Osaka, in Spain, Madrid–Seville (then Barcelona). In European countries, South Korea and Japan, dense networks of city subways and railways provide connections with high-speed rail lines.

Asia

=China=

China has the largest network of high-speed railways in the world and in 2013 it encompassed 10,000 km of high-speed rail.China's high-speed railways exceed 10,000 km-Eastday

=Japan=

In Japan, intra-city rail daily usage per capita is the highest, with cumulative ridership of 6 billion passengersShinkansen (Bullet Train), Japan Railways Group.  (as of 2003). Boston University.

=Taiwan=

Taiwan High Speed Rail is a high-speed rail line that runs approximately 345 km (214 mi) along the west coast of Taiwan, from the national capital Taipei to the southern city of Kaohsiung. The construction was managed by private company Taiwan High Speed Rail Corporation at a total cost of the project was US$18 billion and this company operates the line. The system is based primarily on Japan's Shinkansen technology.

=South Korea=

Since its opening in 2004, KTX has transferred over 360 million passengers until April 2013, accounting to one South Korean using it seven times. For any transportation involving travel above , the KTX secured a market share of 57% over other modes of transport, which is by far the largest. Hankyung. Retrieved on 2013-07-12.

=Russia=

Other target areas include freight lines, such as the Trans-Siberian Railway in Russia, which would allow 3 day Far East to Europe service for freight, potentially fitting in between the months by ship and hours by air.

Americas

=United States=

The United States has domestic definitions for high-speed rail varying between jurisdictions.
As of 2013, the Northeast corridor (Acela Express) is the only high-speed rail line in operation in the United States linking Boston, New York City, and Washington, D.C. The California High-Speed Rail project is planned to have its first operating segment between Fresno and Bakersfield in 2021. No other segment is expected to be in service before 2025.

Europe

=France=

Market segmentation has principally focused on the business travel market. The French original focus on business travelers is reflected by the early design of the TGV trains. Pleasure travel was a secondary market; now many of the French extensions connect with vacation beaches on the Atlantic and Mediterranean, as well as major amusement parks and also the ski resorts in France and Switzerland. Friday evenings are the peak time for TGVs (train à grande vitesse).Levinson, D.
On the Paris – Lyon service, the number of passengers grew sufficiently to justify the introduction of double-decker coaches. Later high-speed rail lines, such as the LGV Atlantique, the LGV Est, and most high-speed lines in France, were designed as feeder routes branching into conventional rail lines, serving a larger number of medium-sized cities.

=Germany=

Germany's first high-speed lines ran north-south, for historical reasons, and later developed east-west after German unification.

=Italy=

During the 1920s and '30s, Italy was one of the first countries to develop the technology for high-speed rail. The country constructed the Direttissime railways connecting major cities on dedicated electrified high-speed track (although not as high-speed as would nowadays be called high-speed rail) and developed the fast ETR 200 trainset. After the Second World War and the fall of the fascist regime, interest in high-speed rail dwindled, with the successive governments considering it too costly and developing the tilting Pendolino, to run at medium-high speed (up to 
A true dedicated high-speed rail network was developed during the 80s and the 1990s, and in 2010 
Over 100 million passengers used the Frecciarossa from the service introduction and the first months of 2012.

=Spain=

Spain has built an extensive high-speed rail network,  (2013), the largest in Europe. It uses standard gauge in opposite to the Iberian gauge used in the most of the national railway network, meaning that the high-speed railways are separated and has almost only high-speed trains, no local trains and no freight. This network is from 2013 connected to the French network, with direct trains Paris-Barcelona.

=Switzerland=

High-speed north–south freight lines in Switzerland are under construction, avoiding slow mountainous truck traffic, and lowering labour costs. The new lines, in particular the Gotthard Base Tunnel, are built for . But the short high-speed parts and the mix with freight will keep the average speeds down. The limited size of the country gives fairly short domestic travel times anyway.

=Turkey=

The Turkish State Railways started building high-speed rail lines in 2003. The first section of the line, between Ankara and Eskişehir, was inaugurated on March 13, 2009. It is a part of the  Istanbul to Ankara high-speed rail line. A subsidiary of Turkish State Railways, Yüksek Hızlı Tren is the sole commercial operator of high-speed trains in Turkey.
The construction of three separate high-speed lines from Ankara to Istanbul, Konya and Sivas, as well as taking an Ankara–İzmir line to the launch stage, form part of the Turkish Ministry of Transport's strategic aims and targets.mt.tr Turkey plans to construct a network of high-speed lines in the early part of the 21st century, targeting a  network by the year 2023.tcdd.tr

=United Kingdom=

The UK's fastest high-speed line (HS-1) connects London St Pancras with Brussels and Paris through the Channel Tunnel..
The Great Western Main Line, South Wales Main Line, West Coast Main Line, Midland Main Line, Cross Country Route and East Coast Main Line all have maximum speed limits of  due to the impracticality of observing lineside signals at such speeds.



Notes and references

Further reading




