[[At Her Majesty's pleasure]]

CATEGORIES: Monarchy in Canada, Canadian law, English legal terms, Law in the United Kingdom

At Her Majesty's pleasure (sometimes abbreviated to Queen's pleasure or, when appropriate, at His Majesty's pleasure or King's pleasure) is a legal term of art referring to the indeterminate length of service of certain appointed officials or the indeterminate sentences of some prisoners. It is based on the concept that all legitimate authority for government comes from the Crown. Originating in the United Kingdom, it is now used throughout the Commonwealth realms. In realms where the monarch is represented by a Governor-General, the phrase may be modified to be at the Governor's pleasure, since the governor-general, governor, or lieutenant governor is the Queen's personal representative in the country, state or province.

Service to the Crown

People appointed by the sovereign to serve the Crown and who have no set limit to the time they occupy their given office—for example, governors-general and ministers of the Crown—are said to serve at Her Majesty's pleasure. In Canada, provincial lieutenant governors are appointed by the Canadian monarch's federal representative, the governor general, and are thus described in the Constitution Act, 1867, as holding office "during the pleasure of the Governor General."

Incarceration

The term is used to describe detainment in prison for an indefinite length of time;
Prisoners held at Her Majesty's pleasure are frequently reviewed to determine whether their sentence can be deemed complete; although this power traditionally rested with the monarch, such reviews are now made by others—the Home Secretary in Britain, for instance. Minimum terms are also set, before which the prisoner cannot be released; in Britain, these were originally set by the Home Secretary, but since 30 November 2000 have been set by the trial judge. Prisoners' sentences are typically deemed to be complete when the reviewing body is "satisfied that there has been a significant change in the offender's attitude and behaviour."

Derivatives

In Hong Kong, following the transfer of its sovereignty to China in 1997, the term was modified to "at executive discretion". Subsequently this was held to be incompatible with the separation of powers enshrined in the Basic Law by Judge Michael Hartmann in the case Yau Kwong Man v. Secretary for Security. Secretary for Security 2002 HKCFI 896; HCAL1595/2001 (9 September 2002)
In Botswana, it became "during the President's pleasure".






