[[Sinclair Lewis]]

CATEGORIES: 1885 births, 1951 deaths, People from Stearns County, Minnesota, 20th-century American novelists, Alcohol-related deaths in Italy, American dramatists and playwrights, American expatriates in Italy, American Nobel laureates, American people of Welsh descent, American satirists, American short story writers, Nobel laureates in Literature, Oberlin College alumni, Writers from New Haven, Connecticut, Prometheus Award winners, Pulitzer Prize for the Novel winners, Writers from California, Writers from Minnesota, Writers from Washington, D.C., Yale University alumni, American male novelists, Sinclair Lewis, Male short story writers

Harry Sinclair Lewis (February 7, 1885 – January 10, 1951) was an American novelist, short-story writer, and playwright. In 1930, he became the first writer from the United States to receive the Nobel Prize in Literature, which was awarded "for his vigorous and graphic art of description and his ability to create, with wit and humor, new types of characters." His works are known for their insightful and critical views of American capitalism and materialism between the wars.com He is also respected for his strong characterizations of modern working women. H.L. Mencken wrote of him, "If there was ever a novelist among us with an authentic call to the trade ... it is this red-haired tornado from the Minnesota wilds."Carl Bode, Mencken (Carbondale, Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press, 1969), p. 166.
He has been honored by the U.S. Postal Service with a Great Americans series postage stamp.

Biography

Childhood and education

Born February 7, 1885, in the village of Sauk Centre, Minnesota, Sinclair Lewis began reading books at a young age and kept a diary. He had two siblings, Fred (born 1875) and Claude (born 1878). His father, Edwin J. Lewis, was a physician and a stern disciplinarian who had difficulty relating to his sensitive, unathletic third son. Lewis's mother, Emma Kermott Lewis, died in 1891. The following year, Edwin Lewis married Isabel Warner, whose company young Lewis apparently enjoyed. Throughout his lonely boyhood, the ungainly Lewis—tall, extremely thin, stricken with acne and somewhat pop-eyed—had trouble gaining friends and pined after various local girls. At the age of 13 he unsuccessfully ran away from home, wanting to become a drummer boy in the Spanish-American War.
In late 1902 Lewis left home for a year at Oberlin Academy (the then-preparatory department of Oberlin College) to qualify for acceptance by Yale University. While at Oberlin, he developed a religious enthusiasm that waxed and waned for much of his remaining teenage years. He entered Yale in 1903 but did not receive his bachelor's degree until 1908, having taken time off to work at Helicon Home Colony, Upton Sinclair's cooperative-living colony in Englewood, New Jersey, and to travel to Panama. Lewis's unprepossessing looks, "fresh" country manners and seemingly self-important loquacity made it difficult for him to win and keep friends at Oberlin and Yale.  He did initiate a few relatively long-lived friendships among students and professors, some of whom recognized his promise as a writer.Schorer, 47–136

Early career

Lewis's earliest published creative work—romantic poetry and short sketches—appeared in the Yale Courant and the Yale Literary Magazine, of which he became an editor. After graduation Lewis moved from job to job and from place to place in an effort to make ends meet, write fiction for publication and to chase away boredom. While working for newspapers and publishing houses (and for a time at the Carmel-by-the-Sea, California writers' colony), he developed a facility for turning out shallow, popular stories that were purchased by a variety of magazines. He also earned money by selling plots to Jack London, including one for the latter's unfinished novel The Assassination Bureau, Ltd.
Lewis's first published book was Hike and the Aeroplane, a Tom Swift-style potboiler that appeared in 1912 under the pseudonym Tom Graham.
Sinclair Lewis's first serious novel, Our Mr. Wrenn: The Romantic Adventures of a Gentle Man, appeared in 1914, followed by The Trail of the Hawk: A Comedy of the Seriousness of Life (1915) and The Job (1917). That same year also saw the publication of another potboiler, The Innocents: A Story for Lovers, an expanded version of a serial story that had originally appeared in Woman's Home Companion. Free Air, another refurbished serial story, was published in 1919.

Marriage and family

In 1914 Lewis married Grace Livingston Hegger (1887-1981), an editor at Vogue magazine. They had one son, Wells Lewis (1917–1944), named after British author H. G. Wells.  Wells Lewis was killed in action while serving in the U.S. Army in World War II, specifically during the rescue of 'The Lost Battalion' in the Foret-De-Champ, near Germany, in France. Dean Acheson, the future Secretary of State, was a neighbor and family friend in Washington, and observed that Sinclair's literary "success was not good for that marriage, or for either of the parties to it, or for Lewis's work" and the family moved out of town. Morning and Noon, Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, 1962, p. 44.
Lewis divorced Grace in 1925. On May 14, 1928, he married Dorothy Thompson, a political newspaper columnist. Later in 1928, he and Dorothy purchased a second home in rural Vermont. Rotary on September 23, 1929; publ. c. 1989. Retrieved 2011-05-11. They had a son, Michael Lewis, in 1930. Their marriage had virtually ended by 1937, and they divorced in 1942.  Michael Lewis became an actor, also suffered with alcoholism, and died in 1975 of Hodgkin's lymphoma. Michael had two sons, John Paul and Gregiry Claude, with wife Bernadette Nanse and a daughter Lesley with wife Valerie Cardew.

Commercial success

Upon moving to Washington, D.C., Lewis devoted himself to writing. As early as 1916, he began taking notes for a realistic novel about small-town life. Work on that novel continued through mid-1920, when he completed Main Street, which was published on October 23, 1920.[ref]
