[[List of recurring actors and actresses in the James Bond film series]]

CATEGORIES: James Bond films, James Bond lists, Lists of actors by film series

This is a list of actors and actresses that have appeared physically (but not always characteristically) in the Eon Productions series of the James Bond film series more than once.

MI6 Branch: Universal Exports – United Kingdom

M – Chief of Operations

=Bernard Lee=

In the Bond films, Bernard Lee's character, M, is Admiral Sir Miles Messervy (only ever named, besides as 'M', as 'Admiral' and 'Miles' on screen in his appearances), Bond's irascible boss who sends him out on assignments. He also portrays M along with Lois Maxwell as Moneypenny in the 1975 French comedy " Bons baisers de Hong Kong". Lee was succeeded by Robert Brown, though not necessarily playing the same character (Brown had played another admiral in the series previously). Judi Dench, a friend of Lee's, would later take over the role of a brand-new M, starting in 1995 with some references to her predecessor, including an oil painting of Lee in the role seen in MI6's secondary HQ (a Scottish castle).
Lee starred in eleven James Bond films.

=Robert Brown=

After Lee's death in 1981, the producers hired actor Robert Brown to continue the role in the Bond films. Brown picks up the role in Octopussy, however it is never explicitly stated on screen whether Robert Brown's character is intended to be the same person played by Lee, if he was intended to be Admiral Hargreaves, the role played by Brown in 1977's The Spy Who Loved Me, or if he is supposed to be another character altogether.
Brown played M in the following James Bond films:

=Judi Dench=

In 1995, actress Judi Dench became known to an international audience after taking over the role of M (James Bond's boss) with the James Bond film series, starting with GoldenEye. She is one of the few actors from Pierce Brosnan's Bond films to remain in the rebooted franchise. She appeared with Daniel Craig cast as Bond in 2006's Casino Royale, 2008's Quantum of Solace and Skyfall, released October 2012.
Dench played M in a total of seven films.

=Ralph Fiennes=

In 2012, following the death of Judi Dench's M in Skyfall, the character of Gareth Mallory (Ralph Fiennes) succeeded the role of M. Fiennes is scheduled to appear in Bond 24.
Fiennes played M in the following films:

Q – Quartermaster

=Desmond Llewelyn=

Starting with the second film in the James Bond series, From Russia with Love (1963), Desmond Llewelyn appeared as Q (the quartermaster of the MI6 gadget lab known as Q-branch) in every Bond film, except Live and Let Die (1973), until The World Is Not Enough (1999). He had originally been chosen for the role as he had previously worked with the director Terence Young on the 1950 war film They Were Not Divided. In the 2002 film Die Another Day, John Cleese, who played the character R, the assistant to Q in The World Is Not Enough, was promoted to the head of Q-branch, thus taking on the title of Q. In all, Llewelyn appeared in 17 Bond films, more than any other actor, and worked with the first five James Bond actors. He also portrayed Q in a 1967 made-for-television special (produced by Eon Productions) entitled, Welcome to Japan, Mr. Bond which was included in the 2006 special edition DVD release of You Only Live Twice.
Desmond Llewelyn appears as Major Boothroyd/Q in the following films:

=John Cleese=

In 1999, comedian John Cleese appeared in the James Bond movie, The World Is Not Enough as Q's assistant, referred to by Bond as R. In 2002, when Cleese reprised his role in Die Another Day, the character was promoted, making Cleese the new quartermaster (Q) of MI6. In 2004, Cleese was featured as Q in the video game James Bond 007: Everything or Nothing, featuring his likeness and voice.
Cleese appears as R/Q in the following films:

=Ben Whishaw=

Actor Ben Whishaw took over the role in 2012's Skyfall. Q was absent from the two previous movies, Casino Royale and Quantum of Solace and it was Daniel Craig who had expressed concern over the character's absence, and expressed his hope that Q would return in Skyfall. Whishaw is scheduled to appear in Bond 24.
Whishaw appears as Q in the following films:

Moneypenny – Secretary

=Lois Maxwell=

Lois Maxwell lobbied for the role in James Bond, as her husband had had a heart attack and they needed the money. Director Terence Young, who once had turned her down on the grounds that she looked like she "smelled of soap", offered her either Moneypenny or the recurring Bond girlfriend, Sylvia Trench, but she was uncomfortable with a revealing scene the latter had in the screenplay. The role as M's secretary guaranteed just two days' work at ₤100 per day; Maxwell supplied her own clothes. The Trench character, however, was eliminated after From Russia With Love.
In 1967, Maxwell angered Sean Connery for a time by appearing in the Italian spy spoof Operation Kid Brother with the star's brother Neil Connery and Bernard Lee. In 1971, Maxwell was nearly replaced for Diamonds Are Forever after demanding a pay raise; her policewoman's cap disguises hair she had already dyed for another role. In 1975, she plays Moneypenny weeping for the death of James Bond in a short scene with Bernard Lee as M in the French comedy Bons baisers de Hong Kong. For the filming of A View to a Kill, her final appearance, Bond producer Albert "Cubby" Broccoli told her that the two of them were the only ones from Dr. No still working on the series. Maxwell asked that her character be killed off, but Broccoli recast the role instead. She was succeeded by Caroline Bliss and later Samantha Bond.
As Moneypenny, according to author Tom Lisanti, she was seen as an "anchor", with her flirtatious repartee with Bond lending the films realism and humanism. For Moneypenny, Bond was "unobtainable", freeing the characters to make outrageous sexual double entendres. At the same time, her character did little to imbue the series with changing feminist notions.
Her total screen time as Moneypenny in 14 films was less than two hours, and she spoke fewer than 200 words.azcentral.html

=Caroline Bliss=

Caroline Bliss was only featured in two James Bond movies (the only two Timothy Dalton starred in as James Bond). Although, her role in Licence to Kill was little more than a cameo. She is the only actress to play Moneypenny while wearing glasses. She is also the youngest actress to play Moneypenny.

=Samantha Bond=

Samantha Bond starred in four James Bond films as Miss Moneypenny.  She retired from her role with the departure of Pierce Brosnan as James Bond.
She appeared as Miss Moneypenny in:
The role of Miss Moneypenny was not cast in the following Bond films, Casino Royale and Quantum of Solace. The character eventually returned in the 2012 film, Skyfall, under the alias 'Eve'.
In a commercial for London's 2012 Olympic bid, Bond once again suited up as Miss Moneypenny. She appeared alongside Roger Moore, who played 007 between 1973-1985.

Bill Tanner – Chief of Staff

=Michael Goodliffe=

Michael Goodliffe appeared in only one Bond film The Man with the Golden Gun in an uncredited appearance.

=Michael Kitchen=

Michael Kitchen appeared in two Bond films Goldeneye and The World Is Not Enough.

=Rory Kinnear=

Rory Kinnear appeared as Bill Tanner in two latest Bond films: Quantum of Solace and Skyfall. 

Charles Robinson – Chief of Staff

=Colin Salmon=

Colin Salmon appeared in three Bond films as Chief of Staff Charles Robinson: Tomorrow Never Dies, The World Is Not Enough and Die Another Day.

Central Intelligence Agency/US Armed Forces – United States

Agent Felix Leiter

=David Hedison=

David Hedison is also notable as the first actor to have played James Bond's ally Felix Leiter in more than one film (Live and Let Die and Licence to Kill) (The second was Jeffrey Wright, who appeared as Leiter in Casino Royale (2006), and reprised the role in Quantum of Solace).
As Felix Leiter:

=Jeffrey Wright=

In 2006, Jeffrey Wright featured as Felix Leiter in the 21st James Bond movie, Casino Royale. This makes him the first African-American man to play the character in an Eon-produced Bond film (Bernie Casey played Leiter in the non-Eon Never Say Never Again). He also reprised the role in Quantum of Solace, making him only the second actor to appear as Leiter twice since David Hedison played the character in Live and Let Die and Licence to Kill.
As Felix Leiter:

General Brad Whitaker/Agent Jack Wade

=Joe Don Baker=

In 1987, Joe Don Baker got the role of the villain Brad Whitaker in the Bond film The Living Daylights, starring Timothy Dalton as James Bond. In 1995 and 1997 Baker returned to the series, this time playing a different character, CIA agent Jack Wade, in GoldenEye and Tomorrow Never Dies with Pierce Brosnan as Bond.
The character of Wade is similar to that of CIA agent Darius Jedburgh, played by Baker in the 1985 BBC Television serial Edge of Darkness. He was nominated for "Best Actor" by the British Academy Television Awards. This serial was directed by Martin Campbell, who also cast Baker as Wade in GoldenEye.
Baker was said to have actually tried out for the role of James Bond once for Live and Let Die.
Baker also shares a birthday with fellow Bond girl Maud Adams.
As General Brad Whitaker:
As CIA Agent Jack Wade:

Other actors

Michael G. Wilson

In 1972 Michael G. Wilson joined Eon Productions, the production company responsible for the James Bond film series dating back to 1962 that began with his stepfather Albert R. 'Cubby' Broccoli and Harry Saltzman. Wilson specifically worked in Eon Productions's legal department until taking a more active role as an assistant to Cubby Broccoli for the film The Spy Who Loved Me (1977). In 1979 Wilson became executive producer of the film Moonraker and since has been an executive producer or producer in every James Bond film, currently co-producing with his half-sister Barbara.

Walter Gotell

A German-British actor, Walter Gotell is known for his role as General Gogol, head of the KGB, in the Bond films.
Gotell won the role of General Alexis Gogol in The Spy Who Loved Me for being a look-alike of the former head of Soviet secret police Lavrentiy Beria. His first role in the James Bond films came in 1963, when he played the henchman Morzeny in From Russia with Love. Starting in the late 1970s, he played the recurring role of General Gogol in the James Bond series, beginning with The Spy Who Loved Me in 1977. The character returned in Moonraker (1979), For Your Eyes Only (1981), Octopussy (1983), A View to a Kill (1985) and The Living Daylights (1987). As the Cold War developed, the role of leader of the KGB was seen to change attitudes to the West – from direct competitor to collaborator. His final appearance, as the Cold War began to become less imminent, sees him transferred to a different, more diplomatic role.

Maud Adams

Swedish actress Maud Adams is known for her roles as two different Bond girls in two James Bond films, The Man with the Golden Gun (1974) and as the title character in Octopussy (1983). She was also an extra in A View to a Kill (1985).

Anthony Dawson

Throughout his career Anthony Dawson could often be found in the films of director Terence Young, including the aforementioned Dr. No, They Were Not Divided (1950),Valley of Eagles (1951), The Amorous Adventures of Moll Flanders (1965), Triple Cross (1966), Red Sun (1971), Inchon (1981), and The Jigsaw Man (1983). Young also cast him as the physical presence of Ernst Stavro Blofeld in his Bond films From Russia with Love (1963), and Thunderball (1965), stroking the ubiquitous white cat. His face was never seen though, and Blofeld's voice was provided by Eric Pohlmann.
Dawson is the only actor to play arch-villain role of Blofeld more than once.

Robbie Coltrane

Robbie Coltrane plays the role of Valentin Dmitrovich Zukovsky in the James Bond films GoldenEye and The World Is Not Enough.
As Valentin Dmitrovich Zukovsky, a Russian Mafia head

Charles Gray

Charles Gray appears as Ernst Stavro Blofeld in the James Bond movie Diamonds Are Forever (1971). In the earlier You Only Live Twice (1967), he had played an Australian agent, Henderson, making him one of a small number of actors to have played a villain and a Bond ally in the series.

Clifton James

Clifton James is known for playing the role of Sheriff J.W. Pepper in the James Bond films Live and Let Die and The Man with the Golden Gun.
As Sheriff J.W. Pepper, Louisiana State Law Enforcement

Martine Beswick

Martine Beswick is best known for her two appearances in the James Bond film series. Although she auditioned for the first Bond film Dr. No, she was cast in the second film From Russia with Love as the fiery gypsy girl Zora. She engaged in the famous "catfight" scene with her rival Vida (played by former Miss Israel Aliza Gur). She was incorrectly billed as "Martin Beswick" in the title sequence. Beswick then appeared as the ill-fated Paula Caplan in Thunderball. She had been away from the Caribbean so long that she was required to sunbathe constantly for two weeks before filming, in order to look like a local.
Martine Beswick film appearances in the James Bond film series

Eunice Gayson

British actress born in London, England on 17 March 1931. Eunice Gayson is best known for playing Sylvia Trench, James Bond's fetching girlfriend in the first two Bond films (Dr. No and From Russia with Love). Originally, Gayson was going to be cast as Miss Moneypenny, but the part went to Lois Maxwell instead. Gayson was originally to have been a regular in the Bond film series, but her character, Sylvia Trench, was dropped. Like nearly all of the actresses who appeared in the first two Bond films, Gayson's voice in Dr. No and From Russia with Love was overdubbed by an uncredited voice actor, though Gayson's real voice can still be heard in original trailers for Dr. No.
Appearances as Sylvia Trench

Richard Kiel

American actor Richard Kiel is best known for his role as the steel-toothed Jaws in the James Bond movies The Spy Who Loved Me (1977) and Moonraker (1979) as well as the video game Everything or Nothing, and Mr. Larson in Happy Gilmore. He stands at a towering height of 7 feet 1.5 inches (2.18 m).
As Jaws:

Marc Lawrence

Tsai Chin

Chin (also known as Irene Chow) is probably best known for her role as Lin Tang, the diabolic daughter of Dr. Fu Manchu in the Christopher Lee Fu Manchu movies. She is also memorable for her role as Ling in pre-titles sequence of the James Bond movie You Only Live Twice and in the role of "Juicy Lucy" in The Virgin Soldiers. She continues to appear in films to this day, including The Joy Luck Club, Memoirs of a Geisha, and the recently released James Bond film Casino Royale. She also has a recurring role in Grey's Anatomy as Helen Rubenstein, the mother of Cristina Yang.
Tsai Chin has the longest gap between recurring roles, at 39 years. She also made appearance with Christopher Lee in the Fu Manchu films who played bond villain Francisco Scaramanga in The Man With The Golden Gun.
Appearances in Bond franchise:






