[[Royal Palace (horse)]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 racehorse births, 1991 racehorse deaths, Thoroughbred racehorses, Racehorses bred in the United Kingdom, Racehorses trained in the United Kingdom, British racehorses, British Classic Race winners, Thoroughbred family 1

Royal Palace (1964–1991) was a British Thoroughbred racehorse. In a racing career which lasted from June 1966 until July 1968 he ran eleven times and won nine races. After being rated the best English-trained two-year-old of 1966, he won the first two legs of the Triple Crown, the 2000 Guineas and the Epsom Derby in 1967. He returned for an unbeaten four-year-old season in 1968 when he won four races which are now Group One events.

Background

Royal Palace was a dark-coated bay horse with a white star and one white foot, bred and raced by Jim Joel, whose father and uncle were both major forces in British horse racing. He was sired by Ballymoss, the leading European racehorse of 1958 and a grandson of one of the most influential stallions in history, Nearco. His dam Crystal Palace was a successful racemare who won the Falmouth Stakes and the Nassau Stakes in 1959. She was also an important broodmare, producing Prince Consort (Princess of Wales's Stakes), Selhurst, (Hardwicke Stakes) and Glass Slipper, the dam of the Classic winners Light Cavalry, (St. Leger Stakes) and Fairy Footsteps, 1000 Guineas. Joel sent the colt into training with Noel Murless at his Warren Place stables in Newmarket, Suffolk.

Racing career

1966:two-year-old season

Royal Palace made his first racecourse appearance in the Coventry Stakes over six furlongs at Royal Ascot in June. He showed good early speed before finishing unplaced behind the Irish colt Bold Lad. After a break of two months, Royal Palace reappeared at the Ebor meeting at York Racecourse, where he won the Acomb Stakes. On his final run of the year, the colt returned to Ascot for the Royal Lodge Stakes over one mile. He was left behind at the start and was still in last place on the final turn, but then quickened past his opponents to win by one and a half lengths from Slip Stitch. In the Free Handicap, an assessment of the year's best two-year-olds, Royal Palace was ranked second, three pounds below Bold Lad.

1967:three-year-old season

Royal Palace made his three-year-old debut in the 2000 Guineas at Newmarket, for which he started 100/30 joint-favourite with Bold Lad in a field of eighteen runners. He was not impressive in the paddock before the race, as he appeared to be agitated and was sweating freely. Ridden by the Australian Racing Hall of Fame jockey George Moore, he challenged for the lead in the final quarter mile and won by a short head from the French-trained colt Taj Dewan. The race was the first British Classic to use starting stalls. The victory was reportedly well-received owing to the popularity of Jim Joel, who was winning his first classic since Royal Palace's great-grandam Picture Play won the 1000 Guineas in 1944.
Having won the first two legs of the Triple Crown, Royal Palace missed the important summer championship races to be prepared for the St Leger at Doncaster Racecourse. In August he sustained an injury which forced him to miss his trial race in the Great Voltigeur Stakes at York. He fell behind in his preparation and worked badly a week before the St Leger, leading his connections to withdraw him from the race. He returned for the Champion Stakes over ten furlongs at Newmarket in October, but failed to reproduce his best form, finishing third behind Reform and Taj Dewan.

1968:four-year-old season

In 1968 the teenager Sandy Barclay replaced Moore and Royal Palace was undefeated in five races. He began by winning the Coronation Stakes at Sandown in May. He then won the Coronation Cup at Epsom and the Prince of Wales's Stakes at Royal Ascot.
In July, returned to Sandown for an exceptionally strong renewal of the Eclipse Stakes, in which his opponents included Taj Dewan and the 1968 Derby winner Sir Ivor, who started the 4/5 favourite. The race has been compared to the 1903 Eclipse, in which the Derby winners Ard Patrick and Rock Sand were opposed by the outstanding racemare Sceptre.

Assessment and honours

Despite his successes, Royal Palace was never voted British Horse of the Year, being beaten by Busted in 1967 and Sir Ivor in 1968. He was given a relatively modest Timeform rating of 131.

Stud career

As a stallion, Royal Palace was owned jointly by Jim Joel, Hon. Lady Macdonald-Buchanan, and Lord Howard de Walden. Royal Palace sired some good winners, but his overall record was disappointing. His best flat runner was Dunfermline,  winner of the 1977 Epsom Oaks and St. Leger Stakes for her owner, Queen Elizabeth II. Royal Palace later sired the triple Champion Hurdler, See You Then.
In 1991, at The National Stud near Newmarket, Suffolk in England, the twenty-seven-year-old Royal Palace was euthanized as a result of infirmities from old age. He is buried in The National Stud's horse cemetery.

Pedigree






