[[Bulgaria in the Eurovision Song Contest 2009]]

CATEGORIES: Bulgaria in the Eurovision Song Contest, 2009 in Bulgaria, Countries in the Eurovision Song Contest 2009

Bulgaria and Bulgarian National Television (BNT) have once again decided to produce a special show to pick the Bulgarian entrant for the Eurovision Song Contest 2009, but in a different format than last year's EuroBGVision. For 2009, a two-part process will be used: the first part, "Be A Star", consisting of a nine heats and three monthly finals will choose the participants for the "Bulgarian Song for Eurovision 2009" part which will consist of a semi-final and final and ultimately choose the Bulgarian entrant.

National selection format

The Bulgarian national final was divided into two parts. First to take place, was a show titled "Be A Star" which consisted of nine heats, and three monthly finals. The second stage titled "Bulgarian Song for Eurovision 2009" will include a semi-final and a grand final.
45 songs competed in nine heats of "Be A Star" with five songs competing each week. After every third heat, a monthly final was held where the nine winning songs from the previous three heats were performed again and voted on, with three going on to the semi-final, a part of "Bulgarian Song for Eurovision". 18 songs in total will compete in the semi-final, to be held on January 24, 2009.
At the semi-final, the first part of "Bulgarian Song for Eurovision", there will be the nine songs chosen through the three monthly finals of "Be A Star" along with nine more chosen by a jury who will choose from songs submitted at a later deadline and songs that did not qualify from the heats and quarter-finals. The semi-final will be held on January 24, 2009.
All songs submitted for "Be A Star" had to be by Bulgarian singers, but the choice of language was up to its writers. The submission deadline for songs was September 19, 2008, and 54 songs were sent in to compete in the heats of "Be A Star", but eight were disqualified having already been released before October 1 or not original works, violations of the contest's rules.

Be A Star

Each month contains three corresponding heats from which nine songs in total will qualify for the monthly selection.

October Selection

=Heat 1=

The first heat was held on October 2, 2008. Five songs were presented, with the jury choosing one song and televoting choosing two more to go on to the October selection final; two songs did not make it through. The first artist to perform was Monika Kirovska with her pop-rock song "I Won". She was accompanied by a guitar player who was also a backing singer. The second singer to take the stage was Emil Sokolov with his rock song "Deystvitelnost ili izmama". He wore a shiny silver shirt and played the guitar while singing. Following Sokolov was I Veline with her ballad "Ready for Love". The fourth song was "I Promise" performed by the rock band Perfect Stranger which included two singers, a drummer, bass player, guitarist and a keyboard player. The last song of the night was the electro-pop "Neka s pesen" by Venelina Milanova. Milanova was accompanied onstage by two backing singers and two dancers. Bulgarian National Television (2008-10-02). Retrieved on 2008-10-02.
At the end of voting, Perfect Stranger with 38.60%, Ivelina with 32.22% and Venelina Milanova with 22.04% qualified for the October selection final. The jury's choice was also the winner of the televote, so the first three placings moved on.
Results

=Heat 2=

The second heat was held on October 9, 2008. Five songs were presented, with the jury choosing one song and televoting choosing two more to go on to the October selection final; two songs did not make it through. The first song was the rock ballad "Dokosni me" performed by the duet Iskra & Misha Illiev. Misha had long hair and black old-fashioned clothes while Iskra wore a black dress. The second act to take the stage was the four-girl group Prima Vista with their cabaret styled "Let's Spread Love". The members of the group wore shiny clothes with each wearing a different color tie and hat than the other. Following Prima Vista was six-member Konkurent with its hard rock song "Placha v noshtta". There was one keyboard player, one drummer, three guitarists and a soloist. The fourth song was "La ragazza che ho lasciato" performed in Italian by Mario Marinov. He was accompanied by a female backing singer. The last song of the night was the ethno-pop "Samo edno more" by Teresa Kolarova. Kolarova was wore a blue dress and was accompanied onstage by two backing female singers dressed in white.
The voting results presented at the contest were incorrect as a problem with the company that processed the votes made an error. Konkurent was shown as the third choice, but after the error was fixed, it was Prima Vista that qualified.
Results

=Heat 3=

The third heat was held on October 16, 2008. Five songs were presented, with the jury choosing one song and televoting choosing two more to go on to the October selection final; two songs did not make it through. The first song was the up-tempo disco song "Tozi Ritam" performed by Iliyan Tsvetanov. The second artist to take the stage was Teodora Kutsarova with her rap song "Droga". She performed alone on stage dressed in black. Following Kutsarova was Ruth with her orchestral musical ballad "Sometimes". The fourth song was the ballad "Imam tvoeto ime" performed by Deyan Dzhenkov. The last song of the night was a mix between pop, folk and soft rock titled "Razstoyaniya" and performed by Moto.
At the conclusion of voting, Deyan Dzhenkov came out on top with 37.21% of the votes, while Iliyan Tsvetanov also qualified gaining 28.52% of the votes. The juries pick did not align with that of the televote, with last place Ruth with "Sometimes" being chosen to go to the October selection final.
Results

=Result of October selection=

The October selection final was held on October 23, 2008 and was hosted by singer Drago Draganov who also performed the opening act. The nine songs that qualified from the first three heats were shown on a large screen and voted on by the public. Out of the nine songs, only the top three, chosen by televoting, would go on to the semi-final. First to be seen was Prima Vista's "Lets's Spread Love", followed by Perfect Stranger's "I Promise" and Tereza Kolarova's "Samo endo more". Fourth was Ruth with "Sometimes" and then fifth to be seen was Deyan Dzhenkov's "Imam tvoeto ime". I Velina went next with "Ready for love" followed by Iliyan Tsvetanov's "Tozi Ritam" and Iskra & Misha Iliev's "Dokosni me". The last performance to be seen was "Neka s pesen" by Venelina Milanova. Bulgarian National Television (2008-10-23). Retrieved on 2008-10-23.
The top three entries from the October selection final qualified for a spot in the semi-final. At the conclusion of voting, Deyan Dzhenkov came out on top with 24.14% of the votes, Prima Vista placed second with 19.66% of the votes and Iskra & Misha Iliev also qualified with 13.46% of the votes.
Results

November Selection

=Heat 4=

The fourth heat was held on October 30, 2008. Four songs were presented, with the jury choosing one song and televoting choosing two more to go on to the November selection final; one song did not make it through. Five songs were originally scheduled to take part, but Sahara with its song "Don't Kiss for Money" decided not to take part with the hope of being one of the nine jury choices for the semi-final of "Bulgarian Song for Eurovision 2009".
The opening act of the show was by Bulgaria's 2008 Eurovision entrants Deep Zone and Balthazar performing a song in Bulgarian. The first contestant to perform was Lorado with her electronic pop song "More ot mechti". She wore a jacket and jeans and was accompanied by a dancer dressed in black who held a red cloth. The second act to take the stage was Fanagora & Milena Peeva with their operatic rock song "Love Never Ends". Peeva, the singer, wore a black and pink dress while Fanagora, the band, played the music of the song. Following "Love Never Ends" was Itso Petroff & Priyateli with their rock song "Rokendrol izkustvo". For the performance, the two were dressed as pirates. The fourth and final song was the folk-pop "Yasno slantse" performed by Gergana Dimova. Dimova appeared on stage wearing a gold dress, joined by five dancers also in gold. Bulgarian National Television (2008-10-30). Retrieved on 2008-10-31.
At the end of voting, Gergana Dimova with 51.94%, Fanagora & Milena Peeva with 28.61% and Itso Petroff & Priyateli with 16.67% qualified for the November selection final.
Results

=Heat 5=

The fifth heat was held on November 6, 2008. Five songs were presented, with the jury choosing one song and televoting choosing two more to go on to the November selection final; two songs did not make it through. The first artist to perform was Plamen Penev with his pop-rock song "Dalechen svyat". He was accompanied on stage by female backing singers. The second singer to take the stage was Zheni Karavacheva with his song "Dumi". Following Karavacheva was a trio made up of Bobi Koker, Bleki & Sunnie which sang the modern styled song "Tozi pat". Koker sang while Bleki & Sunnie rapped. The fourth song was "S teb" performed by Emilya Valenti and was the first ballad of the night. The last song of the night was the folk ballad "Bez dumi" by Hari ot Balgaria. Bulgarian National Television (2008-11-06). Retrieved on 2008-11-07.
At the end of voting, Emilya Valenti with 32.94%, Bobi Koker, Bleki & Sunnie with 23.01% and Plamen Penev with 20.99% qualified for the November selection final. The jury's choice was also the winner of the televote, so the first three placings moved on.
Results

=Heat 6=

The sixth heat was held on November 13, 2008. Five songs were presented, with the jury choosing one song and televoting choosing two more to go on to the November selection final; two songs did not make it through. The first artist to perform was Annayah with her ethno-folk ballad "Az te chakam". She wore a gold dress and was accompanied on stage by two backing singers and two dancers all dressed in white. The second singer to take the stage was Georgi Varbanov with his ethno-rock song "Europe Is My Home!"; he appeared on stage alone. Following Varbanov was Lazar Kisyov with a newer version of his song "You're Not Alone" which was released as a single in October. He appeared with two backing female dancers who remained close to him throughout the song. The fourth song was the pop-rock "Don't Leave Me by the Day" performed by Antoniya Markova. Markova started in a black coat, but took it off mid-song to reveal a purple dress; her several backup dancers also took off their coats revealing dresses of different colors on each. The last song of the night was the ballad "Lipsvash mi tatko" by Mario Denev, who sang alone on stage surrounded by candles and dressed in a black suit. Bulgarian National Television (2008-11-13). Retrieved on 2008-11-14.
At the end of voting, Annayah with 36.99%, Antoniya Markova with 35.84% and Lazar Kisyov with 13.83% qualified for the November selection final. The jury's choice was Lazar Kisyov who placed third in the televote.
Results

=Result of November Selection=

The November selection final was held on November 20, 2008. The nine songs that qualified from heats four through six were performed once more with some participants altering their routines. Out of the nine songs, only the top three, chosen by televoting, would go on to the semi-final. First to be seen was Antoniya Markova with a repeat performance of "Don't Leave by the Day", followed by a repeat of Plamen Penev's "Dalechen svyat". Third was Itso Petroff and Priyateli dressed differently from their heat appearance, performing "Rokendrol izkustvo". Fourth was Lazar Kisyov in a new outfit with "You're Not Alone", and then fifth to be seen was Gergana Dimova's repeat performance of "Yasno slantse". Annayah went next with "Az te chakam" followed by Fanagoria & Milena Peeva's "Love Never Ends". Finally, the show ended with Emiliya Valenti's "S teb". Bulgarian National Television (2008-11-20). Retrieved on 2008-12-02.
Bobi Kokera, Bleki and Sunnie did not perform "Tosi put" third as scheduled as one of the singers had an illness, however, the song can still make it to the final as a jury wildcard.
The top three entries from the November selection final qualified for a spot in the semi-final. At the conclusion of voting, Gergana Dimova came out on top with 41.42% of the votes, Plamen Penev placed second with 14.26% of the votes and Emiliya Valenti also qualified with 12.46% of the votes.
Results

December Selection

=Heat 7=

The seventh heat was held on November 27, 2008. Five songs were presented, with the jury choosing one song and televoting choosing two more to go on to the December selection final; two songs did not make it through. The first artist to perform was Vatticana with their rock song "Sun Is Shining". All members of the band wore black and the overall performance was relatively simple. The second singer to take the stage was Anna Star with her song "Stranger", a mixture of pop, country and swing. Following Anna Star was Svetozar Hristov with his pop song "Barrow from the Shadow" which her sang while seated on a bar stool. The fourth song was "My Song" performed by Just Elly, whose performance consisted of her moving about the stage. The last song of the night was the modern song "Don't Look for Me" by Tedu Karavacheva. She wore a pink dress while her backing dancers were dressed in black and white.
At the end of voting, Tedu Karavacheva with 49.11%, Vatticana with 34.96% and Svetozar Hristov with 10.30% qualified for the December selection final. The jury's choice was Svetozar Hristov, who placed third in the televote.
Results

=Heat 8=

The eighth heat was held on December 4, 2008. Five songs were presented, with the jury choosing one song and televoting choosing two more to go on to the December selection final; two songs did not make it through. The first group to perform was Freeway, composed of a singer, two guitarists, a drummer and a keyboard player. The singer, dressed with large sun glasses, sang the groups rock ballad "Sama" sung in Bulgarian. The second group to take the stage was the three member Biby Michael's Friends with "Valshebni noti". The group was dressed in opera styled dresses with two of them reading from a note sheet, while the third sang next to a table with candles on it. Following Biby Michael's Friends was Iskren Petsov who sang the pop song "Zashto se varna", arranged by Deep Zone, 2008's Eurovision entrant. Iskren Petsov was joined by two backing singers and three jugglers were on stage doing tricks with fire. The fourth song was the hip-hop "Neshto ludo" performed by Sunay Chalakov who was on stage alone. The last song of the night was the piano ballad "What Does It Take" by Tsetso Vlaykov who wore a suit and cowboy hat and was joined by a backing singer and guitarist.
At the end of voting, Sunay Chalakov with 53.11%, Freeway with 30.71% and Iskren Petsov with 5.81% qualified for the December selection final. The jury's choice was Iskren Petsov, who placed fourth in the televote.
Results

=Heat 9=

The ninth heat was held on December 11, 2008. Five songs were presented, with the jury choosing one song and televoting choosing two more to go on to the December selection final; two songs did not make it through. The first group to perform was X-R@Y, which consisted of a singer, guitarist, drummer and violinist. The performed the slow rock song "We" and also took part in EuroBGvision last year. The act to take the stage was Stefan Ilchev with his pop-rock song "Get Up". Ilchev wore black while his three female dancers wore tight silver outfits and his backing singers wore masks. Following Ilchev was Petya Hristova who sang the rock ballad "Sacred Journey". Hristova, dressed in red, was joined by four female dancers. Fourth on the night was the rock song "Senki" performed by the group Zona. Zona was made up of a soloist who plays the guitar, another guitarist and a drummer. The last song of the night was the rock song "Mi fai maile" by Martin Aleksandrov, who wished to participate in EuroBGvision for 2008, but his song was disqualified for being released before the deadline. He sang with a complete band behind him which included guitars, drums and a keyboard. Bulgarian National Television (2008-12-11). Retrieved on 2008-12-14.
At the end of voting, Stefan Ilchev with 37.12%, Zona with 32.70% and Martin Aleksandrov with 11.32% qualified for the December selection final. The jury's choice was Aleksandrov, who placed fourth in the televote.
Results

=Result of December Selection=

The December selection final was held on December 18, 2008. The nine songs that qualified from heats seven through nine were performed once more with some participants altering their routines. Out of the nine songs, only the top three, chosen by televoting, would go on to the semi-final. First to be seen was Freeway with a repeat performance of "Sama", followed by a repeat of Martin Aleksandrov's "Mi fai male". Third was Svetozar Hristov who altered "Barrow from the Shadow" to include three languages: Bulgarian, English and German. Fourth was Sunay Chalakov's "Neshto ludo", and then fifth to be seen was Tedi Slavcheva feat. Teni & Iva's repeat performance of "Don't Look for Me". Zona went next with "Senki" followed by Iskren Petsov's "Zashto se varna" and Vatticana's "Sun is Shining". Finally, the show ended with Stefan Ilchev's "Get Up". Bulgarian National Television (2008-12-18). Retrieved on 2008-12-24.
The top three entries from the December selection final qualified for a spot in the semi-final. At the conclusion of voting, Zona came out on top with 20.45% of the votes, Tedu Karavacheva placed second with 18.33% of the votes and Stefan Ilchev also qualified with 16.86% of the votes. Bulgarian National Television (2008-12-18). Retrieved on 2008-12-20.
Results

Bulgarian Song for Eurovision 2009

Semi-final

The semi-final for Bulgarian Song for Eurovision 2009 was held on January 24, 2009. Eighteen songs participated, nine of them being from Be A Star and the other nine being jury picks.
At the end of voting, the nine songs with the most number of votes were awarded passage on to the final round. During the show, the voting numbers were not shown and instead a list was on screen denoting the winning songs. Bulgarian National Television (2009-01-24). Retrieved on 2009-01-29. Of the nine songs, only one song from Be A Star, Stefan Ilchev's "Get Up" made it to the final.
Results

Final

The final for Bulgarian Song for Eurovision 2009 will take place on February 21, 2009 and will chose the song and performer to represent Bulgaria in the Eurovision Song Contest. The final consists of the nine winning songs from the semi-final joined by three wildcard picks: Mariana Popova with "Crazy", Poli Genova with "One Lifetime Is Not Enough", and Grafa with "Vrag". The table below shows the participants in the final who are listed in no particular order as the draw will be announced at a later date

At Eurovision

Since Bulgaria is not one of the "Big Four" and was not the host of the 2009 contest, it had to compete in one of the two semi-finals. It competed in the first semi-final but failed to reach the final.

Points Awarded by BulgariaEurovision Song Contest 2008

=Semi final=

=Final=








