[[Cathy Garcia-Molina]]

CATEGORIES: Filipino film directors, Filipino television directors, Living people, 1971 births

Cathy Garcia-Molina (born November 28, 1971) is a Filipino film and television director. She has directed most romantic-comedy films distributed by Star Cinema. She has also directed a few TV series, which aired on ABS-CBN. She is considered to be the country's box-office director, with seven of her films entering the list of highest-grossing films in the Philippines. 

Major films

One More Chance (2007)

In 2007, Molina worked with John Lloyd Cruz and Bea Alonzo for the second time in the film One More Chance (first time was in the film Close to You), released by Star Cinema. It differed from her previous films, becoming her first romantic film to contain such solid drama and a mature feeling. In an interview, she stated "This one's different, though, as it's more of a drama and not really a romantic-comedy. In romantic comedies, we usually follow the formula of the two lovers having a cute meet, then they start fighting each other, but you know that in the end, they will still end up in each other's arms. This time, the film opens showing the lovers ... breaking up right at the start of the story. That's why this is really different from any movie I've done before or any movie John Lloyd and Bea have made in the past."

A Very Special Love (2008)

In 2008, Molina directed A Very Special Love, a romantic comedy film which talks about Laida Magtalas (portrayed by Sarah Geronimo) who is a fresh graduate and applies for a job in a magazine publishing company owned by Miggy Montenegro (played by John Lloyd Cruz). Laida is a simple girl and is the breadwinner of her family, while Miggy is a rich, handsome businessman. The movie is about two young people with totally different backgrounds, but they discover that love truly knows no barriers.

You Changed My Life (2009)

In 2009, Star Cinema and VIVA Films released the much-awaited sequel to A Very Special Love, entitled You Changed My Life.

Miss You Like Crazy (2010)

In 2010, Molina's fifth project with John Lloyd Cruz and third with Bea Alonzo, entitled Miss You Like Crazy, was released under Star Cinema. Like One More Chance, the film is a romantic drama with a mature concept. Cruz and Alonzo played the roles of star-crossed lovers, Alan Alvarez and Mia Samonte. Fate throws them chances to be together, but time is not their ally. When they first meet on board the Pasig River Ferry Service, they are instantly attracted to each other. Both of them are from the middle-class and are down-to-earth. As they bond over Divisoria shopping and all-night conversations over coffee, Allan starts to doubt his feelings for his high maintenance fiancée Daphne (portrayed by Maricar Reyes) who happens to be the daughter of his boss. Sooner, Alan and Mia learn that "time is meaningless when you're in love."

Personal life

Catherine Rosales Garcia-Molina was born on November 28, 1971 in Quezon City, Philippines. She is the youngest child of the late Sikatuna Antonio Garcia (1929—1983) and Luisa Rosales Garcia.
She was married to Engineer and Technical Director Philip Rey "Epoy" Molina (who died from a vehicular accident in 2009) with two children.

Casting

Molina often casts certain actors more than once in her films. She has consistently worked with Bea Alonzo, Sarah Geronimo, Toni Gonzaga, Sam Milby and John Lloyd Cruz.

Filmography

Film

Television

Cameo appearances






