[[Charles K. Kao]]

CATEGORIES: 1933 births, Living people, Academics of Imperial College London, Academics of Queen Mary, University of London, Alumni of the University of Greenwich, Alumni of University College London, American electrical engineers, American Nobel laureates, American people of Hong Kong descent, American physicists, British electrical engineers, British emigrants to the United States, British Nobel laureates, British physicists, Chinese University of Hong Kong people, Draper Prize winners, Ethnic Chinese Nobel laureates, Fellows of the Royal Society, Fellows of the Royal Academy of Engineering, Fellow Members of the IEEE, Fellows of the Institution of Engineering and Technology, Hong Kong electrical engineers, Hong Kong emigrants to the United Kingdom, Hong Kong Nobel laureates, Hong Kong physicists, Japan Prize laureates, Knights Commander of the Order of the British Empire, Members of Academia Sinica, Members of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Members of the European Academy of Sciences and Arts, Members of the Optical Society, Members of the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences, Members of the United States National Academy of Engineering, Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom, Nobel laureates in Physics, People with Alzheimer's disease, Recipients of the Grand Bauhinia Medal, Scientists from Shanghai, Shanghai Nobel laureates, Vice chancellors and presidents of universities in Hong Kong, Yale University faculty, Yale University fellows, Hong Kong people of Shanghainese descent, Chinese inventors, Hong Kong Affairs Advisors

The Honourable Sir Charles Kuen Kao, GBM, Kao holds dual citizenship of the United Kingdom and the United States.

Early life

Charles Kao was born in Shanghai in 1933, and his ancestral home is in nearby Jinshan. He studied Chinese classics at home with his brother, under a tutor.
Kao's family moved to Hong Kong in 1948Ifeng. Joseph's College in 1952. He did his undergraduate studies in electrical engineering at Woolwich Polytechnic (now the University of Greenwich), obtaining his Bachelor of Science degree.
He then pursued research and received his PhD degree in electrical engineering in 1965 from University College London It is there that Kao did his first groundbreaking work as an engineer and researcher working alongside George Hockham under the supervision of Alec Reeves.
Kao joined The Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK) in 1970, to found the Department of Electronics, which later became the Department of Electronic Engineering. During this period, Kao was the Reader and then the Chair Professor of Electronics at CUHK; he built up both undergraduate and graduate study programs of electronics and saw the graduation of his first students. Under his leadership, the School of Education and other new research institutes were established. He then went back to ITT Corporation in 1974 (the parent corporation of STC at that time) in the United States and worked in Roanoke, Virginia, first as Chief Scientist and later as Director of Engineering. In 1982, he became the first ITT Executive Scientist and was stationed mainly at the Advanced Technology Center in Connecticut. While there, he served as an adjunct professor and Fellow of Trumbull College at Yale University. In 1985, Kao spent one year in West Germany, at the SEL Research Centre. In 1986, Kao was the Corporate Director of Research at ITT.
Kao was the Vice-Chancellor (President) of the Chinese University of Hong Kong from 1987 to 1996.
Kao then worked as the Chairman and CEO of Transtech Services Ltd., a telecommunication consultancy company in Hong Kong. He was the founder, Chairman and CEO of ITX Services Limited. From 2003 to January 30, 2009, Kao was an Independent Non-executive Director and Member of the Audit Committee of Next Media.
In 2000, Kao founded the Independent Schools Foundation Academy (ISF), which is located in Cyberport, Hong Kong. He was its founding Chairman in 2000, and stepped down from the Board of the ISF in December 2008.
Kao was the keynote speaker at IEEE GLOBECOM 2002 in Taipei, Taiwan. In 2003 Kao was named a Chair Professor by special appointment at the Electronics Institute of the College of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, National Taiwan University.

Industrial

Educational

Governmental

In 1996, Kao donated to Yale University, and the Charles Kao Fund Research Grants was established to support Yale's studies, research and creative projects in Asia.
Kao has been suffering from Alzheimer's disease since early 2004 and has speech difficulty, but has no problem recognizing people or addresses.com: 港媒年初传高锟患老年痴呆症 妻称老人家记性差 Kao's father also suffered from the same disease.
Since 2008, he has resided in Mountain View, California, United States, where he moved from Hong Kong in order to live near his children and grandchild.
Pottery making, a traditional Chinese handiwork, is a hobby of Kao's. Kao also enjoys reading Wuxia novels.QQ.com News 记者探访"光纤之父"高锟：顽皮慈爱的笑
On October 6, 2009, Kao was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for his contributions to the study of the transmission of light in optical fibers and for fiber communication,

Ancestry and family

Kao's father Kao Chun-Hsiang (高君湘) was a lawyer who obtained his J.D. from the University of Michigan Law School in 1925.A short biography of Kao Hieh-HsiangLegal education in modern China and modern Chinese jurisprudence
His grandfather was Gao Xie (aka Gao Chuiwan), a famous scholar, poet, literator, artist, and a leading figure of the Southern Society (南社) during the late Qing Dynasty. Some influential writers including Gao Xu, aka Gao Tianmei), Yao Guang (姚光), and Gao Zeng (高增) were also Gao's close relatives.
His father's cousin was astronomer Ping-Tse Kao;
Kao met his future wife May-Wan Kao (Née: Wong; 黄美芸) in London after graduation.  His wife was a Fortran programmer who worked in the same factory as Kao. both of whom reside and work in Silicon Valley, California.

Work and related history

Fiber optics and communications

In 1960s at STL, Kao and his co-workers did their pioneering work in the realisation of fiber optics as a telecommunications medium, by demonstrating that the high-loss of existing fibre optics arose from impurities in the glass, rather than from an underlying problem with the technology itself.
Initially Kao worked in the team of Antoni E. Karbowiak (aka Toni Karbowiak), who was working under Alec Reeves to study optical waveguides for communications. Kao's task was to investigate fiber attenuation, for which he collected samples from different fiber manufacturers and also investigated the properties of bulk glasses carefully. Kao's study primarily convinced himself that the impurities in material caused the high light losses of those fibers.
In 1963, Kao was appointed head of the electro-optics research group at STL.
Although Kao succeeded Karbowiak as manager of optical communications research, he immediately decided to abandon Karbowiak's plan (thin-film waveguide) and overall change research direction with his colleague George Hockham. They not only considered optical physics but also the material properties. The results were first presented by Kao to the IEE in January 1966 in London, and further published in July with George Hockham (1964–1965 worked with Kao). This study first theorized and proposed to use glass fibers to implement optical communication, the ideas (especially structural features and materials) described are largely the basis of today's optical fiber communications.
In 1965, However, at the time of this determination, optical fibers commonly exhibited light loss as high as 1,000 dB/km and even more. This conclusion opened the intense race to find low-loss materials and suitable fibers for reaching such criteria.
Kao, together with his new team (members including T.W. Davies, M.W. Jones, and C.R. Wright), pursued this goal by testing various materials. They precisely measured the attenuation of light with different wavelengths in glasses and other materials. During this period, Kao pointed out that the high purity of fused silica (SiO2) made it an ideal candidate for optical communication. Kao also stated that the impurity of glass material is the main cause for the dramatic decay of light transmission inside glass fiber, rather than fundamental physical effects such as scattering as many physicists thought at that time, and such impurity could be removed. This led to a worldwide study and production of high-purity glass fibers. When Kao first proposed that such glass fiber could be used for long-distance information transfer and could replace copper wires which were used for telecommunication during that era,1999 Charles Stark Draper Award Presented "''Kao, who was working at ITT's Standard Telecommunications Laboratories in the 1960s, theorized about how to use light for communication instead of bulky copper wire and was the first to publicly propose the possibility of a practical application for fiber-optic telecommunication.''" his ideas were widely disbelieved; later people realized that Kao's ideas revolutionized the whole communication technology and industry.
Kao played a leading role in the early stage of engineering and commercial realization of optical communication. In spring 1966, Kao traveled to the U.S. but failed to interest Bell Labs, which was a competitor of STL in communication technology at that time. He subsequently traveled to Japan and gained support. Kao visited many glass and polymer factories, discussed with various people including engineers, scientists, businessmen about the techniques and improvement of glass fiber manufacture.
In 1969, Kao with M.W. Jones measured the intrinsic loss of bulk-fused silica at 4 dB/km, which is the first evidence of ultra-transparent glass. Bell Labs started considering fiber optics seriously.
Kao developed important techniques and configurations for glass fiber waveguides, and contributed to the development of different fiber types and system devices which met both civil and military
At an early stage of developing optic fibers, Kao already strongly preferred single mode for long-distance optical communication, instead of using multi-mode systems. His vision later was followed and now is applied almost exclusively.
Kao is also a visionary of modern submarine communications cables and largely promoted this idea. He predicted in 1983 that world's seas would be littered with fiber optics, five years ahead of the time that such a trans-oceanic fiber-optic cable first became serviceable.
Ali Javan's introduction of a steady helium–neon laser and Kao's discovery of fiber light-loss properties now are recognized as the two essential milestones for the development of fiber-optic communications.

Environmental studies and energy leadership

Kao is one of the few earliest who started studying the environmental effects of the land reclamation in Hong Kong, and presented one of his first related studies at the conference of ACU (Association of Commonwealth Universities) in Edinburgh in 1972.
Kao was the Chairman and Member of the Energy Advisory Committee (EAC) of Hong Kong for two years, and retired from the position on July 15, 2000.[ref]
</ref> Kao is a Member of the Council of Advisors on Innovation and Technology of Hong Kong, appointed on April 20, 2000.<ref>
 </ref>

Honors and awards

Kao has received numerous honors and awards in his life, the most notable being the Nobel Prize in Physics. His awards including the following:

Academic offices

Honorary degrees

Awards

Kao donated most of his prize medals to the Chinese University of Hong Kong.

Others

Notes







Monographs

Further reading




