[[Microwave auditory effect]]

CATEGORIES: Espionage, Human physiology, Non-lethal weapons, Cognitive neuroscience, Hearing, Mind control, Radio spectrum

The microwave auditory effect, also known as the microwave hearing effect or the Frey effect, consists of audible clicks (or, with modulation, whole words) induced by pulsed/modulated  microwave frequencies. The clicks are generated directly inside the human head without the need of any receiving electronic device. The effect was first reported by persons working in the vicinity of radar transponders during World War II. These induced sounds are not audible to other people nearby. The microwave auditory effect was later discovered to be inducible with shorter-wavelength portions of the electromagnetic spectrum. During the Cold War era, the American neuroscientist Allan H. Frey studied this phenomenon and was the first to publish information on the nature of the microwave auditory effect.
Pulsed microwave radiation can be heard by some workers; the irradiated personnel perceive auditory sensations of clicking or buzzing. The cause is thought to be thermoelastic expansion of portions of auditory apparatus. However, competing theories explain the results of interferometric holography tests differently. 
In 2003, the US Navy conducted research on an MAE system they called  MEDUSA (Mob Excess Deterrent Using Silent Audio) as a way to remotely, temporarily incapacitate personnel. The system relied on the principle of MAE, varying the power and parameters of the microwave pulses "to raise the auditory sensation to the 'discomfort' level, deterring personnel from entering a protected perimeter or, if necessary, temporarily incapacitating particular individuals."
In 2008, Sierra Nevada Corporation, a contractor that worked on the Navy's MEDUSA research, announced that they were seeking funding from the US Department of Defense to build demonstration and transportable versions of the system.

Primary Cold War-era research in the US

The first American to publish on the microwave hearing effect was Allan H. Frey, in 1961. In his experiments, the subjects were discovered to be able to hear appropriately pulsed microwave radiation, from a distance of 100 meters from the transmitter. This was accompanied by side effects such as dizziness, headaches, and a pins and needles sensation.
Sharp and Grove developed 'receiverless' wireless voice transmission technologies for the Advanced Research Projects Agency at Walter Reed Army Institute of Research in 1973. In the above mentioned journal entry to American Psychologist, Dr. Don Justesen reports that Sharp and Grove were readily able to hear, identify, and distinguish among the single-syllable words for digits between 1 and 10. Justesen writes, "The sounds heard were not unlike those emitted by persons with an artificial voice box (Electrolarynx). Communication of more complex words and of sentences was not attempted because the averaged densities of energy required to transmit longer messages would approach the still current 10mW/cm² limit of safe exposure."D.R. Justesen. "Microwaves and Behavior", Am Psychologist, 392(Mar): 391–401, 1975.

Peaceful applications

A 1998 patent describes a device that can scare off birds from wind turbines, aircraft, and other sensitive installations by way of microwave energy pulses.  Using frequencies from 1 GHz to about 40 GHz, the warning system generates pulses of milliseconds duration, which are claimed to be sensed by the birds' auditory systems.  It is believed this may cause them to veer away from the protected object.  "Method and system for warning birds of hazards" USPTO granted 30 June 1998

Conspiracy theories

Numerous individuals suffering from auditory hallucinations, delusional disorders



Notes

 




