[[Tapton, Derbyshire]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Derbyshire

Tapton is a suburb of Chesterfield, in the county of Derbyshire, England. It is located along the Brimington Road B6543, between Chesterfield town centre, and Brimington. It became a suburb of Chesterfield as far back as the 1920s. The buildings along Brimington road, which runs through the centre of Tapton, are testament to this fact. Consisting of various semi-detached houses in a style typical of the 20s and 30s.
The village is also home to Tapton House, in Tapton Woods, the woods being the former grounds of the house, now a Municipal park.

History Of Tapton

Located in the grounds of the House, is a large mound or hill, once the moat, of Chesterfield Castle or Tapton Castle as it was sometimes also known. The castle at least dates as far back as the Norman Conquest

Tapton Hall, Chesterfield

Tapton Hall, Derbyshire (not to be confused with Tapton Hall, Sheffield). In 1638 the lordship of Tapton with a capital messuage known as Tapton Hall was sold by Durant Allsopp and Thomas Allsopp, gentlemen, also of Durant Hall, Holy Well Street, Chesterfield, to George Taylor (d.1668) of London, Vintner, with closes (fields) at Brimington with several other properties including Durant Hall. Derbyshire Record Office D135/M/T/1 17 Feb 1637/8 1 Bargain and sale by Durant Allsopp and Thomas Allsopp of Chesterfield, gents. to George Taylor of London, vintner, in consideration of £2,100, of the manor and lordship of Tapton, a capital messuage known as Tapton Hall, closes called the Croft, Broome Close, Woodclose, Woodmeadowe, Peaserclose, the Pingles, Little Coaterclose, Castleclose Pennyleyes, Little Lady Leys, Goulden Cliffes, 2 lands in Silverice, 1a in Balme Oak Close, closes called Ouldfields, 2 messuages and a close at Hill Topp, Brimington a cottage and 4a land in the Intake, a cottage and 1a land near Ouldfeilde, a cottage in Ouldfeilde, a cottage near Tapton Hall, and a cottage and garden in the Blakepitte, with a capital messuage at Chesterfield known as Durant Hall with closes known as Crofte and Durant Meadowe Taylor left instructions in his will for the founding of alms houses, and 6 alms houses  were duly erected in 1678 in Salter Gate, by his son-in-law Charles Scrimshire, as the inscription inn the centre of the buildings attests. George, History of Chesterfield, 1839, p.273
[/ref] It was inherited by Taylor's daughter and sole-heiress Esther Taylor, who married Sir Charles Scrimshire of Norbury  in Staffordshire, Sheriff of Derbyshire in 1698.5, re Milnes, Taylor, Scrimshire pedigree It was then acquired in 1701, with Durant Hall, by Thomas Gladwin,[ref]Derbyshire Archives D135/M/E/4
"Articles of agreement between Sir Charles Skrymsher and Thomas Gladwin for the sale to Gladwin of Tapton Hall etc. Date 30 September 1701 a member of the Gladwin family of Tupton Hall and descended via his co-heiress to the Clarke family and thence to the Cox family, and in 1746 was sold, with Durant Hall, and with the manor and lordship of Tapton, by William Coxe to Adam Slater of Chesterfield, apothecary. Date 8 May 1746

Tapton House and Castle

Tapton House is a large gentleman's residence, built in the Georgian Style of Red brick, located in the woods on Tapton Hill looking down on the Town of Chesterfield. Tapton House was once the home of English mechanical engineer George Stephenson who built the first public railway line in the world to use steam locomotives. In 1837 he arrived in Chesterfield, to undertake the construction of the Derby to Leeds railway (North Midland Line). As work continued George Stephenson, took up residence there. The House was bequeathed to the borough of Chesterfield on his death.
It was then converted into a school. In 1931, the first pupils passed through its doors as Tapton House Central Selective School. The school continued until 1993.oldtaptonians.co.uk/
Tapton House grounds are now used as the Tapton Park Innovation Centre which is open for free use to the general public. The House itself is currently the Higher Education Campus for Chesterfield College.tapton.co.uk

Tapton Hall, Sheffield

Tapton Hall in Eccleshall near Sheffield was the home of William Shore, the paternal grandfather of Florence Nightingale.






