[[Nukuʻalofa]]

CATEGORIES: Nukuʻalofa, Populated places in Tonga, Capitals in Oceania, Port cities in Oceania

Nukualofa is the capital of the Kingdom of Tonga. It is located on the north coast of the island of Tongatapu, in the southernmost island group of Tonga.

History

Mythological origins

In the Tongan myth of the origin of Nukualofa meaning love.
The name is said to have originated when Moi Kanokupolu) as governor to Hihifo (Western side of Tongatapu). It was a difficult decision for Ngata as the Tu'i Tonga and Tu'i Ha'atakalaua have been unable to control Hihifo. Ngata had many reasons to fear for his life as his predecessors had been killed by the chiefs and people of Hihifo.
When Ngata left Mua and Hihifo in order to plan and prepare for their landing at Hihifo.
Ngata, Nuku and Niukapu decided to wrap their combined bodies under a large mat and land in Hihifo, giving the impression of a large man with three heads. This is the origin of the alofa.

First western records of Nukualofa

On 10 June 1777, British captain James Cook wrote of his arrival at their anchorage place. His description of the place confirmed, with his map, that this was the bay of Nukualofa.
Cook never used the name Nukualofa or any other spelling for the reports of this voyage, but he mentioned the island of Pangaimodoo (Pangaimotu) which was to the east of his anchorage position. Captain Cook also wrote that he travelled by canoes to visit Mooa (Mualofa. Cook also drafted the first map of the bay of Nuku'alofa.
The first written record for Nuku'alofa is stated in the first dedicated book for Tonga by George Vason which was published in 1810. George Vason was an English missionary from the London Missionary Society, who arrived in Tonga in 1797. George Vason wrote of their arrival that:
That was the first mention of Nuku'alofa, spelled as Noogoollefa. Pangaimotu was spelled as Bongy-Moddoo by George Vason since Tongan writing and alphabet would be developed in 1826-27.
The second oldest book dedicated to Tonga was by William Mariner, adopted son of Finau 'Ulukalala, which was published in 1817. Mariner described his experiences during the years he was the adopted son of 'Ulukalala (1806–1810). He described the civil war and the siege of the Fort of Nuku'alofa, which fell to 'Ulukalala and his warriors
The third attempt of Christian missionaries were recorded in April 1826, when two Tahitian London Missionaries were detained by Tupou the chief of Nuku'alofa.
The arrival of the Methodist missionaries in Nuku'alofa in 1827 reinforced the Christian faith. The persecution suffered by Christians in Hihifo and Hahake forced a lot of people to seek refugees in Nuku'alofa. Thanks to the encouragement of Tupou, the King of Nuku'alofa, this was the beginning of the expanding of Nuku'alofa to become the major center of Christianity in Tonga.
The final phase of the arrival of Christianity in Tonga was the arrival of Father Chevron, or Patele Sevelo, in 1842. He wrote that he arrived in Nuku'alofa in 1842 and met the Tu'i Kanokupolu Aleamotu'a who was baptised by the Wesleyan as Sosaia."
In conclusion, these arrival turned Nuku'alofa from a small village and fort into the center of Tonga during the arrival of Christianity.
From the earliest record for Nuku'alofa, the early writer always refer to the settlement as Noogollefa (1797), Nioocalofa (1806), Nukualofa (1826 by Methodist) and Noukou-Alofa (1842 by French Catholic Priest). There was no other mention of any other name of the settlement but only of the settlement or fort of Nuku'alofa.thumb|right|200px|Taumoepeau Building

Capital of the Kingdom of Tonga (1875)

The Declaration of the Constitution of Tonga in 1875 formalised Nuku'alofa as the Capital of Tonga. King George Taufa'ahau Tupou I issued the Constitution of Tonga on 4 November 1875, in Nuku'alofa. The Constitution also stated (Article 38) that the Parliament will meet in Nuku'alofa except in time of war.
Since Nuku'alofa have been expanding from when it became the center of Christianity in Tonga in the 19th century, it became essential that it was reorganised for effective administration of the capital. The reorganisation of Nuku'alofa divided up Nuku'alofa into three major district area:

Government

There are district officers (ofisa kolo), as in all villages of Tonga. Their main task is to disseminate the orders of the government to the people. Vacancies for town officer positions are usually advertised in the local newspapers. Services such as police, fire brigade, and hospitals are arranged by the national government.
The national government is based in Nukualofa. The parliament of Tonga meets there, and the Royal Palace is located near the city. The city is home to the embassies of foreign countries.

Economy

Nukualofa is the economic hub of the country.
Peau Vava'u, an airline, had its head office in the Pacific Royale Hotel in Nukuʻalofa."Contact Information for Peau Vavaʻu." Peau Vavaʻu. June 12, 2007. "Peau Vava'u Limited Pacific Royale Hotel Taufa'ahau Road Nuku'alofa Kingdom of Tonga" The former Royal Tongan Airlines had its head office in the Royco Building in Nukualofa."World Airline Directory." Flight International. 30 March – 5 April 2004. 61."Contact Information." Royal Tongan Airlines. 6 June 2004. Retrieved on 23 October 2009.
The city has markets and a central business district. Much of the central business district was destroyed during the 2006 Nuku'alofa riots, but it is being rebuilt.

Transport

Nukualofa is the central hub for transport in Tonga.
Buses arrive and depart from the central bus station along Vuna Road close to the centre of town. Bus services are privately operated, and their drivers are free to set their own schedules. Fares are fixed by the government, with reduced rates for school children. The buses are usually filled to capacity. In addition, some schools and large hotels provide their own buses.
There are numerous taxis, also privately owned. Many people who own a car earn extra money by providing taxi services in their spare time. Taxi fares are also set by the government. Most families have their own car; few residents ride bicycles. There are no operational railways or trams in Tonga, although there was once a narrow-gauge railway from the lagoon to the wharf, which gave its name to Railway Road.
NukuEueiki.
Air transport is provided by Fuaalofa.

Sister cities

Endnotes






