[[Arithmetic dynamics]]

CATEGORIES: Dynamical systems, Algebraic number theory

Arithmetic dynamics[ref]
[/ref]
is a field that amalgamates two areas of mathematics, dynamical systems and number theory.
Classically, discrete dynamics refers to the study of the iteration of self-maps of the complex plane or real line. Arithmetic dynamics is the study of the number-theoretic properties of integer, rational, -adic, and/or algebraic points under repeated application of a polynomial or rational function. A fundamental goal is to describe arithmetic properties in terms of underlying geometric structures.
Global arithmetic dynamics refers to the study of analogues of classical Diophantine geometry  in the setting of discrete dynamical systems, while local arithmetic dynamics, also called p-adic or nonarchimedean dynamics, is an analogue of classical dynamics in which
one replaces the complex numbers C by a  and studies chaotic behavior and the Fatou and Julia sets.
The following table describes a rough correspondence between Diophantine equations, especially abelian varieties, and dynamical systems:

Definitions and notation from discrete dynamics

Let  be a set and let
 be
a map from  to itself. The iterate of
 times is denoted
A point  is  periodic if
 > 1.
The point is preperiodic if
)
is periodic for some  ≥ 1.
The (forward) orbit of  is the set
Thus  is preperiodic if and only if its orbit
) is finite.

Number theoretic properties of preperiodic points

Let ) be a rational
function of degree at least two with coefficients in Q.
A theorem of Northcott[ref]
D. G. Northcott.
Periodic points on an algebraic variety.
Ann. of Math. (2), 51:167--177, 1950.
[/ref]
says that  has only finitely many Q-rational
preperiodic points, i.e.,  has only
finitely many preperiodic points in
P1(Q).  The Uniform
Boundedness Conjecture[ref]
P. Morton and J. H. Silverman.
Rational periodic points of rational functions.
Internat. Math. Res. Notices, (2):97--110, 1994.
[/ref]
of Morton and Silverman
says that the number of preperiodic points of  in
P1(Q) is bounded by a constant that depends
only on the degree of .
More generally, let  : PN →
PN be a morphism of degree at least two defined over
a number field . Northcott's theorem says that
 has only finitely many preperiodic points in
PN(), and the general Uniform
Boundedness Conjecture says that the number of preperiodic points in
P) may be
bounded solely in terms of , the degree of
 over
Q.
The Uniform Boundedness Conjecture is not known even for quadratic
polynomials ) =
 over the
rational numbers Q. It is known in this case that
) cannot have
periodic points of period four,
[ref]
P. Morton.
Arithmetic properties of periodic points of quadratic maps.
Acta Arith., 62(4):343--372, 1992.
[/ref]
five,[ref]
E. V. Flynn, B. Poonen, and E. F. Schaefer.
Cycles of quadratic polynomials and rational points on a genus-2 curve.
Duke Math. J., 90(3):435--463, 1997.
[/ref]
or six,[ref]
M. Stoll, Rational 6-cycles under iteration of quadratic polynomials, 2008.
[/ref]
although the result for period six is contingent on the validity of
the conjecture of Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer. Poonen has conjectured that
) cannot have
rational periodic points of any period strictly larger than
three.[ref]
B. Poonen.
The classification of rational preperiodic points of quadratic  polynomials over Q: a refined conjecture.
Math. Z., 228(1):11--29, 1998.
[/ref]

Integer points in orbits

The orbit of a rational map may contain infinitely many integers. For
example, if ) is a
polynomial with integer coefficients and if  is
an integer, then it is clear that the entire orbit
)
consists of integers. Similarly, if
) is a rational map and
some iterate
)
is a polynomial with integer coefficients, then every th entry
in the orbit is an integer. An example of this phenomenon is the map
) =
1/, whose second iterate is a polynomial.
It turns out that this is the only way that an orbit can contain
infinitely many integers.
Theorem[ref]
J. H. Silverman.
Integer points, Diophantine approximation, and iteration of rational maps.
Duke Math. J., 71(3):793-829, 1993.
[/ref]
Let ) ∈
Q() be a rational function of degree at
least two, and assume that no iterate[ref]
An elementary theorem says that if
) ∈
C(
is a polynomial, then already the second iterate is a polynomial.
[/ref]
of  is a polynomial. Let
 ∈ Q. Then the orbit
)
contains only finitely many integers.

Dynamically defined points lying on subvarieties

There are general conjectures due to Shouwu Zhang[ref]
S.-W. Zhang, Distributions in algebraic dynamics,
Differential Geometry: A Tribute to Professor S.-S. Chern, Surv. Differ. Geom., Vol. X, Int. Press, Boston, MA, 2006, pages 381–430.
[/ref]
and others concerning subvarieties that contain infinitely many periodic
points or that intersect an orbit in infinitely many points. These are
dynamical analogues of, respectively,  the Manin–Mumford conjecture, proven by Raynaud,
and the Mordell–Lang conjecture, proven by Faltings.
The following conjectures illustrate the general theory in the case that the subvariety is a curve.
Conjecture
Let  : PN → PN be a morphism and let
 ⊂ PN be an irreducible algebraic curve. Suppose
that either of the following is true:
 
(a)  .
 
(b)  There is a point   ∈ PN such that
).
 
Then   in the sense that there is some
iterate   that maps
 to itself.

p-adic dynamics

The field of -adic (or nonarchimedean) dynamics is the study of classical dynamical questions
over a field  that is complete with respect to a nonarchimedean absolute value. Examples of such fields are the
field of  and the completion of its algebraic
closure C and the standard definition of equicontinuity leads to the
usual definition of the Fatou and Julia sets of a rational map ). There are many similarities between the complex and the nonarchimedean theories, but also many differences. A striking difference is that in the nonarchimedean setting, the Fatou set is always nonempty, but the Julia set may be empty. This is the reverse of what is true over the complex numbers. Nonarchimedean dynamics has been extended to Berkovich space,[ref]
R. Rumely and M. Baker,
Analysis and dynamics on the Berkovich projective line, ArXiv preprint, 150 pages.
[/ref]
which is a compact connected space that contains the totally disconnected non-locally compact field C.

Generalizations

There are natural generalizations of arithmetic dynamics
in which Q and Q are
replaced by number fields and their -adic completions.
Another natural generalization is to replace self-maps of P1 or P with self-maps (morphisms)

of other affine or projective varieties.

Other areas in which number theory and dynamics interact

There are many other problems of a number theoretic nature that appear in the setting of dynamical systems, including:
Springer, 2007, ISBN 978-1-4020-5403-7[/ref] and invariant measures, especially on -adic spaces.
The Arithmetic Dynamics Reference List gives an extensive list of articles and books covering a wide range of arithmetical dynamical topics.



Notes and references

Further reading




