[[Baron Geisler]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, Filipino male television actors, Filipino male child actors, Filipino male film actors, Filipino television personalities, Pinoy Big Brother, Bicolano people, People of Kapampangan descent, Filipino people of German descent, German people of Filipino descent, People from Parañaque, People from Angeles, Philippines, Living people, Filipino comedians, ABS-CBN Corporation

Baron Frederick von Geisler (born 5 June 1982, Clark Air Base, Angeles City, Philippines) is a multi-award winning Filipino actor, the son of a Filipina mother and a German American father who was stationed at the former U.S. military base in Angeles City. He is the brother of Donald Geisler, a retired Olympic taekwondo-jin.
Several of Geisler's accolades includes winning the Best Actor award in the 4th Cinemalaya Independent Film Festival on July 20, 2008 and the 2005 PMPC Best Single Performance of an Actor in "Maalaala Mo Kaya" (Will You Ever Remember?).

Life and career

Geisler entered show business as a child actor in 1994 through the phenomenal variety kiddie/teen gag show Ang TV. A year later, he became officially a part of ABS-CBN's roster of rising homegrown talents as a member of the elite Star Circle Batch 5. He was considered as one of the network's most promising young stars alongside John Lloyd Cruz and Marc Solis in the boy trio "Koolits", where he was once paired up with Kristine Hermosa. 
Geisler is one of the most controversial young actors in his generation. While his performance as an actor is stellar and his career becoming stiff, he has confessed to being addicted to alcohol and has been involved in numerous brawls. One of the said brawls is a bar scuffle, in fact, left him with two visible scars on his left cheek. His own mother eventually signed him up in a detox facility (for 10 days) thus helping him earn the nickname as the "Wild Child"  of Pinoy Big Brother: Celebrity Edition 2 and recently as the newest "Bad Boy" image in Philippine Showbiz.
He is currently facing a lawsuit against fellow former Pinoy Big Brother housemate Yayo Aguila's daughter Patricia accusing him of an alleged sexual harassment in which Geisler has denied engaging. The case is on-going as Geisler still appeared in his several TV series projects such as Eva Fonda, Tayong Dalawa (The Two of Us), The Wedding and others to name a few. Geisler also faced a lawsuit filed by actress Yasmien Kurdi for another alleged sexual harassment case.  
Geisler has considered changing network from ABS-CBN to GMA Network after being offered to be a part of SRO Cinemaserye of GMA. Yet, he remained a free lance actor appearing to both networks.
Geisler's also known to have had a past relationships with actress and former Tabing Ilog co-star Jodi Sta. Maria, Dionne Monsanto and Cai Cortez (daughter of veteran actor Rez Cortez).

Indefinite artist ban

In early 2011, Geisler faced a harassment complaint from actress Cherry Pie Picache who accused him for groping her breast on the set of Noah in which Geisler has denied engaging and claimed it was an accidental touch. It was reported that Geisler was under the influence of alcohol on that taping day. This is Geisler's fourth acts of lasciviousness / unjust vexation accusation, the other three are with Patricia Martinez, Yasmien Kurdi and Julia Clarete respectively. 
It was later confirmed by Geisler's manager, Arnold Vegafria, that Geisler immediately made a public apology statement in the presence of Picache just right after the incident and voluntarily entered rehabilitation in a 90-day treatment session. Geisler's alcohol rehabilitation started on January 30, 2011 and has just successfully ended recently.

Return to acting

After finishing rehab, Geisler and Yasmien Kurdi reconciled resulting in Kurdi withdrawing the case filed against him. Geisler recently played Erning "Toothpick" Reyes (a role originally played by actor Paquito Diaz) in the 2011 Metro Manila Film Festival entry of Viva Films, Manila Kingpin: The Asiong Salonga Story top-billed by Laguna Governor Jeorge "ER" Ejercito Estregan.

Legal troubles

Geisler was temporarily detained for physical assault to his neighbor named Raymundo dela Rosa on November 9, 2012. He was released less than 24 hours after a mutual settlement from both parties as the file was withdrawn by dela Rosa. Geisler claimed that the incident was just for self-defense purposes. It was also later found out that Geisler was intoxicated that time.
Geisler later stated in an interview that he is currently struggling from an extreme bipolar disorder and is recently under a strict medication for the said illness.

Filmography

Movies

Television






