[[Shri Swaminarayan Mandir, Karachi]]

CATEGORIES: Religious buildings completed in 1849, Swaminarayan sect of Hinduism, Gurdwaras in Pakistan, Hindu temples in Karachi

The Shri Swaminarayan Mandir, Karachi 

Partition of India and after

The temple became a refugee camp in 1948. Page 52 In 1989, for the first time since the independence in 1947, a group of sadhus from the Shri Swaminarayan Mandir, Ahmedabad visited the temple. Since then, small groups from the Ahmedabad temple pay this temple a visit every few years in a pilgrimage.

Festivals and events

According to the Pakistan Hindu Council, Swaminarayan Jayanti, Ram Navami, Janmastami, Dussehra, Diwali and almost all of the main religious festivals are celebrated by Hindus in this temple.
The temple also doubles up as a marriage venue. In 2008, a mass wedding arrangement was made for 20 poor couples.

Guru Nanak Temple

According to the Pakistan Hindu Council, there is a Guru Nanak temple within the Swaminarayan Temple complex. Here, every Moon Night and for the birthday of Guru Nanak, Baisakhi is celebrated.

Hinglaj Yatra

The Hinglaj yatra starts from the Swaminarayan Temple complex here annually.

Gurdwara

In the Swaminarayan Mandir complex in Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan where a small Hindu community lives, a Gurdwara has been created for the small Sikh community.
The Gurdwara Sahib houses three sets of Sri Guru Granth Sahib Ji in the Palki Sahib.  There are pictures of the Gurus and a small shrine devoted to Guru Nanak Dev Ji.  There is a Hindu bell in the Gurdwara Sahib as well.
The whole compound is protected by a security guard to protect the small number of Hindu families.

File:Karachi Gurdwara IMG 7778.JPG|Interior of Gurdwara in Swami Narain Mandir Complex, Karachi
File:Karachi Gurdwara IMG 7779.JPG|Exterior of Gurdwara in Swami Narain Mandir Complex, Karachi
File:Karachi Gurdwara IMG 7780.JPG|Exterior of Gurdwara in Swami Narain Mandir Complex, Karachi
File:Karachi Temple Gurdwara IMG 7781.JPG|Exterior of Gurdwara in Swami Narain Mandir Complex, Karachi








