[[Uniform convergence]]

CATEGORIES: Calculus, Mathematical series, Topology of function spaces, Convergence (mathematics)

In the mathematical field of analysis, uniform convergence is a type of convergence stronger than pointwise convergence. A sequence {fn} of functions converges uniformly to a limiting function f if the speed of convergence of fn(x) to f(x) does not depend on x. 
The concept is important because several properties of the functions fn, such as continuity and Riemann integrability, are transferred to the limit f if the convergence is uniform. 
Uniform convergence to a function on a given interval can be defined in terms of the uniform norm.

History

Some historians claim
|title=A history of analysis
|first=Hans Niels
|last=Jahnke
|publisher=AMS Bookstore
|year=2003
|isbn=978-0-8218-2623-2
|chapter=6.7 The Foundation of Analysis in the 19th Century: Weierstrass
|postscript=, p. 184.
}}[/ref]
Later Gudermann's pupil Karl Weierstrass, who attended his course on elliptic functions in 1839–1840, coined the term gleichmäßig konvergent ( G. H. Hardy compares the three definitions in his paper "Sir George Stokes and the concept of uniform convergence" and remarks: "Weierstrass's discovery was the earliest, and he alone fully realized its far-reaching importance as one of the fundamental ideas of analysis."
Under the influence of Weierstrass and Bernhard Riemann this concept and related questions were intensely studied at the end of the 19th century by Hermann Hankel, Paul du Bois-Reymond, Ulisse Dini, Cesare Arzelà and others.
 Definition == 
Suppose  tends to 0.
The sequence .

Notes

Note that interchanging the order of "there exists  if and only if 
Here the order of the universal quantifiers for  is.
In the case of uniform convergence,  tends to 1.

Generalizations

One may straightforwardly extend the concept to functions S → M, where (M, d) is a metric space, by replacing |fn(x) − f(x)| with d(fn(x), f(x)).
The most general setting is the uniform convergence of nets of functions S → X, where X is a uniform space. We say that the net (fα) converges uniformly with limit f : S → X if and only if
The above mentioned theorem, stating that the uniform limit of continuous functions is continuous, remains correct in these settings.

Definition in a hyperreal setting

Examples

Given a topological space X, we can equip the space of bounded real or complex-valued functions over X with the uniform norm topology. Then uniform convergence simply means convergence in the uniform norm topology.

Exponential function

Here is the series:
This is trivial:
The ratio test can be used here:

Properties

Applications

To continuity

This theorem is important, since pointwise convergence of continuous functions is not enough to guarantee continuity of the limit function as the image illustrates.
More precisely, this theorem states that the uniform limit of uniformly continuous functions is uniformly continuous; for a locally compact space, continuity is equivalent to local uniform continuity, and thus the uniform limit of continuous functions is continuous.

To differentiability

To integrability

Similarly, one often wants to exchange integrals and limit processes. For the Riemann integral, this can be done if uniform convergence is assumed:
Much stronger theorems in this respect, which require not much more than pointwise convergence, can be obtained if one abandons the Riemann integral and uses the Lebesgue integral instead.

To Analyticity

If a sequence of analytic functions converges uniformly in a region S of the complex plane, then the limit is analytic in S. This demonstrates an example that complex functions are more well-behaved than real functions, since the uniform limit of analytic functions on a real interval need not even be differentiable.

Extended Results to Series

i) pointwise on E if and only if the sequence sn converges where s'n(x) is the sequence of partial sums.
ii) uniformly on E if and only if sn''(x) converges uniformly as n goes to infinity.
With this definition comes the immediate result that comes naturally from the theorems about sequences:

Almost uniform convergence

If the domain of the functions is a measure space then the related notion of almost uniform convergence can be defined. We say a sequence of functions converges almost uniformly on E if the sequence of functions converges uniformly almost everywhere on E, that is, if the set of points for which the sequence does not converge uniformly has an arbitrarily small measure.
Note that almost uniform convergence of a sequence does not mean that the sequence converges uniformly almost everywhere as might be inferred from the name.
Egorov's theorem guarantees that on a finite measure space, a sequence of functions that converges almost everywhere also converges almost uniformly on the same set.
Almost uniform convergence implies almost everywhere convergence and convergence in measure.



Notes






