[[Stanton Middle School (Kent, Ohio)]]

CATEGORIES: Kent, Ohio, Buildings and structures in Portage County, Ohio, Education in Portage County, Ohio, Public middle schools in Ohio

Stanton Middle School is a public middle school located in Kent, Ohio, United States.  It is the only middle school in the Kent City School District and serves the district's 810 students in grades 6-8.  Located at the opposite end of the same campus that houses Theodore Roosevelt High School, it opened in 1999 as a replacement for the former Davey Middle School, which became an elementary school.  Anthony Horton was hired as principal in 2012.

History

The first junior high school in Kent was organized in 1922 as Kent Junior High School.  It included all Kent students in grades 7 and 8 and was housed in the old Central School, which also housed grades 1-6 for students in part of Kent, and until 1922, had also housed Kent High School.  The high school was moved to a new building in 1922 and was named for former US President Theodore Roosevelt.  In 1959, after the completion of a new campus for Theodore Roosevelt High School, the former high school building was remodeled and rededicated as Davey Junior High School, housing grades 7–9.  In 1966, an addition was built to accommodate the growing enrollment.
In 1978, ninth grade students were moved to the high school after an addition was completed there.  Davey would remain a 7–8 building until 1986 when all of the district's sixth graders were moved to the building after previously being housed in the five neighborhood elementary schools.  Space limitations forced the district to send sixth graders from three of the elementary schools back to their respective buildings while students from the remaining two (Walls and Holden Elementary Schools) remained at Davey.  This arrangement would last until the opening of Stanton Middle School in 1999.
In 1993, the district implemented a team-teaching program at Davey which organized both teachers and students into interdisciplinary academic teams, with each team made up of five teachers and approximately 120 students. In October of that year, the school was formally rededicated as Davey Middle School.  District leaders wanted a new school to not only house all the district's sixth graders together but to better fit the team-teaching structure being used.  Kent voters approved a bond issue in November 1996

Campus

The school is located in northern Kent at the western edge of the  campus of Theodore Roosevelt High School.  Previously, much of the current site had been a wooded area behind the district bus garage.  Immediately adjacent to the school is the student and community weight room (housed in the former bus garage) and a small stadium, Stanton Stadium, which has a nine-lane all-weather track surrounding a field used for soccer and lacrosse.  The campus also includes practice and playing fields for the various high school teams as well as a football stadium with an eight-lane all-weather track.  Both high school and middle school teams utilize the facilities and practice fields.

Facilities

The building is mostly a one-story structure with a small second floor in the academic wings on the north side.  It covers approximately   Sixth graders occupy three pods in northwest wing of the building, while the seventh and eighth graders use the opposite wing on two floors.  Within the individual pods are the teams, which generally have six teachers.  
The school is centered on the main entrance and the administrative offices.  On the south end of the building are the co-curricular rooms for band, orchestra, and choir as well as the gymnasium and "auditeria", a large area that can function as a cafeteria or auditorium.






