[[Roger Ebert]]

CATEGORIES: 1942 births, 2013 deaths, 20th-century American writers, 21st-century American writers, American film critics, American humanists, American male writers, American memoirists, American people of Dutch descent, American people of German descent, American people of Irish descent, American people with disabilities, American screenwriters, American skeptics, American television personalities, Cancer deaths in Illinois, Chicago Sun-Times people, Deaths from thyroid cancer, Film historians, Film theorists, Former Roman Catholics, Illinois Democrats, People from Chicago, Illinois, People from Urbana, Illinois, Pulitzer Prize for Criticism winners, Religious skeptics, Science fiction fans, University of Cape Town alumni, University of Chicago faculty, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign alumni, Writers from Illinois

Roger Joseph Ebert ( In 1975, he was the first film critic to win the Pulitzer Prize for Criticism. As of 2010, his reviews were syndicated to more than 200 newspapers in the United States and abroad. Ebert also published more than 20 books and dozens of collections of reviews.
Ebert and Chicago Tribune critic Gene Siskel helped popularize nationally-televised film reviewing when they co-hosted the PBS show Sneak Previews, followed by several variously-named At the Movies programs. The two verbally sparred and traded humorous barbs while discussing films. They created and trademarked the phrase "Two Thumbs Up," used when both hosts gave the same film a positive review. After Siskel died in 1999, Ebert continued hosting the show with various co-hosts and then, starting in 2000, with Richard Roeper.
In 2005, Ebert became the first film critic to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
Ebert lived with cancer of the thyroid and salivary glands from 2002 that required treatments that necessitated his lower jaw being removed, thus costing him the ability to speak or eat normally. Regardless, his ability to write was unimpaired and he continued to publish frequently both online and in print right up until his death on April 4, 2013.

Early life

Roger Joseph Ebert"Roger Ebert – Archive Interview Part 1 of 3 ". YouTube. May 20, 2008. Retrieved June 7, 2012. was born in Urbana, Illinois, the only child of Annabel (née Stumm),"Ebert, Roger (R. Hyde, Reinhold Timme)". encyclopedia. Retrieved April 4, 2013. a bookkeeper, and Walter H. Ebert, He was raised Roman Catholic, attending St. Mary's elementary school and serving as an altarboy in Urbana.
His paternal grandparents were German immigrantsEbert's review of Maryam (April 12, 2002) and his maternal ancestry was German, Dutch, and Irish.
Regarding his early influences in film criticism, Ebert wrote in the 1998 parody collection Mad About the Movies:
Ebert began taking classes at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign as an early-entrance student, completing his high-school courses while also taking his first university class. Life Itself: A Memoir. New York: Grand Central Publishing, 2011. p. 91. After graduating from Urbana High School in 1960, Ebert then attended and received his undergraduate degree in 1964. While at the University of Illinois, Ebert worked as a reporter for the Daily Illini and then served as its editor during his senior year while also continuing to work as a reporter for the News-Gazette of Champaign-Urbana, Illinois (he had begun at the News-Gazette at age 15 covering Urbana High School sports). Life Itself: A Memoir. New York: Grand Central Publishing,  2011. p. 30. As an undergraduate, he was a member of the Phi Delta Theta fraternity and president of the U.S. Student Press Association at Illinois. Life Itself: A Memoir.  New York: Grand Central Publishing,  2011. pp. 92, 96.  One of the first movie reviews he ever wrote was a review of La Dolce Vita, published in The Daily Illini in October 1961.com, October 4, 1961.
Ebert spent a semester as a master's student in the department of English there before attending the University of Cape Town on a Rotary fellowship for a year. Life Itself: A Memoir. New York: Grand Central Publishing, 2011. p.96. He returned from Cape Town to his graduate studies at Illinois for two more semesters and then, after being accepted as a PhD candidate at the University of Chicago, he prepared to move to Chicago. He needed a job to support himself while he worked on his doctorate and so applied to the Chicago Daily News, hoping that, as he had already sold freelance pieces to the Daily News, including an article on the death of writer Brendan Behan, he would be hired by editor Herman Kogan. Instead Kogan referred Ebert to the city editor at the Chicago Sun-Times, Jim Hoge, who hired Ebert as a reporter and feature writer at the Sun-Times in 1966. Life Itself: A Memoir. New York: Grand Central Publishing,  2011. p. 139. He attended doctoral classes at the University of Chicago while working as a general reporter at the Sun-Times for a year. After movie critic Eleanor Keane left the Sun-Times in April 1967, editor Robert Zonka gave the job to Ebert."Ebert named film critic." Chicago Sun-Times, April 5, 1967, p. 57. The load of graduate school and being a film critic proved too much, so Ebert left the University of Chicago to focus his energies on film criticism. Life Itself: A Memoir. New York: Grand Central Publishing,  2011. pp. 142–143.

Career

Ebert began his career as a film critic in 1967, writing for the Chicago Sun-Times. He also met film critic Pauline Kael for the first time at the New York Film Festival in 1967. After he sent her some of his columns, she told him they were "the best film criticism being done in American newspapers today". That same year, Ebert's first book, a history of the University of Illinois titled Illini Century: One Hundred Years of Campus Life, was published by the University's press. In 1969, his review of Night of the Living DeadEbert's review of Night of the Living Dead January 5, 1967 was published in Reader's Digest.
Ebert co-wrote the screenplay for the 1970 Russ Meyer film Beyond the Valley of the Dolls and sometimes joked about being responsible for the film, which was poorly received on its release but is now regarded as a cult classic. Ebert and Meyer also made Beneath the Valley of the Ultra-Vixens, Up!, and other films, and were involved in the ill-fated Sex Pistols movie Who Killed Bambi? (In April 2010, Ebert posted his screenplay of Who Killed Bambi? aka Anarchy in the UK on his blog.)Ebert, Roger. "'Who Killed Bambi?' – A screenplay", ''Chicago Sun-Times, April 25, 2010
From the 1970s on, Ebert worked for the University of Chicago as a guest lecturer, teaching a night class on film. For example, his fall 2005 class was on the work of the German director Rainer Werner Fassbinder.
In 1975, Ebert began co-hosting a weekly film review television show, Sneak Previews, which was locally produced by the Chicago public broadcasting station WTTW. Three years later, Gene Siskel became a co-host when the show was picked up by PBS for national distribution. The duo became famous for their "thumbs up/thumbs down" review summaries. Siskel and Ebert trademarked the phrase "Two Thumbs Up".
In 1982, they moved from PBS to launch a similar syndicated commercial television show named At The Movies With Gene Siskel & Roger Ebert. In 1986, they again moved the show to new ownership, creating Siskel & Ebert & The Movies through Buena Vista Television (part of the Walt Disney Company).
After Siskel's death in 1999, the producers retitled the show Roger Ebert & the Movies and used rotating co-hosts. In September 2000, Chicago Sun-Times columnist Richard Roeper became the permanent co-host and the show was renamed At The Movies With Ebert & Roeper (and other later titles).
Ebert ended his association with the Disney-owned At The Movies in July 2008, and reiterated this plan after Disney announced that the program's last episode would air in August 2010.
On January 31, 2009, Ebert was made an honorary life member of the Directors Guild of America."Directors Guild to honor Roger Ebert" Yahoo! News/Reuters/The Hollywood Reporter; December 17, 2008 His final television series, Ebert Presents: At The Movies, premiered on January 21, 2011, with Ebert contributing a review voiced by Bill Kurtis in a brief segment called "Roger's Office",Roger Ebert returns with new PBS review show, Caryn Rousseau, Associated Press (via Deseret News), January 19, 2011. Retrieved January 20, 2011. as well as featuring more traditional film reviews in the "At The Movies" format presented by Christy Lemire and Ignatiy Vishnevetsky.
His final review in the Chicago Sun-Times was for the film To the Wonder, which he gave 3.5 out of 4 stars. It was published on April 6, 2013.

Critical style and personal taste

Ebert described his critical approach to films as "relative, not absolute"; he reviewed a film for what he felt would be its prospective audience, yet always with at least some consideration as to its value as a whole. He awarded four stars to films of the highest quality, and generally a half star to those of the lowest, unless he considered the film to be "artistically inept" or "morally repugnant", in which case it received no stars.
 When you ask a friend if Hellboy is any good, you're not asking if it's any good compared to Mystic River, you're asking if it's any good compared to The Punisher. And my answer would be, on a scale of one to four, if Superman is four, then Hellboy is three and The Punisher is two. In the same way, if American Beauty gets four stars, then The United States of Leland clocks in at about two.Ebert's review of Shaolin Soccer (April 23, 2004) 
Ebert emphasized that his star ratings had little meaning if not considered in the context of the review itself. Occasionally (as in his review of Basic Instinct 2), Ebert's star rating may have seemed at odds with his written opinion. Ebert acknowledged such cases, stating, "I cannot recommend the movie, but ... why the hell can't I? Just because it's godawful? What kind of reason is that for staying away from a movie? Godawful and boring, that would be a reason". His main criticism was that films, citing Spider-Man 2 as an example, were constantly given four star ratings that they did not deserve. Retrieved January 31, 2008. In his review of The Manson Family, Ebert gave the film three stars for achieving what it set out to do, but admitted that did not count as a recommendation per se. He similarly gave the Adam Sandler-starring remake of The Longest Yard a positive rating of three stars, but in his review, which he wrote soon after attending the Cannes Film Festival, he recommended readers not see the film because they had access to more satisfying cinematic experiences.
Ebert reprinted his starred reviews in movie guides. In his appearances on The Howard Stern Show, he was frequently challenged to defend his ratings. Ebert stood by his opinions with one notable exception – when Stern pointed out that Ebert had given The Godfather Part II a three-star rating in 1974, but had subsequently given The Godfather Part III three and a half stars. Ebert later added The Godfather Part II to his "Great Movies" list in October 2008 stating that his original review has often been cited as proof of his "worthlessness" but he still had not changed his mind and would not change a word of his original review.
Ebert occasionally accused some films of having an unwholesome political agenda, and the word "fascist" accompanied more than one of Ebert's reviews of the law-and-order films of the 1970s such as Dirty Harry. He was wary of films passed off as art, but which he saw as lurid and sensational. He leveled this charge against such films as The Night Porter.
Ebert's reviews could clash with the overall reception of movies, as evidenced by his one-star review of the celebrated 1986 David Lynch film Blue Velvet ("marred by sophomoric satire and cheap shots ... in a way, Lynch's behavior is more sadistic than the Hopper character").
Ebert's reviews were also characterized by what has been called "dry wit". "Unlikely Fan Sends Roger Ebert Flowers" People; May 10, 2007
Ebert commented on films using his Catholic upbringing as a point of reference,Felsenthal, Carol (December 2005). 'A Life In The Movies'. Chicago Magazine. Kael quote, p. 1; agnosticism, p. 2; Catholic upbringing, p. 3. Retrieved April 6, 2013. and was critical of films he believed were grossly ignorant of or insulting to Catholicism, such as StigmataEbert's review of Stigmata (January 1, 1999) and Priest. He also gave favorable reviews of controversial films with themes or references to Jesus and Catholicism, including The Passion of the Christ, The Last Temptation of Christ, and to Kevin Smith's religious satire Dogma.
He often included personal anecdotes in his reviews when he considered them relevant. He occasionally wrote reviews in the forms of stories, poems, songs, He wrote many essays and articles exploring in depth the field of film criticism.
Ebert was also an advocate and supporter of Asian-American cinema, famously coming to the defense of the cast and crew of Justin Lin's Better Luck Tomorrow (2001) during a Sundance Film Festival screening when a white member of the audience asked how Asians could be portrayed in such a negative light and how a film so empty and amoral could be made for Asian-Americans and Americans. Ebert responded that "nobody would say such a thing to a bunch of white filmmakers: how could you do this to "your people"? ... Asian-American characters have the right to be whoever the hell they want to be. They do not have to represent 'their people'!""When Audiences Attack at Sundance". Film Threat. January 19, 2012. "About That Time Roger Ebert Fought a Heckler over Justin Lin's 'Better Luck Tomorrow'". Movies.Harris, Dana (April 4, 2013). "This Video Shows Exactly What We Lost With the Death of Roger Ebert". IndieWire. He was a supporter of the film after the incident at Sundance, and also supported a number of Asian-American films, having them also screen at his film festival (such as  Eric Byler's Charlotte Sometimes). "'Sometimes' a Great Notion'. Chicago Sun-Times. Archived at charlottesometimesthemovie. Retrieved April 4, 2013. Ebert was a fan of Asian-American filmmaker Wayne Wang. "Wayne Wang: Twenty-six years of good movies" @ rogerebert.
Ebert was accused by some horror movie fans of elitism in his dismissal of what he calls "Dead Teenager Movies". Ebert clarified that he did not disparage horror movies as a whole, but that he drew a distinction between films like Nosferatu and The Silence of the Lambs, which he regarded as "masterpieces", and films which he felt consisted of nothing more than groups of teenagers being killed off with the exception of one survivor to populate a sequel.
Ebert indicated that his favorite film was Citizen Kane, joking, "That's the official answer", although he preferred to emphasize it as "the most important" film. He insinuated that his real favorite film was La Dolce Vita.
Ebert compiled "best of the year" movie lists beginning in 1967, thereby helping provide an overview of his critical preferences. His top choices were:
Ebert revisited and sometimes revised his opinions. After ranking E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial third on his 1982 list, it was the only movie from that year to appear on his later "Best Films of the 1980s" list (where it also ranked third). He made similar revaluations of 1981's Raiders of the Lost Ark, and 1985's Ran. The Three Colors trilogy (Blue, White, and Red), and Pulp Fiction originally ranked second and third on Ebert's 1994 list; both were included on his "Best Films of the 1990s" list, but their order had reversed."Siskel and Ebert Top Ten Lists (1969–1998)". innermind. Retrieved November 11, 2011.
Ebert was an admirer of director Werner Herzog, whom he supported through many years when Herzog's popularity had declined. He conducted an onstage public "conversation" with Herzog at the Telluride Film Festival in 2004, after a screening of Herzog's film Invincible at the Ebert's Overlooked Film Festival. Herzog dedicated his 2008 film Encounters at the End of the World to Ebert, and Ebert responded with a heartfelt public letter of gratitude.
In 2005, Ebert opined that video games are not art, and are inferior to media created through authorial control, such as film and literature, stating, "video games can be elegant, subtle, sophisticated, challenging and visually wonderful", but "the nature of the medium prevents it from moving beyond craftsmanship to the stature of art". "Why did the chicken cross the genders?" rogerebert. This resulted in negative reaction from video game enthusiasts, Ebert later defended his position in April 2010, saying, "No video gamer now living will survive long enough to experience the medium as an art form". "Video games can never be art". Roger Ebert's Journal. He also stated that he had never found a video game "worthy of (his) time", and thus had never played one. "Why Ebert is Wrong: A Defense of Games As Art". Cracked.
In a July 1, 2010, blog entry, Ebert maintained his position that video games can never be art in principle, but conceded that he should not have expressed this skepticism without being more familiar with the actual experience of playing them. He reflected on the reaction to his blog entry, gamers' attempts to recommend to him games such as Shadow of the Colossus, and his reluctance to play games due to his lack of interest in the medium. Ebert did say that he enjoyed playing Cosmology of Kyoto. Roger Ebert. "Okay, kids, play on my lawn". rogerebert.

Views on the film industry

Ebert was an outspoken opponent of the Motion Picture Association of America film rating system, repeatedly criticizing its decisions regarding which movies are suitable for children. An example of this was his review of The Exorcist, where he criticized the 'R' rating and suggested an 'X' rating instead. He wrote several articles making a case for the X rating to be replaced with a new 'A' rating, which would allow for serious, well-made films with adults-only content to avoid the pornographic stigma that the X brought.
He also frequently lamented that cinemas outside major cities are "booked by computer from Hollywood with no regard for local tastes", making high-quality independent and foreign films virtually unavailable to most American moviegoers. "They got it right". Chicago Sun-Times.
Ebert was a strong advocate for Maxivision 48, in which the movie projector runs at 48 frames per second, as compared to the usual 24 frames per second. He was opposed to the practice whereby theatres lower the intensity of their projector bulbs in order to extend the life of the bulb, arguing that this has little effect other than to make the film harder to see.

Film and TV appearances

In 1995, Ebert, along with colleague Gene Siskel, guest-starred on an episode of the animated TV series The Critic. In the episode, Siskel and Ebert split and each wants Jay as his new partner. The episode is a parody of the film Sleepless in Seattle.TV.
He also made an appearance as himself in a 1997 episode of the television series Early Edition, which took place in Chicago. In the episode, Ebert consoles a young boy who is depressed after he sees a character called Bosco the Bunny die in a movie.
In 2003, Ebert had a cameo appearance in the film Abby Singer, in which he recited the white parasol monologue from Citizen Kane. Roger Ebert founded his own film festival, Ebertfest, in his home town of Champaign, Illinois, and was also a regular fixture at the Hawaii International Film Festival. On May 4, 2010, Ebert was announced by the International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences as the Webby Person of the Year, having taken to the Internet following his battle with cancer. On October 22, 2010, Ebert appeared on camera with Robert Osborne on the Turner Classic Movies network during the network's "The Essentials" series. Ebert chose the film Sweet Smell of Success to be shown.
During the past decade, on the day of the Academy Award ceremony, Ebert repeatedly appeared with Roeper on the live pre-awards show, An Evening at the Academy Awards: The Arrivals. This aired for over a decade, usually prior to the awards ceremony show, which also featured red carpet interviews and fashion commentary. They also used to appear on the post-awards show entitled An Evening at the Academy Awards: The Winners, produced and aired by the ABC-owned KABC-TV in Los Angeles.
Ebert was one of the principal critics featured in Gerald Peary's 2009 documentary film For the Love of Movies: The Story of American Film Criticism. He is shown discussing the dynamics of appearing with Gene Siskel on the 1970s show Coming to a Theatre Near You, which was the predecessor of Sneak Previews on Chicago PBS station WTTW. He also expressed his approval of the proliferation of young people writing film reviews today on the Internet. TCM Movie Database. Retrieved December 16, 2012.
Ebert provided DVD audio commentaries for several films, including Citizen Kane, Casablanca, Dark City, Floating Weeds, Crumb, and Beyond the Valley of the Dolls (for which Ebert also wrote the screenplay, based on a story that he co-wrote with Russ Meyer). Ebert was also interviewed by Central Park Media for an extra feature on the DVD release of the anime film Grave of the Fireflies. Ebert appeared as a guest star multiple times on Sesame Street. Before his death, it was announced that a bio-documentary called Life Itself based on Ebert was in production.
Though not making a personal appearance, an honorary effigy of Ebert co-starred in the 1998 reimagining version of Godzilla, played by actor Michael Lerner as New York City Mayor Ebert. The trademark image of the glasses, build and hair make the resemblance almost uncanny. In the final action scenes of the movie, as the heroes make their escape in a taxi, the cab displays a campaign ad on top portraying a photo of the mayor with a 'thumbs up' alongside the phrase "Re-elect Mayor Ebert".

Personal life

At age 50, Ebert married trial attorney Charlie "Chaz" Hammelsmith (formerly Chaz Hammel-Smith) in 1992.A Life In The Movies, Carol Felsenthal, Chicago Magazine December 2005 Mrs. Ebert's name is noted on Page 3. Chaz Ebert is now vice president of the Ebert Company and has emceed Ebertfest. "Roger Ebert: The Essential Man". Esquire
Ebert was a recovering alcoholic, having quit drinking in 1979. He was a member of Alcoholics Anonymous and had written some blog entries on the subject. He was also good friends with film historian and critic Leonard Maltin and considered the book Leonard Maltin's Movie and Video Guide to be the standard of film guide books.
A supporter of the Democratic Party,
Ebert was critical of intelligent design creationism, and stated that people who believe in either creationism or New Age beliefs such as crystal healing or astrology are not qualified to be President. Ebert also expressed disbelief in pseudoscientific or supernatural claims in general, calling them "woo-woo". "A Dangerous Method". rogerebert. December 14, 2011
Discussing his beliefs, in 2009 Ebert wrote that he did not "want to provide a category for people to apply to him" because he "would not want his convictions reduced to a word", and stated, "I have never said, although readers have freely informed me I am an atheist, an agnostic, or at the very least a secular humanist – which I am". In the same blog entry, he also said "I am not a believer, not an atheist, not an agnostic. I am still awake at night, asking how? I am more content with the question than I would be with an answer."Caro, Mark (April 9, 2013) Roger Ebert's funeral: 'He had a heart big enough to love all' Chicago Tribune. Retrieved April 9, 2013. In March 2013, he wrote that he was pro-life: "My choice is to not support abortion, except in cases of a clear-cut choice between the lives of the mother and child. A child conceived through incest or rape is innocent and deserves the right to be born." He also stated: "I consider myself Catholic, lock, stock and barrel, with this technical loophole: I cannot believe in God. I refuse to call myself an atheist however, because that indicates too great a certainty about the unknowable."Ebert, Roger (March 1, 2013) How I am a Roman Catholic Roger Ebert's Journal. Retrieved April 11, 2013.
On April 25, 2011, he achieved one of his long-time goals: winning one of the weekly caption contests in The New Yorker after more than 100 attempts.Roger Ebert Wins the Cartoon Caption Contest, Robert Mankoff, The New Yorker, April 25, 2011

Health

In early 2002, Ebert was diagnosed with papillary thyroid cancer which was successfully removed in February. In 2003, he underwent surgery for cancer in his salivary gland, which was followed up by radiation treatment. He was again afflicted with cancer in 2006. In June of that year, he had surgery to remove cancerous tissue near his right jaw.Ebert's words in his review of Sicko, June 29, 2007 He was confined to bed rest and was unable to speak, eat, or drink for a period of time, necessitating the use of a feeding tube. "Nil by mouth". rogerebert. Chicago Sun-Times. The complications kept Ebert off the air for an extended period of time.
Ebert made his first public appearance since mid-2006 at Ebertfest on April 25, 2007. He was unable to speak, instead communicating through his wife.
Ebert underwent further surgery in January 2008 to hopefully restore his voice and address the complications from his previous surgeries. By 2011, Ebert was using a prosthetic chin to hide some of the damage done by his many chin, mouth, and throat surgeries. "Leading with my chin", Roger Ebert's Journal.
In December 2012, Ebert was hospitalized with a fractured hip. He remarked, "I'll be able at last to do what I've always fantasized about doing: reviewing only the movies I want to review."

Death

Three years before his death, Ebert wrote:
Two days before his death, Ebert ended his final blog post by saying, "So on this day of reflection I say again, thank you for going on this journey with me. I'll see you at the movies." On April 4, 2013, Ebert died at the age of 70 at his home in Chicago, ending his 11-year battle with cancer.
His death prompted wide reaction from celebrities both in and out of the entertainment industry. U.S. President Barack Obama wrote, "Roger was the movies ... could capture the unique power of the movies to take us somewhere magical ... The movies won't be the same without Roger"." Oprah Winfrey called Ebert's death the "end of an era", as did Steven Spielberg, who also said that Ebert's "reviews went far deeper than simply thumbs up or thumbs down. He wrote with passion through a real knowledge of film and film history, and in doing so, helped many movies find their audiences... he put television criticism on the map".
On April 7, 2013, a private memorial vigil with an open casket was held at the chapel of Graceland Cemetery on the city's north side.  The funeral was set for the following day, April 8, 2013.
In September 2013, organizers in Champaign, Illinois announced plans to raise $125,000 to build a life-size bronze statue of Ebert in the town, to be unveiled in front of the Virginia Theatre at Ebertfest in 2014.  The composition was selected by Chaz Ebert and depicts Ebert sitting in the middle of three theater seats giving a "thumbs up".
The 2013 Toronto International Film Festival opened with a video tribute of Roger Ebert at the Roy Thompson Hall during the world premiere of the WikiLeaks based film The Fifth Estate. Ebert had been an avid supporter of the festival since its early days. His wife Chaz Ebert was in attendance to accept a plaque on Roger's behalf.

Funeral

Hundreds attended the April 8, 2013 funeral Mass held at Chicago's Holy Name Cathedral, where Ebert was celebrated as a film critic, newspaperman, advocate for social justice, and husband. Father Michael Pfleger concluded the service with: "the balconies of heaven are filled with angels singing Thumbs Up."
A 2-hour-and-45-minute public tribute, entitled Roger Ebert: A Celebration of Life, was held at 7 p.m. on Thursday, April 11, 2013 at the Chicago Theater. It featured in-person remembrances, video testimonials, video and film clips, gospel choirs, and was, according to the Chicago Tribune's Mark Caro, "a laughter- and sorrow-filled send-off from the entertainment and media worlds". At the 86th Academy Awards ceremony, Ebert was included in the In Memoriam montage, a rare honor for a film critic.
At the April 2014 Ebertfest, the Pulitzer Prize-winner will be honored with a life size bronze statue outside the Virginia Theatre in Champaign, IL. A fan of Ebert, Scott Anderson, Jr. and the Public Art League, have commissioned the project and donations are being collected for The Roger Ebert Film Center at the University of Illinois.

Bibliography

Each year from 1999 to 2013, except in 2008, Ebert published Roger Ebert's Movie Yearbook, a collection of all of his movie reviews from the previous two and a half years (for example, the 2011 edition, ISBN 978-0-7407-9769-9, covers January 2008 – July 2010), as well as essays and other writings. He has also written the following books:



Notes






