[[Cammy Bell]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 births, Living people, Sportspeople from Dumfries, Scottish footballers, Scotland international footballers, Association football goalkeepers, Kilmarnock F.C. players, Montrose F.C. players, Queen of the South F.C. players, Rangers F.C. players, Scottish Premier League players, Scottish Football League players, Scottish Professional Football League players

Cameron "Cammy" Bell (born 18 September 1986) is a Scottish professional football player. Bell is a goalkeeper and currently plays for Scottish League One club Rangers. He has represented Scotland once, in 2010.

Club career

Early years

Bell was born in Dumfries and was on the books of local club Queen of the South as a youngster and was also part of the youth set up at Annan Athletic. Bell moved from Queens to Kilmarnock in 2002.

Montrose and Queen of the South loans

In the 2006–07 season Bell had a spell on loan at Montrose, getting a taste of first team football.
In July 2008, Bell was loaned out by Kilmarnock to his home town club Queen of the South,

Break through at Kilmarnock

Bell made his debut for the club, on the final game of the season, in a 2-1 win over Motherwell. After the season, He signed a new one-year contract with the club, as his contract was set to expire this summer. At the end of the 2009-10 season, because he signed a new contract last season, his contract was extended automatically, due to making a certain number of starts, which he did.
Bell remained first pick for the start of the 2010–11 season with his performances attracting attention from Scotland manager Craig Levein. In November 2010, newly manager Mixu Paatelainen says he started negotiations a new contract for Bell.
At the end of the season, many clubs like St. Mirren
The next season, Bell played the first ten games before suffering an elbow injury in mid-October, which left him out for about a month during the international campaign with Scotland.
Early in the 2012–13 season, Bell suffered a wrist injury which will keep him out for ten weeks during a 2-1 loss against Motherwell. Following Antonio Reguero pre-contract signing for Kilmarnock, confirming that Bell will leave Kilmarnock.
In a match against Hibernian on 5 May 2013, which the supporter died during the match, causing the match to be abandoned, Bell says:

Rangers

On 7 April 2013, Bell signed a pre-contract with Rangers.
In January 2014, Manager Ally McCoist says he doesn't have regrets signing players in the summer, as Bell is among them.

=2013-14 season=

Bell made his Rangers debut on 31 August 2013, against East Fife playing as a trialist as the club's new signings couldn't be registered until 1 September 2013, due to their transfer embargo. Bell has since established himself as a first choice goalkeeper. Bell played all 120 minutes of the 2014 Ramsdens Cup Final defeat to Raith Rovers , picking up a runners up medal for Rangers first ever appearance in the Ramsdens Cup Final.  

Career statistics



International

International career

Bell was first called up to the senior Scotland squad on 4 October 2010 for the European Championship qualifiers against Czech Republic and Spain after Matt Gilks dropped out through injury. He made his Scotland debut, as a substitute replacing Craig Gordon, against Faroe Islands on 16 November 2010 in a friendly at Pittodrie Stadium."Doonhamer internationalists" www.com 25 May 2011 He injured his arm during October 2011 in Spain after he saved from a David Goodwillie shot in training and later complained about pain. A scan showed he had damaged tendons. Bell was again called up to the Scotland squad for a friendly against Luxenbourg in November 2012, a just reward for his excellent performances with Kilmarnock.

Personal Life

In 2014, Bell became a first time father after his partner gave birth to a baby girl. As a result of becoming a father, Bell missed a match against Forfar Athletic.

Honours

Club

Personal awards






