[[Finnish phonology]]

CATEGORIES: Finnish language, Language phonologies

Unless otherwise noted, statements in this article refer to Standard Finnish, which is based on the dialect spoken in Häme Province in central south Finland. Standard Finnish is used by professional speakers, such as the reporters and the news presenters on television.

Vowels

Phonetically, the phoneme ).
However, since no language is known to phonemically distinguish all three of these levels of mouth opening, the International Phonetic Association (IPA) provides no separate symbols for mid vowel phones. If precision in phonetic transcription is desired, the mid front phones can be indicated by using the lowering diacritic with the symbols for close-mid front vowels, as follows: .
Finnish makes phonemic contrasts between long and short vowels, even in unstressed syllables, though long close-mid vowels  are more common in unstressed syllables.

Diphthongs

The table below lists the conventionally recognized diphthongs in Finnish. In speech (i.e. phonetically speaking) a diphthong does not sound like a sequence of two different vowels; instead, the sound of the first vowel gradually glides into the sound of the second one with full vocalization lasting through the whole sound. That is to say, the two portions of the diphthong are not broken by a pause or stress pattern. In Finnish, diphthongs are considered phonemic units, contrasting with "long vowels" and with short vowels in Finnish. Phonologically, however, Finnish diphthongs usually are analyzed as sequences (this in contrast to languages like English, where the diphthongs are best analyzed as independent phonemes (see International Phonetic Alphabet for English.)
Diphthongization usually occurs only in initial syllables in Finnish, (with those vowels belonging to separate syllables).
The diphthongs .
Opening diphthongs are in standard Finnish only found in root-initial syllables like in words tietää 'to know', takapyörä 'rear wheel' (from taka- 'back, rear' + pyörä 'wheel'; the latter part is secondarily stressed) or luo 'towards'. This might make them easier to pronounce as true opening diphthongs . Since that time new long mid vowels have come to the language from various sources.
Among the phonological processes operating in Finnish dialects are diphthongization and diphthong reduction. For example, Savo Finnish has the phonemic contrast of .

Vowel harmony

Finnish, like many other Uralic languages, has the phenomenon called vowel harmony, which restricts the cooccurrence in a word of vowels belonging to different articulatory subgroups. Vowels within a word "harmonize" to be either all front or all back. In particular, no native noncompound word can contain vowels from the group {a, o, u} together with vowels from the group {ä, ö, y}. Vowel harmony affects inflectional suffixes and derivational suffixes, which have two forms, one for use with back vowels, and the other with front vowels. Compare e.g., the following pair of abstract nouns: hallit'us'' 'government' (from ''hallita'' "to reign") versus ''tervey's 'health' (from terve "healthy").
There are exceptions to the constraint of vowel harmony. For one, in Finnish there are two front vowels that lack back counterparts: . In the case of compound words, the choice between back and front suffix alternants is determined by the immediately preceding element of the compound; e.g., 'in a wall clock' is seinäkelloss'a, not ''seinäkelloss'''ä.
New loan words may exhibit vowel disharmony; for example, olympialaiset ('Olympic games') and sekundäärinen ('secondary') have both front and back vowels. In standard Finnish, these words are pronounced as they are spelled, but many speakers apply vowel harmony – olumpialaiset, and sekundaarinen or sekyndäärinen.

Consonants

 as in German, thus 'Zimbabwe' /tsimpapʋe/, given that Finnish lacks also 'w' and the /b/–/p/ contrast is inconsistently followed.
With the phoneme .

Voiced plosives

Traditionally,  'on a basket'.
The status of  (see Consonant gradation below). 
Historically, this sound was a fricative,  can now be heard in all parts of the country, at least in loanwords and in formal speech.

Consonant gradation

"Consonant gradation" is the term used for a set of alternations which pervade the language, between a "strong grade" and a "weak grade". These alternations are always conditioned by both phonology and morphosyntax. The phonological factor which triggers the weak grade is the syllable structure of closed syllable. However, there are contexts where weak grade fails to occur in a closed syllable, and there are contexts where the weak grade occurs in an open syllable. Morphosyntactically, the weak grade occurs in nominals (nouns, pronouns, adjectives) usually only before case suffixes, and in verbs usually only before person agreement suffixes.
The "strong grade" is usually the phonologically basic form. Usually, the strong grade occurs in an open syllable (one ending in a vowel) and the weak grade occurs in a closed syllable (one ending in a consonant). The consonants subject to this change are the plosives {p, t, k} when preceded by a vowel or a sonorant ({m, n, l, r}). Consonant gradation appears as degemination in case of the geminates and as a change to an homorganic consonant for single plosives.
The following is a partial list of strong ~ weak correspondences. All the examples involve the nominative singular versus nominative plural. 
Historical phonological changes occasionally complicate the picture, creating exceptions to the general correspondence of strong grade : open syllable :: weak grade : closed syllable.  
Because one of the triggers for consonant gradation is syllable structure, some exceptions in consonant gradation can be traced to later sound changes which alter the syllable structure of words. One such example is found in the illative singular of nouns, e.g. kukka 'flower' ~ kukkaan 'flower. If following the basic rule that a closed syllable causes the deletion of a syllable initial p, t, or k, then the conclusion would be ungrammatical: ˣkukaan. However, due to a historical development in which -h- was deleted in some unstressed medial positions, this particular instance does not result in consonant gradation (kukka+han ~ kukkaan). Forms such as kukkahan, without the deletion of the 'h', are still found in the southern Pohjanmaa dialect and occasionally in poetry.
As most long vowels in non-initial syllables result from loss of former intervening vowels, it can be stated as a phonological rule that the weak grade rarely occurs before a long vowel. Other examples include strong grade verb forms like tapaan (from *tapaðan). However, the present tense passive ending -taan shows a weak grade compared to the strong grade of the other passive forms such as the past (-ttiin) and conditional (-ttaisiin) passive. As the conditional ending is clearly segmented into three parts -tta-isi-in, where -isi- is the conditional mood suffix, it could be argued that the present tense simply lacks any infix at all. By this reasoning, the suffix is underlyingly *-tta-an, which consists of a long vowel with no lost consonant, so that the initial consonant is weakened.
Personal first names and recent loans do not gradate in quality in most cases (e.g. Hilta ~ Hiltan, wiki ~ wikin); though do sometimes in quantity (e.g. Pekka ~ Pekan). Surnames, however, do. Acronyms do not gradate if they include the vowel (NaPa ~ NaPan, cf. common word napa ~ navan), but gradate if end in a consonant (PIK ).

Other consonant alternations

Many of the remaining "irregular" patterns of Finnish noun and verb inflection are explained by a change of a historical  itself does not result from consonant gradation but a phenomenon known as assibilation. However, words having this particular alternation are still subject to consonant gradation because these words do not incorporate this change in all inflectional stems. (Finnish words may have two, and sometimes three stems.) Thus, a word such as vesi 'water (sg. nom.)' may produce veden (sg. gen.) : vetenä (sg. ess.) : vesissä (pl. iness.); because the change from t to s has only occurred in front of i. When i has changed to another vowel, words like vesi inflect just like other nouns with a single t alternating with the consonant gradated d.
This pattern has, however, been reverted in some cases, e.g. kieltää ~ kielsi ('deny') but säätää ~ sääti ('adjust'), although both alternate forms (kielti and sääsi) are found. Apparently this was caused by word pairs such as noutaa ~ nouti ('bring') and nousta ~ nousi ('rise'), which were felt important enough to keep them contrastive.
Assibilation occurred prior to the change of the original consonans cluster , which can be seen in the inflection of the numerals yksi and kaksi: yhden, kahden.
In many recent loanwords, there is vacillation between representing an original voiceless consonant as single or geminate: this is the case for example kalsium (~ kalssium) and kantarelli (~ kanttarelli). The orthography generally favors the single form, if it exists. (More completely assimilated loans such as farssi, minuutti, ooppera generally have settled on geminates.)

Length

All phonemes (including , see below) can occur doubled phonemically as a phonetic increase in length. Consonant doubling always occurs at the boundary of a syllable in accordance with the rules of Finnish syllable structure.
Some example sets of words:
A double ), this distinction is not phonemic, and is not indicated in spelling.
In dialects or in colloquial Finnish,  can have distinctive length, especially due to final consonant mutation, e.g. sevverran (sen verran), kuvvoo (kuvaa), teijjän (teidän).

Phonotactics

The phonemic template of a syllable in Finnish is (O)(L)V(V)(L)(O) with O being an obstruent and L a liquid consonant. A syllable containing two identical vowels is realized as a long vowel, a syllable containing two different vowels as a diphthong. A final consonant of a Finnish word, though not a syllable, must be a coronal one.
Originally Finnish syllables could not start with two consonants but many loans containing these have added this to the inventory. This is observable in older loans such as ranska 
Consonant phonotactics

Word-final Consonants
Word-Initial Consonants
Word-Initial Consonant Clusters
Word-Final Consonant Clusters
Word-Medial Consonant Clusters

Vowel phonotactics

Word-final and word-initial vowels
Vowel sequences

Stress

Like Hungarian and Icelandic, Finnish always places the primary stress on the first syllable of a word. Secondary stress normally falls on odd syllables. Contrary to primary stress, Finnish secondary stress is quantity sensitive. Thus, if secondary stress would fall on a light (CV.) syllable, with a heavy (CVV. or CVC.) syllable following, then the secondary stress is moved one syllable to the right, and the preceding foot (syllable group) will contain three syllables. Thus, omenanani "as my apple" contains light syllables only, and has primary stress on the first syllable and secondary on the third, as expected. In omenanamme "as our apple", on the other hand, the third syllable (na) is light and the fourth heavy (nam), thus secondary stress falls on the fourth syllable. Certain Finnish dialects also have quantitiave-sensitive main stress pattern, but instead of moving the initial stress, they geminate the consonant, so that e.g. light-heavy CV. E.g. the partitive form of "fish" is pronounced kalaa in the quantity-insensitive dialects but kallaa in the quantity-sensitive ones (cf. also the examples under the "Length" section).
Secondary stress falls on the first syllable on non-initial parts of compounds, for example the compound puunaama, meaning "wooden face" (from puu "tree" and naama "face"), is pronounced .

Timing

Finnish is not really isochronic at any level. For example, huutelu "shouting" and huuhtelu "flushing" are distinct words, where the initial syllables huu- and huuh- are of different length. Additionally, acoustic measurements show that the first syllable of a word is (physically) longer than other syllables, in addition to its phonemic length (long or short). Thus, there are four distinct phonetic lengths.

Sandhi

Finnish sandhi is extremely frequent, appearing between many words and morphemes, in formal standard language and in everyday spoken language. In most registers, it is never written down; only dialectal transcriptions preserve it, the rest settling for a morphemic notation. There are two processes. The first is simple assimilation with respect to place of articulation (e.g. np > mp). The second is predictive gemination of initial consonants on morpheme boundaries.
Simple phonetic incomplete assimilations include:
Gemination of a morpheme-initial consonant occurs when the morpheme preceding it ends in a vowel and belongs to one of certain morphological classes:
The gemination can occur between morphemes of a single word as in  without a glottal stop.
These rules are generally valid for the standard language, although many Southwestern dialects, for instance, do not recognise the phenomenon at all. Even in the standard language there is idiolectal variation (disagreement between different speakers); e.g., whether kolme 'three' should cause a gemination of the following initial consonant or not:  'three crows'. Both forms occur and neither one of them is standardised, since in any case it does not affect writing. In some dictionaries compiled for foreigners or linguists, however, the tendency of geminating the following consonant is marked by a superscript x as in perhex.
Historically, morpheme-boundary gemination is the result of regressive assimilation. The preceding word originally ended in .
In many Finnish dialects, including that of Helsinki, the gemination at morpheme boundaries has become more widespread due to the loss of additional final consonants, which appear only as gemination of the following consonant, cf. French liaison. For example, the standard word for 'now' nyt has lost its t and become ny in Helsinki speech. However,  (although the latter would be permissible in the dialect of Turku).
Similar remnants of a lost word final  'my own'.



Notes



|last=Hellstrom
|first=Robert W. 
|title=Finglish
|journal=American Speech
|volume=51
|issue=1/2
|year=1976
|pages=85–93
|doi=10.2307/455358
|jstor=455358
}}
|last=Iivonen
|first=Antti
|last2=Harnud
|first2=Huhe
|year=2005
|title=Acoustical comparison of the monophthong systems in Finnish, Mongolian and Udmurt
|journal=Journal of the International Phonetic Association
|volume=35
|issue=1
|pages=59–71
|doi=10.1017/S002510030500191X
}}
|last=van der Hulst
|first=Harry
|last2=van de Weijer
|first2=Jeroen
|year=1995
|chapter=Vowel Harmony
|title=The Handbook of Phonological Theory
|editor-last=Goldsmith
|editor-first=John A.
|series=Blackwell Handbooks in Linguistics
|publisher=Blackwell Publishers
|pages=495–534
}}
|last3=Ylitalo
|first3=Riikka
|last2=Toivanen
|first2=Juhani
|last1=Suomi
|first1=Kari
|year=2008
|title=Finnish sound structure
|isbn=978-951-42-8983-5
|url=
}}

