[[Kevin and Bean]]

CATEGORIES: American variety radio programs, 1989 radio programme debuts

Kevin and Bean is the morning show on KROQ-FM, an alternative rock-format radio station in Los Angeles, California. It is hosted by Kevin Ryder and Gene "Bean" Baxter.  The show has been on the air since 1990 and intersperses music and news with comedy bits, celebrity interviews, listener call-ins, and live music performances.

Format

Opening and listener call-in

Each episode opens with an audio montage (usually created by Baxter
Recently though the segment of What It Do Nephew? has been taken away from the show.

Hourly segments and The Showbiz Beat

Music from the standard lineup of Kevin and Bean's flagship station, KROQ, is played regularly during the program. Creative control over the choice of music and how many songs are played per hour has been a source of conflict between the hosts and station management over the years.
Because of the show's position as a morning drive-time program, traffic and news segments are also interspersed between the  other material. Newscaster Boyd Britton, known as "Doc on the Roq", provides a brief hourly summary of current events, while Los Angeles-area traffic updates are provided by metro traffic reporter and Kevin and Bean co-host Lisa May.
"The Showbiz Beat" is an hourly entertainment-news report featuring Ryder and Baxter's actor co-host Ralph Garman and is one of the program's longest-running segments. Before the top of every hour, Garman highlights stories from pop culture and media and, with input from his colleagues, frequently mocks perceived hypocrisies and absurdities of public figures and the entertainment industry. The segment always concludes with an announcement of the day's birthdays for celebrities of varying degrees of fame.

Recurring segments

A large portion of the show's material is made up of segments that recur periodically. Many of these are based on listener participation, and involve the hosts taking calls on an interesting discussion topic or for a guest, or involve games and contests that have been created around the station's promotional giveaways. Ryder and Baxter will also occasionally read emails sent to them, and play messages from the show's voice mail service, known as the "Afro Line." Other segments focus on the hosts and their personalities and quirks, like "Thanks for That Info, Bean", which pokes fun at Baxter's intense interest in seemingly trivial topics, and "A Moment with...", where a humorous audio clip of a statement made on-air by a host is replayed. "Would You Like to Take That Back?" is another feature during which the hosts give each other the option of "taking back" an unsuccessful or poorly delivered joke or pun.
Several segments feature regular guests, including weekly interviews with TMZ.com's Harvey Levin,
Some of the most popular (and controversial) pieces have involved vocal impressions and celebrity impersonations, which are typically voiced by Ralph Garman and former Kevin and Bean assistant producer and Loveline co-host "Psycho" Mike Catherwood. Often, Ryder and Baxter will conduct fake interviews with celebrities like Spencer Pratt, Gene Simmons, Sean Connery, and Kevin Federline, while on other occasions impressions might involve a relatively unknown person in a news story or current event. Garman and Catherwood have also created several alter-egos, including Loquecia, an African-American woman who reviews and ridicules reality television shows, and Rudy, a stereotypical heavily accented cholo with a penchant for marijuana use.

Celebrity interviews

In addition to faux interviews, numerous real celebrities and sports figures have appeared on the show over the years. Regular visitors to the show include Kevin Smith, Kathy Griffin, Petros Papadakis, Joe Rogan, and Olivia Munn. Other notable guests include Seth MacFarlane, Andrew Siciliano, Joel McHale, Bill Simmons, Adam Sessler, Mike Rowe, Landon Donovan, Alex Borstein, Tracy Morgan, Jay-Z, Snoop Dogg, Travis Pastrana, Russell Martin, Will Ferrell, David Alan Grier, Jay Mohr and more.

Closing segments

While the program generally ends with a short preview of the next show, on Fridays the show closes (and opens) with a cover of "Don't Bogart Me" by Robert Bradley's Blackwater Surprise (a song first performed by the band Fraternity of Man), as performed by the hosts.

History

Kevin and Bean debuted on KROQ on December 31, 1989, when they hosted the annual countdown of the year's best songs. On June 13, 1990, the show aired a segment called "Confess Your Crime", which included a bogus phone call from fellow DJ Doug "The Slug" Roberts (who was then working at KZZP) as an anonymous listener claiming to have committed murder. The parents of a missing woman believed the fictional caller to be responsible for their daughter's death leading to an investigation by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department and coverage in an episode of Unsolved Mysteries. When the truth was revealed, the station was billed for the costs of the investigation by the LASD, and sued by the distraught parents.  KROQ suspended Kevin and Bean for five days without pay, directed each of them to perform 149 hours of community service, and forced them to pay the Sheriff's bill out of their pockets.  The event also became the inspiration behind the 1996 movie Power 98 starring Eric Roberts.
In March 2003, the show caused international controversy when Ralph made a prank phone call to the office of French president Jacques Chirac while posing as Jerry Lewis.  All were surprised when Chirac picked up the phone and began talking to "Jerry."  Lewis' lawyers were quick to threaten with lawsuits and the bit has rarely been spoken of since.  Though they appear to be under orders not to speak of the matter, Kevin and Bean have made oblique suggestions that Lewis "blackmailed" Kevin and Bean into making a contribution to the Muscular Dystrophy Association, the beneficiary of Lewis' annual Labor Day telethon.
In January 2004, a Los Angeles man filed a breach of contract suit against the station and Kevin and Bean saying he was cheated out of a free SUV.  Though Kevin and Bean do not address specific lawsuits on the air, they often refer to being frequently sued, usually in the context of people not understanding or appreciating their attempts at humor.
In August 2007, a listener e-mailed a complaint to Kevin and Bean as well as put an article in The Advocate Magazine (Gay & Lesbian Magazine). The complaint was about a parody that Psycho Mike of the Kevin and Bean show did titled "Lean Like a Homo", and was made to make fun of Down's "Lean like a Cholo".
On May 8, 2009 – Westwood One announced that it will begin airing The Kevin & Bean Show on radio stations nationwide on May 11, 2009.
On September 15, 2011 Kevin and Bean won the NAB Marconi Radio Award for "Major Market Personality of the Year".

Personalities

Personality quirks abound on the show, with Kevin and especially Bean, and their numerous other personalities.

Kevin

Kevin has odd interests and characteristics that are mentioned on the show from time to time:

Bean

Bean has odd and exotic interests and knowledge of arcane subject matter.  In particular, he:

Other cast members and key staff

Also on the show are:

Frequent Special Guests

Recurring Themes, Characters, & Running Jokes

Noted former cast members

The show has been the stepping stone for celebrities such as:
Other personalities no longer with the show include:

Television & Film

Over the years, Kevin and Bean have made various forays into other media:

Christmas Compilation CDs

Over the years Kevin and Bean have released numerous Christmas related compilation CDs. The compilations consist of skits, bands covering Christmas related songs, and various KROQ personalities. These compilations are usually only available for a short period of time and after that are out of print.

Availability

Listeners in remote areas, or even in particular buildings, often have a difficult time getting clear reception of the show.  As a result, listeners have complained for years that Kevin and Bean were not on the Internet. However, on February 6, 2006, KROQ started streaming online. (KROQ also did not have a web site for many years after the Internet became established.)
Kevin and Bean were also broadcast in Fresno, California for several years, but that station began broadcasting the Adam Carolla Show when it started in January 2006.
On January 3, 2011, the Kevin and Bean show began airing on San Francisco's legendary KITS 105.3 FM (Live 105).  In September 2011, after only eight months, KITS switched to an all music format, dropping the Kevin and Bean show.
The show runs from 5:30 to 10:00 Pacific time on weekday mornings. The early hour will often repeat a comedy segment from the day before; segments from early in the show are often replayed a second time later in the show.
On November 10, 2008, the Kevin and Bean Show started an afternoon segment, 'Cinco De La Tarde', (Spanish for Five in the afternoon) weekdays from 5:00 - 6:00 PM. As of August 3, 2009, this segment has been discontinued and the morning show has been restored to its original 10:00 AM end time. A Best of Kevin and Bean show called "Same Shit, Different Day" was added on Saturday mornings airing from 7:00-10:00 AM.
Beginning  May 11, 2009, Kevin and Bean started syndicating on KEDJ, 103.9 The Edge in Phoenix, Arizona,
As of September 8, 2009, Kevin and Bean are no longer on KEDJ in Phoenix due a change in format at that station emphasizing music.
Starting September 8, 2009, Kevin and Bean began airing in mornings on newly launched Alternative music station KQLZ V99.1 in Boise, Idaho.
Beginning September 13, 2010, Kevin and Bean began airing in mornings on Classic Rock: The Heat 99.5, KMRJ, in Palm Springs, CA.
Kevin and Bean is also heard in portions of Iowa and Illinois in the afternoon on KCJJ-AM 1630, which is located in Iowa City, Iowa
The Kevin and Bean Show is available as a podcast on iTunes.






