[[Augustus Pitt Rivers]]

CATEGORIES: People associated with the Pitt Rivers Museum, English archaeologists, Fellows of the Royal Society, Fellows of the Ethnological Society of London, Museum founders, British collectors, 1827 births, 1900 deaths, People from Wetherby, Graduates of the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, British Army personnel of the Crimean War, Grenadier Guards officers, British Army generals, Fellows of the Society of Antiquaries of London, High Sheriffs of Dorset

Augustus Henry Lane-Fox Pitt Rivers (14 April 1827 – 4 May 1900) was an English army officer, ethnologist, and archaeologist. He was noted for his innovations in archaeological methods, and in the museum display of archaeological and ethnological collections. His collection of about 22,000 objects formed the founding collection of the Pitt Rivers Museum at the University of Oxford.

Early life and family

Born Augustus Henry Lane-Fox at Bramham cum Oglethorpe, Wetherby, Yorkshire, he was the son of William Lane-Fox and Lady Caroline Douglas, a sister of George Douglas, 17th Earl of Morton. George Lane-Fox and Sackville Lane-Fox were his uncles.
In 1880, Lane-Fox inherited the estates of a cousin: Horace Pitt-Rivers, 6th Baron Rivers and consequently the remainder of the Richard Rigby fortune. It was "an event that transformed his life."

Military career

Lane-Fox had a long and successful military career, primarily as a staff officer. He was educated at the Royal Military College Sandhurst and commissioned into the Grenadier Guards on 16 May 1845 as an Ensign.
The then Brevet-Major Lane-Fox, was appointed a member of the Fifth Class of the Order of the Medjidie in 1858 for "distinguished services before the enemy during the War".

Archaeological career

Pitt Rivers' interests in archaeology and ethnology began in the 1850s, during postings overseas, and he became a noted scientist while he was still a serving military officer. He was elected, in the space of five years, to the Ethnological Society of London (1861), the Society of Antiquaries of London (1864) and the Anthropological Society of London (1865). By the time he retired he had amassed ethnographic collections numbering tens of thousands of items from all over the world. Influenced by the evolutionary writings of Charles Darwin and Herbert Spencer, he arranged them typologically and (within types) chronologically. This style of arrangement, designed to highlight the evolutionary trends in human artefacts, was a revolutionary innovation in museum design. Pitt Rivers' ethnological collections today form the basis of the Pitt Rivers Museum which is still one of Oxford's leading attractions. His Wessex Collection is housed in the Salisbury and South Wiltshire Museum, which faces the front of Salisbury Cathedral. A new Wessex Gallery of archaeology is due to open at the Salisbury Museum in 2014, funded by the Heritage Lottery Fund, and the Pitt Rivers collection forms a major part of the display. The story of Pitt Rivers as a man along with other archaeologist such as William Stukeley will also be celebrated in the new Wessex Gallery.
The estates that Pitt Rivers inherited in 1880 contained a wealth of archaeological material from the Roman and Saxon periods. He excavated these over seventeen seasons, beginning in the mid-1880s and ending with his death. His approach was highly methodical by the standards of the time, and he is widely regarded as the first scientific archaeologist to work in Britain. His most important methodological innovation was his insistence that all artefacts, not just beautiful or unique ones, be collected and catalogued. This focus on everyday objects as the key to understanding the past broke decisively with past archaeological practice, which had often verged on treasure hunting. It is Pitt Rivers' most important, and most lasting, scientific legacy. Moreover his work inspired Mortimer Wheeler among others to add to the scientific approach of archaeological excavation techniques.
Pitt Rivers created the Larmer Tree Gardens, a public pleasure garden, on the Rushmore estate near Tollard Royal in Wiltshire.
From 1882 Pitt Rivers served as Britain's first Inspector of Ancient Monuments: a post created by anthropologist and parliamentarian John Lubbock who was married to Pitt Rivers' daughter, Alice. Charged with cataloguing archaeological sites and protecting them from destruction, he worked with his customary methodical zeal but was hampered by the limitations of the law, which gave him little real power over the landowners on whose property the sites stood.
In 1884 he served as High Sheriff of Dorset.

Advocate for cremation

Pitt Rivers was an advocate for cremation at a time when such a practice was illegal in England.  Even though many people believed that it was immoral to destroy a corpse, the cremation movement favored a practical way to dispose of bodies.
Pitt Rivers was cremated after his death in 1900.

Publications

Notes



Further reading




