[[Boba Fett]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional aviators, Fictional bounty hunters, Fictional characters introduced in 1978, Fictional clones, Fictional henchmen, Fictional mercenaries, Fictional orphans, Fictional outlaws, Star Wars characters, Star Wars Transformers characters

Boba Fett is a fictional character in Star Wars. A recurring antagonist in Star Wars Holiday Special, Star Wars Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back, and Star Wars Episode VI: Return of the Jedi as a bounty hunter hired by Darth Vader. Star Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones establishes his origin as a clone of bounty hunter Jango Fett raised as his son. His aura of danger and mystery have created a cult following for the character.

Appearances

Original era

Boba Fett first appeared at the September 20, 1978, San Anselmo Country Fair parade. He also appears in Marvel Comics' Star Wars newspaper strip.
Star Wars Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back features Boba Fett as the "next major villain" after Darth Vader. Fett tracks the Millennium Falcon to Cloud City, where Vader captures its passengers and tortures its captain Han Solo. Wanting to collect a bounty on Solo, Fett confronts Vader about whether Solo will survive carbon freeze. Vader promises that the Empire will compensate Fett if Solo dies; after Solo is determined to be alive, Vader turns him over to Fett.
Star Wars Episode VI: Return of the Jedi features Boba Fett at Jabba the Hutt's palace when Solo's rescuers are captured, and he travels on Jabba's sail barge to the sarlacc pit, where the prisoners are to be executed. He attempts to intervene when the prisoners mount an escape and ends up in a tussle with Luke Skywalker, but Solo accidentally ignites Fett's rocket pack, sending the bounty hunter falling into the sarlacc's mouth.
In the digitally remastered Special Edition version of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, Boba Fett briefly appears outside the Millennium Falcon with Jabba, as well as several added and altered scenes.

Prequel era

Star Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones revealed that Boba Fett is an unaltered child clone whom Jango Fett raises as his son. Boba helps Jango escape from Obi-Wan Kenobi, but later witnesses Jango's decapitation by Mace Windu. 
Boba Fett also appears in the CGI animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars. Boba is featured as a supporting antagonist during the second season finale, and later the fourth season. 

Possible film

On February 6, 2013, Entertainment Weekly reported that The Walt Disney Company, the new mother company of Lucasfilm and Star Wars, is developing a stand-alone film featuring Boba Fett which would take place either between A New Hope and Empire or between Empire and Jedi.

Expanded Universe and television

Boba appears extensively in the Expanded Universe of novels, comic books, and video games. The young adult Fett book series released after Clones depicts Fett taking his father's ship and armor to begin his own bounty-hunting career. Some Expanded Universe stories released before Attack of the Clones depict other accounts of Fett's origins. These stories include him being a stormtrooper who killed his commanding officer; a leader of the fabled Mandalorian warriors; and Jaster Mereel, a "Journeyman Protector" convicted of treason. Karen Traviss' novel Bloodlines (2006), published four years after Clones, states that Fett seeded some of these "false" backstories himself.
Various video games and books depict Fett's work as a bounty hunter, for which he charges "famously expensive" fees and that he undertakes only when the mission meets "his harsh sense of justice." K. W. Jeter's Bounty Hunter Wars trilogy (1998–1999) depicts Fett as more communicative than in the films because the books' plots require Fett to show "an ability to convince people as well as kill them." Works such as Dark Horse Comics' Dark Empire series (1991–1992) describe Fett escaping from the sarlacc. He would have occasional run-ins with Han Solo and his family over the years, before fighting against the Yuuzhan Vong and becoming the leader of the Mandalorians. In the Legacy of the Force series (2006–2008), Jaina Solo asks Fett to train her to help her defeat her corrupted brother and ends up helping fight against Jacen's troops. Such media also reveal that Fett became a family man at one point, though he was forcibly separated from his wife after killing his commanding officer for assaulting her. His wife subsequently disappeared and was presumed dead, and their daughter blamed Boba for her fate, and began hunting him. Her own daughter, Mirta Gev, later sought Boba out and connected with her grandfather, while her mother was killed by Jacen Solo after he became Darth Caedus. Mirta later married a Mandalorian warrior, and Boba's wife was discovered to be alive, having been frozen in carbonite some decades previously.

Concept and development

Boba Fett stems from initial design concepts for Darth Vader, who was originally conceived as a rogue bounty hunter. While Vader became less a mercenary and more of a dark knight, the bounty hunter concept remained, and Fett became "an equally villainous" but "less conspicuous" character. Concept artist Ralph McQuarrie influenced Fett's design, which was finalized by and is credited to Joe Johnston. Screen-tested in all-white, Fett's armor eventually garnered a subdued color scheme intended to visually place him between white-armored "rank-and-file" Imperial stormtroopers and Vader, who wears black. This color scheme had the added bonus of conveying the "gray morality" of his character. The character's armor was designed to appear to have been scavenged from multiple sources, and it is adorned with trophies. A description of the character's armor in the summer 1979 Bantha Tracks newsletter catalyzed "rampant speculation" about the character's mysterious origins.
Despite two years of widespread publicity about Fett's appearance in The Empire Strikes Back, script rewrites significantly reduced the character's presence in the film. Fett's "distinctive" theme, composed by John Williams, is "not music, exactly" ... but "more of a gurgly, viola-and-bassoon thing aurally cross-pollinated with some obscure static sounds." Sound editor Ben Burtt added the sound of jangling spurs, created and performed by the Foley artist team of Robert Rutledge and Edward Steidele, to Fett's appearance in Cloud City, intending to make the character menacing and the scene reminiscent of similar gunfighter appearances in Western films.The Empire Strikes Back DVD audio commentary
Daniel Keys Moran, who wrote several novels featuring Boba Fett, cited Westerns as an influence on his development of the character. Moran said
Star Wars creator George Lucas considered adding a shot of Fett escaping the Sarlacc in Return of the Jedi, but decided against it because it would have detracted from the story's focus, instead leaving the task of "reviving" Fett to Expanded Universe canon." Lucas at one point considered depicting Vader and Fett as brothers in the prequel films, but discounted it as too "hokey." In continuing to develop the character in the prequel films, Lucas closed some avenues for expanding the character's story while opening others.
The cancelled video game Star Wars 1313 would have told the story of the character's career as a young bounty hunter.

Film casting and production

Boba Fett is primarily played by Jeremy Bulloch in The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi. Bulloch's half-brother alerted him to the role. He was cast as Fett because the costume happened to fit "as if a Savile Row tailor had come out and made it"; he did not have to do a reading or a screen test, and Bulloch never worked from a script for either film.
Filming the role for Empire lasted three weeks. The actor was pleased with the costume and used it to convey the character's menace. Bulloch based his performance on Clint Eastwood's portrayal of the Man with No Name in A Fistful of Dollars; similar to the Western character, Bulloch cradled the gun prop, made the character seem ready to shoot, slightly tilted his head, and stood a particular way.
Bulloch spent four weeks working on Jedi. He was unaware of Fett's demise before filming began and was "very upset" by the development; he would like to have done more with Fett. Still, Bulloch believed killing Fett made the character stronger, and that his "weak" death makes fans want the character to return.
A younger version of the character is played by Daniel Logan in Attack of the Clones. Logan had not seen the Star Wars films prior to being cast as Fett, but he watched the original trilogy at Lucas' request. The actor had to rely on his imagination for the bluescreen filming.

Other portrayals

Boba Fett was voiced by Don Francks in Star Wars Holiday Special and in the Star Wars: Droids episode "A Race to the Finish". Although Bulloch wore Fett's costume in Empire and Jedi, John Morton filled in during one scene for Empire, while Jason Wingreen voiced Fett for Empire. His brief appearance in Hope was performed by Industrial Light & Magic creature animator Mark Austin; The character's appearance in the Special Edition footage of Jedi was performed by Don Bies and Nelson Hall. For the 2004 re-releases, Temuera Morrison replaced the character's original voice.
The character's voice in National Public Radio's Star Wars radio dramas was provided by Alan Rosenberg in The Empire Strikes Back and Ed Begley, Jr. in Return of the Jedi, Tim Glovatsky in the audio adaptation of Dark Forces: Rebel Agent, Joe Hacker in audio adaptation of the Dark Empire comics, Temuera Morrison for Star Wars: Empire at War, Star Wars Battlefront II and Star Wars Battlefront: Elite Squadron, Dee Bradley Baker in Star Wars: The Force Unleashed, Star Wars: The Force Unleashed II and Star Tours: The Adventures Continue, Chris Cox in Star Wars: Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike, Tom Kane in Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds, Star Wars: Demolition and Star Wars: Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy, and Daniel Logan for Lego Star Wars: The Video Game and Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
Boba Fett (as an evil pig) is featured in the Angry Birds Star Wars's episode entitled "Boba Fett Missions".  In the Family Guy parody, "Something, Something, Dark Side," Boba Fett is played by the Giant Chicken.

Reception

Boba Fett is a "cult figure" and one of the most popular Star Wars characters.
Bissell adds that Boba Fett, along with other minor characters like Darth Maul and Kyle Katarn, appeals to adolescent boys' "images of themselves: essentially bad-ass but ... honorable about it." This tension and the absence of a clear "evil nature" (distinct from evil actions) offer Fett dramatic appeal. Furthermore, Fett "is cool because he was designed to be cool", presenting a "wicked ambiguity" akin to John Milton's portrayal of Satan in Paradise Lost and Iago in William Shakespeare's Othello. Bissell compares Fett to Beowulf, Ahab, and Huckleberry Finn: characters "too big" for their original presentation, and apt for continued development in other stories. Moran finds Fett reminiscent of the Man with No Name.
The San Francisco Chronicle describes Boba Fett fans as "among the most passionate", and the character is important to Star Wars fan culture. Boba Fett's popular following before the character even appeared in The Empire Strikes Back influenced Damon Lindelof's interest in developing Lost across multiple media.

Merchandising

Fett is one of the top five best-selling Star Wars action figures, and Boba Fett-related products are "among the most expensive" Star Wars merchandise. Fett was the first new mail-away action figure created for The Empire Strikes Back; although advertised as having a rocket-firing backpack, safety concerns led Kenner to sell his rocket attached. Gray called the early toy "a rare and precious commodity", and one of the rocket-firing prototypes sold at auction for $16,000 in 2003. Hallmark Cards created a Boba Fett Christmas tree ornament.








