[[Iaijutsu]]

CATEGORIES: Koryu bujutsu



Purpose

Iaijutsu is a combative sword-drawing art but not necessarily an aggressive art because iaijutsu is also a counterattack-oriented art. Iaijutsu technique may be used aggressively to wage a premeditated surprise attack against an unsuspecting enemy.

Etymology

Historically, it is unclear when the term "iaijutsu" accurately performed, and when techniques to draw katana from the scabbard was first practiced as decided form of exercise. The Japanese sword has existed since the Nara period (710-794), where techniques to draw the sword has been practiced under other names than 'iaijutsu'. and Smith, Robert W. (1980)  Comprehensive Asian Fighting Arts. London: Kodansha International. Page 102-103. ISBN 978-0-87011-436-6. The term 'iaijutsu' was first verified in connection with Iizasa Chōisai Ienao (c. 1387 - c. 1488), founder of the school Tenshin Shōden Katori Shintō-ryū. (1973) Classical Bujutsu - The Martial Arts and Ways of Japan. Weather Hill. Page 71. ISBN 978-0-8348-0233-9. (2005) Japanese Swordsmanship. Boston: Weather Hill. Page 79-80. ISBN 978-0-8348-0236-0.

History

Archaeological excavations dated the oldest sword in Japan from at least as early as second century B.C. 
The development of Japanese swordsmanship as a component system of classical bujutsu created by and for professional warriors (bushi), begins only with the invention and widespread use of the Japanese sword, the curved, single-cutting-edged long sword.
In its curved form, the sword is known to the Japanese as tachi in the eighth century.  It evolved from and gained ascendancy over its straight-bladed prototype because years of battlefield experience proved that the curved form of sword was better suited to the needs of the bushi than the straight-bladed kind. Around the curved long sword the bushi built a mystique of fantastic dimensions, one that still influences Japanese culture today.  The nature of the bushi's combative deployment, mounted as he was on horseback, required the classical warrior to reach out for his enemy, who might either be similarly mounted or otherwise ground-deployed.  
During the Kamakura period (1185-1333) the Japanese sword smiths achieved the highest level of technical excellence and because the war between two influential families, the Minamoto and the Taira, made it possible to test and evaluate swords under the severest of conditions.  By the end of the Kamakura period the tachi was superseded by a shorter weapon in a new form, called katana.
It was with the general widespread use of the curved sword mounted and worn as a katana that classical Japanese swordsmanship for infantry applications really begins. It is not until the fifteenth century that there are evidence in reliable documentary form to prove that the bushi practiced swordsmanship in a systematic manner. In this connection it is belief that kenjutsu, which deals with the art of swordsmanship as it is performed with a sword that has already been brought into unsheathed position, is the senior form to iaijutsu.
Iaijutsu is extant today but there also exists a modern form for drawing the Japanese sword, called iaido. Iaido, the way of drawing the sword, appeared as a term in 1932.

Postures

According to Donn F. Draeger, iaijutsu is a combative art and, therefore, the warrior considered only two starting positions in the execution of a sword-drawing technique. The first techniques is from the low crouching posture, named iai-goshi. The other is the standing posture, named tachi-ai.
The seated posture, tate-hiza, is not used in iaijutsu because it does not permit all-around mobility. Seiza, the formal kneeling-sitting posture, is not used because it is a "dead" posture which is regarded by the warrior as less combatively efficient. It would be difficult for the swordsman using either of these two latter postures to go quickly into action in an emergency.

Koryū Schools

Ryū that still exist and include iaijutsu in their curriculum include. The school below are koryū, or arts developed before the Meiji era.:Hall, David A. (2012) Encyclopedia of Japanese Martial Arts. New York: Kodansha USA. ISBN 978-1-56836-410-0

Mugai ryu

Mugai ryu was once one of the more famous styles in Japan in the Edo period and was developed from a strong influence of Zen. It is characterized by short, direct movements. As it was developed in 1697 by Tsuji Gettan Sukemochi Sukeshige, a Zen practitioner, it has deep links with Zen Buddhism. The original style created by Gettan was a kenjutsu school rather than iaido. Today's Mugai ryu iaido was established by Takahashi Hachisuke Mitsusuke and his younger brother Hidezu in mid Edo period. They studied a style called Jikyo-ryū under the fifth and last generation headmasters Yamamura Masashige. There are several distinct lineages of Mugai ryu throughout Japan today.

Suiō-ryū

Suiō-ryū is a traditional style that specialises in sword drawing, both solo and paired, but other arts, like jōjutsu, naginatajutsu, kenpō and kusarigamajutsu are practised as well. It was founded by Mima Yoichizaemon Kagenobu c. 1615.

Other styles

Other styles that incorporate sword drawing in their curriculum are, for example, Shindō Munen-ryū, Hokushin Ittō-ryū, Shinkage-ryū, Hōki-ryū, Tatsumi-ryū, Tamiya-ryū,  Takenouchi-ryū, Eishin-ryū and:








