[[RMIT International University]]

CATEGORIES: Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, Universities in Ho Chi Minh City, Universities in Vietnam

The Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT) an Australian-based university operating in Vietnam, with two campuses located in Ho Chi Minh City and in Hanoi. The Vietnamese branch is officially known as RMIT International University (commonly referred to as RMIT Vietnam) and its Australian counterpart is known as RMIT University.

History

In 1998, RMIT in Australia was invited by the Vietnamese Government to establish a fully foreign-owned university in Vietnam. 
RMIT University Vietnam was officially founded in 2001, and commenced offering programs at its purpose-built campus in Ho Chi Minh City. In 2004, it established a second campus in the Vietnamese capital city of Hanoi. 
Since its foundation, RMIT University Vietnam has granted over 90 billion VND (approximately $4.5 million USD) in scholarships.
RMIT University Vietnam has been awarded 10 Golden Dragon Award for its "excellence in education" by the Vietnamese Ministry of Trade since 2003. 
In 2008, RMIT International University received a Certificate of Merit from the Prime Minister of Vietnam, Nguyen Tan Dung, for its "educational achievements contributing to the social and economic development of Vietnam".RMIT Vietnam receives award from Vietnamese Prime Minister - RMIT VN News, October 15, 2008

Organisation

All degree programs at RMIT International University are recognised by the Vietnamese Ministry of Education and Training and are audited by the Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency. The University's degrees are awarded by RMIT University in Australia.
The resident President of the university in Vietnam is Professor Joyce Kirk. The Chancellor of RMIT, Dr Ziggy Switkowski, is the Chancellor of both RMIT University and of RMIT International University. RMIT University's Vice-Chancellor, Professor Margaret Gardner, AO, is the corporate President of RMIT International University Holdings Pty. Ltd.

Campuses and Facilities

RMIT Saigon South

RMIT's "Saigon South" campus is located in Ho Chi Minh City, approximately 7 km from the city centre. The purpose-built facility was opened in 2001 and was designed by architectural firm Norman Day and Associates. Professor Norman Day is an Adjunct Professor of Architecture at RMIT University and also an alumnus of the university.
The East Wing of the campus houses its main academic centre and sporting fields, and the West Wing houses the university's administration offices, food and beverage outlets, a health clinic, the 'Melbourne Theatre' and the campus library.
In 2012, RMIT Vietnam opened its latest Academic Building - AB2. Stage 2, completed in 2009, included a sport and leisure centre, tennis courts, and residential buildings.Saigon South campus (RMIT VN Homepage)
In October 2011, RMIT opened English classes at a campus on Pham Ngoc Thach in District 3. The campus will also host business and IELTs classes.

=Library=

The facility, at the University's Saigon South campus, is called the Beanland Library and Learning Commons, in honour of a former leader of RMIT University in Australia, Professor David Beanland, one of the people responsible for RMIT coming to Vietnam.
The library features a greatly expanded book collection, along with better access to many electronic databases from around the world, and a range of different spaces to allow for different kinds of study.
The library features areas where discussion in small groups is encouraged. Other parts are designed for teaching and instruction by librarians specially trained in different study programs. Librarians will also conduct library tours to help new students make the best use of the latest facilities.
Many services offered across the university – such as support to improve student learning skills – will now be accessible from within the library itself.

RMIT Hanoi

RMIT's Hanoi campus opened in 2004 in a renovated multi-level building situated in the Van Phuc Compound in the diplomatic quarter of Hanoi. 
From March 2011, RMIT Hanoi has moved from the previous nine level building near the famous Văn Miếu Hà Nội (Temple of Literature) to Tower B of Handi Resco Building at 521 Kim Ma Street, Ba Dinh District, Hanoi to satisfy the increasing number of students at this campus.Hanoi campus (RMIT VN Homepage)

Programs of Study

The current offered programs include:

Diploma programs

Bachelor programs

Postgraduate programs

Student life

RMIT International University's campuses currently have a combined student population of approximately 6000 students, with international students from Australia, China, France, Germany, Malaysia, Russia, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, the United Kingdom and the United States, as well as other countries.
Each campus (in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh city) owns about 30 clubs for students in many aspects including English, art, photography, motion picture, dancing, entrepreneur, business, accountancy, Aikido, San Shou, SIFE, environment protection and others. 
Events and parties are held by student clubs and Student Council (SC) for every month and annually.

Alumni








