[[Texas Longhorn]]

CATEGORIES: Cattle breeds, Texas culture, Cattle breeds originating in the United States, Megafauna of North America

The Texas Longhorn is a breed of cattle known for its characteristic horns, which can extend to  tip to tip for bulls. Similar cattle were imported by Spanish colonists into other parts of North America, including California and Florida. Horns can have a slight upward turn at their tips or even triple twist. Texas Longhorns are known for their diverse coloring. A longhorn can be any color or mix of colors but dark red and white color mixes are the most dominant. Texas Longhorns with elite genetics can often fetch $40,000 or more at auction with the record of $170,000 in recent history for a cow. Texas Returns to Passion of the Longhorn Reuters via Environmental News Network. November 26, 2004. Due to their innate gentle disposition and intelligence, Texas Longhorns are increasingly being trained as riding steers.
Registries for the breed include the Texas Longhorn Breeders Association of America, the International Texas Longhorn Association, and the Cattlemen's Texas Longhorn Registry.

History of the breed

Genetic analyses show the Longhorn originated from an Iberian hybrid of two ancient cattle lineages: "taurine" descending from the domestication of the wild aurochs in the Middle East, and "indicine", descending from the domestication of the aurochs in India, 85% and 15% respectively by proportion.[ref]

Early US settlers in Texas obtained feral Mexican cattle from the borderland between the Nueces River and the Rio Grande and mixed them with their own eastern cattle.  The result was a tough, rangy animal with long legs and long horns extending up to seven feet. Although this interbreeding was of little consequence to the makeup of a Longhorn, it did alter color. The varieties of color ranged from bluish-grey, and various yellowish hues, to browns, black, ruddy and white, both cleanly bright and dirty-speckled.
As Texas became more heavily settled following annexation by the US, the frontier gave way to established farms and ranch lands. The leaner longhorn beef was not as attractive in an era where tallow was highly prized, and the longhorn's ability to survive on the poor vegetation of the open range was no longer as much of an issue. Other breeds demonstrated traits more highly valued by the modern rancher, such as the ability to gain weight quickly. The Texas Longhorn stock slowly dwindled, until in 1927 the breed was saved from near extinction by enthusiasts from the United States Forest Service, who collected a small herd of stock to breed on the Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge in Lawton, Oklahoma. A few years later, J. Frank Dobie and others gathered small herds to keep in Texas state parks. They were cared for largely as curiosities, but the stock's longevity, resistance to disease and ability to thrive on marginal pastures quickly revived the breed as beef stock. Today, the breed is used as a beef stock, though many Texas ranchers keep herds due to their link to Texas history.

Purpose

Most breeds of cattle fall into either beef or dairy. The Texas Longhorn is principally a beef animal and is known for its lean beef, which is lower in fat, cholesterol and calories than most beef.    thumb|200px|The Texas Longhorns show great variation in coat color
These measurements can be adjusted to horn per month of age (HMA) which is calculated by dividing the number of months of age into the horn measurement. For example, a 48-month-old animal with 50" of horn would be 50 / 48 or 1.04" per month of age.
Commercial ranchers cross-breed longhorns with other breeds for increasing hybrid vigor and easy calving characteristics. Smaller birth weights reduce dystocia for first-calf heifers.

In Culture





Additional Reading




