[[Dr. Finlay's Casebook (TV and radio)]]

CATEGORIES: BBC television dramas, BBC Television programmes, BBC Radio programmes, 1960s British television series, 1970s British television series, 1962 British television programme debuts, 1971 British television programme endings, Lost BBC episodes, British medical television series, Television series set in the 1920s, Period television series, Television programmes based on works by A. J. Cronin, Radio series about health care, Television shows set in Scotland

Dr. Finlay's Casebook is a television series that was broadcast on the BBC from 1962 until 1971. J. Cronin's novella entitled Country Doctor, the storylines centred on a general medical practice in the fictional Scottish town of Tannochbrae during the late 1920s. Cronin was the primary writer for the show between 1962 and 1964.

Characters

The main characters were Dr. Finlay, the junior partner in the practice, played by Bill Simpson, Dr. Cameron, the craggy senior partner, played by Andrew Cruickshank and Janet, their unflappable housekeeper and receptionist at Arden House, played by Barbara Mullen. Other recurrent characters included Dr. Snoddie, Finlay's crusty detractor and Janet's admirer, played by Eric Woodburn and gossipy Mistress Niven (the district nurse), played by Effie Morrison.

Cast

Filming location

Although it is widely documented that location work for the original series was filmed in the town of Callander in Perthshire, the very first six episodes were filmed in Tannoch Drive, Milngavie, where the fictional Arden House was situated on the right-hand side as one approaches Tannoch Loch.  It was the ducks on that loch that formed part of the opening sequence of the programme. The preceding shot is of the Red Bridge over the River Teith. Other outdoor scenes were filmed in Kilbarchan, Church Street in particular has changed little since filming took place. 
In one of those first episodes, Dr. Finlay (Bill Simpson) crashed his old Bullnose Morris into the wall of Arden House—and that was not in the script. Another episode, filmed at night along Mugdock Road, found the local policeman, somewhat inebriated, on his bicycle in a scene with Dr. Snoddie. The interior scenes were shot in various BBC studios in London and Glasgow.

Radio

From 1970 until 1978, episodes from Dr. Finlay's Casebook were broadcast on BBC Radio 4 with some of the same actors from the television programme. Twenty episodes were broadcast on BBC 7 in the autumn of 2003 and have been repeated annually since. In 2001 and 2002, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a version of the original Cronin stories using the titles, The Adventures of a Black Bag and Doctor Finlay - Further Adventures of a Black Bag ; these have been rebroadcast by BBC 7. The adaptations are set in Levenford, the original setting chosen by Cronin, rather than Tannochbrae. The role of Dr. Finlay was played by John Gordon Sinclair. Dr. Cameron was played by Brian Pettifer, and Janet was played initially by Katy Murphy, and then by Celia Imrie. David Tennant was a frequent guest actor.

Music

The programme's famous theme tune was Trevor Duncan's march from A Little Suite. The other two movements from the Suite were often used as background music. The characters from the series are also featured in a song entitled Dr. Finlay by Andy Stewart, which scored a minor Top 50 hit in 1965.

DVD

Simply Media TV released the first series of Dr Finlay's Casebook in March 2013, and the second series will be released early in 2014.

Controversy

Cronin received copies of the scripts, and he wrote a blunt letter to the series' script editor in 1964, expressing his dissatisfaction with the progression of the show.  Word leaked to the media, and in June 1964, stories appeared in the national press suggesting that the author wanted the series to end.  One newspaper even accused the author of "maliciously doing millions out of legitimate enjoyment."  The outcry from the viewing public was immediate, and sackfuls of mail were dispatched to Cronin's home in Switzerland.  He issued a statement on 7 June to refute the charges made against him:   By the following year, the series was in every sense a cult, even a national institution.  A Bill Simpson Fan Club was set up, Andy Stewart's Dr Finlay was in the Hit Parade for five weeks, and Andrew Cruikshank was invited as a guest of honour at the British Medical Association's annual dinner to speak on medical matters as if he were a real GP. On Call with Doctor Finlay. London: Boxtree Limited, 1994








