[[Zoopla]]

CATEGORIES: British websites, Real estate valuation, Property services companies of the United Kingdom, British companies established in 2007, Online real estate databases, Online real estate companies, Technology companies established in 2007

Zoopla (also Zoopla.co.
The site also enables users to access information such as sold house prices, area trends and statistics, and current value estimates for domestic properties in the UK.

Product features

The Zoopla site is a searchable directory of UK residential properties, created using Royal Mail's database, the UK HM Land Registry's data on property transactions, Google maps, Microsoft maps' "bird's eye view", and other data sources.  The data is then presented in a read-write format, so that user-generated content can "fill in the gaps".companieslist.co.uk/06074771-zoopla-property-group-limited
Based on this data, Zoopla has developed an automated valuation model or algorithm that allows the site to provide an instant valuation estimate for any property in the UK, similar to competitors Mouseprice and Hometrack. The AVM is based on user-added information such as property attributes, transactions from the Land Registry, and analysis of historical price trends. The site also allows users to claim their home or set a TemptMe price (a price at which they could be tempted to sell).
The site also provides listings of around 500,000 properties for sale or to rent from residential estate agents along with pictures, descriptions, maps, statistics and local information.
In July 2010, Zoopla also made a similar new service as an iPhone application including GPS-based property searches and augmented reality camera view.

History and company information

Zoopla was founded in 2007 by Alex Chesterman, who also founded ScreenSelect / LoveFilm and Simon Kain, former senior developer at Bookpages / Amazon UK and LoveFilm CTO.
The website had 1.6 million visitors in March 2010,Nielsen NetRatings, March 2010 making it the second largest property website in the UK behind market leader Rightmove.
Zoopla have been quoted in the UK press in a number of articles based on their data, such as the UK Property Rich List
Zoopla is backed by Atlas Venture, Octopus Ventures and other investors.
In July 2009, Zoopla acquired property website Thinkproperty.
In August 2009, Zoopla acquired the PropertyFinder Group, consisting of the websites Propertyfinder.co.
In July 2010, Zoopla acquired property technology company Byteplay.
In August 2010, Zoopla launched its first television advertising campaign.  The humorous campaign compares finding the perfect property with finding the perfect partner, showing a number of people discussing the house-buying process in terms that could be used to describe a relationship.
In 2010 Zoopla was named in the Startups 100 awards as one of the UK's most innovative, inspiring and ground-breaking new companies.
In October 2011 Zoopla and Digital Property Group, the subsidiary of A&N Media which operates property websites Primelocation.com and FindaProperty.
In May 2012, Zoopla acquired property information website UpMyStreet.
In June 2012 Zoopla and Digital Property Group merger completes forming Zoopla Property Group Ltd.zoopla.co.uk/press/releases/zoopla-and-digital-property-group-merger-completes/
In December 2012, Zoopla acquired property information website Globrix.
In March–April 2013, Stephen Morana, who spent around 10 years at the Betfair Group Plc, was appointed new Chief Financial Officer (CFO).cfo-insight.com/human-capital-career/executive-change/zoopla-property-group-taps-stephen-moran-as-new-cfo/
In September 2013, Zoopla bought Trinity Mirror's four property websites for £3.3 million.
Zoopla have been sponsors of West Bromwich Albion Football Club since 2012.
There is current speculation that Zoopla is considering an initial public offering with an enterprise value of over £1bn.






