[[Baker Street robbery]]

CATEGORIES: 1971 in London, 1971 crimes, Bank robberies, Crime in London, Lloyds Banking Group

thumb|Scene of the Baker Street Robbery. The robbers entered from below the buildingThe Baker Street robbery was a robbery of the safe deposit boxes at a branch of Lloyds BankLloyds Bank Map location on the corner of Baker Street and Marylebone Road, London, on the night of 11 September 1971. 
The robbers had rented a leather goods shop named Le Sac, two doors down from the bank, and tunnelled a distance of approximately  passing under the intervening Chicken Inn restaurant. To avoid being overheard they only dug during weekends. They used a thermal lance to try to break into the vault but ultimately had to use explosives.

Robbery

Robert Rowlands, a radio ham operator, overheard conversations between the robbers and their rooftop lookout at about 11 pm.  He contacted police and tape recorded the conversations while the robbery was in progress, but there was insufficient information to identify which bank was being robbed. At 2 am a senior police officer alerted radio detector vans to track down the gang. Police checked the 750 banks within 10 miles of Mr Rowlands' receiver, including the Baker Street bank. At the time, the thieves were still in the bank, but the police failed to realise the fact because the security door was still locked. The thieves got away with £1.5m cash"Four jailed for London's biggest bank theft". The Times (27 January 1973), page 1 (2010: £16.5m) and valuables from safe deposit boxes. The total haul was believed to be near £3m (2010: £33.1m).

Aftermath

It has often been reported that after four days of news coverage British authorities issued a D-Notice, requesting that such reporting be discontinued for reasons of national security  and the story disappear from newspapers. It is claimed by national newspapers in recent years, that some of the security boxes contained embarrassing or nationally sensitive materialWill Lawrence "Revisiting the riddle of Baker Street" Daily Telegraph, 15 February 2008 and that the purpose of the request was to protect a prominent member of the British Royal Family."Untold story of Baker Street bank robbery." The Guardian (11 March 2007)  Rowlands, the aforementioned ham radio operator, claims that the police attempted to prevent him from talking to the press by means of the D-Notice, which he felt was an attempt to hide police incompetence."FOUND Radio Ham's sensational tape" The Daily Mail (16 February 2008)  He also claims that police threatened to prosecute him for listening to an unlicensed radio station.  An investigation some years later showed that a request had never been made to the D-Notice committee at that time. The Times newspaper was still reporting about the case over two months later."£30,000 bail for man on bank raid charge." The Times (30 November 1971)
Other recent reports suggest that the identity of the criminals and their sentences have never been revealed. However, The Times (amongst other newspapers) reported in January 1973 that four men had been convicted of the robbery at a trial at the Old Bailey. Three of these men were named as: Anthony Gavin, 38, a photographer from Dalston; Thomas Stephens, 35, a car dealer from Islington; and Reginald Tucker, 37, a company director from Hackney, who all pleaded guilty and who each received twelve years imprisonment. The fourth man, Benjamin Wolfe, 66, a fancy goods dealer from East Dulwich,  pleaded not guilty but was subsequently convicted and received eight years. Wolfe had signed the lease on the shop used by the robbers."Businessman convicted over raid." The Times (24 January 1973), page 2 Two other men accused of handling banknotes from the robbery were acquitted.  According to one press report, the police believed that the mastermind of the crime was another London car dealer who was never apprehended."The Bank Job Files" The Mail on Sunday (24 February 2008)

The Bank Job

A semi-fictional version of the robbery is the subject of the film The Bank Job (2008), which explores another popular theory of the crime that argues the robbery was either set up by, or later covered up by, MI5 to secure sexually compromising photographs of Princess Margaret which were being kept in a deposit box at the bank by known radical Michael X. While this theory has usually been considered yet another urban myth, there have been some individuals, including George McIndoe, an advisor to the film who claimed to have knowledge of the actual robbery, purporting that this was indeed the real motivation for the robbery.






