[[Michael Applebaum]]

CATEGORIES: Mayors of Montreal, Montreal city councillors, Anglophone Quebec people, Living people, People from Côte-des-Neiges–Notre-Dame-de-Grâce, 1963 births, Jewish Canadian politicians, Canadian realtors, Dawson College alumni, People from Saint-Laurent, Quebec



Michael Mark Applebaum (born February 10, 1963) is a Canadian politician, who was selected by councillors as interim Mayor of Montreal on November 16, 2012."Michael Applebaum elected mayor of Montreal". CTV News, November 16, 2012. A longtime city councillor in Montreal, Quebec, he served as the borough mayor of Côte-des-Neiges–Notre-Dame-de-Grâce from January 1, 2002 to November 21, 2012, upon becoming interim mayor of the city.
Prior to November 14, 2012 Applebaum was part of the Union Montréal party."Mairie: Union Montréal implose". Le Devoir, November 14, 2012. Applebaum was first elected as city councillor for Notre-Dame-de-Grâce on November 6, 1994 as a member of the now defunct Parti des Montréalais.
Applebaum was the first anglophone to hold the office since the end of James John Guerin's term in 1912."Montreal gets first anglophone mayor in a century". Toronto Star, November 16, 2012.
He was also the first Jewish person to assume the office of mayor of Montreal.
On June 17, 2013 he was arrested and indicted on 14 charges including fraud, conspiracy, breach of trust, and corruption in municipal affairs. On June 18, he announced his resignation of Mayor of Montreal, maintaining that the allegations against him are unfounded. He was released from police custody and will make his first court appearance on October 9, 2013. "Montreal Mayor Michael Applebaum resigns". Toronto Star, June 18, 2013.

Biography

Applebaum was born in Montreal the third child of Ray and Moishe Applebaum, Canadian Jews, 
Applebaum is involved in the Jewish community, and is supportive of Israel.
Applebaum married in 1984. He and his wife Merle have three children.

Executive committee

Mayor Gérald Tremblay appointed Applebaum to the Montreal Executive Committee in January 2009. At one point he was the member responsible for Sports & Recreation.
He was promoted by Mayor Tremblay to chair of the executive committee on April 6, 2011.

Mayoralty

Following the resignation of Montreal mayor Gérald Tremblay on November 5, 2012, Applebaum was believed to be a strong contender to win Union Montréal's nomination as its new mayoral candidate. However, he was passed over in favour of councillor Richard Deschamps. 
An anonymous colleague told reporters that Applebaum's candidacy had been rejected because his French language skills were not strong enough to be mayor of an 80 percent francophone city. However, several francophone councillors disputed that claim, saying that Applebaum speaks credible French.  Notably, Vision Montreal leader Louise Harel told The Gazette, "I wish I could speak English as well as Applebaum speaks French.""Anglo question dogs Michael Applebaum in bid to be interim mayor of Montreal". The Gazette, November 15, 2012. 
He subsequently left Union Montréal to sit as an independent councillor and submitted his name as an independent mayoral candidate. He argued that in light of the corruption crisis facing the city, notably among the ruling Union Montreal party, the interim mayor should be independent of party affiliation. In the final city council vote on November 16, 2012, Applebaum won 31 votes to Deschamps' 29. He won in part by reaching out more actively than Deschamps to the opposition Vision Montréal and Projet Montréal parties and the bloc of independent councillors who resigned from Union Montréal in the same period, most notably by promising to share seats on the Montreal Executive Committee in a non-partisan coalition.
Applebaum pledged not to run for mayor in the 2013 municipal election, indicating that he would instead run for another term as borough mayor of Côte-des-Neiges–Notre-Dame-de-Grâce.

Corruption investigation and arrest

Applebaum was arrested by Quebec's anti-corruption unit UPAC at his home on June 17, 2013. He initially faced 14 charges including fraud, conspiracy, breach of trust, and corruption in municipal affairs. The charges stem from alleged acts which occurred before Applebaum became mayor. Officials said they relate to real estate projects between 2006 and 2011 when Applebaum served as borough mayor. Charges were also simultaneously laid against former city councillor Saulie Zajdel and Jean Yves Bisson, a city bureaucrat."Ex-Tory adviser Saulie Zajdel arrested in corruption probe". CBC News, June 17, 2013.
According to an arrest warrant filed in court, Applebaum allegedly engaged in two separate criminal conspiracies, the nature of which officials did not initially disclose. However, Radio-Canada reported that they involve the demolition of a residential building and the construction of condominiums, and link Applebaum to a Laval-based engineering firm central to the municipal corruption testimony being heard at the Charbonneau commission. In addition, Radio-Canada, citing police sources, said the police were investigating a $50,000 payment to Applebaum as well as a $15,000 payment made to Zajdel. 
On June 18, 2013 Applebaum announced his resignation of Mayor of Montreal, maintaining that the allegations against him are unfounded. He hired Marcel Danis, a criminal lawyer and former federal Member of Parliament, as his defence attorney."Former MP to represent Applebaum". The Gazette, June 18, 2013. 
In October 2013, charges against him were widened to encompass ten major real estate transactions between 2002 and 2012 in Côte-des-Neiges."Ex-Montreal Mayor Michael Applebaum Faces Wider Corruption Probe". The Jewish Daily Forward, October 4, 2013. He is not currently in police detention. His preliminary hearing is scheduled for June 2015, immediately before Zajdel's trial."Applebaum's preliminary hearing set for June 2015". The Gazette, March 10, 2014.

Electoral record (partial)






