[[Ribocco]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 racehorse births, Thoroughbred racehorses, Racehorses bred in Kentucky, Racehorses trained in the United Kingdom, British racehorses, British Classic Race winners, Irish Classic Race winners, Thoroughbred family 4

Ribocco (foaled 1964 in Kentucky) was an American-bred British-trained Thoroughbred racehorse and sire. He is best known for his performances in 1967 when he won two of the most important European races for three-year-olds; the  Irish Derby and the St Leger. Ribocco briefly held the record for prize money won by a British-trained racehorse.

Background

Ribocco was a small, but powerfully-built He was a son of the undefeated dual Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe winner, Ribot out of the mare Libra. Libra won only one minor race, but went on to become a notable broodmare, producing Ribero (Irish Derby, St Leger) and Libra's Rib (Princess of Wales's Stakes). Ribocco was sent to England to be trained by Fulke Johnson Houghton at Blewbury in Berkshire.

Racing career

1966: two-year-old career

Ribocco made his racecourse debut in July when he won a maiden race at Newbury and returned to the same course a month later to win the Washington Singer Stakes. In September he was moved up in class to contest the Champagne Stakes at Doncaster and finished second to the Irish-bred Bold Lad. On his final start of the year Ribocco returned to Doncaster for the Observer Gold Cup, Britain's most valuable race for two-year-olds. He established himself as one of the best colts of his generation with an easy win. In the Free Handicap, an end of season ranking of the best British two-year-olds Ribocco was ranked third behind Bold Lad and Royal Palace.

1967: three-year-old season

Ribocco's performances in the spring of 1967 were disappointing: he was well beaten in the Craven Stakes, the Dee Stakes and the Lingfield Derby Trial. His odds for the Derby drifted out despite the booking of Britain's leading jockey Lester Piggott to ride him in the race.
At Epsom Ribocco started at odds of 22/1 in a field of twenty-two runners. He produced a strong finish to overtake Sucaryl inside the final furlong and win by a length. At Ascot in July, Ribocco started favourite for Britain's most important weight-for-age race, the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Stakes. He finished third, beaten three lengths and a neck by the four-year-olds Busted and Salvo.
Ribocco was then aimed at the third leg of British Triple Crown series, the St Leger at Doncaster. In a prep race in August he finished third to Dart Board in the March Stakes at Goodwood. In the St Leger he started 7/2 joint favourite In October he was sent to compete in France in that country's most prestigious race where he finished third in the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe, beaten in a three-way photo finish by the 82/1 winner, Topyo and Salvo. In his final race, Ribocco returned to the land of his birth  and finished seventh in the Washington, D.C. International.

Assessment and achievements

Ribocco's prize money for finishing third in the Arc de Triomphe took his earnings to £155,669 passing the record for a British or Irish racehorse set by Santa Claus in 1964. His place at the top of the list as he was overtaken by Royal Palace in the summer of 1968.

Stud record

Retired at the end of the 1967 racing season, American Thomas Mellon Evans acquired a part interest in Ribocco for breeding purposes. He stood at stud at Evans' Buckland Farm in Virginia where he met with modest success as a sire, with the best of his progeny including Ripon (John B. Campbell Handicap). After the 1972 breeding season he was sent to a stud farm in Japan.

Pedigree




