[[Sushama Reddy]]

CATEGORIES: Indian female models, Living people, People from Andhra Pradesh, Mithibai College alumni, 1976 births

Sushama Reddy (

Early life

Sushama Reddy studied at the Bombay Scottish School, Mahim and graduated in Economics from Mithibai College, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.
She has two sisters including Sameera Reddy who is a famous Bollywood actress.

Career

Modeling

Her sister Meghna persuaded her to join the television world. Her first break was given by Bharatbala Productions. She worked on more than 100 television commercials including Limca, Fair & Lovely, Liberty, Godrej, Blender's Pride, Ford Icon and a TV commercial for Thumbs Up with Salman Khan. Reddy also appeared in Diwakar Pundir's music video Deewana with Sonu Nigam, in DJ Suketu's Tere Jaisa Pyaar and Sona Mohapatra's music compilation Ishq Nachaya.

Hosting

Soon after Channel V was launched in India, she landed with the role of a VJ at the music channel for more than 2 years. Sushama hosted Dream Hotels on the Lifestyle broadcaster Discovery Travel and Living, showcasing the vistas`, luxurious living, décor, style and glitter of hotels uncovering high living in the truest form.


Acting

Sushama made her film debut opposite Anil Kapoor with Vivek Agnihotri's Chocolate: Deep Dark Secrets in 2005 and later appeared in Don: The Chase Begins Again and Chup Chup Ke, with Shahid Kapoor and Kareena Kapoor (both in 2006).

Producing and Filmmaking

In 2008, Sushama assisted Rajat Kapoor on his project Rectangular Love story.
In 2009, she was introduced to current producing partner Sanjay Bhattacharjee through a common friend. After realizing about their common goals related to filmmaking business, distribution and film marketing, they met Aryan Bros. from Delhi, who at that time were also seeking to get into film industry. In June 2009, with funding from Aryan Bros., Reddy and Bhattacharjee established production company Seven Island Studios Pvt. Ltd. Seven Island and Aryan Bros' Dus Tola went on floors in late 2009, and was released on 22 October 2010.  They are now working on her next projects – National Roaming which is a comic-caper, The Stamp Collector which is based on Vishwapriya Iyenger's short story No Letter From Mother and another one based on a Tibetan family's struggle for survival. Work is underway on the next film, tentatively titled "National Roaming",which is a crazy comic caper in the jungle.
Sushama has started her own television production company, Niki Redi Productions and is developing content for travel shows on international Lifestyle channels such as TLC. She is currently producing and achoring her latest show on TLC called Go India Maharashtra, due to be telecasted on December 2012.

Filmography

Actor

Producer






