[[Everyone Nose (All the Girls Standing in the Line for the Bathroom)]]

CATEGORIES: 2008 singles, Kanye West songs, Lupe Fiasco songs, Music videos directed by Diane Martel, Music videos directed by Hype Williams, N.E.R.D songs, Song recordings produced by The Neptunes, Songs written by Pharrell Williams, Songs written by Chad Hugo

"Everyone Nose (All the Girls Standing in the Line for the Bathroom)" is the first single by American band N.E.R.D from their third studio album Seeing Sounds. The song was accompanied by music video and was directed by Diane Martel. A video for the remix of the song featuring Kanye West, Lupe Fiasco and Pusha T of Clipse was also filmed and directed by Hype Williams.
The song was generally well received by critics. N.E.R.D promoted the song through numerous tours and festivals. The song peaked at number seventeen on the Japan Hot 100 Singles and at number forty-one on the UK Singles Chart, but failed to chart in the United States.

Composition

The song was written by Pharrell Williams and Chad Hugo and produced by The Neptunes. The title of the song derives from the subject of social snorting cocaine in lavatories among women.
The beat was inspired by a rare video clip shown to N.E.R.D by Missy Elliott. Williams "lost his mind, the way these people were dancing and these crazy beats." The song begins with an acoustic bass patch from a Roland 5080 and continues with drums from the Triton Extreme. Coleman explained that the beat was inspired by the "Baltimore B-More sound." He went on to say that "Timbaland is scratching in there, too. The big Latin section is again, all Pharrell—all the same instruments; he just flipped the programming. That is the Latin club explosion part, mostly programmed beats with some buckets."

Remix

The song produced a remix featuring Child Rebel Soldier (Kanye West, Lupe Fiasco, Pharrell) and Pusha T that was available as an iTunes and Zune Marketplace bonus track with the purchase of Seeing Sounds. When asked why the song was remixed, Hugo replied with, "We wanted something with more of a straight-ahead, club-bumping beat, just a different take on it. We like to remix, dismantle, take apart shit and put it back together. It's just like a Rubik's Cube: When you can't solve it, you just break it and you put it back together." Williams added, "We think that 'Everyone Nose' in its current form already hits a certain demographic a certain way, so I just wanted to go and do something different."

Critical reception

Critical responses to the song were generally positive. Christian Hoard of Rolling Stone claimed that the song would be "destined to go down as one of 2008's most interesting hip-hop cuts." and that the lyrics were "about as shallow and trite as an inflatable kiddy swimming pool, but less fun".
The remix has also garnered positive reviews; Lowe noted that "Kanye West, Lupe Fiasco, and Pusha T make an appearance on a somewhat more enjoyable remixed version of song", which added a "nice outside perspective to the otherwise tiresome track". Tom Breihan of The Village Voice called the remix "pretty great" compared to the "horrible hammering" of the original song. He criticized West's lyrics, saying he was "back to talking about girls on his verse again … without any of the humane warmth he used to sometimes bring."
In response to the positive reception from listeners, Williams said, "We love the reaction that we get that song. They know what we're talking about." Shay Haley, a member of the band, went on saying, "Me, personally, I'm shocked it's being embraced the way it is. I feel like it sticks out like a sore thumb in comparison to what you hear every day on the radio… It's just our personal observation of what we've seen over the past couple of years, so we felt like making a party record out of it."

Live performances

N.E.R.D promoted the song by performing it in several tours and festivals, including the Austin City Limits Music Festival and the Diesel Bash.

Music video

Williams contacted the T.A.G. ad agency to create an interactive video in the style of an integrated campaign to "hype" the single.
During filming inside a Madison nightclub in New York, a fight broke out on the set of the music video and nearly shut down production. One person was transported to a local hospital for treatment. Lohan and West both visited the set at different times during the shoot, but were not present at the time of the fight. Union workers threatened to walk off the set, complaining that the production team behind the video failed to hire enough security and felt the environment had become unsafe.
MTV initially refused to play "Everyone Nose" because of lyrical references to cocaine. When the website received 5,000 hits in its first week, MTV softened and aired a clean version without the URL, which frustrated T.A.G.; Rebecca Skinner commented, saying, "All artists want their videos to be seen on as many platforms as possible. However MTV is not what it used to be—yet another reason why the online component to this is important."
A music video for the remix of "Everyone Nose" featuring Kanye West, Lupe Fiasco and Pusha T was shot in July and was directed by Hype Williams. "The concept based on old '80s video-game graphics playing behind us while we're rhyming," Williams said. "We just want to have fun with the project. In a day and age where the record industry is what it is, I'm lucky enough to be on a label that understands and they'll just let us have fun."

Track listing

Charts




