[[Lake Huron]]

CATEGORIES: Lakes of Ontario, Lake Huron, Great Lakes Waterway, Lakes of Michigan, Canada–United States border, International lakes of North America

Lake Huron () is one of the five  Great Lakes of North America. Hydrologically, it comprises the easterly portion of Lake Michigan–Huron, having the same surface elevation as its westerly counterpart, to which it is connected by the wide Straits of Mackinac. It is bounded on the east by the Canadian province of Ontario and on the west by the state of Michigan in the United States. The name of the lake is derived from early French explorers who named it for the Huron people inhabiting the region.
The huronian glaciation was named due to evidence collected from Lake Huron region.

Geography

By surface area, Lake Huron is the second-largest of the Great Lakes, with a surface area of 23,000 square miles (59,600 km2) making it the third-largest fresh water lake on Earth (and the fourth-largest lake, if the Caspian Sea is counted as a lake). When measured at the Low Water Datum, the lake contains a volume of 850 cubic miles (3,540 km3) and a shoreline length (including islands) of 3,827 miles (6,157 km).
The surface of Lake Huron is 577 feet (176 m) above sea level..
Important cities on Lake Huron include: Goderich, Sarnia, Bay City, Alpena, Rogers City, Cheboygan, Tobermory, Sauble Beach, Saugeen Shores, St. Ignace, and Port Huron.
A large bay that protrudes northeast from Lake Huron into Ontario, Canada, is called Georgian Bay. A notable feature of the lake is Manitoulin Island, which separates the North Channel and Georgian Bay from Lake Huron's main body of water. It is the world's largest freshwater island. Major centres on Georgian Bay include Owen Sound, Wasaga Beach, Midland, Penetanguishene, Port Severn and Parry Sound.
A smaller bay that protrudes southwest from Lake Huron into the state of Michigan, U.S.A., is called Saginaw Bay.

Water levels

Historic High Water
The lake fluctuates from month to month with the highest lake levels in October and November. The normal high-water mark is  above Chart Datum.
Historic Low Water
Lake levels tend to be the lowest in winter. The normal low-water mark is  below Chart Datum.

Great Lakes Circle Tour

The Great Lakes Circle Tour is a designated scenic road system connecting all the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River.

Geology

Lake Huron has the largest shore line length of any of the Great Lakes, counting its 30,000 islands.
Lake Huron is separated from Lake Michigan, which lies at the same level, by the narrow Straits of Mackinac, making them hydrologically the same body of water (sometimes called Lake Michigan-Huron and sometimes described as two 'lobes of the same lake').  Aggregated, Lake Huron-Michigan, at , "is technically the world's largest freshwater lake." When counted separately, Lake Superior is slightly larger than both; and higher. Lake Superior drains into the St. Marys River at Sault Ste. Marie which then flows southward into Lake Huron. The water then flows south to the St. Clair River, at Port Huron, Michigan, and Sarnia, Ontario.
The Great Lakes Waterway continues thence to Lake St. Clair; the Detroit River and Detroit, Michigan; into Lake Erie and thence – via Lake Ontario and the St. Lawrence River – to the Atlantic Ocean.
Like the other Great Lakes, it was formed by melting ice as the continental glaciers retreated toward the end of the last ice age. Before this, Lake Huron was a low-lying depression through which flowed the now-buried Laurentian and Huronian Rivers; the lake bed was criss-crossed by a large network of tributaries to these ancient waterways, with many of the old channels still evident on bathymetric maps.

History

The French, the first European visitors to the region, often referred to Lake Huron as La Mer Douce, "the fresh-water sea". In 1656, a map by French cartographer Nicolas Sanson refers to the lake as Karegnondi, a Wendat word which has been variously translated as "Freshwater Sea", "Lake of the Hurons", or simply "lake".  The lake was generally labeled "Lac des Hurons" (Lake of the Huron) on most early European maps.

Storm of 1913

On November 9, 1913, a great storm in Lake Huron sank ten ships and more than twenty were driven ashore.  The storm, which raged for 16 hours, killed 235 seamen.True Tales of the Great Lakes, by Dwight Boyer; p212
The Matoa had passed between Port Huron, Michigan, and Sarnia, Ontario, just after midnight. On the 9th, just after six in the morning, the Senator pushed upstream. Less than an hour later, the Manola passed through. Captain Frederick W. Light of the Manola reported that both the Canadian and the American weather stations had storm flag signals flying from their weather towers.m. that Sunday, the Regina steamed out of Sarnia into the northwest gale. The warnings now had been up for four hours.Freshwater Fury by Frank Barcus, pg 72 Waves breaking over the ship damaged several windows and the crew reported seeing portions of the concrete break wall peeling off as the waves struck it.True Tales of the Great Lakes, by Dwight Boyer, pg 269
Meanwhile, fifty miles farther up the lake, the Matoa and Captain Hugh McLeod had to ride out the storm without a safe harbor.Shipwrecks of Lake Huron . . . The Great Sweetwater Sea, Jack Parker, Avery Color Studios, Au Train, Michigan, 1986, pg 56  It was noon on Monday before the winds let up and not until 11:00 p.m. that night before Capt. Light determined it to be safe to continue his journey.Freshwater Fury by Frank Barcus, pg 73

Modern history

On October 26, 2010,

Shipwrecks

More than a thousand wrecks have been recorded in Lake Huron. These purportedly include the first European vessel to sail the Great Lakes, Le Griffon, built in 1679 on the eastern shore of Lake Erie, near Buffalo, New York. Sieur de la Salle navigated across Lake Erie, up the Detroit River, Lake St. Clair and the St. Clair River out into Lake Huron.  Passing the Straits of Mackinac, La Salle and the Griffon made landfall on Washington Island, off the tip of the Door Peninsula on the Wisconsin side of Lake Michigan.  Here, La Salle filled the Griffon with pelts and in late November 1679 sent the Griffon back to the site of modern-day Buffalo, never to be seen again.
Two wrecks have been identified as the Griffon, although neither has gained final verification as the actual wreck.  Blown by a fierce storm after leaving, the Griffon ran aground before the storm.  The people of Manitoulin Island say that the wreck in Mississagi Straits at the western tip of the island is that of the Griffon. Themississagilighthouse. Retrieved on 2013-07-12. Michigansotherside. Retrieved on 2013-07-12.  Meanwhile, others near Tobermory, say that the wreck on Russell Island, 150 miles farther east in Georgian Bay is that of the Griffin. . . The Great Sweetwater Sea, Jack Parker, Avery Color Studios, Au Train, Michigan, 1986, pg 25-6The Mississagi L(i)ghthouse © 2006/2010. Themississagilighthouse. Retrieved on 2013-07-12.

Thunder Bay

The 448-square-mile Thunder Bay National Marine Sanctuary and Underwater Preserve is home to 116 historically significant shipwrecks. It is the thirteenth National Marine Sanctuary designated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, established in 2000. En.org. Retrieved on 2013-07-12. Glass-bottom-boat tours depart from Alpena, Michigan, providing tourists with views of some of the famous shipwrecks in Thunder Bay.

Saginaw Bay

185 of 1,000+ wrecksShipwrecks of Lake Huron . . . The Great Sweetwater Sea, Jack Parker, Avery Color Studios, Au Train, Michigan, 1986, pg 50-61 are within the waters of Saginaw Bay.
Matoa, a propeller freighter weighing 2,311 gross tons, was built in Cleveland in 1890, and was wrecked in 1913 on Port Austin Reef. . . The Great Sweetwater Sea, Jack Parker, Avery Color Studios, Au Train, Michigan, 1986, pg 56

Georgian Bay, North Channel

Georgian Bay, the largest bay on Lake Huron, contains 212 of the 1,000 sunken vessels in the lake. . . The Great Sweetwater Sea, Jack Parker, Avery Color Studios, Au Train, Michigan, 1986, pg 65-77
Manola, a propeller freighter of 2,325 gross tons, was built in 1890 by the Globe Shipping Company of Cleveland, Ohio.  It was operated by the Minnesota Steamship Company (Cleveland) from 1890–1901, and by the Pittsburgh Steamship Company from 1901–1918.  On January 25, 1918, the Manola was sold to the U.S. Shipping Board. It was sold again in 1920 to the Canada Steamship Lines, Ltd., and renamed the Mapledawn. It became stranded on November 20, 1924, on Christian IslandShipwrecks of Lake Huron . . . The Great Sweetwater Sea, Jack Parker, Avery Color Studios, Au Train, Michigan, 1986, pg 71 in Georgian Bay. Headed for Port McNichol, Ontario, it was declared a total loss after two weeks. Salvagers were able to recover approximately 75,000 bushels of barley for delivery to Midland, Ontario.Great Lakes Vessels Index; Historical Collections of the Great Lakes; Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio

File:P7050019 Tawas Point SP (E Tawas Mich).
File:Harrisville Beach near State Park - Lake Huron.jpg|Harrisville Beach on Lake Huron
File:Lake Huron from Upper Peninsula.

Ecology

Lake Huron has a lake retention time of 22 years.
Like all of the Great Lakes, the ecology of Lake Huron has undergone drastic changes in the last century. The lake originally supported a native deepwater fish community dominated by lake trout, which fed on a number of deepwater ciscos as well as sculpins and other native fishes. Several invasive species, including sea lamprey, alewife and rainbow smelt, became abundant in the lake by the 1930s. The major native top predator, lake trout, were virtually extirpated from the lake by 1950 due to a combination of overfishing and the effects of sea lamprey. Several species of deepwater ciscos were also extirpated from the lake by the 1960s; the only remaining native deepwater cisco is the bloater. Nonnative Pacific salmon have been stocked in the lake since the 1960s, and lake trout have also been stocked in an attempt to rehabilitate the species, although little natural reproduction of stocked trout has been observed.
Lake Huron has suffered recently due the introduction of a variety of new invasive species, including zebra and quagga mussels, the spiny water flea, and round gobies.  The deepwater demersal fish community of the lake was in a state of collapse by 2006,Riley, S. C. et al. 2008. "Deepwater demersal fish community collapse in Lake Huron". Transactions of the American Fisheries Society 137: 1879-1880. and a number of drastic changes have been observed in the zooplankton community of the lake. P. et al.  2009. "Recent shifts in the crustacean zooplankton community of Lake Huron". Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 66: 816-828.  Chinook salmon catches have also been greatly reduced in recent years, and lake whitefish have become less abundant and are in poor condition. These recent changes may be attributable to the new exotic species.



Great Lakes in general

 
 

Notes




