[[Alice in Chains]]

CATEGORIES: Alice in Chains, 1987 establishments in Washington (state), 2002 disestablishments in Washington (state), 2005 establishments in Washington (state), American alternative metal musical groups, American hard rock musical groups, Columbia Records artists, EMI Records artists, Grunge musical groups, Heavy metal musical groups from Washington (state), Kerrang! Awards winners, Musical groups established in 1987, Musical groups disestablished in 2002, Musical groups reestablished in 2005, Musical groups from Seattle, Washington, Musical quartets, Virgin Records artists

Alice in Chains is an American rock band formed in Seattle, Washington, in 1987 by guitarist and songwriter Jerry Cantrell and original lead vocalist Layne Staley. The initial lineup was rounded out by drummer Sean Kinney, and bassist Mike Starr (who was replaced in 1993 by Mike Inez).
Although widely associated with grunge music, the band's sound incorporates heavy metal and acoustic elements. Since its formation, Alice in Chains has released five studio albums, three EPs, two live albums, four compilations, and two DVDs. The band is known for its distinct vocal style which often included the harmonized vocals of Staley and Cantrell.
Alice in Chains rose to international fame as part of the grunge movement of the early 1990s, along with other Seattle bands such as Nirvana, Pearl Jam, and Soundgarden. The band was one of the most successful music acts of the 1990s, selling over 25 million albums worldwide, In 1992, the band released their album Dirt, which was critically acclaimed and has been certified quadruple platinum. The band also achieved two No. 1 Billboard 200 releases, 14 top ten songs on the Mainstream Rock Tracks chart and eight Grammy Award nominations.
Although never officially disbanding, Alice in Chains was plagued by extended inactivity from 1996 onwards due to Staley's substance abuse, which resulted in his death in 2002. The band reunited in 2005 with new lead vocalist William DuVall, and released their fourth studio album, Black Gives Way to Blue, in 2009. The album was a success, being certified gold by the RIAA in 2010. Alice in Chains released their fifth studio album, The Devil Put Dinosaurs Here, on May 28, 2013. They are currently on tour for this album.

History

Formation and early years (1984–89)

Before the formation of Alice in Chains, then-drummer Layne Staley landed his first gig as a vocalist when he auditioned to sing for a local glam metal band known as Sleze after receiving some encouragement from his stepbrother Ken Elmer.  Other members of this group at that time were guitarists Johnny Bacolas and Zoli Semanate, drummer James Bergstrom, and bassist Byron Hansen. This band went through several lineup changes culminating with Nick Pollock as their sole guitarist and Bacolas switching to bass before discussions arose about changing their name to Alice in Chains. pp. 211-212. This was prompted by a conversation that Bacolas had with a singer from another band about backstage passes. Due to concerns over the reference to female bondage, the group ultimately chose to spell it differently as Alice N' Chains to allay any parental concerns but Staley's mother Nancy McCallum has said she still was not happy with this at first.
While performing with Alice N' Chains, Staley met guitarist Jerry Cantrell while working at Music Bank rehearsal studios, where the two struggling musicians became roommates, and lived in a rehearsal space they shared. Alice N' Chains soon disbanded and Staley joined a funk band who at the time also required a guitarist. Staley asked Cantrell to join as a sideman. Cantrell agreed on condition that Staley join Cantrell's band, which at the time included drummer Sean Kinney and bassist Mike Starr. Eventually the funk project broke up and in 1987 Staley joined Cantrell's band on a full-time basis, playing in clubs around the Pacific Northwest, often stretching 15 minutes of material into a 45-minute set. The band played a couple of gigs calling themselves several different monikers, including Diamond Lie, which was the name of Cantrell's previous band,
Local promoter Randy Hauser became aware of the band at a concert, and offered to pay for demo recordings. However, one day before the band was due to record at the Music Bank studio in Washington, police shut down the studio during the biggest cannabis raid in the history of the state. The final demo, completed in 1988, was named The Treehouse Tapes, and found its way to the music managers Kelly Curtis and Susan Silver, who also managed the Seattle-based band Soundgarden. Curtis and Silver passed the demo on to Columbia Records' A&R representative Nick Terzo, who set up an appointment with label president Don Ienner. Based on The Treehouse Tapes, Ienner signed Alice in Chains to Columbia in 1989. The band also recorded another untitled demo over a three-month period in 1989. This recording can be found on the bootleg release Sweet Alice.

Facelift and Sap (1990–92)

Alice in Chains soon became a top priority of the label, who released the band's first official recording in July 1990, a promotional EP We Die Young. The EP's lead single, "We Die Young", became a hit on metal radio. After its success, the label rushed Alice in Chains' debut album into production with producer Dave Jerden.
The resulting album, Facelift, was released on August 21, 1990, peaking at number 42 in the summer of 1991 on the Billboard 200 chart.
Facelift was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America by the end of 1990, while the band continued to hone its audience, opening for such artists as Iggy Pop,
Following the tour, Alice in Chains entered the studio to record demos for its next album, but ended up recording five acoustic songs instead. While in the studio, drummer Sean Kinney had a dream about "making an EP called Sap". The band decided "not to mess with fate", and on March 21, 1992, Alice in Chains released their second EP, Sap. The EP was released while Nirvana's Nevermind was at the top of the Billboard 200 charts, resulting in a rising popularity of Seattle-based bands, and the term grunge music. Sap was soon certified gold within two weeks. The EP features guest vocals by Ann Wilson from the band Heart, who joined Staley and Cantrell for the choruses of "Brother", "Am I Inside" and "Love Song". The EP also features Mark Arm of Mudhoney and Chris Cornell of Soundgarden, who appeared together on the song "Right Turn", credited to "Alice Mudgarden" in the liner notes.

Dirt (1992–93)

In March 1992, the band returned to the studio. With new songs written primarily on the road, the material has an overall darker feel than Facelift, with six of the album's thirteen songs dealing with the subject of addiction. "We did a lot of soul searching on this album. There's a lot of intense feelings." Cantrell said, "We deal with our daily demons through music. All of the poison that builds up during the day we cleanse when we play".
On September 29, 1992, Alice in Chains released its second album, Dirt. The album peaked at number six on the Billboard 200, and since its release has been certified quadruple platinum by the RIAA, making Dirt the band's highest selling album to date. The album was a critical success, with Steve Huey of Allmusic praising the album as a "major artistic statement, and the closest they ever came to recording a flat-out masterpiece".

Jar of Flies (1993–94)

Following Alice in Chains' extensive 1993 world tour, Staley said the band "just wanted to go into the studio for a few days with our acoustic guitars and see what happened". "We never really planned on the music we made at that time to be released. But the record label heard it and they really liked it. For us, it was just the experience of four guys getting together in the studio and making some music."
While never originally intended for a public release, Columbia Records released Alice in Chains' second acoustic-based EP, Jar of Flies, on January 25, 1994. Written and recorded in one week, Staley's condition prompted the other band members to cancel all scheduled dates one day before the start of the tour, putting the band on hiatus. Alice in Chains was replaced by Candlebox on the tour.

Alice in Chains (1995–96)

While Alice in Chains was inactive during 1995, Staley joined the "grunge supergroup" Mad Season, which also featured Pearl Jam guitarist Mike McCready, bassist John Baker Saunders from The Walkabouts and Screaming Trees drummer Barrett Martin. Mad Season released one album, Above, for which Staley provided lead vocals and the album artwork. The album spawned a number-two single, "River of Deceit", as well as a home video release of Live at the Moore. In April 1995, Alice in Chains entered Bad Animals Studio in Seattle with producer Toby Wright, who had previously worked with Corrosion of Conformity and Slayer. On October 6, 1995, the band released the studio version of the song to radio via satellite uplink.
On November 7, 1995, Columbia Records released the eponymous Alice in Chains, which debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, and has since been certified double platinum. Of the album's four singles, "Grind", "Again", "Over Now", and "Heaven Beside You", three feature Cantrell on lead vocals. Jon Wiederhorn of Rolling Stone called the album "liberating and enlightening, the songs achieve a startling, staggering and palpable impact."
Alice in Chains resurfaced on April 10, 1996, to perform their first concert in three years for MTV Unplugged, a program featuring all-acoustic set lists.

Hiatus and the death of Layne Staley (1996–2002)

Although Alice in Chains never officially disbanded, Staley became a recluse, rarely leaving his Seattle condominium following the death of his ex-fiancée Demri Parrott in 1996, due to bacterial endocarditis. "Drugs worked for me for years", Staley told Rolling Stone in 1996, "and now they're turning against me, now I'm walking through hell". In 1997, Alice in Chains toured Japan, New Zealand and Australia as the support act for KISS during their Alive/Worldwide Reunion Tour when KISS reformed with their original members and returned to wearing their famous face paint. Unable to continue with new Alice in Chains material, Cantrell released his first solo album, Boggy Depot, in 1998 which also featured Sean Kinney and Mike Inez.
By 2002, Cantrell had finished work on his second solo album, Degradation Trip. Written in 1998, the album's lyrical content focused heavily on what Cantrell regarded as the demise of Alice in Chains which still remained evident as the album approached its June 2002 release. However, in March that year, Cantrell commented, "We're all still around, so it's possible in Chains could all do something someday, and I fully hope someday we will."
After a decade of battling drug addiction, Layne Staley was found dead in his condominium on April 19, 2002.

Reunion shows (2005–08)

In 2005, Jerry Cantrell, Mike Inez, and Sean Kinney reunited to perform a benefit concert in Seattle for victims of the tsunami disaster that struck South Asia.
DuVall joined Alice in Chains as lead singer during the band's reunion concerts. Velvet Revolver and ex-Guns N' Roses bassist Duff McKagan also joined the band for the reunion tour, playing rhythm guitar on selected songs. Before the tour, Kinney mentioned in an interview that he would be interested in writing new material, but not as Alice in Chains. However, AliceinChains.

Black Gives Way to Blue (2008–10)

Blabbermouth.
In October 2008, Alice in Chains began recording its fourth studio album at the Foo Fighters' Studio 606 in Los Angeles with producer Nick Raskulinecz.
In September 2008, it was announced that Alice in Chains would headline Australia's Soundwave Festival in 2009, alongside Nine Inch Nails and Lamb of God. On August 1, 2009, Alice in Chains, along with Mastodon, Avenged Sevenfold, and Glyder, performed at Marlay Park, Dublin as a direct support to Metallica. The band made an appearance on Later Live ... With Jools Holland on November 10, 2009, performing "Lesson Learned", "Black Gives Way To Blue", and "Check My Brain" as the final performance of the episode.
To coincide with the band's European tour, Alice in Chains released its next single, "Your Decision", on November 16 in the UK and was in the US on December 1. On May 18, 2010, Black Gives Way to Blue was certified gold by the RIAA for shipments of over 500,000 copies.
Along with Mastodon and Deftones, Alice In Chains toured the United States and Canada in late 2010 on the Blackdiamondskye tour, an amalgam of the three bands' latest album titles (Black Gives Way to Blue, Diamond Eyes, and Crack the Skye).

Future plans and the death of Mike Starr (2010–2011)

In April 2010, guitarist Jerry Cantrell revealed to MTV News that Alice in Chains was contemplating making a fifth studio album in the foreseeable future. He explained, "There are thoughts. We'll see how far we get. Staying in the moment is a good way to live and we certainly hope that it happens. I don't see any reason why it wouldn't happen."
DuVall revealed in September 2010 that Alice in Chains had not begun writing their next album yet, but "there's plenty of riffs flying around." He added, "That was the case when we first started back up. We would just stockpile these fragments, and then some time later we would sift through the mountain of stuff, and that's what became Black Gives Way to Blue. The same thing has been happening since we've been touring Black Gives Way to Blue, so it would be only natural to at some point say, 'Hey, we've got a lot of stuff. Let's sift through and see what we've got this time.'" DuVall also mentioned that it was possible that the new album would feature songs that were written for Black Gives Way to Blue.
On March 8, 2011, former Alice In Chains bassist Mike Starr was found dead in Salt Lake City. Police told Reuters they were called to Starr's Salt Lake City home at 1:42 pm where the musician's body was found; Starr was 44. Reports later surfaced that Starr's roommate had seen him mixing methadone and anxiety medication hours before he was found dead. Later reports indicated Starr's death may have been linked to two different types of antidepressants he was prescribed by his doctor.

The Devil Put Dinosaurs Here (2011–present)

On March 21, 2011, Alice in Chains announced that they were working on a fifth studio album.
By 2013, it had been reported through statements of both Cantrell and Inez that Alice In Chains had begun the recording process for their fifth studio album. The album was expected to be finished by summer of 2012 and released by the end of 2012 or beginning of 2013. While Alice in Chains had begun writing for a new album in 2011, Cantrell's surgery delayed recording the new material. In an interview published in May 2012, Cantrell explained, "The thing that set me back is I had some bone spurs and cartilage issues in my shoulders. I had the same issue in the other shoulder about six years ago so I've had them both done now. It's a repetitive motion injury from playing.""
On February 13, 2013, Alice in Chains posted on Facebook that their new album title would be an anagram of the letters H V L E N T P S U S D A H I E E O E D T I U R R.
The Devil Put Dinosaurs Here debuted at number 2 on the Billboard 200.
Asked in September 2013 if Alice in Chains would make another album, Cantrell replied, "It'll be a while. It's been four years since we put the last one out, but at least it's not the gap that was between the last one, so that's about right - about three to four years."

Musical style

Although Alice in Chains has been labeled grunge by the mainstream media,
Jerry Cantrell's guitar style combines "pummeling riffs and expansive guitar textures" to create "slow, brooding minor-key grinds". He is also recognized for his natural ability to blend acoustic and electric guitars. While down-tuned distorted guitars mixed with Staley's distinctive "snarl-to-a-scream" vocals appealed to heavy metal fans, the band also had "a sense of melody that was undeniable", which introduced Alice in Chains to a much wider audience outside of the heavy metal underground.
According to Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic, Alice in Chains' sound has a "Black Sabbath-style riffing and an unconventional vocal style". The band has been described by Erlewine as "hard enough for metal fans, yet their dark subject matter and punky attack placed them among the front ranks of the Seattle-based grunge bands". Three of the band's releases feature acoustic music, and while the band initially kept these releases separate, Alice in Chains' self-titled album combined the styles to form "a bleak, nihilistic sound that balanced grinding hard rock with subtly textured acoustic numbers".
Alice in Chains is also noted for the unique vocal harmonies of Staley (or DuVall) and Cantrell, which included overlapping passages, dual lead vocals, and trademark harmonies typically separated by a major third. Alyssa Burrows said the band's distinctive sound "came from Staley's vocal style and his lyrics dealing with personal struggles and addiction". Staley's songs were often considered "dark", with themes such as drug abuse, depression, and suicide, while Cantrell's lyrics often dealt with personal relationships.

Legacy

Alice in Chains has sold more than 14 million albums in the United States, and around 25 million worldwide, released two number-one albums and 21 top 40 singles, and has received eight Grammy nominations. The band was ranked number 34 on VH1's 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock. In August 2009, Alice in Chains won the Kerrang! Icon Award."News – The 2009 Kerrang! Awards winners". Kerrang!. August 3, 2009.
Alice in Chains has had a large impact on many bands, such as Godsmack, who, according to Jon Wiederhorn of MTV, "have sonically followed Alice in Chains' lead while adding their own distinctive edge". Godsmack singer and founder Sully Erna has also cited Layne Staley as his primary influence. Metallica also recorded "Rebel Of Babylon" as a tribute to Layne Staley, but the song was left off Death Magnetic due to manufacturing restrictions and then later released on 4 songs EP Beyond Magnetic.
Alice in Chains has also had a significant influence on modern heavy metal. Their songs were covered by various metal bands such as Opeth,

Personnel

Discography

Awards and nominations

Alice in Chains has received eight Grammy nominations. The band's first Grammy nomination occurred when "Man in the Box" was nominated for Best Hard Rock Performance in 1992. Alice in Chains has also received Grammy nominations for Best Hard Rock Performance for the band's 1992 album, Dirt, "I Stay Away" from 1994's Jar of Flies, "Grind" and "Again" from the band's 1995 self-titled album, and the 1999 track "Get Born Again". The music video for the song "Would?", Alice in Chains' contribution to the 1992 film, Singles, won the award for Best Video from a Film at the 1993 MTV Video Music Awards. In 2009 they won the Kerrang! Icon award
The American Music Awards is an annual awards ceremony created by Dick Clark in 1973.
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 
|-
The Grammy Awards are awarded annually by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences.[ref]
</ref><ref>
</ref><ref>
</ref><ref>
</ref><ref></ref><ref>
</ref>
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 1992 || "Man in the Box" || Best Hard Rock Performance || 
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 1993 || Dirt || Best Hard Rock Performance || 
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 1995 || "I Stay Away" || Best Hard Rock Performance || 
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 1996 || "Grind" || Best Hard Rock Performance || 
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 1997 || "Again" || Best Hard Rock Performance || 
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 2000 ||  "Get Born Again" || Best Hard Rock Performance || 
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 2010 ||  "Check My Brain" || Best Hard Rock Performance || 
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 2011 ||  "A Looking in View" || Best Hard Rock Performance || 
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 2013 ||  "The Devil Put Dinosaurs Here" || Best Engineered Album- Non Classical || 
The MTV Video Music Awards is an annual awards ceremony established in 1984 by MTV.
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 
|-






