[[Anuj Gurwara]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 births, Living people, Indian actors, Indian male film actors, Indian film singers, Indian male singers, Indian radio personalities, Performers of Hindu music, Indian playback singers, Telugu playback singers, Filmfare Awards South winners, Masters of Ceremonies

Anuj Gurwara (born 9 June 1981) is a Filmfare Award winning Indian playback singer, master of ceremonies, lyricist, actor, voice-over artist, radio jockey and television show host. He is most popularly known as the singer of the hit song "Panchadara Bomma" from Magadheera.

Early life

Anuj comes from a family of educators. His father, Yogendra Gurwara, and mother, Jyoti Gurwara, are educationists and run a school, Sherwood Public School, Hyderabad.
Anuj did his schooling in Sherwood and later, graduated in Psychology and Advertising from Nizam College, Hyderabad.

Career

Anuj started his career working as a copywriter and content developer for various design firms and advertising agencies. After a short stint with a theatre group, he decided to pursue a career in entertainment.

Playback singing

In 2009 Anuj debuted as playback singer for Tollywood, not knowing how to speak  Telugu. Under the  direction of M. M. Keeravani, he sang a song, "Panchadara Bomma", for the Telugu film, Magadheera, which would emerge as one of the highest grossing Telugu films of all time. Along with the success of the film, the song, Panchadara Bomma, grew to be a massive hit and established Anuj as a fresh new voice in the world of music.
S. S. Rajamouli, the director of Magadheera stated in an article - "I opine that Panchadara Bomma is the best song in my career".
The song "Panchadara Bomma" is said to have singularly generated revenues of over Rs 30 million from mobile phone ringtone downloads, which is said to be a record that no other song in Telugu cinema has created till now.
Panchadara Bomma also earned Anuj his first ever Filmfare trophy. He was awarded Best Male Playback Singer in a star-studded ceremony in Chennai on 7 August 2010.
Anuj's Hindi singing debut happened in 2012, in the form of Makkhi, the dubbed version of the superhit Telugu film, Eega. Apart from singing two songs in then film, he also penned the lyrics for two songs.

Live Performances

Anuj has been actively performing in India and abroad at various corporate shows and public gigs after his award-winning singing debut.
He has performed across the United States of America to packed audiences. Invited by the Indian associations in various cities, he has set benchmarks with his energetic and fun performances in New York, New Jersey, Washington DC, San Francisco, Sacramento, Phoenix, Detroit, Dallas, San Antonio, Philadelphia, Chicago, Bloomington, etc..
Anuj has also performed in Singapore, Malaysia, Mauritius, Kuwait and other countries.

Master of Ceremonies

Being an RJ and an actor, Anuj diversified himself as an MC. From hosting formal events to large parties and concerts, Anuj has established himself as one of the most popular Master of Ceremonies. He has hosted events, big and small, for a large number of corporate companies and Event Managers.
Anuj's understanding of the pulse of an event, appropriate sense of humor, smooth integration of various elements, personalised involvement with the crowd and respect to the theme of the event, has made him a preferred MC for various kinds of events.

Theatre and film actor

Anuj has been an active theatre actor in Hyderabad since 1999, as part of various Theatre productions. He has showcased his talent as an actor and received positive reviews for his performance.Review of Habeas CorpusDeccan Heral, BangaloreReview of Write, Rite and RightThe Hindu review of Write, Rite and Right
In 2003, while pursuing acting, Anuj got a call from Nagesh Kukunoor for Hyderabad Blues 2. Sekhar had won the National Film Award for his directorial debut in Dollar Dreams. He cast Anuj as the 2nd lead for his film Anand, which released in 2004. Anand was a massive hit and Anuj received good reviews for his part.Total Tollywood review of Anand
Anuj made a comeback into cinema after establishing himself as a playback singer. He played a cameo in S. S. Rajamouli's hit film of 2010 Maryada Ramanna

Radio

In 2005, Anuj auditioned for All India Radio. He was selected and started hosting music-based shows on Yuvavani. Following All India Radio, Anuj worked for Radio Biryani, a private radio program setup that aired on the AIR frequency.Award at Radio Biryani Anuj's joined Radio City 91.1 FM in 2006. The station was setting up in Hyderabad, one of the first private FM stations in the city.Article on Radio City Hyd Launch
Anuj began hosting an evening drive time show, Recharge, six days a week, from 8:00 pm to 11:00 pm. He played popular Hindi music and maintained high energy, wit and humor throughout the three hours. The show was a hit right in its early days. It struck a chord with the evening listenership that would drive back from work, and as Anuj would say, "recharge" their batteries on their way home. Anuj enjoyed immense popularity through the show. The name stuck with him and he is fondly called RJ "Recharge" Anuj to this day. Anuj shifted to the 5:00-9:00 pm time slot after a year, yet, commanded a dedicated listenership in Hyderabad.
Owing to his personal connect and popularity with listeners, he was awarded "No.1 RJ across All-India Radio City" for the year 2006-07. Anuj was soon shifted to the morning show, The Radio City Breakfast Show, from 7:00 am to 11:00 am, where he, with Shraddha, gave a fun and energetic start to the day. The chirpy, positive and friendly banter between them had Hyderabad tuned in every morning. In February 2008, Anuj was awarded "India's Best Radio Host for 2007-08" in a nationwide search.Radio Duniya Awards
Anuj quit Radio City in July 2008, after the station changed its language mix to a more regional sound.

Television (VJ)

In February 2006, Anuj became a VJ with SS Music. He won the VJ Factor 2, a hunt for VJs in South India. Out of about 5000 people who competed, Anuj was one of the four winners.

Travel show host

Anuj hosts a travel-based television show called Road To Paradise, on Travel Trendz TV,www.com a new national television channel. The show, in English and Hindi, is based on an adventure-exploration theme, where Anuj rides a bike across India, followed by two cameras, exploring hidden locales, tourist spots, music, dance, food and culture.traveltrendztv.com

Voice work and writing

Anuj Gurwara is a freelance voice-over artist and script writer for various ad films, radio spots, documentaries, films, training modules and e-learning projects. In 2009, Gurwara became part of India's first ever PlayStation 2 game, Hanuman, as the voice of Hanuman in Hindi and English. He also regularly dubs for characters in films.
As writer and dubbing incharge, one of Gurwara's major projects was the entire language conversion of the Telugu film Eega into its Hindi version, Makkhi. Anuj was responsible for writing the Hindi version of the film, casting voice actors as well as directing the entire dub of the film, apart from dubbing for the main lead, played by Nani. Anuj also sang two songs, while debuting as lyricist for two songs.thehindu.com
Makkhi was a highly successful film, and Anuj received praise and reviews for its high-quality dubbing.bollywoodhungama.hindustantimes.com
He occasionally writes columns for newspapers as well.epaper.com

Discography (Singer)

Discography (Lyricist)

Filmography (Actor)

Filmography (Dialogue Writer)

Radio Shows

Television shows

Awards

Playback singing

Recognition

Radio jockey






