[[Downer EDI Rail GT46C ACe]]

CATEGORIES: Aurizon diesel locomotives, Co-Co locomotives, Diesel locomotives of Australia, Pacific National diesel locomotives, Railway locomotives introduced in 2007

The GT46C ACe is a model of diesel electric locomotive designed and built by Downer Rail, Cardiff using Electro-Motive Diesel components between 2007 and 2013.
The first units were built as the SCT class for freight operator SCT Logistics from 2007 followed by the LDP class for Downer Rail's Locomotive Demand Power division, the TT class for Pacific National and the GWA class for Genesee & Wyoming Australia.

Design

The class was a new design for Australian conditions based on other locomotives produced by Downer EDI Rail, such as the narrow gauge GT42CU AC purchased by Queensland Rail and Pacific National and the GT46C purchased by Westrail, Freight Australia and FreightLink. The GT42CU AC used a 12-cylinder EMD 710 engine, based on the USA built SD70MAC with scaled down traction motors, while the GT46C used a 16-cylinder EMD 710 engine with DC traction systems. The American SD70ACe was EMD's 2nd generation AC loco with IGBT inverters, but was too large and heavy for the Australian interstate standard gauge network, weighting in at 188 tonnes when the limit was 134 tonnes. In addition, the GT46C design was already at the 134 tonne limit, even before adding inverters, heavier traction motors and more cooling capacity for higher power engine, and there was a requirement that fuel capacity could not be sacrificed.[ref]
 [/ref]
The locomotive has AC traction equipment, with a Mitsubishi Electric package also used on the SD70ACe, including a TA17 traction alternator, CA9E companion alternator and six ITB 2630 traction motors, along with solid state IGBT inverters. The prime mover is a turbocharged 16-cylinder EMD 710. New technology used included passive steer bogies, to reduce flange wear on corners. The class were built at Cardiff, with the frames constructed at Port Augusta, and the bogie frames at Kelso.

Operators

SCT class

The SCT class are used by SCT Logistics on their freight services from Adelaide to Melbourne, Parkes and Perth. Locomotive SCT007 is named Geoff (James Bond) Smith after the CEO of the company. An on-train refuelling system carries 60,000 litres of diesel in a tanker behind the locomotives and eliminates the need to refuel en route.

LDP class

The LDP class were built by Downer EDI Rail to be leased out to rail operators through their subsidiary Locomotive Demand Power. In December 2008 it was announced that QR National has signed a five-year deal for the nine locomotives, covering the construction and delivery of the locomotives, maintenance, the provision of spare parts, and options to extend the lease for an additional five years.

TT class

Pacific National purchased 31 TT class to haul their Hunter Valley coal trains. They are fitted with ECP braking and are used with similarly fitted NHDH, NHEH & NHYH hopper wagons built by Bradken Rail. They differ in some respects to the SCT/LDP class units, as they can be operated at two different weights: when weighing between 139 and 132 tonnes they are restricted in speed, fuel load, and range of operation in the same way as the heavyweight 90 class; but below 132 tonnes they are cleared for normal operations like the SCT/LDP class.RailCorp TOC Waiver 106-033 (16 November 2009)TT Class Vicsig
The first locomotives were originally intended to be built as LDP010 - LDP018 and leased to other rail operators, until Downer EDI reached an agreement with Pacific National for their outright sale. TT01 worked its first trial on 26 November 2009.

WH class

The three WH class locomotives were ordered by Whitehaven Coal entering service painted blue and white. They are used to coal haul trains from Whitehaven's mines in the Gunnedah Basin and are operated by Pacific National.WH Class Vicsig

GWA Class

In early 2011 Genesee & Wyoming Australia ordered seven locomotives (later increased to 10) for the Adelaide–Darwin railway.Genesee & Wyoming Australia commission first of 16 locomotives Adelaide Advertiser 22 November 2011New locos to upgrade and expand Genesee & Wyoming fleet Rail Express 23 November 2011GWA Class Vicsig

Summary






