[[55 Water Street]]

CATEGORIES: Skyscrapers in Manhattan, Skyscrapers between 200 and 249 meters, Office buildings completed in 1972, Emery Roth buildings, Financial District, Manhattan

55 Water Street is a  tall skyscraper in the Financial District of Lower Manhattan, New York City, on the East River. It was completed in 1972 and has 53 floors. Emery Roth & Sons designed the building, which is tied with 277 Park Avenue as the 40th tallest building in New York City. When it was completed it was the largest office building in the world, and is still the largest in New York by floor area. In an arrangement with the Office of Lower Manhattan Development, it was built on a superblock created from four adjoining city blocks, suppressing the western part of Front Street.
Its closest competitors in square footage are the Met Life Building at .  When One World Trade Center opens in 2014 it will have roughly the same square footage (3.5 million square feet).  The now-destroyed World Trade Center was also bigger when it opened in 1970-71.

Description

On the north side of the tower is a 15-story wing with a sloping facade and terraces facing the river. The largest terrace forms a privately owned public space known as the "Elevated Acre", about 30 feet above street level and accessible via escalator and stairs from the sidewalk on Water Street.  The creation of public space allowed the developers to increase the total square footage of 55 Water Street beyond what zoning regulations would otherwise have allowed on the site.  The Elevated Acre was originally planned as part of a series of high-level public spaces along East River, to be connected with walkways running above the street level.  The Elevated Acre is available for rental as venue for special events and weddings and during the summer months occasionally hosts free movie screenings open to the community. The original 
55 Water Street was the last major building built by Uris Brothers.

History

From 1973 to 1983 the Whitney Museum of American Art maintained a branch museum in the building; space was rented for a token fee and the operating cost was paid for by several Wall Street corporations.
Since 1993 the building has been owned by Retirement Systems of Alabama who acquired it from Olympia & York.
On October 29, 2012, the building was among many along the Lower Manhattan waterfront that sustained damage related to Hurricane Sandy when over 

Tenants

The building is the headquarters of EmblemHealth."Large Employer Group Application". EmblemHealth. "EmblemHealth, 55 Water Street, New York, New York 10041 HIP Insurance Company of New York, 55 Water Street, New York, NY 10041 Group Health Incorporated, 441 Ninth Avenue, New York, NY 10001" HIP Health Plan of New York, which became a part of EmblemHealth, moved there with 2,000 employees in October 2004.  It was the largest corporate relocation in downtown Manhattan following the September 11 attacks."HIP Celebrates Opening of New Headquarters in Lower Manhattan; Relocation of 2,000 Employees to 55 Water Street Represents Largest Corporate Relocation to Lower Manhattan Since 9/11" HIP Health Plan. (October 12, 2004). Standard & Poor's, a corporate rating agency, FXCM, a forex broker and the Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation are also headquartered in the building."Office Locations." Standard & Poor's. "Corporate 55 Water Street New York New York ""FXCM Contact Information." 








