[[New Year's Revolution (2005)]]

CATEGORIES: 2005 in professional wrestling, 2005 in Puerto Rico, Sports competitions in Puerto Rico, WWE New Year's Revolution

New Year's Revolution (2005) was the first annual New Year's Revolution pay-per-view (PPV) event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment. It took place on January 9, 2005 at the Coliseo de Puerto Rico in San Juan, Puerto Rico. This event was the first pay-per-view event produced by WWE to be held in Puerto Rico. Tickets for this event sold out in less than a month after being available for sale, marking one of the fastest selling events in the short history of the Coliseum.
The main event was an Elimination Chamber match for the vacant World Heavyweight Championship between Triple H, Randy Orton, Batista, Edge, Chris Jericho, and Chris Benoit. Triple H won the match and the championship after last eliminating Orton. One of the predominant matches on the card was between Kane and Gene Snitsky, which Kane won by pinfall after performing a Tombstone Piledriver. Another primary match on the card was Muhammad Hassan versus Jerry Lawler, which Hassan won by pinfall after executing a Reverse STO.

Background

On the December 13, 2004 edition of Raw, Raw General Manager Eric Bischoff announced that at New Year's Revolution, there would be an Elimination Chamber match between Triple H, Edge, Chris Benoit, Chris Jericho, Batista and Randy Orton.
The primary feud heading into the event was between Kane and Gene Snitsky. On the September 13 edition of Raw, Kane competed in a No Holds Barred match against Snitsky. During the match, Kane's on-screen wife, Lita interfered in the match, which led to Kane accidentally falling a top of her after Snitsky hit Kane with a steel chair. The match came to an immediate end as trainers and Emergency medical technicians took Lita on a stretcher to an ambulance, as she needed medical attention. On the December 27 edition of Raw, Bischoff announced that Kane would face Snitsky at New Year's Revolution. On the January 3 edition of Raw, Kane would return (after weeks of inactivity) to save Lita from being double-teamed by Snitsky and Trish Stratus.
The predominant feud heading into the event was between Trish Stratus and Lita over the WWE Women's Championship. On the October 25, 2004 edition of Raw, Stratus approached Lita backstage and told her that she had gained weight from her pregnancy, which led to Lita attacking Stratus. That same night, a match was made between the two for the Women's Championship at Survivor Series. At Survivor Series, Stratus defeated Lita by disqualification to retain the title, after Lita hit Stratus with a steel chair. On the January 3 episode of Raw, it was announced that Stratus would face Lita for the title at New Year's Revolution.

Event

Before the event aired live on pay-per-view, The Hurricane and Rosey defeated La Résistance (Sylvain Grenier and Robért Conway) in a dark match. The first match to air live was a tag team match between the team of Eugene and William Regal and the team of Christian and Tyson Tomko for the World Tag Team Championship. During the match, Christian hit Regal in the nose, causing it to bleed. Eugene delivered a dropkick to Tomko and scored the pinfall to win the match.
The next match was between Trish Stratus and Lita for the WWE Women's Championship. Early on in the match, Lita appeared to suffer a legitimate injury after an attack by Stratus. Towards the match's end, Stratus delivered a Chick Kick to Lita to score the pinfall, win the match, and win the title. The third match of the card was between Shelton Benjamin and Maven for the WWE Intercontinental Championship. Early in the match, Maven escaped the ring to taunt the fans for speaking Spanish. As the referee began to count him out, Maven ran back into the ring. Benjamin quickly rolled-up Maven to score the pinfall and win the match to retain the title. Immediately after the match, Maven demanded a re-match after stating that the first match "did not count." As match started, Benjamin delivered a T-Bone suplex to Maven to score the pinfall, win the match, and retain the title, again.
The next match was between Muhammad Hassan (with Daivari) and Jerry Lawler (with Jim Ross). Due to Lawler and Ross being involved in the match, no commentary was provided for the match. Towards the end of the match, Lawler attempted to pin Hassan, but Daivari pulled Hassan's foot on the bottom rope, which meant the count would have to stop immediately. Lawler then chased Daivari around the ring, until re-entering the ring, which resulted in Hassan delivering a Reverse STO and scoring the pinfall onto Lawler to win the match. The sixth match of the event was between Kane and Snitsky. A back and forth match took place between the two, with both men having advantages at different spot in the match. Towards the end of the match, Snitsky bit Kane's ear, but Kane retaliated by delivering a Tombstone piledriver to Snitsky to score the pinfall and win the match.
The main event of the card was the Elimination Chamber match between Triple H, Edge, Chris Benoit, Chris Jericho, Batista and Randy Orton (with Shawn Michaels as the Special Guest Referee) for the World Heavyweight Championship. The rules of the match were that two participants would start the match, and every five minutes, another participant would enter the match after being released from their individual chamber. Participants were able to be eliminated from the match via pinfall or submission. Benoit and Jericho were the first two in the match. After five minutes, Triple H was released from his chamber, into the match. With all men remaining in the match, Edge was released from his chamber. Benoit attempted to apply the Crippler Crossface to Edge, but Edge countered the attack. Triple H delivered a Pedigree to Jericho right before Orton entered the match. Mid-match, Edge speared Michaels by accident, but when Michaels recovered, he delivered a Sweet Chin Music to Edge, which resulted in Jericho delivering a Lionsault to Edge. Jericho then pinned Edge to eliminate him from the match. Batista, the final entrant, then entered the match after time expired. Batista delivered a Spinebuster to Jericho a top of Benoit. Batista then pinned Benoit to eliminate him from the match. Seconds later, Batista delivered a Batista Bomb to Jericho to pin him and eliminate him from the match. Later on in the match, Triple H countered an RKO, by throwing Orton into Batista. Batista then attempted to deliver a Batista Bomb to Orton, but Orton countered by delivering a low-blow to Batista and scoring the pinfall to eliminate Batista from the match. Before Batista left the ring, he delivered a clothesline to Orton. Afterward, Triple H delivered a Pedigree to Orton to score the pinfall and eliminate Orton. As a result, Triple H won the match and the title.

Aftermath

The night after New Year's Revolution on Raw, Eric Bischoff booked a match between Batista and Randy Orton for later that night. The winner of that match would become the number-one contender for the World Heavyweight Championship, and would face Triple H for the title at the Royal Rumble. Orton won the match via pinfall, and the right to face Triple H at the Rumble.
The feud between Kane and Gene Snitsky continued on the January 17 edition of Raw, when the two competed in a No Holds barred match. The match ended in a no-contest after Kane chokeslamed Snitsky off of the stage. However, the feud ended on the January 31 edition of Raw, when Kane defeated Snitsky in a steel cage match after delivering a chokeslam off of the cage's door. The feud between Trish Stratus and Lita ended after the event, as Lita suffered a legitimately torn ACL ligament. On the January 17 edition of Raw, however, Stratus mocked Lita's injury, but was chokeslammed by Kane.
After New Year's Revolution, Edge began a feud with Shawn Michaels because of his feeling that Michaels screwed him in the Elimination Chamber match. At the Royal Rumble, Edge defeated Michaels in a singles match. At the event, Eugene suffered a legit ruptured left patella tendon, which required surgery. Eugene and William Regal lost the World Tag Team Championships to La Résistance (Rob Conway and Sylvain Grenier). On the February 7 edition of Raw, La Résistance lost the titles to William Regal and Tajiri.

Results

Elimination Chamber entrances and eliminations








