[[EUCLID (university)]]

CATEGORIES: Intergovernmental organizations established by treaty, Organisations based in the Gambia, Educational institutions established in 2008, International universities, Intergovernmental universities, Schools of international relations

EUCLID, also called Pôle Universitaire Euclide or Euclid University, is an international intergovernmental organization with a university charter established in 2008 and headquartered in The Gambia.

History and legal status

EUCLID's origins are connected with the creation of a group of universities called "Euclid Consortium" by the University of Bangui and the University of N'Djamena in 2006. The project was administered by the International Organization for Sustainable Development, an international non-governmental organization headed by Syed Zahid Ali.
Conceived as an international extension for the University of Bangui, EUCLID was redefined and constituted and a distinct institution in 2008 by an intergovernmental convention. The same year, the rector of the University of Bangui, Faustin-Archange Touadera was appointed as Prime Minister, and signed the convention formalising his country's participation in EUCLID in 2010.
In January 2008, Syed Zahid Ali, acting as Secretary-General of IOSD, presented to various governments a new legal framework called EUCLID Phase 2.
According the Ministry of Higher Education of The Gambia, "According to the normative practice of international law regarding intergovernmental universities, EUCLID was granted degree-granting authority under Article 1 with a clause of accreditation by the Ministries of Education".

Participating states

Treaty registration and publication

The two intergovernmental agreements which are EUCLID's "constitutive text"
The agreements signed by the Gambia have been registered by the Permanent Mission of the Gambia to the United Nations in 2013 but are not yet published.

Headquarters

In 2011, EUCLID signed a first headquarters agreement with the Central African Republic and obtained office space in the Prime Minister's building and on the campus of the University of Bangui. Due to unrest in the country which began in December 2012, EUCLID relocated its headquarters to the Republic of The Gambia in 2013.

Domain and trademarks

EUCLID (University) is defined as an having international legal personality and was granted a .

Academic programs

EUCLID offers graduate programs in:
EUCLID was also involved in delivering distance-learning programs to civil servants in cooperation with the Ministry of Education of Eritrea between 2008 and 2012.

Structure

EUCLID's structure is spelled out in the statutes considered as annex to the published treaties. Its administrative organs are:

Secretaries-General and High Stewards

Affiliated institutes

Cooperation with other intergovernmental bodies

EUCLID has signed agreements with:

Memberships

In his personal capacity, the EUCLID Secretary General is a member of the International Association of University Presidents.org/membership/member-list

Accreditation and recognition

Headquarters State

The National UNESCO Commission of Gambia has posted its "UNESCO Portal to Recognized Higher Education Institutions" documents which describe EUCLID as "recognized / accredited".
The Ministry of Higher Education indicated in 2013 that it was "the proper accrediting body and oversight authority of higher education in The Gambia" and acknowledged "the charter, academic accreditation and legal recognition granted to EUCLID in the instrument of participation signed on July 15, 2012". It also indicated that "EUCLID will also participate in any Quality Assurance Framework being implemented to ensure ongoing conformity with updated processes of academic accreditation." In April 2014, EUCLID announced that it would transition to the new Gambia AQAA accreditation system  which will be introduced in the Gambia by the end of the year.

UN / UNESCO / IAU status

Historically, the UNESCO-based International Association of Universities (IAU) did not include the five "international universities" (i.e. EUCLID, the European University Institute, the IMO International Maritime Law Institute, the United Nations University and the World Maritime UniversityList of HEIs (Higher Education Institutions) - List of Universities of the World - by the International Association of Universities  in its World Higher Education Database. This issue was addressed by the United Nations in a December 2012 letter to the Permanent Representative of the Central African Republic stating that "both IAU/UNESCO and the UN Secretariat recognize Euclide- Pole Universitaire Euclide and the other four UN institutions ... as being accredited" in spite of not being included in WHED. The UN also indicated that these institutions which are "regional or global in nature" would be included under their headquarters states in future editions of the IAU WHED database.

In Participating States and Africa

The 2008 intergovernmental agreement states in its Article I that "EUCLID is chartered to confer diplomas, degrees and completion certificates accredited by the ministries of Education of the Participating Parties."
Gambia indicate that the degrees issued by EUCLID upon completion of the required coursework will be legally valid for use in the country by the graduates.
According to the Permanent Mission of the Central African Republic to the United Nations, the UNESCO Regional Convention on the Recognition of Studies, Certificates, Diplomas, Degrees and other Academic Qualifications in Higher Education in the African States applies to EUCLID with effect in the 22 ratifying States.UNESCO | Education - Regional Convention on the Recognition of Studies, Certificates, Diplomas, Degrees and other Academic Qualifications in Higher Education
EUCLID is since June 2012 a member of the Association of African UniversitiesEUCLID (Pôle Universitaire Euclide / Euclid University) News and Events which requires its members to be accredited.aau.org/page/introduction

United States

EUCLID is not a US-based university and it not accredited by an organization recognized by the U.S. Department of Education or Council on Higher Education Accreditation.
The letters sent in 2012 by the governments of Burundi, Central African Republic and Comoros to the US State Department describe the institution as being "duly chartered to confer degrees by its Participating States and enjoys full academic accreditation according to its constitutive mandate under international law (Article I)."
The state of Maine formerly listed "Euclid University" as an unaccredited institution. Maine removed the school from its list after receiving correspondence from EUCLID.
Michigan published until 2012 a list of non-CHEA accredited universities who graduates could not use their degree for public service employment, a list that included Euclid University (and the United Nations University). Following an exchange of letters with EUCLID, Michigan no longer maintains a list of unaccredited institutions, but advises that EUCLID graduates and all graduates from non-CHEA accredited universities applying for jobs with the State of Michigan must demonstrate that their degrees are equivalent to studies at a similar school accredited by a CHEA-recognized accrediting body.michigan.pdf
In December 2013, following a correspondence with EUCLID's legal counsel and two ambassadors to the United States, Oregon's Attorney General's office wrote that the Oregon Office of Degree Authorization (ODA) had stopped maintaining and publishing its list of unrecognised universities. Regarding "Euclid University", the ODA had since 2008 posted a notice that "ODA is currently evaluating the present legal status of this entity."
EUCLID has posted the relevant correspondence regarding these processes on its "legal affairs" page.

Accredibase criticism

Verifile, a private UK-based company, published in December 2011 a reportAccredibase - Status of Euclid University criticizing the existence of intergovernmental universities in general as "procedurally unfortunate, academically risky and generative of a high potential for confusion and dispute" and of EUCLID in particular. The report also accused the International Association of Universities of having "erroneously listed Euclid as an international degree granter" when it included EUCLID in its list of "Regional/International" institutions in May 2011 because "none of the nations has granted that authority and listed Euclid with UNESCO as a degree-granting university". In November, The Gambia did register EUCLID with IAU to be filed under The Gambia as headquarters state. The Verifile "Accredibase" report was also reviewed and replied to by EUCLID in parallel with the publication of an article entitled "Understanding the Legal Status and Degree-Granting Authority of the 'Regional-International' Universities".euclid.pdf
Several Permanent Missions to the United Nations have also documented and refuted the Accredibase claims and in January 2013 notified the government of the United Kingdom and the ERIC NARIC Network that "Accredibate, a private UK label, is to be dismissed". As of August 2012, Accredibase maintained the "unaccredited" designation and in return EUCLID lists Verifile/Accredibase in its own list of "Unqualified entities".EUCLID (Euclid University) - Official and Deceptive Entities






