[[Georg Stage]]

CATEGORIES: Individual sailing vessels, Ships built in Denmark, Tall ships of Denmark, 1934 ships

Georg Stage is a Danish iron-hulled, fully rigged, three-masted sailing ship launched in 1934. The ship serves as a training-platform for sailors in Denmark and is owned and operated by the independent foundation Georg Stages Minde (in memory of Georg Stage). The foundation was instituted in 1882 by the shipowner Frederik Stage and his wife Thea, recognizing the need for better training and qualification of sailors at their time. The ship was named after their son, who died from tuberculosis in 1880, aged 22.

The ship

The current Georg Stage was built during five months in 1934 at Frederikshavn Værft og Flydedok and commenced on its first tour on  above deck height. The figure head is the original from the "old" Georg Stage dating back to 1882 and depicts the young Georg Stage.
The ship has one tour per year, starting in April and ending in September and has been on tour every year, with exceptions of the years during World War II, where the mine danger was deemed too big and the ship was moored in  Isefjorden. In the years following the war and until 1950, the ship would take on two tours as a compensation.
In 1956 the new Georg Stage participated in its first regatta, which turned out to be the predecessor to the current The Tall Ships' Races. Following that race Georg Stage has participated frequently against the largest of the sailing ships such as Kruzenshtern, STS Mir, STS Sedov, Alexander von Humboldt and Christian Radich. 
In 1989 Georg Stage crossed the Atlantic Ocean for the first time, and here it met its predecessor, now renamed Joseph Conrad.

Training aboard Georg Stage

The sailors in training aboard, participates in a basic training, which allows the sailors to muster abord commercial vessels. Since 1974 the ship serves 63 personnel in training, however a part of these includes chefs in training, and a 10 person regular crew. 1973 was the last year, where there were 80 sailors in training aboard. The sailors and chefs in training must be between 17.5 and 22 years old and since 1981 females may also apply for a training position. Since 2004 the Royal Danish Naval Academy aspirants has also been trained aboard in basic seamanship. Following the completion of this, the aspirants will become cadets.dk

The "old" Georg Stage

The first Georg Stage was built by the shipyard Burmeister & Wain on Refshaleøen in Copenhagen, Denmark. It was also a fully rigged ship, however slightly smaller, with a length of  auxiliary engine and a crew of 80 sailors in training and 10 officers.
On 
 It was a great help for us, when the Swedish steam ship Irene, put light on the collision site, using her fine lights, which eased the rescue operation a lot. Our own great boat was put into the water, but rolled over and some of the sailors in training had to hold onto the great boat, until the boat from Ancona reached us. 
Soon after Georg Stage was raised and recovered and continued as a training ship until 1934, when it was decided to put it into retirement. It was bought and saved by an Australian, Alan Villiers, who renamed the ship to Joseph Conrad after the polish novelist. It went on a two-year-long tour around the globe, starting in Ipswich (England) on  and following the tour Villiers published the books The Cruise of the "Conrad" and Stormalong, which both depicts the tour.
In 1936 Villiers went into bankruptcy following the tour and the ship was sold to the American millionaire George Huntington Hartford. Hartford equipped the ship with a more modern engine and used the ship as a personal yacht for three years, during which he participated in a race between USA and Bermuda and return. In 1939 the ship was sold off to the Maritime Commission of USA for US$ 1.01. The ship once again went into service as a training ship and served as such until 1945, where it went into dock for two years and subsequently transferred to the Museum of America and the Sea, Mystic Seaport.

Sources

Referencer


