[[Chaparral]]

CATEGORIES: California chaparral and woodlands, Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub in the United States, Plant communities of California, Plant communities of the West Coast of the United States, Flora of California chaparral and woodlands, Flora of Baja California, Flora of the Sierra Nevada (U.S.), Flora of the Transverse Ranges, Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub, Plants by habitat, Natural history of the California Coast Ranges, Natural history of the Peninsular Ranges, Natural history of the Santa Monica Mountains, San Bernardino Mountains, San Gabriel Mountains, Santa Susana Mountains, Santa Ana Mountains, Ecology of the Sierra Nevada, Lists of flora of California, Nearctic ecozone, Wildfire ecology

Chaparral is a shrubland or heathland plant community found primarily in the U.S. state of California and in the northern portion of the Baja California peninsula, Mexico. It is shaped by a Mediterranean climate (mild, wet winters and hot dry summers) and wildfire, featuring summer-drought tolerant plants with hard sclerophyllous evergreen leaves, as contrasted with the associated soft-leaved, drought deciduous, scrub community of Coastal sage scrub, found below the chaparral biome.  Chaparral covers 5% of the state of California, and associated Mediterranean shrubland an additional 3.5%.calacademy.htm The name comes from the Spanish word chaparro, applied to scrub oaks.

Introduction

In its natural regime, chaparral is characterized by infrequent fires, with intervals ranging between 10–15 years to over a hundred years.  Mature chaparral (stands that have been allowed greater intervals between fires) is characterized by nearly impenetrable, dense thickets (except the more open chaparral of the desert).  These plants are highly flammable.  They grow as woody shrubs with hard and small leaves; are non-leaf dropping (non-deciduous); and are drought tolerant.  After the first rains following a fire, the landscape is dominated by soft-leaved non-woody annual plants, known as fire followers, which die back with the summer dry period.  
Similar plant communities are found in the four other Mediterranean climate regions around the world, including the Mediterranean Basin (where it is known as maquis), central Chile (where it is called matorral), South African Cape Region (known there as fynbos), and in Western and Southern Australia (as kwongan).  According to the California Academy of Sciences, Mediterranean shrubland contains more than 20% of the world's plant diversity.  The word chaparral is a loan word from Spanish chaparro, meaning both "small" and "dwarf" evergreen oak, which itself comes from the Basque word txapar, with exactly the same meaning.
Conservation International and other conservation organizations consider the chaparral to be a biodiversity hotspot- a biological community with a large number of different species - that are under threat by human activity.

California chaparral

California chaparral and woodlands ecoregion

The California chaparral and woodlands ecoregion, of the Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub Biome, has three sub-ecoregions with ecosystem—plant community subdivisions:

=Chaparral and woodlands biota=

For the numerous individual plant and animal species found within the California chaparral and woodlands ecoregion, see the Flora of California chaparral and woodlands (index), and the Fauna of the California chaparral and woodlands (index).

California cismontane and transmontane chaparral subdivisions

Another phytogeography system uses two California chaparral and woodlands subdivisions: the cismontane chaparral; and the transmontane (desert) chaparral.

=California cismontane chaparral=

Cismontane chaparral ("this side of the mountain") refers to a chaparral ecosystem in the Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub Biome in California, growing on the western (and coastal) sides of large mountain range systems, such as: western slopes of the Sierra Nevada in the San Joaquin Valley foothills, western slopes of the Peninsular Ranges and California Coast Ranges, and south-southwest slopes of the Transverse Ranges in the Central Coast and Southern California regions.

==Cismontane chaparral plant species==

In Central and Southern California chaparral forms a dominant habitat. Members of the chaparral biota native to California, all of which tend to regrow quickly after fires, include:

==Cismontane chaparral bird species==

The complex ecology of chaparral habitats supports a very large number of animal species. the following is a short list of birds which are an integral part of the cismontane chaparral ecosystems. 

=California transmontane (desert) chaparral=

Transmontane chaparral or Desert chaparral  — transmontane ("the other side of the mountain") chaparral — refers to the desert shrubland habitat and chaparral plant community growing in the rainshadow of these ranges. Transmontane chaparral features xeric desert climate - not Mediterranean climate habitats, and is also referred to as Desert chaparral.A Natural History of California, Allan A. Schoenerr, Figure 8.9 - 8.10, Table 8.2County of San Diego Department of Planning and Land Use Multiple Species Conservation Program,   Desert chaparral is a regional ecosystem subset of the Deserts and xeric shrublands Biome, with some plant species from the California chaparral and woodlands ecoregion.  Unlike cismontain chaparral, which forms dense, impenatrable stands of plants, desert chaparral is open, with only about 50% of the ground covered.  Individual shrubs can reach up to  in height.  
Transmontane chaparral or Desert chaparral is found on the eastern slopes of major mountain range systems on the western sides of the deserts of California. The mountain systems include: the southeastern Transverse Ranges (the San Bernardino and San Gabriel Mountains) in the Mojave Desert north and northeast of the Los Angeles basin and Inland Empire; and the northern Peninsular Ranges (San Jacinto, Santa Rosa, and Laguna Mountains), which separate the Colorado Desert (western Sonoran Desert) from lower coastal Southern California.A Natural History of California, Allan A. Schoenherr, pp.8-9, 357, 327, ISBN 978-0-520-06922-0  It is distinguished from the cismontain chapparal found on the coastal side of the mountains, which experiences higher winter rainfall. Naturally, desert chaparral experiences less winter rainfall than cismontain chaparral. Plants in this community are characterized by small, hard (sclerophyllic) evergreen (non-dropping; non-deciduous) leaves. Desert chaparral grows above California's desert cactus scrub plant community, and below the Pinyon-juniper woodland. It is further distinguished from the deciduous sub-alpine scrub above the pinyon-juniper woodlands on the same side of the Peninsular ranges.

==Transmontane chaparral distribution==

Transmontane—Desert chaparral typically grows on the lower (
The California transmontane (desert) chaparral is found in the rain shadow deserts of the:

==Transmontane chaparral plants==

==Transmontane chaparral animals==

There is overlap of animals with those of the adjacent desert and Pinyon-Juniper communities.

Chaparral and wildfires

The Chaparral is a coastal biome with hot, dry summers and mild, rainy winters. The Chaparral area receives about  of precipitation a year. This makes the chaparral most vulnerable to fire in the late summer and fall.
The chaparral ecosystem as a whole is adapted to be able to recover from infrequent wildfires (fires occurring a minimum of 15 years apart); indeed, chaparral regions are known culturally and historically for their impressive fires. (This does create a conflict with human development adjacent to and expanding into chaparral systems.) Before a major fire, typical chaparral plant communities are dominated by manzanita, chamise (also called greasewood or Adenostoma fasciculatum) and Ceanothus species, Toyon (which can sometimes be interspersed with scrub oaks), and other drought-resistant shrubs with hard (sclerophyllous) leaves; these plants resprout (see resprouter) from underground burls after a fire.
Because of the hot, dry conditions that exist in the California summer and fall, chaparral is one of the most fire-prone plant communities in North America. Some fires are caused by lightning, but these are usually during periods of high humidity and low winds and are easily controlled. Nearly all of the very large wildfires are caused by human activity during periods of very hot, dry easterly Santa Ana winds. These man-made fires are commonly caused by power line failures, vehicle fires and collisions, sparks from machinery, arson, or campfires.

Wildfire debate

There are two assumptions relating to California chaparral fire regimes that appear to have caused considerable debate, and sometimes confusion and controversy, within the fields of wildfire ecology and land management. 
The perspective that older chaparral is unhealthy or unproductive may have originated during the 1940s when studies were conducted measuring the amount of forage available to deer populations in chaparral stands. However, according to recent studies, California chaparral is extraordinarily resilient to very long periods without fire (Keeley, Pfaff, and Safford 2005) and continues to maintain productive growth throughout pre-fire conditions.(Hubbard 1986, Larigauderie et al. 1990) Seeds of many chaparral plants actually require 30 years or more worth of accumulated leaf litter before they will successfully germinate (e.g. scrub oak: Quercus berberidifolia, toyon: Heteromeles arbutifolia, and holly-leafed cherry: Prunus ilicifolia). When intervals between fires drop below 10 to 15 years, many chaparral species are eliminated and the system is typically replaced by non-native, invasive, weedy grassland.(Haidinger and Keeley 1993, Keeley 1995, Zedler 1995)
The idea that older chaparral is responsible for causing large fires was originally proposed in the 1980s by comparing wildfires in Baja California and southern California .





Bibliography




