[[Oahu]]

CATEGORIES: Geography of Honolulu County, Hawaii, Islands of Hawaii, Oahu

O

Introduction

The island is home to about 953,207 people (approximately 75% of the resident population of the state, with approximately 80% of those living on the "city" side of the island). Oiloa, the Polynesian navigator credited with discovery of the Hawaiian Islands.  The story relates that he named the island after a son.
Residents of Oi), no matter their ancestry.
The city of Honolulu—largest city, state capital, and main deepwater marine port for the State of Hawaiahu is in the City & County of Honolulu, although as a place name, Honolulu occupies only a portion of the southeast end of the island.
Well-known features found on Oohe Bay, Kailua Bay, North Shore.
Being roughly diamond-shaped, surrounded by ocean and divided by mountain ranges, directions on Oahu are not generally described with the compass directions found throughout the world.  Locals instead use "ewa" (pronounced "eh-va") to mean toward the western tip of the island, "Diamond Head" to be toward the eastern tip, "mauka" (pronounced "moww-ka") is toward the mountains and "makai" toward the sea.
Locals consider the island to be divided into various areas, which may overlap.  The most commonly accepted areas are the "City", "Town" or "Town side", which is the metropolitan area from Halawa to the area below Diamond Head (residents of the island north of the Koahu" which runs northwest from Pearl Harbor toward Haleiwa.  These terms are somewhat flexible, depending on the area in which the user lives, and are used in a mostly general way. 
Oahu is also known for having the longest rain shower in history with over 200 days spent with continuous rain. Kaneohe Ranch, Oahu, Hawaii reported 247 straight days with rain from August 27, 1993 to April 30, 1994.

History

The old Kingdom of OIolani Palace, built later by other members of the royal family, is still standing, and is the only royal palace on American soil.
Oi) on February 14, and was leaving the islands for the North Pacific.
The Imperial Japanese Navy attack on Pearl Harbor, Oahu on the morning of December 7, 1941 brought the United States into World War II. The surprise attack was aimed at the Pacific Fleet of the United States Navy and its defending Army Air Corps and Marine Air Forces. The attack damaged or destroyed twelve American warships, destroyed 188 aircraft, and resulted in the deaths of 2,403 American servicemen and 68 civilians (of those, 1,177 were the result of the destruction of the USS Arizona alone).
Today, Oahu has become a tourism and shopping haven. Over five million visitors (mainly from the American mainland and Japan) flock there every year to enjoy the quintessential island holiday experience.
An earthquake, measuring 6.7 on the Richter scale, struck the Island Of Hawai'i and the surrounding islands at 07:07:49 HST on October 15, 2006, causing an island-wide power outage and over $200 million in damage.

Tourist attractions

Top beaches

Attractions

In media

Due to its beauty, easy access from Hollywood, and incentives offered by the state and local governments, Oahu includes, but is not limited to:

Films

In games

Literature

In television

Renewable energy

From 2009 to 2011, Ocean Power Technologies ocean-tested its wave power generation system at the US Marine Corps Base Hawaii (MCBH) at Kaneohe Bay. The O

Notable people



Notes






