[[Indian Mujahideen]]

CATEGORIES: Islamic terrorism in India, Islamism, Anti-Hinduism, Islamist groups, Jihadist organizations, Organizations designated as terrorist by the United States government, European Union designated terrorist organizations, Government of India designated terrorist organisations, United Kingdom Home Office designated terrorist groups, Government of Canada designated terrorist organizations, Indian Mujahideen, Government of New Zealand designated terrorist organizations

Indian Mujahideen (IM) is an terrorist group based in India. The group has carried out several attacks against civilian targets in India."What is Indian Mujahideen?". Retrieved on 2008–07–27
Police investigations have revealed the group to be a front for the Pakistan based Lashkar-e-Taiba. NDTV. Retrieved on 2013-08-17. The Indian Mujahideen on 4 June 2010 was declared a terrorist organisation and banned by the Government of India.
A number of botched arrestsKolkata Police let off Indian Mujahideen chief Yasin Bhatkal in 2008. Zeenews.com. Retrieved on 2013-08-17. and custodial deaths
Investigators believe that Indian Mujahideen is one of many groups composed of lower-tier SIMI members. According to the Indian Intelligence Bureau, SIMI took new titles because the top leadership of SIMI have been detained and would be available for interrogation.[ref]
, Retrieved on 07–29–2008
[/ref] The change in names is believed to signal a change in tactics as SIMI affiliated militants attempt to garner more support from India's Muslim community rather than be seen as a group consisting of foreigners.[ref]
, Retrieved on 07–29–2008
[/ref] Two days after the 13 May 2008 Jaipur bombings, the extremist group"Unknown Islamic group threatens more blasts In tourist India", Agence France-Presse, 14 May 2008. sent an e-mail to Indian media in which they claimed responsibility for the attacks"Mujahideen sends pre−blast video footage", IndiToday, 14 May 2008. and said they would "demolish the faiths (all religions apart from Islam) of the infidels of India"."Outraged India set to expel migrants", The Australian, 19 May 2008. The biggest and boldest attack to date by the group was the 2008 Ahmedabad serial blasts, where it gained national notoriety with a casualty count towards 50.

Background

Factionalism

Even though IM came to light in 2008, in the same year it was already seen to have a faction. The 30 October 2008 Assam bombings were claimed by alleged offspring of the IM, Islamic Security Force-Indian Mujahideen, though police were still investigating this link.

Members

It is suspected that these are the major leaders of the Indian group.

Delhi group

The local group at Delhi is thought to includeThe terror thirteen of Indian Mujahideen the following, most of them from Azamgarh:

Attacks claimed by Indian Mujahideen

The emails sent by Indian Mujahideen claimed that they were responsible for the following terror incidents. One warning email was received 5 minutes before the first blast in Ahmedabad. Another was received soon after the first blast of Delhi bombings. The timing makes it impossible for any other groups to have sent the two emails.

Suspects and arrests

On 28 August 2013, in a major breakthrough Yasin Bhatkal, co-founder of IM and another IM terrorist have been arrested by Indian Police and NIA near Indo-Nepal border. According to Gujarat police, the breakthrough in 2008 Ahmedabad serial blasts case came from five 'switched-off' mobile phone numbers. The analysis of the phone calls made to those SIM cards from PCOs provided them the key leads.
The arrest of ten suspects included the leader, Mufti Abu Bashir Ishlahi alias Abdul Wasir, who was arrested the help of Uttar Pradesh police At his father's home At Sarai Mir In Azamgarh UP"Hang him if He is a terrorist, says Abu Bashir'S father" on 14August 2008.
Bashir studied in the local Madarsatul Islah and later in Deoband in Saharanpur. According to the reports Bashir claimed that the bombings cost Rs 75,000 a SIMI activist sold his house in Kutch to get the amount."Mufti Abu Bashir admits involvement In Ahmedabad blasts: Police!"
Bashir, who had stayed in Ahmedabad along with Abdul Subhan Qureshi alias Tauqeer, a Co-conspirator, had bought five SIM cards using local names and addresses. Bashir had given the SIM cards to the bomb planters on 26 July, who had used them carefully. Each member had contacted the others through STD-PCO booths after successfully planting the bombs. These numbers were used only for receiving calls. Many of the calls were from Juhapura, where Zahid Shaikh, one of the key members of the group, lived at Sandhi Avenue near the Sarkhej highway. These numbers had become inactive immediately after the blasts.
Also, the Government suspects Indian mujahideen for the two blasts in Hyderabad, on 21 February 2013 at 7:01 pm.
Key members of the Indian Mujahideen in Mumbai police custody want to turn approver.ndtv.aspx?id=NEWEN20080073299
In March 2014, a special cell of police in India arrested four members of IM, out of which one was Waqas alias Javed a bomb making expert
in this group. They were arrested in Jaipur and Jodhpur in Rajasthan.

Jamia Nagar encounter

On 19 September 2008, the police raided an apartment in Jamia Nagar, near Jamia Millia Islamia In Delhi. There is speculation that the prime suspect in the Ahmedabad blasts, Mufti Abu Bashir, a madrasa teacher from Azamgarh, may have pointed out the apartment."More attacks possible, says Ahmedabad blasts prime suspect"
The raid resulted in the death of terrorists Bashir alias Mohammed Atif Amin (son of Mohammed Amin, cloth merchant in Bhiwandi, Mumbai), Mohammad Sajid and a decorated police officer Mohan Chand Sharma In the gunfight."Shootout At Jamia Nagar; 2 terrorists killed" Mohammad Saif (the son of Samajwadi Party leader Shadab Ahmed)Jamia trail ends In hitmen cradle was arrested while two hostiles managed to flee by possibly jumping the rooftops. They claimed to be students, but that was denied by Jamia Millia"They were like any other students"
The five were responsible for manufacturing bombs used in Ahmedabad, Jaipur and Delhi blasts.
Atif claimed to have been studying for a diploma in Human Resources Development from Jamia Milia Islamia University."Atif didn't shy from tenant verification" HoweverLinked to Lashkar, fan of Osama, Atif was part of 14 Jamia Milia denied having him As a student. Some residents of Sarai Mir thought He was pursuing his bachelors In technology from Jamia Hamdard."Azamgarh shocked, angry over news of Delhi encounter"
Atif was said to have been the leader of a group of 14 young men belong to Azamgarh in Uttar Pradesh, all claiming to have been studying in Delhi: Atif (24), Sajid alias Pankaj (19), (both now dead), Shehzad alias Pappu (22), Junaid (27), Shahdab Bhai alias Mallick (27), Sajid (24), Mohammad Khalid (25), Arif (22), Shakil (26), Zia Khan (24) and Salman (25), Zeeshan (24) and Mohammad Saif (23).
Zeeshan Jawed was arrested from the offices of a private TV station, He worked for a private company, Monarch International on Vikas Marg, and is also said to be studying management. Both him and Saif claim to have been recruited by Atif.
It is reported that Mohammad Saif has said that the plans to carry out several blasts across the country were mooted about three years ago when the Indian Mujahideen (IM) was formed."Serial blasts were planned In 2005" Although the blasts spanned over a period of 10 months (the first blasts took place in August 2007 in Hyderabad), the planning was made far back in 2005. After that series of explosions occurred Uttar Pradesh, Jaipur, Ahmedabad and Delhi.
There is considerable resentment In Sarai Mir over the death of the local boys. Villagers have blamed the media for giving a bad name to Azamgarh by calling it a "nursery of terror". Mafia don Abu Salem hails from here. Azamgarh used to export its famous country-made pistols, known as kattas, whose factories dot the region. The district was also known for young sharpshooters who joined Mumbai gangs. Individuals from the area have been accused of the murders of Bollywood producer Gulshan Kumar in Mumbai and Left leader Shankar Guha Niyogi in Chhattisgarh.








