[[Oliver Popplewell]]

CATEGORIES: 1927 births, Living people, English judges, English wicket-keepers, Cambridge University cricketers, Free Foresters cricketers, Marylebone Cricket Club cricketers, Presidents of the Marylebone Cricket Club, People educated at Charterhouse School, Alumni of Queens' College, Cambridge, Alumni of Harris Manchester College, Oxford, People from Northwood, London, English autobiographers, Queen's Bench Division judges, British Queen's Counsel, Queen's Counsel 1901–2000, English cricketers

The Honourable Sir Oliver Bury Popplewell (born 15 August 1927) is a former British judge. He chaired the inquiry into the Bradford City stadium fire, presided over the libel case brought by Jonathan Aitken MP against The Guardian newspaper which eventually led to Aitken's imprisonment for perjury, and was widely reported for asking "What is Linford's lunchbox?" during a case over which he was presiding, brought by Linford Christie. He played first-class cricket for Cambridge University and was president of the MCC from 1994 until 1996. He wrote a book about his legal career.

Personal life

Popplewell was born in Northwood, Middlesex. His father, aged 47 when Oliver was born, was a civil servant in the Board of Trade. A widower, Sir Oliver remarried fellow-barrister Dame Elizabeth Gloster in March 2008. among whom is the actress Anna Popplewell.

Education

Popplewell went to Charterhouse School as a scholar, where he played cricket with Peter May and future politician Jim Prior,
In 2003, Popplewell became one of the oldest mature students at the University of Oxford when he started reading Philosophy, Politics and Economics at Harris Manchester College.[ref]
</ref><ref></ref>

Cricket

Popplewell was a right-handed wicket-keeper-batsman, playing 56 innings in 41 matches, scoring 881 runs for an average of 20.46 including two half-centuries.com He played for Cambridge University from 1949 until 1951 at the time when Rev DS Sheppard was playing for the University, for MCC in 1953, and for the Free Foresters from 1952 until 1960.

Legal career

Popplewell was called to the bar in 1951. He became a Queen's Counsel in 1969. After serving as Recorder of Burton upon Trent and Deputy Chairman of Oxfordshire Quarter Sessions, he was appointed as Recorder of the Crown Court in 1971. He was a High Court judge from 1983 until 2003. During this time, he chaired the Bradford Inquiry into Crowd Control and Safety at Sports Grounds in 1985. He became president of the Employment Appeal Tribunal and vice-chairman of the Parole Board in 1986, and a fellow of the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators in 1996.

Cases

In 1975 he defended his godson Stephen Fry, who was 18 at the time, at his trial for credit card fraud. Popplewell and his wife had long been friends of Fry's parents. Stephen Fry writes about the event in his autobiography Moab Is My Washpot.
Following the fire at Valley Parade, the Bradford City stadium, on 11 May 1985, Popplewell was chosen to chair an inquiry held under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975. Following this inquiry, he was chosen to chair a Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds. In 1999, he donated the papers of the inquiry to the University of Bradford.
A copy of the Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds' Interim Report has been published online in PDF format by the Bradford City Fire website.Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds' Interim Report
He presided over the libel case brought by Jonathan Aitken against The Guardian and Granada Television.
While presiding over the High Court case brought by the athlete Linford Christie against former criminal John McVicar, the editor of Spike magazine, he was widely reported as asking, "What is Linford's lunchbox?". He later claimed that this was intended as a joke. Following this case, the name "Mr Justice Cocklecarrot" was revived by Private Eye magazine (it was originally the name of a character in the Beachcomber column in the Daily Express) which became the magazine's generic name for unworldly and out-of-touch judges, though Popplewell asserts that this description did not apply to him.The real world of Oliver Popplewell – the guardian 20 May 2003
He upheld Reynolds Defence, established in the House of Lords in Reynolds v Times Newspapers Ltd in 1999, in an action against the Yorkshire Post for reporting that a local karate company was selling "rip-off" lessons.
Since he retired, Popplewell has spoken up for the right of judges to impose the sentences they see fit. He had an argument with Home Secretary David Blunkett who was seeking to introduce mandatory minimum sentences for some serious crimes.Blunkett branded 'a whiner' – BBC 14 May 2003

Hillsborough controversy

On 19 October 2011 he sparked fury by calling on the Liverpool families involved in the Hillsborough disaster to behave more like the relatives of victims of the Bradford City stadium disaster. He made the comments in a letter to The Times following the Commons debate

Bibliography




