[[Franz Weber]]

CATEGORIES: 1927 births, Animal rights advocates, Living people, People from Basel-Stadt, People from Montreux, Swiss environmentalists

Franz Weber (born on 27 July 1927 in Basel, Switzerland) is an environmentalist and animal welfare activist.

Life

Franz Weber began his career as a journalist and reporter. After his studies of philosophy and linguistics at the Sorbonne University in Paris, he worked from his Paris office from 1951 until 1973. 
Weber became actively interested in ecology and conservation in 1965, when he learned about efforts to conserve the Swiss mountain region, the Engadine Valley of the Lakes. Weber decided to invest himself in the rescue and safeguarding of this region by beginning an international press campaign. At the end of a seven years battle by Weber the Swiss Federal Government declared the Engadine Valley of the Lakes a "National Conservation Region" and put it under the State's protection. 
In order to be able to launch further campaigns, he quit writing for money and devoted himself entirely to the conservation of natural sites of special beauty and value in France, Germany, Austria, Italy, Greece, Switzerland, Yugoslavia and Hungary, as well as endangered species in South America, Canada, Australia, Africa and Europe.
He founded the Franz Weber Foundation in 1975. The board is composed of 5 international personalities with Weber as president. The Foundation has today over 230'000 supporter members.
In 1997, in the presence of Émile Gardaz, Jean-Pierre Thiollet and some other personalities, the township of Delphi appointed him a Citoyen d'honneur.
Weber is married to Judith with one daughter, Vera, and lives in Montreux, Switzerland.

Campaigns

In 1970s and 2000s, Franz Weber launched two popular referendums for the complete protection of the Lavaux region and succeeded. In 1983 the European Economic Community banned all importations of baby seal pelts into the EEC. 
In 1978 the Council of Europe in Strasbourg appealled to Franz Weber to save ancient Delphi in Greece from destruction by an American-Greek project of industrialization.  When, in 1986, Delphi is again threatened by industrialization  "Save Delphi" was successfully revived. In 1997, in recognition of his merits and campaigns, the city of Delphi named Weber Honorary Citizen and Protector of Delphi.
In 1983 Weber battled against the destruction of the alluvial forests of the Danube between Hainburg and Vienna in Austria to build a hydro-electrical complex. 
Also in 1983, parallel to the Danube campaign, Weber saved the turn-of-the century Grandhotel Giessbach on Lake Brienz near Interlaken from destruction by raising the funds to purchase the property. He then entrusted it to the Swiss People as a place of culture, of meeting and of rejuvenation. 
In 2008 a referendum initiated by Weber to end Swiss Air Force training flights over "tourist areas" (virtually the entire country) to reduce the "impact of noise pollution", was soundly defeated by a vote of 68.1%. Weber, who referred to the Air Force's newest jet fighter, the F/A-18 Hornet, as "oversized, ineffective, and ruinous to our country", proposed the use of simulators to replace air operations.

Franz Weber Parks

In 1989, the Franz Weber Foundation purchased Bonrook Station, a former cattle station near Pine Creek, Northern Territory, which it has since developed into a sanctuary for brumbies and native wild life. In 1990, the Togolese Government approached Weber with an appeal to save Togo's last elephants.  A convention was signed which placed the National Park of Fazao-Malfakassa into the care of the Franz Weber Foundation.

Prizes and honours

Books

Books by Franz Weber:
A biography about Franz Weber was written in 2004 by René Langel: 








