[[BBC Introducing]]

CATEGORIES: BBC music, BBC Radio

BBC Introducing is the brand for new music programmes across the BBC radio stations, showcasing unsigned, self signed and other emerging musical talent primarily from the UK. Launched in 2007 the Introducing brand brings programming from across the BBC under a unified brand with each show retaining its own identity. Introducing has also been extended to the BBC's stages at major festivals such as Glastonbury. Introducing shows can now be found on most BBC Radio stations from national to local. In 2010 BBC Introducing was awarded the best new platform to discover music at the BT Digital Music Awards.
Since 5 January 2013, every BBC Local Radio station across England and the Channel Islands broadcasts a BBC Introducing programme at 8pm on Saturday evenings.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p010j8y5/features/shows-and-downloads

History

The initial idea was to introduce a BBC new music discovery proposition consistent across all local and network radio. BBC Introducing was created and selected as the  brand name by Jason Carter, the former Head Of Live Music at Radio 1, he continues to lead the proposition for the BBC. The creation followed research via a pan BBC music steering group.  It was developed as a property that could be added to existing show names, or used as a signpost for features within programming.
BBC Introducing was launched in 2007, and by this period  many BBC local radio stations had launched a weekly local music show to share and champion local bands. As shows such as The Box Office on BBC Three Counties Radio, The Download on BBC Radio Oxford, The Friday Session on BBC Hereford and Worcester, Raw Talent on BBC Radio Humberside and The Weekender on BBC Radio Nottingham proved popular there was interest in developing a more coherent structure and brand for new music on the BBC.
In September 2010 all BBC local radio shows that had not renamed themselves as part of the 'Introducing' were re-branded.

Festival stages

BBC Introducing has hosted a stage at Glastonbury Festival every year since 2007.  The 2011 incarnation featured Ed Sheeran, F-Block, The Good Natured, Sharks Took the Rest, Vessels and Shammi Pithia, amongst others.
BBC Introducing has also hosted stages at the Reading and Leeds festivals since 2008, Radio 1's Big Weekend since 2008 and T in the Park since 2009.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p010j8y5/profiles/festivals

A national network

With most BBC Local Radio stations now featuring an Introducing show, the music team at BBC Radio 1 are seeking to make use of the local knowledge available across the corporation. In essence the national station has access to local experts across the country who are able to act as a filter and recommend artists for national attention. For big events, such as the BBC Introducing stage at the Glastonbury festival, local show producers submit acts for consideration to a central panel.

Upload tool

During February 2009, an upload tool was launched on the BBC Introducing website to allow users to upload their music direct to BBC Introducing producers and presenters.
All material submitted to the BBC Introducing brand via the upload tool is classified by the BBC as User Generated Content (UGC), in relation to UGC before uploading material.
The upload tool was the subject of a complaint to the BBC Trust from a commercial organisation Amazing Tunes that had launched a similar service in 2005. Amazing Tunes provides the musical content for a UK national digital radio station, Amazing Radio. The complaint described the BBC upload mechanism as "to all intents and purposes a direct copy of our privately funded concept". The BBC disputed this description, but advised artists to "explore all the avenues open to them."

Successes

The Ting Tings and Jake Bugg  credit 'BBC Introducing' for bringing them to the attention of the UK public through its coverage of Glastonbury Festival in 2007. reach a larger market.
Other acts that have been supported by BBC Introducing include  Rizzle Kicks,  Bombay Bicycle Club, Cage the Elephant, Chew Lips, Clock Opera, Django Django, Everything Everything, Donae'o, Dry the River, Frankie & The Heartstrings, Gabrielle Aplin, Get Cape. Wear Cape. Fly, Audio Antihero, Ghetts, JME, The Joy Formidable, Jack Hayter, King Charles, Kissy Sell Out, Late of the Pier, Maxsta, Nosferatu D2, MGMT, Natty, Nina Nesbitt, Benjamin Shaw, Panjabi MC, Pete and the Pirates, P Money, Pulled Apart by Horses, Paul Hawkins & The Awkward Silences, Savages, Spector, Tempa T, Toddla T, Twin Atlantic, Unicorn Kid, White Lies and Wretch 32.bbc.co.uk/music/introducing/artists/






