[[Post-Keynesian economics]]

CATEGORIES: Post-Keynesian economists, Post-Keynesian economics, Economic theories, Heterodox economics, History of economic thought, methodology, and heterodox approaches, Keynesian economics, Macroeconomics

Post-Keynesian economicsThere is semantic dispute as to whether there should be a hyphen between Post and Keynesian, which is symbolic of an intellectual dispute over the nature of the school of thought. The American journal of the same name does not use the hyphen despite its grammatical correctness, and the objection to its use dates partly back to Paul Samuelson's claim to be a post-Keynesian. However Financial markets, money and the real world, by Paul Davidson, pp. 88–89

Introduction

The term post-Keynesian was first used to refer to a distinct school of economic thought by Eichner and Kregel (1975)
Post-Keynesian economists are united in maintaining that Keynes's theory is seriously misrepresented by the two other principal Keynesian schools: neo-Keynesian economics which was orthodox in the 1950s and 60s – and by New Keynesian economics, which together with various strands of neoclassical economics has been dominant in mainstream macroeconomics since the 1980s. Post-Keynesian economics can be seen as an attempt to rebuild economic theory in the light of Keynes's ideas and insights. However even in the early years Post Keynesians such as Joan Robinson sought to distance themselves from Keynes himself and much current post-Keynesian thought cannot be found in Keynes. Some Post Keynesians took an even more progressive view than Keynes with greater emphases on worker friendly policies and re-distribution.  Robinson, Paul Davidson and  Hyman Minsky were notable for emphasising the effects on the economy of the practical differences between different types of investments in contrast to Keynes more abstract treatment.
The theoretical foundation of post-Keynesian economics is the principle of effective demand, that demand matters in the long as well as the short run, so that a competitive market economy has no natural or automatic tendency towards full employment.
The positive contribution of post-Keynesian economicsFor a general introduction see  so that the central bank can choose either the quantity of money or the interest rate but not both at the same time.
This view has largely been incorporated into monetary policy, which now targets the interest rate as an instrument, rather than the quantity of money. In the field of finance, Hyman Minsky put forward a theory of financial crisis based on financial fragility, which has recently received renewed attention.

Strands

There are a number of strands to post-Keynesian theory with different emphases. Joan Robinson regarded Michał Kalecki's theory of effective demand to be superior to Keynes's theories. Kalecki's theory is based on a class division between workers and capitalists and imperfect competition.
Paul Davidson follows Keynes closely in placing time and uncertainty at the centre of theory, from which flow the nature of money and of a monetary economy. Monetary circuit theory, originally developed in continental Europe, places particular emphasis on the distinctive role of money as means of payment. Each of these strands continues to see further development by later generations of economists, although the school of thought has been marginalized within the academic profession.

Current work

Journals

Much post-Keynesian research is published in the Journal of Post Keynesian Economics (founded by Sidney Weintraub and Paul Davidson), the Cambridge Journal of Economics, the Review of Political Economy and the Journal of Economic Issues (JEI).

UK

There is also a UK academic association, the Post Keynesian Economics Study Group (PKSG).

US

=Kansas City School=

In the US, there is a center of Post Keynesian work at the University of Missouri – Kansas City, dubbed "The Kansas City School", together with the Center for Full Employment and Price Stability, which has run a Post Keynesian Conference and Post Keynesian Summer School, together with a group blog, Economic Perspectives from Kansas City. Their research emphasis includes Neo-Chartalism, job guarantee programs, and economic policy.

Australia

=University of Newcastle=

The University of Newcastle, in New South Wales, Australia, houses CofFEE, the Centre of Full Employment and Equity, an active educational, research and collaborative organisation whose focus is on policies "restoring full employment" and achieving an economy that delivers an not "equitable outcomes for all". CofFEE's work is on Post-Keynesian macroeconomics, labour economics, regional development and monetary economics. The aim of the research conducted by CofFEE is world class and is leading the clear path to developing successful model to a new global economy that achieves full employment without the consequences suffered by traditional neo-liberal economic policies.

Major post-Keynesian economists

Major post-Keynesian economists of the first and second generations after Keynes include:



Notes



  | last = Arestis
  | first = Philip
  | title = Post-Keynesian economics: towards coherence
  | journal = Cambridge Journal of Economics
  | volume = 20
  | pages = 111–135
  | year = 1996
  | doi=10.1093/oxfordjournals.a013604}}
  | last = Davidson
  | first = Paul
  | authorlink = Paul Davidson (economist)
  | title = John Maynard Keynes
