[[Saints Row (series)]]

CATEGORIES: Saints Row, Action-adventure games, Open world video games, Video game franchises

Saints Row is a video game series created by Volition, Inc. and published by Deep Silver, that tells the story of a gang called the Third Street Saints, the title comes from the name of the district of the gangs home territory. Typically, gameplay is presented in an open world format; because of the mixture of nonlinear gameplay with action-adventure and racing sequences, the series is referred to as being a Grand Theft Auto clone. The series is well known for its comedic elements, the games' stories are written as comedies that feature popular culture homages and parodies, as well as self-referential humor. The series takes place in the same universe as the Red Faction series also created by Volition, with many themes and plots crossing-over between the two franchises.
After completing Red Faction II in late 2002, developer Volition began work on the original Saints Row game in mid-2003. The game was released in 2006 to critical acclaim and commercial success. The sequel, Saints Row 2, was released in 2008 to similar acclaim but greater commercial success. The series' third entry, Saints Row: The Third was released on November 15, 2011. The series' most recent entry, Saints Row IV was released on August 20, 2013. As of September 2013, the series has had unit sales in excess of thirteen million, making it a best-selling video game franchise.

Games

Saints Row

Saints Row was the first installment in the series as a whole, having begun development in mid-2003 as a PlayStation 2 title under the name Bling Bling. A GameCube version was planned but was scrapped due to the release of the Wii.
The game is set in the fictional city Stilwater, located in the state of Michigan. The player character is inducted into the 3rd Street Saints gang after they save his life, and assists the Saints in eliminating three rival gangs that control the city. After the gangs have been eliminated, police chief Monroe kidnaps the Saints founder Julius Little and offers the player to exchange the gang leader's freedom for mayor Marshall Winslow's life. After Winslow is assassinated, Monroe is murdered by the Saints, and Julius is freed. The other Saints members look towards the player character, considering him their new leader. The new mayor Richard Hughes invites the player character aboard his private yacht and Julius betrays the player by blowing the yacht up and killing everyone but the protagonist on board. The game was renowned for being the first seventh-generation sandbox game, and introduces new features which have since become staples to the genre. It introduces online multiplayer, an in-game mobile phone, GPS navigation, and elaborate character and vehicle customization.

Saints Row 2

Saints Row 2 began development in mid-2006, a few months before the Xbox 360 release of Saints Row. A Microsoft Windows port, announced in June 2008, eventually released in the early months of 2009. Three downloadable content packs were developed and launched in mid-2009 (for console only), including Ultor Exposed and Corporate Warfare.
Saints Row 2 is set five years

Saints Row: The Third

Saints Row: The Third was officially announced in March 2011. It was released in North America on 15 November 2011, then in Europe on 18 November 2011, for the Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, and Microsoft Windows platforms.
Saints Row: Money Shot (Saints Row: Drive-By on 3DS) was to be a spin-off of the main series, originally developed for Xbox Live Arcade  It was originally suggested that the game would also be available for the Xbox 360 as an Xbox Live Arcade game and for the PlayStation 3 as a PlayStation Network game featuring 3D graphics
.

Saints Row IV

Saints Row IV was officially unveiled in March 2013 and released in North America on August 20, 2013 and worldwide shortly after on August 23. The game is set four years after the events of Saints Row: The Third. After the Saints stop a terrorist attack by Cyrus Temple on the United States, the Saints leader has been elected president. Soon after, an alien invasion occurs and the earth is overrun. The majority of the game is set in a simulation of Steelport created by the aliens to break the Saints' wills. In this simulation the Saints must fight against the enemy gangs of their past and their own worst fears.

Fifth game

On July 5, 2013, Volition's Scott Phillips spoke to Gamereactor and stated that a fifth Saints Row game would "probably continue series in a different direction." In a preview for Saints Row IV with Rev3Games, after being asked where the series can possibly go after IV and if Volition feels if they "have painted themselves into a corner", Volition lead systems designer Dave Bianchi responded by saying "people said that a lot after Saints Row: The Third, 'where could you possibly go from Saints Row: The Third?'"
In December 2013, comedian Jay Mohr, who voices Dane Vogel, revealed that he is doing voice work for the next Saints Row game.joystiq.com/2013/12/23/comedian-jay-mohr-joins-star-studded-saints-row-cast/

Gameplay

The Saints Row series is part of a genre known as sandbox games. The series combines elements of action, adventure and vehicular gameplay. The player can freely roam the virtual world on foot or by use of vehicles and make use of an array of weapon and mêlée based combat. Illegal activity such as engaging computer-controlled civilians and police officers will instigate a proactive and potentially lethal response from authoritative figures. In the instance of death or arrest, the player will respawn at a nearby hospital or police station.
An emphasis is put on urban warfare; the player character is affiliated with a hip-hop cultured street gang known as the 3rd Street Saints. Game missions are structurally divided into separate mission arcs. These mission arcs do not intertwine but can be played through altogether at once or separately by the player. Missions are unlocked by accruing respect points; respect is game currency earned by playing non-story mini-games known as activities and diversions.

Setting

The setting of both Saints Row and Saints Row 2 is the fictional city of Stilwater, located in the mid-western state of Michigan, USA. The districts were also designed to feel relevant to the gangs that controlled them.
The Stilwater of Saints Row 2 is significantly different from its original rendition; the city is 45% bigger than its older counterpart.
The game Saints Row: The Third is set in the sister city of Steelport, a city that flourished in the 1800s and has since succumbed to economic failure. Steelport's districts are almost distinctly the same, and the city size is smaller than Stilwater but has larger buildings. Steelport's most memorable feature is the large statue on Magarac Island, south-east of downtown Steelport. The statue is that of steel worker Joe Magarac and is a parody of the real-life Statue of Liberty. The overall design and look of Steelport can be changed via progressing through the story. At certain points the player is allowed to choose whether to do one thing over the other, which will change how Steelport's skyline appears. Some of these choices include deciding whether to keep or blow up the Syndicate Tower. A large military ship named the Thermopylae will be located south-east of Steelport after completing the first STAG mission, "Gang Bang".
Saints Row IV is once again set in Steelport, however the city is set in a simulation under control of Zinyak, the game's main villain. Zinyak has changed Steelport to fit his likeness removing all signs of the Saints from the city and replacing them with images of himself, and alien technology can be seen heavily throughout the city. The city of Stilwater returns for one mission of the game.

Reception

Critical reception

Both Saints Row and Saints Row 2 received positive reviews for their Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 ports. However, the mobile phone ports of both games as well as the Windows port of Saints Row 2 received a more mixed response. Additionally, the downloadable content packs for Saints Row 2 received mostly average reviews.
The Xbox 360 port of Saints Row received generally positive reviews and scores. It received an 82.20% and 81/100 from review aggregators GameRankings and Metacritic respectively. IGN reviewer Douglass Perry awarded the game an 8.5/10, praising the presentation and gameplay while pointing out technical shortcomings as well as the often forced humour.
Both the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 ports of Saints Row 2 received positive reviews. It received an 83.37% and 82.99% from GameRankings respectively, and 82/100 and 81/100 from Metacritic respectively. PGNx Media reviewer Adam Nunez awarded the game 9.6/10 and layered praise onto most aspects of the game, summing up by saying "In terms of pure, unadulterated fun, Saints Row 2 is in a league of its own". However, the PC port of Saints Row 2 received a much less positive response. It received an aggregated score of 70.68% and 72/100 from GameRankings and Metacritic.

Sales

Saints Row 2 shipped over two million units for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 during October 2008, the month of its release.
On 2 November 2011, THQ CEO Brian Farrell announced that Saints Row: The Third was already the most pre-ordered title in series history. In fact, the game had four times the number of pre-orders Saints Row 2 had two weeks before its launch. THQ estimated the game would ship over 3 million units before the publisher's fiscal year ends in March 2012. By comparison, Saints Row 2 launched in October 2008 and sold 2.6 million by the end of the fiscal year. On 25 January 2012, THQ announced that The Third had shipped 3.8 million units globally and are expecting to ship between five and six million units lifetime on the title.
To date, the series has roughly sold over 13 million units, including over three million for Saints Row 2.






