[[Swanbourne railway station]]

CATEGORIES: Disused railway stations in Buckinghamshire, Former London and North Western Railway stations, Railway stations opened in 1850, Railway stations closed in 1968, Beeching closures in England

Swanbourne is a disused railway station that served the villages of Swanbourne, Little Horwood and Mursley in north Buckinghamshire, England.  It is on the mothballed Bicester to Bletchley line, roughly at the centre of a triangle drawn between the three villages.

History

Swanbourne was opened by the Buckinghamshire Railway most likely not when the company's line from Banbury to 
As it passed through the parish of Little Horwood, the proposed line had been opposed by the Dauncy family, the occupants of Horwood House, who succeeded in having the alignment moved further south into the parish of Swanbourne, which gave the line a distinct curve at this point.
The station's remote location did not prevent it from developing a healthy goods traffic with income averaging £400 a week.
Passenger traffic was less important due to the relatively sparsely populated locality.
In the wake of the abandonment of a plan to develop the Varsity Line as a freight link from the East Coast ports to South Wales, including a marshalling yard near Swanbourne (see below), the station was listed for closure in the Beeching report

Swanbourne sidings

Wartime relief sidings for Bletchley were constructed at the 3 milepost to the east along the track between Weasel Lane and Whaddon Road at grid reference 
In 1955, as part of British Railways' (BR) Modernisation Plan, it was proposed to develop the Varsity Line as a freight link from the East Coast ports to South Wales, capable of handling up to 2,400 wagons of coal class traffic and empties daily.
However, the construction of the yard was opposed by Gerry Fiennes, appointed BR Chief Operating Officer in 1961, on the basis that it was not justified either from the point of view of existing or potential traffic or as a means of handling the traffic that there was.

Present and future

The main station building has survived into private ownership, the only one of those built by the Buckinghamshire Railway to do so.
A single track of the line remains, although this is rusted beyond use.
The western section of the track from the Bletchley flyover to a point near Whaddon Road bridge at grid reference 
The approval in Autumn 2012 of the western section of the East West Rail Link project should see the line through Swanbourne reopened by 2017.



Notes

Sources


