[[Junior Optimist Octagon International]]

CATEGORIES: Fraternal service organizations, Organizations established in 1988, Youth organizations

Junior Optimist Octagon International (JOOI) is an active youth service organization that was created in 1988Welcome to Optimist International and is affiliated with Optimist International, its sponsor. There are more than 18,500 members in over 675 communities around the world.Welcome to Optimist International
There are three types of JOOI clubs that are separated by age groups: Alpha Clubs (6–9 years), Junior Optimist Clubs (10–13 years), and Octagon Clubs (14-18). While different approaches are undertaken, the main goal of JOOI members is "to promote positive change in their communities." 
Like Optimist International, JOOI is "a community-based organization with a hierarchy that can take a member from a club to office at zone, district, national and international levels." Typically, each club plans their own fund raisers and service projects. The money raised is then donated to (projects and organizations that will improve the well-being of others, such as the Childhood Cancer Campaign (CCC).
JOOI's motto is "Kids Serving Kids."Welcome to Optimist International Since JOOI keeps leadership local, it is able to "empower young people to make positive decisions to serve fellow youths and their community."



thumb|170px|Octagon Club members fund raising for the CCCIn 1988, Optimist International recognized the rapid growth of Optimist Youth Clubs, which had grown to 30,000 members in 1,000 Junior Optimist and Octagon Clubs, and formed its own international organization - Junior Optimist Octagon International. Through their positive attitudes and unwavering commitment, JOOI members continue to play a significant role in the change for the greater good.
During the months of June and July, the JOOI Convention takes place and members across the globe gather together. At this convention, members learn how to become great leaders in their Clubs and schools, exchange project ideas, and meet representatives from Clubs all over the world.Welcome to Optimist International

International Convention

The 16th Annual International Convention took place at Orlando, Florida from June 25, 2008 to June 28, 2008. The International Convention is composed of several activities throughout its four-day span: workshops, business sessions, electing the new JOOI Board of Directors for the upcoming year, service projects, and recreational activities. Various workshops take place that teach members how to become great leaders in their communities and are led by guest speakers as well as members from the JOOI Board of Directors. While topics range from communication skills to life lessons, all of these workshops allow members to learn more about themselves and motivate them to be the best that they can. The business sessions that take place are where members learn about the current issues within the organization. During specific sessions, accredited delegates representing their schools vote for any changes within the Policy for Governance of JOOI.
Throughout the convention, JOOI members are able to campaign in order to become a member of the JOOI Board of Directors. During a certain time at the convention, members can "meet and greet the candidates (mingling)" and learn about their positions on certain issues within JOOI. Later, candidates give their speeches, participate in a "Meet the Candidates Forum," and then the accredited delegates elect who will become the new JOOI Board of Directors. Those elected are announced before the President's Dance on the final night.
Service projects vary from the location of the convention. Sometimes, service projects are on-site, off-site, or there are both. For instance, during the 2008 International Convention, the off-site service project consisted of building and restoring a local park whereas the on-site service project consisted of collecting books for the JOOI of Reading Program. The recreational activities that take place during this convention are the Talent Show, theme days, and President's Dance.

JOOI Board of Directors

The 2013-14 Board of Directors:
2010-11 International Youth Club Committee:

The Optimist Creed

In 1922, the Optimist Creed was adopted as the official creed of the organization. Written by Christian Larson, the creed was originally published under the title "Promise Yourself" in 1912. Optimists in California found the Optimist spirit well-expressed in the 10-line statement and pushed to have it adopted organization-wide. The wife of Los Angeles Optimist James V. Westervelt saw the item in a newspaper and clipped it for her husband. After publishing it in his club's bulletin, Westervelt and other Los Angeles Optimists encouraged other California clubs to use the creed. Soon after, the creed's popularity grew.
The creed reads as follows:
Promise Yourself:-








