[[ASP.NET Web Site Administration Tool]]

CATEGORIES: .NET framework, Microsoft Visual Studio

ASP.

History

The Web Site Administration tool was first introduced with ASP.0 along with ASP.

Interface

ASP.NET Configuration from the Website menu or Project menu in Visual Studio 2010 Professional, or by clicking on the ASP.
Programmatic access to the features provided by the ASP.Web.NET program. The classes Membership and Roles are used to store, access and modify user information in the ASPNETDB database. The user could be authenticated using the Membership.Authenticate

Features

The ASP.NET Web Site Administration tool is a multi-tabbed utility which has the following features:

Security tab

The security tab is used to create users and roles, group users under different roles and assign access rules either at the role-level or user-level. When the Web site administration tool is opened to modify the existing settings, a new database is created in the App_Data folder of the application. This database stores ASP. The name  of the database created is ASPNETDB by default.
The security tab simplifies and optimizes user authentication and authorization. It makes it comparatively easy to configure user permissions than code-based user-defined authentication systems which require a great amount of time, cost and manpower. However, a major drawback of this tool is that access rules could be defined only at the folder-level and not at the page-level.

Application tab

The Application tab is used to specify application settings, configure SMTP settings and enable or disable debugging and tracing apart from other uses. The Application tab interacts with the configuration file of the application (web. Application settings are created as objects and inserted as name-value pairs in the web.

Provider tab

The Provider tab is used to specify the database provider for the ASPNETDB database used to store ASP. The security page does not appear unless and until the database provider is specified in the Providers tab. An SQL Data provider is generally used, but Oracle Data providers are also used in case of Oracle databases. The provider allows the user the option of  to store all data related to the ASP.

Internals

Apart from these tabs, there are a number of other features and components associated with the ASP. The ASP.NET Web Site Administration tool makes use of to access and modify the security and application settings in the Web.




