[[B.S.A. Swamy]]

CATEGORIES: Telugu people, 1942 births, 2008 deaths, Bahujan Samaj Party politicians, Indian judges

Bokka Sri Atchuthananda Swamy (July 11, 1942 – July 24, 2008), well known as B.S.A. Swamy, was an Indian judge and social justice activist who spent his life striving for the upliftment of downtrodden sections of Andhra Pradesh people, particularly Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes through social justice and reservations in politics, judiciary, jobs and education.
Swamy was a judge of Andhra Pradesh High Court between 1995 and 2004. He founded the Andhra Pradesh Backward Castes, Scheduled Castes, and Scheduled Tribes Advocates Association, and was instrumental in implementing rule of reservation in appointment to the post of Law Officers in Andhra Pradesh.B.S.A Swamy as President of A.P B.C, S.C, & S.T Advocates Association
He was also the editor
He was also the founder of B.R.M. Memorial Education Society in memory of his father B. Rama Murthy (B.R.M) to give opportunities for poor and weaker sections of the society for getting educated.B.R.M Memorial Educational Society
He was a disciple of Gouthu Latchanna, an Indian freedom fighter who also fought for the upliftment of oppressed and weaker sections of society, and involved with the establishment of the Gouthu Latchanna Organization for Weaker Sections (GLOW). He was also influenced by Narayana Guru, Periyar, Kanshi Ram, Mahatma Jyotirao Phule, and B. R. Ambedkar which led to the launch of Mahatma Jyotirao Phule Institute for Social Justice. Though they were rationalists and were not closely associated with Hindu religion, Swamy remained and worked within the boundaries of Hindu religion until he died.

Personal details

Swamy was born on July 11, 1942 at Mukteshwaram village of the Ainavalli Mandal in East Godavari, Andhra Pradesh, India.
He did his Bachelor of Science (B.K.B.R college at Amalapuram and Bachelor of Law (B.L) from Andhra University at Waltair.
He died of a heart attack at Nizam institute of Medical Sciences on July 24, 2008, having earlier undergone heart bypass surgery.

Career details

A summary of his career.
After he retired as High Court judge in 2004, he was a frequent participant and speaker at various seminars or protestations related to social justice and reservations.
In 2008 Swamy asked that there be a greater representation in the Indian legal system.
He was a member of a people's court jury which found George W. Bush, President of the United States of America, guilty in perpetrating terrorism in the name of fighting terrorism and attacking and threatening other countries using the issue of nuclear weapons as a pretext and resorting to human rights violation and large-scale killings of people, including women and children, especially in Afghanistan and Iraq and creating a sense of insecurity in the world. Other members of the jury included human rights activists namely Professor Hargopal and Rama Melote.
He was an active speaker and member of Joint Action Committee for Backward Castes in Andhra Pradesh which demands for 50% reservation for backward castes in the coming elections for Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh and members of Parliament of India.BC JAC
He expressed concerns in discriminating Scheduled Castes in law by denying equal rights to them in law.
He opposed the deliberate inclusion of Kapu caste in Backward Castes by the state government. He criticised the action quoting "Constituent Assembly had made it clear that economic backwardness was not the only criteria to consider castes as backward castes. The caste groups should be identified by trades to qualify as backward castes. The principle of shudras and non-shudras should form the basis of dividing the castes". He believed that castes should be recognised as backward castes based on parameters such as poor hygiene, adherence to superstitious beliefs, lack of education, and isolation from village communities.
He complained when a person whom he considered to be inappropriate was appointed as a Supreme Court judge.

Awards




