[[2008 Ahmedabad blasts]]

CATEGORIES: Terrorist incidents in India in 2008, Religious violence in India, Islamic terrorism in India, History of Ahmedabad, Mass murder in 2008, Improvised explosive device bombings in India, History of Gujarat (1947–present), Crime in Gujarat

The 2008 Ahmedabad bombings were a series of 21 bomb blasts that hit Ahmedabad, India, on 26 July 2008, within a span of 70 minutes. 56 people were killed and over 200 people were injured. Ahmedabad is the cultural and commercial heart of Gujarat state, and a large part of western India. The blasts were considered to be of low intensity, and were similar to the Bangalore blasts, Karnataka which occurred the day before.
Several TV channels said they had received an e-mail from a terror outfit called Indian Mujahideen claiming responsibility for the terror attacks; The Gujarat police arrested the suspected mastermind, Mufti Abu Bashir, along with nine others, in connection to the bombings.Abu Bashir behind Ahmedabad blasts: Police
These bombings occurred a day after the Bangalore blasts and a day before a bomb blast in the Indian state of Jharkhand.

The bombings

The bombs were planted in Tiffin carriers on bicycles, a pattern similar to the 13 May 2008 Jaipur bombings.
Gujarat police recovered and defused two more bombs in Surat, another major city in Gujarat, a day after the Ahmedabad blasts. Two cars filled with materials required to make explosives, including detonators, were also found, one of them parked on a roadside near a hospital,

Warning of attacks through e-mail

Several news agencies reported receiving a 14-page e-mail five minutes before the explosions with the subject line: "Await 5 minutes for the revenge of Gujarat",
The contents of the e-mail warned of attacks in 5 minutes: "In the name of Allah the Indian Mujahideen strike again! Do whatever you can, within 5 minutes from now, feel the terror of Death!"
The e-mail also contained threats against the current Chief Minister of Maharashtra, Vilasrao Deshmukh, and his deputy, R.R. Patil, with the claim, "We wonder at your memory. Have you forgotten the evening of 11 July 2006 so quickly and so easily?"
Furthermore, the threats went on to warn Indian businessman Mukesh Ambani of Reliance Industries to "think-twice" before "usurping and building a citadel on a land in Mumbai that belongs to the Waqf board..."
The e-mail also reportedly threatened several Bollywood actors, asking them to stop acting.
Police reported that they questioned U.S national Ken Haywood from whose IP address the threatening email was sent. Haywood's residence in the Sanpada area of Navi Mumbai was raided by ATS officials on 27 July after the IP address from which a threatening email was sent minutes before the Ahmedabad serial blasts was found to be his.

Casualties

56 people were killed by the bombing and over 200 people were injured.
Initially, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh sanctioned an ex gratia payment of Rs 100,000 (US$ 2,300) to the next of kin of the dead. However upon visiting Ahmedabad, he raised the ex gratia figure to Rs 350,000 (US$ 8,050). In addition, he also announced a compensation of Rs 50,000 (US$ 1,200) for those injured in the blasts.
Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi announced a compensation of Rs 500,000 (US$ 11,500) to each victim of the bomb blasts.

Investigations

Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami has claimed the responsibility of the blasts. The email mentioned that "the innocent Muslims arrested in the (Mumbai) bomb blast case are being tried for years and years."
Union Home Secretary Madhukar Gupta said the Centre dispatched one team of bomb experts and decided to convene a meeting of top officials of state governments to discuss the situation arising out of the recent explosions.
According to the Times of India the intelligence community believes that both blasts of Bangalore and Ahmedabad were executed by a network of Wahabi fundamentalists masquerading as Indian Mujahideen.

Leads in the case

|title=Driver of one of the terror cars on CCTV|accessdate=2008-07-30}}[/ref] The car used in the blast at the Ahmedabad Civil Hospital was driven 6 times between Ahmedabad and Surat between 7 July and 24 July.

Suspects

[/ref]

Arrests

Legal case

Controversy arose in the court case of the 26 accused as the state was alleged to have suppressed the legal rights of the accused. On 23 October  lawyers of the accused walked out in protest against the stand taken by the Metropolitan Magistrate. The lawyers wanted to meet the accused alone, however, they had moved an application stating that police did not allow them to meet their clients alone and that the Court should direct the police not to remain present while they were talking to the accused. The Metropolitan Magistrate countered that it was not possible as police had to be with the accused. He is said to have hinted at collusion between the lawyers and the accused, causing a walk out by the accused's lawyers.gujaratglobal.php?id=4416&catype=NEWS   The next day, in two different cases, the designated Metropolitan Court remanded all the 26 accused to police custody till 31 October.Court extends custody of 26 blast accused till Oct 31 – Indian Express
As per the legal rules police have to file a chargesheet in any case before 90 days of the first arrest of the case. However, on 11 November, about three and half months after blasts and the late July arrest, the Gujarat police filed a chargesheet, pertaining to the city civil hospital blast and L G hospital blast case, in a court naming 26 people, all with alleged linkd to SIMI, as accuseds in the case. A 2,000-page chargesheet was filed in the court of the Metropolitan Magistrate, G M Patel. The accused included SIMI activists Mufti Abu Basher, Safdar Nagori and Sajid Mansuri. The chargesheet also listed the names of 50 absconders, and that police had so far examined 511 potential witnesses.ptinews.nsf/0/542B4259CEC82590652574FF0048AB04?OpenDocument 

Similarities

Similarities between the Bangalore and Ahmedabad bombings were investigated, where the former suffered from eight blasts and the latter 21. Union Minister of State for Home Affairs Prakash Jaiswal told reporters in Kanpur that the similarities between this and the Bangalore blasts was that both "blasts were of low intensity" and were planted in crowded areas.[ref]
[/ref] Furthermore, both states – Karnataka and Gujarat – have BJP led governments.

Further threats

The threat of terror continued even after Ahmedabad blasts. The Gujarat police discovered an active bomb which was set to detonate at 12:00am IST in Hatkeshwar, Maninagar. A bomb squad was quick to respond and successfully managed to defuse the bomb in front of a large crowd, which rose to jubilation and applause upon bomb's defusion.

Kerala

A phone call from Pakistan to a Karnataka journalist claimed there would be more blasts in Kerala on Sunday. Kerala police chief Raman Srivastava said: "I have been informed by the DGP of Karnataka about the terror threat to Kerala. We spoke to the journalist concerned, who said he had received two calls today – one at 1 pm and another at 3:30 pm." 

Surat

On the following Monday, just days after the Ahmedabad blasts, another bomb was found in Varacha area of Surat.  This was found after the two car bombs that were discovered immediately after Ahmedabad attacks.
On Tuesday, 29 July, eighteen bombs were found in Surat, and were subsequently defused. They were found mainly in the diamond-processing and residential areas of Surat, within a span of just four hours. After Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi visited the city another bomb was found and defused by a bomb disposal squad. All in all, 23 bombs were found in three days in Surat.23 bombs defused in Surat, India remains on edge – Newindpress.com
Forensic investigations revealed that the bombs had not exploded because the circuits had been wrongly assembled. The police were not sure whether that was on purpose or a way to estimate the reaction time of the bomb squad, for planning future attacks.

Rajasthan

Three bombs were detected on the road in Pali district, near Marwar in Rajasthan. The bombs, put in half-litre oil containers, were planted on the Marwar-Ranawas Road at gap of one km and were spotted by onlookers. The box carried a bundle of fuse wire, 30–40 marbles, 8 iron plates, and detonator. There was no timer nor any electronic devise attached to the explosives. The bombs were defused by the bomb squad.

Tamil Nadu

In Tamil Nadu, Sheikh Abdul Ghaffoor, 39, was arrested with an alleged plan of carrying out bombings on Independence Day, 15 August 2008."Terror module busted in Tamil Nadu, 1 held".. Retrieved 30 July 2008. The plot included bombing the state capital Chennai along with three other cities in Tamil Nadu and at least six trains. Meenakshi Amman Temple in Madurai is believed to be on top of the list for such terror attack. Apparently, it is believed that the plot was revealed by an arrested leader, P Ali Abdullah, of a banned organisation, who has been serving sentences in an Indian jail since 2003. Chennai city police later on 1 August 2008 announced that the arrests were not linked with either the Ahmedabad or Bangalore blasts.arrests have no links with Ahmedabad, Bangalore blasts: police – Indian Express

Kolkata

An E-Mail was sent to Kolkata on 29 July 2008 to bomb 8 different locations in Kolkata. Subsequently, high alert was placed in Kolkata but the E-mail turned out to be a hoax.

New Delhi

Another E-mail was sent to the Japanese Embassy in New Delhi on 30 July 2008 to bomb several locations in Delhi. The mail was soon forwarded to the Delhi Police from the Japanese Embassy and the city was placed under a Red Alert. The E-Mail threatened to bomb Sarojini Nagar which was a target in the October 2005 bombings. Further to these threats Japan closed its embassy in New Delhi on 31 July 2008 and also issue warning to its citizens living in India to avoid crowded places like markets and train stations.Youth held for sending email threat to Japanese Embassy – Times of India Delhi police revealed that the youth who sent the email was frustrated of a failed visa application to the embassy and the email threat was a hoax.Terror email to Japanese Embassy a hoax: Police – Sify News

Criticism

In criticizing the central government Ajai Sahni, executive director of the Institute for Conflict Management said "India's police to population ratio is one of the lowest in the world, barring the poorer African countries. There is a high deficit of personnel in intelligence gathering. The IB has barely 3,500 field officers. We need to address these shortcomings."
Security expert Prakash Singh added "they (terrorists) have no fear of being detected, arrested or prosecuted."
PR Chari, a research professor at the Institute for Peace and Conflict Studies, said "the blasts were a demonstration of their (terrorists) capabilities and a terse reminder of the state's helplessness."
BJP president Rajnath Singh also blamed the UPA government for its "soft approach" to terrorism that has allowed terrorists to grow bolder. He also took the government to task for repealing POTA and for "sleeping over the anti-terror laws like GUJCOCA (an anti-terror law adopted by the Gujarat Assembly)"." Adding that the terror attack pointed to the "total failure' of the state's intelligence machinery.""Gujarat Congress blames Modi government for blasts". India eNews. Retrieved 30 July 2008.

Conspiracy theories

Sushma Swaraj, a senior leader of the BJP, at a press conference in Delhi, claimed the ruling UPA government had a conspiratorial hand in the blasts to divert attention from the allegations of bribery as well as to gain Muslim votes.Below the Belt – Times of India The Congress party's spokesman, Shakeel Ahmed said that Sushma Swaraj should be "tried for treason" and her comments have "given a clean chit to terrorists and anti-national, disruptive forces both within and outside India".Red-faced BJP clears the air, says blasts no conspiracy – Indian Express Although Sushma Swaraj's comments were critically commented by some media and her own party, T. K. Arun, a columnist of The Economic Times suggested that investigations should also look into her point that some of the blasts occurred in Muslim locals of Ahmedabad and "that a large share of those getting slaughtered by the terrorists are Muslims".Sushma Swaraj makes a point – The Economic Times
The US national to whom the suspicious e-mail was traced escaped from India even after a lookout notice was issued.timesnow.aspx?NewsID=13921  

Reaction

Hindu–Muslim Unity

It is widely believed that the attacks were carried out to bring about the levels of unrest Gujarat had seen after the Godhra train burning."Blasts aimed at destroying social fabric: PM". The Times of India. Retrieved 30 July 2008. It is believed that by targeting communally sensitive "Toll rises to 45, army conducts flag marches in Ahmedabad".. Retrieved 30 July 2008. areas such as Sharkej, Hindus and Muslims, attackers wanted to provoke and reignite communal disharmony and riots. However, the people of Gujarat stood tall in unity against such violence. Peaceful demonstrations held across Gujarat by both Hindus and Muslims called attacks an act of cowardice.com : Photos > Pictures, Wallpapers and Calendars from India's leading portal Such demonstrations of unity were also held in Delhi and Bhopal where Hindus and Muslims held candlelight vigils.
Upon his visit to the region, PM Singh praised Gujarat's unity saying "I commend the people of Gujarat for the resilience they have shown. These terrorist acts are aimed at destroying our social fabric, undermining communal harmony and demoralising our people".com: PM praises people of Gujarat for their resilience
President Pratibha Patil, all condemned the blasts and appealed for calm. Minister of State for Home Affairs Shakeel Ahmed expressed surprise and shock at the successive attacks.com Home Minister Shivraj Patil said: "we should assess the situation correctly and try to help the people, who have suffered and plan to see that these things do not happen afterwards.""Political reactions to Ahmedabad blasts". Accessed 30 July 2008.
Opposition Bharatiya Janata Party leader L. K. Advani condemned the blasts, and demanded that both Gujarat and Rajasthan should be allowed to go for their own anti-terror legislation.'Lack of tough anti-terror law, weak intelligence cause of blasts' – Hindustan Times
The Bahujan Samaj Party questioned intelligence agencies failure to be alert to the blast conspiracy, and urged the state Congress to ask the UPA to approve GUJCOCAas. The Vishva Hindu Parishad announced it planned a nationwide anti-jehadi movement from 28 July, and urged the government to act against terrorism "before it is late.""Togadia accuses Govt. of being soft on terrorists".. Retrieved 30 July 2008. AIADMK general secretary J. Jayalalithaa called for the revival of special act like POTA to "effectively counter terrorists and extremist outfits"."Jayaalithaa demands revival of POTA".. Retrieved 30 July 2008.
A host of others who condemned the blasts included Head of the congress party Sonia Gandhi,"Sonia Gandhi condemns Ahmedabad serial blasts".. Retrieved 30 July 2008. Union Minister of State for Home Affairs Prakash Jaiswal, CPI M,"CPM slams serial blasts in Ahmedabad". Sify news. Retrieved 30 July 2008. the All India Muslim Forum,South Asia Contact Group Achieve: Re: SouthAsiaContact Condemnation of Banglore and Ahmedabad Blasts – Dr. M.K."Political parties, social organisations condemn blasts".. Retrieved July, 2008.

International

 United Nations








