[[Sebastian Hardie]]

CATEGORIES: Australian rock music groups, Musical groups established in 1967, Musical groups disestablished in 1977, New South Wales musical groups, Australian progressive rock groups

Sebastian Hardie were Australia's first symphonic rock band. They formed in Sydney in 1967 as Sebastian Hardie Blues Band but dropped the 'Blues Band' reference when they became pop-oriented. By 1973 they developed a more progressive rock style, and later performed as Windchase, but disbanded in 1977. An early member of Sebastian Hardie was Jon English (vocals, rhythm guitar), who starred as Judas Iscariot in the Australian version of the stage musical Jesus Christ Superstar in 1972, he subsequently had a solo career as a singer, actor and playwright. A later member, Mario Millo (lead guitar, mandolin, vocals) became a multi-award winner for his television and movie music.
Sebastian Hardie's other early members included Graham Ford (lead guitar), Peter Plavsic (bass guitar) and his brother Alex Plavsic (drums). After English and Ford had left, the Plavsic brothers were joined by Millo and Toivo Pilt (keyboards). With their addition, Sebastian Hardie developed extended progressive rock tracks to become a symphonic rock group before they released their definitive album Four Moments in 1975, which peaked at No. 13 on the National albums chart. They followed with a second album Windchase in 1976, but it had less chart success. Millo and Pilt formed the band, Windchase, to release Symphinity in 1977, it was a heavier jazz-fusion album but didn't have chart success and they disbanded.

History

1967–1973: Early years

Guitarist Graham Ford (ex-The Interns) made up the name 'Sebastian Hardie' when he founded Sebastian Hardie Blues Band in 1967 in Sydney. Retrieved 8 March 2010. He was eventually replaced by Steve Dunne on vocals and keyboards. British singer Larry Page produced Sebastian Hardie's first single "All Right Now" in September 1973 on RCA Records. Retrieved 8 March 2010.

1973–1977: Four Moments and Windchase

Ford left Sebastian Hardie by October 1973 to be replaced by Mario Millo on lead guitar. They recorded a second single "Day After Day" released in April 1974. By this time Tovio Pilt had replaced Dunne on keyboards and Millo took over on vocals. Besides covers they were playing original progressive rock material. They were Australia's first symphonic rock band and performed a 20-minute version of Mike Oldfield's Tubular Bells as part of their set; Millo was now writing more orchestrated and inventive original material. After signing to Polydor Records they supported tours by international acts Lou Reed and Osibisa during 1974. Their first LP, Four Moments, which peaked at No. 13 on the Australian Kent Music Report Albums Chart, was released in August 1975. Note: Used for Australian Singles and Albums charting from 1970 until ARIA created their own charts in mid-1988. Produced by former member Jon English, it achieved Gold status – selling 35,000 copies, while the related single "Rosanna", an instrumental track, peaked at No. 31 on the Kent Music Report Singles Chart. Four Moments showed the influence of progressive rock groups from Europe, including Genesis, Yes, King Crimson and Focus. It contained only three tracks with the title track taking up one side; Sebastian Hardie displayed "seamless, dramatic arrangements and impeccable musicianship".
Windchase, their second album, was released in February 1976, then they supported the national tour by Santana and released a single "Life, Love and Music", but neither album nor single had any Top 50 chart success. In June, management and internal disagreements led to the Plavsic brothers leaving and an ensuing court decision awarded the band name to Peter Plavsic; consequently Millo and Pilt combined under the name Windchase. They added Doug Nethercote (bass guitar) and Doug Bligh (drums) for the new rhythm section. The Plavsic brothers became backing musicians for The Studs, a Rock n Roll revival group. Retrieved 8 March 2010. Windchase played Sebastian Hardie's material which had been written by Millo and by 1977 started recording Symphinity, which was more jazz-fusion oriented. During album sessions, Nethercote left to be replaced by Duncan McGuire (bass guitar, ex-Doug Parkinson in Focus, Ayers Rock). When the album was released in June, McGuire and Bligh were replaced by Nethercote's return and new member Ralph Cooper (drums). Singles from the album were "Glad to Be Alive" in May and "Flight Call" in October, but neither album nor singles had any chart success. Windchase toured through to October 1977 but the emerging punk and new wave music forms resulted in poor concert audiences and Windchase disbanded.

After the separation

Ford was a member of Sydney-based band, Pleasure Master in 1986 on guitar and vocals. Retrieved 8 March 2010.
Millo worked with Jon English on the 1978 TV series Against the Wind soundtrack, Original soundtracks released include Against the Wind (1978, with Jon English), World Safari II (1984), A Fortunate Life (1986), The Lighthorsemen (1989) and Brides of Christ (1991).
Sebastian Hardie briefly reformed in 1994 — with the Plavsic brothers, Millo and Pilt — to perform at a progressive rock festival, ProgFest, in Los Angeles,
Pilt played keyboards for Ross Ryan during 1979–1983. Retrieved 8 March 2010. Since 2004 he recorded CDs with Sydney "progressive chill" band Tramtracks, with Robert Forbes (keyboards, theremin), Mark Hudson on guitar (who had worked with James Reyne before Australian Crawl) and Graeme James on drums.
In 2011 Sebastian Hardie released a new album, Blueprint, through their website.

Members

Sebastian Hardie Blues Band
Sebastian Hardie
Windchase

Discography

Albums

Singles

(^^) – material released under the name Windchase






