[[Fontainebleau Resort Las Vegas]]

CATEGORIES: Unfinished buildings and structures in the United States, Casinos in the Las Vegas Valley, Skyscraper hotels in the Las Vegas Valley, Las Vegas Strip, Skyscrapers between 200 and 249 meters, Resorts in the Las Vegas Valley, Buildings and structures in Paradise, Nevada, Companies that have filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy

Fontainebleau Las Vegas is a US$2.9 billion, 3,889-room, 68-story unfinished hotel/condo-hotel/casino development near the north end of the Las Vegas Strip on the  site previously occupied by the El Rancho and Algiers hotels in Paradise, Nevada. It was intended to be a sister property to the well-known 1950s-era Fontainebleau Miami Beach.  The building is currently the second tallest in the Las Vegas Valley.
The project, upon completion was expected to include: a 
The building was designed by Carlos Zapata Studio with Bergman Walls Associates as the architect of record.
Groundbreaking was officially announced to have begun on April 30, 2007. Gaming revenue on the Las Vegas Strip peaked at the end of October 2007. The tower was topped out on November 2008.

Bankruptcy

Fontainebleau Resorts CEO Glenn Schaeffer, the former chief financial officer of Mandalay Resort Group, which generated record profits before it was sold to MGM Mirage in 2005, left Fontainebleau Resorts without comment in May 2009. Schaeffer was primarily responsible for securing more than US$3 billion in loans for the project.
Also, Bank of America, the resort's largest lender, refused to provide financing on its committed line of credit for the project around this time; as a result, the resort's operator, Fontainebleau Las Vegas LLC, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in June 2009.
In October 2009, Penn National Gaming was considering purchasing the partially completed resort and the   Penn National has been looking for an opportunity to enter the Las Vegas gaming market.

Carl Icahn purchase

However, in bankruptcy court in Miami, Florida on November 23, 2009, corporate raider and financier Carl Icahn who until 2008 controlled major casino/resort operator American Casino & Entertainment Properties offered US$156 million in cash and financing, outbidding Penn National Gaming for control of the Fontainebleau. Icahn's bid includes a US$51 million debtor-in-possession loan, which, until the resort is auctioned, will provide funding to stabilize the building, cover employees' salaries, cover previous costs and eliminate the need for the resort to ask the bankruptcy court each week to borrow and spend money. Penn National dropped out of the bidding after going as high as US$145 million; they had offered US$101.5 million in cash and loans.
As of November 2009, the cost to complete the resort is an estimated US$1 to 1.5 billion.
On February 18, 2010, Carl Icahn assumed part-ownership of the project without an auction by being the only qualified bidder, paying US$150 million.
In October 2010, Icahn auctioned off the furnishings previously intended for the building. For example, the Plaza Hotel & Casino in Downtown Las Vegas bought rugs, furniture and mattresses from the sale and used them in a refurbishment that was completed in late 2011.  Future plans for the hotel project have not yet been disclosed to the public.
The 68-story Fontainebleau Vegas is described in court papers as essentially a tear-down: valuable for its land on the north end of the Strip, but burdened by a five-year-old (as of 13 November 2013), unfinished tower that Icahn may demolish.






