[[Bliss (spa)]]

CATEGORIES: Companies based in New York City

Bliss is a multi-channel spa and retail product company founded in 1996 and headquartered in Downtown New York. The company retails its own line of bath, body and skincare products through its Bliss catalog, website, Bliss spa stores and at international luxury retailers including Bloomingdale's, Harrods, Harvey Nichols, Neiman Marcus, Saks Fifth Avenue, Nordstrom, Selfridges and Sephora.

History

Bliss spa was founded by Marcia Kilgore, a Saskatchewan, Canada native who moved to Manhattan in 1987 to attend Columbia University. During college, she became a personal trainer to make money. Soon after she decided to take a course in skincare, largely because she had personally suffered from acne since her preteen years. Inspired by her classes, she began giving facials to her friends out of her East Village apartment. To accommodate increasing demand, Kilgore opened the first Bliss Spa in SoHo in July 1996.

Timeline

The brand

Atmosphere
Bliss spa is known for introducing its spa atmosphere and is often credited for starting the mid 1990s spa boom. A "sense of humor" is evident throughout the brand, with whimsically named spa treatments and products, such as "Quadruple Thighpass" for an anti-cellulite treatment.
Blissgirl
One of the most definitive images associated with the Bliss brand is their Blissgirl character, an illustrated girl who appears throughout Bliss-branded channels,
including Bliss catalog covers and blissworld. She is usually depicted using beauty products in playful ways, to align with Bliss' playful brand personality.
Since her introduction, she has undergone several different illustration styles and characteristics, evolving over the years. She has been shown with almost every hair color, and has appeared as different races. She is almost always dressed in a signature white towel and Bliss' Softening Socks and Glamour Gloves.
Products
The products are inspired by the company's spa treatments, and many of them are meant to allow customers to recreate the spa experience at home. This is evident in such products as the Poetic Waxing Kit (the kit contains the same wax used during in spa waxing treatments) and the Triple Oxygen Instant Energizing Mask (a foaming mask that's based on their Triple Oxygen Treatment facial).
Positioning
Bliss spa positions itself as "the young, modern antithesis to stuffy, intimidating spas", that includes rhythm & blues music, a brownie buffet, "movie-while-you-manicure" nail stations, and other features. The spa has attracted celebrity clientele including Oprah Winfrey, Julia Roberts, Uma Thurman, Jennifer Lopez and Madonna.

Acquisition by LVMH

In March 1999, the luxury products group, LVMH (Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton), announced the acquisition of a majority stake in Bliss spa for a reported $30 million. In December 1999, LVMH christened its office tower at 57th Street and Madison Avenue in New York City by opening the second Bliss Spa, Bliss 57.

Acquisition by Starwood Hotels and Resorts

In January 2004, Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide acquired Bliss spa from LVMH for a reported $25 million in cash.

Partnership with JetBlue

In April 2006, JetBlue partnered with Bliss spa, hoping to fill seats in fiercely competitive transcontinental markets. The kits were distributed only on flights between Western states and the East Coast for a one year period.

Acquisition by Steiner Leisure Limited

In January 2010, Steiner Leisure Limited completed its $100 million acquisition of Bliss from Starwood.

Awards

Best Spa in middle east 2010 : Bliss Spa Doha




