[[Keirrison]]

CATEGORIES: 1988 births, Living people, Brazilian footballers, Coritiba Foot Ball Club players, Sociedade Esportiva Palmeiras players, FC Barcelona footballers, S.L. Benfica footballers, ACF Fiorentina players, Santos Futebol Clube players, Cruzeiro Esporte Clube players, Campeonato Brasileiro Série A footballers, Campeonato Brasileiro Série B footballers, Primeira Liga players, Serie A footballers, Brazilian expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in Portugal, Expatriate footballers in Spain, Expatriate footballers in Italy

Keirrison de Souza Carneiro (born 3 December 1988 in Dourados), commonly known as Keirrison, is a Brazilian footballer, currently playing as a striker for Coritiba, on loan from Barcelona.

Club career

Cortiba

Keirrison became a regular in Coritiba's main squad in 2007, helping the club win the Campeonato Brasileiro Série B and being promoted to the following year's Campeonato Brasileiro Série A.

Palmeiras

Keirrison joined Palmeiras in January 2009.

Barcelona

On 23 July 2009, FC Barcelona announced on their website that they had agreed to terms with Brazilian club Palmeiras to bring Keirrison to the Camp Nou. The transfer for the Brazilian striker was worth €14 million plus a bonus up to €2 million depending on the number of matches played with the first team. Keirrison signed on a five-year contract.

=Loan to Benfica=

On 28 July 2009 it was announced that Portuguese side Benfica agreed on terms to take the Brazilian on loan.
He became Portuguese Champion, thanks to the 5 league games he made for Benfica.

=Loan to Fiorentina=

On 31 January 2010 Italian side Fiorentina announced on their website that they had come to terms with FC Barcelona to take the Brazilian on loan until the end of the 2011-12 season.

=Return to Brazil=

On 10 July 2010 Keirrison's loan with Fiorentina was ended pre-maturely.
In Santos, Keirrison won the 2011 Copa Libertadores, but as a reserve. In August 2011 he was loaned to Cruzeiro EC until the end of 2011 Brazilian season.
On March 2012, Keirrison was loaned to his original club Coritiba, until the end of the 2013/2014 season.

Personal life

He was born in Dourados, Mato Grosso do Sul as son of Operário (MS) footballer Adir Carneiro and Alzira Rosa de Souza. His name was chosen by his father, as a tribute to rock musicians Jim Morrison from The Doors and Keith Richards from The Rolling Stones, and also an admiration for the letter K.

Honours

Club

Career statistics

Statistics correct as of 11 July 2011''






