[[Salmon P. Chase College of Law]]

CATEGORIES: Salmon P. Chase College of Law, Law schools in Kentucky, Educational institutions established in 1893, 1893 establishments in Kentucky

Salmon P. Chase College of Law, Northern Kentucky University is a law school in Highland Heights, Kentucky that was founded in 1893 and accredited by the American Bar Association in 1959. The college of law provides both part-time and full-time programs of study that lead to a Juris Doctor (J.D.) degree as well as a joint JD/MBA degree. The school was named for the Reconstruction era U.S. Chief Justice, Salmon P. Chase.  The law school is located in Nunn Hall on Northern Kentucky University's main campus. Nunn Hall's two mock courtrooms are equipped with video and computer technology, as are a majority of the lecture halls and classrooms.

Employment statistics and rankings

According to the law professor blog, The Faculty Lounge, based on 2012 ABA data, only 43.8% of graduates obtained full-time, long term, bar admission required positions (jobs as lawyers), 9 months after graduation, ranking 156th out of 197 law schools. "Full Rankings: Bar Admission Required, Full-Time, Long Term", The Faculty Lounge, March 30, 2013. Retrieved on February 24, 2014,  -- For the latest Employment Summary Reports from the American Bar Association, Section of Legal Education, see 

History

Salmon P. Chase College of Law (Chase), was founded in Cincinnati, Ohio in 1893 as an evening law school affiliated with the Cincinnati YMCA. In 1971, Chase merged into the Kentucky state university system by becoming a part of Northern Kentucky University (NKU). The school then moved from downtown Cincinnati, across the Ohio River, to NKU's Covington Campus. In 1981, Chase moved to its present location in Highland Heights, Kentucky, remaining within the Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky metropolitan area. 

Library

The Chase law library occupies two stories of the five-story Nunn Hall building. The law library's collection consists of approximately 332,151 volumes, along with providing access to electronic resources, including
HeinOnline, LexisNexis, Westlaw, and
many other Web-based products.

Law Review and Groups

Chase has a number of student organizations: Federalist Society (National Chapter), Student Bar Association, American Constitution Society for Law and Policy (National Chapter), Black Law Students Association, Chase Intellectual Property Society, Chase Latino Law Association, Chase Public Interest Group, Chase Student Advocacy Society, Environmental Law Society, International Law Student Association, Legal Association of Women, Phi Alpha Delta, Sports and Entertainment Law Association, Transactional Law Practice Group. 
Chase students may obtain hands-on experience and test their skills against those of other law students both at Chase and throughout the country through a variety of competition team programs. Some recent competition highlights include the 2011 Moot Court Team national championship at the Labor and Employment Law Moot Court Competition, the 2010 National Trial Team championship at the Kentucky Mock Trial Competition, the 2011 National Trial Team regional championship at the National Trial Competition, and the 2011 Arbitration Team national runner-up at the ABA National Arbitration Competition. Other competition teams are Client Counseling Team, Negotiation Team, and the newly formed Toastmasters chapter.
Chase also publishes the Northern Kentucky Law Review four times a year. The journal is independently edited and published by Chase students. The law review also hosts a fall and spring symposium each year.

Clinics and Externships

Chase provides students with many opportunities to complete clinics and/or externships before graduation.
Externship opportunities include working with Kentucky Attorney General's Office, City Solicitors' offices, Internal Revenue Service, Legal Aid, National Labor Relations Board, Ohio Justice and Policy Center, and prosecutors' offices, among others.
Clinic opportunities include the Children's Law Center Clinic, Constitutional Litigation Clinic, Indigent Defense Clinic, Kentucky Criminal Justice Clinic, Kentucky Innocence Project, and Local Government Law Clinic.
Chase also opened the Small Business & Nonprofit Law Clinic in the fall of 2010. It was the first clinic of its kind in Northern Kentucky and Greater Cincinnati. The law clinic provides students with unique, practical experience in transactional law, while providing affordable legal services to entrepreneurs, small businesses, and nonprofit entities in the Kentucky and Greater Cincinnati community. Chase law students staff the clinic under the supervision of a full-time clinic director and licensed attorney. Students interact directly with clients to provide legal advice on a wide range of business-law issues including entity formation, intellectual property, and contracts.

Notable Alumni

File:Steve Chabot 112th Congress Portrait.S. Representative Steve Chabot of Ohio
File:kenlucasky.S. Representative Ken Lucas of Kentucky
File:Tom Luken 97th Congress 1981.S. Mayor Tom Luken of Cincinnati






