[[Israeli outpost]]

CATEGORIES: Arab–Israeli conflict, History of Israel, Israeli settlements, Israeli–Palestinian conflict

The term Israeli outpost (
Outposts appeared after the 1993 Oslo I Accord, when the Israeli government made commitments to freeze the building of new settlements. Although outposts were not officially supported by the government, Israeli public authorities and other government bodies played a major role in establishing and developing them, according to the 2005 Sasson Report, commissioned by then Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. 
Outposts differ from neighborhoods in that they are built at a substantial distance from authorized settlements, while neighborhoods are attached to an existing settlement.
In July 2002, the Israeli government acknowledged that 69 outposts had been established since 1996.
In 2012, ten unauthorized outposts were retroactively legalised by the Israeli government under Prime Minister Benyamin Netanyahu, according to the Israeli NGO Peace Now, by redesignating them as a neighbourhood of nearby settlements.  
Outposts often are provided with security by the Israel Defense Forces. The term "outpost" may also refer to a military outpost.

Background

In 1993, the Rabin Government made commitments to freeze the building of new settlements. After then, however,  settlers built new settlements without governmental decision, but often with the involvement of Israeli public authorities and other government bodies and government ministries, such as the Ministry of Housing and Construction, the Settlement Division of the World Zionist Organization and the Israeli Civil Administration. The Sasson Report, commissioned by then Prime Minister Ariel Sharon found that the proliferation of outposts was a continuation of the Israeli settlement enterprise and makes it clear that "an unauthorized outpost is not a "semi legal" outpost. Unauthorized is illegal."

Characteristics of an outpost

The population of outposts generally numbers between a few and some 400 people and they are usually composed of modular homes, such as caravans. However, they can also be further developed, having more permanent housing as well as "paved roads, bus stops, synagogues and playgrounds."
According to the 2005 Sasson Report, there are four principal characteristics of an unauthorized outpost:
Sasson defines an outpost as a (unauthorized) settlement not attached to an existing settlement. If attached, it is regarded as an unauthorized neighborhood. Moreover, outposts can be built either within or beyond the officially determined municipal boundaries. Although the Israeli government acknowledges that settlements built on land privately owned by Palestinians are illegal, it usually provides them with military defense, access to public utilities, and other infrastructure.

Outposts versus neighborhood

Outposts differ from neighborhoods in that they are built at a substantial distance from authorized settlements. Like outposts, neighborhoods such as Ulpana in Beit El still can be built without authorization. Because the difference is obscure, often disputes rise whether new houses are expansion (thickening) of an existing settlement or the start of a new outpost. According to Peace Now, the Israeli government is playing a trick by legalizing outposts as a neighborhood of an existing settlementPeace Now, For the First Time Since 1990 – the Government is to Approve the Establishment of New Settlements, section The Trick that failed: Legalization as a neighborhood of an existing settlement. 19 April 2012

Types of outposts

Outposts on state land and on private lands

Israel distincts outposts built on state land and those built on privately owned lands. Since the Elon Moreh case in 1979 before the Israeli Supreme Court, the Government formally follows the policy not to allow new settlements on private Palestinian lands. 1, Issue 10, Section Why was Elon Moreh's establishment particularly significant?; 16 September 2005[ref]Nir Shalev, Under the Guise of Legality – Israel's Declarations of State Land in the West Bank (4,6 MB), pp. 12-15, 56-60. B'Tselem, February 2012.

(p.13) Government Decision No. 145 of 1 November 1979: "On 11 November 1979, about one month after the ruling in the Elon Moreh case, the government decided "to expand the settlement in Judea, Samaria, the Jordan Valley, the Gaza Strip and the Golan Heights by increasing the population of the existing communities and by establishing new communities on state-owned land."

(p.59): "International law, which forbids the occupying power to change the local law in force in the occupied area on the eve of its occupation, unless such a change is necessary for security needs or for the benefit of the local population."[/ref]
The Netanyahu government seeks to legalize outposts on state land and dismantle those on private lands. As this state land is part of the Occupied Territories, authorization can only make them legal according to Israeli law; it does not change their illegal status under international law.
In the West Bank, there are two types of state land: 
Most of the state land belongs to the latter type. According to B'Tselem, the declaration as state land was doubtful in many instances.B'Tselem, LAND GRAB – Israel's Settlement Policy in the West Bank, pp. 40,51-54, Chapter 3, B Declaration of Land as State Land. May 2002. Summary: Israel pretends to apply Ottoman land laws, but uses an interpretation of law that differs from the Ottoman/British Mandate/Jordanian rule. The latter never used declaration of state land as a method to take over lands.

"Dummy" outposts

"Dummy" outposts are uninhabited outposts. Apparently, some of them were used to distract the IDF in order to prevent evacuation of occupied outposts. Haaretz, 11 July 2002 Others are destined to improve negotiation positions by offering extra outposts to remove and show the world that the State is dismantling outposts,Haaretz, Focus / Yesha sacrifices trailers in a larger game. 1 July 2002 The idea of the "dummy" outposts is attributed to Ze'ev Hever, a former leader of the Jewish Underground. The Sasson Report found that most of the evacuated outposts were unpopulated.

Military outposts

In theory, military outposts are temporary occupations for military strategic purposes, not for settlement of civilians. In the Occupied Territories, however, they became a principal way to start civilian settlements. 3 February 1982 In Palestine, this were typically Nahal settlements.

Number of outposts

Currently, some hundred outposts exist. The Sasson Report gave a provisional figure of 105 unauthorized outposts by March 2005, although Sasson did not have the disposal of all the necessary information. It found that 26 outposts were on state lands, 15 on private Palestinian lands and 7 on survey lands. The definition of outposts, neighborhoods and authorized settlements may differ between concerned parties. Due to different interpretation, the number of outposts (and of settlements as well) may differ in statistics.
In 2012, four new outposts were established with 317 new housing units built without building permits: Tzofin Tzafon (Tzofin North) outside the Tzofim settlement near Qalqilyah, Nahlei Tal outside the Talmon settlement near Ramallah, Nahalat Yosef near Nablus and Hill 573 as part of the expansion of the settlement Itamar, according to Peace Now.

Roadmap for Peace

In the framework of the 2003 Roadmap for Peace, Israel committed itself under Prime Minister Sharon to evacuate outposts, erected from March 2001, the start of the Sharon government. The Israeli government gave the U.S. a list of 28 unauthorized outposts erected in the West Bank since that date,The list and a map on:Outposts: the Unripe Settlements. ARIJ, 17 January 2004 of which 12 were ordered to be removed, "while some of the remaining 16 outposts were in the process of being approved and planned," according to the Israeli daily Haaretz.
The Government opposes the evacuation of older outposts. Haaretz, 29 April 2013 After March 2001 outposts were further expanded. Ynetnews, 16 November 2006

Legalising outposts

In the "Blue Line"-plan, written in January 2011, at least 26 outposts were included in areas defined as "state lands". Left-wing activist Dror Etkes said, this means the state has started a process to legitimize these outposts.
According to the Israeli NGO Peace Now, the Israeli government under Netanyahu legalised ten illegal outposts in 2012, being the only Israeli government to ever authorize outposts. In February 2012, approval was quietly granted to the outpost Shvut Rachel by redesignating it as a "neighborhood" of the nearby settlement of Shilo, in April of the same year, legal status was conferred on the three outposts Bruchin, Rechelim and Sansana. The Jerusalem Post, 12 August 2012. The Minister of Defense also approved the promotion of plans that will legalize the outposts Nofei Nehemia, Mitzpe Eshtemoa, and El Matan as "neighborhoods" of other settlements or outposts,

Levy Report

In late January 2012, Prime Minister Netanyahu appointed a three member committee headed by former Israeli Supreme Court justice Edmund Levy, dubbed the "outpost committee", to investigate the legal status of unauthorized West Bank Jewish settlements. and provides proposals for new guidelines for settlement construction.
As of April 2013, the report was not brought before the Israeli cabinet or any parliamentary or governmental body which would have the power to approve it.





Further reading


