[[Insomnia]]

CATEGORIES: Sleep disorders, Psychiatric diagnosis

Insomnia, or sleeplessness, is a sleep disorder in which there is an inability to fall asleep or to stay asleep as long as desired.  While the term is sometimes used to describe a disorder demonstrated by polysomnographic evidence of disturbed sleep, this sleep disorder is often practically defined as a positive response to either of two questions: "Do you experience difficulty sleeping?" or "Do you have difficulty falling or staying asleep?"
Insomnia is most often thought of as both a medical sign and a symptom
Those who are having trouble sleeping sometimes turn to sleeping pills, which can help when used occasionally but may lead to substance dependence or addiction if used regularly for an extended period. L., Gilbert, D. T., & Wegner, D. M. (2010). Psychology. 2nd ed. p. 195. New york: Worth Publishers, ISBN 1429237198.
Insomnia can be grouped into primary and secondary, or comorbid, insomnia.  A complete diagnosis will differentiate between free-standing primary insomnia, insomnia as secondary to another condition, and primary insomnia co-morbid with one or more conditions.

Classification

DSM-5 criteria for insomnia"Sleep Wake Disorders ." Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-5.. 5th ed. Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association, 2013. -. Print.

The DSM-5 criteria for insomnia include the following:
Predominant complaint of dissatisfaction with sleep quantity or quality, associated with one (or more) of the following symptoms:
In addition,
note: The DSM-5 criteria for insomnia is intended for use by general mental health and medical clinicians (those caring for adult, geriatric, and pediatric patients).

Types of insomnia

Insomnia can be classified as transient, acute, or chronic.

Patterns of insomnia

Sleep-onset insomnia is difficulty falling asleep at the beginning of the night, often a symptom of anxiety disorders. Delayed sleep phase disorder can be misdiagnosed as insomnia as it causes a delayed period of sleep, spilling over into daylight hours.
It is common for patients who have difficulty falling asleep to also have nocturnal awakenings with difficulty returning to sleep. Two thirds of these patients wake up in middle of the night, with more than half having trouble falling back to sleep after a middle of the night awakening.
Early morning awakening is an awakening occurring earlier (more than 30 minutes) than desired with an inability to go back to sleep, and before total sleep time reaches 6.5 hours. Early morning awakening is often a characteristic of depression.

Poor sleep quality

Poor sleep quality can occur as a result of, for example, restless legs, sleep apnea or major depression.  Poor sleep quality is caused by the individual not reaching stage 3 or delta sleep which has restorative properties.
Major depression leads to alterations in the function of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, causing excessive release of cortisol which can lead to poor sleep quality.
Nocturnal polyuria, excessive nighttime urination, can be very disturbing to sleep.

Subjective insomnia

Some cases of insomnia are not really insomnia in the traditional sense. People experiencing sleep state misperception often sleep for normal durations, yet severely overestimate the time taken to fall asleep. They may believe they slept for only four hours while they, in fact, slept a full eight hours.

Causes and comorbidity

Symptoms of insomnia can be caused by or be co-morbid with:
Sleep studies using polysomnography have suggested that people who have sleep disruption have elevated nighttime levels of circulating cortisol and adrenocorticotropic hormone They also have an elevated metabolic rate, which does not occur in people who do not have insomnia but whose sleep is intentionally disrupted during a sleep study. Studies of brain metabolism using positron emission tomography (PET) scans indicate that people with insomnia have higher metabolic rates by night and by day. The question remains whether these changes are the causes or consequences of long-term insomnia.

Steroid hormones and insomnia

Studies have been conducted with steroid hormones and insomnia. Changes in levels of cortisol, progesterone in the female cycle, or estrogen during menopause are correlated with increased occurrences of insomnia. Those with differing levels of cortisol often have long-term insomnia, where estrogen is onset insomnia catalyzed by menopause, and progesterone is temporary insomnia within the monthly female cycle.

=Cortisol=

Cortisol is typically thought of as the stress hormone in humans, but it is also the awakening hormone.

=Estrogen=

Many postmenopausal women have reported changes in sleep patterns since entering menopause that reflect symptoms of insomnia. This could occur because of the lower levels of estrogen. Lower estrogen levels can cause hot flashes, change in stress reactions, or overall change in the sleep cycle, which all could contribute to insomnia. Estrogen treatment as well as estrogen-progesterone combination supplements as a hormone replacement therapy can help regulate menopausal women's sleep cycle again.

=Progesterone=

Low levels of progesterone throughout the female menstruation cycle, but primarily near the end of the luteal phase, have also been known to correlate with insomnia as well as aggressive behavior, irritability, and depressed mood in women. Around 67% of women have problems with insomnia right before or during their menstrual cycle.; Bain, J. (2013). Menstrual Insomnia. Reader's Digest. Lower levels of progesterone can, like estrogen, correlate with insomnia in menopausal women.
A common misperception is that the amount of sleep required decreases as a person ages. The ability to sleep for long periods, rather than the need for sleep, appears to be lost as people get older. Some elderly insomniacs toss and turn in bed and occasionally fall off the bed at night, diminishing the amount of sleep they receive. Aafp. Retrieved on 2011-11-20.

Risk factors

Insomnia affects people of all age groups but people in the following groups have a higher chance of acquiring insomnia.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of the sleep disorder insomnia has multiple factors that come into play. A qualified sleep specialist should be consulted in the diagnosis of any sleep disorder so the appropriate measures can be taken. The diagnosis should start with looking at the patient's past medical history and a physical examination to rule out insomnia being caused by any other medical conditions. After all other conditions are ruled out a comprehensive sleep history should be taken. The sleep history should include sleep habits, medications (prescription and non-prescription), alcohol consumption, nicotine and caffeine intake, co-morbid illnesses, and sleep environment. "Diagnosis and treatment of insomnia." 2008. The individual should keep a sleep diary for one or two weeks to help sleep specialist get an in-depth look at his/her sleep history. The diary should include time to bed, total sleep time, time to sleep onset, number of awakenings, use of medications, time of awakening and subjective feelings in the morning. Some patients may need to do a sleep study to determine if insomnia is present. The sleep study will involve the assessment tools of a polysomnogram and the multiple sleep latency test and will be conducted in a sleep center or a designated hotel. Some sleep studies may be conducted at home and the results taken to the sleep specialist for review.
Specialists in sleep medicine are qualified to diagnose the many different sleep disorders. Patients with various disorders, including delayed sleep phase syndrome, are often mis-diagnosed with primary insomnia.  When a person has trouble getting to sleep, but has a normal sleep pattern once asleep, a circadian rhythm disorder is a likely cause.
In many cases, insomnia is co-morbid with another disease, side-effects from medications, or a psychological problem. Approximately half of all diagnosed insomnia is related to psychiatric disorders.  In depression in many cases "insomnia should be regarded as a co-morbid condition, rather than as a secondary one;" insomnia typically predates psychiatric symptoms.  "In fact, it is possible that insomnia represents a significant risk for the development of a subsequent psychiatric disorder."
Knowledge of causation is not necessary for a diagnosis.

Treatment

It is important to identify or rule out medical and psychological causes before deciding on the treatment for insomnia.

Non-pharmacological

Non-pharmacological strategies have comparable efficacy to hypnotic medication for insomnia and they may have longer lasting effects. Hypnotic medication is only recommended for short-term use because dependence with rebound withdrawal effects upon discontinuation or tolerance can develop. "Addressing hypnotic medicines use in primary care". NPS News, Vol 67.
Non pharmacological strategies provide long lasting improvements to insomnia and are recommended as a first line and long term strategy of management. The strategies include attention to sleep hygiene, stimulus control, behavioral interventions, sleep-restriction therapy, paradoxical intention, patient education and relaxation therapy. Some examples are keeping a journal, restricting the time spending awake in bed, practicing relaxation techniques, and maintaining a regular sleep schedule and a wake-up time. Behavioral therapy can assist a patient in developing new sleep behaviors to improve sleep quality and consolidation. Behavioral therapy may include, learning healthy sleep habits to promote sleep relaxation, undergoing light therapy to help with worry-reduction strategies and regularizing the biological clock.
EEG biofeedback has demonstrated effectiveness in the treatment of insomnia with improvements in duration as well as quality of sleep.
Sleep hygiene is a common term for all of the behaviors which relate to the promotion of good sleep. These behaviors are used as the basis of sleep interventions and are the primary focus of sleep education programs. J., Hampson, S. E., & Cropley, M. M. "Sleep hygiene or compensatory sleep practices: an examination of behaviors affecting sleep in older adults". 2002 These behaviors include the use of caffeine, nicotine and alcohol consumption, maximizing the regularity and efficiency of sleep episodes, minimizing medication usage and daytime napping, the promotion of regular exercise, and the facilitation of a positive sleep environment.  Exercise can be helpful when establishing a routine for sleep but should not be done close to the time that you are planning on going to sleep. Daytime napping can be used to supplement total sleep if it is not achieved during the night. Napping like exercise should not be done near the time the individual is going to go to sleep. The creation of a positive sleep environment may also be helpful in reducing the symptoms of insomnia. In order to create a positive sleep environment one should remove objects that can cause worry or distressful thoughts from the view of the individual trying to sleep. The room should also be kept at a comfortable temperature and dark to allow ease of sleep. If one cannot fall asleep within 20 minutes of getting in bed they should get up and do something relaxing until that they feel tired and should not return to bed unless they feel they can fall asleep within 20 minutes.
Stimulus control therapy is a treatment for patients who have conditioned themselves to associate the bed, or sleep in general, with a negative response. As stimulus control therapy involves taking steps to control the sleep environment, it is sometimes referred interchangeably with the concept of sleep hygiene. Examples of such environmental modifications include using the bed for sleep or sex only, not for activities such as reading or watching television; waking up at the same time every morning, including on weekends; going to bed only when sleepy and when there is a high likelihood that sleep will occur; leaving the bed and beginning an activity in another location if sleep does not result in a reasonably brief period of time after getting into bed (commonly ~20 min); reducing the subjective effort and energy expended trying to fall asleep; avoiding exposure to bright light during nighttime hours, and eliminating daytime naps.
A component of stimulus control therapy is sleep restriction, a technique that aims to match the time spent in bed with actual time spent asleep. This technique involves maintaining a strict sleep-wake schedule, sleeping only at certain times of the day and for specific amounts of time to induce mild sleep deprivation. Complete treatment usually lasts up to 3 weeks and involves making oneself sleep for only a minimum amount of time that they are actually capable of on average, and then, if capable (i.e. when sleep efficiency improves), slowly increasing this amount (~15 min) by going to bed earlier as the body attempts to reset its internal sleep clock. Bright light therapy, which is often used to help early morning wakers reset their natural sleep cycle, can also be used with sleep restriction therapy to reinforce a new wake schedule. Although applying this technique with consistency is difficult, it can have a positive effect on insomnia in motivated patients.
Paradoxical intention is a cognitive reframing technique where the insomniac, instead of attempting to fall asleep at night, makes every effort to stay awake (i.e. essentially stops trying to fall asleep). One theory that may explain the effectiveness of this method is that by not voluntarily making oneself go to sleep, it relieves the performance anxiety that arises from the need or requirement to fall asleep, which is meant to be a passive act. This technique has been shown to reduce sleep effort and performance anxiety and also lower subjective assessment of sleep-onset latency and overestimation of the sleep deficit (a quality found in many insomniacs).
Meditation has been recommended for the treatment of insomnia. The meditation teacher Siddhārtha Gautama, 'The Buddha', is recorded as having recommended the practice of 'loving-kindness' meditation, or mettā bhāvanā as a way to produce relaxation and thereby, sound sleep – putting it first in a list of the benefits of that meditation.16. Metta Sutta. Good Will. University of Western Florida More recently, studies have concluded that: a mindfulness practice reduced mental and bodily restlessness before sleep and the subjective symptoms of insomnia;

=Cognitive behavioral therapy=

There is some evidence that cognitive behavioural therapy for insomnia is superior in the long-term to benzodiazepines and the nonbenzodiazepines in the treatment and management of insomnia.

=Prevention=

Insomnia can be short-term or long-term. Prevention of the sleep disorder may include maintaining a consistent sleeping schedule, such as waking up and sleeping at the same time. Also, one should avoid caffeinated drinks during the 8 hours before sleeping time. While exercise is essential and can aid the process of sleeping, it is important to not exercise right before bedtime, therefore creating a calm environment. Lastly, one's bed should only be for sleep and possibly sexual intercourse.  These are some of the points included in sleep hygiene. Going to sleep and waking up at the same time every day can create a steady pattern, which may help against insomnia.

=Internet interventions=

Despite the therapeutic effectiveness and proven success of CBT, treatment availability is significantly limited by a lack of trained clinicians, poor geographical distribution of knowledgeable professionals, and expense.
These online programs are typically behaviorally-based treatments that have been operationalized and transformed for delivery via the Internet.  They are usually highly structured; automated or human supported; based on effective face-to-face treatment; personalized to the user; interactive; enhanced by graphics, animations, audio, and possibly video; and tailored to provide follow-up and feedback.
A number of Internet interventions for insomnia have been developedL. Ritterband et al., 2011; L. M. Ritterband et al., 2009; Ström, Pettersson, & Andersson, 2004; Vincent & Lewycky, 2009 and a few of them have been evaluated as part of scientific research trials.
A paper published in 2012 reviewed the related literature and found good evidence for the use of Internet interventions for insomnia.

Medications

Many insomniacs rely on sleeping tablets and other sedatives to get rest. In some places medications are prescribed to over 95% of insomniac cases. The percentage of adults using a prescription sleep
aid increases with age. During 2005–2010, about 4% of U.S. adults aged 20 and over reported that they took prescription sleep aids in the past 30 days. Prevalence of use was lowest among the youngest age group (those aged 20–39) at about 2%, increased to 6% among those aged 50–59, and reached 7% among those aged 80 and over. More adult women (5.0%) reported using  prescription sleep aids than adult men (3.1%). Non-Hispanic white adults reported higher use of sleep aids (4.7%) than non-Hispanic black (2.5%) and Mexican-American (2.0%) adults. No difference was shown between non-Hispanic black adults and Mexican-American adults in use of prescription sleep aids., Fryar, C.D., and Gu, Q. (2013). Prescription Sleep Aid Use Among Adults: United States, 2005–2010. Hyattsville, Md.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. As an alternative to taking prescription drugs, some evidence shows that an average person seeking short-term help may find relief from taking over-the-counter antihistamines such as diphenhydramine or doxylamine.
Benzodiazepines and nonbenzodiazepines have similar efficacy that is not significantly more than for antidepressants.

=Antihistamines=

The antihistamine diphenhydramine is widely used in nonprescription sleep aids such as Benadryl.  The antihistamine doxylamine is used in nonprescription sleep aids such as Unisom (USA) and Unisom 2 (Canada).  In some countries, including Australia, it is marketed under the names Restavit and Dozile. It is the most effective over-the-counter sedative currently available in the United States, and is more sedating than some prescription hypnotics. Drugbank.ca. Retrieved on 2011-11-20.
While the two drugs mentioned above are available over the counter in most countries, the effectiveness of these agents may decrease over time, and the incidence of next-day sedation is higher than for most of the newer prescription drugs. Anticholinergic side-effects may also be a draw back of these particular drugs. While addiction does not seem to be an issue with this class of drugs, they can induce dependence and rebound effects upon abrupt cessation of use.

=Benzodiazepines=

The most commonly used class of hypnotics prescribed for insomnia are the benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepines all bind unselectively to the GABAA receptor. But certain benzodiazepines (hypnotic benzodiazepines) have significantly higher activity at the α1 subunit of the GABAA receptor compared to other benzodiazepines (for example, triazolam and temazepam have significantly higher activity at the α1 subunit compared to alprazolam and diazepam, making them superior sedative-hypnotics – alprazolam and diazepam in turn have higher activity at the α2 subunit compared to triazolam and temazepam, making them superior anxiolytic agents). Modulation of the α1 subunit is associated with sedation, motor-impairment, respiratory depression, amnesia, ataxia, and reinforcing behavior (drug-seeking behavior). Modulation of the α2 subunit is associated with anxiolytic activity and disinhibition. For this reason, certain benzodiazepines are better suited to treat insomnia than others. Hypnotic benzodiazepines include drugs such as temazepam, flunitrazepam, triazolam, flurazepam, midazolam, nitrazepam, and quazepam. These drugs can lead to tolerance, physical dependence, and the benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome upon discontinuation, especially after consistent usage over long periods of time. Benzodiazepines, while inducing unconsciousness, actually worsen sleep as they promote light sleep while decreasing time spent in deep sleep.

=Non-benzodiazepines=

Nonbenzodiazepine sedative-hypnotic drugs, such as zolpidem, zaleplon, zopiclone, and eszopiclone, are a class hypnotic medications indicated for mild to moderate insomnia. Their effectiveness at improving time to sleeping is slight.

=Antidepressants=

Some antidepressants such as amitriptyline, doxepin, mirtazapine, and trazodone can have a sedative effect, and are prescribed to treat insomnia. Amitriptyline and doxepin both have antihistaminergic, anticholinergic, and antiadrenergic properties, which contribute to their side-effect profile, while mirtazapines side-effects are primarily antihistaminergic, and trazadones side-effects are primarily antiadrenergic. Some also alter sleep architecture. As with benzodiazepines, the use of antidepressants in the treatment of insomnia can lead to withdrawal effects; withdrawal may induce rebound insomnia.
Mirtazapine is known to decrease sleep latency, promoting sleep efficiency and increasing the total amount of sleeping time in people with both depression and insomnia.
Agomelatine is a novel melatonergic antidepressant with sleep-improving qualities and does not cause daytime drowsiness.

=Melatonin=

Melatonin is a hormone synthesized by the pineal gland, secreted through the bloodstream in the dark or commonly at nighttime, in order to control the sleep cycle.
Evidence for ramelteon looks promising.
Studies have also shown that children with Autism spectrum disorders, learning disabilities, Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and other related neurological diseases can benefit from the use of melatonin. This is because they often have trouble sleeping due to their disorders. For example, children with ADHD tend to have trouble falling asleep because of their hyperactivity and, as a result, tend to be tired during most of the day. Children who have ADHD then, as well as the other disorders mentioned, are given melatonin before bedtime in order to help them sleep. The sleep cycle regulates for these children when given the melatonin supplement.

=Alcohol=

Alcohol is often used as a form of self-treatment of insomnia to induce sleep. However, alcohol use to induce sleep can be a cause of insomnia. Long-term use of alcohol is associated with a decrease in NREM stage 3 and 4 sleep as well as suppression of REM sleep and REM sleep fragmentation. Frequent moving between sleep stages occurs, with awakenings due to headaches, the need to urinate, dehydration, and excessive sweating. Glutamine rebound also plays a role as when someone is drinking; alcohol inhibits glutamine, one of the body's natural stimulants. When the person stops drinking, the body tries to make up for lost time by producing more glutamine than it needs.
The increase in glutamine levels stimulates the brain while the drinker is trying to sleep, keeping him/her from reaching the deepest levels of sleep. (2004-10-12) HowStuffWorks "How Hangovers Work". Health.com. Retrieved on 2011-11-20. Stopping chronic alcohol use can also lead to severe insomnia with vivid dreams. During withdrawal REM sleep is typically exaggerated as part of a rebound effect.

=Other=

Opioid medications such as hydrocodone, oxycodone, and morphine are used for insomnia that is associated with pain due to their analgesic properties and hypnotic effects. Opioids can fragment sleep and decrease REM and stage 2 sleep. By producing analgesia and sedation, opioids may be appropriate in carefully selected patients with pain-associated insomnia. However, dependence on opioids can lead to suffering from long time disturbance in sleep.
The use of antipsychotics for insomnia, while common, is not recommended as the evidence does not demonstrate a benefit and the risk of adverse effects is significant.[ref], which cites

Alternative medicine

Some insomniacs use herbs such as valerian, chamomile, lavender, cannabis, hops, Withania somnifera, and passion-flower.  Purified valerian extract has undergone multiple studies and appears to be modestly effective.

Epidemiology

