[[CDS Global]]

CATEGORIES: Companies based in Iowa, Companies based in Des Moines, Iowa

CDS Global, Inc. is a privately owned, international data management company based in Des Moines, Iowa
It was founded in 1972 by a group of employees from Look after the magazine ceased publication. The company employs over 2,500 individuals worldwide and has locations on three continents: North America, Europe and Australia. Since 1982, the company has operated as a unit of Hearst Corporation.

History

In late 1971, Look ceased publication due to factors such as a staggering economy and rising postal rates. Two months prior, the circulation department had completed the development of its new computer system that stored the names and addresses of customers on magnetic tape. 
This new fulfillment system gave rise to the idea for a new business, with six Look employees looking for their first client. Edward Downe, Jr., publisher of Ladies' Home Journal and The American Home, agreed to not only be the company's first client, but also its owner – if the company was named after him. Thus, on April 1, 1972, Downe Computer Services opened with 172 employees and one client.
In 1977, the Charter Company in Jacksonville, Florida, started buying Downe Communications' stock. This led to the buying out of Downe's stock in 1978, and the changing of the company name to Charter Data Services (CDS).
Hearst Corporation acquired two Charter Company properties, Redbook and CDS, in 1982. After acquisition, Hearst changed the name of Charter Data Services to Communications Data Services. In 2007, the company's name was changed to CDS Global.

Specialization

CDS Global specializes in outsourced magazine fulfillment services for publishers across the globe, and is currently ranked the top fulfillment service bureau in North America. In 2012, CDS Global managed 132,000,000 paid subscriber records, giving the company over a 50% market share in North America.

Additional Services

In addition to magazine fulfillment services, the company also provides outsourced business solutions to publishers, direct marketing firms, financial institutions, nonprofits, municipalities, utilities, and product manufacturers around the world. Other services include customer service, integrated marketing, e-commerce, payment processing, and printing and mail management. 

International Reach

The company employs over 2,500 individuals worldwide, with sites located on three continents; Australia (Sydney), Europe (Market Harborough; Brighton), and North America (Boone, Iowa; Council Bluffs, Iowa; Harlan, Iowa; Tipton, Iowa; West Des Moines, Iowa; Wilton, Iowa; Bethlehem, Pennsylvania; Prescott, Arizona; New York City; Markham, Ontario; and Montreal). 

International Entities

In 1993, the company purchased Tower Publishing Services Limited of England, and in 2007, acquired 100 percent of its stock. In 2005, Tower expanded their reach by opening an office in Sydney, Australia.
INDAS Limited of Canada was purchased by the company in 2003.
In 2010, the company acquired Optima, a fulfillment group operated by Optima Data Intelligence Services Limited in the U.K.






