[[Córdoba Metro]]

CATEGORIES: Underground rapid transit in Argentina, Córdoba, Argentina, Proposed public transport in Argentina

The Córdoba Metro is a project that will, according to its proponents, serve the Argentine city of Córdoba. The metro system would become the second metro system in Argentina, after the Buenos Aires Underground. The project is currently in the planning and design phase. 

Background

On December 10, 2007, the Secretary of Transport and Traffic of the Argentine Municipality announced an initiative of the Iecsa/Gela companies to build an underground system in the City of Córdoba. and, on December 14, the municipality commenced Technical and Financial Feasibility studies.

First proposal

Finally on April 10, 2008, President Cristina Kirchner in a meeting with the mayor of the city of Córdoba, Daniel Giacomino confirmed the construction of the metro system. of route.
Depending on which vehicles would be selected and other factors, the total planned cost of the system is of nearly US$1.1 billion. The preliminary design of the original project foresaw two principal lines. The first line would cross the city from west to south, over Colón and Duarte Quirós Avenues, up to Perón Boulevard, where it would reach the vicinity of the Mitre Railroad, near the bus terminal. The second line would run from north to south near the Ciudad Universitaria area, and under the Suquía river, continuing northwards to the Belgrano railway, near the Alta Córdoba train station. Plans were initially for the construction of 17 stations, 11 on the west-south line, and six in the south-north line. 
However, an updated plan was announced in November 2010, with 29 stations on a 

Second proposal

The project was redesigned again in 2012. east-west from Fuerza Aérea Avenue to Sabattini Avenue, paralleling Line A but further south, serving 7 stations.

Construction features

Tunnel boring machines will be used for the construction. According to experts of the Lecsa company, since the construction work won't be done on the surface, the disadvantages of traffic complications would be avoided from the very beginning. The tunnels will be covered in  thick prefabricated assembled units of concrete. The trains will have safety systems along the entire metro network.






