[[National Association for Research & Therapy of Homosexuality]]

CATEGORIES: Organizations established in 1992, Sexual orientation change efforts, Conversion therapy, Non-profit organizations based in California, Psychotherapy, Ex-gay movement, Psychology organizations

The National Association for Research & Therapy of Homosexuality (NARTH) is an organization that offers conversion therapy and other regimens that purport to change the sexual orientation of individuals who experience unwanted same-sex attraction. NARTH's leaders describe their organization as "dedicated to the service of persons who experience unwanted homosexual (same-sex) attractions (SSA)." NARTH was founded in 1992 by Joseph Nicolosi, Benjamin Kaufman, and  Charles Socarides. Its headquarters are in Encino, California, at the Thomas Aquinas Psychological Clinic. Julie Hamilton is the current president of NARTH. NARTH's leaders disagree with the holding of the world's major mental health organizations that homosexuality is not a disorder.R. L. Spitzer, "The diagnostic status of homosexuality in DSM-III: a reformulation of the issues", American Journal of Psychiatry 138 (1981): 210–15."An Instant Cure", Time; April 1, 1974.P.A. Normalization of Homosexuality, and the Research Study of Irving BieberResolution on Appropriate Affirmative Responses to Sexual Orientation Distress and Change Efforts

History

NARTH was founded in 1992 by Benjamin Kaufman, Charles Socarides, and Joseph Nicolosi. In an article titled In Defense of the Need for Honest Dialogue, Kaufman wrote that the three of them founded NARTH because the American Psychiatric Association and similar professional organizations "had totally stifled the scientific inquiry that would be necessary to stimulate a discussion homosexuality."In Defense of the Need for Honest Dialogue NARTH's leaders argue that the political atmosphere had changed, making it politically incorrect even to suggest the need for a dialogue that considers the question of the normality of homosexuality. Kaufman states that NARTH was formed in response to censorship of scientific investigation of politically unpopular views.
The organization had 501(c)(3) tax exempt status, which was revoked by the Internal Revenue Service in September 2012 due to ongoing failure to file required paperwork.IRS Exempt Organizations Select Check for National Association for Research

Activities

NARTH is a secular organization, differentiating it from other ex-gay groups that are primarily religious in nature. Nevertheless, NARTH often partners with religious groups, such as Jews Offering New Alternatives for Healing and Evergreen International in Positive Alternatives to Homosexuality. The NARTH website contains a resource list of theological articles. NARTH. Accessed July 27, 2011.
In July 2011, NARTH failed to pay its dues to the California Board for Behavioral Sciences and was removed from the list of groups that provide continuing education credits to therapists in California. NARTH had been an approved continuing education provider since 1998. San Francisco Chronicle, July 2011

Sigmund Freud Award/President's Award

Beginning in 1996, NARTH has given an award in recognition of a researcher's work, called the NARTH Sigmund Freud Award. In some years, the award is called the NARTH President's Award. The award is presented at NARTH's annual conference.

Affiliations

A. Dean Byrd is a past president. Lehrman and Jeffrey Satinover.

PATH

In 2003, PATH's leaders made NARTH a member of Positive Alternatives to Homosexuality.

Position of professional organizations on sexual orientation change efforts

In 2009 an American Psychological Association research summaryAmerican Psychological Association: Resolution on Appropriate Affirmative Responses to Sexual Orientation Distress and Change Efforts included the following statements:
 The longstanding consensus of the behavioral and social sciences and the health and mental health professions is that homosexuality per se is a normal and positive variation of human sexual orientation. 
 SOCE orientation change efforts has been controversial due to tensions between the values held by some faith-based organizations, on the one hand, and those held by lesbian, gay and bisexual rights organizations and professional and scientific organizations, on the other. 
 There are no studies of adequate scientific rigor to conclude whether recent SOCE do work to change a person's sexual orientation. 
 Some individuals and groups have promoted the idea of homosexuality as symptomatic of developmental defects or spiritual and moral failings and have argued that SOCE, including psychotherapy and religious efforts, could alter homosexual feelings and behaviors. Many of these individuals and groups appeared to be embedded within the larger context of conservative religious political movements that have supported the stigmatization of homosexuality on political or religious grounds. 
No major mental health professional organization has sanctioned efforts to change sexual orientation and most of them have adopted policy statements cautioning the profession and the public about treatments that purport to change sexual orientation. These include the American Psychiatric Association, American Psychological Association, American Counseling Association, National Association of Social Workers in the USA,Expert affidavit of Gregory M. Herek, PhD Royal College of Psychiatrists,Royal College of Psychiatrists: Statement from the Royal College of Psychiatrists' Gay and Lesbian Mental Health Special Interest Group and Australian Psychological Society.Australian Psychological Society: Sexual orientation and homosexuality
The American Psychological Association and the Royal College of Psychiatrists expressed concerns that the positions espoused by NARTH are not supported by science and create an environment in which prejudice and discrimination can flourish.Statement of the American Psychological Association

Gerald Schoenewolf controversy

NARTH received criticism from the Southern Poverty Law Center for Gerald Schoenewolf's essay, Gay Rights and Political Correctness: A Brief History, Archived version hosted by Southern Poverty Law Center.  in which the member of NARTH's Science Advisory Committee argued that "Africa at the time of slavery was still primarily a jungle... Life there was savage ... and those brought to America, and other countries, were in many ways better off." He also stated that the civil rights movement, the women's rights movement, and the gay rights movement were all "irrational" and "destructive."SPLCenter... What I tried to say, before my words were twisted by that reporter, is that despite the clear and obvious evil of that practice, we tend to forget that many of the enslaved people had been first been sold into bondage by their fellow countrymen; so coming to America did bring about some eventual good. No social issue has all the 'good guys' lined up on one side and 'bad guys' on the other."Political Correctness Gone Amok: The Latest Controversy








