[[Simon Bird]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 births, Alumni of Birkbeck, University of London, Alumni of Queens' College, Cambridge, Alumni of the University of Cambridge, English male comedians, English male television actors, English writers, Living people, People educated at Royal Grammar School, Guildford, People from Guildford, English stand-up comedians, 21st-century English male actors

Simon Antony Bird (born 19 August 1984) is an English actor, and comedian. He is best known for playing Will McKenzie in the BAFTA-winning E4 sitcom The Inbetweeners, and for playing Adam Goodman in the Channel 4 Comedy Friday Night Dinner.

Early life

Bird was born in Guildford, Surrey in the United Kingdom into a "solidly professional middle-class" family, as the third of four children Bird's three siblings are Alan, currently a Deputy Head at Brighton College; Anne, a doctor in New York City in the United States; and Tom, a medical student at the University of East Anglia.
Bird was educated at Royal Grammar School, Guildford and the Queens' College at the University of Cambridge, where he read English.

Career

Early comedy career

While completing an M.A. in Cultural & Critical Studies at Birkbeck College, Bird set up the sketch comedy group "The House of Windsor" with Joe Thomas (who plays Simon Cooper in The Inbetweeners) and Jonny Sweet. Bird and Thomas were also regulars on series 1 and 2 of The Weekly Show, a podcast for Channel 4 Radio (2006-7).
Bird also performs stand-up comedy and took part in Chortle's national student comedy awards in 2005, 2006, 2007 and 2008, coming second in his final attempt. (He was a finalist in 2006, and was disqualified for deliberately breaking the rules in 2007.)Simon Bird - Revels Chortle Student Comedy Awards 2007Simon Bird - Chortle Student Comedy Awards 2008 2

Breakthrough

In 2008, Bird was cast in E4's teen comedy The Inbetweeners as Will McKenzie, along with Joe Thomas.e4.html He won the 2008 British Comedy Award for Best Male Newcomer and Best Male Performance in a Comedy Programme at the 2009 BAFTA Awards.

Subsequent work

In 2010 Bird created a BBC Three comedy panel show The King Is Dead, in which a well-known person is hypothetically killed off and a panel of three personalities go head-to-head in a series of satirical quiz rounds and challenges in their bid to replace them. He hosted alongside Nick Mohammed and Katy Wix.
Another of Bird's projects is Friday Night Dinner, a single-camera comedy written by Robert Popper and made by Big Talk Productions. Although his character in Friday Night Dinner is a member of a Jewish family (the Friday night dinner being a Jewish tradition), Bird himself is not Jewish.gq-magazine.co.uk/entertainment/articles/2011-03/04/gq-tv-simon-bird-interview-friday-night-dinner-the-inbetweeners-movie-film
Simon Bird returned to the character of Will McKenzie in The Inbetweeners Movie which was released on 17 August 2011.
Bird has also recently co-created, co-written, and co-starred in a pilot, 'Chickens', for Channel 4, alongside Jonny Sweet and Joe Thomas. It is about three men who remain in England during World War I. It was broadcast as part of Channel 4's Comedy Showcase season. In 2012, Sky1 picked up a 6 episode season, filming began in late 2012 and the series premiered in Summer 2013.sky.com/chickens/inbetweeners-stars-simon-bird-joe-thomas-to-star-in-chickens

Personal life

Bird is a well-known Crystal Palace FC fan.
Of his choice of career, Bird states that, "I never came into this industry to be an actor. I wanted to be a comedian. All the people I love are being themselves – like Larry David" and that his parents wish for him to complete his Ph.D..

Filmography

Film

Television






