[[Oral and maxillofacial pathology]]

CATEGORIES: Oral pathology, Diseases of oral cavity, salivary glands and jaws, Mouth diseases

Oral and maxillofacial pathology (also termed oral pathology, stomatognathic disease, dental disease, or mouth disease) refers to the diseases of the mouth ("oral cavity" or "stoma"), jaws ("maxillae" or "gnath") and related structures such as salivary glands, temporomandibular joints, facial muscles and perioral skin (the skin around the mouth).thefreedictionary. It is also prone to a variety of medical and dental disorders.Mouth Disease Information Retrieved on 2010-02-01
The specialty oral and maxillofacial pathology is concerned with diagnosis and study of the causes and effects of diseases affecting the oral and maxillofacial region. It is sometimes considered to be a specialty of dentistry and pathology. Sometimes the term head and neck pathology is used instead, but this might imply that the pathologist deals with otorhinolaryngologic disorders (i.e. ear, nose and throat) in addition to maxillofacial disorders. In this role there is some overlap between the expertise of head and neck pathologists and that of endocrine pathologists.

Example pathologies of the oral and maxillofacial region

A great many diseases involve the mouth, jaws and orofacial skin. Some example pathologies which can involve the oral and maxillofacial region are listed. Some are more common than others, and this list is by no means complete. The examples are considered according to a surgical sieve.

Congenital

Acquired

=Vascular=

=Infective=

Bacterial
Viral
Fungal

=Traumatic=

=Autoimmune=

=Metabolic=

=Inflammatory=

=Neurological=

=Neoplastic=

=Degenerative=

=Environmental=

=Idiopathic=

There are many oral and maxillofacial pathologies which are not fully understood.

Oral and maxillofacial pathology as a specialty

Oral and maxillofacial pathology, also sometimes termed oral pathology, is a speciality involved with the diagnosis and study of the causes and effects of diseases affecting the oral and maxillofacial regions (i.e. the mouth, the jaws and the face). It can be considered a speciality of dentistry and pathology. Oral pathology is a closely allied speciality with oral and maxillofacial surgery, oral surgery and oral medicine.
The clinical evaluation and diagnosis of oral mucosal diseases are in the scope of oral & maxillofacial pathology specialists and oral medicine practitioners, both disciplines of dentistry.  
When a microscopic evaluation is needed, a biopsy is taken, and microscopically observed by a pathologist. The American Dental Association uses the term oral and maxillofacial pathology, and describes it as "the specialty of dentistry and pathology which deals with the nature, identification, and management of diseases affecting the oral and maxillofacial regions. It is a science that investigates the causes, processes and effects of these diseases."
In some parts of the world, oral and maxillofacial pathologists take on responsibilities in forensic odontology.

Geographic variation

=United Kingdom=

There are fewer than 30 oral pathologists in the UK. No medical degree is mandatory, only a dental degree. The shortest pathway to becoming an oral pathologist in the UK is completion of 2 years' general professional training and then 5 years in a diagnostic histopathology training course. After passing the required exams and gaining a Certificate of Completion of Specialist Training, the trainee is entitled to apply for registration as a specialist.

=New Zealand=

There are 5 practising Oral Pathologists in New Zealand (as of May 2013). Oral pathologists in New Zealand also take part in forensic evaluations.







Further reading


