[[Canada–Netherlands relations]]

CATEGORIES: Bilateral relations of Canada, Bilateral relations of the Netherlands, Canada–Netherlands relations

Canada and the Netherlands have a special relationship resulting from actions during World War II when Canadian forces led the liberation of the Netherlands and hosted the Dutch Royal Family in exile.

History

World War II to present

Following German Occupation of the Netherlands, the Dutch royal family took refuge in Canada.  Princess Margriet was born in exile while her family lived in Ottawa. The maternity ward of Ottawa Civic Hospital in which Princess Margriet was born was temporarily declared to be extraterritorial by the Canadian government, thereby allowing her citizenship to be solely influenced by her mother's Dutch citizenship. To commemorate the birth, the Canadian Parliament flew the Dutch flag over Peace Tower. This is the only time a foreign flag has flown over the Canadian Parliament Building.
During 1945, the First Canadian Army was responsible for liberating the Netherlands, which they did through battles such as the Battle of the Scheldt and the Liberation of Arnhem. The liberation of the Randstad, one of the most densely populated areas in the world, is especially notable because the civilian population there was still suffering from the horrific effects of the Hongerwinter ('Hungerwinter'). It was cut off from food that was available in the rest of the Netherlands. German forces in the Netherlands would finally surrender in Wageningen, on 5 May 1945, but not before some 18,000 Dutch civilians died as a result of starvation and malnutrition (desperate coordinated air drops of food had already been staged by the Royal Canadian Air Force over German-occupied Dutch territory in Operation Manna. Civilians wrote "Thank You Canadians!" on their rooftops in response). Immediately following the surrender, Canadian units were able to move into the Randstad and rapidly distribute desperately needed food supplies, causing many to see the Canadians not only as liberators but as saviours.
In appreciation, the Dutch people sent tens of thousands of tulips (the Dutch national flower) to Ottawa. In the following year, the royal family contributed thousands as well, and a further ten thousand yearly since. The donations became an annual tradition, culminating in the Canadian Tulip Festival.

State visits

In May 1967, Queen Juliana of the Netherlands visited Canada.google.com/newspapers?id=vWlkAAAAIBAJ&sjid=vnwNAAAAIBAJ&pg=2881,4686019&dq=canada+netherlands+visit+-germany+-britain&hl=en
From 9–17 May 1988 Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands and Prince Claus of the Netherlands visited Canada.Staatsbezoeken van Hare Majesteit de Koningin (in Dutch) Retrieved 19 October 2012

International Cooperation

Canada and the Netherlands have worked very closely together on many foreign issues. They are both members of the United Nations (and its Specialized Agencies) the World Trade Organization, Interpol, they are both founding members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC) the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe. Canada and the Netherlands also work together on such issues as the prohibition and elimination of anti-personnel mines, the control of the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, eradicating the worst forms of child labour, the provision of rapid reaction peacekeeping forces to the United Nations (SHIRBRIG) and regional security issues such as Bosnia (SFOR) and Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE).

Recent Military Cooperation

Both armies were fighting the War in Afghanistan; many times together, in joint operations in the South of the country, although this has not occurred after 2010, when the Netherlands withdrew. Canada began withdrawing its troops in July 2011. Canada withdrew its combat forces by the end of 2011 and currently maintains a small force dedicated to training the Afghan police and military.

Afghanistan

Canada's role in the invasion of Afghanistan was to help train Afghan National Army and police, facilitate reconstruction, and provide security, but in 2006, with the situation in Kandahar Province turned increasingly violent, and the Canadian Forces have participated in several operations and battles. The Royal Canadian Air Force have a major presence in Afghanistan, including three CC-130 Hercules cargo planes, two CP-140 surveillance planes, six CH-147 Chinook transport helicopters, six Mil Mi-8 leased for one year from Skylink Aviation, eight CH-146 Griffon utility helicopters and three CU-170 Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV). The Canadian Army have increased its presence with main battle tanks, some ten Leopard C2 and twenty Leopard 2A6M CAN, approximately one hundred LAV III armoured vehicles and currently use six 155 mm M777 howitzers in Afghanistan.
As part of Operation Enduring Freedom, the Netherlands also deployed aircraft as part of the European Participating Air Force (EPAF) in support of ground operations in Afghanistan as well as Dutch naval frigates to police the waters of the Middle East/Indian Ocean. The Netherlands deployed further troops and helicopters to Afghanistan in 2006 as part of a new ISAF security operation in the south of the country.

Military sales

In 2007, the Netherlands sold 100 Leopard tanks to Canada. This include 20 Leopard 2-A6s and 80 Leopard 2-A4s.
The agreement was announced during Dutch Defence Minister Eimert van Middelkoop's visit to Canada. As part of the agreement, the Dutch army intended to provide training for Canadian instructors.
The Dutch Army also uses the Colt Canada C7 Rifle as their service rifle.

Military Treaties

Canada and the Netherlands have signed two separate treaties to govern and allow for the deployment of soldiers for training and mutual defense, in each other's territory.

Migration

According to the Canada 2006 Census, there are 1,035,965 Canadians of Dutch descent, including those of full or partial ancestry. Over 400,000 people of Dutch origin are permanent residents of Canada and in 1996 (the last census figures available) 124,545 residents of Canada were listed as being born in the Netherlands: 0.4 percent of the Canadian population. The Dutch Language is the 7th most spoken language in Canada.Census Canada 1995 report It is also the third most spoken language in Prince Edward Island
Of all immigrant groups in Canada, those who are Dutch-speaking have shown a preference for farming that exceeds all other major groups. The capital and expertise they bring have made a substantial contribution to agriculture in Canada. Most Dutch immigrants settle in Ontario. Ontario has the lion's share of all Dutch immigrant farmers in Canada, with 58%. Alberta and British Columbia have similar proportions: 18% and 14% respectively. The Dutch represent a significant proportion of immigrants in the Atlantic provinces.
The Dutch are world leaders in greenhouse technologies and many have brought their expertise to Canada. Thirty percent of all immigrant-run green-house operations have Dutch immigrants at the helm in Canada. Just under one-quarter of all immigrant nursery operators are Dutch.
According to the Canadian Embassy in The Hague, between 4500 to 5000 Canadians live in the Netherlands.
In London, Ontario the Dutch Canadian Society runs the Dutch Canadian Club one of the most popular clubs in that city.

Trade

In 2006, the Netherlands were the 8th ranked destination for Canadian exports (0.7%).

Visa Exemptions

Both countries exempt each other's citizens from obtaining a visa to enter. Visa-free travel is fully available to Canadian citizens in the Netherlands for a 3-month period occurring in a half year.europa.pdf

Youth Exchange

Because of the special relationship they share, Canada and the Netherlands have adopted liberal policies exclusive to one an other and offer special working visas to youth from each country, The visa allow for longer than visa-free travel to take place. (see Working holiday visa)








