[[Net neutrality in Canada]]

CATEGORIES: Net neutrality, Internet in Canada

Net neutrality in Canada is a hotly debated issue.  In Canada, Internet service providers (ISPs) generally provide Internet service in a neutral manner, some notable exceptions being Bell Canada's, Eastlink's, Shaw, and Rogers Hi-Speed Internet's throttling of certain protocols and Telus' censorship of a specific website critical of the company.

History of net neutrality in Canada

In 2005, when Telus blocked access to labour union blogs during an employee strike, the question of net neutrality became more prominent.
In March 2006, the federal government updated the Telecommunications Policy Objectives and Regulation with new objectives to focus on three broad goals:
In November 2008, the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) scheduled a review of the internet traffic management of ISPs and is still in the review process. The CRTC took comments from the public until Monday, February 23, 2009.

Types of net control

Bandwidth throttling

Typically an ISP will allocate a certain portion of bandwidth to a neighbourhood, which is then sold to residents within the neighbourhood.  It is common practice for ISP companies to oversell the amount of bandwidth as typically most customers will only use a fraction of what they're alloted.
Encrypted data may be throttled or filtered causing major problems for businesses that use Virtual Private Networks (VPN)s and other applications that send and receive encrypted data.

IP blocking

IP blocking by an ISP company is purposely preventing its Internet service customers access to a specific website or IP address. In Canada, certain ISP companies have been found to block certain websites.  While some blocking (e.g., of child pornography sites) is considered acceptable or required and is even stated in an ISP company's acceptable Internet use policy.

Cases

Telus vs. Telecommunications Workers Union

In July 2005, while its union workers were striking, Telus blocked its subscribers access to 'Voices for Change'—a community website run by and for Telecommunications Workers Union (TWU) members. Telus claimed that the site suggested striking workers to jam Telus phone lines, and posted pictures of employees crossing the union picket lines. A Telus spokesperson said advocating jamming lines hurts the company (and its customers), and access to those kinds of pictures threatened the privacy and safety of employees.
Telus said in news release that it would unblock access to the website only when all postings, including photographs, posted with the intent of intimidating or threatening Telus employees had been removed as ordered in an Alberta court injunction.

Bell Canada traffic shaping

On April 3, 2008, the Canadian Association of Internet Providers (CAIP) requested that the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) require Bell Canada to immediately cease its traffic shaping and Internet traffic throttling.

Current legal status

On May 28, 2008, the federal New Democratic Party (NDP) introduced a private member's bill, C-552,
This bill died on the order paper at 1st reading on September 7, 2008, when Prime Minister Stephen Harper asked the Governor-General for the dissolution of the 39th Session of Parliament.
On June 8, 2008, a private member's bill, C-555, entitled "The Telecommunications Clarity and Fairness Act" was introduced by Liberal MP David McGuinty (Ottawa South) that sought to undertake, among other things, "an assessment of network management practices that favour, degrade or prioritize any packet transmitted over a broadband network based on source, ownership or destination". Like the NDP bill, this proposed legislation fell after the 39th Parliament was dissolved by the Prime Minister.
A new decision on January 25 of 2011, the CRTC (Canadian Radio, Television, Telecommunications Commission) ruled that usage-based billing could now be introduced. CRTC
Prime Minister Harper signaled that the government may be looking into such a ruling: "We're very concerned about CRTC's decision on usage-based billing and its impact on consumers. I've asked for a review of the decision". The new ruling significantly throttles the availability of access by small business owners as they would have to pay for services.

Arguments for and against

Proponents

=Wholesale Internet Service Providers=

TekSavvy Solutions Inc., Velcom, Acanac Inc. argue that throttling by Bell Canada at the ISP level makes it difficult to differentiate their services against Bell Canada, concerning issues about Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) and security, and the quality of service.
Wholesale ISPs do not throttle bandwidth, but since wholesalers do not have a full network infrastructure, they rely on Bell Canada's network for the last stretch of cabling to customers. When Bell Canada receives packets on the network, it may be throttled, slowing down the connection between the wholesale ISP and the customer.
TekSavvy Solutions Inc. and Velcom support MLPPP which circumvents Bell Canada's throttling.

=Content providers=

Yahoo! and Microsoft argue that net neutrality law is necessary because without such a law ISPs will destroy the free and open nature of the Internet and also create a tiered, dollar-driven net that favours the wealthiest corporations over everyone else.

=Michael Geist=

Michael Geist has been writing about net neutrality in The Toronto Star.
When he had an interview with CARTT."

Political parties

The federal NDP has been a vocal advocate of the principles behind net neutrality, with MP Charlie Angus (Timmins—James Bay) whose role of digital spokesperson for his party has drawn attention to this and other related issues, such as copyright reform. Mr. Angus has raised this issue many times in the House of Commons and in committee.
On June 18, 2009, federal Liberal Party MP Marc Garneau (Westmount—Ville-Marie), the Official Opposition critic for Industry, Science and Technology,
As of June 18, 2009, the ruling federal Conservative Party under Stephen Harper (Calgary Southwest) remains non-committal, contending that free market competition is more favourable than regulation.
While the current position of the Bloc Québecois remains unclear, former Bloc MP Paul Crête (Montmagny—L'Islet—Kamouraska—Rivière-du-Loup) has come out in support of net neutrality.
The Green Party of Canada states its support for net neutrality in its policy statement.

=Bell Canada=

A spokeswoman for Bell Canada, Jacqueline Michelis said "Our position on network diversity/neutrality is that it should be determined by market forces, not regulation" in an e-mail to The Canadian Press.






