[[Indian Register of Shipping]]

CATEGORIES: Classification societies, Shipping in India, 1975 establishments in India

Indian Register of Shipping (IRS) is an internationally recognized, independent ship classification society, founded in India in 1975. It is a Non-Profit organisation, Public undertaking and a member of the 13 member International Association of Classification Societies (IACS). It was inducted into IACS along with Croatian Register of Shipping (CRS) and Polish Register of Shipping (PRS).
Today, IRS acts on behalf of the Maritime Administration of the Indian government as the sole authority for final assignment of Load Lines in Indian flag vessels and also as the security organisation that determines compliance under the International Ship and Port Facility Security Code (ISPS) code for Indian flag ships and port facilities.
IRS provides independent third party technical inspection and certification services for all types of ships, marine craft and structures. These services have also been expanded to cover a range of offshore and industrial projects and are designed to meet ISO 9001 specifications (the International Standard on Quality Management Systems).
Being the parent company of Indian Register Quality Systems, Indian Register of Shipping was established as a public limited company in March 1975 and has been providing classification and records of mercantile shipping. In addition, they establish standards and formulate rules for the construction and maintenance of ships, amphibious installation, marine equipment and industrial and general engineering equipment. They also undertake approval of designs, survey and to issue reports on land installations, machinery, materials and apparatus of all kinds.

History

Indian Register of Shipping was founded in 1975 to act as a catalyst of self-regulation by Indian Shipping Industries and to serve as a forum for research and development.
Here are some important milestones in its history

Organization & Management

IRS is a non-profit making organization. All funds generated from fees for classification services are used solely for the performance of such services. A surplus of receipts in any one year is used for the extension and improvement of the services, including research and development. It has a Committee of Management with representatives from the Ministry and from each industry segment that uses its services. IRS has 15 offices located all over India. It has overseas offices at China, Sri Lanka, Dubai, South Korea, Bangkok, Piraeus, Houston and UK

Services

Statutory Services

IRS carries out statutory design appraisal, surveys and certification work on behalf of Flag States, when so authorized by the governments of such states via the International Maritime Organization Conventions and Codes . The four major IMO conventions are:

Non-Classification Services

=Specification Services=

The experience and knowledge accumulated through classification work enables IRS to provide technical advisory and supervisory services for ship owners. IRS surveyors who are seconded in to the owners for such services operate independently. Though distinct from classification services these services are nonetheless in harmony with them. The aim of IRS is to provide independent technical support and impartial cost effective advice to owners. Owners get value for money, coupled with highest standards of quality during construction, conversion or refit. IRS specification services have been used extensively by various ship owners including national administrations, port authorities, oil companies etc. Specification services are provided for pre-contract as well as post-contract stages.
Pre-contract services include:

=Post-contract services=

Design appraisal is done at the early stages to ensure that proposed arrangement conforms to the agreed specification. The design appraisal could cover model-testing program for power estimation, sea keeping and maneuvering.
Generally the following plans are verified for ensuring compliance with specification:

=Supervision during all stages of construction=

At the shipyard, comprehensive supervision is provided during all stages of constructions including tests and trials. Owners are appraised at monthly or agreed intervals about progress, deviations, from specifications and other pertinent facts of owners interest. Visits are arranged to the sub-contractor's work sites to inspect major items of machinery and equipment to ensure compliance with specifications and agreed standards of workmanship.

=Supervision during major modification and repair=

This includes a broad range of focus areas like:

Damage Surveys

Damage surveys on hull, machinery, equipment and permanent fittings on classed or nonclassed ships are done at the request of ship owners or any other interested parties such as underwriters, and factual reports are issued to the parties.
This service includes survey of damage:








