[[Maken-ki!]]

CATEGORIES: 2007 manga, 2011 Japanese television series debuts, 2013 anime OVAs, 2014 anime television series, Anime International Company, Funimation Entertainment, Romantic comedy anime and manga, Shōnen manga, Xebec (studio), Harem anime and manga



Plot

Takeru Ohyama has enrolled at Tenbi Academy, a high school that converted from all-girls to co-ed. Hoping to have a life full of ogling pretty girls, he reunites with childhood friend Haruko Amaya, who shows him around school. However, he learns that the school is for students who possess magical and spiritual energies called Elements and who wield crafted weapons known as Makens. The students engage in school sanctioned combat matches that showcase their powers. While his own ability and Maken is not apparent at first, Takeru soon finds himself surrounded by girls, including Inaho Kushiya, an attractive girl who says she's his fiancée, and Kodama Himegami, a popular blonde who says she wants to kill him. He joins the , also known as Maken-ki, which supports the student council's operations.

Characters

=Takeru Ohyama=


Years before the series' present, Takeru's family dojo is challenged by Tesshin Kushiya when Takeru is ten years old. After witnessing the death of Atsuma at the hands of Tesshin, Takeru has resented his father and uncle for not being around to protect them.
Takeru was one of the three students that Gen's Element Detector, Keronbo, could not initially identify, but a month later, he gets his Maken, Overblow, which causes his target's Maken to overflow with Element and be rendered useless "like a car engine that blows out". However, it can have the opposite effect, and empower the opponent with an evolved Maken if the opponent can perfectly control or contain the surge.
Takeru is voiced by Tomoaki Maeno, and English dubbed by Ian Sinclair.

=Haruko Amaya=


Haruko is voiced by Noriko Shitaya, and English dubbed by Monica Rial.

=Kodama Himegami=


Kodama's hobbies include shopping, especially for lingerie and rare stuffed animals.
Kodama later reveals that she has extraordinary abilities. In the battle with Venus, Kodama uses her Maken to summon larger spirits that are as powerful as the Eight Maken.
Kodama is voiced by Sayuri Yahagi and is English dubbed by Chloe Ragnbone

=Inaho Kushiya=

 She is the star of the bonus four panel series of Maken-Ki comics where she is presented in super deformed mode. She is voiced by Iori Nomizu in the anime series, and English dubbed by Tia Ballard.

=Students=

=Staff=

=Venus=

Venus is a mercenary unit that joins Tenbi Academy with the mission to search for the person who is trying to revive Yamata no Orochi. It is headed by Akaya Kodai, a former member of Maken-ki, and consists mainly of high school aged girls.

=Kamigari=

The Kamigari are a secret organization that works with the government by using the Elements and Maken. Ouken later decides to go after unlocking the secrets of Amanohara.

Media

Manga

=Volume list=

=Chapters not yet in tankōbon format=

Anime

An anime adaptation was announced on Monthly Dragon Age A cast announcement was made on August 30, 2013, and the complete first season was released on November 12.

=Season 2=

Reception

Andy Hanley of UK Anime Network, in reviewing the first five episodes, found little originality in the anime series, which he called: "a cavalcade of tired old tropes and plot devices, from a visit to a hot springs to a 'date' where the couple are spied on by jealous friends, extending all the way out to the show's various characters and beyond." He gave it a 3/10 and summarized it as "A lazy, generic fan service series that has nothing of worth to offer beyond glimpses of female underwear.

Notes



Manga




