[[Whatever You Like (T.I. song)]]

CATEGORIES: 2008 singles, T.I. songs, Grand Hustle Records singles, Music videos directed by Dave Meyers, Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles, Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs number-one singles, Billboard Rap Songs number-one singles, Billboard Rhythmic Airplay number-one singles, Number-one singles in New Zealand, Song recordings produced by Jim Jonsin, Songs written by Jim Jonsin, Songs written by T.I., Singles certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America, Singles certified platinum by Recorded Music NZ, Songs about sexuality

"Whatever You Like" is a song by American recording artist T.I., released as the lead single (second overall) from his sixth studio album, Paper Trail (2008). The song was written by T.I., James Scheffer and David Siegel and produced by Jim Jonsin. "Whatever You Like" served as the third single from Paper Trail in the UK with a release date of 1 June 2009. It was named the 16th most successful song from 2000 to 2009, on the Billboard Hot 100 Songs of the Decade.I. his Second US No. 1.
This song is T.I.'s most successful single to date, having been on top of the charts for seven nonconsecutive weeks, and in the top 3 of the charts for over 3 total months (12 weeks). It has also been certified 3× Platinum by the RIAA.

Composition

"Whatever You Like" was written by T.I., James Scheffer and David Siegel. The song was produced by Jim Jonsin, who produced Lil Wayne's single, "Lollipop". The production team worked on the track when T.I. was in the studio recording his album. The instrumentals for "Whatever You Like" are based on a beat of lead synthesizers and drum pattern. The song runs for 4:09 and speaks about a man who can buy a woman whatever she asks for, as well encourages the woman to ask for anything she wants. It is a slow R&B/Pop song and the chorus contains breathy soft, singing vocals. The song also contains a sample from "Redemption", the opening and closing theme song from the film Rocky II. "Whatever You Like" is set in common time with a moderately slow tempo of 80 beats per minute, and is written in the key of D minor with a chord progression sequence of Dm-Bb-F-C.
A second version of "Whatever You Like" was released in order to be suitable for radio stations. The original version of the track features T.I. saying "Late night sex so wet, it's so tight", while the radio version replaces these lyrics with the line "Baby I can treat you so special, so nice" in the hook and replacing the line "Thing gets so wet/ it hits so right" with "Girl, you smell so fresh, and look so nice" in the breakdown. The music video also uses the edited lyrics. Other changes include replacing the line "Tell 'em other broke niggas be quiet" with "Tell 'em other broke brothers be quiet" or "Tell 'em other broke jokers be quiet" in the pre-hook. The 2nd verse also mutes the word "brain" in the line "Brain so good/ could've sworn you went to college" due to a slang definition of the word referring to oral sex.

Critical reception

Reviews for "Whatever You Like" were generally favorable. Jared W. Dillon of Sputnikmusic called the song a "more sophisticated take" on Lil Wayne's "Lollipop".

Chart performance

"Whatever You Like" debuted at number 99 on the Billboard Hot 100."T.I. - Whatever You Like global chart positions and trajectories". aCharts.us. Retrieved August 14, 2008. In its third week, it achieved the third biggest leap to number one in Billboard Hot 100 chart history when it jumped 70 positions, from number 71 to the top of the chart, breaking the record previously held by Maroon 5's "Makes Me Wonder", which jumped 64 to number one.
On the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, "Whatever You Like" has peaked at number one, giving T.I. his thirteenth top ten on the chart, and second number one song. It has also reached number three on the Pop 100, giving T.I. his biggest solo pop hit. The song has become T.I.'s biggest radio hit as well, reaching number one on the Hot 100 Airplay chart, and number four so far on Mainstream Top 40. Overall it has topped over nine different Billboard charts.
Internationally, "Whatever You Like" debuted at number twenty-two on the Canadian Hot 100 and has thus far risen to number twelve.  It made a strong debut on the Irish Singles Chart at number nineteen. In Australia, on the ARIA Singles Chart, it has so far peaked at number 15 and on the digital track chart at number 15. In New Zealand, the song made a massive jump from number 32 to number eight on the official RIANZ Chart. The following week it became his first number one in New Zealand and are certified by Platinum in that country. It also debuted at number sixty on the UK Singles Chart and peaked at number forty-seven due to strong download sales. It will be re-released as a full CD single release on 1 June 2009 and has been added to the B-list at BBC Radio 1.

Music video

The music video was filmed in Malibu, Los Angeles, California, and was directed by Dave Meyers. Reagan Gomez-Preston plays T.I.'s love interest. Cameos include Jackie Long, Lil Duval, Jim Jonsin, and T.I.'s girlfriend Tameka Cottle. The video starts with a girl working at a fast food restaurant. When T.I. comes into the restaurant, after ordering hot wings, he hands the girl a folded up paper with his number on it. She then calls him and T.I. invites her to his house. The video then shows her living the high life, with T.I. treating her to private jet rides, fancy dinners, and buying her many expensive gifts, such as a new car. The video also show clips of her living her normal life with her boyfriend. Right before the end of the video, it shows the release date of T.I.'s new album Paper Trail while T.I. is on the red carpet with his girl. At the end it is revealed it is all merely a fantasy sequence the girl was having, and T.I. had only handed the girl a hundred dollar bill, not his number. The concept of the video is similar to the one for Jay-Z's single "Excuse Me Miss".

Other versions

Track listing

Charts

Year-end charts

End of year charts








