[[Annie Leibovitz]]

CATEGORIES: 1949 births, Living people, American photographers, American Jews, Fashion photographers, Photographers from New York, Lesbian artists, LGBT Jews, LGBT artists from the United States, American people of Estonian-Jewish descent, American people of Romanian-Jewish descent, American people of Russian-Jewish descent, People from Waterbury, Connecticut, Portrait photographers, San Francisco Art Institute alumni, People from Greenwich Village, New York, Military brats, American women photographers

Anna-Lou "Annie" Leibovitz (; born October 2, 1949) is an American portrait photographer.

Early life

Born in Waterbury, Connecticut, on October 2, 1949, Leibovitz is the third of six children. She is a third-generation American whose great-grandparents were Jewish immigrants from Central and Eastern Europe. Her father's parents had emigrated from Romania.
At Northwood High School,

Career

Rolling Stone magazine

When Leibovitz returned to the United States in 1970, she started her career as staff photographer, working for the just launched Rolling Stone magazine.
In 1973, publisher Jann Wenner named Leibovitz chief photographer of Rolling Stone, a job she would hold for 10 years.
Leibovitz worked for the magazine until 1983, and her intimate photographs of celebrities helped define the Rolling Stone look. While working for Rolling Stone, Leibovitz became more aware of the other magazines.
Richard Avedon's portraits were an important and powerful example in her life.
She learned that she could work for magazines and still create personal work, which for her was the most important.
She sought intimate moments with her subjects, who "open their hearts and souls and lives to you".
name= "Annie Liebovitz: Always in Style " She was awarded The Royal Photographic Society's Centenary Medal and Honorary Fellowship (HonFRPS) in recognition of a sustained, significant contribution to the art of photography in 2009.rps.org/annual-awards/Centenary-Medal
Photographers such as Robert Frank and Henri Cartier-Bresson influenced her during her time at the San Francisco Art Institute. "Their style of personal reportage—taken in a graphic way—was what we were taught to emulate."

The Rolling Stones

Leibovitz photographed The Rolling Stones in San Francisco in 1971 and 1972, and served as the concert-tour photographer for Rolling Stones Tour of the Americas '75. Her favorite photo from the tour was a photo of Mick Jagger in an elevator. (2008). New York City, NY: Random House. ISBN 978-0-375-50510-2

Joan Armatrading

In 1978 Leibovitz became the first woman to photograph Joan Armatrading for an album. She did the photography for Armatrading's fifth studio album To the Limit, spending four days at her house capturing the images. Joan Armatrading – A Biography (unauthorised). Weidenfeld and Nicolson. ISBN 0-297-81058-8 page 86 She also did the photography for Armatrading's 1979 live album, Steppin' Out.

John Lennon

On December 8, 1980, Leibovitz had a photo shoot with John Lennon for Rolling Stone, promising him that he would make the cover.
The photograph was subsequently re-created in 2009 by John and Yoko's son Sean Lennon, posing with his girlfriend Charlotte Kemp Muhl, with male/female roles reversed (Sean clothed, Kemp naked),Sean Lennon And Nude Model Recreate John And Yoko (NSFW PHOTO), Huffpost, 2009-09-02John Lennon, Sean Lennon - Two Versions of "Two Virgins" (sic – incorrect; Two Virgins is unrelated) – side-by-side comparison and by Henry Bond and Sam Taylor-Wood in their YBA pastiche October 26, 1993.
In 2011, Leibovitz was nominated alongside Singaporean photographer Dominic Khoo and Wing Shya for Asia Pacific Photographer of the Year.

Other projects

In 2007, The BBC misrepresented a portrait shooting by Leibovitz of Queen Elizabeth II to take the Queen's official picture for her state visit to Virginia. This was filmed for the BBC documentary A Year with the Queen. A promotional trailer for the film showed the Queen reacting angrily to Leibovitz's suggestion ("less dressy") that she remove her tiara, then a scene of the Queen walking down a corridor, telling an aide "I'm not changing anything. I've had enough dressing like this, thank you very much." This led to a BBC scandal and a shake-up of ethics training. See The Tiaragate Affair.
Leibovitz claims she never liked the word "celebrity". "I've always been more interested in what they do than who they are, I hope that my photographs reflect that." She tries to receive a little piece of each subjects personality in the photos.

On April 25, 2008, the televised entertainment program Entertainment Tonight reported that 15-year-old Miley Cyrus had posed topless for a photo shoot with Vanity Fair.
In response to the Internet circulation of the photo and ensuing media attention, Cyrus released a statement of apology on April 27:
 "I took part in a photo shoot that was supposed to be 'artistic' and now, seeing the photographs and reading the story, I feel so embarrassed. I never intended for any of this to happen and I apologize to my fans who I care so deeply about."
 
Leibovitz also released a statement saying:
 "I'm sorry that my portrait of Miley has been misinterpreted," Leibovitz said. "The photograph is a simple, classic portrait, shot with very little makeup, and I think it is very beautiful." 
In October, 2011, Leibovitz had an exhibit in Moscow. In an interview with Rossiya 24, she explained her photography style.vesti.html?id=598488

Archive

Since 1977, Leibovitz licensing images have been represented by Contact Press Images, a photojournalism agency based in New York City. She ceased to be represented by Jim Moffat at A Corporation for Art & Commerce in 2009.

Personal life

Leibovitz had a close romantic relationship with noted writer and essayist Susan Sontag. They met in 1989, when both had already established notability in their careers. Leibovitz has suggested that Sontag mentored her and constructively criticized her work.
After Sontag's death in 2004, Newsweek published an article about Leibovitz that made reference to her decade-plus relationship with Sontag, stating that "The two first met in the late '80s, when Leibovitz photographed her for a book jacket. They never lived together, though they each had an apartment within view of the other's."
Neither Leibovitz nor Sontag had ever previously publicly disclosed whether the relationship was familial, a friendship, or sexual in nature. However, when Leibovitz was interviewed for her 2006 book A Photographer's Life: 1990-2005, she said the book told a number of stories, and that "with Susan, it was a love story."
Even though Annie Leibovitz and Susan Sontag never formally stated their relationship Annie has said in her book A Photographers life "Words like 'companion' and 'partner' were not in our vocabulary," Leibovitz says. "We were two people who helped each other through our lives. The closest word is still 'friend'." 
In the preface to the book, she speaks in greater detail about her romantic/intellectual relationship with Sontag, briefly discussing a book they were working on together and describes how assembling A Photographer's Life: 1990-2005 was part of the grieving process after Sontag's death. The book and accompanying show include many photographs of Sontag throughout their life together, including several on her deathbed.
Leibovitz acknowledged that she and Sontag were romantically involved. When asked why she used terms like "companion" to describe Sontag, instead of more specific ones like "partner" or "lover", Leibovitz finally said that "lover" was fine with her. She later repeated the assertion in stating to the San Francisco Chronicle:
"Call us 'lovers'. I like 'lovers.' You know, 'lovers' sounds romantic. I mean, I want to be perfectly clear. I love Susan."
Leibovitz is Jewish and nonobservant. Asked if being Jewish is important to her, Leibovitz replied, "I'm not a practicing Jew, but I feel very Jewish."

Children

Leibovitz has three children. Her daughter Sarah Cameron Leibovitz was born in October 2001 when Leibovitz was 52 years old."Annie Leibovitz" Her twins (two girls) Susan and Samuelle were born to a surrogate mother in May 2005.

Financial troubles

In February 2009, Leibovitz borrowed $15.5 million, having experienced financial challenges in recent years.
In March, 2010, Colony Capital concluded a new financing and marketing agreement with Leibovitz, paying off Art Capital and removing or reducing the risks of Leibovitz losing her artistic and real estate."Private equity firm snaps up chance to help Leibovitz put house in order" by Henny Sender, Financial Times, March 9, 2010 02:00. Retrieved 2010-03-09.
In April 2010, Brunswick Capital Partners filed suit against Leibovitz, claiming that they are owed several hundred thousand dollars for helping her restructure her debt.nytimes.html, The New York Times, April 6, 2010 02:00. Retrieved 2010-04-10.
In December 2012 her famous Townhouse in West Village, NY was listed for sale, asking price was set at $33 Million. Leibovitz stated that she sold her home in order to move closer to her daughter.estiasis.com December 10, 2012 Retrieved 2012-12-10.

Examples of Leibovitz's photographs

Awards

Bibliography






