[[Shmuel Rabinovitch]]

CATEGORIES: Haredi rabbis in Israel, 20th-century rabbis, 21st-century rabbis, Western Wall, Rabbis in Jerusalem, Living people, 1970 births

Shmuel Rabinovitch, also spelled Rabinowitz ( He often escorts visiting heads of state and foreign dignitaries during their visit to the Wall, and has been an outspoken defender of Torah values at the Jewish people's holiest site.

Biography

Rabinovitch is the son of Rabbi Chaim Yehuda Rabinovitch, av beis din of the Jerusalem Rabbinical Courts, and grandson of Rabbi Shmuel Benzion Rabinovitch (d. 1950), a Lubavitcher Hasid born in Russia who brought up six children in the Old Yishuv but died at a young age. Shmuel Rabinovitch was named after his grandfather. He grew up in the Kiryat Mattersdorf neighborhood of Jerusalem and studied at Yeshivat Kol Torah in Bayit Vegan.
During his army service, he served in the Rabbinical Corps of the Israel Defense Forces. Following that, he was appointed as an area rabbi in southwest Jerusalem.
Rabinovitch was appointed to the position of Rabbi of the Western Wall by former Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and former chief rabbis of Israel following the death of the Rabbi of the Western Wall, Rabbi Meir Yehuda Getz, in 1995.

Rabbi of the Western Wall

The Western Wall is a frequent source of political and religious controversy, and Rabinovitch has been involved in and commented on many such controversies.
In May 2008, Rabinovitch prevented a delegation of Roman Catholic clergy from visiting the Wall while they wore visible crosses.
Rabinovitch has maintained rigid gender separation at the Wall, conforming to Haredi practice. In 2009, he gave authority for the police to arrest a member of Women of the Wall who was praying with a tallit (a traditional Jewish prayer shawl worn by men) and holding a Sefer Torah. The act had caused an adverse reaction from Haredi worshippers and Rabinowitz claimed "It is an act of provocation that seeks to turn the Western Wall into disputed territory... A prayer that causes contention and desecration of the sanctity of the Western Wall has no value. It is an act of protest". 
Twice a year, Rabinovitch and his assistants collect the hundreds of thousands of prayer notes placed in the Wall and bury them in the Jewish cemetery on the Mount of Olives.

Escorting dignitaries

Rabinovitch accompanies many heads of state, religious figures, foreign dignitaries, and media on tours of the Wall and the Western Wall Tunnel. He escorted US First Lady Laura Bush together with Gila Katsav, wife of then-President of Israel Moshe Katsav, on a visit in 2005,
In July 2008, Rabinovitch accompanied U.S. presidential candidate Barack Obama on a pre-dawn visit to the Wall. During this visit, Obama placed a prayer note in the Wall.

Other activities

Rabinovitch is the chairman of the The Western Wall Heritage Foundation, a government-mandated organization which preserves and develops the Western Wall site and Western Wall Tunnel, as well as promotes the value of the site through education. Rabinovitch has also headed a public commission for environmental quality, and supervision and licensing of burials in Israel. He is a former vice president of the Aleh Children's Home in Jerusalem.

Works

Rabinovitch wrote the two-volume Sheilos u'Teshuvos Shaarei Tzion, describing the many halakhic questions that have arisen at the Western Wall and other holy sites."Book Review: Sefer Shaarei Tzion, Volume 2". Hamodia, June 21, 2012, p. C2. One chapter in Volume 1 deals exclusively with the question of disposing the prayer notes commonly inserted between the stones of the Wall. Rabinovitch rules that burning is a "pure" way to deal with the notes, but burying them is more honorable.
He is also the author of Minhagei HaKotel, a book on the history and customs of the Western Wall.



Sources

This article incorporates material from the Hebrew Wikipedia article, שמואל רבינוביץ.




