[[Multiple chemical sensitivity]]

CATEGORIES: Ailments of unknown etiology, Building biology, Sensitivities

Multiple chemical sensitivity (MCS) is a chronic medical condition characterized by symptoms that the affected person attributes to low-level chemical exposure. Commonly accused substances include smoke, pesticides, plastics, synthetic fabrics, scented products, petroleum products, and paint fumes. Symptoms are often vague and non-specific, such as nausea, fatigue, dizziness and headaches, but also commonly include inflammation of skin, joints, gastrointestinal tract and airways.
MCS is not recognized as an organic, chemical-caused illness by the American Medical Association and some other US based organisations. Blinded clinical trials have shown MCS patients react as often and as strongly to placebos, including clean air, as they do to the chemicals they say harm them. This has led some in the healthcare profession to believe MCS symptoms are due to odor hypersensitivity or are mainly psychological.

History

MCS was first proposed as a distinct disease by Theron G. Randolph in 1950 shortly after he was expelled from the Northwestern University Medical School for his questionable teaching. Randolph's theories about chemical effects are criticized as nonsensical by toxicologists, and his rejection of the signal importance of IgE antibodies in true allergy conflicts with modern allergists.
In 1965, Randolph founded the Society for Clinical Ecology as an organization to promote his ideas about symptoms reported by his patients. As a consequence, clinical ecology emerged as a non-recognized medical specialty ACOEM position statement. Multiple chemical sensitivities: idiopathic environmental intolerance. College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine. J Occup Environ Med. 1999 Nov;41(11):940-2. whose practitioners have been criticized for tricking mentally ill and suggestible women into thinking that they were chemically sensitive.

Definition

Six consensus criteria were identified by researchers for the diagnosis and definition of MCS in 1989 (later edited in 1999):
The National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences defines MCS as a "chronic, recurring disease caused by a person's inability to tolerate an environmental chemical or class of foreign chemicals".
Environmental medicine specialists claim MCS causes negative health effects in multiple organ systems, and respiratory distress, seizures, cognitive dysfunction, heart arrhythmia, nausea, headache, and fatigue can result from exposure to levels of common chemicals that are normally deemed as safe.  Considerations for the Diagnosis of Chemical Sensitivity.  Retrieved January 1, 2007 from 

Lack of widespread recognition

The International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD), maintained by the World Health Organization, does not recognize multiple chemical sensitivity or environmental sensitivity as a valid diagnosis. 2007.  "The Medical Perspective on Environmental Sensitivities."  Note:  The opinions expressed in this report are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Canadian Human Rights Commission.
The American Medical Association (AMA) has stated that because of the lack of scientific evidence, based on well-controlled clinical trials, that supports a cause-and-effect relationship between exposure to very low levels of chemicals and the myriad symptoms reported by clinical ecologists, MCS is not recognized as an established organic disease. The American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology, the California Medical Association, the American College of Physicians, and the International Society of Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology also do not recognise it.  In 1994, the AMA, American Lung Association, US EPA and US Consumer Product Safety Commission published a booklet on indoor air pollution that discusses MCS, among other issues.  Although sometimes misrepresented as evidence these groups recognize MCS as a specific disease, the booklet states a pathogenesis of MCS has not been definitively proven.  The booklet further states symptoms that have been self-diagnosed by a patient as related to MCS could actually be related to allergies or have a psychological basis.  Finally, the booklet recommends physicians counsel individuals seeking medical assistance to alleviate their symptoms that they may benefit from consultation with specialists in these fields.
Ronald E. Gots, M.D., an environmental toxicologist and frequent defense consultant in toxic tort litigation,An Expert Who Has Been There - Dr. Ronald E. Gots, The Metropolitan Corporate Counsel describes MCS as "a label given to people who do not feel well for a variety of reasons and who share the common belief that chemical sensitivities are to blame. ... It has no consistent characteristics, no uniform cause, no objective or measurable features. It exists because a patient believes it does and a doctor validates that belief."Gots RE. Multiple Chemical sensitivities: What is it? North Bethesda, MD: Risk Communication International, Inc., March 31, 1993. In editorial in the Journal of Toxicology - Clinical Toxicology Gots wrote, "The phenomenon of multiple chemical sensitivities is a peculiar manifestation of our technophobic and chemophobic society. ... It may be the only ailment in existence in which the patient defines both the cause and the manifestations of his own condition."
In 1995, an Interagency Workgroup on Multiple Chemical Sensitivity was formed under the supervision of the Environmental Health Policy Committee within the United States Department of Health and Human Services to examine the body of research that had been conducted on MCS to that date.  The work group included representatives from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, United States Environmental Protection Agency, United States Department of Energy, Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, and the National Institutes of Health.  The Predecisional Draft document generated by the workgroup in 1998  recommended additional research in the basic epidemiology of MCS, the performance of case-comparison and challenge studies, and the development of a case definition for MCS.  However, the workgroup also concluded it was unlikely MCS would receive extensive financial resources from federal agencies due to budgetary restraints and the allocation of funds to other, extensively overlapping syndromes with unknown etiology, such as chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, and Gulf War syndrome.  The Environmental Health Policy Committee is currently inactive, and the workgroup document has not been finalized.health.gov/environment/mcs/
With regard to the potential for exposure to chemicals in the workplace and MCS, the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has indicated MCS is highly controversial and there is insufficient scientific evidence to explain the relationship between the theorized causes of MCS and its symptoms.  However, OSHA recommends "…an evaluation must be performed by a physician knowledgeable of the symptoms of this condition."
A 1997 court decision held that MCS "is untested, speculative, and far from generally accepted in the medical or toxicological community," and thus cannot be used as the basis for disability claims. New York, 972 F. Supp. 130 (N.D.N.Y. 1997) Furthermore, accommodations sought for MCS are sometimes denied as being unreasonable as a matter of law. Kelley, "COMMENT: Sensitivity Training: Multiple Chemical Sensitivity and the ADA," 25 B.C. Envtl. Aff. L. Rev. 485; see, for example, Whillock v. Delta Air Lines, 926 F. 1555 (N.D.Ga. 1995) 

Limited recognition in some situations

Official recognition is generally limited to an agreement that affected people are clinically sick rather than malingering, without agreeing that the symptoms are caused by chemicals.  For example, Australia, which funds some MCS-related research, falls into the group of countries that recognize the existence of the syndrome but does not agree that the symptoms are necessarily caused by or related to chemical exposures.
In 1997, U.S. Social Security Administration Commissioner John Callahan issued a court memorandum officially recognizing MCS "as a medically determinable impairment" on an agency-wide basis. Callahan  That is, without making any statement about the cause of MCS or the role of chemicals in MCS, the Social Security administration agrees that some MCS patients are too disabled to be meaningfully employed.

Clinical trials

There have been both trials that support and don't support the claim that the symptoms of multiple chemical sensitivity are caused by chemicals.
A double-blind inhalant challenge in 1991 concluded, "The conclusion of the study is that in these patients, chemical sensitivity clearly does exist (pulse rate differences between positive responses and placebo - p .001)"Confirmation of chemical sensitivity by means of double-blind inhalant challenge of toxic volatile chemicals 
A 1991 controlled comparison of symptoms and chemical intolerances reported by Gulf War veterans, implant recipients and persons with multiple chemical sensitivity suggests that "some patients with antecedent chemical exposures, whether exogenous (chemical spill, pesticide application, indoor air contaminants) or endogenous (implant), develop new chemical, food, and drug intolerances."A controlled comparison of symptoms and chemical intolerances reported by Gulf War veterans, implant recipients and persons with multiple chemical sensitivity, CS Miller, Toxicol Ind Health. 1999 Apr-Jun;15(3-4):386-97 
A 1993 double-blind study suggested that MCS subjects could not discriminate between their chemical triggers and clean air when an olfactory masker was introduced that eliminated the ability to discriminate on the basis of odor., Double-blind provocation chamber challenges in 20 patients presenting with "multiple chemical sensitivity". ul Toxicol Pharmacol. 1993 Aug;18(1):44-53.
In a 2008 double-blind study, a variety of responses, including the subjective perception of being exposed to solvents, increases in blood pressure or heart rate, or increased symptom severity, were measured following the double-blind exposure to several solvents. People with an MCS diagnosis showed no differences in these parameters when they were exposed to clean air or to solvents at a concentration too low to smell. or psychological factors.
A 2010 Italian study that genotyped patients diagnosed with MCS, with suspected MCS, and healthy controls suggested inhibition of expression and activity of metabolizing and antioxidant enzymes in MCS, accelerated lipid oxidation, increased nitric oxide production and glutathione depletion and increased plasma inflammatory cytokines.

Symptoms

Symptoms of MCS may be mild to disabling. Symptoms may be physical or psychological in nature and are essentially those that are disruptive to the individuals' mental or physical wellness and that the individual attributes to exposure to a chemical or scent.
By far, the most common symptoms are vague, non-specific complaints:  feeling tired, "brain fog" (short-term memory problems, difficulty concentrating) and muscle pain.D.  These complaints are common to a large number of medical conditions, from psychiatric conditions, such as major depressive disorder, to neurological conditions, such as orthostatic intolerance, to sleep disorders, high blood pressure, autoimmune diseases and cancer.
A partial list of other symptoms patients have attributed to MCS include difficulty breathing, pains in the throat, chest, or abdominal region, asthma, skin irritation, contact dermatitis, and hives or other forms of skin rash, headaches, neurological symptoms (nerve pain, pins and needles feelings, weakness, trembling, restless leg syndrome, etc.), tendonitis, seizures, visual disturbances (blurring, halo effect, inability to focus), extreme anxiety, panic and/or anger, sleep disturbance, suppression of immune system, digestive difficulties, nausea, indigestion/heartburn, vomiting, diarrhea, joint pains, vertigo/dizziness, abnormally acute sense of smell (hyperosmia), sensitivity to natural plant fragrance or natural pine terpenes, insomnia, dry mouth, dry eyes, and an overactive bladder.

Causes

There is no clear consensus as to what causes the symptoms of MCS; there may be several.

Misdiagnosis

More than half of 54 people from one study about MCS instead had somatoform disorder

Psychological

Several mechanisms for psychological etiology have been proposed, including theories based on stress, Pavlovian conditioning, or misdiagnoses of an underlying mental illness. Behavior exhibited by MCS sufferers may reflect broader sociological fears about industrial pollution.E. Shorter, Multiple chemical sensitivity: pseudodisease in historical perspective, Scand J Work Environ Health 23 (1997) (suppl 3), pp. 35–42
The distinction between physiological and psychological causes is often difficult to test,J. Das-Munshi, G. J. Rubin, S. Wessely, Multiple chemical sensitivities: A systematic review of provocation studies, Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 118, pp.1257-1264 (2006) and it is particularly challenging for MCS because substances used to test for sensitivity can often be detected by scent. Odor cues make double blind studies of MCS patients difficult, and scents might provoke a psychosomatic response. Research in 2005 found patients only experienced symptoms when they themselves initiated the challenge tests. When they were given random prompts, there was no difference between MCS patients and controls in terms of physical and psychologic symptoms. Their conclusion was "MCS patients do not have either somatic or psychologic symptoms under chemical-free conditions, and symptoms may be provoked only when exposed to chemicals," although their results showed it was not the chemicals themselves that caused the symptoms.
A review of 37 provocation studies concluded "persons with MCS do react to chemical challenges; however, these responses occur when they can discern differences between active and sham substances, suggesting that the mechanism of action is not specific to the chemical itself and might be related to expectations and prior beliefs".
An alternative psychological cause has been suggested by a recent case-control study in which MCS was associated with a personality trait called absorption, in which individuals are predisposed to becoming deeply immersed in sensory experiences, leading to self-altered states of consciousness (see Flow). When 54 MCS sufferers were compared to 44 subjects with a somatoform disorder and 54 normal individuals, only those with MCS had increased absorption scores, leading the authors to suggest absorption contributes to MCS by making individuals more susceptible to harboring beliefs in MCS, and these beliefs are reinforced by conditioning.
The cause and existence of MCS are disputed. In particular, doctors disagree about whether symptoms are physiologically or psychologically generated, or both. United States courts and several medical organizations reject MCS as a physiological disease. An approach called clinical ecology attempts to treat the disease, but this work is controversial.  Critics charge:
These claims are challenged, particularly (1) and (2), insofar as both definitions and physiological pathwaysPall, M (2006).  Novel disease paradigm produces explanations for a whole group of illnesses.  Washington State University, Department of Biochemistry and Basic Medical Sciences, Retrieved December 3, 2006, from:  et al. (2007).A cross-sectional study of self-reported chemical-related sensitivity is associated with gene variants of drug-metabolizing enzymes. Environmental Health. have actually been proposed.  The scientific community remains divided, however, with many proponents of the psychosomatic school rejecting physiological explanations outright.

Neurological

One of the first studies on MCS (1993) focused on possible long-term potentiation in the hippocampi and neural sensitization as a central mechanism. A synaptic model of memory: long-term potentiation in the hippocampus. Nature. 1993 Jan 7;361(6407):31–39
MCS people may have some neurological dysfunction in the odor-processing areas of the brain.

Genetic differences in metabolism

In 2004, McKeown-Eyssen and colleagues showed polymorphisms in the CYP2D6 allele responsible for variation in toxicant metabolism pathways may cause differences in susceptibility to MCS.  Pall has suggested elevated nitric oxide and peroxynitrite (NO/ONOO-) as the etiology for MCS and several related conditions, including fibromyalgia, posttraumatic stress disorder, Gulf War syndrome, and chronic fatigue syndrome. This seems to be supported by a study by Reid et al. (2001) into the prevalence of MCS amongst British Gulf War syndrome sufferers. This study concluded veterans who had used personal organophosphate pesticides during the second Gulf War were 12 times more likely to develop MCS. (2001)  Multiple Chemical Sensitivity and Chronic Fatigue Syndrome in British Gulf War Veterans. American Journal of Epidemiology Vol.153, No.6, pp604-9. Many observable and empirical, scientific facts can help identify MCS, including SPECT scans and chemical encephalopathy, vitamin deficiencies, mineral deficiencies, excess amino acid deficiency, and disturbed lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. Medical Evaluation and Treatment of Patients with Chemical Injury and Sensitivity. National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences.
McKeown-Eyssen studied 203 MCS sufferers and 162 controls; blood tests revealed genetic differences relating to the body's detoxification processes were present more often in those with MCS than those without. A new study by Schnakenberg et al. (2006) confirmed the genetic variation previously found by McKeown-Eyssen and Haley. A total of 521 unrelated individuals participated in the study. Genetic variants of four genes were analyzed: NAT2, GSTM1, GSTT1, and GSTP1. The researchers concluded the individuals who are NAT2 slow acetylators and those with homozygously deleted GSTM1 and GSTT1 genes are significantly more likely to develop chemical sensitivity. According to the study, the glutathione S-transferases act to inactivate chemicals, so people without these GSTM1 and GSTT1 genes are less able to metabolize environmental chemicals, because "glutathione S-transferases play an important role in the detoxification of chemicals". The deletion of another gene, the GSTP1 gene, leaves individuals more susceptible to developing these diseases, as lack of these genes means a loss of protection from oxidative stress.
A specific laboratory rat, the Flinders Sensitive line, has been bred by Dr. Overstreet to be sensitive to an organophosphate, and displays "Increased sensitivity to cholinergic agents that has also been observed in several human populations, including individuals suffering from chemical intolerance.""David H. Overstreet & Veljko Djuric, A Genetic Rat Model of Cholinergic Hypersensitivity: Implications for Chemical Intolerance, Chronic Fatigue, and Asthma. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 933: 92-102 (2001).  In particular, Flinders Sensitive rats show increased responses to nicotine, alcohol, and other chemicals known to act on acetylcholine, dopamine, and serotonin receptors.  However, these rats have not reacted abnormally to other chemicals thought to trigger MCS, such as perfume, in any known studies. Study of these rats may therefore provide useful clues about the mechanisms involved in some, but not all, forms of chemical intolerance in humans.

Miscellaneous theories

People who have stronger emotional states will react more strongly to a smell.sciencemag. That discrepancy between brain regions may relate to anxiety disorders.  If the olfactory region does not distinguish a dangerous odor signal from a benign smell, the brain's fight-or-flight region can overreact.[ref]
