[[Contras]]

CATEGORIES: Nicaraguan Revolution, Nicaraguan Contras, 1980s, Anti-communist organizations, Central Intelligence Agency operations, Cold War conflicts, Cold War rebellions, Counter-revolutionaries, Far-right politics, Guerrilla organizations, History of Nicaragua, History of the foreign relations of the United States, Iran–Contra affair, Nicaragua–United States relations, Nicaraguan anti-communists, Rebellions in North America, Wars involving the United States, Terrorism in Nicaragua

The contras (some references use the capitalized form, "Contras") is a label given to the various rebel groups that were active from 1979 through to the early 1990s in opposition to the Sandinista Junta of National Reconstruction government in Nicaragua. Among the separate contra groups, the Nicaraguan Democratic Force (FDN) emerged as the largest by far. In 1987, virtually all contra organizations were united, at least nominally, into the Nicaraguan Resistance.
From an early stage, the rebels received financial and military support from the U.S. government, and their military significance decisively depended on it. After U.S. support was banned by Congress, the Reagan administration covertly continued it. These covert activities culminated in the Iran–Contra affair.
The term "contra" comes from the Spanish contra, which means against but in this case is short for .
During the war against the Sandinista government, the contras carried out many human rights violations, and evidence suggests that these were systematically committed as an element of warfare strategy. Contra supporters often tried to downplay these violations, or countered that the Sandinista government carried out much more. In particular, the Reagan administration engaged in a campaign to alter public opinion on the contras which has been denoted as "white propaganda."
By the end of the war, over 30,000 Nicaraguans were killed and tens of thousands were wounded. Contra attacks on economic targets and the U.S. embargo devastated the country's agricultural system and infrastructural facilities — making Nicaragua the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere next to Haiti."In the Name of Democracy: U.S. Policy Toward Latin America in the Reagan Years" By Thomas Carothers, 1993"Cease-Fire Begins in Nicaragua As the Contras Agree to Disarm" New York Times, 20 April 1990

History

Origins

The Contras were not a monolithic group, but a combination of three distinct elements of Nicaraguan society:

Main groups

The CIA and Argentine intelligence, seeking to unify the anti-Sandinista cause before initiating large-scale aid, persuaded 15 September Legion, the UDN and several former smaller groups to merge in September 1981 as the Nicaraguan Democratic Force (Fuerza Democrática Nicaragüense, FDN).cia.html Although the FDN had its roots in two groups made up of former National Guardsmen (of the Somoza regime), its joint political directorate was led by businessman and former anti-Somoza activist Adolfo Calero Portocarrero."Although Calero had opposed Somoza, the FDN had its roots in two insurgent groups made up of former National Guardsmen..." As seen at: Lee et al. 1987, p. 29 Edgar Chamorro later stated that there was strong opposition within the UDN against working with the Guardsmen and that the merging only took place because of insistence by the CIA."The UDN, including Cardenal, initially opposed any linkage with the Guardsmen. The CIA, and high-ranking United States Government officiais, insisted that we merge with the Guardsmen. Lt. General Vernon Walters, then a special assistant to the United States Secretary of State (and formerly Deputy Director of the CIA) met with Cardenal to encourage him to accept the CIA's proposal. We were well aware of the crimes the Guardsmen had committed against the Nicaraguan people while in the service of President Somoza and we wanted nothing to do with them. However, we recognized that without help from the United States Government we had no chance of removing the Sandinistas from power, so we eventually acceded to the CIA's, and General Walters', insistence that we join forces with the Guardsmen. Some UDN memhers resigned because they would not associate themselves with the National Guard under any circumstances, but Cardenal and I and others believed the CIA's assurances that we, the civilians, would control the Guardsmen in the new organization that was to he created." As seen at: International Court of Justice (IV) 1986, p. 446
Based in Honduras, Nicaragua's northern neighbor, under the command of former National Guard Colonel Enrique Bermúdez, the new FDN commenced to draw in other smaller insurgent forces in the north. Largely financed, trained, equipped, armed and organized by the U.S.,"On the basis of the available information, the Court is not able to satisfy itself that the Respondent State "created" the contra force in Nicaragua, but holds it established that it largely financed, trained, equipped, armed and organized the FDN, one element of the force." As seen at: International Court of Justice 1986, VII (4) it emerged as the largest and most active contra group."The largest and most active of these groups, which later came to be known as ... (FDN), ..." As seen at: Lee et al. 1987, p. 29
In November 1982, the CIA appointed the FDN the principal faction of its campaign."U.S. arms exiles in plot to topple Nicaraguan govt." Newsweek, 6 November 1982 The New York Times however, assured it's readers in March 82, that "no support would be given to followers of General Somoza," those being the FDN. Washington's policy was to support only political "moderates", according to the Times."U.S. SAID TO PLAN COVERT ACTIONS IN LATIN REGION" New York Times, 14 March 1982 The Nation on the other hand reported that the CIA would indeed be using "former Somoza guardsman.""The Nation, Volume 234" Nation, 14 March 1982 Former
In April 1982, Edén Pastora (Comandante Cero), one of the heroes in the fight against Somoza, organized the Sandinista Revolutionary Front (FRS) – embedded in the Democratic Revolutionary Alliance (ARDE) – and declared war on the Sandinista government. 1987, p. 32 Himself a former Sandinista who had held several high posts in the government, he had resigned abruptly in 1981 and defected, believing that the newly found power had corrupted the Sandinista's original ideas. A popular and charismatic leader, Pastora initially saw his group develop quickly. He confined himself to operate in the southern part of Nicaragua;"He insisted on operating in the southern part of Nicaragua." As seen at: Lee et al. 1987, p. 32 after a press conference he was holding on 30 May 1984 was bombed, he "voluntarily withdrew" from the contra struggle.
A third force, Misurasata, appeared among the Miskito, Sumo and Rama Amerindian peoples of Nicaragua's Atlantic coast, who in December 1981 found themselves in conflict with the authorities following the government's efforts to nationalize Indian land. In the course of this conflict, forced removal of at least 10,000 Indians to relocation centers in the interior of the country and subsequent burning of some villages took place. "Human Rights in Nicaragua 1986" (print), Americas Watch, February 1987. The Misurasata movement split in 1983, with the breakaway Misura group of Stedman Fagoth Muller allying itself more closely with the FDN, and the rest accommodating themselves with the Sandinistas: On 8 December 1984 a ceasefire agreement known as the Bogota Accord was signed by Misurasata and the Nicaraguan government.incore.ac.pdf A subsequent autonomy statute in September 1987 largely defused Miskito resistance.ohchr.pdf

Unity efforts

U.S. officials were active in attempting to unite the Contra groups. In June 1985 most of the groups reorganized as the United Nicaraguan Opposition (UNO), under the leadership of Adolfo Calero, Arturo Cruz and Alfonso Robelo, all originally supporters of the anti-Somoza revolution. After UNO's dissolution early in 1987, the Nicaraguan Resistance (RN) was organized along similar lines in May.

U.S. military and financial assistance

In front of the International Court of Justice, Nicaragua claimed that the contras were altogether a creation of the U.S. 328 This claim was rejected. However, the evidence of a very close relationship between the contras and the United States was considered overwhelming and incontrovertible. 329 The U.S. played a very large role in financing, training, arming, and advising the contras over a long period, and the contras only became capable of carrying out significant military operations as a result of this support."The United States has played a very large role in financing, training, arming, and advising the contras over a long period. The contras only became capable of carrying out significant (para)military operations as a result of this support." As seen at: Gill 1989, p. 329

Political background

The U.S. government viewed the leftist Sandinistas as undemocratic and opposed its ties to Cuba and the Soviet Union."The Foreign Connection" Washington Post 6 Jan. 1987"MUDSLINGING OVER CONTRAS" New York Times, 12 March 1986 Ronald Reagan, who had assumed the American presidency in January 1981, accused the Sandinistas of importing Cuban-style socialism and aiding leftist guerrillas in El Salvador. The Reagan administration and the U.S. media continued to label the Sandinistas as undemocratic despite the 1984 Nicaraguan elections being generally declared fair by foreign observers."1984: Sandinistas claim election victory" BBC News, 5 November 1984The editors of New York Times denounced the Sandinistas for refusing "to subject their power to the consent of the Nicaraguan people." "A Middle Way in Nicaragua" New York Times, 13 February 1985"NICARAGUAN VOTE: 'FREE, FAIR, HOTLY CONTESTED'" New York City Commission on Human Rights, 16 November 1984"the election was fair, clean, and competitive... the Reagan Administration and the U.S. mass media...S. backed candidate, Arturo Cruz — the most prominent opposition figure — did not participate. However, according to some senior Reagan officials, "The Administration never contemplated letting Cruz stay in the race because then the Sandinistas could justifiably claim that the elections were legitimate, making it much harder for the United States to oppose the Nicaraguan Government." "KEY AIDES DISPUTE U.S. ROLE IN NICARAGUAN VOTE" New York Times, 21 October 1984
Although Human Rights Watch deemed as "nonsense" U.S. tales of a "barbaric and bloody" Nicaraguan menace, the committee stressed that the Sandinistas were not without sin. Cases of government repression included it's censorship of La Prensa, a pro-Contra newspaper financed by the CIA and an estimated 4,000 political prisoners charged with either aiding the Contras or being former members of the National Guard."Human Rights in Nicaragua: 1986, Volume 1986" Human Rights Watch, 1986
The Reagan administration also branded the Sandinista government as Communist — and therefore, predisposed to align itself with the Soviet Union. Nevertheless, the Sandinistas did not establish a Communist political or economic system, nor did the government have a Communist ideology."Some 60 percent of the country's production remained in private hands." "Inevitable Revolutions: The United States in Central America" By Walter LaFeber, 1993".. Nationalizations went no further." "Inevitable Revolutions: The United States in Central America" Walter Lafeber, 1993"They tried a balanced agrarian reform program aimed to give land to peasant cooperatives; by 1984 less than 20 percent remained under state ownership. No limit was placed on the size of private holdings as long as they were productive. This was hardly Marxist-Leninism. Indeed, the emerging leader in the nine person national directorate, Daniel Ortega belonged to the most pragmatic, non-doctrinaire faction, the Terceristas (See p. 228)." p. 306 is unavailable for viewing in Google Books, sorry. "Inevitable Revolutions: The United States in Central America, p. 306" Walter LaFeber, 1993"(Terceristas), which was the most open and pluralistic (although it did oppose the Communist party),.." "Inevitable Revolutions: The United States in Central America" Walter LaFeber, 1993"Economic elites can survive in the new system, and even make private profits, if they recognize the interests of the majority population and collaborate with the state in meeting the majority's needs; but they will no longer be allowed to rule." "The Electoral Process in Nicaragua" Latin American Studies Association, 1984"In Nicaragua, the Sandinistas' victory had, in like fashion, bypassed and eclipsed the Soviet-aligned Socialist Party. Moscow then acknowledged that the revolutionary crest was passing it by and scrambled to catch up. It gave up the old doctrine that a Communist Party was the only possible instigator and vanguard of revolution." "Soviet posture in the Western Hemisphere" Carl G. Jacobsen, 28 February 1985"The attempt of the Sandinista government, as we perceive it, is not, as it is often alleged to establish a Marxist state. ..g. Chile, Uruguay, Guatemala, El Salvador) simply does not exist in Nicaragua. Economically, Nicaragua has maintained a mixed economy, wherein private enterprise controls a larger share of the economy than does the public sector,..." "Report on Nicaragua" World Council of Churches, 4–10 September 1983"Rather than comprising hard-line Stalinists, as groups such as the Committee of Santa Fe claimed, the Sandinista front was made up of a coalition of progressive capitalists, socialists, Marxists, and Catholics. While they had no desire to replicate Castro's sclerotic economy or polity, they were dedicated to making Nicaragua more humane through the creation of a mixed economy in which the state directed capital investment and redistributed wealth by providing health care and education." "Empire's Workshop: Latin America, the United States, and the Rise of the New Imperialism" Greg Grandin, 2006
A common theme of the Reagan administration — and echoed by the U.S. mass media — was the need to "restore democracy" to Nicaragua."the United States is working through the contras to restore democracy to Nicaragua..." "The Foreign Connection" Washington Post 6 Jan. 1987"President Reagan renewed his commitment..." "President Shifts Emphasis From Contra Warfare" LA Times, 4 May 1987"Guatemala..." "GUATEMALAN IN PLEA OVER U.S. POLICY" New York Times, 14 May 1987"Most Central American nations......." "Opportunity in Nicaragua" Christian Science Monitor, 24 Nov. 1987".. U.S. must continue moderating the course of the Nicaraguan revolution." "CONTRA CUTOFF; In Central America, Trying To Deal With New Realities" New York Times, 7 February 1988"It would be hard to exaggerate the purity of heart that the Reagan administration feels," New Republic editor Leon Wieseltier observed. "The pure hearts" at the helm of the "great and good power" that is the United States, "dream of democracy in Nicaragua," he exulted. "Pure Hearts Often Come" New York Times Magazine, 15 December 1986 "This notion of restoring democracy...""In the Name of Democracy: U.S. Policy Toward Latin America in the Reagan Years" By Thomas Carothers, 1993 As advocated by the editors of the Washington Post, Washington was determined to "fit Nicaragua back into a Central American mode", among the "Latin democracies" such as Guatemala, El Salvador, and HondurasThe Post's editors also advocated "turning Nicaragua back toward democracy": "Is There a Chance in Nicaragua?" Washington Post, 31 March 1986 — that is a U.S. dependency."U.S. officials.......' ..." "Inevitable Revolutions: The United States in Central America" Walter Lafeber, 1993"Carter's secretary of defense, Harold Brown, made the connection between domestic revival and overseas expansion explicit. 'The particular manner in which our economy has expanded,' he said, 'means that we have come to depend to no small degree on imports, exports and the earnings from overseas investments for our material well-being.' The 'debt crisis afforded an unparalleled opportunity,' wrote Jerome Levinson, a former official of the Inter- American Development Bank, that allowed the U.S. Treasury to achieve 'the structural reforms Latin America favored by the Reagan administration,' which included a 'commitment  on the part of the debtor countries to reduce the role of the public sector as a vehicle for economic and social development and rely more on market forces and private enterprises'. Latin Development, Reagan said, would come about by 'stimulating international trade,...." "Empire's Workshop: Latin America, the United States, and the Rise of the New Imperialism" Greg Grandin, 2006"Another Carter administration contradiction was its approach to restructuring economic systems in the third world. The problem was captured in testimony given to Congress by Richard Cooper, undersecretary of state for economic affairs, in 1980. The United States understood and sympathized with the developing nations that wanted 'a new international economic order' aimed at 'a more equitable distribution of the world's  wealth,' Cooper declared. 'However,.....'" "Inevitable Revolutions: The United States in Central America" Walter LaFeber, 1993"The underlying U.S. goal is maintaining the basic societal orders of particular Latin American countries approximately as they are ensuring that the economics are not drastically rearranged and that the power relations of the various social sectors are not turned upside down... The deep fear in the United States government of populist-based change in Latin America with all its implications for upsetting established economic and political orders and heading off in a leftist direction leads to an emphasis on incremental change from the top down." "In the Name of Democracy: U.S. Policy Toward Latin America in the Reagan Years" Thomas Carothers, 1993"The Reagan administration came to adopt pro-democracy policies as a means of relieving pressure for more radical change, but inevitably sought only limited, top-down forms of democratic change that did not risk upsetting the traditional structures of power with which the United States has long been allied." "Exporting democracy: the United States and Latin America" Thomas Carothers, 1991
In addition, there were concerns that Nicaragua would inspire and strengthen leftist revolutionary movements throughout Latin America, thereby threatening U.S. control of the Panama Canal, sea lanes and oil supplies."Thomas O. Enders, an Assistant Secretary of State, told a House subcommittee. 'If after Nicaragua, El Salvador is captured by a violent minority, who in Central America would not live in fear? How long would it be before major strategic interests - the Panama Canal, sea lanes, oil supplies, were at risk?'" Reported in: "STRUGGLE IN SALVADOR PINCHES WASHINGTON'S 'VIETNAM NERVE'" New York Times, 7 February 1982Enders added that "The struggle would go on, but on battlefields where the stakes would be much higher. We cannot permit that." Reported in: "State Department Official Links 'Domino Theory' to El Salvador" Associated Press, 2 Mar 1983"There was an impression that the revolutionary left was on a roll in Central America... The administration correctly saw that infectious spirit as a 'virus' that had to be stopped." As seen at: "USING NICARAGUA AS A PRACTICE GROUND FOR A 'LOW-INTENSITY' WAR" Boston Globe, 27 August 1985Secretary of State George Shultz warned, in March 1986, that if the Sandinistas "succeed in consolidating their power," then "all the countries in Latin America, who all face serious internal economic problems, will see radical forces emboldened to exploit these problems". Reported in: "1986: US guilty of backing Contras" BBC News, 27 June 1986"The Sandinistas would attack with ideological "subversion" rather than conventional warfare, and 'You cannot contain that by putting military forces on their border'". Cited in: "Contra Aid Pays Off, Top U.S. General in Latin America Says" Los Angeles Times, 20 May 1987"As with other shows of force in the last four years, the maneuver in May is intended to deter the Sandinista Government in Managua from exporting its leftist ideology by maintaining what American officers have called a continuing presence in Honduras and the Caribbean." Cited in: "NEW U.S. EXERCISES SET FOR HONDURAS" The New York Times, 22 March 1987"goal may have to be: Securing an agreement that the Sandinistas will not export revolution across Nicaragua's borders... the Sandinistas have to understand that their neighbors and Washington rightly see a connection between internal and external behavior. The realistic way of dealing with them on this issue is through trade and development aid." "The Contras and the Drain" New York Times, 15 March 1987"We don't have a wall to stop Sandinista ideology or subversives," complains William Hall Rivera, the Honduran president's chief of staff. "It won't be a fight over land, but over minds." Cited in: "Central Issue - If the Contras Collapse, U.S. Faces Bigger Task In Containing Marxism" The Wall Street Journal, 18 May 1987"Sandinistas' failure to spread their revolution, and their humiliating silence about it, should be taken as a sign of reassurance,.." "THE VIETNAM SYNDROME" Boston Globe, 14 Jul 1986 U.S. officials also warned that Nicaragua could actively export leftist ideology by training radical union and peasant leaders of its neighboring countries."officials are concerned that Nicaragua can cause trouble by training radical union and peasant leaders. Fortunately for the neighbors, leftist groups have been declining throughout the isthmus since 1983". Cited in: "Latin Qualms: Central America Allies See U.S. Aid to Contras Doomed by Scandal --- Nations Already Ambivalent Now Actively Criticize Help to Nicaragua Rebels --- Turmoil Seen From San Jose" Wall Street Journal, 5 December 1986 
On the other hand, Noam Chomsky stated that Nicaragua posed "the threat of a good example," threatening United States hegemony in the region."The destabilization of the Sandinista government in Nicaragua by the Reagan Administration in the 1980s was, according to Chomsky (citing Oxfam reports), largely a response to the "threat of a good example" posed by the constructive social programs and absence of widespread torture in Nicargua; this example contrasts dramatically with many of the military regimes supported by the United States in the region (e.g. Chile, El Salvador, Guatemala)." As seen at: Cummins, J. (1994).  The discourse of disinformation: The debate on bilingual education and language rights in the United States.  In R. Phillipson & T. Skutnabb-Kangas (Ed.).  Linguistic human rights.  Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. ISBN 978-3110148787 Citing Oxfam, Chomsky says that efforts to raise literacy and increase healthcare access, as well as other social and economic reforms undertaken by the Sandinistas in the early eighties, (which had already received praise not just by Oxfam, but also by the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank"... project implementation has been extraordinarily successful in Nicaragua in some sectors, better than anywhere else in the world..." As seen at:"Nicaragua, the price of intervention: Reagan's wars against the Sandinistas" Peter Kornbluh, 1987) 
began to succeed, showing that a socialist revolution could be successful in some respects."The remarkable progress in health and literacy achieved in the early 1980s can barely be sustained."... "from Oxfam's experience of working in seventy-six developing countries, Nicaragua was to prove exceptional in the strength of that Government's commitment...." As seen at: Dianna Melrose, "Nicaragua: The Threat of a Good Example?", Oxford (U.K.): Oxfam, 1985 (preface 1989), pp. vii, 13-14
In any case, the U.S. government explicitly planned to back the contras as a means to destroy the economy and force the Sandinista government to divert scarce resources to the military and away from social and economic programs."As part of this plan, the contra commandos eventually would attempt to destroy vital Nicaraguan targets, such as power plants and bridges, in an effort to disrupt the economy and divert the attention and the resources of the government." "U.S. Plans Covert Operations To Disrupt Nicaraguan Economy" Washington Post, 10 March 1982"State Department officials had told us that the two objectives are 'debilitation of the Nicaraguan economy' and 'killing Nicaraguan soldiers'." "Affaire Des Activités Militaires Et Paramilitaires Au Nicaragua Et Contre Celui-ci (Nicaragua C. Etats-Unis D'Amérique)" Reed Brody, United Nations Publications, 1 Jan 2000"Administration officials said they are content to see the contras debilitate the Sandinistas by forcing them to divert scarce resources toward the war and away from social programs." Cited in: "CONGRESS' MESSAGE TO CONTRAS: 'SHOW ME'\ CHANCES OF GETTING AMERICAN AID TO FIGHT SANDINISTAS APPEAR LINKED; TO MILITARY SUCCESSES THAT SEEM UNLIKELY" Boston Globe, 9 February 1986"Those 2,000 hard-core guys could keep some pressure on the Nicaraguan government, force them to use their economic resources for the military and prevent them from solving their economic problems--and that's a plus. Anything that puts pressure on the Sandinista regime, calls attention to the lack of democracy and prevents the Sandinistas from solving their economic problems is a plus." Cited in: "U.S. Lowers Its Contra Goals; Collapse Feared" The Los Angeles Times, 28 May 1988"The revised goal is not to topple the Sandinistas by force but to push them into increased domestic repression and to spend scarce currency on the military rather than social programs." Cited in: "U.S. ROLE CALLED MAJOR IN ANTI-SANDANISTA EFFORT" Philadelphia Inquirer, 3 January 1983 Accordingly, the "ultimate goal" was to "turn Nicaragua into the Albania of Central America — that is, poor, isolated and radical" — and "leave it to fester in its own juices"."THE CONTRA-AID COMPROMISE" Boston Globe, 14 Aug 1988"U.S. POLICY TOWARD NICARAGUA: AID TO NICARAGUAN RESISTANCE PROPOSAL" United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations, 1986 Though, some dissenting liberals in the press such as New Republic Editor Jefferson Morley argued that Nicaragua may be "beyond the reach of our good intentions"."BEYOND THE REACH OF OUR GOOD INTENTIONS" New York Times, 12 April 1987 
On 4 January 1982, Reagan signed the top secret National Security Decision Directive 17 (NSDD-17), giving the CIA the authority to recruit and support the contras with $19 million in military aid. The effort to support the contras was one component of the Reagan Doctrine, which called for providing military support to movements opposing Soviet-supported, communist governments.
By December 1981, however, the United States had already begun to support armed opponents of the Sandinista regime. From the beginning, the CIA was in charge. 1987, p.3 The arming, clothing, feeding and supervision of the contrasLee et al. 1987, p. 3 became the most ambitious paramilitary and political action operation mounted by the agency in nearly a decade."In December 1982, the New York Times reported intelligence officials as saying that Washington's 'covert activities have... become the most ambitious paramilitary and political action operation mounted by the C.I.A. in nearly a decade...'" As seen at: Lee et al. 1987, p. 33 One of the purposes the CIA hoped to achieve by these operations was an aggressive and violent response from the Sandinista government which in turn could be used as a pretext for proper military actions."The principal actions to be undertaken were paramilitary which hopefully would provoke cross-border attacks by Nicaraguan forces and thus serve to demonstrate Nicaragua's aggressive nature and possibly call into play the Organization of American States' provisions (regarding collective self-defense). It was hoped that the Nicaraguan Government would clamp down on civil liberties within Nicaragua itself, arresting its opposition, so demonstrating its allegedly inherent totalitarian nature and thus increase domestic dissent within the country, and further that there would be reaction against United States citizens, particularly against United States diplomatic personnel within Nicaragua and thus to demonstrate the hostility of Nicaragua towards the United States." As seen at: "Case Concerning Military and Paramilitary Activities in and Against Nicaragua (Nicaragua V. United States of America)" International Court Of Justice, 2000
In the fiscal year 1984, the U.S. Congress approved $24 million in contra aid. 1987, p. 3 However, since the contras failed to win widespread popular support or military victories within Nicaragua, since opinion polls indicated that a majority of the U.S. public was not supportive of the contras,"..." As seen at: Lee et al. 1987, p. 3 since the Reagan administration lost much of its support regarding its contra policy within Congress after disclosure of CIA mining of Nicaraguan ports,"Following disclosure....., public criticism mounted and the administration's Contra policy lost much of its support within Congress". As seen at: Lee et al. 1987, p. 3 and since a report of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research commissioned by the State Department found Reagan's allegations about Soviet influence in Nicaragua "exaggerated""Soviet military aid to Nicaragua is unobtrusive and elusive to track... the limited amounts of truly modern equipment acquired by the Sandinistas, of which more later, came from Western Europe not the Eastern bloc... all too many U.S. claims proved open to question..." Conclusions of : "Soviet Attitudes Towards Aid to and Contacts with Central American Revolutionaries" Carl G. Jacobsen, 1984"The State Department delayed a report concluding that 'all too many' Reagan administration claims of Soviet involvement in Nicaragua 'proved hollow' until the author agreed to soften some of its language,... After prolonged dispute, the study is being issued essentially as Jacobsen wrote it, even though a few sentences have been softened from the original draft. For example, the initial draft said Soviet military aid to Nicaragua is 'unobtrusive and sometimes ephemeral.' The final version said it was 'unobtrusive, and elusive to track.' Jacobsen went on to say in his original that 'all too many U.S. claims' on Soviet military aid to Nicaragua 'proved hollow.' The final report said: 'All too many U.S. claims proved open to question.'" Reported in: "U.S. DELAYED REPORT ON SOVIETS IN NICARAGUA" Miami Herald, 18 September 1984 Congress cut off all funds for the contras in 1985 by the third Boland Amendment. The Boland Amendment had first been passed by Congress in December 1982. At this time, it only outlawed U.S. assistance to the contras for the purpose of overthrowing the Nicaraguan government, while allowing assistance for other purposes. In October 1984, it was amended to forbid action by not only the Defense Department and the Central Intelligence Agency but all U.S. government agencies.
Nevertheless, the case for support of the contras continued to be made in Washington, D.C., by both the Reagan administration and the Heritage Foundation, which argued that support for the contras would counter Soviet influence in Nicaragua."The Lessons of Afghanistan", by Michael Johns, Policy Review magazine, The Heritage Foundation, Spring 1987
On 1 May 1985 President Reagan announced that his administration perceived Nicaragua to be "an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States" and declared a "national emergency" and imposed a trade embargo to "deal with that threat"."Executive Order 12513--Prohibiting trade and certain other transactions involving Nicaragua" National Archives After the U.S. enforced the embargo, Nicaragua was isolated from the West, forcing the Sandinistas to rely more on Eastern bloc military and economic assistance. Though Moscow declined to offer the quantity of aid it provided to close communist allies."Nicaragua, the price of intervention: Reagan's wars against the Sandinistas" By Peter Kornbluh, 1987
On 16 May 1985, Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega traveled to Western Europe and reaffirmed "a position of nonalignment", while attempting to collect military aid from France, Spain, and Italy. Ortega managed to win pledges of political and economic support, though military aid was ruled out. In 1982, France sold Nicaragua about $17 million worth of arms before U.S. pressure compelled them to terminate the deal. A French Foreign Ministry official explained that this reticence resulted, "because we have limited power to maneuver in Central America, and after all, the region is in America's backyard.""Ortega collects warm words of support on European trip. Yet his visit is unlikely to drum up much concrete aid" Christian Science Monitor, 16 May 1985 In 1982, Secretary of State Alexander Haig condemned the France-Nicaragua arms deal as "a stab in the back"."Inevitable Revolutions: The United States and Central America" Walter Lafeber, 1993 France countered that Nicaragua had no desire to become a Soviet satellite — observing that U.S. policy was "designed to push the junta right into the arms of Moscow.""PARIS DEFENDS PLAN TO SELL ARMS TO MANAGUA" New York Times, 9 January 1982 Thus, Washington would remain a "stick wielding imperialist" until the deed was done."Washington does not want to remain a stick-wielding imperialist. It is doubtful, however, that any American President would permit such a shift." "CONTRA CUTOFF; In Central America, Trying To Deal With New Realities" New York Times, February 7, 1988

Illegal covert operations

With Congress blocking further contra aid, the Reagan administration sought to arrange funding and military supplies by means of third countries and private sources. 1987, p. 4 Between 1984 and 1986, $34 million from third countries and $2.7 million from private sources were raised this way. The secret contra assistance was run by the National Security Council, with officer Lt. Col. Oliver North in charge. With the third-party funds, North created an organization called "The Enterprise" which served as the secret arm of the NSC staff and had its own airplanes, pilots, airfield, ship, operatives and secret Swiss bank accounts. It also received assistance from personnel from other government agencies, especially from CIA personnel in Central America. This operation functioned, however, without any of the accountability required of U.S. government activities. The Enterprise's efforts culminated in the Iran-Contra Affair of 1986–1987, which facilitated contra funding through the proceeds of arms sales to Iran.
According to the National Security Archive, Oliver North had been in contact with Manuel Noriega, the military leader of Panama later convicted on drug charges, whom he personally met. The issue of drug money and its importance in funding the Nicaraguan conflict was the subject of various reports and publications. The contras were funded by drug trafficking, of which the United States was aware. Senator John Kerry's 1988 Committee on Foreign Relations report on Contra drug links concluded that "senior U.S. policy makers were not immune to the idea that drug money was a perfect solution to the Contras' funding problems".
The Reagan administration's support for the Contras continued to stir controversy well into the 1990s. In August 1996, San Jose Mercury News reporter Gary Webb published a series titled Dark Alliance, alleging that the contras contributed to the rise of crack cocaine in California. 

Propaganda

During the time the US Congress blocked funding for the contras, the Reagan government engaged in a campaign to alter public opinion and change the vote in Congress on contra aid. 1987, p. 5 For this purpose, the NSC established an interagency working group which in turn coordinated the Office of Public Diplomacy for Latin America and the Caribbean (managed by Otto Reich), which conducted the campaign. The S/LPD produced and widely disseminated a variety of pro-contra publications, arranged speeches and press conferences. It also disseminated "white propaganda"—pro-contra newspaper articles by paid consultants who did not disclose their connection to the Reagan administration."It also disseminated what one official termed "white propaganda": pro-Contra newspaper articles by paid consultants who did not disclose their connection to the Administration." As seen at: Lee et al. 1987, p. 5
On top of that, Oliver North helped Carl Channell's tax-exempt organization, the "National Endowment for the Preservation of Liberty", to raise $10 million, by arranging numerous briefings for groups of potential contributors at the premises of the White House and by facilitating private visits and photo sessions with President Reagan for major contributors. 1987, p. 6 Channell, in turn, used part of that money to run a series of television advertisements directed at home districts of Congressmen considered to be swing votes on contra aid. Out of the $10 million raised, more than $1 million was spent on pro-contra publicity.
"If you look at it as a whole", a senior S/LPD official said, "the Office of Public Diplomacy was carrying out a vast psychological warfare operation of the kind the military conducts to influence a population in enemy territory.""NSC OVERSAW CAMPAIGN TO SWAY CONTRA AID VOTE" The Miami Herald, 19 July 1987"Reagan's Pro-Contra Propaganda Machine" The Washington Post, 4 September 1988"Public Diplomacy and Covert Propaganda: The Declassified Record of Otto Juan Reich" The National Security Archive, 2 March 2001

International Court of Justice ruling

In 1984 the Sandinista government filed a suit in the International Court of Justice (ICJ) against the United States (Nicaragua v. United States), which resulted in a 1986 judgment against the United States. The ICJ held that the U.S. had violated international law by supporting the contras in their rebellion against the Nicaraguan government and by mining Nicaragua's harbors. Regarding the alleged human rights violations by the contras, however, the ICJ took the view that the United States could only be held accountable for them if it would have been proven that the U.S. had effective control of the contra operations resulting in these alleged violations."Having reached the above conclusion, the Court takes the view that the contras remain responsible for their acts, in particular the alleged violations by them of humanitarian law. For the United States to be legally responsible, it would have to be proved that that State had effective control of the operations in the course of which the alleged violations were committed." As seen at: International Court of Justice 1986, VII (5) Nevertheless, the ICJ found that the U.S. encouraged acts contrary to general principles of humanitarian law by producing the manual Psychological Operations in Guerrilla Warfare (Operaciones sicológicas en guerra de guerrillas) and disseminating it to the contras."..." As seen at: International Court of Justice 1986, (9) The manual, amongst other things, advised on how to rationalize killings of civilians"In the case of shooting "a citizen who was trying to leave the town or city in which the guerrillas are carrying out armed propaganda or political proselytism", the manual suggests that the contras "explain that if that citizen had managed to escape, he would have alerted the enemy." As seen at: Sklar 1988, p. 179 and recommended to hire professional killers for specific selective tasks. 181
The United States, which did not participate in the merits phase of the proceedings, maintained that the ICJ's power did not supersede the Constitution of the United States and argued that the court did not seriously consider the Nicaraguan role in El Salvador, while it accused Nicaragua of actively supporting armed groups there, specifically in the form of supply of arms."In any event the evidence is insufficient to satisfy the Court that the Government of Nicaragua was responsible for any flow of arms at either period." As seen at: International Court of Justice 1986, VIII (1) The U.S. argument was affirmed, however, by the dissenting opinion of ICJ member U.S. Judge Schwebel,"But the Court, remarkably enough, while finding the United States responsible for intervention in Nicaragua, failed to recognize Nicaragua's prior and continuing intervention in El Salvador." As seen at: International Court of Justice 1986, Dissenting Opinion of Judge Schwebel who concluded that in supporting the contras, the United States acted lawfully in collective self-defence in El Salvador's support."..." As seen at: International Court of Justice 1986, Dissenting Opinion of Judge Schwebel The U.S. blocked enforcement of the ICJ judgment by the United Nations Security Council and thereby prevented Nicaragua from obtaining any actual compensation.
The editors of the New York Times condemned the court's ruling, dismissing it as a "hostile forum", corrupted by Communist judges."America's Guilt - or Default" New York Times, 1 July 1986

Human rights violations

Edgar Chamorro, a former Contra and member of the FDN's political directorate who later became a critic of the Contras, stated that during his time with the Contras, he frequently received reports about atrocities committed by Contra troops against civilians and against Sandinista prisoners: "As time went on, I became more and more troubled by the frequent reports I received of atrocities committed by our troops against civilians and against Sandinista prisoners. The atrocities I had heard about were not isolated incidents, but reflected a consistent pattern of behaviour by our troops. There were unit commanders who openly bragged about their murders, mutilations, etc.""Case Concerning Military and Paramilitary Activities in and Against Nicaragua (Nicaragua V. United States of America): Application instituting proceedings" International Court of Justice, 2000
A Sandinista militiaman interviewed by The Guardian stated that Contra rebels committed these atrocities against Sandinista prisoners after a battle at a Sandinista rural outpost: "Rosa had her breasts cut off. Then they cut into her chest and took out her heart. The men had their arms broken, their testicles cut off. They were killed by slitting their throats and pulling the tongue out through the slit.""The Contras' litany of destruction" The Guardian
Americas Watch – which subsequently became part of Human Rights Watch –  accused the Contras of:
Human Rights Watch released a report on the situation in 1989, which stated: "The contras were major and systematic violators of the most basic standards of the laws of armed conflict, including by launching indiscriminate attacks on civilians, selectively murdering non-combatants, and mistreating prisoners.""NICARAGUA" Human Rights Watch, 1989
Similarly, the Catholic Institute for International Relations (CIIR, now known as "Progressio"), a human rights organization which identifies itself with liberation theology, had summarized Contra operating procedures in their 1987 human rights report: "The record of the contras in the field, as opposed to their official professions of democratic faith, is one of consistent and bloody abuse of human rights, of murder, torture, mutilation, rape, arson, destruction and kidnapping.""Right to survive: human rights in Nicaragua" Catholic Institute for International Relations, 1987 Earlier, in December 1984, the Council on Hemispheric Affairs had issued a report condemning the Contras and the United States government as being among the worst human rights violators in Latin America: "The CIA directed forces are among the worst human rights violators in Latin America, responsible for systematic brutality against a civilian population. For its critical role in facilitating the Contra violence, the States Administration must share responsibility as a hemispheric violator of human rights. The Contras have killed, tortured, raped, mutilated and abducted hundreds of civilians they suspect of sympathizing with the Sandinistas. Victims have included peasants, teachers, doctors and agricultural workers.""Case Concerning Military and Paramilitary Activities in and Against Nicaragua (Nicaragua V. United States of America)" International Court Of Justice, 2000

Human rights violations as a strategy

A fact finding mission of 1985 – sponsored by the International Human Rights Law Group and the Washington Office on Latin America, and carried out independently of any Nicaraguan government interference or direction - found that the contras with some frequency deliberately targeted Nicaraguan citizens in acts of terroristic violence."We found that there is substantial credible evidence that the contras engaged with some frequency in acts of terroristic violence directed at Nicaraguan civilians... These are individuals who are not caught in the cross-fire between government and contra forces, but..." As seen at: "Case Concerning Military and Paramilitary Activities in and Against Nicaragua (Nicaragua V. United States of America)" International Court Of Justice, 2000
An influential report on Contra atrocities was issued by lawyer Reed Brody shortly before the 1985 U.S. Congressional vote on Contra aid. It disclosed a "distinct pattern" of abuses by the contras, including: "attacks on purely civilian targets resulting in the killing of unarmed men, woman, children and the elderly—premeditated acts of brutality including rapes, beatings, mutilations and torture—and individual and mass kidnappings of civilians for the purpose of forced recruitment into the Contra forces and the creation of a hostage refugee population in Honduras; – assaults on economic and social targets such as farms, cooperatives and on vehicles carrying volunteer coffee harvesters; – intimidation of civilians who participate or cooperate in government or community programs such as distribution of subsidized food products, education and local self-defense militias; – and kidnapping, intimidation, and even murder of religious leaders who support the government, including priests and clergy- trained lay pastors.""Contra terror in Nicaragua: report of a fact-finding mission, September 1984 – January 1985" By Reed Brody, 1985
Similarly, Human Rights Watch pointed out that "the Contras systematically engage in violent abuses...
In his affidavit to the World Court, former contra leader Edgar Chamorro testified that "The CIA did not discourage such tactics. To the contrary,.......""Case Concerning Military and Paramilitary Activities in and Against Nicaragua (Nicaragua V. United States of America): Affidavit of Edgar Chamarro" International Court of Justice, 5 September 1985 Also authorized by the CIA, the Contras would routinely force recruitment of new members by publicly executing Sandinista officials and their sympathizers in small Nicaraguan towns."A former Nicaraguan rebel says in a court affidavit that the rebels routinely forcibly recruited new guerrillas by publicly killing Government officials and their sympathizers in small Nicaraguan towns... with the acquiescence of the Central Intelligence Agency." "NICARAGUAN REBEL TELLS OF KILLINGS AS DEVICE FOR FORCED RECRUITMENT" New York Times, 12 September 1985 Chamorro indicated that the contras were a CIA "proxy army" lead by "officers of Somoza's National Guard," who themselves were "controlled by the U.S. Government"; and that it was "premeditated policy to terrorize civilian noncombatants to prevent them from cooperating with the Government." Chamorro added:
 "The Sandinistas, for all their faults, have made enormous advances in education, housing and health care, issues of vital importance to Nicaragua's poor majority. Unfortunately, the 'contras' burn down schools, homes and health centers as fast as the Sandinistas build them. While Nicaragua's economy is suffering - partly because of Sandinista mistakes, but more because of the war and the U.S. economic embargo - the Sandinistas must be credited with generating an atmosphere of genuine equality for the first time in Nicaragua's history. By contrast, the 'contras' who were my colleagues talked mostly of recovering their lost wealth and privileged status.""Terror Is the Most Effective Weapon of Nicaragua's 'Contras'" New York Times, January 9, 1986 
Contra terror had been acknowledged by the CIA as early as late 1983, when Duane Clarridge, Latin America division chief of the CIA's Directorate for Operations, admitted in a secret briefing to the Senate subcommittee that his contras had murdered "civilians and Sandinista officials in the provinces, as well as heads of cooperatives, nurses, doctors and judges". But that didn't violate the presidential directive, Dewey said. "These events don't constitute assassinations because as far as we are concerned assassinations are only those of heads of state," so it's just murder."With the Contras: a reporter in the wilds of Nicaragua" By Christopher Dickey, 1987 Indeed, the purpose of U.S. aid to the Contras was "to permit people who are fighting on our side to use more violence," proclaimed Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams."Nicaraguan Aid Sought By Clerics" United Press International, 21 December 1985
Nonetheless, the editors of the Christian Science Monitor expressed their frustration that Contra terror was not producing adequate "results": The contras "have some distance to go before convincing the American people that they are capable of scoring a military victory" and "may well be deprived" of further military aid "unless Congress becomes convinced that they are up to the job," the editors warned."The US and contra policy: the great divide" Christian Science Monitor, 6 May 1987 To that end, in spite of the New York Times telling it's readers that the CIA was "choosing precise military targets for the rebels","C.I.A. GIVES CONTRAS DETAILED PROFILES OF CIVIL TARGETS" New York Times, 19 March 1987 United States Southern Command (SOUTHCOM) had directed the Contras to attack civilian targets rather than the military. SOUTHCOM Commander, General John Galvin assured a House subcommittee that this strategy of attacking "soft targets" produced "lots of victories"."US GENERAL SAYS CONTRA CHANCES IMPROVING" Boston Globe, 20 May 1987 Though, the New York Times editors, presuming the Contras would likely fail, warned that Washington may have to take the "calculated risk" and "tolerate a Marxist neighbor, if it is boxed in by treaties and commitments to rudimentary human rights.""The Contras and the Drain" New York Times, 15 March 1987

=Psychological Operations in Guerrilla Warfare=

The CIA manual, "Psychological Operations in Guerrilla Warfare" (Operaciones sicológicas en guerra de guerrillas), had been written in 1983 to be used by the contras."Violations of the laws of war by both sides in Nicaragua, 1981–1985" Americas Watch Committee, 1985 The manual talks about killing civilians who try to leave an occupied town and to rationalize their killing, hiring professional assassins, blackmailing citizens into working for the contras, and inciting violence during demonstrations."Nicaragua: the human rights record" Amnesty International, 1986 The rationale for this strategy was that if "the government police cannot put an end to the guerrilla activities, the population will lose confidence in the government, which has the inherent mission of guaranteeing the safety of citizens.""Psychological Operations in Guerrilla Warfare" Central Intelligence Agency
The International Court of Justice ruled on 27 June 1986 that by disseminating the manual to the contras, the United States of America had "encouraged ... acts contrary to general principles of humanitarian law.""Yearbook, Issue 40" International Court of Justice, 1 January 1985 Americas Watch had come to a similar conclusion in 1985.

U.S. justification

New Republic editor Michael Kinsley argued that critics should not simply dismiss State Department justifications for contra attacks on "soft targets": "The State Department has defended bloody contra attacks on government-sponsored farm cooperatives, saying that these civilian facilities have military aspects. And, of course, that's true. In a Marxist society geared up for war, there are no clear lines separating officials, soldiers and civilians. A guerrilla struggle can't be won by attacking only card-carrying Sandinistas. The goal is to undermine morale and confidence in the government: a perfectly legitimate goal if you believe in the cause, but impossible to achieve without vast civilian suffering. Any sensible policy must meet the test of cost-benefit analysis. The amount of blood and misery that will be poured in, and the likelihood that democracy will emerge at the other end."Michael Kinsley, Wall Street Journal, 26 March 1987.
In line with this, contra leader Adolfo Calero denied that his forces deliberately targeted civilians:  "What they call a cooperative is also a troop concentration full of armed people. We are not killing civilians. We are fighting armed people and returning fire when fire is directed at us."New York Times, 23 November 1984.

Controversy

U.S. news media published several articles accusing Americas Watch and other bodies of ideological bias and unreliable reporting. It alleged that Americas Watch gave too much credence to alleged Contra abuses and systematically tried to discredit Nicaraguan human rights groups such as the Permanent Commission on Human Rights, which blamed the major human rights abuses on the Sandinistas.
In 1985, the Wall Street Journal reported:
Human Rights Watch, the umbrella organization of Americas Watch, replied to these allegations: "Almost invariably, U.S. pronouncements on human rights exaggerated and distorted the real human rights violations of the Sandinista regime, and exculpated those of the U.S.-supported insurgents, known as the contras...S. force, but also because the Bush administration has continued to minimize and deny these violations, and has refused to investigate them seriously."
U.S. political scientist Rudolph Rummel estimated that by 1987, the contras had murdered about 500 people while the Sandinistas had murdered 4,000 to 7,000 people in democide.edu. Line 2558 In contrast, Witness for Peace and the Sandinista government claimed at least 736 civilians were murdered by the contras between March 1987 and October 1988 alone.

Military successes and election of Violeta Chamorro

By 1986 the contras were besieged by charges of corruption, human-rights abuses, and military ineptitude. A much-vaunted early 1986 offensive never materialized, and Contra forces were largely reduced to isolated acts of terrorism. In October 1987, however, the contras staged a successful attack in southern Nicaragua." As seen at: 
[/ref] Then on 21 December 1987, the FDN launched attacks at La Bonanza, La Siuna, and La Rosita in Zelaya province, resulting in heavy fighting. ARDE Frente Sur attacked at El Almendro and along the Rama road. Contra Cross: Insurgency And Tyranny in Central America, 1979–1989. U.S. Naval Institute Press, 2006. These large-scale raids mainly became possible as the contras were able to use U.S.-provided Redeye missiles against Sandinista Mi-24 helicopter gunships, which had been supplied by the Soviets. Nevertheless, the Contras remained tenuously encamped within Honduras and weren't able to hold Nicaraguan territory.
There were isolated protests among the population against the draft implemented by the Sandinista government, which even resulted in full-blown street clashes in Masaya in 1988. But only in the town of Masaya, 19 miles southeast of the capital of Managua, did the conscription spark a full-blown street clash..." As seen at: 
[/ref] However, polls showed the Sandinista government still enjoyed strong support from Nicaraguans. Political opposition groups were splintered and the Contras began to experience defections, although United States aid maintained them as a viable military force.
After a cutoff in U.S. military support and with both sides facing international pressure to bring an end to the conflict, the contras agreed to negotiations with the FSLN. With the help of five Central American Presidents, including Ortega, it was agreed that a voluntary demobilization of the contras should start in early December 1989, in order to facilitate free and fair elections in Nicaragua in February 1990 (even though the Reagan administration had pushed for a delay of contra disbandment)."U.S. Endorses Contra Plan as Prod to Democracy in Nicaragua" The Washington Post, 9 August 1989
In the resulting February 1990 elections, Violeta Chamorro and her party the UNO won an upset victory of 55% to 41% over Daniel Ortega, even though polls leading up to the election had clearly indicated an FSLN victory.
Possible explanations include that the Nicaraguan people were disenchanted with the Ortega regime as well as the fact that already in November 1989, the White House had announced that the economic embargo against Nicaragua would continue unless Violeta Chamorro won."Bush Vows to End Embargo if Chamorro Wins", The Washington Post, 9 November 1989 Washington also warned that the Contra war would resume should the Sandinistas not be voted out."Empire's Workshop: Latin America, the United States, and the Rise of the New Imperialism" Greg Grandin, 2006 There had been reports of intimidation from the side of the contras,"The policy of keeping the contras alive ... also has placed in jeopardy the holding of elections by encouraging contra attacks on the electoral process. Thus, while the Bush administration proclaims its support for human rights and free and fair elections in Nicaragua, it persists in sabotaging both." As seen at: "Nicaragua" Human Rights Watch, 1990 with a Canadian observer mission confirming 42 people killed by the contras in "election violence" in October 1989."U.S. trying to disrupt election in Nicaragua, Canadians report" The Toronto Star, 27 October 1989 Furthermore, the Congressionally funded National Endowment for Democracy (NED) spent at least $4 million backing the UNO and other anti-government groups."Inevitable Revolutions: The United States in Central America" Walter LaFeber, 1993
This led many commentators to assume that Nicaraguans voted against the Sandinistas out of fear of a continuation of the Contra war and economic deprivation."For Nicaraguans, the choice was simple, he said: continued war, poverty and inflation or opposition candidate Violeta Barrios de Chamorro ... ′They were not electing a president, they were electing a way out′." As seen at: "Nicaragua Election Was Neither Free Nor Honest, Ex-Contra Leader Charges" Los Angeles Times, 15 March 1990"American intervention is the main obstacle to the attainment of free and fair elections in Nicaragua...A campaign of intimidation with the clear message,`if you support the (Sandinista government), we will be back to kill you'." As seen at: "U.S. trying to disrupt election in Nicaragua, Canadians report" The Toronto Star, 27 October 1989"EVEN AT THE END, A CONTRA EXPLOITATION" The Boston Globe, 26 Oct. 1989"... because the Nicaraguan people were tired of war and sick of economic deprivation" As seen at: "IN THE NATION; Bush and Managua" New York Times, 1 March 1990"The voters chose a candidate of Washington's choice with a 'gun held to their heads', as was clear to many impartial observers." As seen at: "Nicaragua: living in the shadow of the eagle" By Thomas W. Walker, 2003
Both by critics and supporters of the Reagan administration, this was seen as a direct result of the administration's efforts concerning the contras."It is true that partly because of the confrontation with the U.S., Nicaragua's economy suffered terribly, setting the stage for the widespread public discontent with the Sandinistas reflected in Sunday's balloting. But few governments become moderate during a war; the contra war strengthened Sandinista hard-liners and probably contributed to their oppressive policies. The way to resolution opened only when Congress suspended the war, in effect, to give the Sandinistas a chance to proceed democratically..." As seen at: "Nicaragua, Victory U.S. Fair Play" The New York Times, 1 March 1990"The economic distress that no doubt moved some Nicaraguans to vote for Mrs. Chamorro was caused in part, after all, by U.S. sanctions" As seen at: "ABROAD AT HOME; Out of This Nettle" The New York Times, 2 March 1990"... wreck the economy and prosecute a long and deadly proxy war until the exhausted natives overthrow the unwanted government themselves. Since 1985 Washington has strangled Nicaraguan trade with an embargo. It has cut off Nicaragua's credit at the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. The contra war cost Managua tens of millions and left the country with wrecked bridges, sabotaged power stations and ruined farms. The impoverishment of the people of Nicaragua was a harrowing way to give the National Opposition Union (U.N.O.) a winning issue. Nicaragua had been devastated by a 40% drop in GNP, an inflation rate running at 1,700% a year and constant shortages of food and basic necessities. At least 30,000 people had been killed in the war, and 500,000 more had fled." As seen at: "But Will It Work?" Time, 12 March 1990"Impoverishing the people of Nicaragua was precisely the point of the contra war and the parallel policy of economic boycott and veto of international development loans.... Those who supported aid to the contras..., as did this magazine, can find considerable vindication in the outcome. Gratifying as the election results are democracy is not yet quite safe in Nicaragua and having served as an inspiration for the triumph of democracy in our time, the United States now has an opportunity to see to it that democracy prevails." As seen at: "Taking responsibility. (effect of '80's U.S. Nicaragua policy on Chamorro victory)" The New Republic, 19 March 1990"It is hard to say which is sadder: What happened to Nicaragua and its people (and its revolution) on the way to the stunning defeat of the Sandinistas in the election on Sunday. Or the fact that so many Americans in public life -- the politicians and journalists who establish the terms of discourse for everyone else—describe the election victory of the American-backed candidate as a victory for peace and democracy. This was undeniably a victory for former President Reagan and President Bush, and for Elliott Abrams and Oliver North. It was a victory for violence pays. For money talks. For cynicism. For terrorism, fading into mere cruelty. And for cowardice among the liberal opposition." As seen at: "IN NICARAGUA, A WIN BUT NOT A VICTORY" The Boston Globe, 28 February 1990 Despite Washington's methods, the U.S. news media was "united in joy" over the outcome, declaring the Sandinista defeat a "victory for U.S. fair play"."Post-Mortem on Nicaragua's Election" FAIR, 1 March 1990



Notes






