[[Transport in Norway]]

CATEGORIES: Transport in Norway

Transport in Norway is highly influenced by Norway's low population density, narrow shape and long coastline. Norway has old water transport traditions, but road, rail and air transport have increased in importance during the 20th century. Due to the low population density, public transport is somewhat less built out in rural areas of Norway, however public transport in, and around cities is well developed.
The main governing body is the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications, which performs operations through numerous subsidiaries. Most infrastructure is publicly owned, while most operations are performed by private companies; public transport is subsidized.
In average each Norwegian transported themselves for 70 minutes each day. 8% of passenger transport was made by public transport; road transport is the dominant mode of transport. The transport sector was responsible for 4.1% of the gross national product and 6.6% of employment in 2006. According to the World Economic Forum's Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report 2013,World Economic Forum's Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report 2013 Norway placed 83 out of 140 countries regarding quality of roads, 47 out of 122 regarding quality of railroad infrastructure, 25 out of 140 regarding quality of port infrastructure and 54 out of 140 regarding ground transport networks.

Civil aviation

Aviation has become an important passenger transport mode since the 1960s. Aircraft are a common used mode of transport on longer distances, and the routes between Oslo and Bergen, Trondheim and Stavanger are all among the largest in Europe.
Major airlines based in Norway are Scandinavian Airlines, Norwegian Air Shuttle and Widerøe.

Airports

Of the 98 airports in Norway, 51 are public, Seven airports have more than one million passengers annually. 41,089,675 passengers passed through Norwegian airports in 2007, of which 13,397,458 were international.
The main gateway by air to Norway is Oslo Airport, Gardermoen, located about 
Heliports are common at hospitals and oil platforms. The Norwegian Air Ambulance service operates twelve helicopters and nine airplanes.

Regional aviation

The regional airport service was introduced in the 1960s, with 30 airports being served by short take-off and landing aircraft. These are located mainly in Sogn og Fjordane and Northern Norway, in areas with long distances to large cities and with too little traffic to support commercial flights. The airports, which typically have a  1,214,508 passengers passed through the regional airports in 2012.

Rail transport

The main railway network consists of . The railways transported 56,827,000 passengers 2,956 million passenger kilometers and 24,783,000 tonnes of cargo 3,414 million tonne kilometers.Norwegian National Rail Administration, 2008: 4
The main long-haul network consists of lines from Oslo and westwards along the South Coast to Stavanger and over the mountains to Bergen; and north to Åndalsnes and via Trondheim to Bodø. Four lines connect to Sweden, allowing access to the European network.Norwegian National Rail Administration, 2008: 13 Several companies operate freight trains.Norwegian National Rail Administration, 2008: 16
Investment in new infrastructure and maintenance is financed through the state budget, and subsidies are provided for passenger train operations.

Rail transit

Tramways operate in Oslo, Trondheim and Bergen. The only rapid transit system is the Oslo T-bane, while the only funicular is in Bergen. The rail transits are operated by the counties, and the ticket system is integrated into the bus transport. In Oslo the two systems make the backbone of the Ruter public transport system, giving Oslo by far the highest public transport share of 20%. Local trains on the railway is operated by NSB, but monthly passes are integrated into the local transit ticket system.
In 2007, 101 million passengers were transported 490 million passenger kilometers by rail transit.Norwegian National Rail Administration, 2007: 12–13

Road transport

Norway has a road network of  There are four tiers of road routes; national, county, municipal and private, with national and primary county roads numbered en route. The most important national routes are part of the European route scheme, and the two most prominent are the E6 going north-south through the entire country, while E39 follows the West Coast. National and county roads are managed by the Norwegian Public Roads Administration.Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications, 2003: 15
Motorways exist around the largest cities; many of the larger cities have introduced toll schemes to help finance roads. The most exposed mountain passes are closed the entire winter.
In 2007 there were 2.6 million automobiles in Norway, or 444 per 1000 residents, an increase of 27% the last ten years—average age was 10.2 years. Road accidents killed 242 people and road transport caused 20% of greenhouse gas emissions. Trucks transported 264 million tonnes 15 billion tonne kilometers.
See also: Road signs in Norway, Vehicle registration plates of Norway.

Bus transport

Each county is responsible for the public bus and boat transport in their area,
Bus, bus and water bus services are normally operated by private companies on contract with the county or their public transport authority (such as Ruter or Vestviken Kollektivtrafikk). Tickets and tickets prices are organised by these authorities. Some of them have special brand names and connected painting of the buses, especially in bigger cities. Other counties, especially smaller, don't use brand names and let the operators decide bus paint.
Long-haul coach services are operated by various companies, most of whom cooperate through NOR-WAY Bussekspress.

Water transport

The coastal infrastructure is operated by the Norwegian Coastal Administration, of shoreline, 400,000 leisure craft and a 715 ships in the merchant marine.

Merchant marine

Norway is the fifth largest beneficial shipowning country, with 5% of the world's fleet;

Ferries

Car ferries are vital links across fjords and to islands, where are no fixed connection. There are more than one hundred car ferry connections inside Norway. Fast passenger ferries operate many places where fjords and islands make it quicker to follow the waterways than the roads; some small islands are served by water buses. Public transport by ship transported eight million passengers 273 million passenger kilometers in 2007.

Pipelines

The petroleum and natural gas production on the Norwegian continental shelf uses pipelines to transport produce to processing plants on mainland Norway and other European countries; total length is 

Notes






