[[Dida language]]

CATEGORIES: Kru languages, Languages of Ivory Coast

Dida is a dialect cluster of the Kru family spoken in Ivory Coast.
Ethnologue divides Dida into two groups, Yocoboué Dida (101,600 speakers in 1993) and Lakota Dida (93,800 speakers in 1993), which are only marginally mutually intelligible and best considered separate languages. Each is dialectically diverse: Yocoboué (Yokubwe) consists of the Lozoua (Lozwa) and Divo dialects (7,100 and 94,500 speakers), and Lakota the Lakota (Lákota), Abou (Abu), and Vata dialects. The prestige dialect is the Lozoua speech of the town of Guitry.
Yocoboué is also known as Guitry, Yocoboue, Yokouboué, Gakpa, Goudou (Gudu), and Kagoué (Kagwe). Lakota is also known as Dieko, Gabo, Satro, Guébie (Gebye), Brabori, and Ziki.

Phonology

The Dida lects have consonant and vowel inventories typical of the Eastern Kru languages. However, tone varies significantly between dialects, or at least between their descriptions. The following phonology is that of Abu Dida, from Miller (2005).

Vowels

Dida has a ten-vowel system: nine vowels distinguished by "tenseness", likely either pharyngealization or supra-glottal phonation (contraction of the larynx) of the type described as retracted tongue root, plus an uncommon mid-central vowel .
The non-contracted vowels are , but here are transcribed with lower vowels to reflect their phonetic realization. There is no tense contrast with the low vowel.) The formants of the tense vowels show them to be lower than their non-tense counterparts: the formants of the highest tense vowels overlap the formants of the non-tense mid vowels, but there is visible tension in the lips and throat when these are enunciated carefully.
Dida has a number of diphthongs, which have the same number of tonal distinctions as simple vowels. All start with the higher vowels,  "little bone".
Dida also has nasal vowels, but they are not common and it is not clear how many. Examples are  "25 cents" (from English "pound"). In diphthongs, nasalization shows up primarily on the second element of the vowel.
Vowel length is not distinctive, apart from phonesthesia (as in  "get").

Consonants

The consonants are typical for Eastern Kru:
Syllables may be vowel only, consonant-vowel, or consonant-.
 "face".
When emphasized, zero-onset words may take an initial  when emphasized.

Tones

Dida uses tone as a grammatical device. Morpho-tonology plays a greater role in verb and pronominal paradigms than it does in nouns, and perhaps because of this, Dida verbs utilize a simpler tone system than nouns do: Noun roots have four lexically contrastive tones, subject pronouns have three, and verb roots have just two word tones.
There are three level tones in Abou Dida:  is realized as a simple low tone.) However, some of these only occur in morphologically complex words, such as perfective verbs.
Monosyllabic nouns contrast four tones:  being the most frequent.



Further reading


