[[Walker Percy]]

CATEGORIES: 1916 births, 1990 deaths, 20th-century American novelists, American male novelists, American Roman Catholics, Benedictine oblates, Cancer deaths in Louisiana, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons alumni, Converts to Roman Catholicism, Converts to Roman Catholicism from atheism or agnosticism, Deaths from prostate cancer, Louisiana State University faculty, National Book Award winners, Writers from Birmingham, Alabama, People from Covington, Louisiana, Roman Catholic writers, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill alumni, Writers from Georgia (U.S. state), Writers from Louisiana, Writers from Mississippi, Laetare Medal recipients

Walker Percy, Obl.S.B. (May 28, 1916 – May 10, 1990) was a Southern author from Covington, Louisiana, whose interests included philosophy and semiotics. Percy is known for his philosophical novels set in and around New Orleans, Louisiana, the first of which, The Moviegoer, won the U.S. National Book Award for Fiction. He devoted his literary life to the exploration of "the dislocation of man in the modern age."Kimball, Roger. Existentialism, Semiotics and Iced Tea, Review of Conversations with Walker Percy New York Times, August 4, 1985. Retrieved 2010-06-12. His work displays a combination of existential questioning, Southern sensibility, and deep Catholic faith.

Biography

Percy was born in Birmingham, Alabama, as the first of three boys to LeRoy Pratt Percy and Martha Susan Phinizy.  His father's Mississippi Protestant family included his uncle LeRoy Percy, a U.S. Senator, and LeRoy Pope Percy, a Civil War hero. In February 1917, his grandfather committed suicide, setting a family pattern of emotional struggle and deaths that would haunt Percy throughout his life.
In 1929, when Percy was 13, his father committed suicide. His mother took the family to her mother's home in Athens, Georgia. Two years later, Percy's mother died when she drove a car off a country bridge and into Deer Creek near Leland, Mississippi. Percy regarded this death as another suicide. Walker Percy: A Life. (Loyola Press USA, 1999) p. 4 Walker and his two younger brothers, LeRoy (Roy) and Phinizy (Phin), moved to Greenville, Mississippi, where their second cousin William Alexander Percy, a bachelor lawyer and poet, became their guardian.  
Percy was raised as an agnostic, though he was nominally affiliated with a theologically liberal Presbyterian church.O'Gorman, Farrell. Extract from "Walker Percy, the Catholic Church and Southern race relations (ca. 1947–1970)", The Mississippi Quarterly, Winter, 1999/2000. William Percy introduced him to many writers and poets and to a neighboring boy his own age, Shelby Foote, who became his lifelong best friend. The Life You Save May Be Your Own: An American Pilgrimage, Farrar, Straus & Giroux. Later, he and his wife would both join the Roman Catholic Church.  Percy insisted on being confirmed with the children as a sign of his new life.
As young men, Percy and Foote decided to pay their respects to William Faulkner by visiting him in Oxford, Mississippi. But when they arrived at his home, Percy was so in awe of the literary giant that he could not bring himself to speak to him. He later recounted how he could only sit in the car and watch while Foote and Faulkner had a lively conversation on the porch.
Percy attended the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where he joined the Xi chapter of Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity. He received a medical degree from Columbia University in New York City in 1941. He underwent psychotherapy to deal with the legacy of suicide in his family. After contracting tuberculosis while performing an autopsy at Bellevue Hospital Center, Percy spent several years recuperating at the Trudeau Sanitorium in Saranac Lake, New York. 
During this period, Percy read the works of the Danish existentialist writer Søren Kierkegaard and the Russian novelist Fyodor Dostoevsky. He began to question the ability of science to explain the basic mysteries of human existence. Having been influenced by the example of one of his college roommates to rise daily at dawn and go to Mass, Percy decided to convert, and he was received into the Roman Catholic Church in 1947. A Century of Catholic Converts. Our Sunday Visitor, 2003. 151-53. Print.

Marriage and family

He married Mary Bernice Townsend, a medical technician, on November 7, 1946.  Fearing that he was sterile, the married couple adopted their first daughter, Mary Pratt. They later managed to conceive their second daughter Ann, who was deaf from an early age. The family settled in Covington, Louisiana. Percy's wife and one of their daughters had a bookstore, where he often wrote in an office on the second floor.
Walker Percy died of prostate cancer in 1990, eighteen days before his 74th birthday. He is buried on the grounds of St. Joseph Benedictine Abbey in St. Benedict, Louisiana. He was a secular oblate of the Abbey's monastic community, making his final oblation on February 16, 1990, less than three months before his death."Remembering Walker Percy as a Benedictine Oblate", Plastic Beatitude blog.

Literary career

After many years of writing and rewriting in collaboration with editor Stanley Kauffmann, Percy published his first novel, The Moviegoer, in 1961. Percy later wrote of the novel that it was the story of "a young man who had all the advantages of a cultivated old-line southern family: a feel for science and art, a liking for girls, sports cars, and the ordinary things of the culture, but who nevertheless feels himself quite alienated from both worlds, the old South and the new America."Andrews, Deborah. Annual Obituary, 1990. St. James Press, 1991. 317. Print.
Subsequent works included The Last Gentleman (1966), Love in the Ruins (1971), Lancelot (1977), The Second Coming (1980), and The Thanatos Syndrome in 1987. Percy also published a number of non-fiction works exploring his interests in semiotics and Existentialism, the most popular work being Lost in the Cosmos.
Percy taught and mentored younger writers.  While teaching at Loyola University of New Orleans, he was instrumental in getting John Kennedy Toole's novel A Confederacy of Dunces published in 1980, more than a decade after Toole committed suicide because he was despondent about not being able to get his book recognized. Set in New Orleans, it won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction.[ref]
