[[We Got Married]]

CATEGORIES: Dating and relationship reality television series, South Korean reality television series, Munhwa Broadcasting Corporation television programmes, 2008 South Korean television series debuts, 2000s South Korean television series, Korean-language television programming

We Got Married ( Each week, couples are assigned missions to complete, with candid interviews of the participants to reveal their thoughts and feelings.

The Hosts

The pilot episode that aired as a special on New Year's Day was hosted by Lee Hyuk-jae, Hyun Young and Oh Sang Jin. The first season, only Hyuk-jae remains as an original host. He was joined by Kim Won Hee, and Lee Hwi Jae for the first 8 episodes until Hwi Jae replaced Jung Hyung Don as one of the grooms in episode 9. Won Hee later left to film a movie after episode 12, and Park Myung Soo was then introduced as host in episode 13. After episode 17, Hwi Jae resumed his position as MC, and the latest addition of Kang Soo Jung, now the only female, brings a total of 5 hosts. Lee Hwi Jae officially left the show after Episode 30 in order to make time for other programs. In preparation for its new format in addition to budget cuts, the MCs and live studio recordings were officially dropped after Episode 36.
In Season II, the series consisted of three permanent hosts Park Mi-Sun, Jo Hyung Gi and Kim Na Young, and guest commentators from different age groups appearing every few weeks. The studio was replaced by a smaller room with no live audience where the progress of the marriages is discussed. As of episode 78, host Jo Hyung Gi no longer appears on the show. In Episode 80 and 81 where the husbands and wives were separated into two groups, the couples watched the footage along with the hosts in the studio. From episode 100 and above, Seulong and Jinwoon of 2AM become regular commentators along with Park Mi Sun, Kim Jung Min, and Kim Na Young.
2013, The Hosts are Park Mi Sun, Kim Jung Min, Lee Ji Hye and Danny Ahn.

2008 Lunar New Year Special

This special pilot episode aired on February 6, 2008. The four arranged couples must prepare dinner with a fixed amount of money.

Season 1

With a new format and slightly different couples, newlyweds are given a mission to complete each week. As during the special pilot episode, interviewed participants provide a unique perspective on the ongoing relationship conflicts and developments. All of the recorded material is then played in front of the participants, MCs, and audience who add commentary or clarification.
Beginning with a Lunar New Year's Special in 2009 with three new couples, a new format is introduced into the show, first forecasted through the addition of Kangin and Lee Yoon Ji. Each couple is given a concept to portray; in Kangin and Lee Yoon Ji's case, a college couple living with a limited income. The show now consists of more special effects and editing in order to show each couple in a set atmosphere and theme.

Season 2

As of May 2009, the producers announced another change in the format with all four couples departing, cutting down to just one couple and shortening the show to just 60 minutes. The show will now portray a more realistic side to what a marriage is, instead of "the painted image of marriage based on romance". For the first time, a real couple is cast in the show. Guest celebrities are invited to be show's commentators for each episode so that they can share their opinions on marriage on behalf of their age group. Kim Yong Jun and Hwang Jung Eum also do the interview room together dressed in wedding attire.
However, due to low ratings, the show returned to its old format with the addition of a make-believe couple actor Park Jae Jung and After School member Uee on August 2, 2009. For the Chuseok special, Brown Eyed Girls' Gain & 2AM's Jo Kwon and SG Wannabe's Lee Seok Hun & host Kim Na Young appeared as two new couples. The episode achieved Season II's highest rating, and Gain and Jo Kwon were announced to be a permanent couple.

Season 3

Season three officially begins on April 9, with two additional couples upon the departure of Yonghwa & Seohyun, as well as a new format. Park Hwi Sun and K.

Season 4

Additional couples

Controversies

Lee Si Young joined the cast of MBC variety reality show We Got Married where she is paired up with Jun Jin of Shinhwa. As of June 2009, they have become the first couple to officially have a real relationship outside the show. However, they broke up after a 6 month relationship.
In late March 2010, MBC stopped broadcast of new episodes due to labour strikes, with repeats airing instead."'우결' 조권 가인, MBC 파업 중 발리行 가능했던 이유? (We Got Married continues to Bali, Indonesia despite Labor Strike)" Nate News. 11 May 2011. Retrieved 2012-05-01  This event, compounded with the ROKS Cheonan sinking incident, which caused cancellation of most variety shows at the time, resulted in backlogged of recordings for Jo Kwon & Gain and Yonghwa & Seohyun couple. With the contents of their latest episodes which were recorded from a few months previously, instead of regular 1–2 weeks from the original.
During Lee Joon & Oh Yeon Seo's season 4 tenure (broadcasting from September 2012 through February 2013), Yeon Seo was observed meeting in public with Lee Jang Woo, her male co-star from the drama series, "Oh Ja Ryong is Coming".allkpop.  Because Yeon Seo and Lee Joon were in the midst of filming WGM at the time this news was released, the integrity of their virtual marriage was questioned by fans.allkpop.g. as her "ideal type" and wanting to meet with him outside of filming).soompi.  Shortly after the rumors of Yeon Seo and Jang Woo's relationship surfaced, Lee Joon publicly expressed his frustration about not having his voice heard, with online fans suggesting it was due to his overbearing workload and/or Yeon Seo's alleged relationship with Jang Woo.allkpop.

Spin-Off

Pit-a-Pat Shake

MBC has announced a new show to be based off We Got Married. The emphasis of the show is not on married life but rather dating life. The producer taking charge is the original producer of We Got Married, circa couples Seo In Young and Crown J, and Shin Ae and Alex. The success of the earliest and most memorable couples has given people high hopes for the pilot. A Lunar Year Special will be done as pilot. 3 January 2012. Retrieved 2012-05-01 
The female idols to be in the spin-off, now revealed to be called Pit-a-Pat Shake, are KARA's Seungyeon, After School's Lizzy, SISTAR's Hyorin, and SECRET's Sunhwa. MBLAQ's Lee Joon was confirmed as Lizzy partner. Actor Lee Tae Sung will pair up with Kara's Han SeungYeon.

Chinese version

The Chinese version of We Got Married paired Korean and Chinese celebrities. Two out of three pairings were international: T-ara's Hyomin and Super Junior's Kyuhyun. It was produced by MBC to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of South Korea's diplomatic ties with China. It aired as a Valentine's Day special in China on an entertainment channel of Shanghai Media Group and on MBC on 25 February but with only the Korean segments.

Global Edition

A global edition spinoff of the widely popular 'We Got Married', get to see how the on-screen virtual marriage between idol celebrities from different countries work out through weekly missions and candid interviews. Couples are paired from Korea, Japan and Taiwan.

Awards

Affiliated works

Dubbed couple names

Apart from the abbreviated names given by the fans, a few of the couples earned unique nicknames that were officially used in the show.

Season I

Season II

Season III

Season IV

Global We Got Married






