[[Family International]]

CATEGORIES: Family International, Intentional communities, Jesus movement, Religious organizations established in 1968, Christian organizations established in the 20th century, New religious movements

The Family International (formed as the Children of God (COG), renamed Family of Love and later to The Family), is a new religious movement often referred to as a cult (by such academics as Benjamin Beit-Hallahmi and John HuxleyHuxley J (1992). "Sunday Times: Sex-cult children held – Children of God". The Sunday Times (Sydney) 1992-05-17.) started in 1968 in Huntington Beach, California, United States, with many of its early converts drawn from the hippie movement.



TFI initially spread a message of salvation, apocalypticism, and spiritual "revolution" against the outside world, which the members called "the System", resulting in controversy. In 1976, it began a method of evangelism called Flirty Fishing, using sex to "show God's love" and win converts.  TFI's founder and prophetic leader, David Berg (who was first called "Moses David" in the Texas press), took the titles of 'King,' 'The Last Endtime Prophet,' 'Moses,' and 'David.' He communicated with his followers via Mo Letters—letters of instruction and counsel on myriad spiritual and practical subjects—until his death in late 1994.org Publications Database — contains the entire text of "Mo Letters" After his death, his widow Karen Zerby became the leader of TFI, taking the title of 'Queen' and 'prophetess.' She married Steve Kelly, an assistant of David Berg who he had handpicked as her 'consort' before his death. Steve Kelly took the title of 'King Peter' and became the public face of TFI, speaking in a more public capacity than either David Berg or Karen Zerby.

History

The Children of God (1968–1977)

Members of the Children of God founded communes, first called "colonies" (now referred to as "homes") in various cities. They would proselytize in the streets and distribute pamphlets.
New converts memorized MO letters, took Bible classes, and were expected to emulate the lives of early Christians while rejecting mainstream denominational Christianity. In common with converts to some other religions, most incoming members adopted a new "Bible" name.
The founder of the movement was a former baptist and Christian and Missionary Alliance pastor, David Brandt Berg (1919–1994), also known within the group as Moses David, Mo, Father David, and Dad to adult group members, and eventually as Grandpa to the group's youngest members.
Berg communicated with his followers through more than 3,000 published letters written over 24 years, referred to as "Mo Letters" by members of the group. By January 1972, Berg introduced through his letters that he was God's prophet for this time, further establishing his spiritual authority within the group. Despite this teaching, Berg freely acknowledged his failings and weaknesses.
By the end of 1972, COG members had printed and distributed approximately 42 million Christian tracts, mostly on God's salvation and America's doom. Street distribution of Berg's Letters (called "litnessing") became the COG's predominant method of both outreach and support for the next five years.
The Children of God ended as an organizational entity in February 1978. Berg reorganized the movement amid reports of serious misconduct, financial mismanagement, and established leaders having abused their positions (and others having opposed flirty fishing). He dismissed more than 300 of the movement's leaders, known as The Chain, and declared the general dissolution of the COG structure. This shift was known as the "Reorganization Nationalization Revolution" (RNR). A third of the total membership left the movement, and those who remained became part of the reorganized movement, dubbed the Family of Love, and later the Family. Most of the group's beliefs, however, remained the same.The Origins of a Movement: From "The Children of God" to "The Family International", found on the official website

The Family of Love (1978–1981)

The Family of Love era was characterized by expansion into more countries. Regular proselytizer methods included door-to-door distributing tracts and other gospel literature, and organized classes on various aspects of Christian life, with heavy use of TFI-created music.
In 1976, David Berg introduced a new proselytization method called Flirty Fishing (or FFing), which encouraged female members to show God's love by engaging in sexual activity with potential converts. Flirty Fishing was practiced by members of Berg's inner circle starting in 1973, and was later introduced to the general membership in 1976. By 1978, it was widely practiced by members of the group. In some areas, Flirty Fishers used escort agencies to meet people. According to TFI, as a result of Flirty Fishing, "over 100,000 received God's gift of salvation through Jesus, and some chose to live the life of a disciple and missionary". According to data provided by TFI to researcher Bill Bainbridge, from 1974 until 1987, members had sexual contact with 223,989 people while practicing Flirty Fishing. "The Sociology of Religious Movements". Routledge. ISBN 0-415-91202-4. pg 223 Flirty Fishing also resulted in the births of many children, including Karen Zerby's son, Ricky Rodriguez (aka Davidito), who committed suicide after murdering a female member of the cult who had sexually abused him as a toddler. Children born as result of Flirty Fishing were referred to as "Jesus Babies". By the end of 1981, more than 300 "Jesus Babies" had been born.
In an official statement on its origins, TFI partly describes the practice of Flirty Fishing as follows:
In his judgment of a child custody court case in England in 1994, after extensive research of COG publications and the testimony of numerous witnesses, Lord Justice Sir Alan Ward said the following about Flirty Fishing:
A judge in Italy came to a different conclusion in 1991, deciding that Flirty Fishing was not prostitution (see Tribunale Penale di Roma (Criminal Court of Rome), 15 November 1991, re: Berg and others, and in the archives of the Criminal Court of Rome (RG 3841/84)). The judge concluded that it was only in "the last months of 1977 Berg started counseling the members that it was permissible for proselyting reasons to offer sexual contacts and services to perspective  members, the more so when the latter were potentially good financial contributors to the cult". Among the Children of God, the judge argued, Flirty Fishing was not understood as prostitution but "as a personal contribution to the humanitarian aims that the sect always claimed to pursue".
Flirty Fishing was officially abandoned, though the principles and theory retained, in 1987 in favor of other witnessing methods and also to avoid contracting and spreading HIV within the group. In 1987, new rules were introduced that banned, under penalty of excommunication, sexual contact with non-members. However, the new rules also stated that exceptions to the rule would be allowed in certain cases. For example, one publication stated: "All sex with outsiders is banned!--Unless they are already close and well-known friends!"The Family: D.O. Is for DOers of the Word! (James 1:22)-Requirements for Receiving DO Mailings!
Many of the Mo Letters also promoted sharing, including the sharing of ones physical body in love. Women and female children were led to believe that it was their duty to share with a man anytime he wanted. After some complaints from people who had been abused as children by adults, a new rule, that sexual interactions should not occur between an adult and a minor, was encouraged and promoted, but not enforced.

The Family (1982–1994)

By 1982, more Family members had moved to southern and eastern parts of the world. At the end of 1983, TF was reporting 10,000 fulltime members living in 1,642 TF homes. Additionally, TF's Music With Meaning radio club had by this time grown to almost 20,000 members. According to statistics by TF, at this time evangelization efforts were resulting in an average of 200,000 conversions to Christ and distribution of nearly 30 million pages of literature per month.
In March 1989, TF issued a statement which stated that, in "early 1985" an urgent memorandum was sent to all of its members "reminding them that any such activities sexual contact are strictly forbidden within our group".org) (emphasis in original). In January 2005, Claire Borowik, a spokesperson for TFI, issued a statement that said, "Due to the fact that our current zero-tolerance policy regarding sexual interaction between adults and underage minors was not clearly stated in our literature published before 1986, we came to the realization that during a transitional stage of our movement, from 1978 until 1986, there were cases when some minors were subject to sexually inappropriate advances... This was corrected officially in 1986, when any contact between an adult and minor (any person under 21 years of age) was declared an excommunicable offense".Claire Borowik
In the 1990s, numerous allegations of child sexual abuse were brought against TF around the world, in locations including Argentina, Australia, Brazil, France, Italy, Japan, Norway, Peru, Spain, Sweden, the UK, the USA, and Venezuela. TFI leadership has maintained that they did not sanction or condone the sexual abuse of children. UK's High Court of Justice found that not only did widespread sexual abuse happen but publications printed by church leaders promoted the activities.exfamily.htm Berg published a document in which he said in par. 69 "There's nothing in the world at all wrong with sex as long as it's practised in love, whatever it is or whoever it's with, no matter who or what age or what relative or what manner! And you don't hardly dare even say these words in private!" 

=Transformation in the 1990s=

In the early 1990s, TF members took advantage of the newly opened Eastern Europe (following the fall of Communism) and expanded their evangelisation campaigns eastward, alongside many other religious groups. The production and dissemination of millions of pieces of literature earned them the colloquial name "the poster people".
The early 1990s also saw the launch of what TF termed their "Consider the Poor" (CTP) ministries. Expanding their outreach beyond evangelization, members began providing material aid to the poor and disadvantaged.

The Family (1995–2003)

After Berg's death in October 1994, Karen Zerby (known in the group as Mama Maria, Queen Maria, Maria David, or Maria Fontaine), took over leadership of the group. She married her longtime partner, Steven Douglas Kelly, an American known in the group as Peter Amsterdam or King Peter, who legally changed his name to Christopher Smith. He became her traveling representative due to Zerby's reclusive separation from most of her followers.
In February 1995, the group introduced the Love Charter,An Overview of Our Governing Charter which defined the rights and responsibilities of Charter members and Homes. The Charter also includes the "Fundamental Family Rules", a summary of rules and guidelines from past TF publications which were still in effect with the enactment of the Charter.
The Charter established a new way of living within the organization, allowing members greater freedom to choose and follow their pursuits. The rights referred to in the Charter were what a member could expect to receive from the group and how members were to be treated by leadership and fellow members. The responsibilities referred to were what members were expected to give to the group if they wished to remain full-time members, including tithing ten percent of their income to World Services, giving three percent to the "Family Aid Fund", set up to support needy field situations, and one percent to regional "common pots", which are used for local projects, activities, and fellowships. The Charter has been subsequently amended over the years according to changes within the group. TFI's 2010 policies state that all members must tithe (give 10% of their income) or give a monthly contribution in order to retain membership.
In a 1995 British court case, the Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Alan Ward decided that the group, including some of its top leadership, had engaged in abusive sexual practices involving minors and that they had also engaged in severe corporal punishment and sequestration of minors. However, he concluded that TF had abandoned these practices and that they were a safe environment for children. Nevertheless, he did require that the group cease all corporal punishment of children in the United Kingdom and denounce any of Berg's writings that were "responsible for children in TF having been subjected to sexually inappropriate behaviour".

The Family International (2004–present)

In 2004, the movement's name was changed to The Family International. However, TFI members were told that they could retain their former names so long as they do not conceal their affiliation with TFI.
In 2004, there were major internal changes in the group. Internal publications spoke of arresting a general trend towards a less dedicated lifestyle, and the need for re-commitment to the group's mission of fervent evangelization. In the second half of 2004, a six-month period was held to help members refocus their priorities (known as The Renewal). Membership was reorganized and new levels of membership were introduced. At that time membership was defined into the following categories: Family Disciples (FD), Missionary Members (MM), Fellow Members (FM), Active Members (AM), and General Members (GM).
The Love Charter governs FDs, while the Missionary Member Statutes and Fellow Member Statutes were written for the governance of TFI's Missionary member and Fellow Member circles, respectively. FD homes are reviewed every six months against an annunciated set of criteria.
According to TFI statistics, at the beginning of 2005 there were 1,238 TFI homes and 10,202 members worldwide. Of those, 266 Homes and 4884 members were FD, 255 Homes and 1,769 members were MM, and 717 Homes and 3,549 members were FM. Statistics on AM and GM categories are currently unavailable.

Beliefs

To some extent, TFI identifies itself with fundamentalist Christianity, though their more radical beliefs and practices are generally regarded as non-traditional, even heretical, by many conservative Christians. TFI teaches that the Bible and MO letters are the inspired Word of God and sacred revelation. Group founder David Berg is regarded within the group  He is regarded as a prophet in that he passed on the message of God and in that his writing were considered to be "filling in the gaps" (par.24  The group believes Berg's spiritual "mantle" passed to his wife, Karen Zerby, at his death. The officially published writings of both David Berg and Karen Zerby are regarded as part of the "Word of God" which carries the same weight and importance as the Bible since they are considered divine revelations. These views on past writings and "the word of God" have been readdressed with documents  issued in 2010 and is no longer a requirement for membership. However neither David Berg nor Karen Zerby's generally held position as prophet and prophetess has been retracted.
They believe that the Great Commission of evangelizing the world is the duty of every Christian, and that their lives should be dedicated to the service of God and others. They had several levels of membership, and the most committed, called "Family Disciples" (FD), live communally. They also encourage having children. While birth control was initially highly discouraged, being seen as Ungodly, the choice is currently left to the individual and is not uncommon in practice, though it was officially regarded as indicative of a lack of trust in God's plan. Birth control views were readressed in 2010, and Family doctrine and policy no longer influences choices regarding birth control.
A central tenet to their theology is the "Law of Love", which, stated simply, claims that if a person's actions are motivated by unselfish, sacrificial love and are not intentionally hurtful to others, such actions are in accordance with Scripture and are, thus, lawful in the eyes of God. The romantic and sexual implication of this principle is also commonly known as polyamory, although the "Law of Love" is believed by TFI to be the Scriptural foundation for every aspect of a Christian's life, not only romantic and sexual, and emphasizes unselfishness, giving, caring, respect, honesty, and other essential Christian values that should be enacted in everyday life (the Scriptural basis used for this teaching can be found in Matthew 22:37 - 40 and in Galatians 5:14). They believe that this tenet supersedes all other Biblical laws, except those forbidding male homosexuality, which they believe is a sin. Female bisexuality is sanctioned, though female homosexuality at the complete exclusion of men is not permitted. They believe that God created human sexuality, that it is a natural, emotional, and physical need, and that heterosexual relations between consenting adults is a pure and natural wonder of God's creation,The Devil Hates Sex! But God Loves It!, by David Berg, May 1980 and permissible according to Scripture.
Documents issued in 2010 expressed the need for more tolerant attitudes toward varying choices regarding sexuality. Since 2010, the age of consent in TFI is determined by local laws and regulations. Since 1986,Liberty or Stumblingblock?, by Sara Kelley, November 1986 sex between minors and adults has been forbidden. Adult members may have sex with any other adult member of the opposite sex, and are encouraged to do so, regardless of marital status, as a way to foster unity and combat loneliness of those "in need". This was commonly called "sharing", or in some cases "sacrificial sex". While TFI policy states that members should not be pressured to have sex against their will, numerous former members have alleged being coerced to "share" and subsequently cast as selfish or unloving when they did not. These views have been readdressed in 2010, reflecting on the influence that past documents have had on TFI's culture, and addressing the need to change this aspect of TFI culture to reflect more respect for personal decisions regarding sexuality and more inclusiveness regarding differing personal views on sexuality.
They believe that they are now living in the time period known in the Bible as the "Last Days" or the "Time of the End", which is the era immediately preceding the return of Jesus Christ. Before that event, they believe that the world will be ruled for seven years by the Antichrist, who will create a one-world government. At the half-way point in his rule he will become completely possessed by Satan, precipitating a time of troubles known as the Great Tribulation which will bring intense persecution of Christians as well as stupendous natural and unnatural disasters. At the end of this period, faithful Christians will be taken to heaven in an event known as the Rapture that is shortly followed by a battle between Jesus and the Antichrist commonly known as the "Battle of Armageddon", in which the Antichrist is defeated. Then, they say, Jesus Christ will reign on Earth for 1000 years, a period they call the Millennium.

Recent teachings

TFI's recent teachings center around beliefs that they have termed the "new spiritual weapons". TFI members believe that they are soldiers in the spiritual war of good versus evil for the souls and hearts of men. Although some of the following beliefs are not new to TFI, they have assumed greater importance in recent years.

=Prophecy=

=Spirit Helpers=

=The Keys of the Kingdom=

=Loving Jesus=

TFI continues to stress the imminent Second Coming of Christ, preceded by the rise of a worldwide government led by the "Antichrist". Doctrines regarding the "end times" influence virtually all long-term decision-making. However, documents issued in 2010 have changed this view to reflect a need for long-term plans and projects.

Issues

Child abduction

Since the late 1970s, there have been reports of children of former members being abducted and moved to other countries to prevent their parents, law enforcement authorities and child welfare agencies from finding them. An investigation into the whereabouts of four missing children, whose mother, Ruth Frouman,Ruth Frouman – XFamily – Children of God was expelled from the group in July 1987, eight months after being diagnosed with breast cancer, and not allowed to leave with her children, resulted in police raidsLegal Case Argentina, 1993 – XFamily – Children of God on ten TFI homes in Buenos Aires, Argentina in September 1993. After holding a large number of TFI children in custody and conducting many physical and psychological examinations on the children, the court returned the children to their parents, citing lack of evidence.202 – XFamily – Children of God Two of Ruth Frouman's children were returned to their father in May 1993, and the other two children were reunited with their father and other relatives in mid-1997.
Although official TFI spokespersons have rarely made any public statements about specific child abduction cases involving its members, TFI's policies and practices regarding child custody were better defined in the mid-1990s with the introduction of the "Love Charter", TFI's governing document which was introduced in February 1995, several months after the death of its founder. In Section 60 of this document, Permanent Marital Separation Rules, states that couples with children must come to a mutual written agreement regarding the separation and the custody of the children and that obtaining a legal divorce and child custody order is optional.xfamily.pdf This policy stated that it only applied to marital separations after February 1995. The June 2003 amendments state that if the parties involved cannot reach a mutual agreement and "opt to use the court system to settle the matter", they must "relinquish Charter membership until the matter is settled".org) This clause is no longer valid under TFI's 2010 policies, and members may settle the matter in a court of law while retaining membership.
One TFI member, Peter Bevan Riddell, is known to have been convicted of crimes relating to child abduction. In 1984, the Australian government canceled Riddell's passport and he was deported from Japan to Australia, where he was convicted of committing forgery and making false statements to facilitate unlawful abduction. He later returned to Japan, where he continued working on behalf of David Berg and Karen Zerby in World Services.Brian Edward Pickus – Argentina Extradition Case – XFamily – Children of God

The second generation

Second-generation adults are adults who were born or reared in TFI (known in the group as "SGAs"), and have assumed many leadership positions in the organization. This includes chairmanships of international, regional, and national boards.
However, many second-generation members have left to pursue secular careers or higher education and to rear their children in an environment different from the one they were reared in. There is a great deal of anti-TFI sentiment among those who have left (some examples include Rose McGowan, as well as sisters Celeste Jones, Kristina Jones, and Julianna Buhring, who wrote a bookJones, K., Jones, C. & Buhring, J. 2007 "Not without my sister", Harpercollinspuplishing, London on their lives in TFI The anti-TFI sentiment includes threats to legally pursue alleged physical and sexual abusers, who, some allege, have been shielded from prosecution by the group's leadership.
Many of these former Missionary Kids have returned to the country of their citizenship and have, thus, become Third Culture Kids (TCKs). Many have also kept in communication with each other. A notable example of this is their use of the site MovingOn.
Some who remained in the group as of 2005, have been vocal in their defense of TFI's lifestyle; for example, at MyConclusion.com – Opinions and responses by current second-generation members with positive viewpoints about TFI a site established by second-generation members of TFI shortly after the January 2005 murder-suicide of Rick Rodriguez and Angela Smith. Notably however, many of those same second generation members of TFI went on to become just as vocal, or more so, in opposition to TFI after leaving TFI in the following years. This illustrates the impact and results of mental conditioning and group-think imposed on youth within the group, and the radical turn around often demonstrated upon their exit of the group.
Members of TFI are encouraged to maintain friendly relations with relatives who have left. However, they have also been discouraged from associating with relatives who are considered enemies of TFI and who have frequently appeared on television programs around the world to denounce and speak out against the group.
There are some former second-generation members who have reported crimes to law enforcement agencies, testified against the group in court cases involving its members, and publicly expressed negative opinions about the group's members and practices. In the past TFI has used the sociological/religious term apostate to describe these former members and has argued that their testimony is unreliable and less credible than that of current members. Some TFI members have argued that second-generation members who alleged they were abused in the group are either mentally unstable, demonically possessed, or highly paid by anti-cult movements to lie about TFI. Some second-generation former members resent the apostate label, as most of them did not make the choice to join the group and as such, cannot rightly be called apostates. Negative terms relating to former members have been officially discouraged in documents issued in 2009. These documents addressed the need for understanding and respect for the decisions made by former members, and the need to support them in establishing themselves outside of the group. TFI's past literature however, and the general culture of distrust by current TFI members of those who have left or who disagree or disprove of TFI doctrine or theories, continues to make the period of time after second and third generation TFI members leave, problematic and challenging.

Secrecy

TFI members are expected to respect the legal and civil authorities of countries in which they live; and members have typically cooperated with appointed authorities, even during the police and social service raids of their communities in the early 1990s. "The Endtime Family: Children of God". State University of New York Press, Albany, NY. However, a controversial belief that was taught and practiced by members of the group maintains that it is right to lie to non-members (or "unbelievers") to protect God's work. This belief is commonly referred to as "deceivers yet true".Deceivers yet true – XFamily – Children of God
A consistent trait throughout the history of TFI has been their aversion to government oversight and extreme secrecy surrounding leadership and finances. World Services (WS), the central administrative wing of TFI, continues to operate in seclusion, with very few members of TFI knowing its whereabouts. In 2010, this policy loosened, and information about the location of WS centers is available to personal family members of WS workers, though still not widely known or discussed.
It is not uncommon for senior leaders to legally change their names. There have been allegations that members of TFI, including senior leaders, have used forged or fraudulently obtained passports and other identity documents from Australia, Canada, the United States, and other countries. Senior leadership typically still attempt to keep their legal names from common circulation, although this has become more difficult through the second half of the 1990s, because of legal action in many countries. In particular, a major court case in England brought to light many formerly guarded names of senior members.
In TFI's older publications, printed photographs of WS members were typically censored by means of a rudimentary pencil drawing over the person's face. It was not uncommon in TFI-produced art for Berg's head to be replaced with that of a lion.
Following the death of David Berg in 1994, members of TF and the public were finally allowed to see up-to-date photographs of the organization's late founder. For many members, this was the first time they had seen a photograph of his face. In recent years, Steven Kelly has carried pictures of Karen Zerby with him on travels to show members, since most had never seen a picture of her prior to this. Although, by now, most of the group's members have seen photographs or video footage of Karen Zerby and Steven Kelly, their identities and location are still heavily guarded by members working closest to them. Recent photographs or video footage of Karen Zerby, Steven Kelly, and most WS members were not readily available even to full-time members of TFI until March 2005, when several recent photographs were leaked online. Due to developments in TFI policy made in 2009, the issue of secrecy has changed somewhat. Pictures of Karen Zerby and Steve Kelly can be found at 

Finances

TFI finances are based on a system of tithing. Ten percent of all members' income is required to be donated to World Services. A further three percent is donated to regional offices for locally administered projects and a community lending program, and an additional one percent is given for regional literature publishing. Supplementary giving to TFI offices and leadership, beyond the typical 14% of income, is encouraged, and fairly common in practice. Present requirements for TFI membership include tithing 10% (or a monthly contribution), and these funds are reinvested in TFI services and projects benefiting TFI members.
Income to the group's members is primarily through individual donations which are solicited by the group with the understanding that the money will be used to help local charities. However, the percentage of donations used for local charities has not always been tracked or published by the group. Additional sources of income have come from selling products such as children's videos and music sold under a variety of names such as the Treasure Attic and Kiddy Viddy series. Posters have also been sold on the street for donations. In recent years many TFI members have worked to establish associations and foundations and are subject to the accounting and auditing regulations of the countries in which they are established, and since 2008, TFI documents have focused on and emphasized the need for transparency and sustainability of charity works managed by TFI members.
A study of how TFI channels funds around the world is interesting from a sociological angle since it depends largely on trust of carefully placed, non-senior members who typically manage bank accounts that contain organization funds in their own names. Despite this, very little graft has been experienced, and notable cases have involved insubstantial amounts of money.
Organization literature includes many discussions of impending global financial doom. As a result, TFI has gone to considerable lengths to avoid investments and actions that it deems unstable in the event of a financial crash. Typically, reserves are stored in Japanese yen, Swiss francs, or even gold. TFI has consistently avoided property investments and stocks or bonds, believing them to be contrary to the scriptural requirements for Christian discipleship and their end time beliefs. Since many TFI members are now working to establish enterprises and the endtime belief has been addressed to reflect a need for long term planning and preparation, long term investments by TFI members have become more common.

Reception

The group has been heavily criticized by the press and the anti-cult movement. In 1971, an organization called FREECOG was founded by concerned family members and followers, including deprogrammer Ted Patrick, to "free" them from their involvement in the group.
Frequently, critics of the movement cite the writings of David Berg, as well as incidents of alleged criminal behavior by individuals. TFI members, meanwhile, state that the entirety of Berg's writings do not reflect the organization's fundamental beliefs (contained in the "Statement of Faith") or policies (contained in the Love Charter, published in 1995). Likewise, they reject the concept of the entire group being blamed for the wrongdoing of individuals, even when involving members at the highest levels of leadership.
Due to the high commitment nature of the group and its controversial beliefs, the movement tends to generate strong feelings in both current and former members.

Programs, projects, and productions

TFI has numerous programs, local foundations, and projects through which it operates around the world. The largest of these are the "Family Care Foundation" (FCF), "Aurora Production AG", and "Activated Ministries". The latter most of these is a California-based nonprofit organization which heavily supports TFI projects and initiatives.

Leadership and management

The leadership of TFI is headed by:
Under them, management is divided into World Services, Creations, and Family Care Foundation. Each region is managed by a team of Continental Officers (COs), each team typically having five to seven members. The management structures beneath the CO team are more variable and their members are changed frequently.

Statistics

According to the Children of God, there were 130 communes or "colonies" in 15 countries in 1972. In 1993, 7,000 of the 10,000 members were under 18 years of age. Recent changes to the cult have resulted in the majority of its members leaving to pursue a normal life.

Notable members (past and present)

Raised in COG as children

Media featuring the group





Further reading

Academic

Journalistic and popular

Court cases




