[[Valproic acid]]

CATEGORIES: Anticonvulsants, Carboxylic acids, GABA transaminase inhibitors, Histone deacetylase inhibitors, Mood stabilizers, Teratogens, World Health Organization essential medicines

Valproic acid (VPA, valproate), an acidic chemical compound, has found clinical use as an anticonvulsant and mood-stabilizing drug, primarily in the treatment of epilepsy, bipolar disorder and prevention of migraine headaches. VPA is a liquid at room temperature, but it can be reacted with a base such as sodium hydroxide to form the salt sodium valproate, which is a solid. 
The acid, salt, or a mixture of the two (valproate semisodium) are marketed under a number of different brand names, including: Depakote, Epilim, Valparin, Valpro, Vilapro and Stavzor. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines, a list of the most important medication needed in a basic health system.

Medical uses

Its primary use in medicine is in the treatment of epilepsy, bipolar mania and migraine prophylaxis. It is also used off-label for bipolar maintenance. Other off-label uses include impulse control disorders, suggested by recent evidence of efficacy in controlling this adverse effect of Parkinson's Disease medical therapy. Recently, it has been trialled in the treatment of HIV and cancer, owing to its histone deacetylase-inhibiting effects.

Adverse effects

The most common adverse effects of valproic acid are digestive complaints like diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting and indigestion; vision problems like seeing double or lazy eye; hormonal disturbances (increased testosterone production in females and menstrual irregularities), hair loss, memory problems, weight gain, infections, low platelet count (which can make one bleed more easily), infection, dizziness, drowsiness, tremor and headache. Less common, yet serious side effects include liver damage, brittle bones (becomes far more common with long-term use), polycystic ovaries, movement disorders (which may be irreversible like tardive dyskinesia), psychiatric/neurologic disturbances like hallucinations, anxiety and confusion; swollen pancreas, low body temperature and potentially life-threatening blood abnormalities.

By frequency

Sources: 
Very common (>10% frequency): 
Common (1-10% frequency):
Uncommon (0.1-1% frequency):
Rare (
Other possible side effects

There is evidence that valproic acid may cause premature growth plate ossification in children and adolescents, resulting in short stature... Child Neurol. 2004 - PubMed - NCBIInhibition of cartilage growth by the anticonvulsant drugs diphenylhydantoin and sodium valproateLong-Term Valproate and Lamotrigine Treatment May Be a Marker for Reduced Growth and Bone Mass in Children with Epilepsy - Guo - 2002 - Epilepsia - Wiley Online LibraryLong-term valproate and lamotrigine treatment may ... 2001 - PubMed - NCBI

Pregnancy

Valproate causes birth defects; exposure during pregnancy is associated with about three times as many major anomalies as usual, mainly spina bifida and, more rarely, with several other defects, possibly including a "valproate syndrome".
Women who intend to become pregnant should switch to a different drug if possible.) They should take high-dose folic acid and be offered antenatal screening (alpha-fetoprotein and second-trimester ultrasound scans), although screening and scans do not find all birth defects.British National Formulary (March 2003) 45
Valproate can cause neural tube defects. Folic acid supplements may reduce the risk of birth defects, however. A recent study showed children of mothers taking valproate during pregnancy are at risk for significantly lower IQs. FDA. June 2011

Contraindications

Contraindications include:

Interactions

Valproate inhibits CYP2C9, glucuronyl transferase, and epoxide hydrolase and is highly protein bound and hence may interact with drugs that are substrates for any of these enzymes or are highly protein bound themselves. It may also potentiate the CNS depressant effects of alcohol. It should not be given in conjunction with other antiepileptics due to the potential for reduced clearance of other antiepileptics (including carbamazepine, lamotrigine, phenytoin and phenobarbitone) and itself. It may also interact with:

Overdose and toxicity

Excessive amounts of valproic acid can result in tremor, stupor, respiratory depression, coma, metabolic acidosis, and death. Overdosage in children is usually of an accidental nature, whereas with adults it is more likely to be an intentional act. In general, serum or plasma valproic acid concentrations are in a range of 20–100 mg/l during controlled therapy, but may reach 150–1500 mg/l following acute poisoning. Monitoring of the serum level is often accomplished using commercial immunoassay techniques, although some laboratories employ gas or liquid chromatography.
In contrast to other antiepileptic drugs, at present there is little evidence favorable evidence for salivary therapeutic drug monitoring. Salivary levels of valproic acid correlate poorly with serum levels, at least in part due to valproate's weak acid property (pKa of 4.9). 
In severe intoxication, hemoperfusion or hemofiltration can be an effective means of hastening elimination of the drug from the body. than L-carnitine. 

Mechanism of action

The mechanism of action of valproate is not fully understood. Its anticonvulsant effect is attributed to the 
blockade of voltage-dependent sodium channels and increased brain levels of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). The GABAergic effect is also believed to contribute towards the anti-manic properties of valproate. In animals, sodium valproate raises cerebral and cerebellar levels of the inhibitory synaptic transmitter, GABA, possibly by inhibiting GABA degradative enzymes, such as GABA transaminase, succinate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase and by inhibiting the re-uptake of GABA by neuronal cells. It also possesses histone deacetylase-inhibiting effects. The inhibition of histone deacetylase, by promoting more transcriptionally active chromatin structures, likely presents the epigenetic mechanism for regulation of many of the neuroprotective effects attributed to valproic acid. Intermediate molecules mediating these effects include VEGF, BDNF, and GDNF. 

History

Valproic acid was first synthesized in 1882 by B.S. Burton as an analogue of valeric acid, found naturally in valerian.

Society and culture

Approval status

Formulations

Branded products include:

Chemistry

Valproic acid, 2-propylvaleric acid, is synthesized by the alkylation of ethyl cyanoacetate with two equivalents of propyl bromide, to give dipropylcyanoacetic ester. Hydrolysis and decarboxylation of the carboethoxy group gives 2-propylpentanenitrile, which is hydrolyzed into valproic acid.M. Chignac, C. Grain,  (1977)





Further reading




