[[Vidyodaya School]]

CATEGORIES: Schools in Kochi, Private schools in India, Educational institutions established in 1990, Boys' schools in India, Education in Kochi, Schools in Kerala, Boarding schools in India

Vidyodaya School is a private college-preparatory combined-grades school located in Thevakkal, Kochi, India. It provides comprehensive school education from lower primary to grade 12. A co-educational school, with an English-language medium of instruction, Vidyodaya follows the Central Board of Secondary Education prescribed syllabus. It started functioning in 1990, under the management of Vidyodaya Educational and Charitable Trust. The first batch of students from Vidyodaya graduated in  1997.
Students from the school are regularly ranked among the top few in all CBSE examinations, even achieving the second highest national aggregate in the CBSE AISSE 2006. It is regularly placed among the top schools in the nation according to CBSE examination rankings. It produces field hockey, judo, and wrestling teams which have won accolades at state and national-level tournaments.
The principal, M. Krishnakumari Nair has won the National Award for the Best Principal 2010-11 from the National Science Olympiad Foundation.The Hindu - Kochi Principal wins National Best Principal Award

History

Established in 1990-91 the school conducts classes from LKG to Grade 12. The campus accommodates more than 2000 students.

Academics

Admissions are given restricting the number of students to 30 in each class.

Curriculum

The school's academic program is based on the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE), New Delhi and the text books are as prescribed by the National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT). The medium of instruction is English. However, a three-language method is adopted in all classes, with a focus on Sanskrit.

Sports and cultural activities

In extra-curricular activities, students have topped competitions at District, State and National Championships. Of particular note are the judo and wrestling teams which have won several National Championships.
Every year the school hosts a big stage for inter-school cultural competitions called Vox Polpuli(voice of the people) with usually value based themes.

=Dramatics=

The School Dramatics Club has conducted programs such as Thattakam Tree Weekly Drama and the Annual Dramatics Show.

Campus

The campus is located on a  lush green hillock. The classrooms are grouped into three blocks.

Nursery Block

The Nursery Block, containing the Kindergarten, is situated at the bottom of the hillock, near the campus entrance. It is in a figurative art-deco architectural style. Shaped in the form of a train station, with a train on one side, the surrounding garden and park are complementary to the concept, by including references to public transportation such as models of traffic lights and buses. A notable feature is the murals on the walls.

Primary and Secondary Section

The Primary and Secondary Section has multiple blocks spread over the campus. The class strength is restricted to a maximum of 30.

Senior Secondary Block

The Senior Secondary Block, also called the Science Block, due to the Science Laboratories being located within, is situated on the north-west side of the hillock. Architecture within and around the building also allude to the popular moniker, such as a giant turtle shaped pool, dinosaurs painted on the walls, and a model science park. Grades 11-12 are located here.

Administrative Block

The Administrative Block includes the school offices, Fine Arts classrooms, library, reading room, and a  canteen. The canteen offers vegetarian foods every day at 11.30am.

Sports facilities

Sports facilities include a general sports Stadium, a basketball court, a hockey court, a cricket pitch, a roller skating rink, a volleyball court, a swimming pool, a gymnasium, and an indoor sports complex.

Additional Facilities

There are  Chemistry, Physics, Biology, Computer Science and Mathematics Laboratories spread throughout the campus. Other facilities include SMART Classes(Virtual Classrooms), multiple conference halls, and open-air classrooms spread around the campus.

Environmentally friendly campus

The campus is environmentally friendly, with compost pits, central water conservation system, interior and exterior gardens, and a tree conservation mechanism. Programs are included in the curriculum to help inculcate a green awareness among the students. The campus is noted for its sustainable energy-friendly facilities having won the VL State Eco-Friendly School Award.

School transportation

The school transportation facilities include a school bus system of over a dozen school buses which ply the different suburbs of the city, including a private bus terminus on the campus. There are private vehicles operating to and from the school.

Student activities

Student activities include a Student Government framework, Student Houses, clubs, groups, and events. Activities include flower making, paper craft, clay modelling, tie and dye work, metal work, scientific awareness, and nutrition.
Cultural celebrations include Onam, Christmas, Ramayana month, Navrathri, and Ramzan.
The students social awareness is enhanced by the observance of World Environment Day, Constitution Day, Human Rights Day, and Science Day. Their patriotism and reverence for India's traditional values are reinforced through community singing, skits, and plays. Arts and Crafts, Science, and other exhibitions are a feature of the school. Programs are also held to improve awareness of Energy conservation and water consumption.

School Parliamentary Forum

School Parliamentary Forum is the name of the Vidyodaya School Student Government. Modeled around the Indian Parliament, students from each class are selected to the Forum, and divided into different circles for different activities. Each circle is headed by a Minister, who reports to the Speaker or Deputy Speaker, both of whom are elected by the Forum.
Another post includes the Forum Secretary who is elected and notes down the proceedings. The head of the Forum are the Head Boys and Head Girls, who are directly elected by the students in an annual election during the month of July. House Captains are members of the Forum of the same status as the Speaker.

Houses

The school students are divided into four houses- Ezhuthachan, Kabir, Tagore and Valmiki, each with their respective colors and teams. Intra school competitions in craft, painting, dance and music, literary histrionic skills, sports and games are held between the houses to inculcate a competitive spirit between the children.

Clubs

The most prominent clubs are Quiz Club, Sports Club and Dramatics Club. Other clubs include Literary, Photography, and Philately.

=Y!=

There is a school chapter of the CII Promoted Young Indians, which functions as a club. The club seeks to inspire leadership qualities among the students. It is one of the most prominent clubs of the school.

=Junior Red Cross=

A chapter of the Junior Red Cross which functions in the school. Members wear white clothing with red stripes every Wednesday.

=Shanti Samithi=

The social service activities club seeks to promote the values of Gandhiism, peace and nonviolence among the students. It holds annual activities and conducts programs to help the poor in the surrounding areas.

Events

=Sarganjali=

A programme for the students, by the students. The program is conducted every year by the students of each class of each grade, with the grade below being their audience.

=Vox Populi=

Vox Populi (Latin for Voice Of The People) is a stage for Interschool Competitions,wherein senior students get the opportunity to develop their organizing skills. The competition is one of the most prominent in the city, attracting companies and students.

=International Inter-School Camp=

The school conducts an activities filled inter-school camp every year for the students of 8th Grade, inviting participation from National and International Schools. The event is organized by the students of 11th grade.

=Arangu=

The academic year comes to a close with a spectacular display of fine arts and martial arts by the students of grades 1 to 5.

=Sports Day=

Every year, students show their mastery of martial arts and sports in a day-long sports celebration, beginning with a March Past, Oath taking, Aerobics and martial arts display. This then develops into an intraschool students sports competition in athletics. A popular sideshow is an athletics competition for teaching and non-teaching staff.

=Shastra Samasya=

In connection with the National Science Day, the school introduced an annual Science Quiz open to all city schools. Its encourages science talents in children. The C V Raman Memorial Ever Rolling Trophy is awarded to the winning team.

=SPICE=

Social Participation In Child Education is a supplementary learning program adopted since 1995 wherein the students get a chance to interact with eminent personalities from diverse realms in society.

=Other programs=

The Orientation program is held at the beginning of the year. The FIT (Faculty Improvement Training) program improves the teaching learning process at the school.

School traditions

Some school traditions include Class Divisions of Upper High School adopting nicknames as identifiers as a part of freshman bonding. For example, during the batch of 2006-07, the four divisions of the 12th Grade were nicknamed, WoOfErS, Evo, BoBy and B2bC. The 12th grade batch of 2009-10 held the tradition by naming themselves, sPuNc, Bix, KuZn, and BlackZ.








