[[Rockies Express Pipeline]]

CATEGORIES: Energy infrastructure completed in 2009, Natural gas pipelines in the United States

The Rockies Express Pipeline is a  long high-speed natural gas pipeline system from the Rocky Mountains, Colorado to eastern Ohio. The pipeline system consists of three sections running through eight states.  It is the largest natural gas pipeline built in the United States in more than 20 years, and one of the largest natural gas pipelines ever built in North America.[ref]

 
[/ref] 

Technical description

The diameter of . The capacity of the pipeline is 16.5 billion cubic meter (bcm) of natural gas per year.  The whole pipeline costs around US$5 billion.  The final section of the pipeline was completed on 12 November 2009.

REX — Entrega

REX — Entrega is the  pipeline, which is in service since February 2007. 

REX — West

REX — West is a  branch connecting pipeline with the Williams Energy owned Echo Springs Processing Plant.
On 31 May 2006, the Rockies Express Pipeline filed an application to construct and operate this section. The construction approval was issued by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) on 20 April 2007.  The first  long segment was commissioned on 16 May 2008.  It is in full service since 16 May 2008.

REX — East

REX — East is a  pipeline from Audrain County, Missouri, to Clarington in Monroe County, Ohio.  The Rockies Express Pipeline filed an application to construct and operate this section on 30 April 2007 and the FERC issued approval on 30 May 2008.

Further interconnections

Several expansion projects have been proposed to transport gas further to northeast. The  long  Northeast Express project would run from Clarington and Lebanon, Ohio, to Princeton, New Jersey.  Other extension project foresees connection of the Rockies Express Pipeline with the Spectra Energy owned Texas Eastern Transmission pipeline. Spectra Energy made a contract with ConocoPhillips, according to which it will expand the Texas Eastern Transmission pipeline by 4 bcm per year to transport Rocky Mountains gas further to Pennsylvania. This expansion, known as TIME III Project, is expected to be commissioned by November 2010. Another Spectra Energy's project, known as Northern Bridge, will increase the capacity of a pipeline from Clarington, Ohio, to Oakford, Pennsylvania, up to 5 bcm per year by late 2009.[ref]

 
[/ref]  El Paso Corporation and Equitable Resources plan to build an  long Rockies Connector Pipeline, which would connect the Rockies Express Pipeline in Clarington with its owned Transcontinental Pipeline in York County, Pennsylvania.

Partnership

The pipeline is operated by Rockies Express Pipeline, LLC, a partnership between Tallgrass Energy Partners, Phillips 66 and Sempra Energy. In February 2006, Kinder Morgan Energy Partners and Sempra Energy acquired Entrega Gas Pipeline Inc., from EnCana Corporation.  In June 2006, ConocoPhillips acquired 24% of the project. ConocoPhillips spun off the downstream part of its business in May 2012.

Environmental concerns

The pipeline project has raised some environmental concerns. Ohio officials have asked to avoid crossing the Big Darby Creek in Pickaway County and the Little Miami River in Warren County within Caesar Creek State Park because of the risk of harming fish and other wildlife posed by drilling the pipeline beneath the rivers.
A Lawsuit by American Energy Corporation was filed against REX over the disruption of coal mine owned by AEC beneath REX. In light of past pipeline accidents, where subsiding abandoned mines have caused pipelines to fail, the wisdom of the location of that part of the REX pipeline is of concern to pipeline industry critics.






