[[19th Street Bridge]]

CATEGORIES: Former road bridges in the United States, Bridges on the National Register of Historic Places in Colorado, National Register of Historic Places in Denver, Colorado, Transportation in Denver, Colorado, Truss bridges, Pedestrian bridges in Colorado, Road bridges in Colorado

19th Street Bridge is a two-span through Pratt truss road bridge in Denver, Colorado, over the South Platte River, now used for pedestrians. It was built in 1888 to replace a wooden structure and carried automobile traffic until 1986. The bridge is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

History

A number of bridges were built across the South Platte River beginning in 1859, and by 1875, there was interest in a bridge to span the river at the 19th Street location. In 1876, a wooden bridge was constructed at the site.
Around 1898, a plan surfaced to rebuild the bridge as a viaduct so that it would not cross only the river, but also the rail switching yard. However, the plan was defeated in June 1904.
Because of repeated wear and deterioration caused by salt for melting ice, the bridge was restricted to pedestrians and bicycles beginning on December 16, 1986. Following the closure, a new vehicular bridge was planned downstream (to the northeast), tentatively referred to as the "Nineteen and A-Half Street Bridge"; it was built in 1992.
Aside from serving as a pedestrian bridge, the structure has hosted the annual "Gala on the Bridge", a fundraiser for The Greenway Foundation. It began in 2011, and was described in The Denver Post as the "first time the bridge has been used for anything other than a way for people to cross the South Platte River".
In the state of Colorado, the 19th Street Bridge is the oldest surviving wrought iron bridge, oldest vehicular bridge at its original location, and oldest vehicular bridge still in public use.

Design

The bridge's two spans have a through Pratt truss design, each with five panels. The bridge is described by History Colorado as one of the most ornamental in Colorado.



Notes



Bibliography




