[[Housing Commission of Victoria]]

CATEGORIES: Government agencies of Victoria (Australia), Public housing in Australia, Public policy in Australia

The Housing Commission of Victoria (colloquially known as the Housing Commission) was a State Government body responsible for public housing in Victoria, Australia. Responsible to the Victorian Minister for Housing, it was established in 1938 and existed until replaced by the Victorian Office of Housing.
Its most notable legacy was the tens of thousands of buildings either acquired or constructed to provide more affordable housing for residents of Melbourne and other Victorian towns, including the construction of 40–45 individual precast concrete high-rise apartments in inner Melbourne. Though the Commission arguably often operated with the best of intentions, few would agree that its influence was benign or that its original ideal of replacing slums with modern and functional housing (and communities) was met. The high-rise apartments are popularly considered as a scar on the Melbourne cityscape, and successive governments have actively worked towards their demolition or gentrification.

History

The Commission was established over the Housing Act 1937 in response to slum housing in Melbourne, and worked under the Slum Reclamation and Housing Act 1938. The mission was 'slum abolition' driven by the zeal of Christian and other social reformers, but later became 'slum clearance' and 'block demolition'.
The Commission presided over the construction of the Melbourne Olympic Village in 1956, and made its mark on the Melbourne skyline during the 1960s in the form of high-rise blocks of flats on various sites around inner Melbourne, the largest of which being Lygon Street in Carlton and Atherton Gardens in Fitzroy. Approximately twenty of these precast concrete 20 to 30 storey height buildings were constructed around Melbourne, until the type of development fell into disrepute, mainly for sociological reasons. By 1970 nearly 4000 privately owned dwellings had been compulsory acquired and replaced by nearly 7000 high rise flats. 
Production then moved to low rise walk up and single dwelling units, with about 10,000 homes using locally engineered design and erection methods constructed using the technology. Public housing was also built in regional Victorian cities, such as Wangaratta, Wodonga and Geelong.

Slum Reclamation

In the midst of the economic conditions caused by the Great Depression, the overcrowded conditions in the inner suburban areas of Melbourne had created a 'housing crisis'. In the next few years, the Commission moved thousands from the slums to new housing, improving conditions but also encountering problems along the way.
The Housing Commission of Victoria was established under the Housing Act 1937 to improve existing housing conditions and to provide adequate housing for persons of limited means; the Slum Reclamation Act 1938 and the Reclamation and Housing (Financial) Act 1938 provided the framework for the Commission's work. Slums were to be reclaimed and people rehoused.
To house the people moved from the slum areas, the Commission needed to provide new homes. The Commission's first estate was the Garden City development at Fisherman's Bend. Next was the development of flats at Pigdon Street, Carlton, though the original proposal for three storey flats was reduced to two storeys after local opposition. These estates and acquisitions were the first of many.
The Commission's acquisition plans were ambitious and it was bound to come across difficulties. The synchronisation of the 'demolition program' was proving difficult and by June 1940, only 53 families had moved into new houses while only 99 houses had been ordered for demolition. The rehousing of those from the slums was a difficult task.
As a landlord, the Commission also experienced problems. Tenants were initially reluctant to move, while rents on the estates were more expensive than in their former accommodation.
By 1942, building had halted as the Commission shifted its focus to post-war planning. It continued to acquire land though, taking advantage of low prices by purchasing land in industrial areas in the western suburbs as well as in the middle class eastern and southern suburbs. The era of slum reclamation was over.
While the Commission was planning for the future, so were its commissioners. Barnett and Burt published We Must Go On calling for a fairer society and centralised planning. By now, housing for growing numbers was the main concern.
The Housing Commission achieved a lot in these early years. The Commission had reclaimed slums and provided housing for many in new estates. In doing this though, it also encountered difficulties. With the end of the war approaching, the increasing housing shortage as well as the large numbers returning from war meant that the Commission shifted its focus from reclaiming slums to become a housing provider.

1960s high rises

There are 20 or 21 sites, spread across 14 suburbs in Melbourne that contain around 40–45 high rises in total. The largest sites contain 4 buildings each; Elizabeth St, Richmond, Atherton Gardens, Fitzroy and Racecourse Rd, Flemington. Other large sites contain 3 buildings; Boundary Rd, North Melbourne and Malvern Rd, Prahran. The high-rise buildings vary between 20–30 storeys in height and come in a variety of shapes, when viewed from the air these appear as; S, T, Y, I, L and C-shape, the most common being the S-shape. The high-rises have become pop-culture icons, being synonymous with ambitious government projects and ideas that become compromised, and are used for various film and photographic work.

Sites






