[[Jeff Koons]]

CATEGORIES: 1955 births, American artists, 20th-century American painters, 21st-century American painters, American printmakers, American sculptors, Artists from New York, Painters from Pennsylvania, Contemporary painters, Living people, People from York, Pennsylvania, Postmodern artists, School of the Art Institute of Chicago alumni

Jeffrey "Jeff" Koons (born January 21, 1955) is an American artist known for his reproductions of banal objects—such as balloon animals produced in stainless steel with mirror finish surfaces. He lives and works in both New York City and his hometown of York, Pennsylvania.
His works have sold for substantial sums of money, including at least one world record auction price for a work by a living artist. On November 12, 2013, Koons's Balloon Dog (Orange) sold at Christie's Post-War and Contemporary Art Evening Sale in New York for $58.4 million, above its high $55 million estimate, becoming the most expensive work by a living artist sold at auction.4 Million, Triptych Is the Most Expensive Artwork Ever Sold at an Auction New York Times. The price topped Koons's previous record of $33.7 millionKatya Kazakina and Philip Boroff (November 13, 2013), Koons's Puppy Sets $58 Million Record for Living Artist Bloomberg. and the record for the most expensive living artist, held by Gerhard Richter, whose 1968 painting, Domplatz, Mailand, sold for $37.1 million at Sotheby's in May.4 Million Hollywood Reporter. Balloon Dog (Orange) was one of the first of the Balloon Dogs to be fabricated, and had been acquired by Greenwich collector Peter Brant in the late 1990s.
Critics are sharply divided in their views of Koons. Some view his work as pioneering and of major art-historical importance. Others dismiss his work as kitsch: crass and based on cynical self-merchandising. Koons has stated that there are no hidden meanings in his works,Galenson, David. "You Cannot be Serious: the conceptual innovator as trickster", National Bureau of Economic Research, 2006, p. 25, citing Koons, The Jeff Koons Handbook. nor any critiques.

Early life and education

Koons was born in York, Pennsylvania to Henry and Gloria Koons. His fatherWood, Gaby (June 3, 2007), "The wizard of odd", The Guardian. was a furniture dealer and interior decorator; his mother was a seamstress. "Funhouse - A Jeff Koons retrospective", The New Yorker, June 9, 2008. As a child he went door to door after school selling gift-wrapping paper and candy to earn pocket-money. "Selling Candy to the Masses: Koons talks about sex, pleasure and future works", Apollo, 2008-03-01. Retrieved on 2009-06-09. As a teenager he revered Salvador Dalí, to the extent that he visited him at the St. Regis Hotel in New York City. Koons studied painting at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago and the Maryland Institute College of Art. While a visiting student at the Art Institute, Koons met the artist Ed Paschke, who became a major influence and for whom he worked as a studio assistant in the late 1970s. After college, he moved to New York in 1977Ingrid Sischy (March 2001), Koons, High and Low Vanity Fair. and worked at the membership desk of the Museum of Modern ArtJeff Koons, New Shelton Wet/Dry Doubledecker (1981) MoMA, New York. while establishing himself as an artist. During this time, he dyed his hair red and would often cultivate a pencil mustache, after Dalí. In 1980, he got licensed to sell mutual funds and stocks and began working as a Wall Street commodities broker at First Investors Corporation. After a summer with his parents in Sarasota, Florida (Koons took on a brief job there as a political canvasser), he returned to New York and found a new career as a commodities broker, first at Clayton Brokerage Company and then at Smith Barney.

Work

Jeff Koons rose to prominence in the mid-1980s as part of a generation of artists who explored the meaning of art in a media-saturated era. He gained recognition in the 1980s and subsequently set up a factory-like studio in a SoHo loft on the corner of Houston Street and Broadway in New York. It was staffed with over 30 assistants, each assigned to a different aspect of producing his work—in a similar mode as Andy Warhol's Factory (notable because all of his work is produced using a method known as Art fabrication). "Koons Most Expensive Living Artist at Auction", The Independent (London), 7 November 2007. Today, he has a  factory near the old Hudson rail yardsLucy Davies (June 18, 2012), Is Jeff Koons having a laugh? Daily Telegraph. in Chelsea, working with 90 to 120 regular assistants. Koons developed a color-by-numbers system, so that each of his assistantsPowers, John "I Was Jeff Koons's Studio Serf"(August 17, 2012) New York Times could execute his canvases and sculptures as if they had been done "by a single hand". "I think art takes you outside yourself, takes you past yourself. I believe that my journey has really been to remove my own anxiety. That's the key. The more anxiety you can remove, the more free you are to make that gesture, whatever the gesture is. The dialogue is first with the artist, but then it goes outward, and is shared with other people. And if the anxiety is removed everything is so close, everything is available, and it's just this little bit of confidence, or trust, that people have to delve into."The Turnaround Artist

The Pre-New, The New, and Equilibrium series

Since 1979 Koons has produced work within series. His early work was in the form of conceptual sculpture, an example of which is The Pre-New, a series of domestic objects attached to light fixtures, resulting in strange new configurations. Another example is The New, a series of vacuum-cleaners, often selected for brand names that appealed to the artist, which he had mounted in illuminated Perspex boxes. Koons first exhibited these pieces in the window of the New Museum in New York in 1980. He chose a limited combination of vacuum cleaners and arranged them in cabinets accordingly, juxtaposing the verticality of the upright cleaners with the squat cylinders of the "Shelton Wet/Dry drum" cleaners. At the museum, the machines were displayed as if in a showroom, and oriented around a central red fluorescent lightbox with just the words "The New" written on it as if it were announcing some new concept or marketing brand. 
Another example for Koon's early work is The Equilibrium Series (1985), consisting of one to three basketballs floating in distilled water, a project the artist had researched with the help of Nobel Prize-winning physicist Richard Feynman. The Total Equilibrium Tanks are completely filled with distilled water and a small amount of ordinary salt, to assist the hollow balls in remaining suspended in the centre of the liquid. In a second version, the 50/50 Tanks, only half the tank is filled with distilled water, with the result that the balls float half in and half out of the water. In addition, Koons conceived and fabricated five unique works for the Encased series (1983-1993/98), sculptures consisting of stacked sporting balls with their original cardboard packaging in glass display case.

Statuary series

Koons started creating sculptures using inflatable toys in the 1970s. Taking a readymade inflatable rabbit Koons cast the object in highly polished stainless steel, resulting in Rabbit (1986), one of his most famous artworks. Originally part of the private collection of Ileana Sonnabend, Rabbit is today owned by the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago. A proof of the sculpture is owned by Eli Broad.
The Rabbit has since returned to its original soft form, and, many times larger at more than 50 feet high, taken to the air. On October 13, 2009, the giant metallic monochrome color rabbit used during the 2007 Macy's Thanksgiving day paradeRoberta Smith (November 23, 2007), A Bunny Balloon Sheds Its Steel Skin New York Times. was put on display for Nuit Blanche in the Eaton Centre in Toronto.

Luxury and Degradation series

First shown in Koons' eponymous exhibitions at the short-lived International With Monument Gallery, New York, and at Daniel Weinberg Gallery, Los Angeles, in 1986, the Luxury and Degradation series is a group of works thematically centered on alcohol. This group included a stainless steel travel cocktail cabinet, a Baccarat crystal decanter and other hand-made renderings of alcohol-related paraphernalia, as well as reprinted and framed ads for drinks such as Gordon's Gin ("I Could Go for Something Gordon's"), Hennessy ("Hennessy, The Civilized Way to Lay Down the Law"), Barcardi ("Aquí... el gran sabor del ron Barcardi"), Dewars ("The Empire State of Scotch"), Martell ("I Assume You Drink Martell") and Frangelico ("Stay in Tonight" and "Find a Quiet Table")Jeff Koons, Jim Beam-Box Car (1986) Christie's Post War And Contemporary Art Evening Sale, 13 May 2008. in seductively intensified colors on canvas  
Koons appropriated these advertisements and revalued them by recontextualising them into artworks. They "deliver a critique of traditional advertising that supports Baudrillard's censorious view oft he obscene promiscuity of consumer signs."Joan Gibbons: Art and Advertising. London 2005. P. 150.
Another work, Jim Beam - J.B. Turner Engine (1986) is based on a commemorative, collectible in bottle in the form of a locomotive that was created by Jim Beam; however, Koons appropriated this model and had it cast in gleaming stainless-steel.B. Turner Engine (1986) Christie's Post War and Contemporary Evening Sale, 13 May 2009. The train model cast in steel titled Jim Beam - Baggage Car (1986) even contains Jim Beam bourbon.
With the Luxury and Degradation series Koons interfered into the realms of the social. He created an artificial and gleaming surface which represented a proletarian luxury. It was interpreted as seduction by simulation because it was faked luxurxy. Being the producer of this deception brought him to a kind of leadership, as he commented himself. Marketing (as) Sculpture. In: Performance Magazine 61/ 1990. P. 25.

Banality series

Koons then moved on to the Banality series. For this project he engaged workshops in Germany and Italy that had a long tradition of working in ceramic, porcelain, and wood. The series culminated in 1988 with Michael Jackson and Bubbles, a series of three life-size gold-leaf plated porcelain statues of the sitting singer cuddling Bubbles, his pet chimpanzee. Three years later, one of these sold at Sotheby's New York for $5.6 million. Two of these sculptures are now at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art and the Broad Contemporary Art Museum (BCAM) at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art. The statue was included in a 2004 retrospective at the Astrup Fearnley Museum of Modern Art in Oslo which traveled a year later to the Helsinki City Art Museum. It also featured in his second retrospective at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago, in 2008. The statue is currently back at the newly opened Astrup Fearnley Museum of Modern Art at Tjuvholmen in Oslo.
Anticipating a less than generous critical response to his 1988 Banality series exhibition, with all of his new objects made in an edition of three,Brenson, Michael (December 18, 1988), Plus Glitz, With a Dollop of Innocence, The New York Times. allowing for simultaneous, identical shows at galleries in New York, Cologne, and Chicago, Koons devised the Art Magazine Ads series (1988–89). Placed in Artforum, Art in America, Flash Art, and Art News, the ads were designed as promotions for his own gallery exhibitions. Koons also issued Signature Plate, an edition for Parkett magazine, with a photographic decal in colors on a porcelain plate with gold-plated rim. Arts journalist Arifa Akbar reported for The Independent that in "an era when artists were not regarded as 'stars', Koons went to great lengths to cultivate his public persona by employing an image consultant." Featuring photographs by Matt Chedgey, Koons placed "advertisements in international art magazines of himself surrounded by the trappings of success" and gave interviews "referring to himself in the third person."

Made in Heaven series

In 1989 the Whitney Museum asked Koons to make an artwork about the media on a billboard for the show "Image World: Art and Media Culture". Koons employed Ilona Staller as a model in the shoot that formed the basis of the resulting work for the Whitney, Made in Heaven (1990–91). The series of paintings, photographs, and sculptures portrayed Koons and Staller in explicit sexual positions and created considerable controversy. It was first shown at the 1990 Venice Biennale. Koons reportedly destroyed much of the work when Staller took their son Ludwig with her to Italy. In celebration of Made in Heaven's 20th anniversary, Luxembourg & Dayan chose to present a redux edition of the series.

Puppy

Koons was not among the 44 American artists selected to exhibit his work in Documenta 9 in 1992,Smith, Roberta (July 5, 1992) How Much Is That Doggy in the Courtyard?, New York Times. but was commissioned by three art dealers to create a piece for nearby Arolsen Castle in Bad Arolsen, Germany. The result was Puppy, a  tall topiary sculpture of a West Highland White Terrier puppy, executed in a variety of flowers (including Marigolds, Begonias, Impatiens, Petunias, and Lobelias)Jeff Koons: Puppy, June 6 - September 5, 2000 Public Art Fund. on a transparent colour-coated chrome stainless steel substructure. In 1995, the sculpture was dismantled and re-erected at the Museum of Contemporary Art on Sydney Harbour on a new, more permanent, stainless steel armature with an internal irrigation system. While the Arolsen Puppy had 20,000 plants, the Sydney version held around 60,000.
The piece was purchased in 1997 by the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation and installed on the terrace outside the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao. "En el corazón de Puppy", El Correo. Before the dedication at the museum, an Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA) trio disguised as gardeners attempted to plant explosive-filled flowerpots near the sculpture,Robinson, Walter. "Terror attack at gugg bilbao", Artnet, 14 October 1997. but was foiled by Basque police officer Jose María Aguirre, who then was shot dead by ETA members. "Un sindicato policial dice que personas con antecedentes trabajaban en el Guggenheim", El Pais, 21 October 1997. Currently the square in which the statue is placed bears the name of Aguirre. In the summer of 2000, the statue traveled to New York City for a temporary exhibition at Rockefeller Center.
Media mogul Peter Brant and his wife, model Stephanie Seymour, commissioned Koons to create a duplicate of the Bilbao statue Puppy (1993) for their Connecticut estate, the Brant Foundation Art Study Center.  "Peter Brant and Stephanie Seymour put their contemporary art collection on show", The Art Newspaper, 8 April 2009. In 1998, a miniature version of Puppy was released as a white glazed porcelain vase, in an edition of 3000.

Celebration series

Koons entitled Celebration, to honor the ardently hoped-for return of Ludwig from Rome. Consists of a series of large-scale sculptures and paintings of, among others balloon dogs, Valentine hearts, diamonds, and Easter eggs, was conceived in 1994. Some of the pieces are still being fabricated. Each of the 20 different sculptures in the series comes in five differently colored "unique versions",Thornton, Sarah (November 26, 2009), Inflatable investments - The volatile art of Jeff Koons The Economist. including the artist's cracked Egg (Blue) won the 2008 Charles Wollaston Award for the most distinguished work in the Royal Academy's Summer Exhibition.Linda Sandler (September 14, 2007), Jeff Koons's `Blue Diamond' for Sale at Christie's New York , Bloomberg. Created in an edition of five versions, his later work Tulips (1995–2004) consists of a bouquet of multicolor balloon flowers blown up to gargantuan proportions (more than  across). Koons finally started to work on Balloon Flower in 1995.
Koons was pushing to finish the series in time for a 1996 exhibition at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York, but the show was ultimately canceled because of production delays and cost overruns. When "Celebration" funding ran out, the staff was laid off, leaving a skeleton crew of two: Gary McCraw, Koons's studio manager, who had been with him since 1990, and Justine Wheeler, an artist from South Africa, who had arrived in 1995 and eventually took charge of the sculpture operation. The artist convinced his primary collectors Dakis Joannou, Peter Brant, and Eli Broad, along with dealers Jeffrey Deitch, Anthony d'Offay, and Max Hetzler, to invest heavily in the costly fabrication of the Celebration series at Arnold, a Frankfurt-based company. The dealers funded the project in part by selling works to collectors before they were fabricated.  In 1999, his 1988 "Pink Panther" sculpture sold at auction for $1.8 million, and he returned to the Sonnabend gallery. Well aware of Koons's bottomless needs and demands, Ileana Sonnabend and Antonio Homem, her gallery director and adopted son, nevertheless welcomed him back; in all likelihood they sensed (correctly, it turned out) that he was poised for a glorious second act—something that only he, among his generation of overpublicized artists, has so far managed to pull off. Koons, however, no longer confines himself to a single gallery. Larry Gagosian, the colossus of New York dealers, agreed to finance the completion of all the unfinished "Celebration" work, in exchange for exclusive rights to sell it.
In 2006, Koons presented Hanging Heart, a 9 feet tall highly polished, steel heart, one of a series of five differently colored examples, part of his Celebration series."Jeff Koon's Hanging Heart Sets Record At Auction", Culturekiosque, 15 November 2007. Large sculptures from that series were exhibited at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York in 2008. Later additions to the series include Balloon Swan (2004–2011), an 11.5-foot (3.5-metre), stainless-steel bird,Sarah Thornton (July 7, 2012), Sexy contemporary antiquities - Goddesses, hulks and cartoons inspire Jeff Koons The Economist. Balloon Rabbit (2005–2010), and Balloon Monkey, all for which children's party favors are reconceived as mesmerizing monumental forms.
The series also includes, in addition to sculptures, sixteenJeff Koons: Cracked Egg (Blue), October 2 - December 22, 2006 Gagosian Gallery, London. oil paintings.

Popeye and Hulk Elvis series

Paintings and sculptures from the Popeye series, which Koons began in 2002, feature the cartoon figures of Popeye and Olive Oyl. The works Hulk (Friends) and Hulks (Bell) (both 2004-2012) feature apparently inflatable Incredible Hulks that actually weigh almost a ton each and are made of bronze and wood.

Antiquity series

Referring to the ancient Roman marble statue Callipygian Venus, Metallic Venus (2010–2012) was made of high chromium stainless steel with transparent color coating and live flowering plants.
At the center of each scene in the Antiquity paintings (2009–13) is a famous ancient or classical sculpture, meticulously rendered in oil paint and scaled to the same size as the sculptures. The equally detailed backdrops include an Arcadian vision.

Recent work

Commissioned by the Deutsche Guggenheim in 1999, Koons began a new series, Easyfun, comprising paintings and wall-mounted sculptures. One year later, he designed Split-Rocker, his second floral sculpture made of stainless steel, soil, geotextile fabric, and an internal irrigation system, which was first shown at the Palais des Papes in Avignon. In 2001, Koons undertook a series of paintings, Easyfun-Ethereal, using a collage approach that combined bikinis, food, and landscapes painted under his supervision by assistants. For the season 2007/2008 in the Vienna State Opera Jeff Koons designed the large scale picture (176 sqm) Geisha as part of the exhibition series "Safety Curtain", conceived by museum in progress."Safety Curtain 2007/2008", museum in progress, Vienna. Koons worked with American pop performer Lady Gaga on her 2013 studio album Artpop, including the creation of its cover artwork featuring a sculpture he made of Lady Gaga.

Other

In 1999, Koons commissioned a song about himself on Momus's album Stars Forever.
In 2006, he appeared on Artstar, an unscripted television series set in the New York art world and from February 15 to March 6, 2008, he donated a private tour of his studio to the Hereditary Disease Foundation for auction on Charitybuzz.
A drawing similar to his Tulip Balloons was placed on the front page of the Internet search engine Google. The drawing greeted all who visited Google's main page on April 30, 2008 and May 1, 2008.
Koons had a minor role in the 2008 film Milk playing state assemblyman Art Agnos. "Jeff Koons Makes a Surprising Turn as an Actor in Milk", Media Bistro, 8 December 2008.
From his 2010 Tulip designs for Kiehls Crème de Corps, a portion of the proceeds go to the Koons Family Institute.
In September 2012, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo gave Koons the task of helping to review the designs for a new Tappan Zee Bridge.

Curating

Koons acted as curator of an Ed Paschke exhibition at Gagosian Gallery, New York, in 2009. In 2010 he curated an exhibition of works from the private collection of Greek billionaire Dakis Joannou at the New Museum in New York City. The exhibition, Skin Fruit: Selections from the Dakis Joannou Collection, generated debate concerning cronyism within the art world as Koons is heavily collected by Joannou and had previously designed the exterior of Joannou's yacht Guilty.

BMW Art Car

Jeff Koons was the artist named to design the seventeenth in the series of BMW "Art Cars". His artwork was applied to a race-spec E92 BMW M3, and revealed to the public at The Pompidou Centre in Paris on 2 June 2010.com, 7 June 2010.  Backed by BMW Motorsport, the car then competed at the 2010 24 Hours of Le Mans in France.BMW picks Jeff Koons as artist for next Art Car

Lady Gaga's ARTPOP

He collaborated with American recording artist Lady Gaga for her third studio album, ARTPOP. The image of the cover was revealed piece-by-piece in a social marketing campaign where her fans had to tweet the Twitter hashtag "#iHeartARTPOP" to unlock it.com/ladygaga/status/387253774537854976

Wine

Koons has also produced some fine wine-related commissions. In December 2012, Chateau Mouton Rothschild announced that Koons was the artist for their 2010 vintage label - a tradition that was started in 1946. Other artists to design labels include Pablo Picasso, Francis Bacon, Salvador Dalí & Joan Miró, amongst others.thedrinksbusiness. This has an recommended retail price of e15,000.

Exhibitions

Since a 1980 window installation at the New Museum of Contemporary Art in New York, Koons' work has been widely exhibited internationally in solo and group exhibitions. In 1986, he appeared in a group show with Peter Halley, Ashley Bickerton, and Meyer Vaisman at Sonnabend Gallery in New York. In 1997, the Galerie Jerome de Noirmont organised his first solo show in Europe. His Made in Heaven series was first shown at the Venice Biennale in 1990.
His museum solo shows include the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago (1988), Walker Art Center in Minneapolis (1993), Deutsche Guggenheim in Berlin (2000), Kunsthaus Bregenz (2001), the Museo archeologico nazionale di Napoli (2003), and a retrospective survey at the Astrup Fearnley Museum of Modern Art, Oslo (2004), which traveled to the Helsinki City Art Museum (2005). In 2008, the Celebration series was shown at the Neue Nationalgalerie, Berlin, and on the roof of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Considered as his first retrospective in France, the 2008 exhibition of 17 Koons sculptures at the Chateau de Versailles also marked the first ambitious display of a contemporary American artist organized by the chateau. The New York Times reported that "several dozen people demonstrated outside the palace gates" in a protest arranged by a little-known, right-wing group dedicated to French artistic purity. It was also criticised that ninety percent of the $2.8 million in financing for the exhibition came from private patrons, mainly François Pinault. "At the Court of the Sun King, Some All-American Art", The New York Times, 10 September 2008.
The May 31 – September 21, 2008 Koons retrospective at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago, For the final exhibition in its Marcel Breuer building, the Whitney Museum is planning to present a Koons retrospective in collaboration with the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles and the Centre Pompidou, Paris. Before Whitney's Move, a Koons Retrospective, The New York Times, May 10, 2012.
In July 2009, Koons had his first major solo show in London, at the Serpentine Gallery.  Entitled Jeff Koons: Popeye Series, the exhibit included cast aluminum models of children's pool toys and "dense, realist paintings of Popeye holding his can of spinach or smoking his pipe, a red lobster looming over his head." Vogel, Carol. "Koons and a Sailor Man in London", The New York Times, 2 July 2009.
In May 2012, Koons had his first major solo show in Switzerland, at the Beyeler Museum in Basel, entitled Jeff Koons. Shown are works from three series: The New,Banality and Celebration as well as the flowered sculpture Split-Rocker.tv/blog/2012/05/14/jeff-koons-at-fondation-beyeler/, 'Vernissage TV, May 2012.
Also in 2012, Jeff Koons. The Painter at Schirn Kunsthalle Frankfurt focussed primarily on the artist's development as a painter, while in the show Jeff Koons. The Sculptor at the Liebieghaus in Frankfurt, the sculptures by Jeff Koons entered enter into dialogues with the historical building and a sculpture collection spanning five millennia.
 Together, both shows form the largest showing of Koons's work to date.

Recognition

Koons received the BZ Cultural Award from the City of Berlin in 2000 and the Skowhegan Medal for Sculpture in 2001. He was named a Chevalier of the French Legion of Honor in 2002 and then promoted to Officier in 2007. He was given the 2008 Wollaston Award from the Royal Academy of Arts in London. In 2013 he received the U.S. State Department's Medal of Arts. 4.

Art market

Many of Koons's works have been sold at auctions and privately. His auction records have primarily been achieved by his sculptures (especially those from his Celebration series), whereas his paintings are less popular. In 2001, one of his three Michael Jackson and Bubbles porcelain sculptures sold for $5.6 million. On November 14, 2007, Hanging Heart (Magenta/Gold) from the collection of Adam Lindemann, one of five in different colors, sold at Sotheby's New York for $23.6 million becoming, at the time, the most expensive piece by a living artist ever auctioned. It was bought by the Gagosian Gallery in New York, which the previous day had purchased another Koons sculpture, "Diamond (Blue)", for $11.8 million from Christie's London. Reflective Surface. The Washington Post. Accessed September 2013. Gagosian appears to have bought both Celebration series works on behalf of Ukrainian steel oligarch Victor Pinchuk. "Recipe for a Record Price", The Art Newspaper, No. 191, 1 May 2008. In July 2008, his 11-foot (3.3 meter) Balloon Flower (Magenta) (1995–2000) from the collection of Howard and Cindy Rachofsky also sold at Christie's London for an auction record of $25.7 million. In total, Koons was the top-selling artist at auction with €81.3 million ($117.2 million) of sales in the year to June 2008. Until 2013, the largest sum known to be paid for a work by Koons was Tulips which was sold for US$ 33,682,500 (£21,219,975) at Christie's New York on November 14, 2012 (Lot 35) in the Post-War & Contemporary Art Evening Sale.
During the late 2000s recession, however, art prices plummeted and auction sales of high-value works by Koons dropped 50 percent in 2009. A violet Hanging Heart sold for $11 million in a private sale. "More Artworks Sell in Private in Slowdown", The New York Times, 26 April 2009. However prices for the artist's earlier Luxury and Degradation series appear to be holding up. The Economist reported that Thomas H. Lee, a private-equity investor, sold Jim Beam J.B. Turner Train (1986) in a package deal brokered by Giraud Pissarro Segalot for more than $15 million."Crossing to safety: New York's uneven contemporary art sales", The Economist, 16 May 2009. In 2012, Tulips (1995-2004) brought a record auction price for Koons at Christie's, selling to a telephone bidder for $33.6 million, well above its high $25 million estimate.
Koons has been represented by dealers such as Mary Boone (1979–1980), Sonnabend Gallery (since 1986), Max Hetzler in Berlin and Jérôme de Noirmont in Paris. The exclusive right to the primary sale of the "Celebration" series is held by Gagosian Gallery, his dominant dealer. Today Koons works closely with Gagosian and with Sonnabend. The artist is widely collected in America and Europe, where some collectors acquire his work in depth. Eli Broad has 24 pieces, and Dakis Joannou owns some 38 works from all stages of the artist's career."Inflatable investments - The volatile art of Jeff Koons". The Economist, 26 November 2009.

Classification

Among curators and art collectors and others in the art world, Koons's work is labeled as Neo-pop or Post-Pop as part of an '80s movement in reaction to the pared-down art of Minimalism and Conceptualism in the previous decade. Koons resists such comments: "A viewer might at first see irony in my work... but I see none at all. Irony causes too much critical contemplation." 
He has caused controversy by the elevation of unashamed kitsch into the high art arena, exploiting more throwaway subjects than, for example, Warhol's soup cans. His work Balloon Dog (1994–2000) is based on balloons twisted into shape to make a toy dog.

Evaluation and influence

Koons has received extreme reactions to his work. Critic Amy Dempsey described his Balloon Dog as "an awesome presence... a massive durable monument."[ref]Dempsey, Amy (ed.). Styles, Schools and Movements, Thames & Hudson, 2002.
[/ref] Jerry Saltz at artnet.Saltz, Jerry. "Breathing Lessons", artnet.
Mark Stevens of The New Republic dismissed him as a "decadent artist who lacks the imaginative will to do more than trivialize and italicise his themes and the tradition in which he works... He is another of those who serve the tacky rich."Stevens, Mark. "Adventures in the Skin Trade", The New Republic, 20 January 1992. Michael Kimmelman of The New York Times saw "one last, pathetic gasp of the sort of self-promoting hype and sensationalism that characterized the worst of the 1980s" and called Koons's work "artificial," "cheap" and "unabashedly cynical."Kimmelman, Michael. "Jeff Koons", The New York Times, 29 November 1991.
In an article comparing the contemporary art scene with show business, renowned critic Robert Hughes wrote that Koons is "an extreme and self-satisfied manifestation of the sanctimony that attaches to big bucks. Koons really does think he's Michelangelo and is not shy to say so. The significant thing is that there are collectors, especially in America, who believe it. He has the slimy assurance, the gross patter about transcendence through art, of a blow-dried Baptist selling swamp acres in Florida. And the result is that you can't imagine America's singularly depraved culture without him."Hughes, Robert. "Showbiz and the Art World", The Guardian, 30 June 2004. Hughes placed Koons's work just above that of Seward Johnson and was quoted in a New York Times article as having stated that comparing their careers was "like debating the merits of dog excrement versus cat excrement". "At Home with Robert Hughes: After Calamity, a Critic's Soft Landing", The New York Times, 12 October 2006.
He has influenced younger artists such as Damien Hirst (for example, in Hirst's Hymn, an 
In 2005, he was elected as a Fellow to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.

Copyright infringement litigation

Koons has been sued several times for copyright infringement over his use of pre-existing images, the original works of others, in his work.  In Rogers v. Koons, 960 F.2d 301 (2d Cir. 1992), the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit upheld a judgment against him for his use of a photograph of puppies as the basis for a sculpture, String of Puppies.
Koons also lost lawsuits in United Features Syndicate, Inc. v. Koons, 817 F. Supp. 370 (S.D.N.Y. 1993), and Campbell v. Koons, No. 91 Civ. 6055, 1993 WL 97381 (S.D.N.Y. Apr. 1, 1993).
More recently, he won one lawsuit, Blanch v. Koons, No. 03 Civ. 8026 (LLS), S.D.N.Y., Nov. 1 2005 (slip op.),
Koons has also threatened others under copyright, claiming that a gallery infringed his proprietary rights by selling bookends in the shape of balloon dogs. Koons abandoned that claim after the gallery filed a complaint for declaratory relief stating, "As virtually any clown can attest, no one owns the idea of making a balloon dog, and the shape created by twisting a balloon into a dog-like form is part of the public domain." 6 Hilarious Zingers From the Balloon-Dog Freedom Suit Filed Against Jeff Koons

Personal life

While a student at the Maryland College of Art, Koons fathered a daughter, Shannon Rodgers. Though he offered to marry the girl's mother, she felt that they were too young for the commitment, and the couple reluctantly put the child up for adoption. Shannon Rodgers reconnected with Koons in 1995.
Around 1990, Koons lived in New York in a full-service hotel near Wall Street. During that time, he did not have a studio. In 1991, he married Hungarian-born naturalized-Italian pornography star Cicciolina (Ilona Staller) who for five years (1987–92) pursued an alternate career as a member of the Italian parliament. After seeing her picture in two European magazines, he had flown to Rome, watched her perform, and gone backstage to suggest that they collaborate on what he then thought would be a movie. She agreed. A series of strenuous photographic sessions became the basis for the "Made in Heaven" paintings and sculptures, in various media. The movie never got made, but Koons and Staller fell in love. He courted her through an interpreter—she spoke very little English, and Koons, who spoke about four words of Italian, kept trying to communicate directly by speaking English with an Italian accent. The interpreter had to be let go, because she fell in love with Koons. He proposed to Staller in Venice that spring, and they were married a year later. While maintaining a home in Manhattan, Koons and Staller lived in Munich. In 1992, they had a son, Ludwig. The marriage ended soon afterward amid allegations that Koons had subjected Staller to physical and emotional abuse.
Koons is now married to Justine Wheeler, an artist and former employee who began working for Koons' studio in 1995. The couple have six children. The family currently lives on several floors of an Upper East Side townhouse. In 2009, Koons purchased 11 East 67th Street for $12 million. In 2010, he bought the neighbouring 10,000-square-foot mansion at 13 East 67th Street, the longtime home of Barbara Sears Rockefeller, for $20 million.

Film and video



Sources





