[[Koreans in Paraguay]]

CATEGORIES: Asian Paraguayan, Ethnic groups in Paraguay, Korean Latin American, Overseas Korean groups, Immigration to Paraguay

Koreans in Paraguay formed one of the earliest Korean diaspora communities in Latin America; however, they were always overshadowed by the larger Korean communities in neighbouring Brazil and Argentina, and since the late 1990s, their population has fallen significantly.

Migration history

The first Korean immigrants to Paraguay came from Busan on a two-month journey by sea to Buenos Aires and then overland to Asunción, finally arriving on 22 April 1965. By 1999, South Korea's Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade estimated that 10,428 Koreans resided in the country, but by just two years later, that figure fell by more than 40% to 6,190.
The population continued to decline after that, though less sharply;  Between 2009 and 2011, the population remained roughly stable. Of the 5,205 South Korean nationals or former nationals in Paraguay in 2011, 499 had become Paraguayan nationals, the vast majority (4,641 persons) had permanent residency, 16 were international students, and 49 had other kinds of visas.

Business and employment

The early Korean migrants who settled in Paraguay engaged in a variety of agricultural and commercial work, including beekeeping and door-to-door sales of imported clothing. By the early 1980s, many were involved in importing consumer electronics as well. Some also opened convenience stores in poorer neighbourhoods; they gained attention for remaining open through the siesta, unlike many of their competitors. The second generation have largely moved away from manual labour or small retail business, and entered into the liberal professions, such as medicine, law, pharmacy, architecture, and accountancy.

Language and education

Koreans in Paraguay opened their own school in 1972, the Colegio Coreano del Paraguay, to provide cultural and language education to their youth. It is located in the San Vicente neighbourhood of Asunción.
Little language shift is observed from Korean-dominance to Spanish-dominance among members of the Korean community in Paraguay, including those born locally; this contrasts sharply with the rapid shift from Korean-dominance to English-dominance among Korean Americans, especially of the second generation. Many Koreans in Paraguay their children to study and universities in the United States and Europe; as of 2007, there were also roughly 100 Paraguay-born Koreans studying at universities in South Korea. They typically view English, rather than Spanish, as the most prestigious and economically important language to learn.

Religion

Korean Christian missionaries are active among indigenous communities in Alto Paraná department.

Notable people






