[[Foreign relations of Norway]]

CATEGORIES: Foreign relations of Norway

The foreign relations of Norway are based on the country's membership in NATO and within the workings of the United Nations (UN). Additionally, Norway takes part in the integration of the European Union (EU) through its membership in the European Economic Area. Norway's foreign ministry includes both the minister of foreign affairs and minister of international development.

History

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs was established on the same day that Norway declared the dissolution of the union with Sweden: June 7, 1905. Although diplomats could not present credentials to foreign governments until the Swedish king formally renounced his right to the Norwegian throne, a number of unofficial representatives worked on the provisional government's behalf until the first Norwegian ambassador, Hjalmar Christian Hauge, sought accreditation by the United States Secretary of State Elihu Root on November 6, 1905.
The initial purposes of the newly formed Foreign Ministry were to represent Norway's interests through diplomatic channels, and to provide consular services for Norwegian shipping and commerce overseas. In 1906, the Storting decided to establish six embassies in Europe, with two more in the Americas: one in the United States and one in Argentina. 20 consular offices were also opened.
During World War I, the foreign ministry was confronted with unprecedented challenges in maintaining neutrality for Norway, in particular in order to protect its merchant fleet.
In 1922, the ministry was consolidated and reorganised to ensure fuller cooperation between the diplomatic and consular branches. The reorganization included the formation of a designated career path for diplomats that included completion of a university entrance examination and professional experience from international trade. The economic hardship of the times forced austerity measures at the ministry for the next several years.
When Norway was invaded by Nazi Germany in 1940, the government fled to the United Kingdom and reconstituted in exile in Bracknell, outside London. Kingston House in London was later used. The government moved back to Norway following the peace in 1945.
After the end of World War II, Norway was a founding member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation and the United Nations, the latter having Norwegian Trygve Lie as inaugural Secretary-General.

Elements of policy

Since the end of the Cold War, Norway has developed a model to foreign policy known as the "Norwegian model," the goal of which is to contribute to peace and stability through coordinated response among governmental and non-governmental Norwegian organizations; acting as an honest broker in international conflicts; an informal network of Norwegian individuals with access and credibility among parties; and the willingness to take the long view in international issues.
The post-war foreign policy of Norway can be described along four dimensions:

Strategic alliances

Norway's strategic importance for waging war in the North Atlantic became important in the failed neutrality policy of World War II.  Norway became a founding member of NATO in order to ally itself with countries that shared its democratic values.  Both through diplomatic and military cooperation, Norway has played a visible role in the formation and operations of NATO.  It allowed a limited number of military bases and exercises to be based in its territories, which caused some controversy when NATO decided to put forward bases in Northern Norway in preparation for a conflict with the Soviet Union.

International cooperation

Norway supports international cooperation and the peaceful settlement of disputes, recognizing the need for maintaining a strong national defence through collective security. Accordingly, the cornerstones of Norwegian policy are active membership in NATO and support for the United Nations and its specialized agencies. Norway also pursues a policy of economic, social, and cultural cooperation with other Nordic countries--Denmark, Sweden, Finland, and Iceland—through the Nordic Council. Its relations with Iceland are very close due to the cultural bond the two nations share. Norway ended a 2-year term on the UN Security Council in January 2003, and chaired the Iraq Sanctions Committee.
Norway is the only Scandinavian country that is not a member of the European Union. Membership has been proposed within Norway, and referendums over Norwegian membership were held in 1972 and 1994. Popular opinion was split between rural and urban areas. See Norway and the European Union.
The present government is not planning to raise the possibility for future membership.
Norway also has a history of co-operation and friendship with the United Kingdom, due to their shared cultural heritage since Viking times. The Vikings conquered areas including the Hebrides, Orkney and Shetland for several hundred years. Norway is only 300 kilometres (159 Nautical miles) east of Unst, the northernmost island of Shetland.  The Norwegian embassy to the United Kingdom is located in London, and Norway also maintains a Consulate General in Edinburgh. A Norway Spruce is given by the city of Oslo and presented to London as a Christmas tree for display in Trafalgar Square as a token of gratitude for the UK's support during World War II.  King Haakon, his son Crown Prince Olav and the country's government lived in exile in London throughout the war. As part of the tradition, the Lord Mayor of Westminster visits Oslo in the late autumn to take part in the felling of the tree, and the Mayor of Oslo then goes to London to light the tree at the Christmas ceremony.

Third party mediation in international conflicts

Norway has played an active role as a third party mediator in a number of international conflicts.  The late foreign minister Johan Jørgen Holst was instrumental in forging the Oslo Accords between Israel and the PLO.  Thorvald Stoltenberg was part of the unsuccessful mediation team in seeking an end to the war in Bosnia.  Norway has contributed both mediation services and financial assistance in Guatemala.
As of 2005, Norwegian diplomats are acting as mediators in Sudan, Bosnia, Sri Lanka, and Colombia. Some of those countries accuse Norway of supporting and propping up separatist groups.  Israel is often bitter with harsh criticisms from Norwegian politicians. The spat was at its highest when finance minister Kristin Halvorsen supported boycott of Israeli goods.  Norway retaliated by cutting aid to Ethiopia.

International disputes

Territorial claims in Antarctica (Queen Maud Land and Peter I Island) are only recognized by Australia, France, New Zealand and the United Kingdom.

Bilateral Relations











Cyprus-Norway relations are foreign relations between Cyprus and Norway. The government in Cyprus considers that "bilateral relations between Cyprus and Norway are excellent in all fields".
Neither country has resident ambassadors. Cyprus is represented in Norway through its embassy in Stockholm, Sweden and 2 honorary consulates, one in Oslo and the second in Kristiansand. Norway is represented in Cyprus through its embassy in Athens, Greece and an honorary consulate in Nicosia. Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe.
On August 21, 1951 there was a Consular Convention and an Exchange of Letters relating to establishing diplomatic relations. On May 2, 1951 there was a Convention for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income. On May 17, 1962 there was an Exchange of Letters constituting an Agreement on the Abolition of Visa Requirement in Nicosia. On March 5, 1963 there was an Agreement on Commercial Scheduled Air Transport signed in London.
Norway provides direct funding to the Cypriot Government and also to local authorities, NGOs and educational institutions through EEA and Norway Grants.
The taxation levels in Cyprus are considerably lower than in Norway, and Cyprus has actively courted Norwegians to move to Cyprus.
In 1996 tax rules in Norway were changed to keep shipping companies competitive and under the Norwegian flag. By 2008 changes to the tonnage tax regime to harmonize them with the European Union forced some companies to register in Cyprus.
Several Norwegian retirees also moved to Cyprus; this too is largely to benefit from the lower tax rate on Cyprus and the minimal crime.



Both countries have a very long history together, both countries were part of the Kalmar Union between 1397 and 1523. Norway was in Union with Denmark between 1537 and 1814. Both countries established diplomatic relations in 1905, after Norway's independence. Denmark has an embassy in Oslo.  Norway has an embassy in Copenhagen. Both countries are full members of the Council of the Baltic Sea States, of NATO, and of the Council of Europe. There are around 15,000 Norwegian people living in Denmark and around 20,000 Danish people living in Norway.Statistics Norway











Iceland has an embassy in Oslo and Norway has an embassy in Reykjavík. In 2007, the two countries signed a defence agreement, covering surveillance and military defense of Icelandic air space and economic zone. It means that Norwegian jet fighters and surveillance aircraft will be patrolling Icelandic air space. It is underlined that the agreement with Norway only covers peace time. In case of a military conflict it is still NATO and the United States Government that will carry the main responsibility for Iceland's defence.





Norway was one of the first countries to recognize Israel on February 4, 1949.  Both countries established diplomatic relation later that year.  Israel has an embassy in Oslo.Norwegian embassy in Tel Aviv



Kazakhstan has its embassy in Oslo.



Norway recognized Kosovo in 28 March 2008. Norway has an embassy in Pristina, while Kosovo has hinted that it will include Norway in the second wave of embassy openings.



Both nations established diplomatic relations in 1922.





Diplomatic relations were established on 26 January 1973. Norway established an embassy in Kathmandu in 2000.norway.np/Devcoop/In+Nepal/DevCoop. Norwegian aid prioritizes education, good governance and energy. 

















Norway and Sweden established diplomatic relations in 1905, after the dissolution of the union between Norway and Sweden in 1905. Sweden has an embassy in Oslo, while Norway has an embassy in Stockholm and three consulates in Gothenburg, Malmö and Sundsvall.



In March 2012 the Norwegian Foreign Ministry announced that the Norwegian embassy in Damascus will be temporarily closed, mainly due to the deteriorating security situation in the country, however Foreign Minister Jonas Gahr Støre also emphasized the closing being a political signal. One Norwegian diplomat will remain, stationed at the Danish embassy. Norway has been aligned with the Western nations' criticism of the Assad government and with allegations from human rights organizations of violence against protesters from the military and security forces.







The United States and Norway have a long tradition of positive relations. There are millions of Americans with Norwegian heritage in the United States and around 10,000 U.S. citizens residing in Norway. 








