[[Garry's Mod]]

CATEGORIES: 2004 video games, Fangames, Filmmaking video games, First-person shooters, Internet memes, Lua-scripted video games, OS X games, Role-playing video games, Source engine mods, Windows games, Steam Workshop games, Independent video game developers

Garry's Mod (often abbreviated as GMod) is a sandbox physics game using a modified Source engine, created by Garry Newman. Garry's Mod has been available on Valve's content delivery service  Steam since November 29, 2006.

Gameplay

Although Garry's Mod is usually considered to be a full game, it has no game objective and players can use the game's set of tools for any purpose whatsoever, although sometimes when playing on a multiplayer server it may have role-play or other types of game modes. Garry's Mod allows players to manipulate items, furniture and "props" – various objects that players can place in-game. Props can be selected from any installed Source engine game or from a community created collection. The game features two "guns" – Physics Gun and Tool Gun for manipulating objects. The Physics Gun allows objects to be picked up, adjusted, and frozen in place. The Tool Gun is a multi-purpose tool for performing various tasks, such as combining props, attaching them via ropes, and creating controllable winches and wheels. The Tool Gun is also used to control add-ons created by the community.
Another popular Garry's Mod concept is ragdoll posing. The player can instantiate a ragdoll model from a Source game and pose it using a variety of tools. This is a popular tool for making fan-made videos and machinimas.
Garry's Mod takes advantage of the Source engine's modified version of the Havok Physics Engine, which allows players to build contraptions that follow the laws of physics.

Multiplayer

Garry's Mod supports multiplayer gameplay on dedicated game servers. These servers are operated by the community and some servers earn a profit from having additional VIP features. Players can build contraptions together and communicate via text or voice.
Garry's Mod servers run many game modes, most of which are user-created modifications.  Some of the more popular modes include: Roleplay (RP) where players take on a specific role in the server's society, where players role-play in a city-like society and Trouble in Terrorist Town (TTT), which involves a group of terrorists (Innocents) (this can also include a group of detectives, who have special tools aid in finding traitors) with another, smaller group of traitors within them, whose goal is to kill all of the Innocents; as well as several zombie survival mods. There are also Deathrun servers where the "Death" players trigger traps to try and kill the other players that are trying to get to the end of the level, which is usually an obstacle course, of sorts.

User-created content

Garry's Mod features a wide range of mods and addons that can be created using Garry's Mods implementation of the Lua scripting language, which allows users to create their own weapons, entities, game modes, and other modifications.
There are many examples of features created by Garry's Mods addons. Game rules and features can also be modified to suit a particular game mode or genre. Players can create their own weapons, ranging from melee weapons, to firearms, to indirect weapons, such as airstrikes. Weapon models and skins can be reused from either existing Source engine games or from the community created list. Players can create "scripted entities" and "scripted tools" that can interact with the player directly in-game or allow manipulating objects from in-game menu, respectively. Players can also create scripts for non-player characters in Lua.
Different models, skins, and maps can be added to the game. Multiplayer game servers will automatically attempt to send any custom content to the client when they connect.

Fretta contest

In winter 2009/2010, a contest was held for Garry's Mod by the game's developers to create the best new game mode using a programming framework called "Fretta".
Three of the winning games have been shipped, Trouble in Terrorist Town, Dogfight Arcade, and Prop Hunt.

Toybox

On September 7, 2010, Newman added a feature called the "Toybox" to Garry's Mod.
The Toybox was shortly removed, and has been replaced with the Steam Workshop in versions 13 and up. As of February 2014 there are now over 245,000 mods on the Steam Workshop for Garry's Mod and counting.






