[[Monocoque]]

CATEGORIES: Automotive chassis types, Motorcycle frames, Airship technology, Structural engineering, Aircraft components

Monocoque ( The technique may also be called structural skin. The term is often misused for sub-components that are superficially monocoques, but which are used as a part of a larger frame structure.
Alternatives to monocoque include trusses, unibodies, inflatable shells and semi-monocoque or stressed skin. The semi-monocoque is a hybrid combining a tensile shell and compressive structure made up of longerons and ribs or frames.
Car bodies are almost never monocoques; instead modern cars use unitary construction or unit body, unibody, or Body Frame Integral construction,NAAA Structural Damage Policy dated 1 January 2011, retrieved 29 March 2012 with box sections, bulkheads and tubes providing most of the strength of the vehicle, to which the skin adds relatively little to the strength or stiffness.

Aircraft

Early aircraft were constructed using internal frames, typically of wood or steel tubing, which were then covered (or skinned) with fabricMegson, 1972, p.198 such as irish linen or cotton.1–2 The skin added nothing to the structural strength of the airframe and was essentially dead weight beyond providing a smooth sealed surface. By thinking of the airframe as a whole, and not just the sum of its parts, it made sense to adopt a monocoque structure and it did not take long for various companies to adopt practices from the boat industry such as laminating thin strips of wood. In 1912 Deperdussin introduced a monocoque racer using a fuselage made up of three layers of laminated strips of glued poplar veneer, which provided both the external skin and the main load-bearing structure.112 This reduced drag so effectively it was able to win most of the races it was entered into. This style of construction was copied, with some variations, in Germany by LFG Roland — licensed by them to Pfalz Flugzeugwerke in the so-called, patented Wickelrumpf (wrapped body) form using two layers of plywood strips and fabric wrapping between them over a male mold for each half of the fuselage surface "shell"; while Albatros, Hannover and Siemens-Schuckert used four-sided panels of plywood instead, covering the light internal framework working forward from the tail, and upwards from the ventral side of the structure. However, it was prone to damage from moisture and delamination.1.2 Following the initial successes of all-metal aircraft from the Junkers firm as early as 1915 onwards, by the late 1930s, aluminum monocoque skin was used to form a pressurized cabin for high-altitude flight, such as in the Lockheed XC-35.

Armored vehicles

Tanks and other armored vehicles such as the German Fuchs 2 and RG-33 may use a body which is built of armor rather than attaching armor to a frame. This reduces weight for a given amount of armor compared to vehicles to which armor has been attached to an underlying frame.

Two-wheeled vehicles

A monocoque-framed motorcycle was developed by the Spanish motorcycle manufacturer, Ossa, for the 1967 Grand Prix motorcycle racing season. lighter and its monocoque frame was much stiffer than conventional motorcycle frames, giving it superior agility on the racetrack. Ossa would win four Grand Prix races with the monocoque bike before their rider was killed during the 1970 Isle of Man TT, causing the Ossa factory to withdraw from Grand Prix competition.
Notable designers such as Eric Offenstadt and Dan Hanebrink created unique monocoque designs in the early 1970s. In 2009, Ducati introduced the Desmosedici GP9 with a carbon fibre semi-monocoque chassis.
Single-piece carbon fiber bicycle frames are sometimes described as monocoques however as most use the components to form a frame structure (even if molded in a single piece),, Velocite-bikes.

Rockets

Various rockets have used pressure-stabilized monocoque designs, such as Atlas The Atlas was very light since a major portion of its structural support was provided by its single-wall steel "balloon" fuel tanks, which held their shape by internal pressure.





Bibliography




