[[Baalbek]]

CATEGORIES: Visitor attractions in Lebanon, Populated places in the Baalbek District, World Heritage Sites in Lebanon, Archaeological sites in Lebanon, Great Rift Valley, Phoenician cities, Phoenician sites in Lebanon, Roman colonies, Ancient cities, Populated places established in the 7th millennium BC, Roman sites in Lebanon, Tourism in Lebanon, World Digital Library related

Baalbeck, also known as Baalbek () during the period of Roman rule, it was one of the largest sanctuaries in the empire and contains some of the best preserved Roman ruins in Lebanon. The gods worshiped at the temple, the triad of Jupiter, Venus and Bacchus, were grafted onto the indigenous deities of Hadad, Atargatis and a young male god of fertility. Local influences are seen in the planning and layout of the temples, which vary from the classic Roman design.
Baalbeck is home to the annual Baalbeck International Festival.  The town is about  mostly Shia Muslims.

Archaeology

Tell Baalbeck

There has been much conjecture about earlier levels at Baalbeck with suggestions that it may have been an ancient settlement. The German expedition in 1898 reporting nothing prior to Roman occupation.

History

Prehistory

The history of settlement in the area of Baalbeck dates back about 9,000 years, with almost continual settlement of the tell under the Temple of Jupiter, which was a temple since the pre-Hellenistic era.dainst.html
Nineteenth century Bible archaeologists wanted to connect Baalbeck to the "Baalgad" mentioned in Joshua 11:17, but the assertion has seldom been taken up in modern times. In fact, this minor Phoenician city, named for the "Lord (Baal) of the Beqaa valley" lacked enough commercial or strategic importance to be rated worthy of mention in Assyrian or Egyptian records so far uncovered, according to Hélène Sader, professor of archaeology at the American University of Beirut.

Heliopolis, the City of the Sun

After Alexander the Great conquered the Near East in 334 BC, the existing settlement was named Heliopolis (Ἡλιούπολις) from helios, Greek for sun, and polis, Greek for city.  The city retained its religious function during Greco-Roman times, when the sanctuary of the Heliopolitan Jupiter-Baal was a pilgrimage site. Trajan's biographer records that the emperor consulted the oracle there. Trajan inquired of the Heliopolitan Jupiter whether he would return alive from his wars against the Parthians. In reply, the god presented him with a vine shoot cut into pieces. Macrobius, a Latin grammarian of the 5th century, mentioned Zeus Heliopolitanus and the temple, a place of oracular divination. Starting in the last quarter of the 1st century BC (reign of Augustus)  and over a period of two centuries (reign of Philip the Arab), the Romans had built a temple complex in Baalbeck consisting of three temples: Jupiter, Bacchus and Venus. On a nearby hill, they built a fourth temple dedicated to Mercury.
The city, then known as Heliopolis (there was another Heliopolis in Egypt), was made a colonia by Septimius Severus in 193, having been part of the territory of Berytus on the Phoenician coast since 15 BC. Work on the religious complex there lasted over a century and a half and was never completed. The dedication of the present temple ruins, the largest religious building in the entire Roman empire, dates from the reign of Septimius Severus (193-211 AD), whose coins first show the two temples. In commemoration, no doubt, of the dedication of the new sanctuaries, Severus conferred the rights of the ius Italicum on the city.
Today, only six Corinthian columns remain standing. Eight more were disassembled and shipped to Constantinople under Justinian's orders circa 532-537 CE, for his basilica of Hagia Sophia.
The greatest of the three temples was sacred to Jupiter Baal, ("Heliopolitan Zeus"), identified here with the sun, and was constructed during the first century AD (completed circa 60 AD). 19, No. 3/4 (1956), pp. 353–361 "It is apparent from a graffito on one of the columns of the Temple of Jupiter that that building was nearing completion in 60 A.D." With it were associated a temple to Venus and a lesser temple in honor of Bacchus (though it was traditionally referred to as the "Temple of the Sun" by Neoclassical visitors, who saw it as the best-preserved Roman temple in the world – it is surrounded by forty-two columns nearly 20 meters in height). Thus three Eastern deities were worshipped in Roman guise: thundering Jove, the god of storms, stood in for Baal-Hadad, Venus for 'Ashtart and Bacchus for Anatolian Dionysus.
The original number of Jupiter columns was 54 columns. The architrave and frieze blocks weigh up to 60 tons each, and one corner block over 100 tons, all of them raised to a height of  above the ground.J. J. Coulton: "Lifting in Early Greek Architecture", The Journal of Hellenic Studies, Vol. 94 (1974), p. 16 This was thought to have been done using Roman cranes. Roman cranes were not capable of lifting stones this heavy; however, by combining multiple cranes they may have been able to lift them to this height. If necessary they may have used the cranes to lever one side up a little at a time and use shims to hold it while they did the other side.
The Roman construction was built on top of earlier ruins and involved the creation of an immense raised plaza onto which the actual buildings were placed. The sloping terrain necessitated the creation of retaining walls on the north, south and west sides of the plaza. These walls are built of about 24 monoliths at their lowest level each weighing approximately 300 tons. The western, tallest retaining wall has a second course of monoliths containg the famous trilithon: a row of three stones, each over 19 metres long, 4.3 metres high and 3.6 metres broad, cut from limestone. They weigh approximately 800 tons each.
A fourth, still larger stone called Stone of the Pregnant Woman lies unused in a nearby quarry about 1 mile from the town., 1944: History of Baalbeck. American Press. p. 139 – its weight, often exaggerated, is estimated at 1,000 tons. tall stone columns surviving, out of an original 128 columns.
Jupiter-Baal was represented locally (on coinage) as a beardless god in long scaly drapery holding a whip in his right hand and thunderbolts and ears of wheat in his left. Two bulls supported him. In this guise he passed into European worship in the 3rd century and 4th century. The icon of Helipolitan Zeus (in A.B. Cook, Zeus, i:570–576) bore busts of the seven planetary powers on the front of the pillarlike term in which he was encased. A bronze statuette of this Heliopolitan Zeus was discovered at Tortosa, Spain; another was found at Byblos in Phoenicia. A comparable iconic image is the Lady of Ephesus.4
Other emperors enriched the sanctuary of Heliopolitan Jupiter each in turn. Nero (54–68 AD) built the tower-altar opposite the Temple of Jupiter; Trajan (98-117) added the forecourt to the Temple of Jupiter, with porticos of pink granite brought from Aswan in Egypt. Antoninus Pius (138-161) built the Temple of Bacchus, the best preserved of the sanctuary's structures, for it was protected by the rubble of the site's ruins. It is enriched with refined reliefs and sculpture. Septimius Severus (193-211) added a pentagonal temple of Venus, who as Aphrodite had enjoyed an early Syrian role with her consort Adonis ("Lord", the Aramaic translation of "Baal."). Emperor Philip the Arab (244–249) was the last to add a monument at Heliopolis: the hexagonal forecourt. When he was finished Heliopolis and Praeneste in Italy were the two largest sanctuaries in the Western world.
The extreme license of the Heliopolitan worship of Aphrodite was often commented upon by early Christian writers, who competed with one another to execrate her worship. Eusebius of Caesarea, down the coast, averred that 'men and women vie with one another to honour their shameless goddess; husbands and fathers let their wives and daughters publicly prostitute themselves to please Astarte'. Constantine, making an effort to curb the Venus cult, built a basilica in Heliopolis. Theodosius I erected another, with a western apse, occupying the main court of the Jupiter temple, as was Christian practice everywhere. The vast stone blocks of its walls were taken from the temple. Today nothing of the Theodosian basilica remains.

Early Islamic period

In 637 AD, the Muslim army under Abu Ubaida ibn al-Jarrah captured Baalbeck after defeating the Byzantine army at Battle of Yarmouk. It was still an opulent city and yielded rich plunder. It became a bone of contention between the various Syrian dynasties and the caliphs first of Damascus, then of Egypt. The place was fortified and took on the name al-Qala' ("fortress"; see Alcala) but in 748 was sacked again with great slaughter. The Byzantine Emperor John Tzimisces sacked the city in 975. In 1090 it passed to the Seljuks and in 1134 to Zengi; but after 1145 it remained attached to Damascus and was captured by Saladin in 1175. The Crusaders raided its valley more than once but never took the city. Three times shaken by earthquakes in the 12th century, it was dismantled by 1260 when it served as the Mongol base for the last unsuccessful attack upon the Mamlukes of Egypt. But it revived, and most of its fine mosque and fortress architecture, still extant, belonged to the reign of Sultan Qalawun (1282), during which Abulfeda describes it as a very strong place. In 1400 Timur pillaged it.

Ottoman period

In 1517, it passed, with the rest of Syria, to the Ottoman Empire. But Ottoman jurisdiction was merely nominal in the Lebanon. Baalbeck, badly shaken in the Near East earthquake of 1759, was really in the hands of the Metawali who retained it against other Lebanese tribes. The colossal and picturesque ruins attracted particularly intrepid Westerners since the 18th century. English visitor Robert Wood was not simply a tourist: his carefully measured drawings were engraved for The Ruins of Baalbeck (1757), which provided some excellent new detail in the Corinthian order that British and European Neoclassical architects added to their vocabulary.  Robert Adam, for example, based a bed
Even after Jezzar Pasha, the rebel governor of Acre province, broke the power of the Metawali in the last half of the 18th century, Baalbeck was no destination for the traveller unaccompanied by an armed guard.  The chaos that succeeded his death in 1804 was ended only by the Egyptian occupation in 1832. With the treaty of London (1840) Baalbek became really Ottoman, the Encyclopædia Britannica (1911) reported and since about 1864 had attracted great numbers of tourists. In November 1898, the German Emperor Wilhelm II on his way to Jerusalem and passing by Baalbeck was equally struck by the magnificence of the ruins projecting from the rubble and the dreary condition. Within a month, the German archaeological team he dispatched was at work on the site. The campaign produced meticulously presented and illustrated series of volumes.

2006 Israel-Lebanon conflict

On August 4, 2006, as part of the 2006 Lebanon War, Israeli helicopter-borne soldiers supported by bombs from aircraft entered the Shi'ite Islamic Hikmeh Hospital in Baalbeck to capture senior members of Hezbollah who were considered to be responsible for the kidnapping of the two Israeli IDF soldiers on July 13, 2006, and who were believed to be residing in the building. The fighting caused minor damage to the hospital. Several gunmen were killed, and weapons and ammunition were seized from inside the hospital building. No patients were hospitalized at the time.[ref]
</ref><ref>
[/ref]
It has been reported that during the conflict, vibrations caused by bombs damaged the ruins.   UNESCO offered help to coordinate restoration efforts.Karam,Zeina, "Cleanup to Start at old sites in Lebanon", AP, 4 October 2006

World Heritage Site

"Baalbeck, with its colossal structures, is one of the finest examples of Imperial Roman architecture at its apogee", UNESCO reported in making Baalbeck a World Heritage Site in 1984.  When the committee inscribed the site, it expressed the wish that the protected area include the entire town within the Arab walls, as well as the southwestern extramural quarter between Bastan-al-Khan, the Roman site and the Mameluk mosque of Ras-al-Ain. Lebanon's representative gave assurances that the committee's wish would be honored.
 

Moving the stones

The quarry was slightly higher up

Gallery

File:Baalbek-GenPix.jpg|The Eastern Façade
File:BaalbekTempleJupiter1.jpg|Temple of Jupiter
File:Baalbek - Lebanon.JPG|Temple of Jupiter From Below
File:BaalbekTempleJupiter3.jpg|Temple of Jupiter from the Great Court
File:BaalbekGreatCourt.jpg|Great court
File:BaalbekBacchusTemple.jpg|Temple of Bacchus
File:BaalbekBacchusTempleEntrance.jpg|Entrance into the Bacchus Temple
File:BaalbekPropylaea.jpg|Propylaea at the entrance of the site
File:BaalbekMosquePillars.jpg|Pillars of the former mosque
File:Grundplan af Baalbeks ruiner, Nordisk familjebok.png|Plan of the temple complex
File:Baalbek 1890 PD.jpg|View of Baalbeck 1890 – 1900
File:Baalbek-stoneofpregnantwoman.jpg|Stone of the Pregnant Woman
File:Baalbek- largest stone.jpg|The largest stone at Baalbeck
File:Baalbek shaft. Shaft of unknown function leads to the interior of what is now the museum.
File:Baalbek roof sculpture.jpg|Roof sculpture of an unknown God
File:Baalbek roof sculpture (Ceres).jpg|Roof sculpture of Ceres
File:Baalbek roof sculpture (Marcus Antonius).jpg|Roof sculpture of Mark Antony
File:Baalbek roof sculpture (Cleopatra).jpg|Roof sculpture of Cleopatra

Climate

Baalbeck experiences a semi-arid Mediterranean climate with hot, dry summers and relatively cold, sometimes snowy, winters.

International relations

Twin towns – Sister cities

Baalbeck is twinned with:
  | last = Syaifullah
  | first = M.
  | title = Yogyakarta dan Libanon Bentuk Kota Kembar
  | publisher = Tempo Interaktif
  | date = October 26, 2008
  | url = 
  | accessdate = 2010-01-25 }}</ref>



Notable People



 | last = Adam
 | first = Jean-Pierre
 | title = À propos du trilithon de Baalbeck: Le transport et la mise en oeuvre des mégalithes
 | journal = Syria
 | volume = 54
 | issue = 1/2
 | year = 1977
 | pages = 31–63
 | doi=10.3406/syria.1977.6623
}}
 | last = Ruprechtsberger
 | first = Erwin M.
 | title = Vom Steinbruch zum Jupitertempel von Heliopolis/Baalbeck (Libanon)
 | journal = Linzer Archäologische Forschungen
 | volume = 30
 | pages = 7–56
 | year = 1999
}}

Notes

Further reading




