[[W-League (Australia)]]

CATEGORIES: W-League (Australia), National association football premier leagues, Summer association football leagues, 2008 establishments in Australia, Women's soccer leagues in Australia, Sports leagues established in 2008, Women's association football leagues

The W-League is the top division of women's association football in Australia. Established in 2008, the league is composed of eight teams of which seven are affiliated with clubs in the A-League and their respective state federations. The eighth team based in Canberra. As the league is sponsored by the Westfield Group, it is now known as the Westfield W-League.

Competition format

The W-League's season typically runs from November to February and consists of 12 rounds.

History

Establishment

After the Australia women's national football team qualified for the quarterfinals of the 2007 FIFA Women's World Cup in China for the first time, head coach Tom Sermanni felt the establishment of a professional league was vital for continuing the development of players.
The Central Coast Mariners were forced to withdraw from the 2010–11 season due to a lack of funding and have yet to return.

Inaugural season, 2008

The W-League's inaugural season commenced on 25 October 2008, with Perth Glory hosting Sydney FC at Members Equity Stadium. After ten rounds, Queensland Roar were the top-placed team, becoming the first W-League premiers, and advancing to the semi-finals along with the second-, third- and fourth-placed teams. They faced Canberra United in the W-League Grand Final 2009, defeating them 2–0 to take the champions trophy.
One game per week (the 3:00 pm Saturday game) was broadcast live nationwide on ABC1."Brisbane Roar v Canberra United – Saturday, 3 October at 3pm on ABC1" The teams in the W-League have a salary cap of A$150,000 for the entire squad. By comparison, the salary cap for clubs in the corresponding men's competition, the A-League, is A$2.35 million.

Expansion

When the Western Sydney Wanderers joined the A-League for the 2012–13 season, they also entered a team into the W-League, returning the competition to eight teams.

Organisation

Current clubs

Broadcasting

Live matches are broadcast nationwide on ABC1 each Sunday at 3:00pm. Beginning in the 2013-14 season, Fox Sports will also broadcast two matches during the season. The matches will be part of W-League / A-League doubleheaders.

Stadiums

Primary venues currently used in the W-League:
Other venues previously used by W-League clubs include:
1Central Coast Mariners played this fixture as a home game against Canberra United.
2Sydney FC played this fixture as a home game against Perth Glory. It is also a 'curtain raiser' to the second game, to be played by the Mariners. Central Coast Mariners  played this fixture as a home game against Melbourne Victory.

Referees

The W-League features Women Referees and Assistant Referees from Australia. Referees include:

Champions and premiers

Queensland Roar changed their name to Brisbane Roar for the 2009 season.

Individual honours

League awards

The league presents annual awards for outstanding achievements including: 

W-League all-time top scorers

Shows players at current club or last club played for.
(*) Denotes players who have played for more than one W-League team.
Last updated 23 February 2014

Current and past foreign players in the league

Due to the W-League's season running during the off-season of several leagues around the world, many foreign players have played for teams in the league. Many players from countries such as Canada, England, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, the United States, and Wales have participated throughout the history of the league.








