[[Shared universe]]

CATEGORIES: Continuity (fiction), Fiction, Narratology, Role-playing game terminology, Setting

A shared universe is a fictional universe to which more than one writer contributes. Works set in a shared universe share characters and other elements with varying degrees of consistency. Shared universes are contrasted with collaborative writing, in which multiple authors work on a single story. Shared universes are more common in fantasy and science fiction than in other genres. Examples include Star Wars, DC Universe, Marvel Universe, Star Trek, Forgotten Realms, Babylon 5, Foundation series, Dragonlance, Power Rangers, Man-Kzin Wars, Cthulhu Mythos and the 1632 series.

Definitions

There is no formalized definition of when the appearance of fictional characters in another author's work constitutes a shared universe.  Fiction in some media, such as most television programs and many comic book titles, is understood to require the contribution of multiple authors and does not by itself create a shared universe.  Incidental appearances, such as that of d'Artagnan in Cyrano de Bergerac, may instead be considered literary cameo appearances.  More substantial interaction between characters from different sources is often marketed as a crossover. While crossovers occur in a shared universe, not all crossovers are intended to merge their settings' back-stories and are instead used for marketing, parody, or to explore what-if scenarios.
The term has also been used in a wider, non-literary sense to convey interdisciplinary often in the context of a "shared universe of discourse."

Characteristics

The modern definition of copyright, especially under United States copyright law, considers the expansion of a previous work's setting or characters to be a derivative work.  In a process similar to brand licensing, the intellectual property owners of established fictional settings at times allow others to author new material, creating an expanded universe.  Such franchises, generally based on television programs or film, allow for series of novels, video games, original sound recordings and other media.  Not all shared universe settings are simply the expansion or combination of pre-existing material by new authors.  At times, an author or group of authors has created a setting specifically for development by multiple authors, often through collaboration.
Especially when a shared universe grows to include a large number of works, it becomes difficult for writers to maintain an internally consistent continuity and to avoid contradicting details in earlier works.  The version that is deemed official by the author or company controlling the setting is known as canon.  Not all shared universes have a controlling entity capable of or willing to determine canonicity, and not all fans agree with these determinations when they occur.
Readers may also object when a story or series is integrated into a shared universe, feeling it "requires one hero's fans to buy other heroes' titles",

Expansion of existing material

In 1941, writer Gardner Fox at All-American Comics (later part of DC Comics) created the Justice Society of America in All-Star Comics #3, credited with being the first superhero team-up and laying the groundwork for the DC Universe, the first comic book shared universe.  DC and Marvel have also periodically co-published series in which their respective characters meet and interact.  These intercompany crossovers have typically been written as self-limiting events that avoid implying that the DC Universe and Marvel Universe co-exist. Exceptions include the twenty-four comics released under the metafictional imprint Amalgam Comics in 1996, depicting a shared universe populated by hybridizations of the two companies' characters.  Marvel has since referred to this as part of its setting's greater multiverse by labeling it Earth-692.
The Star Wars franchise takes a unique view regarding the canon properties of its expanded universe, introducing a four-tier system based on compatibility with the six films.  Star Trek canon is less well-defined, generally excluding not only licensed works such as books and video games and acknowledging that "even events in some of the movies have been called into question".  Furthermore, both franchises have blurred the lines between canon and non-canon content by adopting unofficial material into later official productions.

  Even Smith's summary does not address spin-offs such as the Bernice Summerfield novels and the Faction Paradox series that are legally distinct from the origins of their characters in officially licensed novels. Many fans consider only the television series canon and all other media apocrypha. The television series has never explicitly acknowledged any of the spin-offs, partly because the BBC's status as a public service broadcaster prohibits them from producing a programme that can only be fully understood by those who have purchased licensed products. Modern episodes of the programme since 2005 however have made both purist and fully inclusive positions relatively difficult, as they refer to concepts, characters and species introduced in comic books, audio dramas and novelizations, while also directly adapting Expanded Universe content depicting older Doctors into new episodes starring the television actors of the day.
The expansion of existing material into a shared universe is not restricted to settings licensed from movies and television.  For example, Larry Niven opened his Known Space setting to other writers initially because he considered his lack of military experience to prevent him from adequately describing the wars between mankind and the Kzinti.
A setting may also be expanded in a similar manner after the death of its creator, although this posthumous expansion does not meet some strict definitions of a shared universe.  One such example is August Derleth's development of the Cthulhu Mythos from the writings of H. P. Lovecraft, an approach whose result is considered by some to be "completely dissimilar" to Lovecraft's own works.

Original settings

Although DC and Marvel's successful shared universe approaches to comics have set them apart from competitors in the industry,
Many other published works of this nature take the form of a series of short-story anthologies with occasional standalone novels.  Examples include Robert Lynn Asprin's Thieves' World,
Role-playing games are inherently designed to include some aspects of the shared universe concept, as individual games are derived from the core material.  Campaign settings, such as Dungeons & Dragons's Faerûn, Dragonlance and Eberron, provide a more detailed world in which novels and other related media are additionally set.  Living campaigns, including the RPGA's Living Greyhawk provide an opportunity for individual games hosted worldwide to take part in a single continuity.
The influence of the Internet on collaborative and interactive fiction has also resulted in a large number of amateur shared universe settings.  Amateur authors have created shared universes by contributing to mailing lists, story archives and Usenet.  One of the earliest of these settings, SFStory, saw its spin-off setting Superguy cited as illustrative of the potential of the Internet.
At least one publisher has introduced a division specifically for encouraging and handling shared universe fiction.

Animated universes

An animated universe is a derivative of the shared universe that applies to animated works, including animated television series and films, which share the same characters and continuity with each other; it may also derive from the characters and continuity of previous literary serial works, including comics, and may thus be termed by the literary work from whence it derived. Notable examples of the animated universe include:

Anime universes

Japan has also created many animated universes:

Film universes

A film universe is a derivative of the shared universe that applies films. Notable examples of the film universe include:






