[[The Open Group]]

CATEGORIES: Unix, Open Group standards, POSIX, X Window System, Consortia, Standards organizations

The Open Group is a vendor and technology-neutral industry consortium, currently with over four hundred member organizations. It was formed in 1996 when X/Open merged with the Open Software Foundation. Services provided include strategy, management, innovation and research, standards, certification, and test development.
The Open Group is most famous as the certifying body for the UNIX trademark, which extends the POSIX standards and is the official definition of a UNIX system. The Open Group also develops and manages the TOGAF standard, which is an industry standard 
enterprise architecture framework.
The Open Group members include a range of IT buyers and vendors as well as government agencies, for example Capgemini, Fujitsu, Oracle, Hitachi, HP, Orbus Software, IBM, Kingdee, NEC, SAP, US Department of Defense, NASA and others.

History

By the early 1990s, the major UNIX system vendors had begun to realize that the standards rivalries often termed as the Unix wars were causing all participants more harm than good, leaving the UNIX industry open to emerging competition from Microsoft.  The COSE initiative in 1993 can be considered to be the first unification step and the merger of the Open Software Foundation (OSF) and X/Open in 1996 as the ultimate step in the end of those skirmishes. OSF had previously merged with UNIX International in 1994, meaning that the new entity effectively represented all elements of the Unix community of the time.
In January 1997, the responsibility for the X Window System was transferred to The Open Group from the defunct X Consortium. In 1999, X. The X.8 while The Open Group provided management services. In 2004, X.Org Foundation who then took control of the x. (See the history of the X Window System.)

Programs

Certification

The Open Group's best-known services are their certification programs, and UNIX.
The Open Group offers certifications for IT professionals. In addition to the TOGAF (The Open Group Architecture Framework) certification which covers tools, services and people certification, The Open Group also administers the Open Group Certified Architect (Open CA) certification program; the latter are skills and experience based certification programs.

Member forums

The Open Group provides a platform for its members to discuss their requirements, and work jointly on development and adoption of industry standards, to facilitate enterprise integration. (Note: Some of The Open Group documents are only available to members, especially when they are under development.) Based on their area of interest, members can join one or more semi-autonomous forums, which include:
Members come together at The Open Group's quarterly conferences and member meetings.

Collaboration services

The Open Group also provides a range of services to consortia agencies, suppliers, and companies or organizations set up by governments to advance government goals.

Inventions and standards








