[[Berne Convention]]

CATEGORIES: Copyright treaties, World Intellectual Property Organization treaties, 1886 treaties, Treaties entered into force in 1887, Treaties of Albania, Treaties of Algeria, Treaties of Andorra, Treaties of Antigua and Barbuda, Treaties of Argentina, Treaties of Armenia, Treaties of Australia, Treaties of the First Austrian Republic, Treaties of Azerbaijan, Treaties of the Bahamas, Treaties of Bahrain, Treaties of Bangladesh, Treaties of Barbados, Treaties of Belarus, Treaties of Belgium, Treaties of Belize, Treaties of the Republic of Dahomey, Treaties of Bhutan, Treaties of Bolivia, Treaties of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Treaties of Botswana, Treaties of the First Brazilian Republic, Treaties of Brunei, Treaties of the Kingdom of Bulgaria, Treaties of Burkina Faso, Treaties of Cameroon, Treaties of Canada, Treaties of Cape Verde, Treaties of the Central African Republic, Treaties of Chad, Treaties of Chile, Treaties of the People's Republic of China, Treaties of the United States of Colombia, Treaties of Comoros, Treaties of the Republic of the Congo (Léopoldville), Treaties of the Republic of the Congo, Treaties of Costa Rica, Treaties of Ivory Coast, Treaties of Croatia, Treaties of Cuba, Treaties of Cyprus, Treaties of the Czech Republic, Treaties of Czechoslovakia, Treaties of Denmark, Treaties of Djibouti, Treaties of the Dominican Republic, Treaties of Dominica, Treaties of Ecuador, Treaties of Egypt, Treaties of El Salvador, Treaties of Equatorial Guinea, Treaties of Estonia, Treaties of Fiji, Treaties of Finland, Treaties of the French Third Republic, Treaties of Gabon, Treaties of the Gambia, Treaties of Georgia (country), Treaties of the German Empire, Treaties of Ghana, Treaties of the Kingdom of Greece, Treaties of Grenada, Treaties of Guatemala, Treaties of Guinea, Treaties of Guinea-Bissau, Treaties of Guyana, Treaties of Haiti, Treaties of Honduras, Treaties extended to Hong Kong, Treaties of the Kingdom of Hungary (1920–46), Treaties of Iceland, Treaties of British India, Treaties of Indonesia, Treaties of the Irish Free State, Treaties of Israel, Treaties of the Kingdom of Italy (1861–1946), Treaties of Jamaica, Treaties of the Empire of Japan, Treaties of Jersey, Treaties of Jordan, Treaties of Kazakhstan, Treaties of Kenya, Treaties of North Korea, Treaties of South Korea, Treaties of Kyrgyzstan, Treaties of Laos, Treaties of Latvia, Treaties of Lebanon, Treaties of Lesotho, Treaties of Liberia, Treaties of Liechtenstein, Treaties of Lithuania, Treaties of Luxembourg, Treaties extended to Macau, Treaties of the Republic of Macedonia, Treaties of Madagascar, Treaties of Malawi, Treaties of Malaysia, Treaties of Mali, Treaties of Malta, Treaties of Mauritania, Treaties of Mauritius, Treaties of Mexico, Treaties of the Federated States of Micronesia, Treaties of Moldova, Treaties of Monaco, Treaties of Mongolia, Treaties of Montenegro, Treaties of Morocco, Treaties of Mozambique, Treaties of Namibia, Treaties of Nepal, Treaties of the Netherlands, Treaties of New Zealand, Treaties of Nicaragua, Treaties of Niger, Treaties of Nigeria, Treaties of Norway, Treaties of Oman, Treaties of the Dominion of Pakistan, Treaties of Panama, Treaties of Paraguay, Treaties of Peru, Treaties of the Philippines, Treaties of the Second Polish Republic, Treaties of the Portuguese First Republic, Treaties of Qatar, Treaties of the Kingdom of Romania, Treaties of Russia, Treaties of Rwanda, Treaties of Saint Kitts and Nevis, Treaties of Saint Lucia, Treaties of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Treaties of Samoa, Treaties of Saudi Arabia, Treaties of Senegal, Treaties of Serbia and Montenegro, Treaties of Singapore, Treaties of Slovakia, Treaties of Slovenia, Treaties of the Union of South Africa, Treaties of Spain under the Restoration, Treaties of the Dominion of Ceylon, Treaties of the Republic of the Sudan (1985–2011), Treaties of Suriname, Treaties of Swaziland, Treaties of Switzerland, Treaties of Sweden, Treaties of Syria, Treaties of Tajikistan, Treaties of Tanzania, Treaties of Thailand, Treaties of Togo, Treaties of Tonga, Treaties of Trinidad and Tobago, Treaties of Tunisia, Treaties of Turkey, Treaties of Ukraine, Treaties of the United Arab Emirates, Treaties of the United Kingdom (1801–1922), Treaties of the United States, Treaties of Uruguay, Treaties of Uzbekistan, Treaties of Vanuatu, Treaties of the Holy See, Treaties of Venezuela, Treaties of Vietnam, Treaties of Yemen, Treaties of Zambia, Treaties of Yugoslavia, Treaties of Zimbabwe, 1886 in Switzerland, Treaties extended to Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Treaties extended to the Australian Antarctic Territory, Treaties extended to Christmas Island, Treaties extended to Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Treaties extended to the Coral Sea Islands, Treaties extended to Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Treaties extended to Norfolk Island, Treaties extended to the Netherlands Antilles, Treaties extended to Aruba, Treaties extended to the Isle of Man, Treaties extended to West Berlin, Treaties of India

The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, usually known as the Berne Convention, is an international agreement governing copyright, which was first accepted in Berne, Switzerland, in 1886.

Content

The Berne Convention requires its signatories to recognize the copyright of works of authors from other signatory countries (known as members of the Berne Union) in the same way as it recognizes the copyright of its own nationals. For example, French copyright law applies to anything published or performed in France, regardless of where it was originally created.
In addition to establishing a system of equal treatment that internationalised copyright amongst signatories, the agreement also required member states to provide strong minimum standards for copyright law. 
Copyright under the Berne Convention must be automatic; it is prohibited to require formal registration (note however that when the United States joined the Convention in 1988, it continued to make statutory damages and attorney's fees only available for registered works).

Applicability

Under Article 3, the protection of the Convention applies to nationals and residents of signatory countries, and to works first published or simultaneously published (under Article 3(4), "simultaneously" is defined as "within 30 days") in a signatory country. Under Article 4, it also applies to cinematic works by persons who have their headquarters or habitual residence in a signatory country, and to architectural works situated in a signatory country.

Country of origin

The Convention relies on the concept of "country of origin". Often determining the country of origin is straightforward: when a work is published in a signatory country and nowhere else, this is the country of origin. However, under Article 5(4), when a work is published simultaneously in several signatory countries (under Article 3(4), "simultaneously" is defined as "within 30 days" Berne Convention Article 3.), the country with the shortest term of protection is defined as the country of origin. 
For works simultaneously published in a signatory country and one or more non-signatory countries, the signatory country is the country of origin. For unpublished works or works first published in a non-signatory country (without publication within 30 days in a signatory country), the author's nationality usually provides the country of origin, if a national of a signatory country. (There are exceptions for cinematic and architectural works.)
In the internet age, publication online may be considered publication in every sufficiently internet-connected jurisdiction in the world. It is not clear what this may mean for determining "country of origin". In Kernel v. Mosley, a U.S. court "concluded that a work created outside of the United States, uploaded in Australia and owned by a company registered in Finland was nonetheless a U.S. work by virtue of its being published online". However other U.S. courts in similar situations have reached different conclusions, e.g. Håkan Moberg v. 33T LLC., Shi, Sampsung Xiaoxiang, Foong, Cheryl, & Pappalardo, Kylie M. (2011), "Country of Origin and Internet Publication : Applying the Berne Convention in the Digital Age". Journal of Intellectual Property (NJIP) Maiden Edition, pp. 38–73. The matter of determining the country of origin for digital publication remains a topic of controversy among law academics as well.[ref] See for example the columns of Jane Ginsburg:
And the article 

Copyright term

The Berne Convention states that all works except photographic and cinematographic shall be copyrighted for at least 50 years after the author's death, but parties are free to provide longer terms,Berne Convention Article 7. as the European Union did with the 1993 Directive on harmonising the term of copyright protection. For photography, the Berne Convention sets a minimum term of 25 years from the year the photograph was created, and for cinematography the minimum is 50 years after first showing, or 50 years after creation if it hasn't been shown within 50 years after the creation. Countries under the older revisions of the treaty may choose to provide their own protection terms, and certain types of works (such as phonorecords and motion pictures) may be provided shorter terms.
If the author is unknown, because for example the author was deliberately anonymous or worked under a pseudonym, the Convention provides for a term of 50 years after publication ("after the work has been lawfully made available to the public"). However if the identity of the author becomes known, the copyright term for known authors (50 years after death) applies.
Although the Berne Convention states that the copyright law of the country where copyright is claimed shall be applied, Article 7(8) states that "unless the legislation of that country otherwise provides, the term shall not exceed the term fixed in the country of origin of the work", i.e., an author is normally not entitled a longer copyright abroad than at home, even if the laws abroad give a longer term. This is commonly known as "the rule of the shorter term". Not all countries have accepted this rule.

Fair use

The Berne Convention authorizes countries to allow "fair" uses of copyrighted works in other publications or broadcasts.[ref]
