[[Curtly Ambrose]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, Living people, West Indies One Day International cricketers, West Indies Test cricketers, West Indian cricketers, West Indian cricketers of 1970–71 to 1999–2000, Leeward Islands cricketers, Northamptonshire cricketers, Wisden Cricketers of the Year, Cricketers at the 1992 Cricket World Cup, Cricketers at the 1996 Cricket World Cup, Cricketers at the 1999 Cricket World Cup, Cricketers at the 1998 Commonwealth Games, Wisden Leading Cricketers in the World, International Cricket Council Hall of Fame inductees, Antigua and Barbuda cricketers, Cricket players and officials awarded knighthoods

Sir Curtly Elconn Lynwall Ambrose (born 21 September 1963) is a former cricketer from Antigua who played 98 Test matches for the West Indies. A fast bowler, he took 405 Test wickets at an average of 20.99 and topped the ICC Player Rankings for much of his career to be rated the best bowler in the world. His great height—he is 6 feet 7 inches (2.01 m) tall—allowed him to make the ball bounce unusually high after he delivered it; allied to his pace and accuracy, it made him a difficult bowler for batsmen to face. A man of few words during his career, he was notoriously reluctant to speak to journalists. He was chosen as one of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year in 1992; after he retired he was entered into the International Cricket Council Hall of Fame and selected as one of West Indies all-time XI by a panel of experts.
Born in Swetes, Antigua, Ambrose came to cricket at a relatively late age, having preferred basketball in his youth, but quickly made an impression as a fast bowler. Progressing through regional and national teams, he was first chosen for the West Indies in 1988. He was almost immediately successful and remained in the team until his retirement in 2000. On many occasions, his bowling was responsible for the West Indies winning matches which seemed lost, particularly in association with Courtney Walsh. Against Australia in 1993, he took seven wickets while conceding a single run; in 1994 he was largely responsible for bowling England out for 46 runs, taking six for 24 (six wickets for 24 runs).
Ambrose's bowling method relied on accuracy and conceding few runs; several of his best performances came when he took wickets in quick succession to devastate the opposition. He was particularly successful against leading batsmen. From 1995, Ambrose was increasingly affected by injury, and several times critics claimed that he was no longer effective. However, he continued to take wickets regularly up until his retirement, although he was sometimes less effective in the early matches of a series. In his final years, the West Indies team was in decline and often relied heavily on Ambrose and Walsh; both men often bowled with little support from the other bowlers. Following his retirement, Ambrose has pursued a career in music as the bass guitarist in a reggae band. He was knighted by the Antiguan government in 2014.

Early life and career

Ambrose was born in Swetes, Antigua on 21 September 1963,. Around this time, his mother encouraged him to become more involved in cricket. Success as a fast bowler in a softball cricket match persuaded Ambrose to play in some club matches at the age of 20. He quickly attracted the attention of coaches and progressed to the St John's cricket team. Selected in the Leeward Islands competition, he took seven for 67 (seven wickets for 67 runs) for Antigua against St Kitts. 12. He made his first-class debut for the Leeward Islands in 1985–86 and took four wickets in the game, but failed to retain his place the following year. A local scholarship provided funding for him to play in English club cricket for Chester Boughton Hall in the Liverpool league during 1986. The following year, he returned to England to play for Heywood Cricket Club in the Central Lancashire League, for whom he took 115 wickets in the season; the experiences helped to improve his bowling technique.
When he returned to Antigua, Ambrose was determined to regain his place in the Leeward Islands team and practised hard. He was selected and, in the absence of leading bowlers Winston Benjamin and Eldine Baptiste with the West Indies team, became the main attacking bowler in the side. He was no-balled for throwing in the first match, which Wisden Cricketers' Almanack later attributed to confusion caused by his attribute of flicking his wrist prior to releasing the ball to impart extra pace, and there were no subsequent doubts about the legality of his bowling action. Retaining his place when the international bowlers returned, he took 35 wickets—including 12 in a match against Guyana, of which nine were bowled—in five matches in the competition to set a new record for most wickets in a season. Wisden's report on the West Indian season said his performance was "dominant", although few had heard of him previously. Identifying his yorker as his most effective delivery, it noted that he "never lost his pace, his accuracy, or his thirst for wickets".

International bowler

Debut and first years

When Pakistan toured the West Indies in 1988, Ambrose played in the One Day International (ODI) series, taking the place of the recently retired Joel Garner. Ambrose made his debut during the first match, on 12 March 1988 in Kingston, Jamaica. He took wickets with his third and ninth deliveries and ended the innings with four for 39 from 10 overs. In the second match, he took four for 35 and followed with another two wickets in the third game. West Indies won those first three matches to take the series, and Ambrose did not play in the fourth or fifth matches. 981–83, 985–86. In the Test series which followed, Ambrose was less effective. In the first Test, he took two for 121 as West Indies lost at home for the first time in 10 years. 986–87. Wisden noted that his debut was "unimpressive", but that he improved in the subsequent matches. 978. He finished the series with seven wickets at an average of over 50 runs per wicket. Later that year, Ambrose was chosen to tour England. After appearing in early tour games, he was chosen for the first two ODIs, taking three wickets in total, but was omitted from the third. 288–92. In the Test series, he played in all five matches to take 22 wickets at an average of 20.22; his best figures of four for 58 came in the fourth Test, in which he took seven wickets and was named man of the match. 284, 305–07. Writing in Wisden, commentator Tony Cozier described Ambrose as "a ready-made replacement for Garner"; the amount of bounce he generated after the ball pitched "made him a constant menace". 281.
In 1988–89, West Indies took part in an ODI tournament in Sharjah. Ambrose took 8 wickets,

County cricketer and success against England

Northamptonshire County Cricket Club signed Ambrose to play for the team in 1988, but owing to his commitments to the touring West Indies team that year, his debut for the county came in 1989.
Early in 1990, England toured the West Indies and played four Tests—a fifth was abandoned owing to rain. The visiting team dominated the first part of the series but West Indies eventually won 2–1. 967–70. Ambrose was unfit for the first Test, which West Indies lost, and the first four ODIs, but returned to take four for 18 in an ODI organised to replace the rained-off second Test. 974–79. After a drawn third Test, West Indies won the fourth game. The home captain, Viv Richards, set England 356 to win, but after losing early wickets, the English batsmen entered the last hour of the game with five wickets still to fall. Ambrose took the new ball and removed the last five batsmen for 18 runs in 46 deliveries,

Leading bowler in the world

Wisden cricketer of the year

West Indies toured Pakistan in late 1990, and Ambrose topped the team's bowling averages in a three-match series which was drawn 1–1. He took 14 wickets at 17.07,Ahmed (1992), pp. 1,012–13. but was overshadowed slightly by the performances of Ian Bishop. 1,011. He played the first two ODIs, but missed the third after Pakistan had already won the series, and his best figures in the Tests came in the final match when he took five for 35. 1,014–16, 1,022. Then, when Australia toured West Indies from February 1991, Ambrose took 18 wickets in the five Tests at an average of 27.38. West Indies won the series 2–1, and Ambrose was fourth in the averages,Cozier (1992), p. 1,044. but Tony Cozier observed in Wisden that the whole West Indies attack was dependable. 1,043. Ambrose made an impression batting as part of a West Indian lower batting order which repeatedly added crucial runs during the series. He took part in two important partnerships to help his team recover from a difficult situation, and in the third match, he scored his only half-century in Tests. He also took 20 wickets for Leeward Islands.
West Indies' next matches were in England. The Test series was drawn 2–2 and Ambrose was the team's leading wicket-taker with 28 (averaging 20.00); he also came top of the bowling averages. 297–98. He had a particular impact on Graeme Hick, who was appearing in Test cricket for the first time, dismissing him six times in seven innings with short-pitched bowling. Accurate bowling was important in the series, played on a series of slow-paced pitches; according to Scyld Berry, writing in Wisden, "Since the 1988 tour, Ambrose had improved his control to the point where a batsman had to play almost every ball—and not with a scoring stroke, either". 294. Berry suggests that West Indies may have won the series had Viv Richards used a different tactical approach with Ambrose's bowling. The bowler was not fully fit in the final Test, which may have affected the outcome. Berry also describes "Ambrose's rise to the status of a giant—with the mannerism of celebrating each wicket by whirling his arms upwards, like a flock of doves taking to the air." Ambrose twice took five wickets in an innings—his best figures were six for 52 in the first Test, when he twice took wickets with consecutive deliveries. 309. Ambrose was named man-of the-match in the third Test and adjudged West Indies man-of-the-series. 317, 328. For his performances, Ambrose was named one of Wisden's Cricketers of the Year. The citation remarked on his consistency and stated: "Ambrose has the ability to exert a debilitating psychological influence which so often precipitates a cluster of wickets after the initial breach has been made ... Moreover, he was arguably the essential difference between the two sides in what proved to be a zestful series." The West Indies wicket-keeper, Jeff Dujon, said: ""He is mature beyond his years, has pace, accuracy, heart and determination, plus, importantly, real pride in economical figures."
During the 1991–92 season, West Indies played mainly one-day cricket, taking part in tournaments in Sharjah—

Second tour of Australia

The West Indies toured Australia in 1992–93, recovering from losing the second Test to win the final two matches and take the series 2–1. The team also won the annual World Series Cup. In the first three Tests, Ambrose was hampered by pitches which did not suit his bowling and was often unlucky when he bowled,Cozier (1994), pp. 1,044–47. although he took five for 66 in the first Test. In the final two matches, he took 19 wickets. In the fourth match he took ten wickets, including six for 74 in the first innings; in the second innings, he took three wickets in 19 deliveries as West Indies won the match by one run. According to Wisden, the captains of both teams, Richie Richardson and Allan Border, "paid tribute to the man who made the result possible: Ambrose consolidated his reputation as the world's leading bowler". 1,057–58. Then on the first day of the decisive final Test, Ambrose took seven wickets at the cost of one run from 32 deliveries and finished with figures of seven for 25. Wisden described it as "one of Test cricket's most devastating spells". 1,059–60. West Indies won by an innings and Ambrose was named man of the series, having taken 33 wickets to equal the record in an Australia-West Indies Test series. He topped the West Indies bowling averages with an average of 16.42. In Wisden, Tony Cozier described Ambrose's performance as "instrumental in winning series" and his bowling as "flawless". In the one-day tournament, Ambrose took 18 wickets at 13.38. He took eight wickets in the two-match final—both games were won by the West Indies. In the first final, he took five for 32, driven to bowl with more hostility when the Australian batsman Dean Jones asked him to remove his white wristbands while bowling. He followed up with three for 26 in the second match to be named player of the finals.
Having developed a slower ball, and using the yorker more sparingly,

More success against England

When he returned to the West Indies, Ambrose took 19 first-class wickets for the Leeward Islands at an average of 11.68, But he played in three times in the five-match ODI series to take two wickets, and took a further two wickets in the first Test, which West Indies won. 995–1,001. In Wisden, Alan Lee described his performances at this time as "lethargic",Lee (1995), p. 1,002. and in the Guardian, Paul Allott wrote that he bowled "like a shadow" owing to the effects of continuous cricket. England made a good start to the second Test, and Ambrose was again ineffective, but he recovered later in the innings, and ended the match with eight wickets; according to Lee, he "struck the critical blows of the match in the first innings. In the third Test, played in Trinidad, he took five for 60 in England's first innings, but after the visiting team built a substantial lead, West Indies were bowled out to leave England a target of 194 to win. With an hour left on the fourth evening for England to bat, Ambrose took six wickets to leave England 40 for eight at the close of play; the next morning, they were bowled out for 46 and Ambrose had figures of six for 24 in the innings and match figures of 11 for 84. 1,005–06. Ambrose was named man of the match. Lee described the collapse as "staggering", and judged Ambrose bowling to be "of the highest calibre". He continued: "He delivered one of the most devastating spells of even his career." Allott called it "the definitive spell of fast bowling". Ambrose took four wickets in the fourth Test, but West Indies lost the match, their first defeat in Barbados for 59 years, and Ambrose was fined £1,000 by the match referee for knocking down his stumps in frustration when he was the last man out. 1,009. He took one more wicket in the drawn final Test to finish the series with 26 wickets and top the West Indian bowling averages. 992. Writing in Wisden, Lee summarised Ambrose's performances: "Ambrose was magnificent. He was deservedly named man of the series, not only for taking 26 wickets at an average of 19.96 apiece and winning the Trinidad Test single-handed, but for the more profound truth that West Indies now look to him whenever they need wickets ... He carried the attack alone". 990.
Ambrose returned to play for Northamptonshire in 1994, but arrived later than scheduled. Claiming that he needed a rest, During the remainder of the season, he bowled extremely effectively to take 77 first-class wickets, the most for the club in 18 years, at an average of 14.45 to top the national bowling averages. According to Andrew Radd in Wisden, the club were mollified by his success, but he wrote: "Rarely in Northamptonshire's history have the performances and the personality of one cricketer dominated a season to the extent that Curtly Ambrose did in 1994." Ambrose missed the final match of the season with a shoulder problem.

Apparent decline

Shoulder injury

Ambrose's shoulder injury, caused by his bowling workload, He remained in the team when Australia toured the Caribbean later in 1995; the West Indies lost the Test series 2–1, their first defeat in a Test series since 1980. 1,120. After taking two wickets in four ODIs,Craddock, pp. 1,124–28. Ambrose took 13 wickets at 19.84 in the four-Test series to lead the West Indian averages. 1,123. He took nine of these wickets in Trinidad during the third Test, when West Indies levelled the series having lost the first Test (the second was drawn). 1,130–34. Bowling on a pitch that was extremely difficult for batting, and which both teams considered to be unsatisfactory, Ambrose took nine for 65 in the match and was named man of the match. During the game, Ambrose had to be pulled away from a verbal confrontation with Steve Waugh by the captain, Richardson. 1,134. But outside of this match, the Australian team judged his bowling to have declined in pace following his shoulder injury, and that he lacked the variety to adapt to a different role. 1,122. The West Indies' cricket manager, former Test bowler Andy Roberts, publicly claimed during the series that several of his team possessed "attitude problems", and complained that the fast bowlers would not follow his advice. 339.
During the tour of England which followed, Ambrose did not take a wicket in the three-match ODI series; according to journalist Simon Barnes, both Ambrose and the team lacked confidence following their defeat by Australia; he lacked rhythm and displayed signs of frustration and unhappiness.
Along with other senior players, Ambrose was rested from West Indies' next tour, an ODI tournament in October 1995,

Team in decline

Following Australia's victory in 1994–95, when West Indies toured Australia in 1996–97 the series was heavily publicised as a re-match. However, the visiting team were often ineffective, continuing a trend of decline, and depended heavily on their senior players, one of whom was Ambrose. He began the series poorly, continuing a pattern established in several preceding series, and critics suggested that he was no longer effective. 1,063–64. After taking only three wickets in the first two Tests, both of which were lost by West Indies, Ambrose told his team-mates that he would take ten wickets in the third. On a difficult pitch for batting, he managed to take nine in the match, including three in the first hour of the game, despite struggling with a hamstring injury. West Indies won, and Ambrose was named man of the match,Baum, p. 1,072. but he missed the fourth Test with an injury. Writing in Wisden, Greg Baum suggested that Ambrose absence possibly affected the outcome of the series; Australia won easily to ensure they won the series. Ambrose returned for the final match, and on another difficult batting pitch, took five for 43 on the first day. West Indies won and Ambrose was again man of the match. 1,075. He led the West Indies bowling averages with 19 wickets at 23.36,Baum, p. 1,066. but had been the driving factor in West Indies' two wins. Ambrose also played in an ODI tournament during the tour of Australia, taking nine wickets at 27.33. Later in the season, between March and May 1997, India toured West Indies; Ambrose took ten wickets at 30.10 in the Test series, including five for 87 in the second Test, but was no longer the home team's most effective bowler. 1,111–12. Then in June, Sri Lanka played a two-Test series, won 1–0 by West Indies. In the first, Ambrose took five for 37 in the first innings, and eight wickets in the game, to be named man of the match. This included his 300th wicket in Test matches; he was the 12th bowler, and fourth West Indian, to reach this landmark. 1,131–32. Ambrose also played five ODIs during the West Indies home season, taking nine wickets.
West Indies' loss of form continued in late 1997 when they lost every international match during their tour of Pakistan. 1,094–95. Ambrose played in two out of West Indies' three matches in an ODI tournament, taking one wicket, but his performance in taking one wicket in the two Test matches he played—he missed the third match with injury—prompted Fazeer Mohammed, writing in Wisden, to describe Ambrose as "a shadow of his former self". Any danger that Ambrose might have retired after this series was forestalled when Brian Lara was appointed West Indies captain and immediately spoke to Ambrose and Walsh to ask them to continue in the team. 1,023. When England toured the West Indies between January and April 1998, he took 30 wickets at 14.26 to top the bowling averages for the series. 1,027. Many of the pitches during the tour were poor for batting, but Ambrose was very effective, particularly in the second, third and fourth Tests. In addition, he dismissed Mike Atherton, the England captain, six times in the series. Scyld Berry wrote in Wisden that Ambrose was "back to something near his peak form ... He defied every prediction that he was finished after his tour of Pakistan." In the second Test, Ambrose took eight wickets; he conceded only 23 runs from 26 overs in the first innings and bowled a spell of five wickets for 16 runs from 47 deliveries in the second to complete figures of five for 52. 1,034–35. Having won the second match, West Indies lost the third, but according to Matthew Engel, "Ambrose's abiding power was the most constant feature of a fluctuating match". 1,037–38. His eight wickets in the game, including five for 25 in the first innings, took him past fifty Test wickets in Trinidad. He followed up with six wickets in West Indies victory in the fourth Test, taking four for 38 in the final innings. Tony Cozier wrote that Ambrose "thundered in, arms and knees pumping like pistons, to generate all of his old pace."Cozier, Tony in Berry (1998), pp. 1,041–42. Following the Test series, which West Indies won 3–1, Ambrose played in the first three matches of the ODI series,Berry (1999), pp. 1,048–52. and took three wickets.

Final years of career

Ambrose and Walsh missed the Mini World Cup ODI tournament in October 1998,Cozier (2000), p. 1,329. in Ambrose's case following damage to his house caused by Hurricane Georges.
Following the World Cup, the West Indian selectors chose to rest Ambrose, along with Walsh, from alternate ODI tournaments. Ambrose consequently missed two ODI series, but in October 1999 he played two ODIs in a series against Bangladesh in Dhaka and three in a tournament in Sharjah.
Before his next series, a five-match series in England, Ambrose announced that he would retire after the final Test, He took four wickets in the first innings of both the third and fourth Tests, passing 400 wickets in the latter match. 447. After he took three wickets in his final Test match, the crowd gave him a standing ovation and the England players formed a guard-of-honour when he came out to bat. 29. 454. In 98 Test matches, he took 405 wickets at an average of 20.99; according to Mike Selvey, in Swetes,  his mother rang a bell each time he took a Test wicket.
Having retired from cricket, Ambrose has concentrated on music, playing with several bands.

Style and technique

Mike Selvey wrote in The Guardian in 1991 that Ambrose had "the sort of easy, repetitive, no-sweat action which is the key to unyielding accuracy. There is no respite and all his other qualities are byproducts." At his peak, Ambrose did not rely on pronounced swing or seam movement of the ball. Instead, he repeatedly bowled into the same areas of the pitch and the height from which he delivered the ball made him extremely difficult to face. The ball bounced sharply after pitching, sometimes deviating slightly from a straight line after pitching on the seam, and frequently took the edge of the batsman's bat to be caught behind the wicket. His 1992 citation as Wisden Cricketer of the Year states that he had "outright pace and he generates a disconcerting, steepling bounce from fuller-length deliveries ... His height and a slender, sinewy wrist contribute greatly to the final velocity the ball, the wrist snapping forward at the instant of release to impart extra thrust". Writing in 2001 following Ambrose's retirement, Michael Atherton, whom Ambrose dismissed more often than any other batsman, said: "At his best, there is no doubt that Ambrose moved beyond the fine line that separates the great from the very good. Quality bowlers essentially need two of three things: pace, movement and accuracy. Ambrose had all three."Atherton, pp. 29–31.
Ambrose's height, and the accuracy with which he bowled, made it difficult for batsmen to play forward to the ball; instead they were forced to play with their weight going back. His accuracy meant that he was effective if the pitch favoured batsmen.
As of 2012, Ambrose's 405 Test wickets place him 11th on the list of leading Test wicket-takers. became associated with him throughout his career, but he was more willing to talk to journalists after he retired.



Notes



Bibliography




