[[Aliwan Fiesta]]

CATEGORIES: Festivals in the Philippines, Events in Metro Manila

Aliwan Fiesta is an annual event that gathers different cultural festivals of the Philippines in Star City Complex in Pasay City wherein contingents compete in dance parade and float competitions, as well as in a beauty pageant.  Organized by Manila Broadcasting Company (MBC) together with Cultural Center of the Philippines (CCP) and the cities of Manila and Pasay, the event is dubbed as "The Mother of All Fiestas," with prizes totaling to P3 million (roughly US$70,000).  Aliwan Fiesta, which began in 2003, aims to showcase the different Filipino cultures and heritage not only to the people in Metro Manila but also to the rest of the world.

Competition

Aliwan Fiesta is divided into three categories:  Cultural Street Dance Competition (the main event), Float Parade, and Reyna ng Aliwan (Queen of Entertainment/Amusement) beauty pageant.  Each of the country's 17 regions have the option to send up to two contingents representing its respective cultural festival, as well as an option to send a representing float and or beauty pageant contestant.
Meanwhile, the participating floats are only allowed to use local textiles, produce, flowers, and other products specific in their representing city in decorating the vehicles.  Each float, portraying local folklore and indigenous traditions, is topped by a participant of Reyna ng Aliwan serving as muse.
The top ten contingents in the cultural dance and float competitions receive cash prizes, with the top float winner receiving P500,000 (roughly US$11,000) and the winning cultural dance group getting P1 million (about US$23,000) as well as the bragging rights of becoming the champion of Aliwan Fiesta.  Meanwhile, the Reyna ng Aliwan receives P100,000 (roughly US$2,300).

Winners

Dinagyang Festival of Iloilo City has won the most number of wins in the cultural dance category including four straight championships from 2010 to 2013. Dinagyang Festival is the first festival to be inducted to the Aliwan Hall of Fame for winning five times (2007, 2008. In addition, Dinagyang has also copped second places from 2006 to 2008.  Another contingent from Cebu, Sinulog sa Carmen, also won 3rd place year 2008 (both contingents, Lumad Basakanon of Cebu City and Sinulog sa Carmen from the Cebu Province, landed in the top three wherein Lumad Basakanon garnered the Aliwan Hall-of-Fame).  Other Aliwan Fiesta champions include Halad Festival of Midsayap, Cotabato (2003) and 2004 Dinagyang's Tribu Atub-Atub, 2005 Dinagyang's Pintados de Passi of Passi City, Iloilo 2010 Dinagyang's Tribu Paghidaet and Dinagyang's Tribu Pan-ay in 2011, won the street dance championship. Aside from the official Aliwan Fiesta website, there is a decent blog that has a listing of the winners for 2010 with videos on display.

Coffee table book

MBC presented a coffee table book in 2008 entitled Aliwan Fiesta: Celebrating Life In These 7,107 Islands.  It was documented by cultural affairs specialist Susan Isorena-Arcega, featuring various photographs taken during Aliwan Fiesta's first five years.  The book aims to tackle the Filipino's festive psyche, the multi-pronged treatise on what the Philippine festivals are rooted in, and the display of cultural heritage through dance and craftsmanship.



Footnotes


