[[Tux]]

CATEGORIES: Linux, Computing mascots, Bird mascots, Fictional penguins, Free software culture and documents, Linux kernel

Tux is a penguin character and the official mascot of the Linux kernel. linux. In video games featuring the character, female counterparts named Penny and Gown accompany him. The character is used in many other Linux programs and as a general symbol of Linux.

History

Origins

The concept of the Linux mascot being a penguin came from Linus Torvalds, the creator of Linux. Tux was created by Larry Ewing in 1996 after an initial suggestion made by Alan CoxRe: Linux logo. Ussg.iu. Retrieved on 2013-07-04. and further refined by Linus Torvalds on the Linux kernel mailing list. Ussg.iu. Retrieved on 2013-07-04. Torvalds took his inspiration from an image he found on an FTP site,Re: Linux logo. Lkml. Retrieved on 2013-07-04. showing a penguin figurine looking strangely like the Creature Comforts characters made by Nick Park. The first person to call the penguin "Tux" was James Hughes, who said that it stood for "(T)orvalds (U)ni(X)".0 really _is_ released..). Ussg.iu. Retrieved on 2013-07-04. However, tux is also an abbreviation of tuxedo, the outfit which springs to mind when one sees a penguin.
Tux was originally designed as a submission for a Linux logo contest. Three such competitions took place; Tux won none of them. This is why Tux is formally known as the Linux mascot and not the logo. Sjbaker. Retrieved on 2013-07-04. Tux was created version (0.54) of GIMP, a free software graphics package. It was released by him under the following condition:

According to Jeff Ayers, Linus Torvalds had a "fixation for flightless, fat waterfowl" and Torvalds claims to have contracted "penguinitis" after being gently nibbled by a penguin: "Penguinitis makes you stay awake at nights just thinking about penguins and feeling great love towards them."
In an interview Linus commented on the penguin bite:

Tuz 2009

Tuz was the mascot of the 2009 linux.au conference. It has been chosen by Linus Torvalds as the logo for version 2.6.29 of the Linux kernelLinus' git commit from Rusty Russell. Git.org. Retrieved on 2013-07-04. to support the effort to save the Tasmanian devil species from extinctionThe kernel gets a new logo. LWN. Retrieved on 2013-07-04. due to the devil facial tumour disease.
The image was designed by Andrew McGown and recreated as an Inkscape SVG by Josh Bush,One Bush who has designs on LCA2009. Itwire. Retrieved on 2013-07-04. and released under Creative Commons license CC-BY-SA.txt from Linux kernel source code. Git.org. Retrieved on 2013-07-04.

Linux for Workgroups 2013

For the Linux 3.11-rc1 release, Linus Torvalds changed the code name from "Unicycling Gorilla" to "Linux for Workgroups" and modified the logo that some systems display when booting to depict a Tux holding a flag with a symbol that is reminiscent of the logo of Windows for Workgroups 3.11, which was released in 1993.Linux for Workgroups, The H Open, 2013-07-15

Uses and reception

In some Linux distributions, for example Gentoo, Tux greets the user during booting with multi-processor systems displaying multiple images of Tux, one for each processor core.

Video games

Tux has taken on a role in the Linux community similar to that which Mario holds in the Nintendo community. He has been featured in open-source look-alikes of other mainstream games, such as Tux Racer, Extreme Tux Racer, Tux Math Scrabble, TuxWordSmith Tux Math, SuperTux, SuperTuxKart, and Tux Paint. See also List of video games with Tux below.

=Female Tux versions in video games=

Some games that star Tux also include explicitly female penguin characters, allowing the players to play as one of those characters instead of Tux. One such female penguin is Tux's friend "Gown". Gown is variously depicted as being a pink version of Tux (XTux) or as having a somewhat less fat appearance and wearing items of clothing such as a red and white short skirt and a hair bow (e.g. TuxKart and A Quest for Herring).
In SuperTux and SuperTuxKart, there is a different female penguin called "Penny" who is purple and white (SuperTuxKart once had Gown and still has a map called "Gown's Bow"). In the arcade game Tux 2 there is a female penguin called "Trixi", and in FreeCiv the female leader name for the Antarctican civilization is "Tuxette".

Tux in popular culture

Other uses

List of video games with Tux

Several computer games, mostly free and open source and/or for Linux, have included Tux, including:

Media

File:Crystal_128_penguin.png|Tux Crystal 1st revision
File:Tux-G2.svg|Tux Crystal 2nd revision
File:Pax tux.png|PaX version of Tux
File:Slackware-mascot.jpeg|Slackware version of Tux
File:Tux.svg|High-quality 3D vectorized Tux
File:Tux-simple.svg|2D vectorized Tux
File:NewTux.svg|Crystallized Tux
File:Tux-Shirt.svg|Make your own Tux shirt
File:Linux penguin.jpg|Tux plush toy from Novell
File:Tux the penguin.jpg|Tux the collectible








