[[Metz]]

CATEGORIES: Metz, Communes of Moselle, Imperial free cities, Prefectures in France

Metz (
Metz has a rich 3,000-year-history,Bour R. (2007) Histoire de Metz, nouvelle édition. Eds. Serpenoise. ISBN 978-2-87692-728-5  The Merovingian ca
la République messine. Eds. Serpenoise. ISBN 978-2-87692-709-4 
Because of its historical, cultural, and architectural background, Metz has been submitted on the France's UNESCO World Heritage Tentative List. Metz is home to some world-class venues including the Arsenal Concert Hall and the Centre Pompidou-Metz museum.
A basin of urban ecology,Pelt J.M. (1977) L'Homme re-naturé. Eds. Seuil. ISBN 2-02-004589-3 
A historic garrison town, Metz is the economic heart of the Lorraine region, specialising in information technology and automotive industries. Metz is home to the University of Lorraine and a centre for applied research and development in the materials sector, notably in metallurgy and metallography,

Etymology

In ancient times, the town was known as "city of Mediomatrici", being inhabited by the tribe of the same name. (2010) Metz, 2000 years of history. Eds. Serpenoise. ISBN 978-2-87692-845-9 pp. 8–9 After its integration into the Roman Empire, the city was called Divodurum Mediomatricum, meaning Holy Village or Holy Fortress of the Mediomatrici,Toussaint M. (1948) Metz à l'époque gallo-romaine. Eds. Impr. P. Even. pp. 21–22  then it was known as Mediomatrix. During the 5th century AD, the name evolved to "Mettis", which gave rise to Metz.

History

Metz has a recorded history dating back over 3,000 years. Before the conquest of Gaul by Julius Caesar in 52 BC, it was the oppidum of the Celtic Mediomatrici tribe. Integrated into the Roman Empire, Metz became quickly one of the principal towns of Gaul with a population of 40,000,Vigneron B. (1986) Metz antique: Divodurum Mediomatricorum. Eds. Maisonneuve. ISBN 2-7160-0115-4 
During the 1950s, Metz was chosen to be the capital of the newly created Lorraine region. (2012) Histoire politique de la Lorraine, de 1900 à nos jours. Eds. Serpenoise. ISBN 978-2-87692-881-7  With the creation of the European Community and the later European Union, the city has became central to the Greater Region and the SaarLorLux Euroregion.

Geography

Metz is located on the banks of the Moselle and the Seille rivers, 
The terrain of Metz forms part of the Paris Basin and presents a plateau relief cut by river valleys presenting cuestas in the north-south direction. and Pautrot C. (2006) Géologie et géographie de la Lorraine. Eds. Serpenoise. ISBN 2-87692-632-6 

Climate

The climate of Lorraine is a semi-continental climate.S. (2011) 2000 ans de climat en Alsace et en Lorraine. Eds. Coprur. ISBN 978-2-84208-209-3 
The length of the day varies significantly over the course of the year. The shortest day is 21 December with 8:01 hours of sunlight; the longest day is 20 June with 15:58 hours of sunlight. The median cloud cover is 93% and does not vary substantially over the course of the year.

Demographics

]]

Population

The inhabitants of Metz are called Messin(e)s. Statistics on the ethnic and religious make up of the population of Metz are haphazard, as the French Republic prohibits making distinctions between citizens regarding race, beliefs, and political and philosophic opinions in the process of census taking.A law from 1872 forbids the collection by the state of census data based on questions about religious beliefs. The French Third Republic considered that kind of information to be private and that any citizen of the Republic should be considered as equal of his mates, regardless his private life. In accordance with the concept of laïcité, this principle was reaffirmed by the current French Fifth Republic in a law from 1978, stating that "it is forbidden to collect or process data of a personal nature related to racial or ethnic origins as well as political, philosophic, or religious opinions."
The French national census of 2009 estimated the population of Metz to be 121,841, while the population of Metz urban agglomeration was about 389,851.

Notable people linked to the city

Several well-known figures have been linked to the city of Metz throughout its history. Renowned Messins include poet Paul Verlaine, composer Ambroise Thomas, and mathematician Jean-Victor Poncelet; numerous well-known German figures were also born in Metz notably during the annexation periods. Moreover, the city has been the residence of people such as writer François Rabelais, Cardinal Mazarin, political thinker Alexis de Tocqueville, French patriot and American Revolutionary War hero the Marquis de La Fayette, and Luxembourg-born German-French statesman Robert Schuman.

Law and government

Local law

Local law () applied in Metz is a legal system that operates in parallel with French law. Created in 1919, it preserves the French laws applied in France before 1870 and maintained by the Germans during the annexation of Alsace-Lorraine, but repealed in the rest of France after 1871. It also maintains German laws enacted by the German Empire between 1871 and 1918, specific provisions adopted by the local authorities, and French laws that have been enacted after 1919 to be applicable only in Alsace-Lorraine. This specific local legislation encompasses different areas including religion, social work and finance.
The most striking of the legal differences between France and Alsace-Lorraine is the absence in Alsace-Lorraine of strict secularism, even though a constitutional right of freedom of religion is guaranteed by the French government. Alsace-Lorraine is still governed by a pre-1905 law established by the Concordat of 1801, which provides for the public subsidy of the Roman Catholic, Lutheran, and Calvinist churches and the Jewish religion.

Administration

Like every commune of the present French Republic, Metz is managed by a mayor (
The city belongs to the Metz Metropole union of cities, which includes the 40 cities of the Metz urban agglomeration. Metz is the seat of government of Lorraine region and the prefecture of the Moselle, based in the former Saint-Clement Abbey and Intendant Palace, respectively.

City administrative divisions

The city of Metz is divided into 14 administrative divisions:

Cityscape and environmental policy

Metz contains a mishmash of architectural layers, bearing witness to centuries of history at the crossroads of different cultures,Braun S. (2008) Metz, Portrait d'une ville.  Eds. Serpenoise. ISBN 978-2-87692-781-0  Highlights include Metz Cathedral, the Centre Pompidou-Metz museum (night and day views), several skyscapes, and Metz's wooded hillsides.
The city is famous for its yellow limestone architecture, a result of the extensive use of Jaumont stone. At the Cardo and Decumanus intersection was situated the Roman forum, today the Saint-Jacques Square.

Civilian architecture

From its Gallo-Roman past, the city preserves vestiges of the thermae (in the basement of the Golden Courtyard museum), parts of the aqueduct,Collectif (2006) L'aqueduc antique de Gorze à Metz. Moselle 119. Coll. Itinéraires du patrimoine. Eds. Serpenoise. ISBN 2-87692-306-8 
Saint Louis' square with its vaulted arcades and a Knights Templar chapel remains a major symbol of the city's High Medieval heritage. The Gothic Saint-Stephen Cathedral, several churches and Hôtels, and two remarkable municipal granaries reflect the Late Middle Ages.).
The city hall and the buildings surrounding the town square are by French architect Jacques-François Blondel, who was awarded the task of redesigning and modernizing the centre of Metz by the Royal Academy of Architecture in 1755 the context of the Enlightenment . and the Royal Governor's Palace (the present-day courthouse) built by Charles-Louis Clérisseau, are also found in the city.
The Imperial District was built during the first annexation of Metz by the German Empire. (2005) Metz 1848–1918. Eds. Serpenoise. ISBN 978-2-87692-584-7  In order to "germanise" the city, Emperor Wilhelm II decided to create a new district shaped by a distinctive blend of Germanic architecture, including Renaissance, neo-Romanesque and neo-Classical, mixed with elements of Art Nouveau, Art Deco, Alsatian and mock-Bavarian styles. Instead of Jaumont stone, commonly used everywhere else in the city, stone used in the Rhineland, such as pink and grey sandstone, granite and basalt were used. The district features noteworthy buildings including the impressive station and the Central Post Office by German architect Jürgen Kröger.
Modern architecture can also be seen in the town with works of French architects Roger-Henri Expert (Sainte-Thérèse-de-l'Enfant-Jésus church, 1934), Georges-Henri Pingusson (Fire Station, 1960), and Jean Dubuisson (subdivisions, 1960s).H. Roger-Henri Expert, 1882–1955. Volume 3 de Institut français d'architecture. Eds. du Moniteur.  The refurbishment of the former Ney Arsenal as a Concert Hall in 1989 and the erection of the Metz Arena in 2002, by Spanish and French architects Ricardo Bofill and French Paul Chemetov represent the Postmodern movement.
The Centre Pompidou-Metz museum currently under construction in the Amphitheatre District represents a strong architectural initiative to mark the entrance of Metz into the 21st century. (2010) Shigeru Ban, complete works 1985–2010. Ed. Jodidio, Philip. ISBN 978-3-8365-1792-8 pp. 426–447 Designed by Japanese architect Shigeru Ban, the building is remarkable for the complex, innovative carpentry of its roof,

Urban ecology

Under the leadership of such people as botanist Jean-Marie Pelt, Metz pioneered a policy of urban ecology during the early 1970s. Because of the failure of post-war urban planning and housing estate development in Europe during the 1960s, mostly based on the concepts of CIAM,Berrar J.C. (2011) Metz défigurée dans les années 60-70. Eds. Serpenoise. ISBN 978-2-87692-909-8  Jean-Marie Pelt, then municipal councillor of Metz, initiated a new approach to the urban environment.
Based initially on the ideas of the Chicago School, Pelt's theories pleaded for better integration of humans into their environment and developed a concept centered around the relationship between "stone and water". of open areas per inhabitant in the form of numerous public gardens in the city.
The principles of urban ecology are still applied in Metz with the implementation of a local Agenda 21 action plan. The municipal ecological policy encompasses the sustainable refurbishment of ancient buildings,
Additionally, the city has developed its own combined heat and power station, using waste wood biomass from the surrounding forests as a renewable energy source.

Military architecture

As a historic Garrison town, Metz has been heavily influenced by military architecture throughout its history.), has become one of the landmarks of the city. Remains of the citadel from the 16th century and fortifications built by Louis de Cormontaigne are still visible today., Halleck H.W., and Halleck H. (2009) Elements of military art and science. Ed. Applewood Books. ISBN 978-1-4290-2206-4 Important barracks, mostly from the 18th and 19th centuries, are spread around the city: some, which are of architectural interest, have  been converted to civilian use, such as the Arsenal Concert Hall by Spanish architect Ricardo Bofill.
The extensive fortifications of Metz, which ring the city, include early examples of Séré de Rivières system forts. (2001) Le système Séré de Rivières ou le témoignage des pierres. Eds. Ysec. ISBN 2-84673-008-3 

Economy

Although the steel industry has historically dominated Moselle's economy, Metz's efforts at economic diversification have created a base in the sectors of commerce, tourism, information technology and the automotive industry. The city is the economic heart of the Lorraine region and around 73,000 people work daily within the urban agglomeration.
Metz is home to the Moselle Chamber of Commerce. International companies such as PSA Peugeot Citroën, ArcelorMittal, SFR, and TDF have established plants and centres in the Metz conurbation. Metz is also the regional headquarters of the Caisse d'Epargne and Banque Populaire banking groups.
Metz is an important commercial centre of northern France with France's biggest retailer federation, consisting of around 2,000 retailers. Important store companies are found in the city, such as the Galeries Lafayette, the Printemps department store and the Fnac entertainment retail chain. The historic city centre displays one of the largest commercial pedestrian areas in France and a mall, the Saint-Jacques centre. In addition there are several multiplex movie theatres and malls found in the urban agglomeration.
In recent years, Metz municipality have promoted an ambitious policy of tourism development, including urban revitalization and refurbishment of buildings and public squares.

Culture and contemporary life

Museums and exhibition halls

In addition, Metz features other museums and exhibition venues, such as:

Entertainment and performing arts

Metz has several venues for the performing arts. The Opera House of Metz, the oldest working opera house in France, features plays, dance, and lyric poetry. The Braun Hall and the Koltès Theater feature plays, and the city has two movie theaters specializing in Auteur cinema. The Saint-Jacques Square, surrounded by busy bars and pubs whose open-air tables fill the centre of the square, contributes to the quality of life in Metz, as do numerous other associations, private music bars and theaters.
Since 2014, the former bus garage has been converted to accommodate over thirty artists in residence, in a space where they can create and rehearse artworks and even build set decorations. The artistic complex, called Metz Network of All Cultures ( with backstages.

Metz in the arts

Metz was an important cultural centre during the Carolingian Renaissance.J. (2004) L'art du chantre carolingien. Eds. Serpenoise. ISBN 2-87692-555-9 
The Metz School ( The term was originally proposed in 1845 by the poet Charles Baudelaire, who appreciated the works of the artists. They were influenced by Eugène Delacroix and inspired by the medieval heritage of Metz and its romantic surroundings. The Franco-Prussian War and the annexation of the territory by the Germans resulted in the dismantling of the movement. The main figures of the Metz School were Charles-Laurent Maréchal, Auguste Migette, Auguste Hussenot, Louis-Théodore Devilly, Christopher Fratin, and Charles Pêtre. Their works include paintings, engravings, drawings, stained-glass windows, and sculptures.

The Graoully dragon as symbol of the city

The Graoully is depicted as a fearsome dragon, vanquished by the sacred powers of Saint Clement of Metz, the first Bishop of the city. The Graoully quickly became a symbol of Metz and can be seen in numerous insignia of the city, from the 10th century on. (1966) Le Graoully de Metz à la lumière de la paléontologie. Ed. Mémoires de l'Académie de Metz. ISBN 978-2-9531744-3-4  Writers from Metz tend to present the legend as an allegory of Christianity's victory over paganism, represented by the harmful dragon.

Cuisine

Local specialties include the quiche, the potée, the Lorrain pâté, and also the suckling pig. (2002) Cuisine, terroir et traditions de Moselle. Eds. Serpenoise. ISBN 2-87692-534-6 ), a ganache-stuffed biscuit coated with marzipan, caramel, and dark chocolate. Local beverages include Moselle wine and Amos beer. (2002) Cuisine, terroir et traditions de Moselle. Eds. Serpenoise. ISBN 2-87692-534-6
The Covered Market of Metz is one of the oldest, most grandiose in France and is home to traditional local food producers and retailers. Originally built as the bishop's palace, the French Revolution broke out before the Bishop of Metz could move in and the citizens decided to turn it into a food market.) is surrounded by numerous local food restaurants.

Celebrations and events

Many events are celebrated in Metz throughout the year.
A literature festival is held in June. The Montgolfiades hot air balloon festival is organized in September. The second most popular Christmas Market in France is held in November and December. Finally, a Saint Nicholas parade honors the patron saint of the Lorraine region in December.

Sports

Metz is home to the Football Club of Metz (FC Metz), a football association club in Ligue 2, the second highest division of French football. FC Metz has twice won the Coupe de France (in 1984 and 1988), the French League Cup (in 1986 and 1996), and the Ligue 2 (1935 and 2007), and was French championship runner-up in 1998. FC Metz has also gained recognition in France and Europe for its successful youth academy, winning the Gambardella Cup 3 times in 1981, 2001, and 2010. The Saint-Symphorien stadium has been the home of  FC Metz since the creation of the club.
Metz Handball is a Team Handball club. Metz Handball has won  the French Women's First League championship 18 times, the French Women's League Cup eight times and the Women's France Cup six times. The Metz Arena has been the home of Metz Handball since 2002.
Since 2003, Metz has been home to the Moselle Open, an ATP World Tour 250 tournament played on indoor hard courts, which usually takes place in September.

Education

High schools

Metz has numerous high schools, including the Fabert High School and the Lycée of Communication. Some of these institutions offer higher education programs such as classes préparatoires (undergraduate school) or BTS (technician certificate).

University of Lorraine

Metz is also home to the University of Lorraine (often abbreviated in UdL).  
The university is divided into two university centers, one in Metz (material sciences, technology, and management) and one in Nancy (biological sciences, health care, administration, and management). The University of Lorraine has a student body of over 55,000 and offers 101 accredited research centers organized in 9 research areas and 8 doctoral colleges. 
The University of Lorraine was ranked 11th among French universities in 2013 and is among the top 300 universities in the world, according to the Academic Ranking of World Universities.

Graduate schools

At the end of the 1990s, the city expanded and the Metz Science Park was created in the southern area. Along with this expansion, several graduate schools took the opportunity to establish campuses in the park. At first, facilities were grouped around the lake Symphony, like Supélec in 1985 and Georgia Tech Lorraine in 1990.gatech. These graduate schools often cooperate with the University of Lorraine. For instance, the university and ENSAM share research teams, laboratories, equipments, and doctoral programs.

Transport

Local transport

Public transport includes a bus rapid transit system, called Mettis.

Railways

Metz Railway Station is connected to the French high speed train (TGV) network, which provides a direct rail service to Paris and Luxembourg. The time from Paris (Gare de l'Est) to Metz is 82 minutes. Additionally, Metz is served by the Lorraine TGV railway station, located at Louvigny, to the south of Metz, for high speed trains going to Nantes, Rennes, Lille and Bordeaux (without stopping in Paris). Also, Metz is one of the main stations of the regional express trains system, Métrolor.

Motorways

Metz is located at the intersection of two major road axes: the Eastern Motorway, itself a part of the European route E50 connecting Paris to Prague, and the A31 Motorway, which goes north to Luxembourg and south to the Mediterranean Sea towards Nancy, Dijon, and Lyon.

Airports

The Luxembourg International Airport is the nearest international airport, connected to Metz by Métrolor train. The Lorraine TGV Station is 75 minutes by train from France international Paris-Charles de Gaulle Airport. Finally, Metz-Nancy-Lorraine Airport is located in Goin,  southeast of Metz..

Waterways

Metz is located at the confluence of the Moselle and the Seille rivers, both navigable waterways. The marina connects Metz to the cities of the Moselle valley (i.e. Trier, Schengen, and Koblenz) via the Moselle river.

Main sights

Religious heritage

Civil heritage

Administrative heritage

Military heritage

International relations

Metz is a member of the QuattroPole(FR)(DE) union of cities, along with Luxembourg, Saarbrücken, and Trier (neighbouring countries: Luxembourg, France, and Germany).




