[[Switzerland in the Eurovision Song Contest 2009]]

CATEGORIES: Switzerland in the Eurovision Song Contest, 2009 in Switzerland

Switzerland competed in the Eurovision Song Contest 2009. The Swiss broadcaster, SRG SSR idée suisse, internally selected Lovebugs to represent the country with the song "The Highest Heights".  The song did not progress from the first semi-final of the competition.

Background

Switzerland debuted at Eurovision at the first contest in 1956,
The Swiss broadcaster SRG SSR idée suisse has been in charge of the Swiss Eurovision entry since its interception. In the past the organistaion has held a national final to select the Swiss entry to Eurovision, with each regional broadcaster entering songs to the contest. Since 2005, however, the organisation has held an internal selection for the Swiss Eurovision entry, which was continued for the 2009 selection.

Selection

Schweizer Fernsehen (SF), the German-language sector of SRG SSR, began its selection for Eurovision 2009 in July 2008. From July to 20 October 2008 SF held an open call for artists interested in Eurovision. Artists and authors wishing to enter were not obliged to be Swiss citizens, however SF stressed that the experience of possible candidates was vital. An internal jury will select the final entry for Switzerland for the contest.
After months of deliberation, Swiss newspaper Blick claimed in January 2009 that SF had selected the popular Swiss band the Lovebugs to represent Switzerland at the 2009 Contest in Moscow, Russia.
On 23 February, it was finally announced that the Lovebugs will compete at the contest with "The Highest Heights". The group will compete in the first semi-final on 12 May 2009. They failed to qualify for the finals of the contest.

At Eurovision

Since Switzerland is not one of the "Big Four" and is not the host of the 2009 contest, it had to compete in one of the two semi-finals.  The song competed in the first semi-final but failed to reach the final.

Points Awarded by Switzerland

=Semi final=

=Final=








