[[Olympic medal table]]

CATEGORIES: Olympic medals, Olympic Games medal tables

The Olympic medal table is a method of sorting the medal placements of countries in the modern-day Olympics and Paralympics. Officially, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) does not recognize a ranking of participating countries at the Olympic Games. The convention used by the IOC is to sort by the number of gold medals the athletes from a country have earned. In the event of a tie in the number of gold medals, the number of silver medals is taken into consideration, and then the number of bronze medals.  If two countries have an equal number of gold, silver, and bronze medals, they are ordered in the table alphabetically by their IOC country code.

Background

The Olympic Charter, Chapter 1, section 6 states that:

The Charter goes even further in Chapter 5, section 57, expressly prohibiting the IOC from producing an official ranking:
According to Australian IOC member Kevan Gosper, the IOC began to accommodate medals tables in 1992, releasing 'information' based on the 'gold first' standard. The medal tables provided on its website carry this disclaimer:

Ranking systems

As the IOC does not consider its sorting of nations to be an official ranking system, various methods of ranking nations are used. Some sort rankings decided by the total number of medals the country has but most list by the gold medals counted. However, if two or more teams have the same number of gold medals, the silver medals are then judged from the most to the least and then the bronze medals.

Medal count ranking

The gold first ranking system described above is used by most of the world media, as well as the IOC. While the gold first ranking system has been used occasionally by some American media outlets, newspapers in the United States primarily publish medal tables ordered by the total number of medals won.
This difference in rankings has its origins in the early days of the Olympics, when the IOC did not publish or recognise medal tables. Before 2002 Winter Olympics the difference in ranking system received scant notice, since in recent Olympic history the country that led in total medals also led in the gold count. However, in 2002 Winter Olympics Germany won the highest number of medals (36) but was left behind by Norway in gold medal count - Germany winning 12 and Norway winning 13.databaseolympics.htm?g=45 A similar situation occurred at the 2008 Summer Olympics, with China and U.S. topping the gold and total medal tallies respectively, 
Other exceptions are the 1896, 1912, and 1964 Summer Olympics when the United States finished first in gold medal count but second in the overall medal count.
In an August 24, 2008 news conference, IOC President Jacques Rogge confirmed that the IOC does not have a view on any particular ranking system.

Population-size, resources-per-person and multivariate prediction models and ratings

Sporting success predictions and ratings can be univariate, i.e. based on one independent variable, such as a country's population size and the number of medals is divided by the population of the country, or multivariate, where resources-per-person in the form of GDP per capita and other variables are included. 
Resources per person in the form of GDP per capita has been included in an article by The Guardian published during 2012 Summer Olympics.

Weighted ranking

Systematic rankings based upon a weighted point system with the most points awarded to a gold medal have also been devised. For example, in 1908, the British press invented a ranking system based on awarding gold medals 5 points, silver medals 3 points, and bronze medals 1 point (5:3:1).  These systems have been popular in some places at some time, but none of them have been adopted on a large scale.






