[[Daddy (Beyoncé song)]]

CATEGORIES: 2003 songs, Beyoncé songs, Songs written by Beyoncé

"Daddy" is a song recorded by American recording artist Beyoncé for her debut studio album, Dangerously in Love (2003). It was composed by Knowles as well as Mark Batson. The song was not originally intended to be featured on the final track listing of the album. Knowles was able to record the song as the release date of her debut album had been postponed. "Daddy" was released to US iTunes Store as a digital single on June 3, 2003, through Columbia Records.
Knowles explained that the song's development was motivated by the devotion and the loyalty her father/manager, Mathew Knowles has towards his family members. Many of the songs on the album examine aspects of relationships. However, "Daddy" was considered to be an element analyzing the kinship ties between a father and his offspring from a different and more powerful perspective. Music critics, who generally received the song with positive reception, commented that the song was a way for Knowles to pay tribute to her father.

Background and development

"Daddy" was written by Knowles as well as Mark Batson.
Concerning the conception of "Daddy", Knowles told MTV News:

Composition

"Daddy" is a nearly five-minute long R&B song. The first verse of the song begins with Knowles reminiscing about the times she and her father/manager, Mathew Knowles shared as a child and through her adolescence. She sings about wanting to be with a man and a child who has similar qualities as her father.

Critical reception

Mark Edward Nero of About." Making reference to Knowles long-time relationship with Jay-Z and then recent rumors about them possibly getting married, Nero added that the song might leave several numerous fans wondering what could happen next. Marc Anthony Neal of the international webzine PopMatters considered "Daddy" to be the "most affecting song on Dangerously in Love." He went on writing that the song is an extraordinary tribute to her father Mathew Knowles, stating that Knowles "embraces ... the man that has helped take the kind of artistic leap that Dangerously in Love represents." He ended up by adding that "By the time listeners get to the fifteenth and final track, they will have been so pleasantly surprised and impressed by Beyoncé's performance throughout, that 'Daddy' seems less corny" but it is in this song that she finally accepts the state of being a woman, rather than a girl. Erika Ramirez of Billboard magazine described the song as an ode dedicated to the man that "instilled perseverance".
Anthony DeCurtis of Rolling Stone commented that the album, which starts with "a cauldron of energy" on "Crazy in Love" (2003), ends by contrast with "Daddy" which he described as a five-minute tribute to her manager-father, and considered to be "an anthology of vocal and lyrical cliches."




