[[Craig Owens]]

CATEGORIES: American Lutherans, American male singers, American rock singers, Countertenors, Equal Vision Records artists, Living people, Musicians from Michigan, People from Davison, Michigan, People from Oakland County, Michigan, People from Rochester, Michigan, People from Rochester Hills, Michigan, People with bipolar disorder, 1984 births

Craig Michael Owens is an American musician best known as the lead vocalist of Chiodos. He has also had an involvement in various side projects such as Cinematic Sunrise and the supergroups Isles & Glaciers and Destroy Rebuild Until God Shows. A founding member of all four bands, Owens is as of August 2012 active with Chiodos, following a separation from the band from 2009 to early 2012. He has also recorded as a solo artist and appeared in the 2012 film K-11.

Music career

Chiodos

 Following several years of national touring and independent recording, they were signed by Equal Vision Records in 2004 and, under the name Chiodos, released their first full-length album, All's Well That Ends Well in 2005. They continued thereafter, recording and touring.
While Chiodos and Cinematic Sunrise (see below) were recording and touring, Owens was struggling with personal issues. On July 24, 2008, four days after an overdose on Xanax in his Michigan home, he revealed in his Myspace blog that he had been suffering from bipolar disorder and anxiety attacks for years. He also announced that he took no lasting harm from the attempted overdose and would not be canceling any of his appearances with Chiodos.
Even after his separation from his first band, Owens continued to have an interest in working with them and, after being asked by his management about what project he most wanted to pursue, he made overtures about a possible return to Chiodos. On April 26, 2012, Owens announced his return to Chiodos. Subsequently, on April 27, the remaining members of D.R.U.G.S. revealed their intention to disband. As of that date, the members had tentative plans for a new album, on which they have been working separately but not yet begun to coordinate.

Cinematic Sunrise

During this work with Chiodos, Owens and Bell formed the side project Cinematic Sunrise as a place to perform music that didn't fit Chiodos' style. Cinematic Sunrise released an EP later that Spring, A Coloring Storybook and Long Playing Record.

Isles & Glaciers

In September 2008, Owens revealed to fans on his journal that in addition to several guest vocalist appearances, he was working on another side project with Jonny Craig of Emarosa/Dance Gavin Dance, Vic Fuentes of Pierce the Veil and Nick Martin of Cinematic Sunrise.
The supergroup premiered their first songs during a radio interview on January 18, 2009.
Asked in March 2012 if Isles & Glaciers would consider further collaboration, Owens indicated that the possibility had been discussed among various members of the group but not established; "we've tossed the idea around to see if we could put it back together, but that was just to see if we could do anything..."

Destroy Rebuild Until God Shows

On September 15, 2009, Owens released a solo EP entitled "Με την αγάπη (With Love)" through Equal Vision Records.
In June 2010, at the time he discussed his upcoming project with Alternative Press, he had written or co-written 30 songs for a not-yet-completed supergroup signed to Decaydance featuring Nick Martin of Cinematic Sunrise and Aaron Stern of Matchbook Romance. On 17 August, Owens announced via Twitter that the new band would be named D.R.U.G.S. (Destroy Rebuild Until God Shows).
In 2011, Owens made an appearance as the character Ian Sheffield in the film K-11, which debuted at the Cannes Film Festival in 2012.
On 16 November 2013 Craig Owens performed Miles Away (Owens covered Kellin Quinn's verses) with Memphis May Fire at Vans Warped Tour UK.

Discography

Albums

=Studio albums=

=Featured albums=

Singles

Featured appearances






