[[Brno]]

CATEGORIES: Brno, Brno-City District, Cities and towns in the Czech Republic

Brno (
Brno is the seat of judicial authority of the Czech Republic – it is the seat of the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court, the Supreme Administrative Court, and the Supreme Public Prosecutor's Office. The city is also a significant administrative centre. It is the seat of a number of state authorities, including the Ombudsman,
Brno Exhibition Centre ranks among the largest exhibition centres in Europe (23rd in the world).
The most visited sights of the city include the Špilberk castle and fortress and the Cathedral of Saints Peter and Paul on Petrov hill, two medieval buildings that dominate the cityscape and are often depicted as its traditional symbols. The other large preserved castle near the city is Veveří Castle by the Brno Dam Lake. This castle is the site of a number of legends, as are many other places in Brno. One of the natural sights nearby is the Moravian Karst.

Etymology

The etymology of the name Brno is disputed. It perhaps comes from Old Czech brnie 'muddy, swampy.'E.M. Pospelov, Geograficheskie nazvaniya mira (Moscow, 1998), p. 82. Alternative derivations are from a Slavic verb brniti (to armor or to fortify) or a Celtic language spoken in the area before it was overrun by Germanic peoples and later Slavic peoples (this theory would make it cognate with other Celtic words for hill, such as the Welsh word bryn). Throughout its history, Brno's locals also referred to the town in other languages, including Brünn in German, ברין (Brin) in Yiddish and Bruna in Latin.
The city was also referred to as Brunn ()
The Asteroid 2889 Brno was named after the city, as well as the Bren light machine gun (Brno + Enfield), one of the most famous weapons of World War II.

History

The Brno basin has been inhabited since prehistoric times, In the early 11th century Brno was established as a castle of a non-ruling prince from the House of Přemyslid, and Brno became one of the centres of Moravia along with Olomouc and Znojmo.
In the 11th century a chapel was founded on the Petrov hill; since then, the chapel has undergone many changes which after centuries resulted in the current Gothic Cathedral of St. Peter and Paul. The Špilberk Castle was founded in the 13th century, originally as the main royal castle in Moravia. In the 14th century, Brno became one of the centres for the Moravian regional assemblies, whose meetings alternated between Brno and Olomouc. These assemblies made political, legal, and financial decisions. Brno and Olomouc were also the seats of the Land Court and the Land Tables, thus they were the two most important cities in Moravia. From the mid 14th century to the early 15th century the Špilberk Castle had served as the permanent seat of the Margraves of Moravia (Moravian rulers); one of them was elected the King of the Romans.
In the 1641 Brno became the sole capital of Moravia. During the 17th century Špilberk Castle was rebuilt as a huge baroque citadel. In 1777 the bishopric of Brno was established; Mathias Franz Graf von Chorinsky Freiherr von Ledske was the first Bishop. In 1839 the first train arrived in Brno from Vienna, this was the beginning of rail transport in what is now the Czech Republic. In the years 1859-1864 the city fortification was almost completely removed. In 1869 a horsecar service started to operate in Brno, it was the first tram service in the Czech lands.

Major battles

The capital of Moravia

In the mid 11th century, Moravia was divided into three separate territories; each one of them had its own ruler, coming from the Přemyslids dynasty, but independent of the other two, and subordinated only to the Bohemian ruler in Prague. Seats of these rulers and thus "capitals" of these territories were castles and towns of Brno, Olomouc, and Znojmo. In the late 12th century, Moravia began to reunify, forming the Margraviate of Moravia. Since then, until the mid of the 17th century, it was not clear which town should be the capital of Moravia. Political power was therefore "evenly" divided between Brno and Olomouc, but Znojmo also played an important role. The Moravian Diet (cz: Moravský Zemský sněm), the Moravian Land Tables (cz: Moravské Zemské desky), and the Moravian Land Court (cz: Moravský Zemský soud) were all seated in both cities at once. However, Brno was the official seat of the Moravian Margraves (rulers of Moravia), and later its geographical position closer to Vienna also became important. Otherwise, until 1642 Olomouc was larger than Brno as the population number is concerned, and it was the seat of the only Roman Catholic diocese in Moravia. Since 1573, Olomouc was also the seat of the only Moravian university existing at that time (nowadays Palacký University of Olomouc).
In 1641, in the midst of the Thirty Years' War, the Holy Roman Emperor and Margrave of Moravia Ferdinand III commanded permanent relocation of the diet, court, and the land tables from Olomouc to Brno, as Olomouc's Collegium Nordicum made it one of the primary targets of Swedish armies.[ref] 
[/ref] In 1642 Olomouc surrendered to the Swedish army which then stayed there for 8 years.

The 20th century and Greater Brno

In 1919 two neighbouring towns, Královo Pole and Husovice, and 21 other municipalities were annexed to Brno, creating Greater Brno ( In 1921 Brno became the capital of the Land of Moravia (cz: země Moravská), before that it was the capital of the Margraviate of Moravia. Seven years later, Brno became the capital of the Land of Moravia-Silesia (cz: země Moravskoslezská). In 1939 Brno was occupied by Nazi Germany, and in 1945 it was liberated by the Red Army.
When the First World War ended in 1918, the population of Brno included about 55,000 German speakers, including almost all inhabitants of Jewish origin. Most of Brno's Jewish population of about 12,000 was murdered by the Nazis during the German occupation of the Czech lands between 1939 and 1945. All Czech universities including those of Brno were closed by the Nazis in 1939, and the Faculty of Law was transformed into the headquarters of the Gestapo and the university dormitory was used as a prison. About 35,000 Czechs and some American and British prisoners of war were imprisoned and tortured there, with about 800 civilians executed or dead. One source states that executions were public and local Germans attended for a 3 Reichsmark fee. to the Austrian border. According to testimony collected by German sources, about 5,200 of them died during the march.: Die Vertreibung der Deutschen aus Ost-Mitteleuropa. Vorarbeiten Fritz Valjavec. Teil 4: Die Vertreibung der deutschen Bevölkerung aus der Tschechoslowakei. Bonn, 1957, 2 Bände. However, later estimates by Czech sources put the death toll at about 1,700, with most deaths due to an epidemic of shigellosis.Redrawing nations: ethnic cleansing in East-Central Europe, 1944-1948
At the beginning of the Communist Era in Czechoslovakia, in 1948, Brno ceased to be the capital of Moravia.
In 2009 Pope Benedict XVI came to Brno during his state visit to the Czech Republic. A Catholic mass was celebrated on the compound of the Brno Airport. 

Geography and climate

Brno is located in the southeastern part of the Czech Republic, at the confluence of the Svitava and Svratka rivers and there are also several brooks flowing through it including the Veverka, Ponávka, and Říčka. The Svratka River flows through the city for about , i.e. 28%. Due to its location between the Bohemian-Moravian Highlands and the Southern Moravian lowlands, Brno has a moderate climate. Compared to other cities in the country, Brno has a very high air quality, this is ensured by a good natural circulation of air, no severely violent storms or similar natural disasters have ever been recorded in the city.

Climate

Under the Köppen climate classification, Brno has a borderline oceanic climate (Cfb) and a humid continental climate (Dfb) with cold winters and warm, mild summers., and the highest point in the area is the Kopeček Hill. There are dozens of legally protected areas which are protected because of their ecological and/or natural values, like the Moravian Karst, Stránská Skála, and others.
Brno is the former capital city of Moravia and the political and cultural hub of the South Moravian Region. The city has over 400 thousand residents. Its urban agglomeration  to the south.

Administration

By law Brno is a statutory city; it consists of 29 city districts (administrative divisions, cz: Městské části) the highest body of its self-government is the Assembly of the City of Brno (cz: Zastupitelstvo města Brna).
 The executive body is the City Council (cz: Rada města Brna) and local councils of the city districts, the City Council has 11 members including the Lord Mayor and his four deputies.

The city itself forms a separate district the Brno-City District (cz: Okres Brno-město) surrounded by the Brno-Country District (cz: Okres Brno-venkov), Brno is divided into 29 administrative divisions (city districts) and consists of 48 cadastral areas. This might sound confusing but there is a big difference between "a city district of Brno", "the Brno-City District" and "the Brno-Country District".
The city districts of Brno significantly varies in their size by both population and area. The most populated city district of Brno is the Brno-Centre which has over 91 thousand of residents and the less populated are Brno-Ořešín and Brno-Útěchov with about 500 residents. By its area the largest one is Brno-Bystrc with .
Brno is the home to the highest courts in the Czech judiciary.  The Supreme Court is on Burešova Street,

Demographics

According to the 2011 census, Brno had 385,913 inhabitants. Brno experienced the largest increase in population during the 19th century at the time of the industrial revolution. A slight decrease in population after 1989 was caused by suburbanisation.

Culture

The city spends about 30 million euro every year on culture. There are many museums, theatres and other cultural institutions. Brno is also a vibrant university city with about ninety thousand students, a number of festivals and other cultural events.
Since the 1990s Brno has experienced a great cultural "rebirth", façades of historical monuments are being repaired and various exhibitions, shows, etc., are being established or extended. In 2007 a summit of 15 presidents of the EU Member States was held in Brno.
Despite its urban character, some of the city districts still preserve traditional Moravian folklore, including folk festivals with traditional Moravian costumes (cz: kroje), Moravian wines, folk music and dances. Unlike smaller municipalities, in Brno the traditional folk festivals are held locally by city districts, among the city district where annually the traditional Moravian festivals takes place are Židenice,
Hantec is a unique dialect that originated in Brno.

Sights

Brno has hundreds of historical sights, including one designated a World Heritage Site by UNESCO,
Špilberk Castle, originally a royal castle, but from the 17th century a fortress and feared prison (e.g. Carbonari) is one of the city's principal monuments,
Abbey of Saint Thomas is the place where Gregor Mendel established the new science of genetics. Church of Saint Tomas is the final resting place of its founder Margrave of Moravia John Henry of Luxembourg and his son King of the Romans and Margrave of Moravia Jobst of Moravia. Basilica of the assumption of our Lady the final resting place also of its founder Queen Elisabeth Richeza. Church of Saint James is one of the most preserved and most spectacular Gothic churches in Brno.
Brno Ossuary which is the second largest ossuary in Europe, The Labyrinth under Vegetable Market, a system of underground corridors and cellars dating back to Middle Ages, has been recently opened to the public.
Brno is home to a functionalist Synagogue and the largest Jewish cemetery in Moravia. A Jewish population lived in Brno as early as the 13th century, and remnants of tombstones can be traced back to as early as 1349.
The era between the world wars brought a building boom to the city, leaving it with many modern and especially functionalist buildings, Other functionalist buildings include Avion Hotel and Morava Palace. The Brno Exhibition Centre is the city's premier attraction for international business visitors. Annually, over one million visitors attend over 40 professional trade fairs and business conferences held here. The exhibition and convention industry contributes heavily to the region's economy. 
Lužánky is the oldest public park opened in the current Czech Republic, as a public park it was established in the late 18th century.

Festivals

The biggest festival held in Brno is the fireworks competition festival Ignis Brunensis (Latin for "Flame of Brno") held annually in June. It is part of a festival with a bold name "Brno - City in the Centre of Europe". usually attracts one or two hundred thousand visitors every day.
International film festival Cinema Mundi shows about 60 films competing for Oscar nomination in the category of Best Foreign Language Film.
The Theatre World Brno is another international festival annually held in the city where the Brno theatres and the city centre stages around one hundred performances by both national and foreign ensembles.
There are many other festivals regularly held in Brno, for instance the International Music Festival Brno, and many others...
Every September, Brno is home to a large wine festival (Slavnosti vína) to celebrate the harvest in the surrounding wine-producing region.

Theatres

Brno has the oldest theatre building in Central Europe, it's the Reduta Theatre at Zelný trh (en: the Vegetable Market).
The National Theatre Brno is the leading scene of opera,
The most commercially successful theatre in Brno is the Brno City Theatre, it was founded in 1945,
There is a variety of smaller theatres in Brno, such as Divadlo Bolka Polívky, Divadlo Husa na provázku, HaDivadlo, loutkové divadlo Radost, Divadlo Polárka, G Studio, Divadlo v 7 a půl - Kabinet múz, Divadlo Vaňkovka for children, etc.
Theatres in Brno experienced a long development and the current seats of the theatres and their artistic ensembles might be considerably different from the original ones, for example the Mahen Theatre was originally called the City Theatre and until 1918 it performed exclusively in German and also it wasn't part of the National Theatre in Brno, there was similar situation regarding the Reduta Theatre. Between the years 1971 and 1978 some plays were performed at Brno Exhibition Centre due to reconstruction of the Mahen Theatre.

Legends connected with Brno

There are several legends connected with the City of Brno; one of the best known is the Legend of the Brno Dragon. It is said that there was a terrible creature terrorizing the citizens of Brno. The people had never seen such a beast before, so they called it a dragon. They trembled in fear of the dragon until a brave man decided to kill the monster by tricking it into eating a carcass filled with lime. In reality the dragon was a crocodile, the preserved body of which is now displayed at the entrance of the Old Town Hall. Crocodile motifs are common in Brno. A "krokodýl" (in Czech language) is the local stuffed baguette, and the city radio station is known as Radio Krokodýl.
Next to the "dragon" at the Old Town Hall the town's second well-known emblem is displayed. This is a waggon wheel made from a tree found and felled fifty miles away from the city. According to the story, a local man waged to fell the tree, to make a wheel out of it, and to roll the wheel to the city of Brno, all this within a single day. Since the whole achievement was considered impossible by normal human means, the man was later believed to have called on the devil for assistance, and he died in poverty as a result.
As a historic memento to victory over the Swedish army in 1645, the local Petrov Cathedral rings noon an hour earlier, at 11 o'clock because the locals and Swedish army were in stalemate and the Swedish general said he would withdraw if his army had not won by noon and the bellringer tricked him by ringing the bell an hour early. Keeping his word, the general and his army left.

Museums, libraries, and galleries

The most significant museum in Brno is the Moravian Museum which is the largest and the biggest museum in Moravia and the second in the Czech Republic. The museum was founded in 1817 and its collections include over 6 million objects.

Education

Over the past two decades Brno evolved into an important university city, the number of students of higher education institutions reached 89 thousand in 2010. The city also became home to a number of institutions directly related to research and development, like the Central European Institute of Technology (CEITEC), etc.
With over 40 thousand students Masaryk University is by far the biggest university in Brno and the second biggest in the Czech republic.
The Brno University of Technology was established in 1899. Today with over 20 thousand students it ranks among the Czech republic's biggest technical universities. Viktor Kaplan, inventor of the Kaplan turbine, spent nearly 30 years on German Technical University in Brno (which ceased to exist in 1945 and its property was transferred to Brno University of Technology).
Mendel University, named after the founder of genetics Gregor Mendel who created his revolutionary scientific theories in Brno, has roughly 10 thousand students.
Janáček Academy of Music and Performing Arts, named after Leoš Janáček, was founded in 1947 and is one of two academies of music and drama in the Czech Republic.

Sports

The town has a long history of motor racing. Since 1968, Brno has been a permanent fixture on the European Touring Car Championship (ETCC) series. The road course ceased use at the end of 1986, when all motorsport activities resumed at the new permanent Masaryk Circuit, which was completed in 1985. Among other events, it hosts the Moto GP series.
There is also a horse-race course at Brno-Dvorska and an aeroclub airport in Medlánky. Several sports clubs play the highest Czech league, respectively. For example, (football) FC Zbrojovka Brno, (ice hockey) HC Kometa Brno, (team handball) KP Brno, men and women basketball teams, four baseball teams (AVG Draci Brno, Hroši Brno, VSK Technika Brno, MZLU Express Brno), American football team (Brno Alligators), two rugby teams (RC Dragon Brno, RC Bystrc) and others. Tennis player Lucie Šafářová comes from Brno as well as Lukáš Rosol, who managed to beat top-player Rafael Nadal in the second round of the 2012 Wimbledon Championships.

Transport

Public transport in Brno consists of 12 tram lines, 13 trolleybus lines (the largest trolleybus network in the Czech Republic) and almost 40 day and 11 night bus lines.
Railway transport first started to operate in the city in 1839 on line Brno–Vienna, this was the first operating railway line in the current Czech Republic. The current main station building is outdated and lack sufficient operating capacity but the construction of the new station has been postponed for several times for various reasons.
Road transport makes Brno an international crossroad of highways. There are two motorways on the southern edge of the city, D1 leading to Ostrava and to Prague and D2 leading to Bratislava.
Air transport is enabled by two functional airports. One of them is the public international airport Airport Brno. Passenger traffic at this airport has experienced a large increase in recent years, regular flights fly from there to London, Eindhoven, Milan and Moscow,
Cycling is widespread in Brno also due to lowland nature of the landscape. Existing tracks for cycling and roller skating in 2011 measured in total approximately  Several hiking trails of the Czech Tourist Club also pass through Brno.

International relations

Twin towns—Sister cities

Brno is twinned with the following cities:

Nearby cities

This tool shows only cities with population over 300,000 in radius of .

Gallery

File:Brno - Náměstí Svobody I.jpg|The Liberty Square, in the Middle Ages it was the main square
File:Brno - Biskupský dvůr I.jpg|The Bishop´s Palace towards the Cathedral
File:Ulice Veveří v Brně I.jpg|Tivoli
File:Brno-Líšeň - Líšeňský zámek ve Staré Líšni focený od Kostelíčku (2).jpg|Líšeň Castle



Notes



Bibliography




