[[Death of Otto Zehm]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, 2006 deaths, American people with disabilities, Deaths from hypoxia, Deaths in police custody in the United States, Death in Washington (state), Filmed deaths, People from Spokane, Washington, People with intellectual impairment, Police brutality in the United States, Victims of police brutality, 2006 in Washington (state)

Otto Zehm (1970–2006) was a mentally disabled man from Spokane, Washington who died on March 20, 2006, two days after being beaten, tasered multiple times, hogtied, gagged and sat upon by seven Spokane Police Officers until he passed out and never regained consciousness.

Incident and death

On March 18, 2006, Zehm — who worked as a janitor and did not own a car — had gone on foot to an ATM at his bank to withdraw money from his account.  Two young women, who were in a car at the ATM when Zehm arrived, erroneously reported to police by phone that a man was attempting to steal money from the ATM.  The women followed Zehm in their car while reporting additional information to the police dispatch by phone.
Zehm next entered the convenience store that he routinely visited to buy a soft drink and fast food.  Video from the convenience store security cameras show that within sixteen seconds of the first officer entering the store, the officer had run up to Zehm, whose back was initially turned to him, twice ordered him to "drop the pop", Within another sixteen seconds Zehm had also been tasered.  In addition to the multiple beatings and taserings, Zehm was improperly hog-tied by police and placed on his stomach for more than sixteen minutes.  Furthermore, the police requested a non-rebreather mask from paramedics at the scene and strapped it to Zehm's face.  The non-rebreather mask was not attached to oxygen.  Zehm stopped breathing three minutes after the mask was placed on his face.  When ruled a homicide by the county coroner on May 30, 2006, the cause of death was reported as "lack of oxygen to the brain due to heart failure while being restrained on his stomach."  No illegal drugs or alcohol were found in Zehm's system.

Discrepancies resulting from video analysis

Police alleged that Zehm had "lunged" at the original officer with a plastic soft drink bottle.  However, the silent surveillance video of the incident (withheld by the police for three months) contradicted this police claim.  Then-acting police chief Jim Nicks subsequently stated that he misspoke in alleging Zehm "lunged" at the officer. The video also did not provide support for the officer's claim that he paused and gave verbal orders to Zehm. Each frame showed the officer advancing at a brisk rate while Zehm, after seeing the officer advancing with his baton raised, only back-pedals slowly away.

Investigative reports

In August 2006 an independent report on Zehm's death was commissioned by then-Spokane mayor Dennis Hession.  Known as the Worley Report, after law enforcement consultant Michael Worley, to look at the three matters—the Zehm homicide, a Spokane Fire Department sex scandal,[ref]
</ref><ref></ref>

Controversy involving officers

Three of the seven officers involved in the attack on Zehm received one day of administrative leave (paid).  Beyond that, no Spokane Police officer or administrator has been disciplined or suspended or fired as a result of the case.  However, one officer involved in the case, Spokane Police officer Jason Uberuaga, was subsequently fired for "conduct unbecoming" after being involved in an October 11, 2007, incident involving alcohol and allegations of sexual misconduct.  At the time of that incident, Uberuaga was a member of a federal law enforcement task force.

Officer Dan Torok

A second Spokane Police officer involved in the Zehm case is Dan Torok.borgnet.jpg  In the Zehm case, Torok provided a written statement in which he stated, "When my knee struck him, I heard him exhale and I was able to force his arm behind his back."  In addition to Torok's knee in his chest, Zehm was subjected to being hog-tied and placed on his chest for 16 minutes, as well as being subjected to a non-rebreather mask placed on his face without oxygen attached, thus limiting his ability to breathe.  Zehm stopped breathing and was transported by para-medic to a Spokane area hospital where he was declared brain-dead and died two days later. Otto Zehm's last words were, "All I wanted was a Snickers Bar"
Almost exactly a year after his involvement in Zehm's death, Officer Torok shot and killed a homeless man, Jerome Alford, on March 24, 2007. a periodic blog thread identified by a reproduction of the Spokane Police badge at the Spokesman-Review's online blog site.

Analysis and impact

The Zehm case provoked public outrage, including protests and public challenges to the Spokane Police by critics.  On July 9, 2007, in the wake of another police scandal involving the arrest on July 4, 2007 of 17 people in Spokane's Riverfront Park, a group of some 200 people gathered a block from Spokane's Public Safety Building demanding independent oversight of the Spokane Police Department.  At the end of the rally, a group of people entered the street and marched to City Hall where they presented their concerns to the Spokane City Council.
The case also prompted intense scrutiny by the local media and calls for independent oversight.  A series of public meetings were held in the first half of 2007, including a three part series on Police Accountability at Gonzaga University.  Participants in the series included Breean Beggs of Spokane's Center for Justice, independent journalist Tim Connor, Spokane Police Chief Anne Kirkpatrick, Spokane City Councilwoman  Mary Verner, and others.  The series, sponsored by the ACLU, the League of Women Voters, and the Peace and Justice Action League (PJALS), culminated in a growing consensus that an appropriate step to address the concerns about police misconduct would be an independent ombudsman styled after the Boise (Idaho) Office of the Community Ombudsman

Federal indictment and trial

On June 22, 2009, a federal Grand Jury handed down an indictment on Spokane Police Officer Karl Thompson. Thompson is a veteran of the force and was the first of seven officers that responded to the Zip Trip.  The 2 counts are: unreasonable use of force and making a false entry into a record being investigated by a federal agency. Both counts are felonies and could hold a 20 year maximum sentence if Thompson is convicted on both charges. Standard sentencing ranges for these offenses would likely result in confinement in a federal institution for 2–4 years. The unreasonable use of force stems from the surveillance video that shows Thompson approaching Zehm from behind and striking him to the ground moments after Zehm turned and faced the officer without any indication of aggressiveness, followed by multiple vertical baton blows and an application of a drive-stun taser.  Zehm was not acting combative at the time of the initial blow and only started fighting back after Thompson engaged Zehm with force.  Federal prosecutors confirmed that the unreasonable use of force charge against Thompson was due to the injuries Zehm suffered from the initial baton blows and not Zehm's death.  It is unclear at this time if more indictments will be handed down for Zehm's death or for his improper restraint for being hog-tied on his stomach with a non-rebreather mask.
Thompson's federal trial began on October 12, 2011 with jury selection. The trial was moved from Spokane to Yakima, Washington after defense attorneys raised concerns about the extent of local media coverage of the controversy. Judge Fred Van Sickle of US District Court in Yakima ruled to exclude residents of Spokane County from the jury pool in the interest of fairness.spokesman.com/stories/2011/oct/04/thompson-trial-moving-yakima/
On November 2, 2011, the jury found Thompson guilty on both counts; excessive use of force and lying to investigators about the confrontation.khq.
Thompson's defense attorneys argued for a sentence of zero to 16 months, while federal prosecutors recommended a sentence of between 9 and 11 years. On November 15, 2012, Judge Van Sickle sentenced Thompson to 51 months in federal prison.kxly.html Judge Van Sickle also ordered that Thompson be taken into custody immediately over the objections of Thompson's defense attorney, who wanted him to remain free while the verdict is appealed.huffingtonpost.html
Washington State paid $541,180 in legal fees to the law firm defending Karl Thompson. Thompson was declared indigent in July 2009 following an uncontested divorce initiated by his then-wife, Diana J. Thompson.
Thompson is currently serving his sentence at the Federal Correctional Institution, Safford, a low-security prison in Arizona.bop.gov/iloc2/InmateFinderServlet?Transaction=IDSearch&needingMoreList=false&IDType=IRN&IDNumber=12755-085&x=82&y=20

Settlement of civil case

On August 22, 2012, the civil case brought by the Estate of Otto Zehm was closed following mediation and settlement. The settlement included a $1.67 million payment to the family, and budgeting for specialized training for all Spokane Police Officers more than 1 year from retirement. The training will focus on police interaction with mentally ill detainees. The settlement also includes a budget for implementation of new rules regarding the use of force, and a permanent memorial to Otto Zehm. Attorneys for the Estate were Breean Beggs and Jeffry Finer; and for the City of Spokane, Nancy Isserlis.






