[[Altibase]]

CATEGORIES: Proprietary database management systems, Software companies of South Korea, Database companies, Companies established in 1999, 1999 establishments in South Korea

Altibase founded in 1999, is a relational database management system (RDBMS) vendor that specializes in In-Memory computing technology.  Altibase focuses on high-intensity transactional processing through RAM memory, complementing its disk-resident database in a single database solution.storagenewsletter.com/rubriques/software/altibase-hdb-hybrid-database-management/

History

Altibase got its start in South Korea in the early to mid-1990's as a government-sponsored research initiative.

In 2003, Altibase entered the Chinese Main Memory Database Management System market.naver.nhn?mode=LSD&mid=sec&sid1=105&oid=030&aid=0000045419 Less than a year after Altibase entered the Chinese market, they began working with Chinese Telecommunications, such as China Unicom for billing systems.naver.nhn?mode=LSD&mid=sec&sid1=105&oid=001&aid=0000890379
According to Gartner in its Who's Who for In-Memory databases 2014, Altibase has over 500 customers and it's U.S. offices are expanding on its U.S. customer base.


Corporate Structure

Altibase Corporation is privately owned, its U.S. headquarters is in the Greater New York City area and the Asia headquarters is located in Seoul, South Korea. It also operates a branch office in Palo Alto, California, which opened in November 2010. "글로벌 '성공신화' 꿈꾸는 국내SW 기업들 (Korean Software Companies with Global Aspirations)" inews24 July 1, 2012. Altibase also has corporate offices in China, Singapore, and Japan

Revenue and Market Share

Altibase is privately owned.
Altibase is a major vendor in the in memory computing market according to Markets and Markets research with over 500 customers and thousands of installations globally.tmcnet.htm
In South Korea, Altibase occupies 80% of the in-memory database market in all sectors,Kim, Jeong-Eun. 알티베이스, "세계 넘버원 DBMS 회사로 도약한다"  (Altibase, "Set to be the Number One Database Company in the World") IT Daily October 10, 2010. Last retrieved on September 3, 2012. including 90% market share in the securities field. "알티베이스, 증권시장 90% 점유 국산 DBMS 강자 (Altibase, Korean database powerhouse, occupies 90% of domestic securities database market)" Digital Times February 6, 2011. Last retrieved on August 7, 2012.

Clients

Altibase's global clients in the telecommunications, financial services, manufacturing, and utilities sectors in  include LG U+, E*TRADE, HP, UAT Inc., SK Telecom, KT Corporation (formerly Korea Telecom), Hyundai Securities, Samsung Electronics, Shinhan Bank, Woori Bank, The South Korean Ministry of Defense, G-Market and Chung-Ang University. "Altibase, the Top Data Performance Solutions Provider" Advanced Technology Korea. June 1, 2012. "Fastest, Most Efficient Databases Imaginable with Altibase" Korea IT Times Friday, August 26th, 2011. Last retrieved on June 24, 2012.
Altibase users in Japan include FX Prime (:ja:FXプライム), a foreign exchange services company, and Retela Crea Securities (:ja:リテラ・クレア証券). "일본 IT시장, 새로운 먹거리로 떠오르나? (The IT industry in Japan: a promising new market?)" Digital Daily. May 31, 2011.에드몬드 (Edmund). "알티베이스, 일본 증권사에 하이브리드 DBMS 공급 (Altibase provides DBMS for Japanese Securities Companies)" Daily Grid. November 5, 2010.
In China, the three major telecommunications companies (China Mobile, China Unicom, and China Telecom) use ALTIBASE HDB in 29 of 31 Chinese provinces.

General Features







Advanced Features







Products and Services

Altibase XDB™

ALTIBASE XDB™ is a traditional relational database that has fast data processing speeds in main-memory. It comes with High-Availability, replication and scalability features.  ALTIBASE XDB™ comes with 3 interfaces that include Direct Access Mode, Direct Access API Mode as well as conventional client/server protocols such as TCP/IP and IPC for more complex database operations.ciokorea. 

Altibase HDB™

ALTIBASE HDB is a "hybrid DBMS with Hybrid Architecture" that combines an in-memory database with a conventional disk-resident database.altibase.Net, Java, C/C++, Precompiler.
Gartner notes, in addition to applying its technology to unique billing scenarios in telecom, as well as real-time flaw detection in manufacturing scenarios, customers cite their use of HDB for analytics and storage of text and rich media content.blogspot.html
According to Gartner, Altibase's hybrid database (HDB) is based on SQL and is fully ACID compliant. HDB can run both in-memory and on physical disk which "....." 

Altibase CEP™

ALTIBASE CEP™ is a Windows-based data caching software for use in real-time Complex event processing applications.itdaily.asp?a_id=35647 This product was formerly known as DSM ("Altibase Data Stream").






