[[Natural Resources Defense Council]]

CATEGORIES: Advocacy groups, Environmental organizations based in the United States, Non-profit organizations based in New York City, Natural Resources Defense Council

The Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) is a New York City-based, non-profit international environmental advocacy group, with offices in Washington, D.C., San Francisco, Los Angeles, Chicago, and Beijing. Founded in 1970, NRDC today has 1.4 million members and online activists nationwide and a staff of more than 400 lawyers, scientists and other policy experts.
Some charity monitoring groups and mainstream media outlets have praised the Natural Resources Defense Council for its charitable fund-raising practices and its power in American politics.Charity Navigator

About

The NRDC was co-founded in 1970 by John Adams, Richard Ayres, John Bryson, Edward Strohbehn, and Gus Speth, together with a board of scientists and attorneys at the forefront of the environmental movement. NRDC. Retrieved on 2013-08-09.  The organization states that it seeks sustainable policies from federal, state and local government and industrial corporations. It seeks to influence federal and state environmental and other agencies, the Congress and state legislatures, and the courts to reduce global warming, limit pollution, and generally conserve energy and increase sustainability of commerce and manufacturing. NRDC participates in litigation in federal and state courts to influence implementation and enforcement of the Clean Air Act,  Clean Water Act, and other federal and state laws protecting the environment. The Council also supports an environmental science program that involves NRDC staff and associated scientists, including a program seeking transformation of manufacturing industries to more sustainable production. In addition, the organization states that it educates the public.
In 2001, NRDC launched the BioGems Initiative to mobilize concerned individuals in defense of exceptional and imperiled ecosystems. The initiative matches NRDC's legal and institutional assets with the work of citizen activists.
It has issued a report on the health effects arising from the September 11, 2001 attacks."The Environmental Impacts of the World Trade Center Attacks: A Preliminary Assessment." Natural Resources Defense Council.
NRDC became involved with community activists in New Orleans following Hurricane Katrina.O. Environmental Quality Test Results
NRDC has published a number of studies on nuclear weapon stockpiles around the world, both as monographs and as individual studies in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists.
In December 2006, Green Day and NRDC jointly launched a website to raise awareness on the U.S.'s petroleum dependence.NRDC: New Nuclear Power Plants Are Not a Solution for America's Energy Needs  Other authorities on the subject disagree on that point.

Programs

NRDC runs a number of environmental programs:[ref]NRDC.NRDC's Programs
[/ref]

OnEarth Magazine

OnEarth magazine is a quarterly publication of the NRDC dealing with environmental challenges. The magazine was founded in 1979 as The Amicus Journal.George Polk Award Winners

Directors

Frances Beinecke is the current President.  Peter Lehner is the Executive Director.  On June 14, 2010, Beinecke was appointed by President Barack Obama to the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling in the wake of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. Whitehouse. Retrieved on 2013-08-09.

Issues

NRDC's stated priorities include curbing global warming, political activity advocating their "Clean Energy Future" policy proposals, a statement that they are interested in "reviving the world's oceans," defending endangered wildlife and wild places, protecting the public health by preventing pollution, ensuring "safe and sufficient water,"
and fostering "sustainable communities"About the Natural Resources Defense Council. NRDC. Retrieved on 2013-08-09.

Legislation

NRDC opposed the Water Rights Protection Act (H.R. 3189; 113th Congress), a bill that would prevent federal agencies from requiring certain entities to relinquish their water rights to the United States in order to use public lands. They believe the bill "could also block federal fisheries agencies like the United States Fish and Wildlife Service from requiring flows that help salmon find fish ladders and safely pass over dams."

Effect on administrative law

The NRDC has been involved in the following Supreme Court cases interpreting United States administrative law.








