[[Inner nuclear membrane protein]]

CATEGORIES: Proteins

Inner nuclear membrane (INM) proteins are proteins that are embedded in or associated with the inner membrane of the nuclear envelope (NE). There are about 60 INM proteins, most of which are poorly characterized with respect to structure and function. Among the few well-characterized INM proteins are lamin B receptor (LBR), the lamina-associated polypeptide 1 (LAP1), the lamina-associated polypeptide-2 (LAP2), emerin and  MAN1.

Common structural features

There have been identified several integral nuclear membrane proteins of different size and structure.

Function

Lamins and chromatin found at the nuclear envelope are organised with the assistance of proteins embedded in the INM.

Synthesis and translocation

There are several proteins associated with the inner nuclear membrane. It is likely that the majority of them are also associated with the nuclear lamina. Some may interact directly with the nuclear lamina, and some may be associated with it through scaffold proteins. All INM proteins are arranged such that their N-termini is facing the nucleoplasm and targeted by various kinases. Current opinion is that INM proteins synthesised in the cytoplasm are transported to the INM through nuclear pore complexes (NPC).

Potential Role In Cell Differentiation

It has been proposed that chromatin-binding/modifying proteins embedded within the inner nuclear membrane may be central in determining the identity of newly differentiated cells. The nucleoplasmic domains of such proteins can interact with chromatin to create a scaffold and restrict the conformation of chromosomes within three dimensions. Such inner-nuclear-membrane proteins (INMs) may function simply by restricting the movement of bound chromatin, by recruiting chromatin-remodeling proteins, or through inherent enzyme activity. INM:chromatin interactions causes some segments of chromatin to be more exposed to the nucleoplasm than others.
Once INM:chromatin interactions have been established following formation of the nuclear envelope, soluble nuclear proteins may bind to exposed chromosomal segments. Such proteins could include enzymes that modify histones—such as methylases and acetylases—which act to alter the three-dimensional conformation of chromatin, as well as DNA binding proteins—such as helicases, gyrases, and transcription factors—that are involved in unwinding/looping DNA and/or recruiting RNAP holoenzyme. This will promote the transcription of some genes and down-regulate or prevent transcription of others. Thus, the nuclear scaffold places limits on what genes can and can not be expressed within a given cell and, hence, may serve a basis for cell identity.  
Once all regulatory proteins, etc. have been synthesized and the scaffold has been established, the cell has attained its own specific expression profile.  This allows it to synthesize cell-specific enzymes and receptors characteristic of its particular function.  The nuclear scaffold is predicted to be relatively permanent for a given cell type, but induction of a signaling pathway—by ligand binding, cell:cell contact, or some other mechanism—can temporarily shift the expression profile. When such a signal changes expression of genes coding for INM or a chromatin-modifying enzymes, it can induce differentiation in to a different cell type. Thus, the Nuclear Scaffold Theory predicts that symmetric cell division occurs when a daughter cell contains the same complement of INMs as the parent cell. Conversely, asymmetric cell division is expected to result in parent and daughter cells with different INM profiles.  
The INM profile of closely related cells (e.g., CD4+ TH1 and TH2 helper T-cells) is expected to be more similar than for cells that are more distantly related (e.g., T-cells and B-cells). The degree of INM complementarity is expected to be roughly proportional to the degree of relatedness (e.g., % complementarity to TH1 helper T-cells will be: TH2 > CD8+ > B-cell > Erythrocyte > cardiomyocyte). Some cells that are very closely related may have similar INMs, but transient changes in expression--e.g., in response to extracellular signals--could possibly lead to more permanent changes in expression profile by altering transcription rates for chromatin modifying enzymes, transcriptional modulators, or other regulatory proteins.

Examples of inner nuclear membrane proteins

Posttranslational modifications

Posttranslational modifications of INM proteins play a critical role in their functional modulation. Arginine and serine residues phosphorylation control LBR's interaction with other subunits of the LBR complex and was proposed to modulate the interaction with chromatin.

Inner nuclear membrane proteins and disease

Laminopathies

The wide array of diseases involving lamins and their associated inner nuclear membrane proteins are collectively called laminopathies.

Cancer

Tumor cells often show an aberrant nuclear structure, which is used by pathologists in diagnostics. As changes in the nuclear envelope correspond to functional changes in the nucleus, morphological changes in the nucleus may be involved in carcinogenesis. The regulatory functions of inner nuclear membrane proteins strongly suggest this possibility.






