[[New Jack City II]]

CATEGORIES: 2009 albums, Bow Wow (rapper) albums, Albums produced by Jermaine Dupri, Albums produced by Swizz Beatz, Albums produced by J. R. Rotem, Albums produced by Ron Browz, Albums produced by No I.D., Albums produced by DJ Toomp, Albums produced by Drumma Boy, Albums produced by T-Pain, Columbia Records albums

New Jack City II is the sixth studio album by American rapper Bow Wow. This is Bow Wow's first solo album to receive a Parental Advisory label for Adult Language.

Album information

The album was released on March 31, 2009. On Bow Wow's and JD's YouTube page, JD explains the title of the album. This single samples TLC's hit "Baby, Baby, Baby."
Guest appearances confirmed include  Swizz Beatz, Jermaine Dupri, Nelly, Trey Songz, T-Pain, Ron Browz, Dondria Nicole, Lil Eddie and T.I.. Bow Wow tried to get Kid Rock on the song "Sunshine", but was unsuccessful.
Three versions of the album will be released. A Standard Version, a Limited Edition includes a Bonus DVD & a Walmart Version (Only a Clean Edition) with 3 Bonus Tracks.

Videos

The first video for the promotional single "Marco Polo" was recorded in an aquatic park outside of an Atlanta Suburb known as Sun Valley Beach, in Paulding Co. GA.
The second video for the promotional single "Big Girls" premiered on Youtube one day after "Marco Polo". The complete version was released later on Youtube for some time but then removed again for unknown reasons. There is no official date on the videos re-release.
The video for the song "Roc The Mic" is released and is featuring and produced by Jermaine Dupri. It was shot in Los Angeles, California near the Staples Center. The video for the song "You Can Get It All" featuring Johntá Austin and produced by Jermaine Dupri was shot in Malibu, California and has also been released. Both videos were directed by Hype Williams. Bow Wow confirmed that he will be shooting a video for "Pole In My Basement". The video will be shot in a strip club theme. The "Pole In My Basement" video is set to premiere on May 30, 2009 at 9 am EST on Bow Wow's official Youtube page.
In his tour bus, Bow Wow has made videos for the songs "Sunshine", on his Youtube page, but the videos are home videos and not official videos.

Sales

New Jack City II debuted at number sixteen on the Billboard 200. On one of his YouTube videos, Bow Wow asked his fans to help him get the number one rap album - as a 'birthday gift'.  Unfortunately for Bow Wow, Southern rap group UGK's UGK 4 Life took the top spot that week.

Track listing

Deluxe edition

Personnel

Chart positions






