[[Marquette University Special Collections and University Archives]]

CATEGORIES: Archives in the United States, Marquette University, University departments in the United States, Tolkien studies, Research libraries

The mission of the Department of Special Collections and University Archives of Marquette University is to collect, arrange, describe, preserve, and service records of enduring historical value for research, instructional, and administrative use. The archival and manuscript collecting program of the department is an extension of the spiritual, philosophical, and scholarly strengths of the university as a Christian, Catholic, and Jesuit institution. The department collects and administers the archives of Marquette University and its various units, including office administrative files, publications, and the papers of faculty, students, staff, and alumni, and their respective organizations.
The collections are held in the John P. Raynor, S.J. Library, completed in 2003, named for one of Marquette's former presidentsJ.R.R. Tolkien Collection: Special Collections and Archives. Marquette University Libraries. Marquette University. and serves as one of the main study areas on campus. Marquette University.

Holdings

Published holdings include retrospective files of the Marquette Tribune, the Hilltop yearbook; course catalogs, commencement programs, faculty and student directories, and programs of musical concerts, lectures, dramatic performances, and athletic events. Other printed items include college and departmental reports, press releases, calendars of events, reports of the President, and alumni publications.
The department retains abound copy of each Marquette dissertation and thesis, in addition to many undergraduate and graduate essays. A growing file of faculty publications contains journal articles, reprints, and books. The extensive photographic collection includes prints of faculty, students, class reunions, laboratories, classrooms, buildings, and campus scenes. Slides, negatives, and audio/videotape records are also available. An excellent collection of football and basketball films dates from the 1930s.

Catholic social action collections

The department holds collections of national and international significance relating to social action, particularly involving Catholic organizations, movements, and individuals in the United States during the 20th century. Major holdings document the role of the Church and its members in promoting basic human rights, interracial justice, agrarian reform, women's rights, and world peace, and in responding to the immediate needs of the poor. Notable collections include the records of the Catholic Association for International Peace, the Catholic Worker movement (incorporating the papers of its co-founder, Dorothy Day), the National Catholic Conference for Interracial Justice, the National Catholic Rural Life Conference, the National Coalition of American Nuns, Project Equality, the Sister Formation/Religious Formation Conference, and the Women's Ordination Conference, and the personal papers of Monsignor Luigi G. Ligutti and Sister Margaret Traxler.

Christianity in Native North America

The Archives is committed to documenting the ongoing story of Christianity in Native North America. Since 1977, the department has acquired the Bureau of Catholic Indian Missions Records (1848–present, 300+ cubic feet) and 16 other collections. This material documents the histories of urban and rural missions and parishes; the values and attitudes of clergy, religious, and laity; the history and customs of Indian tribes; and the cultural interaction among Indians, church leaders, and U.S. Government officials. Documentation is particularly strong on tribes within Alberta, Canada, Chiapas, Mexico, and 16 states: Alaska, Arizona, California, Idaho, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Dakota, Washington, Wisconsin, and Wyoming. 
The records of the Bureau of Catholic Indian Missions comprise the records of the Bureau of Catholic Indian Missions, the Commission for the Catholic Missions among the Colored People and the Indians and the Catholic Negro-American Mission Board and include papers of General Charles Ewing, Reverend John-Baptiste Brouillet, Captain John Mullan, Reverend Joseph Stephan, Monsignor William Ketcham, Reverend William M. Hughes and Reverend John Tennelly. The records of Holy Rosary Mission - Red Cloud Indian School (Pine Ridge Indian Reservation, South Dakota) include those of Red Cloud High School. Papers of Father Eugene Buechel are included in both the records of Holy Rosary Mission - Red Cloud Indian School and St. Francis Mission (Rosebud Indian Reservation, South Dakota).

Tolkien Manuscripts, literary holdings, and rare books

The J. R. R. Tolkien Collection represents an extraordinary body of literary papers. The collection includes 11,000 original manuscripts and multiple working drafts of The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit, as well as books, periodicals, and other material by and about Tolkien. Other holdings include the papers of Catholic poets Jessica Powers and Joyce Kilmer, books by and about James Joyce, and the papers of Milwaukee artist Karl Priebe. The Music Collection, 1846–1963, contains 4,000 pieces of printed and manuscript music. Reflecting Marquette's institutional character, the Rare Book Collection of over 8,000 volumes is strong in philosophy, religion, and Jesuitica.

Politics and popular entertainment

The department holds the papers of two alumni who represented Wisconsin in Congress and changed the course of post-war American politics: Senator Joseph McCarthy and Congressman Clement J. Zablocki. The papers of Wisconsin's longest serving governor, Tommy G. Thompson, are also preserved. Modern political history is further chronicled in FBI records (105 cubic feet of photocopies) relating to the investigation and surveillance of activist organizations and individuals. Popular entertainment in the 20th century is documented in the papers of alumni Don McNeill (performer) and Hildegarde Sell.

List of collections






