[[Rick Ross (consultant)]]

CATEGORIES: 1952 births, American adoptees, Exit counselors, Living people, Critics of Falun Gong, Anti-cult organizations and individuals, Jews and Judaism in Ohio, Deprogrammers

Rick Alan Ross (born 1952 in Cleveland, Ohio, as Ricky Alan Ross) works as a consultant, lecturer, and intervention specialist, with a focus on exit counseling and deprogramming of those belonging to cults. He runs a blog called Cult News
Ross' interest in controversial religious groups dates to a 1982 incident at his grandmother's nursing home. During the 1980s he represented the Jewish community on a number of advisory committees. In 1986 he began working full-time as a consultant, sometimes involuntarily deprogramming members of controversial groups and movements. By 2004 he said he had worked over 350 cases with a 75% success rate. His work deprogramming a 14 year old Potter's House Christian Fellowship member was covered in a 1989 edition of the American TV series 48 hours.
In 1993 Ross faced charges over a 1991 forcible deprogramming where he held an United Pentecostal Church International member Jason Scott against his will for five days, but was cleared the following year by jury trial. Ross settled a civil suit with Scott in 1995, causing Ross to file for personal bankruptcy because of the $2,500,000 in punitive damages awarded against him.

Early life

Ross was adopted by Paul and Ethel Ross in Cleveland, Ohio in 1953. The Ross family moved to Phoenix, Arizona, in 1956, where Ross grew up. Except for attending one year South Carolina's Camden Military Academy, Ross completed all of his education in Arizona. He graduated from Phoenix Union High School in 1971 and did not attend college.
In 1974 at the age of 21, Ross was convicted of the attempted burglary of a vacant model home and sentenced to probation. The following year, he robbed a jewelry store in Phoenix. Ross confessed to the crime and received five years probation.
Following high school, Ross went to work for a finance company and then a Phoenix-area bank. In 1975, he began work for a cousin's car-salvage company, later becoming vice-president. He continued working in the car-salvage field until 1982.

Early career

Ross first became concerned about controversial religious groups in 1982 following a visit with his grandmother at Phoenix's Kivel Home, a Jewish residential and nursing facility where she lived.  Ross learned that missionary affiliates of the locally produced Jewish Voice Broadcast had infiltrated the home as staff members in order to specifically target Jews for conversion to Pentecostal Christianity. After bringing the matter to the attention of the home's director and to the local Jewish community, Ross successfully campaigned to have the group's activities stopped. He then began working as a volunteer, lecturer and researcher for a variety of Jewish organizations. He worked for the Jewish Federation of Greater Phoenix,Taking Aim: Efforts to convert Jews draw fire from interdenominational group, The Arizona Republic, 1982, by Richard Lessner, as hosted on culteducation. KABBALAH CENTRE hawks 'snake oil for the soul and the Union of American Hebrew Congregations appointed him to two national committees focusing on cults and inter-religious affairs."Challenging Cults, Cultivating Family", The Greater Phoenix Jewish News, February, 1989, by Elaine DeRosa, as hosted on culteducation.com
During the 1980s Ross represented the Jewish community on the Religious Advisory Committee of the Arizona Department of Corrections. Later the Committee elected him as its chairman,, as hosted on culteducation.C. Ross's work within the prison system covered inmate religious rights and educational efforts regarding hate groups."Three Nation Umbrella Org. to Aid Jewish Prison Inmates, Families", National "Jewish Press", April 1986, as hosted on culteducation.Curriculum Vitae, Rick Ross web site

Consultant, lecturer, and deprogrammer

In 1986 Ross left the staff of the JFCS and BJE to become a full-time private consultant and deprogrammer. and worked as a Cult Awareness Network-associated deprogrammer.
He undertook a number of involuntary deprogramming interventions at the requests of parents whose children had joined controversial groups and movements. By 2004, Ross had handled more than 350 deprogramming cases in various countries including the United States, the United Kingdom, Israel and Italy, typically charging around $5,000 per case.
In 1989 the CBS television program 48 Hours covered Ross's deprogramming of a 14-year-old boy, Aaron Paron, a member of the Potter's House Christian Fellowship.[ref]
</ref> Aaron refused to leave the organization, and saw his mother as "possessed by the devil".<ref name="cbsnews">CBS News – New York, ''CBS News' 48 Hours Takes Viewers Inside the Deprogramming of a 14-year Old Boy May 18 on CBS''], April 1989</ref> Most of the hour-long program focused upon Ross's efforts to persuade Paron to see the Potter's House as "a destructive Bible-based group" bent on taking control of its members' lives.<ref name="nytgoodman"/> The case resulted in the parties entering into an agreement that Potter's House would not harbor Aaron, entice him away from his mother, attempt to influence his behavior or take any action that would interfere with his mother's parental rights.<ref name="Enge"/>
In 1992 and 1993, Ross opposed actions of the Branch Davidian group led by David Koresh in Waco, Texas.

Jason Scott deprogramming

In 1993, Ross faced charges of unlawful imprisonment in the State of Washington due to the alleged forcible detention of Jason Scott (an eighteen-year-old member of Life Tabernacle Church, part of United Pentecostal Church International) in 1991.[ref]
 Scott later sued Ross, two of his associates, and the Cult Awareness Network (CAN), for his abduction and failed deprogramming (CAN was a co-defendant because a CAN contact person had referred Scott's mother to Ross). Ross said the lawsuit was an attempt by the Church of Scientology to silence his efforts, claiming "This isn't about Jason Scott. This isn't about his civil rights. They recruited him to harass me".
The two men hired by Scott's mother seized him outside her house, the teenager was handcuffed and forced into a van, before being transported to a beach cottage for the deprogramming.wikimedia.pdf, as hosted on culteducation.com[ref]
