[[James M. Buchanan]]

CATEGORIES: 1919 births, 2013 deaths, 20th-century American writers, 21st-century American writers, 20th-century economists, 21st-century economists, American economists, American libertarians, American Nobel laureates, American people of Scottish descent, American people of Scotch-Irish descent, American political theorists, Austrian School economists, Florida State University faculty, George Mason University faculty, Libertarian economists, Libertarian theorists, Middle Tennessee State University alumni, National Humanities Medal recipients, Nobel laureates in Economics, People from Murfreesboro, Tennessee, Public choice theory, University of Chicago alumni


James McGill Buchanan, Jr. (; October 3, 1919 – January 9, 2013) was an American economist known for his work on public choice theory, for which he received the Nobel Memorial Prize in 1986. Buchanan's work initiated research on how politicians' self-interest and non-economic forces affect government economic policy. He was a member of the Board of Advisors of The Independent Institute, a Distinguished Senior Fellow of the Cato Institute, and professor at George Mason University.

Biography

Buchanan was born in Murfreesboro, Tennessee, the eldest child of James and Lila (Scott) Buchanan.  He was a grandson of John P. Buchanan, a governor of Tennessee in the 1890s.  He graduated from Middle Tennessee State Teachers College, now known as Middle Tennessee State University, in 1940.  Buchanan completed his M.S. from the University of Tennessee in 1941. He spent the war years on the staff of Admiral Nimitz in Honolulu, and it was during that time he met and married Anne Bakke on 5 October 1945; Anne, of Norwegian descent, was working as a nurse at the military base in Hawaii.
Buchanan received his Ph.D. from the University of Chicago in 1948 for his thesis "Fiscal Equity in a Federal State," in which he was heavily influenced by Frank H. Knight. It was also at Chicago that he read for the first time and found enlightening the work of Knut Wicksell.  Photographs of Knight and Wicksell have hung from his office walls ever since.
Buchanan was the founder of a new Virginia school of political economy.
He taught at the University of Virginia from 1956–1968, where he founded the Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression.
He taught at UCLA 1968–1969, followed by Virginia Polytechnic Institute 1969–1983 where he founded the Center for the Study of Public Choice (CSPC). In 1983 a conflict with Economics Department head Daniel M. Orr came to a head and Buchanan took the CSPC to its new home at George Mason University.
He also taught at Florida State University and the University of Tennessee.
In 1988 Buchanan returned to Hawaii for the first time since the War and gave a series of lectures later published by the University Press.  In 2001 Buchanan received an honorary doctoral degree from Universidad Francisco Marroquín, in Guatemala City, Guatemala, for his contribution to economics.Honorary Doctoral Degrees at Universidad Francisco Marroquín
Buchanan's work focused on public finance, the public debt, voting, rigorous analysis of the theory of logrolling, macroeconomics, constitutional economics, and libertarian theory. "The 25th Anniversary of Constitutional Economics: The Russian Model and Legal Reform in Russia, in The World Rule of Law Movement and Russian Legal Reform", edited by Francis Neate and Holly Nielsen, Justitsinform, Moscow (2007).
Buchanan died January 9, 2013, in Blacksburg, Virginia, at age 93.

Approach to economic analysis

Buchanan was largely responsible for the rebirth of political economy as a scholarly pursuit.J. (1998). James M. Buchanan and the rebirth of political economy, in (S. Pressman and R. Holt, eds.), Against the Grain: Dissent in Economics, pp. 21–39, Aldershot, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, 1998 Buchanan emphasized that public policy cannot be considered in terms of distribution, but is instead always a question of the choice over rules of the game that engender a pattern of exchange and distribution.  His work in public choice theory is often interpreted as the quintessential case of economic imperialism;Amartya Sen, in Economics and Sociology, ch. 14, Princeton: Princeton University Press. p. 263 however, as Amartya Sen has argued, Buchanan should not be identified with economic imperialism, since Buchanan has done more than most to introduce ethics, legal political thinking, and indeed social thinking into economics. (1990). Economics and Sociology: On Redefining Their Boundaries, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. p. 263 Crucial to understanding Buchanan's system of thought is the distinction he made between politics and policy. Politics is about the rules of the game, where policy is focused on strategies that players adopt within a given set of rules. "Questions about what are good rules of the game are in the domain of social philosophy, whereas questions about the strategies that players will adopt given those rules is the domain of economics, and it is the play between the rules (social philosophy) and the strategies (economics) that constitutes what Buchanan refers to as constitutional political economy"."Where Economics and Philosophy Meet: Review of The Elgar Companion to Economics and Philosophy with responses from the authors", The Economic Journal, 116 (June), 2006
Buchanan's important contribution to constitutionalism is his development of the sub-discipline of constitutional economics., 1990. "The Domain of Constitutional Economics," Constitutional Political Economy, 1(1), pp. 1–18. Also as at 1990b &  
According to Buchanan the ethic of constitutionalism is a key for constitutional order and "may be called the idealized Kantian world" where the individual "who is making the ordering, along with substantially all of his fellows, adopts the moral law as a general rule for behaviour". 314 Buchanan rejects "any organic conception of the state as superior in wisdom, to the citizens of this state". This philosophical position forms the basis of constitutional economics. Buchanan believed that every constitution is created for at least several generations of citizens. Therefore, it must be able to balance the interests of the state, society, and each individual., Logical Formulations of Constitutional Liberty, Vol. 1, Indianapolis, 1999, p. 372.
Buchanan is considered to be a quasi-member of the Austrian school of economics, not formally associated with the school but sharing many common beliefs.cato.pdf As Buchanan puts it: "I certainly have a great deal of affinity with Austrian economics and I have no objections to being called an Austrian. Hayek and Mises might consider me an Austrian but, surely some of the others would not." Buchanan went on to say that: "I didn't become acquainted with Mises until I wrote an article on individual choice and voting in the market in 1954. After I had finished the first draft I went back to see what Mises had said in Human Action. I found out, amazingly, that he had come closer to saying what I was trying to say than anybody else."

List of publications





Sources




