[[Howard James Hubbard]]

CATEGORIES: American Roman Catholic bishops, Roman Catholic Diocese of Albany, Saint Joseph's Seminary (Dunwoodie) alumni, The Catholic University of America alumni, 1938 births, People from Troy, New York, Living people, Pontifical North American College alumni, Alumni of the Pontifical Gregorian University

Howard James Hubbard, DD (born October 31, 1938) is an United States prelate of the Roman Catholic Church. He was the ninth Bishop of Albany.

Early life and ministry

Howard Hubbard was born in Troy, New York, to Howard and Elizabeth Hubbard. He attended La Salle Institute, and entered Mater Christi Seminary in 1956. He furthered his studies at St. Joseph's Seminary in Yonkers and the Pontifical North American College and Pontifical Gregorian University in Rome. While in Rome, Hubbard was ordained to the priesthood by Archbishop Martin O'Connor on December 18, 1963.
Upon his return to the United States, he served as associate pastor of St. Joseph's Church in Schenectady and at the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception in Albany. He then did his graduate studies in social services at the Catholic University of America in Washington, D.C.

Episcopal career

On February 2, 1977, Hubbard was appointed Bishop of Albany by Pope Paul VI. He received his episcopal consecration on the following March 27 from Cardinal Terence Cooke, with Bishops Edwin B. Broderick and Edward Joseph Maginn serving as co-consecrators. He was the youngest bishop in the country at the time.
Appointed by Pope John Paul II to the Vatican's Secretariat for Non-Christians (now the Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue), he is a supporter of the ecumenical movement, serving as Roman Catholic Co-chair of the Oriental Orthodox-Roman Catholic Consultation.  Under his leadership, the Roman Catholic Diocese of Albany has had a very active Catholic-Jewish dialogue, and has been at the forefront of efforts to achieve a good working relationship between the Roman Catholic Diocese and the Jewish community. He has been a leader in pro-life efforts,  suing to prevent an abortion clinic from opening in Albany and serving as president of New Yorkers Against the Death Penalty.
At the time of his retirement, Hubbard's tenure as bishop was the longest in the Diocese's history, at 37 years. The previous record was 35 years belonging to Edmund Gibbons. Liturgical design consultant Richard S. Vosko served as his liturgical adviser during his tenure...Reflections on a Press Conference and Agony in Albany" By Paul Likoudis February 27, 2004

Controversies

There were longstanding rumors and protests over alleged sexual misconduct and homosexual relationships between Bishop Hubbard and minors during the latter part of his tenure.  March 28, 2004. Although none of these allegations materialized nor resulted in his removal from office, his approval rating and public opinion suffered greatly because of them.
In 2004, independent investigators cleared Hubbard of allegations of sexual misconduct, stating that "The facts did not substantiate any of the charges against Bishop Hubbard"New York Times: "Report Clears Albany Bishop In Sexual Misconduct Inquiry" June 25, 2004

Abuse affairs

In March 19, 2011, Hubbard placed three retired priests on administrative leave and removed another from the ministry after receiving allegations of child sexual abuse.

Communion controversy

In March 2011, Hubbard gave an interview in which he explained that he would not deny communion to New York's Governor, Andrew Cuomo.  Critics of the bishop have argued that Cuomo should be denied communion either for his support of same-sex marriage and abortion rights, his cohabitation with a girlfriend, or both.

Retirement

Hubbard submitted his letter of resignation to Pope Francis when he reached the age of 75 as required. The Vatican announced on February 11, 2014, that Pope Francis had accepted Hubbard's resignation and appointed as his successor Rev. Msgr. Edward Bernard Scharfenberger, a priest of the Diocese of Brooklyn and Episcopal Vicar for the area of Queens.

Episcopal succession






