[[Jean-Luc Picard]]

CATEGORIES: Star Trek: The Next Generation characters, Star Trek: Deep Space Nine characters, Star Trek (film franchise) characters, Starfleet officers, Fictional captains, Fictional diplomats, Fictional archaeologists, Fictional French people, Starfleet captains, Fictional characters introduced in 1987

Captain Jean-Luc Picard () is a Star Trek character portrayed by Patrick Stewart. He appears in the television series Star Trek: The Next Generation and the feature films Star Trek Generations, Star Trek: First Contact, Star Trek: Insurrection and Star Trek: Nemesis. He also made an appearance in the pilot episode of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine.

Casting and design

After the success of the contemporary Star Trek feature films, a new television series featuring a new cast was announced on October 10, 1986. October 13, 1986, Monday, Final Edition. BYLINE: John Carmody, Washington Post Staff Writer. SECTION: STYLE; PAGE B8; THE TV COLUMN Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry named Picard for one or both of the twin brothers Auguste Piccard and Jean Felix Piccard, 20th-century Swiss scientists.
Patrick Stewart, who has a background of theatre at the Royal Shakespeare Company,Phillip Brochbank, ed., Players of Shakespeare Cambridge: Cambride University Press (1995) was initially considered for the role of Data;James Hatfield, George Burt, Patrick Stewart: The Unauthorized Biography New York: Kensington Publishing (1996) he has said that he would not have been interested in taking a supporting role "to sit around".
As the series progressed, Stewart exercised more control over the character's development. By the time production began on the first Next Generation film, "it was impossible to tell where Jean Luc started and Patrick Stewart ended", and by the fourth film, he stated that

Stewart stated, however, that he is not nearly as serious or brooding as his alter ego.The Journal Arts: Patrick Stewart
Stewart also stated, "One of the delights of having done this series and played this role is that people are so attracted to the whole idea of Star Trek... several years after the series has ended... I enjoy hearing how much people enjoyed the work we did... It's always gratifying to me that this bald, middle-aged Englishman seems to connect with them." Stewart has also commented that his role has helped open up Shakespeare to science fiction fans. He has noted the "regular presence of Trekkies in the audience" whenever he plays theatre, and added: "I meet these people afterwards, I get letters from them and see them at the stage door... And they say, 'I've never seen Shakespeare before, I didn't think I'd understand it, but it was wonderful and I can't wait to come back.'"Patrick Stewart interview (BBC)

Character biography

Jean-Luc Picard was born to Maurice and Yvette Picard in La Barre, France, on July 13, 2305, and dreamed of joining Starfleet. He and the rest of his family speak English, with English accents—the French language having become obscure by the 24th century, as mentioned in the Next Generation episode "Code of Honor".  The young Picard failed his first Starfleet Academy entrance exam, but was subsequently admitted and became the first freshman to win the Academy marathon. His academic training in archaeology is mentioned in numerous TNG episodes; he continues to pursue archaeology as a hobby and has a strong interest in centuries-old analog devices. He also remarks at one point that he failed a semester of organic chemistry because of a distraction created by romantic issues. Shortly after graduation, Picard was stabbed in the heart by a Nausicaan, leaving the organ irreparable and requiring replacement with a parthenogenetic implant; this would prove near-fatal (or fatal; as Q discussed, life and death are not necessarily absolute concepts) later. Picard eventually served as first officer aboard the USS Stargazer, which he later commanded. During that time, he invented a starship evade and attack tactic that would become known as the Picard Maneuver.
Depicted as deeply moral, highly logical and intelligent, Picard is a master of diplomacy and debate who resolves seemingly intractable issues between multiple, sometimes inplacable parties with a Solomon-like wisdom. Though such resolutions are usually peaceful, Picard is also shown using his remarkable tactical cunning in situations when it is required. Picard has a fondness for detective stories, Shakespearean drama, and archeology. He is frequently shown drinking Earl Grey tea and issuing an order by saying "Make it so." or "Engage".
Star Trek: The Next Generation depicts Picard's command of the USS Enterprise (NCC-1701-D). The pilot episode shows the ship's mission to investigate a problem at Farpoint Station, which  becomes sidetracked when Q  makes Picard "representative" in a trial charging humanity with being a "dangerously savage child-race". Picard persuades Q to test humanity, and Q chooses as the test's first stage the crew's performance at Farpoint. The trial "ends" seven years later (when Q reminds Picard that it never does), in the series finale, when humanity is absolved by Picard's demonstration that the species has the capacity to explore the "possibilities of existence".
The third season finale, "The Best of Both Worlds, Part I", depicts Picard being assimilated by the Borg to serve as a bridge between humanity and the Borg (renamed Locutus of Borg); Picard's assimilation and recovery are a critical point in the character's development, and provided backstory for the film Star Trek: First Contact and the development of Benjamin Sisko, the protagonist of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine. Stewart asked Roddenberry to keep Picard a Borg for a few more episodes beyond the third season finale, as he thought that would be more interesting than simply restoring Picard in Part II. It is later revealed in First Contact that parts of Borg machinery were removed from inside Picard, but that he retains traumatic memories of assimilation (which becomes a pivotal plot twist in Star Trek: First Contact).
The fourth-season episode "Family" reveals that Picard has a brother, Robert, who took charge of the family vineyards in La Barre after Picard joined Starfleet. Robert and his wife have a young son, René, who is Picard's nephew. In the film Star Trek Generations, Picard learns that Robert and René have both died in a fire. 
Picard joins forces with legendary Enterprise captain James T. Kirk in Star Trek Generations to fight the film's villain Dr. Tolian Soran. Commanding the new USS Enterprise-E (after the Enterprise-D is destroyed in Generations), Picard again confronts the Borg in First Contact. Later, he fights a species' forced relocation in Star Trek: Insurrection, and encounters Shinzon, a Romulan-made clone of himself, in Star Trek Nemesis.
In recent novels by Pocket Books, Picard has married Beverly Crusher, and they have a son named René Jacques Robert Francois Picard. Jean-Luc also corresponds regularly with Marie, his sister-in-law, who still maintains the family vineyards.

Reception


The character has near-universal critical acclaim among fans of The Next Generation, and he is usually considered one of the top two captains in the entire Star Trek franchise - there are often lengthy and serious debates over whether Picard or James T. Kirk is the "best" Starfleet captain. A 1991 TV Guide cover story was titled "It's Kirk vs. Picard: Experts and fans debate who's best." 
UGO Networks listed Picard as one of their best heroes in entertainment, saying, "He doesn't have Kirk's sense of panache, but he did have a tendency to take everything really, really seriously for years".

Other actors

The character of Jean Luc Picard has also been portrayed by:






