[[Mission San Xavier del Bac]]

CATEGORIES: Roman Catholic Church in Arizona, Jesuit history in North America, National Historic Landmarks in Arizona, 1699 establishments in New Spain, Properties of religious function on the National Register of Historic Places in Arizona, Buildings and structures in Pima County, Arizona, History of Pima County, Arizona, Landmarks in Tucson, Arizona, Tohono O'odham, Protected areas established in 1960, Spanish Colonial architecture in Arizona, Visitor attractions in Pima County, Arizona, Catholic pilgrimage sites, Churches in Pima County, Arizona, San Antonio-San Diego Mail Line, Stagecoach stops

Mission San Xavier del Bac is a historic Spanish Catholic mission located about 10 miles (16 km) south of downtown Tucson, Arizona, on the Tohono O'odham San Xavier Indian Reservation. The mission was named in 1692 by Padre Eusebio Kino for a pioneering Christian missionary and co-founder of the Society of Jesus (Jesuit Order), Francis Xavier. The mission is also known as the "place where the water appears", as there were once natural springs in the area.(Nentvig, J. 1980.  Rudo Ensayo: A Description of Sonora and Arizona in 1764.  University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ)  The Santa Cruz River, which now runs only part of the year, is also nearby. The mission is situated in the center of a centuries-old Indian settlement of the Tohono O'odham (formerly known as Papago), located along the banks of the Santa Cruz River.
The mission is a pilgrimage site with thousands of pilgrims who visit the church each year, many of them walking Fontana, Bernard L. & photos by McCain,Edward, "A Gift of Angels: The Art of Mission San Xavier del Bac", p. 41, The University of Arizona Press, Tucson, 2010, ISBN 978-0-8165-2840-0 or riding on horseback cabalgatas.

Founding

The mission was founded in 1692 by the Jesuit missionary Eusebio Francisco Kino, founder of the Spanish missions in the Sonoran Desert chain, who often visited and preached in the area. The original mission church, located about two miles (3 km) away, was vulnerable to Apache attacks which finally destroyed it in about 1770. Charles III of Spain banned all Jesuits from Spanish lands in the Americas in 1767 because of his distrust of the Jesuits. From this time on, San Xavier mission was led by the more pliable and "reliable" Franciscans. The present building was constructed under the direction of Franciscan fathers Juan Bautista Velderrain and Juan Bautista Llorenz mainly with native labor working from 1783–1797 with a loan of 7,000 pesos and serves the Catholics of the San Xavier District of the Tohono O'odham Nation. Unlike the other Spanish missions in Arizona, San Xavier is still actively served by Franciscans, and still serves the Native community by which it was built. The San Xavier church and its Indian converts were protected somewhat from Apache raids by the Presidio San Augustin del Tucson, established in 1775 roughly 7 miles downstream.

Architecture

Outside, San Xavier has a white, Moorish-inspired design, elegant and simple, with an ornately decorated entrance. No records of the architect, builders, craftsmen or artisans responsible for creating and decorating it are known. Most of the labor was provided by the local Indians, and many believe they provided most or all of the artisans as well. Visitors entering the massive, carved mesquite-wood doors of San Xavier are often struck by the coolness of the interior, and the dazzling colors of the paintings, carvings, frescoes and statues. The interior is richly decorated with ornaments showing a mixture of New Spain and Native American artistic motifs.
The floor plan of the church resembles the classic Latin cross. The main aisle is separated from the sanctuary by the transept or cross aisle, with chapels at either end. The dome above the transept is .

Jurisdiction

Not much appears to have been written about the mission from 1797 to 1828. In 1822, it fell under the jurisdiction of the newly independent Mexican government and the Catholic Diocese of Sonora. In 1828, the Mexican government banned all Spanish-born priests, and the priest serving at San Xavier was sent home to Spain; San Xavier was left vacant. Between 1828 and 1858, the vacant church began to decay, and local Indians, concerned about their church, began to preserve what they could. In 1853, the church was brought under U.S. jurisdiction when the surrounding territory was bought in the Gadsden Purchase. The vacant and decaying church was re-opened, in 1859, when the Santa Fe Diocese added Arizona to its jurisdiction. The bishop for the Santa Fe Diocese ordered repairs to be made with diocesean money, and a priest was assigned to serve at San Xavier.
The mission was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1960. and Accompanying 16 photos, 15 by Marilynn Larew from 1977, 1 from 1877 after earthquake.

Gallery

Image:SanXavier1887. Photographer: Leo Goldschmidt.
File:Mission San Xavier del Bac, Tucson, Arizona, 1902.
Image:San_Xavier_del_Bac,_c1913.
Image:StXavier.
Image:San Xavier del Bac inside.
File:MISSION SAN XAVIER DEL BAC.jpg|A chapel altar

Mission today

Today, the mission is open to the public daily, except when it is being used for church services. The San Xavier Festival is held the evening of the Friday after Easter and features a torch-light parade of Tohono O'odham and Yaqui tribal members. Extensive restoration efforts in the late 20th century have restored the interior to its historic splendor. Extensive exterior restoration is continuing (as of June 2007, the left tower was completely enclosed in scaffolding). Concrete stuccoing added in the 1980s is being removed as this material was found to trap water inside the church which damaged the interior decoration. This modern stucco is being replaced with the traditional mud plaster, including pulp from the prickly pear cactus, that "breathes" better to allow excess water to escape but requires more regular inspection and higher maintenance costs. Following extensive and ongoing restoration of the interior decorations, the  mission church interior now largely appears in its original state, with brilliant colors and complex design.San Xavier Mission Organization site
Among the many legends surrounding the building is a popular myth suggesting that early taxation laws exempted buildings under construction, so the builders chose to leave one dome unfinished . The mission has acted as a community center for the Tohono O'odham for almost two centuries. In 1895, a school was opened, and a grant of $1,000 was given to repair the building. More classrooms were added in 1900; in 1947, a new school was built next to the church for the Tohono O'odham children.





Nentvig, J. 1980.  Rudo Ensayo: A Description of Sonora and Arizona in 1764.  University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ




