[[Craig Venter]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences, Living people, United States Navy sailors, University of California, San Diego alumni, University at Buffalo faculty, American atheists, American military personnel of the Vietnam War, American geneticists, Biotechnologists

John Craig Venter (born October 14, 1946) is an American biologist and entrepreneur. He is known for being one of the first to sequence the human genome He is a member of the USA Science and Engineering Festival's Advisory Board.usasciencefestival.org/about/advisors retrieved 2010-07-05

Early life and education

Venter was born in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Elizabeth and John Venter. He graduated from Mills High School in Millbrae, California.
Although he was against the Vietnam War, While in Vietnam, he attempted suicide by swimming out to sea, but changed his mind more than a mile out.
Being confronted with wounded, maimed, and dying soldiers on a daily basis instilled in him a desire to study medicine'Artificial life' breakthrough announced by scientists, BBC, 21 May 2010.  — although he later switched to biomedical research.
Venter began his college career at a community college, College of San Mateo in California. He received his B.S. degree in biochemistry in 1972, and his Ph.D. degree in physiology and pharmacology in 1975, both from the University of California, San Diego. At UCSD, he studied under biochemist Nathan O. Kaplan.nndb.
In Buffalo, he divorced Dr. Rae-Venter and married his student, Claire M. Fraser, remaining married to her until 2005.
Venter is an atheist. The universe is far more wonderful."
Venter himself recognized his own ADHD behavior in his adolescence, and later found ADHD-linked genes in his own DNA.

Career

Scientific discoveries

While at the NIH, Venter learned of a technique for rapidly identifying all of the mRNAs present in a cell and began to use it to identify human brain genes. The short cDNA sequence fragments discovered by this method are called expressed sequence tags (ESTs), a name coined by Anthony Kerlavage at The Institute for Genomic Research. The NIH initially led an effort to patent these gene fragments, in which Venter coincidentally and controversially became involved.

=Human Genome Project=

Venter was passionate about the power of genomics to radically transform healthcare. Venter believed that shotgun sequencing was the fastest and most effective way to get useful human genome data. The method was controversial, however, since some geneticists felt it would not be accurate enough for a genome as complicated as that of humans.
On the 15 February 2001, the Human Genome Project consortium published the first Human Genome in the journal Nature, and was followed, one day later, by a Celera publication in Science. Despite some claims that shotgun sequencing was in some ways less accurate than the clone-by-clone method chosen by the Human Genome Project,[ref]
</ref> the technique became widely accepted by the scientific community.
Although Celera was originally set to sequence a composite of DNA samples, partway through the sequencing, Venter switched the samples for his own DNA.
After contributing to the Human Genome, and its release into the public domain, Venter was fired by Celera in early 2002. According to his biography, Venter was ready to leave Celera, and was fired due to conflict with the main investor, Tony White, that had existed since day one of the project. Venter writes that his main goal was always to accelerate science and thereby discovery, and he only sought help from the corporate world when he couldn't find funding in the public sector.

=Global Ocean Sampling Expedition=

The Global Ocean Sampling Expedition (GOS) is an ocean exploration genome project with the goal of assessing the genetic diversity in marine microbial communities and to understand their role in nature's fundamental processes. Begun as a Sargasso Sea pilot sampling project in August 2003, Craig Venter announced the full Expedition on 4 March 2004. The project, which used Craig Venter's personal yacht, Sorcerer II, started in Halifax, Canada, circumnavigated the globe and returned to the U.S. in January 2006.

=Synthetic genomics=

Venter is currently the president of the J. Craig Venter Institute, which conducts research in synthetic biology. In June 2005, he co-founded Synthetic Genomics, a firm dedicated to using modified microorganisms to produce clean fuels and biochemicals. In July 2009, ExxonMobil announced a $600 million collaboration with Synthetic Genomics to research and develop next-generation biofuels.
Venter is seeking to patent the first life form created by humanity, possibly to be named Mycoplasma laboratorium.
In May 2010, a team of scientists led by Venter became the first to successfully create what was described as "synthetic life". The single-celled organism contains four "watermarks"Using Arc to decode Venter's secret DNA watermark by Ken Shirriff
written into its DNA to identify it as synthetic and to help trace its descendants. The watermarks include 
In 2013 Venter said scientists would soon be able to use 3D printers to create synthetic life, possibly even recreating alien genomes whose DNA sequences are beamed back from probes like NASA's Curiosity rover. The Independent. 8 OCtober 2013.

Individual human genome

On September 4, 2007, a team led by Sam Levy published the first complete (six-billion-letter) genome of an individual human—Venter's own DNA sequence. This genome, dubbed HuRef by Levy and others, was a landmark accomplishment and as of mid-2010 is probably the highest quality personal genome sequence yet completed.
The Human Reference Genome Browser is a web application for the navigation and analysis of Venter's recently published genome. The HuRef database consists of approximately 32 million DNA reads sequenced using microfluidic Sanger sequencing, assembled into 4,528 scaffolds and 4.1 million DNA variations identified by genome analysis. These variants include single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), block substitutions, short and large indels, and structural variations like insertions, deletions, inversions and copy number changes.
The browser enables scientists to navigate the HuRef genome assembly and sequence variations, and to compare it with the NCBI human build 36 assembly in the context of the NCBI and Ensembl annotations. The browser provides a comparative view between NCBI and HuRef consensus sequences, the sequence multi-alignment of the HuRef assembly, Ensembl and dbSNP annotations, HuRef variants, and the underlying variant evidence and functional analysis. The interface also represents the haplotype blocks from which diploid genome sequence can be inferred and the relation of variants to gene annotations. The display of variants and gene annotations are linked to external public resources including dbSNP, Ensembl, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) and Gene Ontology (GO).
Users can search the HuRef genome using HUGO gene names, Ensembl and dbSNP identifiers, HuRef contig or scaffold locations, or NCBI chromosome locations. Users can then easily and quickly browse any genomic region via the simple and intuitive pan and zoom controls; furthermore, data relevant to specific loci can be exported for further analysis.

In popular culture

Venter has been the subject of several biography books, several scientific documentary books, TV documentaries, numerous magazine articles, and many speeches.
Venter has been the subject of articles in several magazines, including Wired,Shreeve, James. "Craig Venter's Epic Voyage to Redefine the Origin of the Species," Wired, August 2004. Accessed June 7, 2007. The Economist,"The Journey of the Sorcerer", The Economist, December 4, 2004. Australian science magazine Cosmos,First individual person's genome decoded - Cosmos Magazine. September 4, 2007. October 8, 2007. and The Atlantic. "The God of Small Things," The Atlantic, Jan/Feb 2007. Additionally, he was featured on The Colbert Report on both February 27, 2007, and October 30, 2007.
Venter appeared in the "Evolution" episode of the documentary television series Understanding.
On May 16, 2004, Venter gave the commencement speech at Boston University. April 30: Genome scientist to speak at Commencement, The Daily Free Press, April 28, 2004. Accessed August 2, 2008.
In a 2007 interview with New Scientist when asked "Assuming you can make synthetic bacteria, what will you do with them?", Venter replied:
Furthermore it suggests that one of the main purposes for creating synthetic bacteria would be to reduce the dependence on fossil fuels through bioremediation.
On May 10, 2007, Venter was awarded an honorary doctorate from Arizona State University,Aufrett, Sarah. "ASU Celebrates Spring Graduates", ASU Insight, May 11, 2007. Accessed June 7, 2007. and on October 24 of the same year, he received an honorary doctorate from Imperial College London."Honorary degrees awarded to Browne, Venter and Rausing", Imperial College, October 24, 2007. Accessed May 21, 2010.
He was on the 2007 Time 100 most influential people in the world list made by Time magazine. In 2007 he also received the Golden Eurydice Award for contributions to Biophilosophy.
On September 4, 2007, a team led by Venter published the first complete (six-billion-letter) genome of an individual human — Venter's own DNA sequence.
On December 4, 2007, Venter gave the Dimbleby lecture for the BBC in London. In February 2008, he gave a speech about his current work at the TED conference.TED | Talks | Craig Venter: On the verge of creating synthetic life (video)
Venter delivered the 2008 convocation speech for Faculty of Science honours and specialization students at the University of Alberta. A transcription of the speech is available here.: "Genomics leader accepts U of A honorary degree", "UofA ExpressNews"; retrieved on June 7, 2009.
Venter was featured in Time Magazine's "The Top 10 Everything of 2008" article. Number three in 2008's Top 10 Scientific Discoveries was a piece outlining his work stitching together the 582,000 base pairs necessary to invent the genetic information for a whole new bacterium.
For an episode aired on July 27, 2009, Venter was interviewed on his boat by BBC One for the first episode of TV show Bang Goes the Theory.
On May 8, 2010, Venter received an honorary doctor of science degree from Clarkson University for his work on the human genome.clarkson.php?id=2455
On May 20, 2010, Venter announced the creation of first self-replicating semi-synthetic bacterial cell.ted.html
On November 21, 2010 Steve Kroft profiled Venter and his research on 60 minutes.
On April 21, 2011, Venter received the 2011 Benjamin Rush Medal from William & Mary School of Law.
In the June 2011 issue of Men's Journal, Venter was featured as the "Survival Skills" celebrity of the month.  He shared various anecdotes, and advice, including stories of his time in Vietnam, as well as mentioning a bout with melanoma upon his back, which subsequently resulted in "giving a pound of flesh" to surgery.
Venter is mentioned, in the season finale of the first season of the science fiction series Orphan Black, a joint production of Space and BBC America. In the episode, Venter is referenced as patenting an organism and encoding a message in the genome of that organism, an act repeated by the character of Aldous Leekie (played by Matt Frewer). While the clones fear that this renders them as nothing more than property, in reality, in the United States and Canada, where the show primarily takes place, it is likely that such a patent would either be entirely unenforceable or would to the genomic sequence of the organism only, due to constitutional provisions and laws against owning human beings.

Awards and nominations

Bibliography

Venter is an ISI highly cited researcher and has authored over 200 publications in scientific journals.

Further reading








