[[Ian Livingstone]]

CATEGORIES: 1949 births, British gamebook writers, Commanders of the Order of the British Empire, Dungeons & Dragons game designers, English fantasy writers, Fighting Fantasy, Games Workshop, Living people, People educated at Altrincham Grammar School for Boys, People from Prestbury, Cheshire, Role-playing game designers

Ian Livingstone CBE (born December 1949) is an English fantasy author and entrepreneur. Along with Steve Jackson he is the co-founder of the popular and influential series of Fighting Fantasy roleplaying gamebook series and author of many books within that series. He is also one of the co-founders of prominent games company Games Workshop.

Early life

Livingstone attended Altrincham Grammar School for Boys, where he earned (he claims) only one A level, in Geography. He has retained his close links with the school and has visited it on numerous occasions, including to donate money for a refurbishment of the ICT suite, and also to give a speech and present awards to GCSE recipients in 1998.

Career

Games Workshop

Livingstone co-founded Games Workshop in early 1975 with flatmates John Peake and Steve Jackson.
Under the direction of Livingstone and Jackson, Games Workshop expanded from being a bedroom mail order company to a successful gaming manufacturer and retail chain, with the first Games Workshop store opening in Hammersmith in 1977.
In 1980, Livingstone and Jackson began to develop the concept of the Fighting Fantasy gamebook series, the first volume of which (The Warlock of Firetop Mountain) was published in 1982 by Puffin Books (a subsidiary imprint of Penguin Books). Livingstone and Jackson sold Games Workshop in 1991 for £10 million.
The pair, together with Bryan Ansell, founded Citadel Miniatures in Newark to make miniatures for games.

Fighting Fantasy

In 1981 Jackson and Livingstone co-wrote The Warlock of Firetop Mountain, the first book in the Fighting Fantasy series, but following an instruction from publishers Penguin to write more books "as quickly as possible", the pair wrote subsequent books separately. The series had sold over 14 million copies in 23 languages as of 1998, with Livingstone's Deathtrap Dungeon selling over 300,000 copies in the United Kingdom alone. Livingstone wrote another twelve Fighting Fantasy gamebooks, including The Forest of Doom, City of Thieves and Caverns of the Snow Witch before, in 2012, marking the 30th anniversary of the publication of The Warlock of Firetop Mountain with a new gamebook, Blood of the Zombies;Ian Livingstone, Twitter, 14 October 2011 the title was selected by a vote on the Fighting Fantasy website.

Videogame industry

In the mid 1980s Livingstone did some design work for video game publisher Domark, and in 1993 he returned to the company, this time as a major investor and board member. In 1995 Domark was acquired by the video technology company Eidos plc, which had floated on the London Stock Exchange in 1990, and formed the major part of the newly created Eidos Interactive. In 2005 Eidos was taken over by SCi and Livingstone was then the only former board member to be retained, taking on the role of product acquisition director. He contributed to the Tomb Raider project entitled Tomb Raider: Anniversary (an enhanced version of the original Tomb Raider game), which was released in 2007. In 2009, Japanese video-game company Square Enix completed a buyout of Eidos Interactive and Ian was promoted to Life President of Eidos.

Skills Champion

In 2010 Livingstone was asked to act as the Skills Champion by Ed Vaizey, tasked with producing a report reviewing the UK video games industry. The report, co-authored with Alex Hope of visual effects firm Double Negative, was released in 2011;Video Games and Visual Effects Skills Review Livingstone described it as a "complete bottom up review of the whole education system relating to games."Ian Livingstone Interview at Edinburgh Interactive Festival

Awards

In 2002, Livingstone won the BAFTA Interactive Special Award for outstanding contribution to the industry.
Livingstone was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2006 New Year Honours,New Year Honours list recognises UK tech visionaries
In 2011, Livingstone received an Honorary Doctorate of Arts from Bournemouth University.






