[[Verkhoyansk]]

CATEGORIES: Cities and towns in the Sakha Republic, Populated places of Arctic Russia, Weather extremes of Earth

Verkhoyansk (

History

Cossacks founded an ostrog in 1638, southwest of the modern town.  The ostrog's name Verkhoyansky, roughly translating from Russian as Town on the Upper Yana, derived from its geographical location on the upper reaches of the Yana River.
In 1775, it was moved to the left bank of the Yana River to facilitate tax collection. It was granted town status in 1817. Between the 1860s and 1917, the town was a place of political exile, with some of the more prominent exiles including the Polish writer Wacław Sieroszewski, as well as Bolshevik revolutionaries Ivan Babushkin and Viktor Nogin.
In January 2012, the town was attacked by a pack of about 400 wolves. According to biologists, the attack was due to a mass migration caused by a shortage in the wolves' natural food sources, in particular blue hares. About 3,500 wolves are believed to live in the Sakha Republic, an area larger than Argentina; however, according to the local government, the area can realistically only support 500 wolves. Locals were forced to patrol on snowmobiles until government forces could reach the area. According to the Agriculture Ministry, wolves killed 313 horses and over 16,000 reindeer in 2012.telegraph.co.html

Administrative and municipal status

As an inhabited locality, Verkhoyansk is classified as a town under district jurisdiction. As a municipal division, the Town of Verkhoyansk is incorporated within Verkhoyansky Municipal District as Verkhoyansk Urban Settlement.Law #173-Z #353-III

Economy

There is a river port, an airport, a fur-collecting depot, and the center of a reindeer-raising area.

Climate

Verkhoyansk is notable chiefly for its exceptionally low winter temperatures and some of the greatest temperature differences on Earth between summer and winter. Average monthly temperatures range from  from June through August, with the intervening months of May and September constituting very short transitional seasons. Verkhoyansk has an extreme subarctic climate (Köppen Dfd) dominated much of the year by high pressure. This has the effect of cutting off the region from warming influences in winter, and together with a lack of cloud cover leads to extensive heat losses during the cooler months.
Verkhoyansk is one of the places considered the northern Pole of Cold, the other being Oymyakon. The lowest temperature recorded there, in February 1892, was  
In this area, temperature inversions consistently form in winter due to the extremely cold and dense air of the Siberian High pooling in deep hollows, so that temperatures increase rather than decrease with higher altitude. In Verkhoyansk it sometimes happens that the average minimum temperatures for January, February, and December are below 
In June, July, and August, daytime temperatures over  Daily records on the right of the page; December-March records can be accessed via buttons at the bottom of the page. 
Verkhoyansk has a dry climate with little rainfall or snowfall: the average annual precipitation is . Although no month can be described as truly wet, there are strong seasonal differences in precipitation, with the summer being much wetter than the winter. Winter precipitation is extremely light, largely because of the dominance of high pressure at this time of year. Snow is actually most likely in October and May, when the weather is less dry than in winter.
 
 



Notes

Sources


