[[Medicare (Australia)]]

CATEGORIES: Health in Australia, Public policy in Australia, Publicly funded health care, Medicare Australia

Medicare is a publicly funded universal health care scheme in Australia. Operated by the government authority Medicare Australia, Medicare is the primary funder of health care in Australia, funding primary health care for Australian citizens and permanent residents (except for those on Norfolk Island). Residents are entitled to subsidised treatment from medical practitioners, eligible midwives, nurse practitioners and allied health professionals who have been issued a Medicare provider number, and can also obtain free treatment in public hospitals. The plan was introduced in 1975 by the Whitlam Government as Medibank, and was supplemented in 1976 by a government-owned private health insurance fund, Medibank Private, established by the Fraser Government. Medibank was renamed Medicare in 1984.
Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) are in place with the United Kingdom, Sweden, the Netherlands, Belgium, Finland, Norway, Slovenia, Malta, Italy, Republic of Ireland and New Zealand, which entitle visitors from these countries to limited access to Medicare and entitles Australian residents to reciprocal rights while in one of these countries.
Since 1999, the public health plan has been supplemented by a Private Health Insurance Rebate, where the government funds up to 30% of any private health insurance premium covering people eligible for Medicare. Including these rebates, Medicare is the major component of the total Commonwealth health budget, taking up about 43% of the total. The program is estimated to cost $18.3 billion in 2007–08. In 2009 before means testing was introduced, the private health insurance rebate was estimated to cost $4 billion, around 20% of the total budget. The overall figure is projected to rise by almost 4% annually in real terms over the next few years.

History

Medibank

There was an increase in the number of Australians covered by health insurance plans following the end of the Second World War. However, a large proportion of the Australian population continued to lack coverage for health risks in the early 1970s. In 1972, 17% of Australians outside of Queensland (which had a free public health care systemHealth Reform: Public Success, Private Failure by Daniel Drache and Terry Sullivan) were uninsured, most of whom were on low incomes.  Gough Whitlam's Australian Labor Party government was elected in 1972 and sought to put an end to this two-tier system by extending healthcare coverage to the entire population.
According to the second reading speech of the Health Insurance Bill 1973 delivered by Bill Hayden on 29 November 1973, the purpose of the new universal health insurance scheme, called Medibank, was to provide the 'most equitable and efficient means of providing health insurance coverage for all Australians'. There was opposition to the scheme from the Liberal Coalition controlled Senate, and the Health Insurance Bill 1973 and the accompanying bills were rejected by the Senate on three occasions (12 December 1973, 2 April 1974 and 18 July 1974). The Medibank legislation was one of the bills which resulted in a double dissolution of Parliament on 11 April 1974, and was passed at a subsequent joint sitting of Parliament on 7 August 1974.
Medibank started on schedule on 1 July 1975. In nine months, the Health Insurance Commission had increased its staff from 22 to 3500, opened 81 offices, installed 31 minicomputers, 633 terminals and 10 medium-sized computers linked by land-lines to the central computer, and issued registered health insurance cards to 90% of the Australian population.

Medibank Mark II

After a change of government at the December 1975 election, the Fraser Liberal government established the Medibank Review Committee in January 1976. The Committee findings were not made public but the new program was announced in a Ministerial Statement to Parliament on 20 May 1976. 'Medibank Mark II' was launched on 1 October 1976 and included a 2.5 per cent levy on income, with the option of taking out private health insurance instead of paying the levy. Other changes included reducing rebates to doctors and hospitals.
On 1 October 1976, the Fraser government also passed the Medibank Private bill. This legislation allowed the Health Insurance Commission (HIC) to enter the private health insurance business. This legislation led to the original Medibank closing in 1981.

Medicare

On 1 February 1984, Medicare was established by the Hawke Labor government. The major changes introduced by the Fraser government were largely rejected by the Hawke government, which returned to the original Medibank model. Although the financing arrangements were different, and there was a name change from Medibank to Medicare, little else differed from the original. Medicare came into effect on 1 February 1984, following the passage in September 1983 of the Health Legislation Amendment Act 1983, including amendments to the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973.

Funding and legal framework

Program funding

The original Medibank program proposed a 1.35% levy (with low income exemptions) but these bills were rejected by the Senate, and so Medibank was originally funded from general revenue.  In October 1976, the Fraser Government introduced a 2.5% levy.
The program is now nominally funded by an income tax surcharge known as the Medicare levy, which is currently set at 1.5%.  An exemption applies to low income earners, with different thresholds applying to singles, families, seniors and pensioners. In general, if no tax is payable, then medicare levy is also not payable, but there is a phasing-in range.
There is an additional levy of 1.0%, known as the Medicare Levy Surcharge, for individuals on high annual incomes (which increased to $70,000 in the 2008 federal budget) who do not have adequate levels of private hospital coverage.– Medicare Levy Surchage ATO page  This was part of an effort by the Howard Coalition Federal Government to encourage people towards private health insurance. The surcharge rose to 1.5% from 1 July 2012.
The medicare levy will temporarily increase to 2% from 1 July 2014, to go to fund the National Disability Insurance Scheme.

Constitutional framework

Section 51 (xxiiiA) of the Commonwealth Constitution was inserted following the successful referendum of 1946. It gave the Federal Parliament power, subject to the Constitution, to make laws with respect to: The provision of maternity allowances, widows' pensions, child endowment, unemployment, pharmaceutical, sickness and hospital benefits, medical and dental services (but not so as to authorise any form of civil conscription), benefits to students and family allowances.
This power supports the Commonwealth operating the Medicare program, but not the entire Australian health system.  The authority to operate public hospitals remains the province of the State and Territory governments.  In practice, the state governments, as well as private doctors, act as pseudo-contractors.  This is done by a provider number system controlled by the Commonwealth.
Privately run hospitals are also part of the Medicare system.  Medicare benefits are payable for medical treatment provided to admitted patients of private hospitals as well as public hospitals.  However, a patient in a private hospital (by definition, a private patient) would need private insurance coverage to help him or her meet any of the hospital charges such as accommodation costs, as well as some or all of the remainder of the doctor's charges above the 75% Medicare benefit.

Medicare rebates

Standard Medicare rebate

The standard Medicare rebate is 85% of the Medicare-determined schedule fee, called the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS). Patients need to pay the balance of the fees above the 85% of schedule fee level, until the safety nets cut in. Many medical practitioners charge more than the schedule fees, and the amount in excess of the schedule fee must be borne by the patient and is not counted towards the safety net threshold.
Where practitioners "bulk bill" patients, they agree with Medicare to accept 85% of the schedule fee in full payment for their services. The MBS is not indexed, but is reviewed from time to time.

Medicare safety nets

To provide additional relief to those who incur higher than usual medical costs, Medicare safety nets have been set up. These provide singles and families with an additional rebate when an annual threshold (determined on a calendar year basis) is reached for out-of-hospital Medicare services.2  There are two safety nets:
The thresholds for both safety nets are indexed on 1 January each year to the Consumer Price Index.

=Original Medicare safety net=

Under the original Medicare safety net, once an annual threshold in gap costs has been reached, the Medicare rebate for out-of-hospital services is increased to 100% of the schedule fee (up from 85%).  Gap costs refer to the difference between the standard Medicare rebate (85% of the schedule fee) and the actual fee paid, but limited to 100% of the schedule fee. The threshold for calendar year 2012 is $413.50. This threshold applies to all Medicare-eligible singles and families.

=Extended Medicare safety net=

The extended Medicare safety net (EMSN) was first introduced in March 2004. At that time the general threshold for singles and families was $700 and $300 for singles and families that hold a Commonwealth concession card, and families that received Family Tax Benefit Part (A) (FTB(A)) and families that qualify for notional FTB(A). On 1 January 2006 the thresholds were increased to $1,000 and $500 respectively. From then the EMSN was indexed by the Consumer Price Index on 1 January each year.Extended Medicare Safety Net Review
Under EMSN, once an annual threshold in out-of-pocket costs for out-of-hospital Medicare services is reached, The Medicare rebate will increase to 80% of any future out-of-pocket costs (now subject to the EMSN fee cap) for out-of-hospital Medicare services for the remainder of the calendar year.  Out-of-pocket costs are the difference between the fee actually paid to the practitioner (subject to the fee cap) and the standard Medicare rebate.
Since 1 January 2010, some medical fees have been subject to an EMSN fee cap, so that the out-of-pocket costs used in determining whether the threshold has been reached are limited to that cap. The items subject to a cap has expanded since 2010, the latest being in November 2012.Fact Sheet - EMSN Summary
For calendar year 2012, the general threshold is $1,198.00 and the concession threshold is $598.80.

Medicare and private health insurance

Debates regarding Medicare focus on the two-tier system and the role of private health insurance.  Controversial issues include:
People who take up private health insurance are currently rewarded in a number of ways.  They receive a Private Health Insurance Rebate that subsidises 30% of their insurance premiums, increasing to 35% or 40% for people over 65. Critics say that the rebate is an unfair subsidy to those who can afford health insurance, claiming the money would be better spent on public hospitals where it would benefit everyone.  Supporters say people must be encouraged into the private health care system, claiming the public system is not universally sustainable for the future.  Similarly, even after the introduction of the rebate, some private health insurance organisations have raised their premiums most years,  somewhat negating the benefit of the rebate.
As at March 2010 approximately 44.5%
The proportion of Australians with private health insurance was declining, but has increased again with the introduction of Lifetime Health Cover (where people who take out private hospital insurance later in life pay higher premiums than those who have held coverage since they were younger) and tax incentives to take out private cover (such as the Medicare Levy Surcharge).

Other health care programs

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme

The Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) subsidises certain prescribed pharmaceuticals.  The PBS pre-dates Medicare, being established in 1948.  It is generally considered a separate health policy to 'Medicare'.  However, the PBS is now administered by Medicare Australia (formerly the Health Insurance Commission) under the Health Insurance Act 1973, with input from a range of other bodies such as the Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing Authority.

State/territory programs

State and Territory Governments also sometimes administer peripheral health programmes, such as free dentistry for school students and community sexual health programmes.

Practitioner review programs

This is a basic overview of the practitioner review process in point form:





Notes

Sources




