[[Roosevelt Island Public Safety Department]]

CATEGORIES: Law enforcement agencies of New York, Specialist police departments of New York, Law enforcement agencies of New York City, Roosevelt Island

The Roosevelt Island Public Safety Department (RIPSD) is a law enforcement agency in New York City whose duties are to patrol Roosevelt Island, New York, Manhattan Tram Plaza, Roosevelt Island F-Train Station because of the contract New York State made with New York City in 1968 which gave New York State a 99 year lease on the land. The department is Roosevelt Island Operating Corporation's law enforcement arm and protects the island's property including all public/state facilities, storefronts and patrols certain contracted residential buildings 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Officers also patrol the island's only subway station and public school which is under NYC DOE, and enforce state and city laws on the island. The department is manned by approximately 40 officers.  They patrol an area which is approximately  at its largest width, which is East to West. On September 21, 2009, the department opened their new command center located at 550 Main Street. The new command center has new and improved offices, a new training room, a weight room, as well as two holding cells for arrest processing. The Main command center monitors 24 hour island-wide camera system and every vehicle that comes onto Roosevelt Island via Lic. As well as cameras on the Manhattan side of the tram, along the route and inside the tram cars. Also the officers monitor cameras in the Roosevelt Landings housing Complex.

Equipment and uniforms

Roosevelt Island Officers wear dark blue uniforms with patches on the front and back as well as the Roosevelt Island Department of Public Safety patches on their arms. The department uses marked vehicles. The department also has an Anti Crime Unit with officers in plain clothes, Bike Patrol officers, Radar enforcement officers and one certified EMT. All officers are trained in basic life support. Several members carry firearms. Due to the community in non support of firearms, not all members are authorized to carry firearms while on duty.

Power and authority

Roosevelt Island Officers are certified New York State Peace Officers. Officers can make warrantless arrests, issue summonses such as NYC Parking Violations, NYS and NYC Criminal Court summonses, Environmental Control Board summonses, and use physical force when necessary. Arrests are processed by the officers, and persons arrested are processed and lodged at Manhattan Central Booking, where they await arraignment. All officers are trained and responsible to factually testify in the court of law in regard to their actions.

Training

The officers complete an extensive Peace Officers course which includes training in law, police science, powers of a peace officer, self-defense/tactics, arrest procedures, traffic stops,and beat patrolling, vertical patrol tactics, park enforcement, and basic life support/CPR. Also an additional 8 weeks of Field Training, in which new officers must satisfactory complete in part of their supplemental training. For those seeking the certification, Bicycle Training and Radar Training are also provided.

History

When the island was first developed/opened to the public for housing by the "Roosevelt Island Development Corp", security on the island was handled by security guards contracted by "RIDC". The firm was City Security Guards Inc. from 1976–1978. Then in 1978 the contract was terminated and a full service police force was formed and law enforcement was handled by the Roosevelt Island Police Department (RIPD) from 1979–1981. In 1981 a name change happened and RIDC transferred all officers to the "NYS Division of Housing and Community Renewal Police" (NYS DHCR Police) from 1981 to approx. 1985. Both police departments were staffed by peace officers, and members had statewide jurisdiction and powers both on and off duty. Officers were armed with standard issue .38 special revolvers. Originally, RIPD/DHCRPD had state jurisdiction since they were employed as state officers. In 1984, the "Roosevelt Island Operating Corp." was formed and all island operations were transferred to it. Not long after that (in 1985) the DHCR Police were disbanded and Officers/Sergeants/Lieutenants/Captains could remain as Security Guards for "RIOC" or could join the NYS Department of Correctional Services. Most officers went to the NYPD, New York City Transit Police, and New York City Housing Authority Police Department, and only two or three went to New York State Department of Corrections. The officers who stayed were now part of RIOC Security, with no special patrolman status, no guns, and security type uniforms. Then about a year or two later, after residents demanded a more professional, police-type force, RIOC formed the Roosevelt Island Public Safety Department. Their first patrol cars were red Ford Jeeps and uniforms were changed to NYPD-style uniforms. They were given New York State Peace Officer powers and certain equipment but were still unarmed. The RIPD 1979-1981 cars looked like the Port Authority's police cars. They were blue with yellow tops and gray lines with the words "Roosevelt Island Police" written in red lettering, The color was changed in 1980 to white and a van was added. Then they switched from RIPD to a name change of NYS DHCR Police 1981–1985. Those cars looked like modern day state trooper cars. Same graphics, colors, (actually, instead of navy blue the cars were black with gold stripes) and where it says "State Trooper" it said "DHCR POLICE". In 1986, in the wake of a major news story story on a duplication of services by a town police department in upstate New York, then-Governor Mario Cuomo started an investigation on duplicated services for police departments, and since Roosevelt Island was in New York City, the New York City Police Department is the responsible law enforcement agency on the island, Cuomo then disbanded about 15 police departments total in the state, with DHCRPD being one. RIOC concurred with this move in order to have autonomy of their own Public Safety Department.  At present, their vehicles are SUV's.

Rank structure

There are seven titles (referred to as ranks) in the Roosevelt Island Public Safety Department:

Excessive force complaints

Some residents have accused the RIPSD of a pattern of violent behavior towards residents, and making overly aggressive, unnecessary arrests. In a February 6, 2013, public meeting, the Roosevelt Island Residents Association Common Council, which includes elected representatives from most buildings, called for the removal of the Director and his Deputy. In one specific case, a resident, Anthony Jones, 20, was arrested on January 13, 2013, on Trespass and Resisting Arrest charges. The Manhattan District Attorney's office refused to prosecute the case, and the charges were dropped. Jones said that after handcuffing him, Public Safety officers threw him to the ground, beat and kicked him. Jones was hospitalized with a punctured lung, and is suing the Roosevelt Island Operating Corporation. Other residents complained of being arrested and roughly handled on charges that were eventually dismissed. 9, 2013Roosevelt Island Residents Demand Public Safety Department Changes, By Mirela Iverac, WNYC News, February 27, 2013Roosevelt Island Safety Nightmare. by Joanna Fantozzi, New York Press, March 1, 2013








