[[Indigenous peoples of Sikkim]]

CATEGORIES: Culture of Sikkim, Tibetan culture, Social groups of India, Himalayan peoples, Indigenous peoples of South Asia, Scheduled Tribes of India

Indigenous people of Sikkim include the  Lepchas and Bhutias  in contrast to the dominant heterogeneous Nepali population of Sikkim.

History

The Lepcha is the earliest ethnic group settled Sikkim. The Sikkim was named by Limboo/Subba. Relations between the Lepcha and Tibetan peoples began in the thirteenth century with the signing of a blood brotherhood by the Lepcha Chief Thekong Tek and the Tibetan Prince Khye Bumsa at Kabi Lungchok in north Sikkim. The Bhutias introduced Buddhism to the region.
In 1642, the Bhutia established a monarchy headed by the Chogyal (; divine king), and opened relations with Tibet. By the founding of the Bhutia monarchy, Tibetan sources considered Tibetans (Bhutia), Lepchas, and Limbus to be the "original races of the kingdom."
Around 1819, the Lepchas were still the most numerous population, comprising roughly half of all Sikkimese, followed by Bhutias (30%) and Limbus (20%); sources disagree on whether the Bhutias outnumbered the Limbu or vice-versa, but in any event, the Limbu frequently intermarried with the Lepcha. At this time there was apparently no appreciable Nepali population present.
Throughout the nineteenth century, further groups of Tibetans known as Rui-chhung ("little families") migrated to Sikkim under British rule. 
Between the 1890s and the early 1900s, the large scale immigration of Nepalis began, encouraged by colonial landlords in order to raise rents in otherwise densely forested Sikkim.

Indigenous cultures

The indigenous Sikkimese show wide cultural variation.  
The Lepcha  speak Lepcha and use Lepcha script. Both the Lepcha and Limbu scripts are descended from the Tibetan script. Among Lepchas, there is a tradition of nuclear family structure and of monogamous marriage; though divorce is relatively rare, widowed persons customarily remarry.
Traditionally, the Lepcha practice a religion centered around shamans called mun, who officiate ceremonies and festivals, and bóngthíng, who are healers and are often female. The Lepcha converted to Buddhism in the eighteenth century, though their beliefs are largely syncretic.
Bhutias speak Sikkimese, which is also referred to as Dranjongke, written in the Tibetan script, proper. Men and women wear bakhus, while for women only this is accompanied by a hongu (blouse) around which they tie a woolen cloth around their waist called pangden if they are married.
Most  Lepcha, and Bhutia today practice local forms of Buddhism, incorporating aspects of Bön religion and animism, in contrast to the Hindu Nepalese majority. Followers of Buddhism in Sikkim are largely either Karmapa or Nyingma, though a small section of Bhutias claim to adhere to Bön in particular. Since the arrival of the Nepalese and Western missionaries, few Lepchas have converted to Christianity.

Contemporary issues

Lepchas are suffering from a feeling of inferiority, some denying they are Lepchas, while Nepalis who seek to integrate them label Lepchas as Bhutias.





Further reading




