[[Western Xia]]

CATEGORIES: 1227 disestablishments, Former countries in Chinese history, Former empires, Imperial Chinese dynasties, States and territories established in 1038, Tangut history, Western Xia

The Western Xia () also known as the Tangut Empire and to the Tanguts and the Tibetans as Minyak,Stein (1972), pp. 70–71. was an empire which existed from 1038 to 1227 AD in what are now the northwestern Chinese provinces of Ningxia, Gansu, eastern Qinghai, northern Shaanxi, northeastern Xinjiang, southwest Inner Mongolia, and southernmost Outer Mongolia, measuring about eight hundred thousand square kilometers. Xixia zhan shi Battle History of Western Xia 西夏战史. Yinchuan 银川, Ningxia ren min chu ban she People's Press 宁夏人民出版社. Xixia: xiao shi zai li shi ji yi zhong de guo du Xia: the kingdom lost in historical memories 西夏: 消逝在历史记忆中的国度. Beijing 北京, Wai wen chu ban she Language Press 外文出版社. Xixia tong shi History of Western Xia 西夏通史. Beijing 北京 and Yinchuan 银川, Ren min chu ban she Press 人民出版社; Ningxia ren min chu ban she People's Press 宁夏人民出版社. The state suffered from devastating destruction by the Mongols who founded Mongol Empire, including most of its written records and architecture. Its founders and history therefore remained controversial until recent research conducted both in the West and within China. They occupied the area of important trade route between North China and Central Asia, the Hexi Corridor. The Western Xia made significant achievements in literature, art, music, and architecture, which was characterized as "shining and sparkling". "Qian tan xi xia gong wen wen feng yu gong wen zai ti brief discussion on the writing style in official documents and documental carrier 浅谈西夏公文文风与公文载体." Xibei min zu yan jiu Nationalities Research 西北民族研究 45(2): 78-84. Their extensive stance among the other empires of the Liao, Song, and Jin was attributable to their effective military organizations that integrated cavalry, chariots, archery, shields, artillery (cannons carried on the back of camels), and amphibious troops for combats on land and water. "Xixia jun shi ti yu yu ke xue ji shu military sports, science and technology of West Xia 西夏军事体育与科学技术." Ningxia da xue xue bao of Ningxia University 宁夏大学学报 79 (2): 48-50.

Name

The full title of the Western Xia as named by their own state is "90px" reconstructed as /*phiow¹-bjij²-lhjij-lhjij²/ which translates as "The Great Xia State of the White and the Lofty" (白高大夏國), or called "mjɨ-njaa" or "khjɨ-dwuu-lhjij" (萬秘國). The region was known to the Tanguts and the Tibetans as Minyak (彌藥). 444.
"Western Xia" is the literal translation of the state's Chinese name "Xi Xia" (西夏). It is derived from its location on the western side of the Yellow River, in contrast to the Liao (916–1125) and Jin (1115–1234) on its east, and the Song Dynasty in the southeast.  The English reference of "Tangut" comes from the Mongolian name for the country, Tangghut (), believed to reflect the same word as "Dangxiang" (党項) found in Chinese literature.

Foundations

The founder of the Tangut-Western Xia was the Mongolian Tuoba Xianbei from the Tuyuhun Kingdom. After Tuyuhun Kingdom was destroyed by the Tibetans in 670, its famous prince, Tuoba Chici, who controlled the "Dangxiang Qiang" submitted under the Tang Dynasty and was "bestowed" with the royal name of Li (李).  In the end of the Tang Dynasty, the Tuoba brought troops to suppress the Huang Chao Rebellion on behalf of the Tang court and took control of the Xia State, or Xia Zhou, in northern Shaanxi in 881. After the Tang fell in 907, the Tuoba descendants formally declared resistance against the expanding Northern Song in 982 and proclaimed independence to establish the Western Xia or Tangut, in 1038.
The foundation of Western Xia goes back to the year 982 under Li Jiqian.  However, it would not be until 1038 that the Tangut chieftain Li Yuanhao, Li Deming's son, who also ordered the creation of a Tangut writing system and the translation of Chinese classics into Tangut, named himself emperor of Da Xia, and demanded of the Song emperor recognition as an equal. The Song court accepted the recognition of Li Yuanhao as 'governor', but not 'emperor', a title considered exclusive to the Song emperor. After intense diplomatic contacts, in 1043 the Tangut state accepted the recognition of the Song emperor as emperor in exchange for annual gifts, which implied tacit recognition on the part of the Song of the military power of the Tangut

Early history

After Jingzong's death (1048), Yizong became the emperor at the age of two. His mother became the regent and during Yizong's reign, Liao Dynasty launched an invasion of Western Xia, causing Western Xia to submit to Liao Dynasty as a vassal state. After Yizong's death, Huizong was put under house arrest by his mother, and she attacked Song Dynasty. The attack was a failure, and Huizong took back power from his mother. After Chongzong became emperor, his grandmother (Huizong's mother) became regent again and launched invasion of Liao Dynasty and Song Dynasty. Again, both campaigns ended in defeat and Chongzong took direct control of Western Xia. He ended wars with both Liao and Song and focused on domestic reform.
In 1115, Jurchen Jin Dynasty was set up and Liao emperor fled to Western Xia in 1123. Chongzong submitted to the Jin demand of the Liao emperor and Western Xia became a vassal state of Jin. After Jin Dynasty attacked and took parts of the northern territories from the Song Dynasty, initiating the Southern Song period, Western Xia also attacked and took several thousands square miles of land. Immediately following Renzong's coronation, many natural disasters occurred and Renzong worked to stabilize the economy.
The kingdom developed a script to write its own Tibeto-Burman language. (2005), p. 988.

Conquest by the Mongols

After Renzong's death, Emperor Huanzong of Western Xia came into power and Western Xia's power began to fail. After Genghis Khan unified the northern grasslands of Mongolia, the Xianbei who resided near Mt. Yin self-proclaimed to be "White Mongols" and joined them. They received the same treatment as the Mongols and partook in their westward conquests in Central Asia and Europe.Lü, Jianfu 呂建福, 2002. Tu zu shi Tu History 土族史. Beijing 北京, Zhongguo she hui ke xue chu ban she Social Sciences Press 中囯社会科学出版社. p. 311–312.
In the late 1190s and early 1200s, Temujin, soon to be Genghis Khan, began consolidating his power in Mongolia. Following the death of the Kerait leader Ong Khan to Temujin's emerging Mongol Empire in 1203, Keriat leader Nilqa Senggum led a small band of followers into Western Xia, also known as Xi-Xia. However, after his adherents took to plundering the locals, Nilqa Senggum was expelled from Western Xia territory.
Using his rival Nilga Senggum's temporary refuge in Western Xia as a pretext, Temujin launched a raid against the state in 1205 in the Edsin region.C. P. Atwood Encyclopedia of Mongolia and the Mongol Empire, p.590
In 1209, the Genghis undertook a larger campaign to secure the submission of Western Xia. After defeating a force led by Kao Liang-Hui outside Wulahai, Genghis captured the city and pushed up along the Yellow River, defeated several cities, and besieged the capital, Yinchuan, which held a well fortified garrison of 150,000.85 The Mongols, at this point inexperienced at siege warfare, attempted to flood out the city by diverting the Yellow River, but the dike they built to accomplish this broke and flooded the Mongol camp. Nevertheless, Emperor Li Anquan, still threatened by the Mongols and receiving no relief from the Jin Dynasty, agreed to submit to Mongol rule, and demonstrated his loyalty by giving a daughter, Chaka, in marriage to Genghis and paying a tribute of camels, falcons, and textiles.
After their defeat in 1210, Western Xia attacked the Jin dynasty as punishment for their refusal to aid them against the Mongols. The following year, the Mongols joined Western Xia and began a 23-year-long campaign against Jin. The same year, 1211, Li Anquan abdicated the throne, and subsequently died, after Shenzong seized power.
In 1219, Genghis Khan launched his campaign against the Khwarazmian dynasty in Central Asia, and requested military aid from Western Xia. However, the emperor and his military commander Asha refused to take part in the campaign, stating that if Genghis had too few troops to attack Khwarazm, then he had no claim to supreme power.
After defeating Khwarazm in 1221, Genghis prepared his armies to punish Western Xia for their betrayal. Meanwhile, Emperor Shenzong stepped down from power in 1223, leaving his son, Xianzong, in his place. In 1225, Genghis attacked with a force of approximately 180,000.
In August 1226, Mongol troops approached Wuwei, the second-largest city of the Western Xia empire, which surrendered without resistance in order to escape destruction.
Genghis reached Yinchuan in 1227, laid siege to the city, and launched several offensives into Jin to prevent them from sending reinforcements to Western Xia, with one force reaching as a far as Kaifeng, the Jin capital.
The destruction of Western Xia during the second campaign was near total. According to John Man, Western Xia is little known to anyone other than experts in the field precisely because of Genghis Khan's policy calling for their complete eradication. He states that "There is a case to be made that this was the first ever recorded example of attempted genocide. It was certainly very successful ethnocide."

Rulers of Western Xia





Notes




