[[Holger Badstuber]]

CATEGORIES: 1989 births, Living people, People from Memmingen, Footballers from Bavaria, German footballers, Germany youth international footballers, Germany under-21 international footballers, Germany international footballers, Association football defenders, 3. Liga players, Bundesliga players, FC Bayern Munich II players, FC Bayern Munich players, 2010 FIFA World Cup players, UEFA Euro 2012 players

Holger Felix Badstuber (

Club career

From 2002 to 2007, he progressed through the youth setup at Bayern Munich. He played for Bayern's reserve team before signing professional terms in July 2009, along with team-mate Thomas Müller, having been an unused substitute in a number of first-team matches in the 2008–09 season. He made his debut in the first league game of the 2009–10 season, against Hoffenheim and has been a regular in defence. He scored his first senior goal, a powerful free kick, against Borussia Mönchengladbach on 4 December 2009. A centre back by trade, he has been playing out of position at left back. The youngster impressed in his first season, and started all league games save one in the 2009–10 Bundesliga season.
On 4 February 2010, Bayern Munich announced that Badstuber had signed a new contract that would keep him at the club until 2014.
Throughout the 2010–11 season with Bayern, Badstuber endured a tumultuous relationship with coach Louis van Gaal, who despite stating that he has high trust in Badstuber, strongly criticized him following a number of poor performances. As a result of his poor form he found himself out of the starting eleven several times throughout the season. With the arrival of Jupp Heynckes however, he was reinstated at the left of central defense, where he has enjoyed a fruitful relationship with fellow international Jerome Boateng, and helped Bayern maintain 11 clean sheets in a row. Additionally, he was integral to the Bayern Munich defensive line which lead the team to the 2012 UEFA Champions League Final, beating Real Madrid, Napoli and Manchester City along the way,
He spent most of the 2012–13 season out injured with a ruptured knee ligament.
On 3 February 2013, Badstuber signed a contract extension with Bayern, keeping him at the club until 2017.

International career

2010 World Cup

He was first called up to the senior team as part of the provisional squad for the 2010 World Cup. He made his debut in a warm-up match against Hungary on 29 May coming on as a substitute for Arne Friedrich, He started in Germany's opening group game against Australia at the Durban Stadium, playing the full 90 minutes at left-back and helping the team to a 4–0 victory, it was only his third match in the Germany jersey. Badstuber then started the next group game against Serbia on 18 June 2010 in Port Elizabeth at the Nelson Mandela Bay Stadium. He played 77 minutes, prior to being substituted for fellow Bayern team mate Mario Gómez. He was criticised for his performance and lost his leftback position in the starting lineup to Jerome Boateng for the rest of the tournament, the 1–0 loss against the Serbs was – so far – the only match in which Badstuber played and Germany lost.

Euro 2012

After the erratic World Cup, Badstuber improved his performances with consistency and established himself as a starting lineup defender in Löw's team. He helped Germany to win all 10 matches of the Mannschaft's qualification campaign for Euro 2012 to top group A by playing nine out of a possible ten matches, he was only spared in the – for qualification irrelevant – last match against Belgium. During the campaign Badstuber scored his first goal, the 5–1 against Azerbaijan, he headed home a corner kick by Mesut Özil. In a friendly 3–3 draw on 11 November 2011 against Ukraine, in the international inauguration match of the new Kiev Olympic Stadion, Löw's experimental formation featured only three defenders, Badstuber was as named the single centre back, this was interpreted as a signal that out of many possible candidates Badstuber has established himself as Löw's most important player in Germany's central defense.
Badstuber started the first game for Germany in UEFA Euro 2012 helping the team to a clean sheet against Portugal in which the Germans won 1–0.

Career statistics

Club career

International goals

Honours

Club

International






