[[Albert White (basketball)]]

CATEGORIES: 1977 births, Living people, African-American basketball players, Basketball players from Michigan, Forwards (basketball), London Lightning players, McDonald's High School All-Americans, Michigan Wolverines men's basketball players, Missouri Tigers men's basketball players, Parade High School All-Americans (boys' basketball)



Albert White (born ) is a professional American basketball player who last played for the London Lightning of the National Basketball League of Canada.  Before joining the Lightning, White had played in a variety of domestic and foreign basketball leagues.  In high school, he was one of the most highly decorated basketball players in the United States.  In college he achieved success after transferring from University of Michigan to University of Missouri, but his success did not lead him to the National Basketball Association (henceforth NBA).  Instead, he went to the Continental Basketball Association (CBA) and has since played in various developmental and foreign basketball leagues as a professional.
In high school, he was a Street & Smith,  Parade, and McDonald's All-American and in college he became a first team All-Big 12 Conference player and CNN/Sports Illustrated Big 12 Player of the Year.  White was implicated in the University of Michigan basketball scandal, but was not named in the final indictments.  He transferred from Michigan to Missouri after his freshman year, which included the basketball scandal, for unrelated reasons.  He achieved several firsts for Missouri and led the team to their best season in the Big 12 era in 1998–1999.
He declared himself eligible for the 1999 NBA draft as a redshirt junior and went undrafted.  He was drafted in the 1999 CBA draft. He has had multiple stints in the CBA, United States Basketball League (USBL), International Basketball League (IBL) and various foreign leagues.  As a professional, he once was named to the All-CBA second team.  He was selected as an All-star or All-league player and been part of championship teams in several of the professional leagues he played in.

High school

Born   During the tenth anniversary of his Street & Smith 1994–1995 High School All-America Team, eight of the twenty members were still playing in the NBA.

College

White was implicated in early investigations of the University of Michigan basketball scandal because he accepted US$37,000. He was not named in later indictments and was not named as having been called before the grand jury.
White transferred to the Missouri Tigers men's basketball team due to a clash with Steve Fisher after his freshman year with the Michigan Wolverines men's basketball team.
White played for the 1995–1996 Michigan Wolverines team that went to the 1996 NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Tournament as a seventh seed, but lost 80–76 in the first round to the Texas Longhorns men's basketball team. He returned to the 1999 NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Tournament as an eighth seed with Missouri, but lost 61–59 in the first round to the New Mexico Lobos men's basketball team.  As of 2008, the second place Big 12 finish that season is the only top four placing for the Tigers since the formation of the Big 12 conference during the 1996–1997 season.
During the 1998–1999 season he became the first Missouri Tigers player to lead the team in scoring, rebounds and assists in the same season, and he placed in the top five in the Big 12 in both scoring and rebounding.
After his redshirt junior season, he declared himself eligible for the 1999 NBA draft with one year of collegiate eligibility remaining, making him the first Missouri Tiger to declare early for the NBA draft.

Professional career

White was drafted in the 1999 CBA draft by the Sioux Falls Skyforce.  Over the course of his professional career he was selected as an All-star or All-league player in the CBA, BBL, KBL and IBL.  He has been part of Championship teams in the USBL in 2002, CBA in 2003 and LPB in 2007.
On October 21, 2011, it was announced that White had made the final twelve-man roster for the National Basketball League of Canada's London Lightning.

Notes




