[[Attash Durrani]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, COMSATS University of Science and Technology alumni, Pakistani people, Pakistani writers, Urdu-language writers, Pakistani literary critics, Pakistani linguists, Urdu scholars, Linguists of Urdu, Pakistani scholars, Terminologists, University of the Punjab alumni, Urdu critics, 1952 births

Prof. Dr. Attash Durrani (

Early life

Dr. Durrani received his PhD in Urdu terminology in 1991 from the University Oriental College, University of the Punjab, Lahore. 
He also earned certificates in statistics, journalism, project mangement,  research methodology and Curriculum and Text book Development courses offered by the University of the Punjab, Institute of Education and Research, Lahore;  Pakistan Planning and Management Institute (PPMI), Islamabad, University of Bradford (United Kingdom); COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan; Project Management Institute (PMI) (USA);  National University of Science and Technology (NUST), Islamabad, Pakistan; and International Bureau of Education(IBE), UNESCO, Geneva. He supervised a number of  M.S., PhD. students on Urdu, Punjabi, Iqbaliat, Linguistics, Translatology, Education, Informatics, and Computer Science projects/theses.

Career

Dr. Durrani has written many books and articles in Urdu and English.  and terminologies, bibliographies and encyclopedias, and also Iqbal studies, Pakistan studies, history and philosophy of science.
He is chairman of INKSOFT Inc., Islamabad, (Pakistan's first Software Localization Company) for the Localization for Urdu, Pakistani  (Pashto, Punjabi, Sindhi), Persian, Dari and Arabic languages.
A thesis of M. level is written by Mussarat Khan Zahidi on the contributions of his works, in the Department of Urdu, University of Peshawar in 2007.
He is also known as Localization Guru of Pakistan.
He was the first in-charge of Microsoft Local Language Program for Urdu Language.

Awards and honors

The President of Pakistan granted him the National Civil Award Tamgha-i-Imtiaz on his contributions to the Urdu literature and Urdu informatics, on 14 August 2010, that was given on 23 March 2011. 
He is deriving a hypothesis on Pakistani as a language on e-world, a theory against Hindustani. He is the flag-career activist linguist of Language Planning, Development, Promotion and Policy for Urdu and Pakistani languages.
He has been listed in international WHO'S WHO in Translation and Terminology (1995), published by Union Latine Infoterm International Where, How and Praetorius. He is also listed in the LINGUIST List. His credentials as an expert in multilingualism are mentioned in International Directory of Multilingualism, Union Latine, Paris (2007).
He has also been listed in the List of notable or famous alumni/graduates/students from University of the Punjab; prominent alums from this institution incl. celebrities, politicians and business people., 








