[[Fact]]

CATEGORIES: Concepts in epistemology, Concepts in logic, Critical thinking, Philosophy of science, Reality, Statements, Units of information (cognitive processes), Truth


A fact (derived from the Latin factum, see below) is something that has really occurred or is actually the case. The usual test for a statement of fact is verifiability, that is whether it can be proven to correspond to experience. Standard reference works are often used to check facts. Scientific facts are verified by repeatable experiments.

Etymology and usage

The word fact derives from the Latin factum, and was first used in English with the same meaning: "a thing done or performed", a use that is now obsolete."Fact". OED_2d_Ed_1989, (but note the conventional uses: after the fact and before the fact).  The common usage of "something that has really occurred or is the case" dates from the middle of the sixteenth century."Fact" (1a). OED_2d_Ed_1989 Joye Exp. Dan. xi. Z vij b, Let emprours and kinges know this godly kynges fact. 1545
Fact is sometimes used synonymously with truth, as distinct from opinions, falsehoods, or matters of taste.  This use is found in such phrases as, It is a fact that the cup is blue or Matter of fact,"Fact" (4a) OED_2d_Ed_1989 and "... not history, nor fact, but imagination." Filmmaker Werner Herzog distinguishes clearly between the two, claiming that "fact creates norms, and truth illumination".wernerherzog.html
Fact also indicates a matter under discussion deemed to be true or correct, such as to emphasize a point or prove a disputed issue; (e.g., "... the fact of the matter is ...")."Fact" (6c). OED_2d_Ed_1989(See also "Matter" (2,6). Compact_OED)
Alternatively, fact may also indicate an allegation or stipulation of something that may or may not be a "true fact","Fact" (5). OED_2d_Ed_1989 (e.g., "the author's facts are not trustworthy"). This alternate usage, although contested by some, has a long history in standard English. The OED dates this use to 1729.
Fact may also indicate findings derived through a process of evaluation, including review of testimony, direct observation, or otherwise; as distinguishable from matters of inference or speculation."Fact" (6a). OED_2d_Ed_1989 This use is reflected in the terms "fact-find" and "fact-finder" (e.g., "set up a fact-finding commission")."Fact" (8). OED_2d_Ed_1989
Facts may be checked by reason, experiment, personal experience, or may be argued from authority.  Roger Bacon wrote "If in other sciences we should arrive at certainty without doubt and truth without error, it behooves us to place the foundations of knowledge in mathematics."Roger Bacon, translated by Robert Burke Opus Majus, Book I, Chapter 2.

Fact in philosophy

In philosophy, the concept fact is considered in epistemology and ontology. Questions of objectivity and truth are closely associated with questions of fact. A "fact" can be defined as something which is the case, that is, a state of affairs."A fact, it might be said, is a state of affairs that is the case or obtains" -- Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy. States of AffairsSee Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, Proposition 2: What is the case -- a fact -- is the existence of states of affairs.
Facts may be understood as that which makes a true sentence true."A fact is, traditionally, the worldly correlate of a true proposition, a state of affairs whose obtaining makes that proposition true". -- Fact in The Oxford Companion to Philosophy Facts may also be understood as those things to which a true sentence refers. The statement "Jupiter is the largest planet in the solar system" is about the fact Jupiter is the largest planet in the solar system.[ref]Alex Oliver, Fact, in 
[/ref]

Correspondence and the slingshot argument

Engel's version of the correspondence theory of truth explains that what makes a sentence true is that it corresponds to a fact.
This theory presupposes the existence of an objective world.
The Slingshot argument claims to show that all true statements stand for the same thing - the truth value true. If this argument holds, and facts are taken to be what true statements stand for, then we reach the counter-intuitive conclusion that there is only one fact - "the truth".[ref]The argument is presented in many places, but see for example Davidson, Truth and Meaning, in 
[/ref]

Compound facts

Any non-trivial true statement about reality is necessarily an abstraction composed of a complex of objects and properties or relations."Facts possess internal structure, being complexes of objects and properties or relations" Oxford Companion to Philosophy For example, the fact described by the true statement "Paris is the capital city of France" implies that there is such a place as Paris, there is such a place as France, there are such things as capital cities, as well as that France has a government, that the government of France has the power to define its capital city, and that the French government has chosen Paris to be the capital, that there is such a thing as a "place" or a "government", and so on.  The verifiable accuracy of all of these assertions, if facts themselves, may coincide to create the fact that Paris is the capital of France.
Difficulties arise, however, in attempting to identify the constituent parts of negative, modal, disjunctive, or moral facts."Fact", in The Oxford Companion to Philosophy, Ted Honderich, editor. (Oxford, 1995) ISBN 0-19-866132-0

Fact–value distinction

Moral philosophers since David Hume have debated whether values are objective, and thus factual. In A Treatise of Human Nature Hume pointed out there is no obvious way for a series of statements about what ought to be the case to be derived from a series of statements of what is the case. Those who insist there is a logical gulf between facts and values, such that it is fallacious to attempt to derive values from facts, include G. E. Moore, who called attempting to do so the Naturalistic fallacy.

Factual–counterfactual distinction

Factuality — what has occurred — can also be contrasted with counterfactuality —
what might have occurred, but did not. A counterfactual conditional or subjunctive conditional is a conditional (or "if-then") statement indicating what would be the case if events had been other than they actually are. For example, "If Alexander had lived, his empire would have been greater than Rome". This is to be contrasted with an indicative conditional, which indicates what is (in fact) the case if its antecedent is (in fact) true — for example, "if you drink this, it will make you well".
Such sentences are important to Modal logic, especially since the development of Possible world semantics.

Fact in science

In science, a "fact" is a careful observation or measurement, also called empirical evidence.  Facts are central to building scientific theories.  Various forms of observation and measurement lead to fundamental questions about the scientific method, and the scope and validity of scientific reasoning.
In the most basic sense, a scientific fact is an objective and verifiable observation, in contrast with a hypothesis or theory, which is intended to explain or interpret facts. 
Various scholars have offered significant refinements to this basic formulation.  Scientists are careful to distinguish between: 1) states of affairs in the external world and 2) assertions of fact that may be considered relevant in scientific analysis. The term is used in both senses in the philosophy of science.
Scholars and clinical researchers in both the social and natural sciences have written about numerous questions and theories that arise in the attempt to clarify the fundamental nature of scientific fact.(Gower 1996) Pertinent issues raised by this inquiry include:
Consistent with the theory of confirmation holism, some scholars assert "fact" to be necessarily "theory-laden" to some degree. Thomas Kuhn points out that knowing what facts to measure, and how to measure them, requires the use of other theories. For example, the age of fossils is based on radiometric dating which is justified by reasoning that radioactive decay follows a Poisson process rather than a Bernoulli process. Similarly, Percy Williams Bridgman is credited with the methodological position known as operationalism, which asserts that all observations are not only influenced, but necessarily defined by the means and assumptions used to measure them.

Fact and the scientific method

Apart from the fundamental inquiry into the nature of scientific fact, there remain the practical and social considerations of how fact is investigated, established, and substantiated through the proper application of the scientific method. 181 et. seq. (Chapter Six: "Facts and their evolution") Scientific facts are generally believed to be independent of the observer: no matter who performs a scientific experiment, all observers will agree on the outcome. The Nature of Suffering and the Goals of Medicine Oxford University Press. Retrieved 16 May 2007.
In addition to these considerations, there are the social and institutional measures, such as peer review and accreditation, that are intended to promote factual accuracy (among other interests) in scientific study.(Ravetz 1996)

Fact in history

A common rhetorical cliché states, "History is written by the winners". This phrase suggests but does not examine the use of facts in the writing of history.
E. H. Carr in his 1961 volume, What is History?, argues that the inherent biases from the gathering of facts makes the objective truth of any historical perspective idealistic and impossible. Facts are, "like fish in the Ocean," of which we may only happen to catch a few, only an indication of what is below the surface. Even a dragnet cannot tell us for certain what it would be like to live below the Ocean's surface. Even if we do not discard any facts (or fish) presented, we will always miss the majority; the site of our fishing, the methods undertaken, the weather and even luck play a vital role in what we will catch. Additionally, the composition of history is inevitably made up by the compilation of many different biases of fact finding - all compounded over time. He concludes that for a historian to attempt a more objective method, one must accept that history can only aspire to a conversation of the present with the past - and that one's methods of fact gathering should be openly examined.  Historical truth and facts will therefore change over time and reflect only the present consensus (if that).

Fact in law

In most common law jurisdictions,Ed. note: this section of the article emphasizes common law jurisprudence (as primarily represented in Anglo-American–based legal tradition). Nevertheless, the principles described herein have analogous treatment in other legal systems (such as civil law systems) as well. the general concept and analysis of fact reflects fundamental principles of jurisprudence, and is supported by several well-established standards.[ref]
p. 305[/ref] Matters of fact have various formal definitions under common law jurisdictions.
These include:
| title     = Law Language and Ethics: An Introduction to Law and Legal Method
| first     = William R.
| last      = Bishin
| publisher = Foundation Press
| year      = 1972
| id        = Original from the University of Michigan Digitized March 24, 2006
}}p. 277[/ref]
| title     = The American and English Encyclopedia of Law
| first     = John Houston
| last      = Merrill
| publisher = E. Thompson
| year      = 1895
| id        = Original from Harvard University Digitized April 26, 2007
}}[/ref] and
| title     = Criminal Investigation
| first     = Wayne W.
| last      = Bennett
| publisher = Thomson Wadsworth
| year      = 2003
| isbn        = 0-534-61524-4
}}[/ref]

Legal pleadings

A party to a civil suit generally must clearly state all relevant allegations of fact upon which a claim is based. The requisite level of precision and particularity of these allegations varies depending on the rules of civil procedure as well as the jurisdiction. Parties who face uncertainties regarding the facts and circumstances attendant to their side in a dispute may sometimes invoke alternative pleading. McDonald, Alternative Pleading in the United States: I Columbia Law Review, Vol. 52, No. 4 (Apr., 1952), pp. 443-478 In this situation, a party may plead separate sets of facts that (when considered together) may be contradictory or mutually exclusive. This (seemingly) logically-inconsistent presentation of facts may be necessary as a safeguard against contingencies (such as res judicata) that would otherwise preclude presenting a claim or defense that depends on a particular interpretation of the underlying facts.(McDonald 1952)






