[[Rex Damschroder]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Members of the Ohio House of Representatives, Ohio Republicans, People from Sandusky County, Ohio, 1950 births

Rex Damschroder is a member of the Ohio House of Representatives since 2011. He currently serves as the Chairman of the House Transportation, Public Safety & Homeland Security Committee. He was also a member from 1995 to 2003.  Damschroder is a Republican.   

Career

Damschroder has owned several small business throughout the community, and is a licensed realtor.  He has served on Fremont City Council and at Terra Community College on the Board of Trustees.  He is a graduate of Bowling Green State University and Tiffin University.
Damschroder is the son of Gene Damschroder, who held the same House seat from 1973 to 1983.

Ohio House of Representatives

Damschroder was elected to the Ohio House of Representatives in 1994, representing the 89th district which included parts of Sandusky County and Seneca Counties. He served from 1995 to 2003, when he was required to step down due to term limits.
In 2002, Damschroder unsuccessfully challenged incumbent Congressman Paul Gillmor in the 5th congressional district Republican primary. After that, he remained out of the political realm for eight years.  
However, with successor Jeff Wagner termed out in 2010, Damschroder made a comeback.  He faced primary opposition from Merrill Keiser and Holly Stacy, but won the nomination with 59.88% of the vote.31% of the vote.Brunner, Jennifer 2010 general election results (2010-11-02) 
Damschroder was sworn in for his fifth term on January 3, 2011.  
In late March 2011, Damschroder suffered from a heart attack and received triple bypass heart surgery two days later.
With Senator Karen Gillmor resigning her seat, Damschroder had been named as a possible successor.
Damschroder ran for reelection in 2012, facing opposition from Democratic nominee Bill Young.  Damschroder defeated Young by 55.6% to 44.4%, winning reelection.
On February 13, 2014, Damschroder announced he was withdrawing his re-election bid after the Board of Elections Director announced that his name would not appear on the ballot because he forgot to sign his Declaration of Candidacy form, a legal document, that without the candidate's signature caused his candidacy to be invalid. No other candidate filed for the race, and Damschroder said he was looking at all his options to get back on the ballot, including running as a write-in candidate.

Initiatives and positions

Damschroder has proposed legislation that would ban reading or writing on any digital device while driving.  It passed the House almost unanimously.  He has rejected the notion that it takes away from personal freedoms.
With the Ohio Statehouse adding a full service bar to their existing restaurant, Damschroder came out in opposition of serving alcohol at the Statehouse.
Damschroder is currently working to prevent high voltage power lines from being erected through a nature preserve known as Peninsular Farms in Fremont, Ohio.toledoblade.html

Electoral history






