[[Gümüş (TV series)]]

CATEGORIES: Turkish drama television series, Turkish television soap operas, 2005 Turkish television series debuts, 2007 Turkish television series endings

"Gümüş" ("Silver"), a Turkish melodrama originally broadcast in Turkey by Kanal D from 2005 to 2007. The sudser became a pop-culture phenomenon when it aired across the Arab world as "Noor" (Arabic for "light") in 2006
The success of "Noor" for MBC has sparked a boom in dubbed Turkish dramas across many leading Arab sat-casters. MBC even launched a pay TV channel in partnership with pay TV platform Showtime Arabia entirely dedicated to "Noor" that allows viewers to watch episodes of the sudser around the clock.
The dizzying pop-cultural phenomenon surrounding the series has encouraged the broadcaster further to make a film out of the Turkish soap. The feature version, which MBC will co-produce with Turkish shingle Momentum Prods., will have a budget in the $2.5 million-3.5 million range and will also be shot in Turkish before being dubbed into Arabic. The project will reunite Turkish thespians Kıvanç Tatlıtuğ and Songül Öden, who captured the hearts of Arab audiences in their husband-and-wife roles of Muhannad and Noor, respectively.
The series has also been shown in Iran  and the show dubbed into Persian with the title "Nur" ("Brightness").
The series has also been shown in Romania on Kanal D Romania with the title "Iubire de Argint" ("Love of Silver"). The Bulgarian private TV channel bTV currently airing the show dubbed into Bulgarian with the title "Перла" ("Pearl").
The series is also currently shown in Greece under the title  "Ασημένια Φεγγάρια" ("Silver Moons"). The first sixty episodes were broadcast on Makedonia TV from September 2010 to January 2011. However, due to the series' great success it was then picked up by ANT1 and is currently shown there. In Albania, the series is currently showing under the title "Gymysh".

Cast

Popularity

In Saudi Arabia alone, 3-4 million viewers admit to watching the program daily on the Saudi-owned MBC channel. The show's final episode attracted a record 85 million Arab viewers when it aired last Aug. 30.
In Bulgaria, Gümüş is  also very popular and every episode is watched by at least 2 million viewers. In result of its popularity, Songül Öden came to Bulgaria and was a guest in the Bulgarian TV shows "Dancing Stars 2" and "Slavi Show".
She also visited Albania as a guest in "Kenga Magjike" festival. It is above average in Pakistan and was is currently showing on Turkish1 and Geo Tv / Geo Kahani in Pakistan.Gumus was one of the first series shown in Macedonia ,and now the popularity of turskish series in Macedonia is growing.

Reception and influence

Noor and Muhannad observe Ramadan, and their marriage is arranged by Muhannad's grandfather but the characters break with tradition in other ways.  Characters are shown drinking wine with dinner, partying, and kissing onscreen which has been deemed inappropriate for younger audiences such as children. Muhannad had sex (and an illegitimate child) before marrying Noor, and one of his cousins has an abortion.qantara.php/_c-478/_nr-801/i.
Maternity wards report a rise in the baby names Noor and Mohannad.Riyadh and Hebron births
Clothing stores throughout the Middle East report brisk sales of blouses and dresses seen on the television series.
The show encouraged Arabs to visit Turkey.alarabonline.asp?fname=2008\07\07-28\zalsoz\924.

The final episode

In the final episode of the series the time is moved forwards to 14 years later and the audience sees that everyone has grown up and are all living a happy life. Gümüş is writing in her diaries about what has happened for the past 13 years and shows us how all the characters have grown up and changed including her current pregnancy.






