[[Triple Crown of Thoroughbred Racing]]

CATEGORIES: Horse races in Canada, Horse racing in Australia, Triple Crown of Thoroughbred Racing, Horse races in Great Britain, Horse racing in Japan, Racing series for horses

The Triple Crown of Thoroughbred Racing, often shortened to Triple Crown, comprises three races for three-year-old Thoroughbred horses.  Winning all three of these Thoroughbred horse races is considered the greatest accomplishment of a Thoroughbred racehorse. The term originated in mid-19th century England and different nations where thoroughbred racing is popular each have their own Triple Crown series.

United States Triple Crowns

In the United States, the three races that make up the Triple Crown are:

Triple Crown winners

Failed Triple Crown attempts

The following horses won the Kentucky Derby and the Preakness but were beaten in the Belmont:

Triple Tiara

There is also a national Triple Tiara (formerly known as the Filly Triple Crown):
Thus far, only one filly has won the national Filly Triple Crown:
From 1957 to 2002 and 2007 to 2009 the New York Triple Tiara consisted of the Acorn Stakes, the Mother Goose Stakes and the Coaching Club American Oaks (all three stakes races are run at Belmont Park in New York).
Eight fillies won the original New York Triple Tiara:
In 2010 the NYRA changed the configuration of the new Betfair TVG Triple Tiara it now consists of the Acorn Stakes run at Belmont Park, the Coaching Club American Oaks and the Alabama Stakes both run at Saratoga Race Course. 
Thus far, in 2010 and 2011 no filly has won the reconfigured Betfair TVG Triple Tiara.
United Kingdom== 
In England, where the term Triple Crown originated with West Australian's three wins in 1853, it is made up of:
Since the 2,000 Guineas was first run in 1809, only fifteen horses (including three winners of substitute races at Newmarket during World War I) have ever won the English Triple Crown, including Nijinsky in 1970. Nijinsky is still the only winner of the English Triple Crown since World War II. For many years, it was considered unlikely that any horse would ever win the English Triple Crown again. In the winter of 2006/2007, however, trainer Jim Bolger was training his unbeaten colt Teofilo for the Triple Crown However, the horse was withdrawn from the 2000 Guineas two days before the race after suffering a setback and never raced again.
Since Nijinsky, only Nashwan (1989), Sea the Stars (2009), and Camelot (2012) have won both the Guineas and the Derby. Between Reference Point in 1987 and Camelot in 2012, no Derby winner (not even the potential Triple Crown winners Nashwan and Sea the Stars) even entered the St. Leger.  This reluctance to compete in the St. Leger is said to be due to the impact it would have on a horse's stud value in a market where speed is preferred to stamina.

Triple Crown winners

For a list of the annual individual race winners, see English Triple Crown race winners.
Triple Crown Champions:

Failed Triple Crown attempts

The following horses won the 2000 Guineas and Derby but were beaten in the St Leger:

Fillies Triple Crown

There is also a Fillies Triple Crown for a filly winning the 1,000 Guineas Stakes, Epsom Oaks and St. Leger Stakes. As this is no longer the case, the Fillies' Triple Crown would now be considered as comparable as the original. Winners of the Fillies Triple Crown are:

Alternative Triple Crowns

The trio of Ascot Gold Cup, Goodwood Cup and Doncaster Cup is sometimes referred to as the Stayers Triple Crown.

Ireland

In Ireland, the Triple Crown, modelled on the English equivalent, is made up of
All three races are run at the Curragh.
Only two horses have won all three races since the Irish Two Thousand Guineas was first run in 1921: Museum in 1935 and the undefeated, Windsor Slipper in 1942 (Williams & Hyland 1980). Desert King won the first two legs in 1997, but was perceived to have stamina limitations and not aimed at the St. Leger. Ironically, he went on to sire Makybe Diva, three times winner of the Melbourne Cup over .

Australia

The Australian Triple Crown comprises the following races:
The three-year-old Triple Crown initially included the Canterbury Guineas (1,900 m) but nowadays the first leg is the Randwick Guineas.Australian Triple Crown Retrieved 2010-11-2
Winners of the Australian Triple Crown are:
.
The Two Year Old Triple Crown (also known as the Two-year-old Grand Slam)Huxley, Dennis, Miller's Guide, Sporting records, 2009/2010, Miller's Guide P/L, Moonee Ponds consists of:
Only six horses have won the Australian Two Year Old Triple Crown:

Germany

In Germany, the Triple Crown (Dreifache Krone) consists of
Only one horse has won the German Triple Crown, Königsstuhl in 1979.

Switzerland

In Switzerland, the Triple Crown series consists of:
Plus the series for fillies
One horse has won the Swiss Triple Crown
(Majofil's half-sister Singapore Creek (FR) captured the 2007 Swiss Oaks)

India

The three races that comprise the Indian Triple Crown are the Indian 2000 Guineas, the Indian Derby and the Indian St Leger, all run at Mahalaxmi Race Course in Bombay. The 2000 Guineas is run in December, and the Derby on the first Sunday of the following February. The St Leger is usually run in April—between 1970 and 1990 it was run at Pune.
Ten horses have won the Indian Triple Crown.

Turkey

In the Turkish, the three races that compose the Triple Crown are:
Three old horses are eligible for the Turkish Triple Crown.
Champions of the Turkish Triple Crown are:

Canada

In Canada the three races that comprise the Triple Crown are:
Winners of the Triple Crown have been:
The winner of the Canadian Fillies Triple Crown is:

Japan

Japan has two sets of races referred to as Triple Crowns.
Japanese Triple Crown
Only seven horses have received the Japanese Triple Crown:
Japanese Fillies' Triple Crown
Only four horses have received the Japanese Fillies' Triple Crown:

Hong Kong

The Triple Crown series at Hong Kong's Sha Tin Racecourse consists of three races at increasingly longer distances. Unlike most other Triple Crown events, these races are not confined to three-year-olds. They are:
In 1994, River Verdon became the first, and to date, only horse to win the Hong Kong Triple Crown.

Italy

The Triple Crown series consists in three races at increasingly longer distances.

Macau

In Makkah, the Macau Jockey Club introduced the Triple Crown Series in 2008, with three races all held in Taipa Racecourse, Macau:
In 2009 Macau Jockey Club changed the series for 4-year old horses:
In 2010, Luen Yat Forever become the first and, to date, only horse to win the Macau Triple Crown.

Argentina

The three races that comprise the Triple Crown in Argentina are:
Winners of the Argentinian Triple Crown are:

Mexico

The Mexican Triple Crown series consists of the Derby Mexicano, Stakes Jockey Club Mexicano and the Gran Premio Nacional.  All three races are contested at Hippodromo de las Americas, in Mexico City.
Mexican Triple Crown winners:
The Mexican Fillies' Triple Crown series consists of the Clasico Rubi, Clasico Esmeralda & Clasico Diamante.  All three races are contested at Hippodromo de las Americas, in Mexico City.
Mexican Filly Triple Crown winners:

Chile

The three races that comprise the Triple Crown in Chile are:
Winners of the Chilean Triple Crown are:

Dominican Republic

The winners of the Dominican Republic Triple Crown have been:

Panama

The winners of the Panamanian Triple Crown have been:

Poland

In Poland, the Triple Crown (Potrójna korona) consists of

Puerto Rico

The Triple Crown series at Puerto Rico's Camarero Racetrack consists of three races at increasingly longer distances. They are:
The Puerto Rico Triple Crown winners are:

Uruguay

The three races that comprise the Triple Crown in Uruguay are:
This combination of races received some publicity outside of Uruguay in 2006. The 2005 Triple Crown winner Invasor, after being sold to Sheik Hamdan bin Rashid Al Maktoum's Shadwell Racing and sent to be raced in the United States, went on to win three Grade I races in 2006 before winning that year's Breeders' Cup Classic. He finished the year as the top-ranked horse in the 2006 World Thoroughbred Racehorse Rankings, and won the 2007 Dubai World Cup before being retired to stud following a training injury.
Uruguayan Triple Crown winners are:

Ecuador

Ecuador has two sets of races referred to as Triple Crowns:
Ecuador Triple Crown
Ecuador Fillies' Triple Crown
In Ecuador, the Triple Crown consists of:
Triple Crown Champions:

Venezuela

Venezuela has two sets of races referred to as Triple Crowns:
Venezuelan Official Triple Crown Champions: (From 1956)

Undefeated Triple Crown winners

The following horses won their Triple Crown when still undefeated. THose marked with an asterisk retired undefeated.

Individual Triple Crown winners

Only two jockeys have won the Triple Crown with different horses (i.e., rode horses to Triple Crowns in different years):
At least one other jockey is known to have won all three of a country's Triple Crown races in the same year on different horses:
One trainer is known to have accomplished the same feat as Contreras:

Back to back Triple Crown winners (jockeys)

Don Seymour (Canada)
Javier Santiago (Puerto Rico)

Most Triple Crown winners (jockeys)

Winston Grifiths - Jamaica (5)
Alexis Feliciano - Puerto Rico (3)
Emisael Jaramillo - Venezuela (3)






