[[Jo Yeo-jeong]]

CATEGORIES: South Korean actresses, South Korean film actresses, South Korean television actresses, South Korean musical theatre actors, South Korean female models, 1981 births, Living people, Dongguk University alumni

Jo Yeo-jeong (born February 10, 1981) is a South Korean actress. She is best known for her leading roles in the period films The Servant (2010) and The Concubine (2012).

Career

Jo Yeo-jeong debuted as a CeCi Magazine cover girl at the age of 16 in 1997, and began actively acting in 1999. Despite appearing in drama series, music videos, and TV commercials afterwards, she remained obscure. During this period, she was also unhappy with the limited roles being offered to her.
Then Jo rose to the spotlight in 2010 by starring as the ambitious Joseon woman of low caste in the erotic period drama The Servant.
In 2011 Jo starred in hit cable series I Need Romance, a sexually frank and funny comedy about a group of single thirtysomething girlfriends navigating the dating scene in Seoul, which boasted stylish and slick production values.
Few would have expected her to star in another period drama that requires full nudity, as doing so may stigmatize her in Korea's film industry ― where most young actresses still stay away from nude scenes as much as possible. Despite the collective concerns expressed by the local media outlets that she was "going nude too often," in 2012 the actress chose another period thriller with explicit sex scenes.
In the 2012 romantic comedy series Haeundae Lovers, she played the bright and cheerful daughter of a Busan gangster, who falls in love with the amnesiac undercover prosecutor living with them.
In 2013, Jo became involved in a publicized contract dispute when she signed a new contract with Bom Entertainment while her contract with Didim531 was still in effect. 
Jo starred in two movies in 2014. She reunited with director Kim Dae-woo (The Servant) in another erotic period film, this time set during the Vietnam War, titled Obsessed.

Filmography

Television drama

Musical theatre

Variety show

Book

Discography

Awards






