[[DrinkOrDie]]

CATEGORIES: 1993 establishments in Russia, Warez groups



DrinkOrDie (DoD) was one of the most prestigious underground software piracy group and warez trading network during the 1990s. On December 11, 2001, a major law enforcement raid - known as Operation Buccaneer - forced it to close under criminal charges of infringement. DoD, as a rule, received no financial profit for their activities. The DoD network - which primarily consisted of university undergraduates - was also supported by software company employees, who would leak copies of software and other digital media. DoD was also actively involved in illicit file-trading with other networks.

History

Start up and trading

DrinkOrDie was founded in 1993 in Moscow by a Russian with the handle "deviator" aka "Jimmy Jamez" and a friend who went by the code name "CyberAngel." By 1995, the group was global with Jimmy Jamez as leader.
One of its earliest major accomplishments was the Internet release of Windows 95 two weeks before Microsoft released the official version. It is also known for its DoD DVD Speed Ripper released in 1999 shortly before DeCSS. The activity of the DoD group diminished after 1996, and they were not considered major players in the warez scene by 2000.

Member raids

In 2001 the group was busted in a U.S. Customs operation called Operation Buccaneer. The global raids were initiated after information was given to United States Customs by James Cudney, known as Bcrea8tiv. Cudney quickly rose up the ranks of DOD council where he spent many years working undercover for US Customs, logging conversations in chat rooms and channels visited on IRC. He also carried out undercover operations in the UK, France, and the US prior to the arrests collecting detailed information on DOD members and members of other online warez groups. e.g., screenames, ftp locations, nationalities. At the time, DrinkOrDie allegedly had two leaders, one in the United States and another in Australia.
The Australian co-leader Hew Raymond Griffiths, known by his handle "Bandido", from Bateau Bay on the Central Coast of New South Wales, was charged in 2003 with copyright infringement and conspiracy to commit copyright infringement under US legislation. He was involved in opposing extradition to the USA in Australian courts for a period of almost 3 years.
Griffiths was ultimately unsuccessful and in early February 2007, he was transferred to the US detention system. He pleaded guilty on 20 April 2007 to one count of conspiracy to commit criminal copyright infringement and one count of criminal copyright infringement.

=UK=

As a result of Operation Buccaneer, the National Hi-Tech Crime Unit in the UK also arrested six members residing in Great Britain. Two of those arrested ran a 9 month trial starting in September 2004 at the Central Criminal Court - Old Bailey and were convicted for Conspiracy to Defraud Software Companies and Institutions. Sentences for those convicted ranged from house arrest to 30 months in prison.

=Elsewhere=

Apart from the Australian and British defendants, others implicated in DoD were Swedish, German, Norwegian, Italian and Finnish nationals. All except the Australian were dealt with under the copyright or fraud laws of their own country. Griffiths was the only member of the international network to be extradited to the USA. This has set an important benchmark in copyright enforcement for the US Department of Justice.






