[[Screenshot]]

CATEGORIES: Screenshot software, Graphical user interfaces

A screenshot, screen capture (or screen-cap), screen dump, screengrab Motive.co. Usually, this is a digital image using the operating system or software running on the computer, but it can also be a capture made by a camera  
Screenshots can be used to demonstrate a program, a particular problem a user might be having, or generally when display output needs to be shown to others or archived.  For example, after being emailed a screenshot, a Web page author might be surprised to see how their page looks on a different Web browser and can take corrective action. Likewise with differing email software programs, (particularly such as in a cell phone, tablet, etc.,) a sender might have no idea how their email looks to others until they see a screenshot from another computer and can (hopefully) tweak their settings appropriately.

Built-in screenshot functionality

Android

Screenshot support was added to Android in version 4.0 (Ice Cream Sandwich). Before that, some devices supported screenshot functionality with the following combinations: 
Screenshots can be taken by pressing 
On certain devices that use modified Android; the button combination and the storage location can vary. Some vendors have also implemented the screenshot functionality on earlier Android versions.
There is no direct way to take screenshots programmatically in non-system apps. However, on most devices, apps may use the system screenshot functionality without special permissions.

Amazon Kindle

On Amazon Kindle devices, one can take a screenshot by:

Chrome OS

On Chromebook and related devices with the Chrome OS keyboard layout, pressing the equivalent of 

HP WebOS

Screenshots of the HP webOS can be taken. For webOS phones, simultaneously press 

iOS

A screenshot can be taken on iOS by simultaneously pressing the Home button and the Lock button; the screen will flash and the picture will be stored in PNG format in the "Camera Roll" if the device has a camera, or in "Saved Photos" if the device does not. The screenshot feature is available with iOS 2.0 and later.

Linux

On KDE or GNOME,  key behavior is quite similar to Windows. (See ยง Microsoft Windows.) In addition, the following screenshooting utilities are bundled with Linux distributions:

Mac OS X

On Mac OS X, a user can take a screenshot of an entire screen by pressing  while doing either then the screenshot will be copied to the clipboard instead.
Beginning with Mac OS X Panther, it is possible to make a screenshot of an active application window. By following , the cross-hair cursor turns into a small camera icon. The current window under the cursor is highlighted, and a click on the mouse or trackpad will capture a screenshot of the entire highlighted element (including the parts offscreen or covered by other windows).Take a screenshot on your Mac
A provided application called Grab will capture a chosen area, a whole window, the whole screen, or the whole screen after 10 seconds and pops the screenshot up in a window ready for copying to the clipboard or saving as a TIFF. The Preview application, also provided, has the same capture options as Grab but opens the captured image immediately in a new window.
A shell utility called "screencapture" (located in /usr/sbin/screencapture) can be used from the Terminal application or in shell scripts to capture screenshots and save them to files. Various options are available to choose the file format of the screenshot, how the screenshot is captured, if sounds are played, etc. This utility might only be available when the Mac OS X developer tools are installed. A user cannot capture the screen while DVD Player is running.

Maemo 5

On Maemo 5 a screenshot can be taken by pressing 

Windows

On Windows, pressing 
Windows Vista and later include a utility called Snipping Tool, first introduced in Windows XP Tablet PC Edition. It is a screen-capture tool that allows taking screenshots ("snips") of a window, rectangular area, or free-form area. Snips can then be annotated, saved as an image file or as an HTML page, or emailed. However, it does not work with non-tablet XP versions but represents an XP compatible equivalent. Windows 7 and later also include Problem Step Recorder as part of their troubleshooting platforms that once started, automatically captures a screenshot at mouse clicks. 
There are exceptions to what can be captured by this method. For example, contents in hardware overlay are not captured. This includes video images that Windows Media Player 10 or earlier play. As such, special software may be required to capture the screens of video games.

Windows Phone

In Windows Phone 8, screenshots can be taken by simultaneously pressing and holding the phone's sleep/wake button and Windows Start button. The screenshots are saved in the phone's native screen resolution under "screenshots" in the Photos hub. The screenshot functionality is only available for Windows Phone 8 or later.

External tools

Common technical issues

Hardware overlays

On Windows systems, screenshots of games and media players sometimes fail, resulting in a blank rectangle. The reason for this is that the graphics are bypassing the normal screen and going to a high-speed graphics processor on the graphics card by using a method called hardware overlay. Generally, there is no way to extract a computed image back out of the graphics card, though software may exist for special cases or specific video cards.
One way these images can be captured is to turn off the hardware overlay. Because many computers have no hardware overlay, most programs are built to work without it, just a little slower. In Windows XP, this is disabled by opening the Display Properties menu, clicking on the "Settings" tab, clicking, "Advanced", "Troubleshoot", and moving the Hardware Acceleration Slider to "None."
Free software media players may also use the overlay but often have a setting to avoid it or have dedicated screenshot functions.

Screen recording

The screen recording capability of some screen capture programs is a time-saving way to create instructions and presentations, but the resulting files are often large.
A common problem with video recordings is the action jumps, instead of flowing smoothly, due to low frame rate. Though getting faster all the time, ordinary PCs are not yet fast enough to play videos and simultaneously capture them at professional frame rates, i.e. 30 frame/s. For many cases, high frame rates are not required. This is not generally an issue if simply capturing desktop video, which requires far less processing power than video playback, and it is very possible to capture at 30 frame/s. This of course varies depending on desktop resolution, processing requirements needed for the application that is being captured, and many other factors.

Copyright issues

Some companies believe the use of screenshots is an infringement of copyright on their program, as it is a derivative work of the widgets and other art created for the software. Regardless of copyright, screenshots may still be legally used under the principle of fair use in the U.S. or fair dealing and similar laws in other countries.








