[[Narconon]]

CATEGORIES: Addiction and substance abuse organizations, Religion and society, Scientology, Pseudoscience, Front organizations, Prison-related organizations, Hemet, California, Religion in Riverside County, California

Narconon International is an organisation which promotes L. Ron Hubbard's theories of substance abuse treatment and addiction. Its parent organisation is ABLE, which is controlled by The Church of Scientology., "Narconon International 4652 Hollywood Boulevard Hollywood, CA 90027." Narconon operates several dozen residential centers worldwide, chiefly in the United States and Western Europe.
The organization was formed in 1966 by Scientologist William Benitez, a former inmate of Arizona State Prison. Benitez contacted L. Ron Hubbard after reading his book, Scientology: The Fundamentals of Thought and with Hubbard's help Narconon was incorporated in 1970.
While both The Church of Scientology and Narconon state that Narconon is a secular program, that it is independent of Scientology, Narconon has been described by many government reports and former patients as a Church of Scientology front group.
The program has garnered considerable controversy as a result of its origins in Scientology and its methods. Its drug rehabilitation treatment has been described as "medically unsafe", "quackery" and "medical fraud", while academic and medical experts have dismissed its educational program as containing "factual errors in basic concepts such as physical and mental effects, addiction and even spelling".
In turn, Narconon has claimed that mainstream medicine is "biased" against it, and that "people who endorse so-called controlled drug use cannot be trusted to review a program advocating totally drug-free living." Narconon has said that criticism of its programs is "bigoted", and that its critics are "in favor of drug abuse ... they are either using drugs or selling drugs."
Hubbard's writings, which underlie the program, state that drugs and their metabolites are stored in the body's fatty tissue, causing the addict's cravings when partially released later on, and can be flushed out through a regimen known as Purification Rundown, which involves exercise, sauna and intake of high doses of vitamins. This hypothesis is contradicted by experimental evidence, and is not accepted by mainstream medicine or education.
Narconon's facilities have been the location of several deaths, some of which have been linked to a lack of trained medical personnel on site. There exist no independently recognized studies which confirm the efficacy of the Narconon program.

History

Origins

thumbnail|L. Ron Hubbard, founder of Scientology, upon whose ideology the Narconon program is based.
Narconon was established 19 February 1966 as a drug rehabilitation program based on the book Scientology: The Fundamentals of Thought by L. Ron Hubbard and delivered to drug abusers in the Arizona State Prisons. The name "Narconon" originally referred not to an organization but to the program.
Narconon's creator was William C. Benitez, a former inmate at Arizona State Prison who had served time for narcotics offenses. Retrieved 4 June 2006. His work was supported by Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard, and in 1972 Hubbard sponsored the incorporation of Narconon as an organization. Ron Hubbard and the Narconon program". Retrieved 4 June 2006. It was co-founded by Benitez and two Scientologists, Henning Heldt and Arthur Maren.
Even before Narconon became established, Scientology and Dianetics were promoted as providing a cure for drug addiction. In 1970 the Reverend John W. Elliot, senior minister of the Church of Scientology and chairman of its Drug Abuse Prevention team, announced that "Dianetic Counselling" had "completely cured 30 out of 30 people" who came to the Church of Scientology for help. Rev. Elliott also reported that Dianetics could cure hay fever, asthma and arthritis.
In the early days of Narconon, no distinction was made between Scientology's 'religious' and 'secular' branches; Narconon was considered by Scientologists to be an example of Scientology in action. "Narconon, with the Scientology program, is another example of the workability of Dianetics and Scientology", said an adherent in 1970. "The program has been expanded and is used in all Scientology churches and missions".
The Narconon website reports that the keynote of Narconon is that the "…individual is responsible for his own condition and that anyone can improve his condition if he is given a workable way to do so… man is basically good and it is pain, suffering, and loss that lead him astray." It positions the program as an approach to rehabilitation without recourse to alternative drugs. This early program did not, however, deal directly with withdrawal symptoms. In 1973, the Narconon program adopted procedures to include drug-free withdrawal.

Twenty-first century

A number of celebrities have publicly attested that Narconon was helpful in their own lives. Musician Nicky Hopkins and actress Kirstie Alley have credited Narconon for their recovery from addiction to drugs and alcohol.
[/ref] Toxicologist Dr Ronald E. Gotts described the Narconon / Purification Rundown program in a 1987 report on its use by California firefighters:
In 2004 and 2005, WISE at Work magazine and International Scientology News each published articles clarifying the relationship between Narconon and Scientology; each placed Narconon in Scientology's 'Division 6B', with responsibility for introducing the public to Scientology services.
By the end of 2005, according to the International Association of Scientologists, Narconon was operating 183 rehabilitation centers around the world. New centers opened in that year included Hastings, UK (now closed), and Stone Hawk, in Battle Creek, Michigan."IAS 21st Anniversary Event, Impact 112, 2006) Narconon President Clark Carr asserted that drug prevention lectures "have been given to over 2 million children and adults over several decades..C., Georgia, Florida, Oklahoma and surrounding states, Michigan and Illinois, Texas, New Mexico, Idaho, California, Nevada, Hawaii and possibly others" in response to an inquiry from The Humanist.
On 17 July 2006, Narconon center, Narconon Trois-Rivieres (Three-Rivers) based in Canada, started a website at narcodex.ca.ca at Archive.
In July 2013, Narconon proposed to acquire the 150 acre Hockley, Ontario estate of Donald Blenkarn, who had died the previous year. Narconon planned to convert the estate into a drug and alcohol rehabilitation center, but drew widespread opposition from residents who were opposed to the presence of a rehab center, and to the presence of Narconon and Scientology specifically.

Narconon and Scientology

Its affiliation with the Church of Scientology has made Narconon itself a focus of controversy. The organization has never denied that many of its administrators are committed Scientologists or that its methods are based on the teachings of L. Ron Hubbard. In its early days, Narconon used unaltered Scientology materials in its courses, and Scientology executives ran the organization (founders Heldt and Maren were high-ranking members of the Church's public-relations department known as the Guardian's Office). Mary Sue Hubbard et al., 493 F. Supp. 209, (D.D.C. 1979) (hosted by the Lisa McPherson Trust)
In April 1970, Scientology spokesman Max Prudente described Narconon as, "Based solely on the philosophy and tenets of Scientology", claiming an 85% success rate.
However, as Narconon promoted its drug-treatment services to a variety of governmental jurisdictions within the US, the organization repeatedly found itself at the center of controversy when the Scientology connection was raised by journalists or politicians.
Not only did the Church of Scientology have serious public-image problems, but the link with Scientology raised questions about the constitutional appropriateness of governmental bodies sponsoring a religiously affiliated organization (see Lemon v. Kurtzman). These problems were further intensified by claims that the treatment program was medically unsound and numerous allegations that the Narconon treatment program serves as a fundraising and recruitment program for the Church of Scientology. A2Alan McEwen "Scientology-link group is banned", Edinburgh Evening News, 18 March 2004. Retrieved 4 June 2006.
thumb|From 1964 to 1995, the Founding Church of Scientology in Washington, D.C.. The building was raided by the FBI in July 1977. When the FBI raided Scientology offices on 8 July 1977, papers seized revealed that Scientologists were instructed to refer to Narconon and other "front groups" using code names:

In the 1990s, Narconon was at pains to deny all links to Scientology; in 1994 John Wood, the head of Narconon UK, denied any connection between Narconon and Scientology, saying, "I know beyond doubt that Narconon does not recruit for nor promote the Church of Scientology", despite the final stage in Narconon's process for patients at that time being "Route to nearest Org (Scientology organisation) for further services",
A  1–5 March 1998 Boston Herald series exposed how two Scientology-linked groups, Narconon and the World Literacy Crusade, used anti-drug and learn-to-read programs to gain access to public schools without disclosing their Scientology ties.[ref]
[/ref]Jim MacLaughlin and Andrew Gully "Church of Scientology probes Herald reporter - Investigation follows pattern of harassment" Boston Herald 19 March 1998 Pg. 004  After the Herald report was published, Heber Jentzsch, president of the Church of Scientology International, confirmed that the church's Los Angeles law firm had hired a private-investigative firm to investigate the personal life of reporter Joseph Mallia, who wrote the series. The Herald noted numerous other instances over the years where reporters were harassed with "noisy investigations" after writing stories exposing Scientology.
In Montreal, Narconon employees describe themselves as 'FSM's, a Scientology abbreviation for Field Staff Member, as well as to parent organisation ABLE.

Drug rehabilitation program

Since its establishment, Narconon has faced considerable controversy over the safety and effectiveness of its rehabilitation methods and the organization's links to the Church of Scientology. The medical profession has been sharply critical of Narconon's methods, which rely on theories of drug metabolism that are not supported by mainstream toxicology. To recover from drugs, addicts can remove the drugs from their fat through saunas and use of vitamins. Medical experts disagree with this basic understanding of physiology, there isn't any significant amount of drugs in a person's fat, and drugs can't be "sweated out" like Narconon claims. In one 2005 report scientific experts stated that Narconon's treatment methods "does not reflect accurate, widely accepted medical and scientific evidence."
Particular criticism has been directed at the therapy's use of vitamins (including massive doses of niacin) and extended sauna sessions.
Dr. David Root, an occupational medicine practitioner and a member of the Narconon Scientific Advisory Board, defended the program's validity. He told the San Francisco Chronicle in 1991 that drugs and other poisons "come out through the skin in the form of sebaceous, or fatty, sweat. The material is frequently visible and drips, or is rubbed off on towels." This apparently explains the need for "daily doses of vitamins, minerals, and oils, including niacin."
The "New Life Program" consists of two principal stages: 'detoxification' and 'rehabilitation'. The "New Life Detoxification Program", adapted from Hubbard's Purification Rundown, consists of six elements: exercise, sauna, supplements, sufficient liquids, regular diet with fresh vegetables, and adequate sleep.
Each US patient spends an average of 3 to 4 months at Narconon, for a fee which ranges from $10,000 to around $30,000.
There are more than 200 beds at Narconon Arrowhead, according to John Bitinas, who is part of the public relations staff for the facility. Asked whether medications are used to help patients going though withdrawal, he said that "Narconon is drug-free, meaning we do not use substitute drugs as part of our rehabilitation process." All patients are assessed at enrollment to determine whether they are "psychiatrically or medically qualified for the level of care we offer here. If they are found to need a higher level of care then Narconon is qualified to offer at that time, they are referred to a more appropriate facility." If patients require medications to treat physical conditions like diabetes, infections, and so on, those medications are prescribed by the Narconon physician, who is part-time but available on-call on a 24-hour basis, according to Bitinas.

Overview

The detoxification program is based on Hubbard's theory that "small amounts of drugs their metabolites stored in fat are released at a later time causing the person to re-experience the drug effect and desire to use again." According to Narconon, exercise helps to release toxins from body fat as fat deposits are burned for energy, while concurrently releasing chemicals via sweating, sebum (produced by the skin's sebaceous glands), and regular bowel movements.
The Narconon program rejects the disease model of addiction, and its program literature has described the terminology used by that model as being disempowering to patients.
The Narconon treatment program follows the "social education" model of drug rehabilitation. The program is four-to-six months and includes a regimen of detoxification that includes "aerobic exercise, dry-sauna sweating, hydration and nutrition supplements; life skills trainings; and personalized plans for after-graduation living." The main premise of the detoxification regimen is that "the activation of drug residuals stored in the body can elicit drug cravings in the former drug user thus tempting relapse. The Narconon detoxification regimen is designed to eliminate drug residues from drug users' bodies and thus reduce the cravings that may be caused by these residues."
Experts from mainstream medicine and toxicology have repeatedly argued that Hubbard's method has no validity: "one may from a pharmacological point of view strongly question the idea of using enforced sweating to expel drugs from the body", says Professor Folke Sjoqvist in a 1996 report for the Swedish government, while an Oklahoma Board of Mental Health report from 1990 states that, "Although minute quantities of some drugs may be found in sweat the amount represents a small fraction of drug elimination".
In a deposition concerning the death of Patrick Desmond at Narconon Georgia, expert witness Dr. Louis A. Casal was questioned by plaintiff's attorney Jeff Harris:

Narconon asserts that methadone, amphetamines, methamphetamines, morphine, copper, mercury, and other toxins, some consumed years earlier, leave the body by means of sweating. This contrasts with the view of the body's drug retention taken by mainstream science, which has found that most recreational drugs leave the body within a few days (with the exception of marijuana, which in the case of frequent use can remain in the body for up to a month).

Niacin

According to Narconon, vitamin and mineral supplements are needed to address nutritional deficiencies and offset nutrient loss due to sweating. Other key elements in the program are the use of niacin, which Hubbard believed to increase free fatty acid mobilization, and the inclusion of polyunsaturated fats which he thought to increase the excretion rate of some toxin compounds. Together with a proper amount of sleep, this regime is thought by Narconon to mobilize and eliminate long-term stored toxins.
Narconon's "drug bomb" includes a niacin dose of 4000 mg/day. The risk to patients of taking high-dose niacin is one reason why medical experts assessing the Narconon program have found that it is a danger to patients; the Narconon program has been banned in a number of jurisdictions including France and Quebec.
Because Narconon doctrines dictate that patients undergoing its program exhibit physical symptoms relating to the drugs which are (supposedly) being 'sweated out', and because Narconon's staff are not medically qualified or typically qualified in orthodox drug rehabilitation, there is a risk that serious medical symptoms - from niacin overdose, or from other causes - may be misinterpreted by Narconon staff as the desirable effects of detoxification:

'Training routines'

The remainder of the Narconon course uses "training routines" or "TRs" originally devised by Hubbard to teach communications skills to Scientologists. Retrieved 4 June 2006. In the Narconon variant, these courses claim to be designed to rehabilitate drug abusers. These training routines sometimes include TR 8,Hubbard, Narconon Withdrawal Specialist Course. Book 4b, 2004c edition. (pg. 221-236) Narconon Publication. Table of contents which involves the individual commanding an ashtray to "stand up" and "sit down", and thanking it for doing so, as loudly as they can. (pg. 447-482) Narconon PublicationJoseph Mallia "Inside the Church of Scientology; Sacred teachings not secret anymore" Boston Herald 4 March 1998 p. 025 Former Scientologists say that the purpose of the drill is for the individual to "beam" their "intention" into the ashtray to make it move. 9 March 2006.

Efficacy

Narconon typically claims success rates as high as 75% of the graduates of the Narconon program remaining drug-free for the rest of their lives,
Independent researchers have found considerably lower rates of success. At least one website critical of Narconon cites a Swedish research study which gives a rate of 6.6%.
The Church of Scientology claims that "the Narconon success rate is not merely the world's highest, it is four times better than international averages", while a systematic review of evidence regarding Narconon's efficacy conducted by the Norwegian Knowledge Centre for the Health Services on behalf of the Norwegian Directorate of Health concluded that:
In April 2014, the Australian town of Wyong refused permission for Narconon to open a new centre, saying that its method of treatment was a factor in the decision. Wyong Mayor Doug Eaton said:

Education program

Florida

In 1999, Scientologists from Clearwater, Florida tried to get a Narconon drug-education program installed into the Pinellas County school district. After a hearing on the matter, a school-district committee refused to allow students to participate in an anti-drug program based on the teachings of Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard, citing that teaching students about the "tone scale" and other trappings of Scientology was inappropriate for a drug-education program for their schools.Shelby Oppel "School panel rejects anti-drug program" Saint Petersburg Times 13 April 1999

California

In 2004, Narconon offered an anti-drug program to public schools in California, free of charge. A series of articles in the San Francisco Chronicle on  9 and 10 June 2004, resulted in California school officials investigating Narconon's claims. The study found that Narconon's program did not reflect medically and scientifically based practices and that it offered students misleading information about drug use and abuse.
As a result of the investigation, on 23 February 2005, the state's superintendent of public instruction, Jack O'Connell, officially recommended that all schools in the state reject the Narconon program."Schools urged to drop antidrug program", The San Francisco Chronicle, 23 February 2005. Retrieved 4 June 2006. O'Connell's secretary announced that the school systems in Los Angeles and San Francisco had dropped the program. The president of Narconon, Clark Carr, responded that the study presented only limited information about his organization's work, and that those efforts were "accurate and relevant to the current challenges children face with drugs."

United Kingdom

The UK prisons ombudsman recommended to prison governors that Narconon rehabilitation programs not be used in prisons although some schools in the UK are using these programs; The Sunday Times said this was because schools are less aware of Narconon's links to the Church of Scientology.[ref]
</ref>
In September 2012, the 149 Church of England schools in the Diocese of London were warned not to accept offers from Narconon to give lectures to their pupils, following complaints from parents.[ref]
</ref>
A Narconon newsletter  claimed that the organisation's anti-drug lectures in Newham schools were funded by blue chip companies including John Lewis, Marks & Spencer, Coutts and Ford, and claimed support from ex-footballer Paul Canoville. Although John Lewis denied making any donations to Narconon and Paul Canoville declared that he had "no connections with this cult whatsoever", Coutts and Ford both said they had given "small sums" of money.[ref]
[/ref]

Cecchini/Lennox study

In 2008, Narconon executive Marie Cecchini published, with Richard Lennox, a paper which claimed to show that the Narconon educational program reduced drug use among youths.[ref]

Lennox and Cecchini's peer-reviewed paper in the journal Substance Abuse Treatment, Prevention, and Policy presenting the findings of a research study conducted with approximately 1,000 Oklahoma and Hawai'i high-school students to test Narconon International's high-school curriculum efficacy. They evaluated students using the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP) Participant Outcome Measures for Discretionary Programs survey at three time periods: baseline, one month later, and six-month follow-up. Schools assigned to experimental conditions scheduled the Narconon curriculum between the baseline and one-month follow-up test; schools in control conditions received drug education after the six-month follow-up. The study concluded that at six-month follow-up, youths who received the Narconon drug education curriculum showed reduced drug use compared with controls across all drug categories tested; that the strongest effects were seen in all tobacco products and cigarette frequency followed by marijuana; that there were significant reductions measured for alcohol and amphetamines; that the program produced changes in knowledge, attitudes and perception of risk; and that the eight-module Narconon curriculum had thorough grounding in substance abuse aetiology and prevention theory, and reduced drug use among youths.
[/ref] However, the study was funded by Narconon's parent organisation, ABLE, and subsequent correspondence in the same journal asserted that the study's conclusions were contradicted by its own data: that the control group "were more likely to resist pressures to take drugs" than the Narconon group.

Deaths

Jocelyne Dorfmann, Grancey-sur-Ource, France (1984)

In 1984, a 34 year-old French woman named Jocelyne Dorfmann died from an untreated epilepsy crisis while undergoing treatment at a Narconon center in Grancey-sur-Ource (near Dijon). The assistant-director of that center was convictedCounty Court of Dijon: judgment of 9 January 1987 (No 118-87) of lack of assistance to a person in danger and the Narconon center was closed.
Medical experts reported that her death was caused by "an epileptic seizure due to the absence of sufficient treatment at its beginning and of emergency treatment during the seizure". Narconon staff failed to call for medical assistance, as a result of which, Dorfmann died.

Paride Ella and Giuseppe Tomba, Valsassina, Italy (1995)

In 1995, two young men, Paride Ella (22) and Giuseppe Tomba (26) died suddenly at the Narconon centre in Taceno, Valsassina. Paride Ella died of acute kidney failure (symptoms consistent with a niacin overdose), while the recorded cause of death for Giuseppe Tomba was heart attack.
Both patients suffered similar symptoms, vomiting and diarrhoea, for days before their deaths. The young men died within a few days of one another, in the so-called 'detoxification' (ultra-high doses of niacin and other vitamins, multi-hour saunas) stage of the Narconon program.
The Narconon centre had no medical staff and was unable - in either case - to diagnose the seriousness of their condition. Before the deaths, the village's mayor had asked for the Narconon centre to be closed.

Federica X, Torre dell'Orso, Italy (2002)

In Italy, a 33-year-old Italian female patient of the Narconon center in Torre dell'Orso died under similar conditions in 2002.
Federica died from peritonitis, according to her autopsy. She first began to suffer from stomach pains on Monday 7 October 2002, and was driven to the first aid station at Meledugno, which she was given painkillers. She was driven to hospital the following evening, where she died soon after being admitted in a coma.
Narconon patient Giovanni Costa later stabbed staff member Rodolfo Savino, whom Costa claimed had ignored Federica's symptoms, and given her insufficient medical aid. Costa was arrested and charged with attempted murder.[ref]

[/ref]

Patrick Desmond, Norcross, Georgia, US (2008)

Patrick W. "Ricko" Desmond, a former member of the US Marine Corps, died at Narconon Georgia on 11 June 2008, aged 28, from a heroin overdose.
His family alleged wrongful death and filed a lawsuit against Narconon, claiming that Narconon's actions led to his death, and that Narconon falsely claimed to be a licensed inpatient program.
Atlanta's Channel 2 News said that:
Desmond's family paid Narconon $30,000 for his treatment. Narconon Georgia director Mary Rieser commented to a reporter:

The lawsuit between Narconon Of Georgia and the Desmond family was settled 'out of court' in February 2013, three days before jury selection was scheduled to begin.
The settlement followed harsh sanctions against Narconon by the trial judge Stacey K. Hydrick, who said in a court order that Narconon Of Georgia had: 
Narconon International denied that it had any connection with Narconon of Georgia,  describing in her reports the evening of Patrick's death:


Multiple deaths at Narconon Arrowhead, Oklahoma, US (2009-2012)

In August 2012, Pittsburg County sheriffs
The investigation includes the recent deaths of four patients: Stacy Dawn Murphy, aged 20, who died at Narconon Arrowhead on 19 July 2012; Hillary Holten, 21, who was found dead at the facility on 11 April 2012; 32-year-old Gabriel Graves, who died there on 26 October 2011; and 28-year-old Kaysie Dianne Werninck, also a patient at Narconon Arrowhead, who was found dead on 3 March 2009.
Following media attention surrounding the deaths, the National Association of Forensic Counselors permanently revoked the Certified Chemical Dependency Counseling certification of several Narconon Arrowhead employees including director Gary Smith,
In August 2013, Inspector General Kim Poff, and investigator Michael DeLong, of the Oklahoma Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse, who had been investigating the deaths which had taken place at Narconon, had their employment terminated. No reason was given for the termination, but the investigators' attorney claimed (after the termination of their employment) that the two were wrongfully fired, saying: "Their termination, in part, relates to the Narconon Investigation". 

=Narconon in Oklahoma=

Narconon began operations in Oklahoma in 1990, In 1992 it applied for a state licence, and was twice refused by the Oklahoma Mental Health Department, which found "no evidence that drug and alcohol abuse education was part of the program";, and declared the program "not medically safe";[ref]
Findings of Fact regarding the Narconon-Chilocco Application For Certification by the Board of Mental Health, State of Oklahoma, 13 December 1991
[/ref] a decision to which Narconon spokesperson Kirstie Alley  responded, "The arrogance and irresponsibility of the mental health board will not survive the outrage of the many thousands of parents, graduates and supporters from the scientific community".
During the period 1989-1992, Narconon (through Scientology attorney Tim Bowles)  filed lawsuits against the Oklahoma Board of Mental Health and Substance Abuse, its members,[ref]
[/ref] and local newspaper editor Robert Lobsinger (who had written about Narconon's Scientology connection). Narconon contacted the Mayor of Newkirk's 12-year-old son at a library, and hired a private detective firm to research Narconon's opponents, leading residents to fear retribution if they spoke out against Narconon.[ref]
[/ref]
A Narconon spokesman quoted by the New York Times described Narconon's critics in Newkirk as, "in favor of drug abuse… They're either connected to selling drugs or they're using drugs."
Narconon achieved exemption from the requirement for state licensing in 1992, as a result of approval from the Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities. Scientology leader David Miscavige commented on the case in an interview with ABC News Nightline, saying, "There are a group of people on this planet who find us to be a threat to their existence, and they will do everything in their power to stop us. And that is the mental health field. I didn't pick a war with them."[ref]
</ref>
In 2012, a paid advert in the Oklahoma Gazette contained allegations from a previously unknown group named "Oklahomans for the preservation of homeland security and american values, (ohsav)"  The advertisement showed the characteristics of a Scientology "DA flier".

=Kaysie Dianne Werninck=

The parents of Kaysie Dianne Werninck, who died at Narconon Arrowhead on 3 March 2009, filed a lawsuit against the center claiming her death was "a result of the defendant's Narconon's gross negligence". The case was settled.

=Gabriel Graves=

Gabriel Graves, who died at the facility in October 2011, was the subject of an open records request made to the Oklahoma State Department of Mental Health by the Tulsa World newspaper, which revealed reports of use and distribution of drugs at the centre. His autopsy recorded his cause of death as 'unknown'.

=Hillary Holten=

Hillary Holten, whose parents filed a lawsuit against Narconon Arrowhead, is alleged by her parents to have died due to lack of medical care. Their lawsuit states that she "had a history of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia, a condition which required the daily administration of Dexamethasone and in extreme circumstances, an injection of liquid cortisone", and that Narconon Arrowhead did not properly manage her medical condition. Gary Smith of Narconon refrained from comment, adding that "there are federal rights to privacy laws which prohibit us from discussing anything about former clients."

=Stacy Murphy=

Stacy Murphy's father said Narconon officials told him that when his daughter was found dead alone in the 'detox' room, she had not been checked on for two and a half hours. "That's too long, if they thought she was overdosed, why didn't they have someone with her the whole time?" he said, adding "We sent her there to get better, not to die". Gary Smith, director of the facility, responded in an email statement that, "It is always deeply saddening when drug addiction takes a life or destroys a family. ... For the family the pain of losing a loved one to addiction is unimaginable."
A patient who was resident at Narconon Arrowhead at the time of Stacy's death said, "There was no doctor there, no nurse on staff. There's nothing like that there ... The staff, they're all former patients. ... My understanding is that everyone there is pretty much a former patient. ... The drugs that would have saved Stacy's life were either not available or no one there knew how to administer it." Now he fears retaliation for talking to the police and media: "I'm afraid for my life."
Stacy's roommate, Destanie Ramsey, called police on the night of Stacy's death in order to leave Narconon Arrowhead, where she said she was being held against her will.

=Public and media response=

Protests over the deaths have taken place outside the Narconon centre; on 23/24 June 2012, a protest, planned to include bereaved family members, was disrupted by road resurfacing works outside the facility, paid for by Narconon. Pittsburg County Commission Chairman Gene Rogers explained that, "He (Gary Smith) called me and said they might be having a problem with the public that weekend and he wanted help policing the area and he asked about doing overlaying (of the road)".
Oklahoma State Senator Tom Ivester commented that, "Clearly something isn't right and we have a moral obligation to do everything in our power to end this predatory business being run by the Church of Scientology disguised as drug treatment", adding, "This is a disgusting business that preys on desperate family members and their sick loved ones, scamming them out of thousands of dollars with the promise of providing hope and new life. It's a disgrace to have these people operating in the state of Oklahoma."
In response to an NBC Rock Center news report on the facility,

Controversies

State code violations

Narconon facilities in California were cited repeatedly for violations by state inspectors. Violations included administering medication without authorization, having alcohol on the facility, and not having proper bedding for clients. Narconon has also attempted to silence opposition, including sending letters to neighbors of a proposed facility in Leona Valley, California threatening legal action for criticism. Residents of the Leona Valley were concerned that Narconon would increase crime. "Proposed Narcanon rehab clinic raises concern among residents." Los Angeles Daily News, 22 July 2006. 
March 2013, Narcanon Arrowhead-
 National Association of Forensic Counselors President Karla Taylor told The McAlester News-Capital that CEO Gary Smith and the employee's certificates were revoked earlier this month. Taylor said she can't say why the certificates were revoked.
In Clearwater, Florida, an endorsement from the Los Angeles County Department of Public Social Services, which Narconon submitted in support of its application for a state license to conduct anti-drug educational programs, was found to be a forgery.

Investigation in Russia

In April 2007, it was revealed that Moscow's South District office of public procurator had begun an investigation into Narconon's activities in Russia. The Moskovsky Komsomolets daily paper reported that legal proceedings were begun against the head of the clinic "Narconon-Standard", for violating bans in Russian medical practices. Russian law enforcement became interested after receiving many complaints from citizens about the high fees charged by Narconon. The Narconon office in Bolshaya Tulskaya St., Moscow was searched, and documents and unidentified medications were seized.
In April 2008, as part of an investigation in Ulyanovsk into the Church of Scientology, police searched a Narconon office in the town of Dimitrovgrad.

Narconon Trois-Rivières closed by Quebec health authorities

On 17 April 2012, Quebec health officials ordered the Narconon in Trois-Rivières to close, and relocate its 32 residents. After an investigation into Narconon Trois-Rivières' activities by the Centre Québécois d'Agrément (an independent body which monitors the quality of healthcare), the Mauricie Region's Health and Social Services Agency decided not to re-certify Narconon because of their concerns that its methods "may represent a risk to health" of patients.[ref]
</ref>
The Agency's director, Marc Latour, said that Narconon Trois-Rivières was dangerous for patients, that it violated many of the criteria governing rehabilitation centres in Quebec, and that there was no medical supervision and no scientific basis to its treatment. He added that at least four clients had been hospitalized in recent months because of methods used at the centre.[ref]
</ref>
Narconon Trois-Rivières issued a response, saying, "People with drug problems and their families should have a right to choose the program that works for them as these days there are many good alternative programs".
The closure follows a 2-year campaign by ex-Narconon patient and staff member David Love, whose negative experiences at Narconon prompted him to become one of its fiercest critics in Canada. While he was at Narconon Trois-Rivieres, Love reports that,
Before the centre's closure, Narconon had alleged that Love's allegations were fictitious and that he had been bribed to make them; Andre Ahern, Director of Legal Affairs for Narconon Trois-Rivieres, said:
Love is one of five former Narconon patients who have filed a complaint with Quebec's Human Rights Commission, alleging that their drug addiction was exploited by Narconon, in recruiting them into the program and making them do manual labout while taking part in it. Love also alleges that Narconon Trois-Rivieres earned around $16 million for Scientology between its opening in 2005 and its forced closure in 2012.

Pur Detox suicide attempt

In September 2012, Pur Detox, a Narconon offshoot, was sued in Orange County, California for negligence, medical malpractice, and negligent supervision.
William Sweeney, the plaintiff, "suffered severe personal injuries" after a suicide attempt, jumping from a third floor balcony at the clinic, in Dana Point, California.
Sweeney's complaint alleges that he was taken off his prescribed psychiatric medication at the facility, and that it was this which led to his suicide attempt.

Arrest of Heber Jentzsch

In December 1988, the president of the Church of Scientology, Heber Jentzsch, was arrested in Spain after an investigation into Narconon that resulted in (later dropped) allegations that he and the Church of Scientology were defrauding Spanish citizens and running its centers with unqualified staff. Petersburg Times 22 November 1988 pg. 1A The judge in the case said at a news conference after the arrests that the only god of the church of Scientology is money, and he compared the church to a pyramid scheme in which members pay increasing sums of money. He said that Narconon swindled its clients and lured them into Scientology. Petersburg Times 10 December 1988 In 1989, 75 Scientologists in Italy were arrested and an investigation showed that "parents of drug addicts were paying heavy monthly fees to Narconon, which advertised itself as a drug rehabilitation and cure center, but getting nothing in return."Ruth Gruber "75 Scientologists go on trial today // 'It should be a lively court session'" St. Petersburg Times 29 March 1989 pg. 11.A By the end of 1991 the court found there was no evidence to support prosecutors' allegations that drug rehabilitation and other programs sponsored by the Church of Scientology in Spain amounted to illicit gathering aimed at activities such
as bilking people of money. The court also ordered that the bail bond deposited for his release in 1988 be returned to the Church along with interest, which nearly doubled the original amount."Spanish court drops charges against Scientology chief after 14 years", Agence France Presse, 11 April 2002

Slatkin fraud

On 8 November 2006, the Associated Press reported that Narconon was one of the Scientology groups that would pay back a total of 3.5 million dollars of illegal funds from EarthLink co-founder Reed Slatkin:

Head of Narconon deported from Kazakhstan

In July 2008, the head of Narconon in Kazakhstan was deported: Kazakh Justice Minister Zagipa Baliyeva announced that "foreigners from the USA, Georgia, South Korea and Japan have been deported from the country by law-enforcement agencies and in line with court rulings for violating the rules regarding the stay of foreigners and carrying out missionary activities without registration. In particular, with a further ban on entering Kazakhstan for five years, the head of the Narconon public foundation affiliated with the Church of Scientology has been deported," adding, "27 cases were uncovered where heads of non-traditional religious organizations violated the law on the freedom of conscience and religious organizations; in particular, materials propagating radical ideas and teachings of non-traditional religions were seized from them".

Accusation of website graphics design/layout plagiarism

In January 2001, Narconon came under fire when they appeared to copy the entire layout and site design of the webzine Urban75.com and cocaineaddiction.[ref]Thomas C.
Greene "Scientologist Web site rips off urban75. Retrieved 4 June 2006.[/ref] The editor of Urban75 posted up comparisons of the copying, showing that Narconon had not even removed Urban75s hidden javascript code, unique to Urban75. Retrieved 4 June 2006. The Register noted the irony of this scandal, quoting a critic who wrote, "Scientology has sued countless individuals and organizations putatively sic for 'copyright violation' and the organization claims loudly that they're at the 'forefront of protecting proprietary information on the Internet'."Lester Haines "Scientology exposé finds favour" The Register 26 January 2001. Retrieved 4 June 2006. Narconon has since acquired the heroinaddiction.com domain names.

Narconon Georgia closed amid investigation for insurance fraud

In April 2013, agents of the insurance commissioner of Georgia and the Gwinnett County, Georgia District attorney's office searched the group's offices in Norcross, Georgia, questioning employees as they arrived at work and impounding more than a dozen computers and boxes full of documents. The state Insurance Commissioner said during the investigation that "We have credible information that indicates that insurance fraud is taking place with Narconon".
The family of one patient said that the group was billing insurance companies for treatments that had never been given, and the doctors for whom the costs were being billed claimed never to have met the patient.
State investigators discovered nearly $3 million of insurance fraud at Narconon Georgia; in September 2013, the facility surrendered its state license in order to avoid criminal charges.

Narconon in California Sued

In March 2014, attorney Ryan Hamilton filed two civil lawsuits with the State of California.
The first civil lawsuit was filed on behalf of Angelo Amato of Illinois who purchased Narconon's Purification Rundown at the Scientology facility known as Narconon Fresh Start (a.k.a. Sunshine Summit Lodge) In Warner Springs, California, after Amato searched the Internet for drug treatment facilities and believed allegedly fraudulent claims by Scientology which purported to be an "independent consultant" web site. Amato claims to have been defrauded of $31,000 and began the Narconon program only to discover that it was actually Scientology being practiced, alleging that no actual drug treatment was offered at the facility.
The second civil lawsuit was filed on behalf of plaintiffs Christie Estrada and Branden Chavez of New Mexico who also researched "drug treatment facilities" on the Internet and was allegedly deceived by Narconon Fresh Start in to paying $33,000 before Scientology's Purification Rundown process could be applied, with Narconon Fresh Start allegedly asking for $23,000 of that fee up front in cash. The defendants in this case are also Narconon Fresh Start.
The core plaintiff complaints cover a spectrum of allegations of criminal misconduct by Scientology which include insurance fraud, denial that Narconon is Scientology, fraudulent claims that Narconon staff were medically trained in drug treatment, and a number of other false claims.

Narconon in Nevada Sued

In February 2014, attorney Ryan Hamilton filed an additional civil lawsuit with the State of Nevada.
Michael Tarr, a former heroin addict and Narconon client, and his mother Cathy, who borrowed the money to pay Narconon for his participation, sued Narconon Fresh Start (doing business as Rainbow Canyon Retreat) for fraud, breach of contract and negligence. 
The Tarr plaintiff's civil lawsuit followed closely behind a previous civil lawsuit filed by Hamilton on behalf of David, Stacy, and Jack Welch of Texas who also allege that Narconon Fresh Start committed breach of contract, fraud, and negligence.
In April 2014, Hamilton filed another lawsuit against Narconon Nevada, this time on behalf of  Harry and Lauren Geanacopulos and their son Peter. The Geanacopulos family's complaint argues that Narconon's programme content and success rate were misrepresented to them and that it has no genuine medical or scientific basis.

Spin-offs and related groups

thumbnail|Stall for 'The Truth About Drugs', one of the names under which Narconon and Scientology market their programs. There are also other Scientology-affiliated drug rehabilitation groups that are based on the Purification rundown.
cite book
|last=Abgrall
|first=Jean-Marie
|title=Healing Or Stealing?: Medical Charlatans in the New Age
|year=2001
|isbn=1-892941-51-1
|url=
|accessdate=24 September 2012
|page=193
|quote=Narconon, a subsidiary of Scientology, and the association "Yes to Life, No to Drugs" have also made a specialty of the fight against drugs and treating drug addicts. ... Drug addicts are just one of the Scientologists' targets for recruitment. The offer of care and healing through techniques derived from dianetics is only a come-on. The detoxification of the patient by means of "dianetics purification" is more a matter of manipulation, through the general weakening that it causes; it is a way of brainwashing the subject. Frequently convicted for illegal practice of medicine, violence, fraud and slander, the Scientologists have more and more trouble getting people to accept their techniques as effective health measures, as they like to claim. They recommend their purification processes to eliminate X-rays and nuclear radiation, and to treat goiter and warts, hypertension and psoriasis, hemorrhoids and myopia. . . why would anyone find that hard to swallow? Scientology has built a library of several hundreds of volumes of writings exalting the effects of purification, and its disciples spew propaganda based on irresponsible medical writings by doctors who are more interested in the support provided by Scientology than in their patients' well-being. On the other hand, responsible scientific reviews have long since "eliminated" dianetics and purification from the lists of therapies — relegating them to the great bazaar of medical fraud. ... Medical charlatans do not base their claims on scientific proof but, quite to the contrary, on peremptory assertions — the kind of assertions that they challenge when they come out of the mouths of those who defend "real" medicine.
}}[/ref]
|last=Muir
|first=Hugh
|title=Diary
|url= |deadurl=no |accessdate=20 March 2014
|newspaper=The Guardian
|date=13 August 2012
|quote=Who else will be sad that the Olympics is over? Well there may well be a post-Games dip among members of L Ron Hubbard's Scientology organisation. For they seemed to be doing good business around Tower Bridge, handing out literature linked to the organisation. The little booklets promised The Truth About Drugs. Neither Scientology nor L Ron are mentioned. Just his Foundation for a Drug-Free World, the web address for which sits on the Scientology website. Everyone was fair game this weekend. Even a passing 15-year-old. That sort of opportunity might not come again.}}[/ref]
Though not directly linked to Narconon, the New York Rescue Workers Detoxification Project and Second Chance Program are both Scientology-affiliated and also use the Purification rundown.

Narconon and support from other religious groups

Non-Scientology religious figures that have voiced support for Narconon have included Reverend Charles Kennedy of The Glorious Church of God in Christ, Imam Wilmore Sadiki, James Mclaughlin of the Wayman Chapel, Baptist pastor Alfreddie Johnson, Reverend Catherine Bego of the Word Evangelism Ministry, and Tony Muhammad of the Nation of Islam.
The Narconon website also mentions funding from more traditional churches, apart from civic volunteer organizations, corporations, foundations and volunteer agencies. 







Official Narconon sites
Others

