[[Nursultan Nazarbayev]]

CATEGORIES: 1940 births, Commanders Grand Cross of the Order of the Lion of Finland, Commanders Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the White Rose of Finland, Communist Party of Kazakhstan politicians, Communist Party of the Soviet Union members, Communist rulers, Converts to Islam from atheism or agnosticism, Grand Cordons of the Order of Leopold (Belgium), Grand Cordons of the Order of the Nile, Grand Croix of the Légion d'honneur, Grand Crosses of the Order of Merit (Austria), Grand Crosses of the Order of the Oak Crown, Grand Crosses of the Order of the Redeemer, Grand Order of King Tomislav recipients, Honorary Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George, Kazakhstani Muslims, Knights Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic, Living people, Nur Otan politicians, Order of the Oak Crown recipients, Pan-Turkism, Party leaders of the Soviet Union, People from Almaty Province, Politburo of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union members, Presidents of Kazakhstan, Recipients of the Collar of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana, Recipients of the Order of Liberty (Ukraine), Recipients of the Order of Merit (Hungary), Recipients of the Order of Prince Yaroslav the Wise, Recipients of the Order of St. Andrew, Recipients of the Order of the Chrysanthemum, Recipients of the Order of the Three Stars, 1st Class, Recipients of the Order of the White Double Cross, Recipients of the Order of the White Eagle (Poland), Recipients of the Order of Vytautas the Great, Sashes of the Order of the Star of Romania

Nursultan Äbishuly Nazarbayev  (; born 6 July 1940) is the President of Kazakhstan.  He has been the country's leader since 1989, when he was named First Secretary of the Communist Party of the Kazakh SSR, and was elected the nation's first president following its independence from the Soviet Union in December 1991. In April 2011, Nazarbayev was re-elected to another five-year term.

Early life

Nazarbayev was born in Chemolgan, a rural town near Almaty, when Kazakhstan was one of the republics of the Soviet Union.
His father avoided compulsory military service due to a withered arm he sustained when putting out a fire.
After leaving school he took up a one year, government-funded scholarship at the Karaganda Steel Mill in Temirtau. He also spent time training at a steel plant in Dniprodzerzhynsk, and therefore was away from Temirtau as riots over working conditions enveloped the town. 
By the age of 20, he was earning a relatively good wage doing "incredibly heavy and dangerous work" in the blast furnace.
He joined the Communist Party in 1962, and quickly became a prominent member of the Young Communist League. He soon became a full-time worker for the party, and picked up a college education at the Karagandy Polytechnic Institute. He was appointed secretary of the Communist Party Committee of the Karaganda Metallurgical Kombinat in 1972, and four years later became Second Secretary of the Karaganda Regional Party Committee.
In his role as a bureaucrat, Nazarbayev spent his days dealing with legal papers, solving logistical problems and industrial disputes, as well as meeting workers to solve individual issues. He later wrote that "the central allocation of capital investment and the distribution of funds" meant that infrastructure was poor, workers were demoralized and overworked, and centrally set targets were unrealistic; he saw the steel plant's problems as a microcosm for the problems for the Soviet Union as a whole.

Rise to power

In 1984, Nazarbayev became the Prime Minister of Kazakhstan (chairman of the Council of Ministers), working under Dinmukhamed Kunayev, the First Secretary of the Communist Party of Kazakhstan.  Nazarbayev criticized Askar Kunayev, head of the Academy of Sciences, at the 16th session of the Communist Party of Kazakhstan in January 1986 for not reforming his department. Dinmukhamed Kunayev, Nazarbayev's boss and Askar's brother, felt deeply angered and betrayed. Kunayev went to Moscow and demanded Nazarbayev's dismissal while Nazarbayev's supporters campaigned for Kunayev's dismissal and Nazarbayev's promotion.
Kunayev was ousted in 1986 and replaced by a Russian, Gennady Kolbin, who despite his office had little authority in Kazakhstan.  Nazarbayev was named party leader on 22 June 1989-- only the second Kazakh (after Kunayev) to hold the post. He was Chairman of the Supreme Soviet (head of state) from 22 February to 24 April 1990.
Despite having just been named as leader of Kazakhstan, Nazarbayev was close enough to Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev that he was Gorbachev's second choice to be Vice President of the Soviet Union in 1990.  However, Nazarbayev turned the offer down. He supported Russian President Boris Yeltsin against the attempted coup in August 1991 by Soviet hardliners.
The Soviet Union disintegrated following the failed coup, though Nazarbayev was highly concerned with maintaining the close economic ties between Kazakhstan and Russia.

Presidency

Nazarbayev is a constant participant of the most important conferences and forums of the world, such as high-level meetings as UN General Assembly, Nuclear Security Summits, World Economic Forum in Davos. Nazarbayev has opened Kazakhstan's doors as host country for high-level events: the OSCE Summit in Astana held in December 2010, the 38th Session of the OIC Ministerial Council in June, 2011, and the Almaty 1 & Almaty 2 P5+1 talks with Iran on its nuclear program. Nazarbayev also initiated a series of forums that gather the international community's attention. In particular, the Astana Economic Forum, the Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions, the Eurasian Media Forum, sessions of the Council of Foreign Investors and others.
In December 2012, President Nazarbayev outlined a forward-looking national strategy called the Kazakhstan 2050 Strategy.
Nazarbayev renamed the former State Defense Committees as the Ministry of Defense and appointed Sagadat Nurmagambetov as Defense Minister on 7 May 1992. The Supreme Council, under the leadership of Speaker Serikbolsyn Abdilin, began debating over a draft constitution in June 1992. The constitution created a strong executive branch with limited checks on executive power.
Opposition political parties Ezat, Zheltoqsan and the Republican Party, held demonstrations in Almaty from 10–17 June calling for the formation of a coalition government and the resignation of the government of Prime Minister Sergey Tereshchenko and the Supreme Council. Kazakh security personnel forcibly put down the protest on 18 June 1992. The Parliament of Kazakhstan, composed of Communist Party legislators who had yet to stand in an election since the country gained its independence, adopted the constitution on 28 January 1993.
An April 1995 referendum extended his term until 2000. He was re-elected in January 1999 and again in December 2005. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe criticized the last presidential election as falling short of international democratic standards. An election requires two or more candidates running in opposition. A single candidate is not an election but a referendum. On 18 May 2007, the Parliament of Kazakhstan approved a constitutional amendment which would allow Nazarbayev to seek re-election as many times as he wishes. This amendment applies specifically and only to Nazarbayev: the original constitution's prescribed maximum of two presidential terms will still apply to all future presidents of Kazakhstan."Kazakhstan lifts term limits on long-ruling leader", Los Angeles Times. Latimes. Retrieved on 3 February 2011.
Nazarbayev appointed Altynbek Sarsenbayev, who at the time served as the Minister of Culture, Information and Concord, the Secretary of the Kazakh Security Council, replacing Marat Tazhin, on 4 May 2001. Tazhin became the Chairman of the National Security Council, replacing Alnur Musayev. Musayev became the head of the Guards' Service of the President.
Notwithstanding Kazakhstan's membership in the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (now the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation), under Nazarbayev the country has had good relations with Israel. Diplomatic relations were established in 1992 and President Nazarbayev paid official visits to Israel in 1995 and 2000. Web.org. Retrieved on 3 February 2011. Bilateral trade between the two countries amounted to $724 million in 2005.
In 1994 Nazarbayev suggested the move of the capital from Almaty to Astana, and the official shift of the capital happened o December 10, 1997.akorda.kz/en/category/astana
On 4 December 2005 new Presidential elections were held and President Nazarbayev won by an overwhelming majority of 91.15% (from a total of 6,871,571 eligible participating voters) as reported by the Central Electoral Commission of Kazakhstan, an estimation criticized by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe and other election watchdog organizations. Nazarbayev was sworn in for another seven-year term on 11 January 2006.
In 2009, former UK cabinet minister Jonathan Aitken released a biography of the Kazakhstani leader entitled Nazarbayev and the Making of Kazakhstan. The book takes a generally pro-Nazarbayev stance, asserting in the introduction that he is mostly responsible for the success of modern Kazakhstan.
December 2011 saw the 2011 Mangystau riots, described by the BBC as the biggest opposition movement of his time in power. On 16 December 2011 demonstrations in the oil town of Zhanaozen clashed with police on the country's Independence Day. Fifteen people were shot dead by security forces and almost 100 were injured. Protests quickly spread to other cities but then died away. The subsequent trial of demonstrators uncovered mass abuse and torture of detainees.
Kazakhstan President Nursultan Nazarbayev received the Man of the Year national award in 2012. The award in State Policy category was also given to Russia's President Vladimir Putin and President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko. The leaders of the three countries were awarded for their contribution into creation of the Eurasian Economic Community (EurAsEC) and the Customs Union.
President Nazarbayev announced in 2014 that Kazakhstan should change its name to Kazakh Yeli. The reason for this announcement is for Kazakhstan to attract better and more foreign investment since Kazakhstan by name is associated with other -stan countries. Also, he noted Mongolia is receiving more investment than Kazakhstan because its not a -stan country even though it is in the same neighborhood as Kazakhstan and not as stable as Kazakhstan. However, he is letting the people decide on whether the country should change its name.

Allegations of corruption

Kazakhstan has never held an election that met international standards.
Nazarbayev won the first presidential election in 1991, as no other politician managed to gather enough signatures to enroll as an official candidate.
In May 2007, the Parliament of Kazakhstan approved a constitutional amendment which would allow Nazarbayev to seek re-election as many times as he wishes. This amendment applies specifically and only to Nazarbayev, since it states that the first president will have no limits on how many times he can run for office, but subsequent presidents will be held to a five-year term.
President Nazarbayev declared a holy war against corruption and ordered the adoption of "10 steps against corruption"КонтиненТ: казахстан: политика, общество. Continent.kz. Retrieved 3 February 2011. to fight corruption at all levels of state and society. A few international NGOs have accused the Nazarbayev government of merely paying lip service to anti-corruption efforts. Despite becoming a chair of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe in 2010, some civil activists inside and outside the country stated that little was done to address human rights abuses and widespread corruption. The Nazarbayev family itself was embroiled in a series of investigations by Western governments into money laundering, bribery, and assassinations. Among these investigations was the so-called Kazakhgate, as the result of which the US Department of Justice did not find the Nazarbayev family guilty and closed the case in August 2010.New York Merchant Bank Pleads Guilty to FCPA Violation; Bank Chairman Pleads Guilty to Failing to Disclose Control of Foreign Bank Account, Department of Justice, 6 August 2010
A former minister in the Nazarbayev government, Zamanbek K. Nurkadilov, said that Nazarbayev should answer allegations that Kazakh officials had accepted millions of US dollars in bribes from an intermediary for U.S. oil firms in the 1990s.
Nazarbayev has been called one of the "ultimate oligarchs" of the post-Soviet central Asia states. He is believed to have transferred at least $1 billion worth of oil revenues to his private bank accounts in other countries and his family controls many other key enterprises in Kazakhstan.

Nazarbayev on various issues

Environmental issues

In his 1998 autobiography, Nazarbayev wrote that "The shrinking of the Aral Sea, because of its scope, is one of the most serious ecological disasters being faced by our planet today. It is not an exaggeration to put it on the same level as the destruction of the Amazon rainforest."

Nuclear issues

Nazarbayev is a global leader on nuclear nonproliferation issues and global security. Kazakhstan inherited from the Soviet Union the world's fourth largest stockpile of nuclear weapons. Within four years of independence, Kazakhstan possessed zero nuclear weapons.
President Obama acknowledged President Nazarbayev's leadership during a bilateral meeting at the 2012 Nuclear Summit in Seoul, South Korea. Nazarbayev offers Kazakhstan as a model for other countries to gain security by giving up nuclear weapons programs and stockpiles.
During the Soviet era, over 500 military experiments with nuclear weapons were conducted by scientists in the Kazakhstan region, mostly at the Semipalatinsk Test Site, causing radiation sickness and birth defects.
Nazarbayev encouraged the United Nations General Assembly to establish 29 August as the International Day Against Nuclear Tests. In his article he has proposed a new Non-Proliferation Treaty "that would guarantee clear obligations on the part of signatory governments and define real sanctions for those who fail to observe the terms of the agreement."Right time for building global nuclear security. Chicago Tribune (11 April 2010). Retrieved 3 February 2011. He signed a treaty authorizing the Central Asian Nuclear Weapon Free Zone on 8 September 2006.
In an oped in the Washington Times, President Nazarbayev called for the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty to be modernized and better balanced.

Iran

In a speech given on 15 December 2006 marking the 15th anniversary of Kazakhstan's independence, Nazarbayev stated he wished to join with Iran in support of a single currency for all Central Asian states and intended to push the idea forward with Iran's then President Ahmadinejad on an upcoming visit. The Kazakh president also reportedly criticized Iran as a terrorism-supporting state. The Kazakh Foreign Ministry released a statement on 19 December, saying the reports were mistaken and contradictory to what the president actually meant. Web.org. Retrieved on 2011-02-03.

Kazakhstan 2050 Strategy

Nazarbayev unveiled in his 2012 State of the Nation the Kazakhstan 2050 Strategy, a long-term strategy to ensure future growth prospects of Kazakhstan, and position Kazakhstan as one of the 30 most developed nations in the world.

Women in politics

In 2011, Nazarbayev called on his government to provide increased opportunities for women to serve in politics and government. "I instruct the government, together with the Presidential administration and the national commission for women's affairs, the leadership of the Nur Otan Party, to form a concrete plan effective to 2016 for the promotion of women in taking decisions", he said at the first women's congress."Kazakh president calls for more women in politics" rian.ru

Religion

President Nursultan Nazarbayev has put forward the initiative of holding a forum of world and traditional religions in the capital of Kazakhstan, Astana. Earlier the organizers of similar events were only representatives of leading religions and denominations. Among other similar events aimed at establishing interdenominational dialogue were the meetings of representatives of world religions and denominations held in Assisi, Italy in October 1986 and January 2002. Religions-congress. Retrieved on 3 February 2011. The first Congress of World and Traditional Religions which gathered in 2003 allowed the leaders of all major religions to develop prospects for mutual cooperation.
Nazarbayev espoused anti-religious views during the Soviet era;Ideology and National Identity in Post-Communist Foreign Policies By Rick Fawn, p. 147 he has now exerted effort to highlight his Muslim heritage by performing the Hajj pilgrimage, and supporting mosque renovations.Moscow's Largest Mosque to Undergo Extension
Under the leadership of Nazarbayev, the Republic of Kazakhstan has enacted some degrees of multiculturalism in order to retain and attract talents from diverse ethnic groups among its citizenry, and even from nations that are developing ties of cooperation with the country, in order to coordinate human resources onto the state-guided path of global market economic participation. This principle of the Kazakh leadership has earned it the name "Singapore of the Steppes".
However, in 2012 Nazarbayev proposed a law that was later adopted by the parliament which imposes stringent restrictions on religious practices. Religious groups were required to re-register, or face closure.eurasianet. However, under the new law many minority religious groups are deemed illegal. In order to exist on a local level, group must have more than 50 member; on a regional level - more than 500; on the national level - more than 5000. It is estimated that two-thirds of currently existing religious groups will be forced to close down.

Personal life

He is married to Sara Alpysqyzy Nazarbayeva, and they have three daughters — Dariga, Dinara and Aliya.

Honours

Kazakhstan

Soviet Union

Russian Federation

Foreign awards







|-
|-
|-


