[[Amethyst Initiative]]

CATEGORIES: Drinking culture, Adolescence, Non-profit organizations based in the United States, Youth rights, Alcohol law in the United States, 2008 establishments in the United States, Organizations established in 2008, Age and society, Ageism, Alcohol abuse in the United States

The Amethyst Initiative is an organization made up of U.S. college presidents and chancellors that in July 2008 launched a movement calling for the reconsideration of U.S. legal drinking age, particularly the minimum age of 21. The National Minimum Drinking Age Act of 1984  requires all US states to raise their minimum age for purchase and public possession of alcohol to 21 or face a reduction in highway funds under the Federal-Aid Highway Act. The Amethyst Initiative was initiated by John McCardell, founder of Choose Responsibility,
According to Greek and Roman legend, amethysts protected their owners from drunkenness.

Purpose

The Amethyst Initiative states that, in their experience as university presidents, they have observed, "Alcohol education that mandates abstinence as the only legal option has not resulted in significant constructive behavioral change among our students," and therefore they urge lawmakers "to invite new ideas about the best ways to prepare young adults to make responsible decisions about alcohol".
Gustavus Adolphus College President Jack R. Ohle said in a statement that the initiative is not about lowering the drinking age, but to open a debate on alcohol policies that affect young people and their choices about alcohol use. 

Statement

The Amethyst Initiative states the following:

Signatories

Signatories of the initiative include:

Criticism

The initiative has been criticized by several groups and government and industry officials, including Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD). Joining MADD's criticism are other groups, including the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, the American Medical Association, and the National Transportation Safety Board.
A spokesman for the Governors Highway Safety Association told the Washington Post that university leaders "are really just punting on the issue and leaving the high school principals to deal with it.""Lower drinking age is criticized" (free registration required), Washington Post, August 1, 2008 However, Amethyst Initiative's parent organization, Choose Responsibility, proposes that only high school graduates should be eligible.
In a press release, MADD argues that lowering the drinking age would result in greater numbers of fatal automobile accidents, and that the presidents are "looking for an easy way out of an inconvenient problem" and "misrepresenting science." MADD cited former U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Secretary, and current University of Miami president Donna Shalala statement that "maintaining the legal drinking age at 21 is a socially and medically sound policy that helps parents, schools and law enforcement protect our youth from the potentially life-threatening effects of underage drinking."
Choose Responsibility argues that scientific evidence supports the Amethyst Initiative's views and goals.
Radley Balko, of Reason, wryly noted inconsistency opponents of the Amethyst Initiative believe that it "would be a "national tragedy" to, for example, allow 19- and 20-year-old men and women returning from Iraq and Afghanistan to have a beer in celebration of completing their tours of duty."
In November 2008, the Student Senate at the University of Wisconsin–La Crosse rejected a proposal to urge that university's chancellor to sign the Amethyst Initiative.""UW–L students say no to drinking age debate,La Crosse Tribune, Retrieved on 2008-12-15 Supposedly the first such attempt by a student body to ask a president or chancellor to sign on, the measure at UW–L was defeated 14-19 after three weeks' debate. Chancellor Joe Gow said this vote, "certainly defies the 'conventional wisdom' regarding young people being eager to lower the drinking age." ""Amethyst Initiative debate finally over,The Racquet, Retrieved on 2008-12-15










