[[Keith Henson]]

CATEGORIES: American non-fiction writers, Critics of Scientology, University of Arizona alumni, Scientology and the legal system, Cryonics pioneers, 1942 births, Space advocates, Living people, Memetics, Transhumanists, Scientology and the Internet, Anti-cult organizations and individuals



Howard Keith Henson (born 1942) is an American electrical engineer and writer on space engineering, space law (Moon treaty), memetics, cryonics, evolutionary psychology and physical limitations of Transhumanism.
In 1975, he and his then-wife Carolyn Meinel founded the L5 Society, which promoted space colonization and which was eventually folded into the National Space Society. More recently, Henson's outspoken criticism of the Church of Scientology and subsequent criminal proceedings have gained him headlines.

Early influences

Keith Henson was raised as an "army brat" attending seven schools before 7th grade. His father, Lt. Col. Howard W. Henson (1909–2001), was a decorated US Army officer who spent much of his career in Army Intelligence. The science-fiction author Robert A. Heinlein played a major role in influencing his early life.R. U. Sirius interview with Keith Henson Henson graduated from Prescott High School shortly after his father retired, before attending the University of Arizona and receiving a degree in Electrical Engineering. G. Michaud, Reaching for the High Frontier, Out of the desert, Praeger Publishers, 1986. 47, p. 188.

University

During much of this period, Henson worked at a geophysics company, mostly running induced polarization surveys in the western US and Peru.  Henson also programmed geophysical type cases and wrote data reduction programs for the company."Theoretical Induced Polarization and Resistivity Response for the Dual Frequency System Collinear Dipole-dipole Array: Volume 1 & 2. By Chris S Ludwig, H Keith Henson, Heinrichs Geoexploration Company Published by Heinrichs Geoexploration Co., 1967"

Druid prank

Henson was known at the University of Arizona as one of the founders of the Druid Student Center, where a campus humor newspaper, The Frumious Bandersnatch was published in the late 1960s. He later cited an incident that occurred in his student days as a good example of memetic replication. When asked to fill in a form that required him to disclose his religious affiliations he wrote Druid. His prank was soon noticed by other students and before long almost 20% of the student body had registered themselves as Reform Druids, Orthodox Druids, Members of the Church of the nth Druid, Zen Druids, Latter-Day Druids and so on. The university was forced to remove the religious affiliation question, breaking the chain of replication and variation. The Civilization of Illiteracy, p. 407. DUP, 1997. ISBN 3-931828-38-7

Analog engineering

After graduation, Henson went to work for Burr-Brown Research, now merged into Texas Instruments, in Tucson, Arizona.  While there, he worked on extremely low distortion quadrature oscillators and non-linear function modules (multipliers, vector adders and root-mean-square). His first patent was a design for a 4-quadrant log-antilog multiplier. He claims to have been fired (not from Burr-Brown) in 1972 for refusing to certify an electronic module for a nuclear power plant that failed to meet a required MTBF specification., producing specialized computer interface equipment and related industrial control devices.nss.htm[ref]Declaration of H. Keith Henson, HILARY DEZOTELL, KEN HODEN, and BRUCE WAGONER, Plaintiff/Respondent, vs KEITH HENSON,
Defendant/Appellant, Appellate No. 00338, Case No. HEC009673 Riverside Superior Court Appeals Division, Riverside, California, January 21, 2003 copy at  see Attachment A, Background and timelines for H. Keith Henson.[/ref]
Henson married his first wife, Carolyn Meinel, in 1967

L5 Society

In 1974, Henson's occasional rock climbing partner, physicist Dr. Dan Jones,Giving to New Mexico Tech, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, retrieved 10-27-07. introduced him to the space colonization work of Dr. Gerard K. O'Neill of Princeton University.  To promote these ideas, Henson and Meinel founded the L5 Society in 1975. The Great Mambo Chicken and the Transhuman Condition: Science Slightly Over the Edge. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. ISBN 0-201-56751-2Mark, Hans. The Space Station: A Personal Journey, p. 54. Duke University Press, 1987. ISBN 0-8223-0727-8
Henson co-wrote papers for three Space Manufacturing conferences at Princeton.  The 1977 and 1979 papers were co-authored with Eric Drexler.  Patents were issued on both subjects—vapor phase fabrication and space radiators.K., and K.E. Drexler. (1988) "Heterodensity heat transfer apparatus and method" U.S. Patent Office: #4,759,404 Henson, H.K., and K.E. Drexler. (1984) "Method for processing and fabricating metals in space" U.S. Patent Office: #4,480,677
In 1980, Henson testified before the United States Congress when the L5 Society successfully opposed the Moon Treaty.  The society was represented by Leigh Ratiner (later a figure in the Inslaw proceedings).  The experience eventually became an article, Star Laws, jointly written by Henson and Arel Lucas and published in Reason Magazine.space.

Cryonics

In 1985, having been convinced by Eric Drexler that nanotechnology provided a route to make it work, Henson, his wife, and their two-year old daughter signed up with Alcor for cryonic suspension. Henson's daughter was the youngest member ever signed up to Alcor. Following the Dora Kent problems,Dora Kent: Questions and Answers, Alcor Life Extension Foundation, Excerpted from Cryonics, March 1988 Henson became increasingly active with Alcor.  After Alcor had to freeze their chief surgeon, he learned enough surgery to put several cryonics patients on cardiac bypass."Cryonics 'wet work'", message posted by Keith Henson on the newsgroup sci. He also wrote a column for Alcor's magazine, Cryonics, for a few years. Henson persuaded Timothy Leary to become an Alcor Member-although Leary eventually dropped his membership.
In that same year, Henson moved to Silicon Valley, consulting for a number of firms, and eventually debugging garbage collection software for the last stage of Project Xanadu.  He was still working for the company that bought the Xanadu license when Scientology lawyer Helena Kobrin tried to destroy the news group alt.scientology.

Memetics

Henson's wife, Arel Lucas, was credited by Douglas Hofstadter in Metamagical Themas for suggesting the study of memes be called memetics. Henson wrote two articles on memes in 1987, one published in Analog. The other, Memes, MetaMemes and Politics, circulated on the internet before being printed.  
Richard Dawkins, who originated the concept of memes, approvingly cites in the second edition of his book The Selfish Gene Henson's coining of the neologism memeoids to refer to "victims who have been taken over by a meme to the extent that their own survival becomes inconsequential."Dawkins, Richard. The Selfish Gene, p.330. Oxford University Press, 1989. ISBN 0-19-286092-5

Scientology

Henson has become one of the focal points of the ongoing struggle between the Church of Scientology and its critics, often referred to as Scientology versus the Internet.  Henson entered the Scientology conflict when it was at its most heated, in the mid-1990s. In 1996, many of Scientology's secret writings were released onto the Internet, and the Church of Scientology embarked on a massive worldwide campaign to keep them from being spread to the general public. Henson examined these writings, entitled New Era Dianetics (NOTS), and from his examination of these secret documents, claimed that Scientology was committing medical fraud. The NOTS documents, he said, contained detailed instructions for the treatment of physical ailments and illnesses through the use of Scientology practices. A Supreme Court decision in 1971 had declared that Scientology's writings were meant for "purely spiritual" purposes, and all Scientology books published since then have included disclaimers stating that Scientology's E-meter device "does nothing" and does not cure any physical ailments.[ref]
