[[Battletoads]]

CATEGORIES: Television pilots not picked up as a series, 1990s American television series, Battletoads, Animated series based on video games, Rareware games, Video game franchises

Battletoads is a video game media franchise by Rare that began with the original beat 'em up game Battletoads in 1991. Starring three anthropomorphic toads named after skin conditions, Rash, Zitz, and Pimple, the series was created to rival the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles games. The series as a whole has been quite popular and at its apex spawned an animated television pilot.
The initial Battletoads game for the NES was renowned for its difficulty, but was well received and spawned sequels for various platforms including a crossover with the Double Dragon series. In each of the games, the objective is to defeat the toads' nemesis the Dark Queen and her army of space mutants. Most titles in the series do not feature all three toads as playable characters, with one or two members of the team being captured by the Dark Queen. The exceptions to this were Battletoads & Double Dragon and the Battletoads arcade game.

Video games

A canceled sequel/remake game was being developed for the Game Boy Advance while Rare was still owned by Nintendo.

Cartoon

Battletoads spun-off a Canadian half-hour animated television special produced by DIC Entertainment that aired in syndication in the United States on the weekend of Thanksgiving 1992 in an attempt to capitalize on the popularity of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (DiC  would try this again later on by producing Street Sharks and then later Extreme Dinosaurs).  However, only the pilot episode made it to the airwaves; it was never picked up as a full animated series, despite comic-style ads in GamePro magazine claiming otherwise. A VHS tape with the pilot was released in the United States on January 15, 1994.
The story served as a prequel to the video game franchise. Set in Oxnard, California, it stars three junior high schoolers (despite the fact that the comic's story revolved around three video game testers). The trio is given the ability to transform into anthropomorphic toads with superhuman strength and the ability to change their arms and legs into weapons in techniques called "Smash Hits". They are charged with protecting Professor T. Bird and Princess Angelica from the Dark Queen, who wants to steal Angelica's magical amulet for her plans of universal conquest.
The cartoon was developed and written by Phil Harnage and David Wise (Wise has no relation to the Battletoads video games composer of the same name but was the main writer of the 1987 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles TV cartoon series). A comic with the backstory of Battletoads, written by Rare employee Guy Miller, was also published in Nintendo Power.

Characters

Reception

In 2010, Game Informer included Battletoads among ten gaming franchises that deserve a revival, and precisely, "a true HD sequel".
On the other hand, the animated version of Battletoads was very badly received. It was included on the lists of five "worst one-shot TV cartoons ever made" by Topless Robot in 2008






