[[Battle.net]]

CATEGORIES: Blizzard Entertainment, Online gaming services, Multiplayer gaming service, 1997 software

Battle. Battle. Battle. This feature, along with ease of account creations and the absence of member fees, caused Battle. Since the successful launch of Battle.
Blizzard officially unveiled the new revamped Battle.

Supported games

Diablo

When the service initially launched with Diablo in November 30, 1996, Battle. Players could connect to the service, talk with other gamers and join multiplayer games of Diablo. Besides user account data, no game data was stored on the Battle. When a player connected to a game, they would be connecting directly to the other players in the game. No data was sent through the Battle. While this made the service quick and easy to use, it quickly led to widespread cheating since players using cheats could modify their game data locally. However, since there was an option to create private games, many players ended up playing with people they knew.

StarCraft

The release of StarCraft in 1998 increased usage of the Battle. Features such as ladder ranking and game filters were added to the service. Battle. StarCraft Battle.
StarCraft also brought with it a new copy protection scheme using CD keys. Under Diablo, Battle. With StarCraft, only those players with a valid and unique CD key – a generated 13-digit number distributed with each boxed game – were allowed onto the service. Only one person could connect to Battle. CD-Keys could also be muted (unable to whisper or chat in channels), voided (restricted to The Void channel), jailed (both unable to whisper or chat in channels and restricted to The Void) or banned from Battle. Every Blizzard game since StarCraft has used the CD key system to connect to Battle. With the release of the Gateway system in Brood War, two players can play at the same time, as long as they are on different gateways, though they cannot play in the same game, chat with each other and so on.

Warcraft II: Battle.net Edition

Diablo II

Diablo II was released in 2000 to much fanfare. The main highlight of Diablo II as it relates to Battle. The game was no longer simulated on each player's computer, but instead was run on Blizzard's server. This also meant that all of the character data for the game was stored on the Battle. The game also has an open character feature on Battle. This allowed players to play characters locally or on a LAN, and then use those same characters on Battle. However, any open games played on Battle. Diablo II also had a unique feature that would show the players in the Battle. It also used a different Battle.  There was also expanded ladder support including a "Hardcore" ladder which listed players whose characters would be removed permanently if they died in-game. Again, with Diablo II usage of Battle.

Warcraft III

Warcraft III: Reign of Chaos was released in 2002 and its expansion pack, Warcraft III: The Frozen Throne, was released in 2003. The release of these two games brought with them a number of new features to the online service. The most significant feature to be added was probably the concept of Anonymous Matchmaking. This feature allowed a user who wanted to play a game to simply press a button and automatically be matched up with one or more other players who were similar in skill (based on ranking) and also wanted to play a game. This allowed for people to get into games quickly and easily. It also reduced win-trading, where two people would purposely win and lose games to artificially raise their rank on the ladder. The matchmaking concept was also expanded to team games in a feature called "Arranged Teams". In an arranged team game, you could make a team with one or more friends, which was then anonymously matched up with another team of the same size and rank. However, a strategy was introduced on how to cheat the automated 'fair' matchups, called 'Abusing', simply by someone losing the Arranged Team Games intentionally with one ally so that with another ally (who wants to gain wins easily) won't find it difficult because the automatic matchups would put the two players up against relatively unskilled players. Automated tournaments were added in the expansion, where players would compete to be crowned tournament champion in a series of games played throughout the day. In addition to the new game styles, a slew of other features were added including selectable chatroom icons unlocked based on the player's number of wins, a friends list, and clan support.

World of Warcraft

World of Warcraft initially did not support Battle.net ones until the revamp of Battle.net accounts.net accounts The features of Battle.

StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty

StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty is the first game to natively support the new revamped Battle.  The new Battle. Instead, regular and custom maps are available for everyone and sorted by a popularity system based on total playtime. The new interface includes a chat service which is similar to that of Instant Messengers which allows players to interact across different games. Initially not having been shipped with regular, channel-based chat rooms, this was later added in a patch after both community and gaming media noted the lack of the feature. The game also supports VoIP for players.

Diablo III

Blizzard confirmed on June 28, 2008 at the Worldwide Invitational in Paris, France that Diablo III would feature Battle. However, it would progress to the point that a Battle.

Battle.0

Battle. The new Battle. The first allows players to connect all Battle.net account. Players can also unlock achievements in-game which would in turn unlock avatars and decals which would be shown on the player's profile, the decals can also be seen in-game on the player's units.
The second section consists of making Battle. The ladder system has also been revamped; the system classifies players into certain leagues according to their level of competitiveness. Players would then compete against others who have a similar skill level to their own, albeit across leagues. There is also a special practice league to practice and hone skills, where game speed is reduced and maps are designed to create a slower pace of the game. The party system works similar to that of World of Warcraft where players with friends would join together and enter games as a party.
The final section involves the new chat system which involves a new system similar to Instant Messaging across games. Players may communicate with friends across games, servers, and characters.
Another new element is the use of an online marketplace which allows player or map makers to create and sell their maps online through Battle. This is however not implemented yet.
On May 5, 2010, Blizzard revealed that Battle.0 would be integrated with social networking site Facebook, "linking the world's premier online gaming platform with the world's most popular social platform".

Growth history

According to Blizzard's claims, Battle.
Blizzard claims "millions of active users" on Battle.
By November 1997 they had 2.2 million games played, had 1.25 million different users, and averaged 3,500 new users each day.
By April 1999, it was reported that Battle.3 million active users, and more than 50,000 concurrent users.
By September 2002, their active user count had jumped to 11 million.
By September 2004, their active user count was up to nearly 12 million, spending more than 2.1 million hours online each day, and they had an average of 200,000 concurrent users, with a peak concurrent user count of 400,000.
In November 2008, Blizzard banned over 357,700 accounts that were found to be using third-party hacks.

Community

A community of developers has arisen around Battle. Many unofficial clients are available for Battle.net-enabled games has been reverse-engineered and published by volunteers.
Also, several communication tools have been made, like a "whisper" tool, so that a player could talk to their friends even if they are in a game.
Custom games (using maps that were not made by Blizzard) have helped build the community, and now are a substantial portion of the games played.  Among the most popular of these games in WarCraft 3 are tower defense maps and Hero solo maps (like Defense of the Ancients, and arena maps) or pure RTS games like Civilization Wars, where the player develops their economy, tech, and unit diversity but the player has no control of their units.

Controversy

bnetd

A group of gamers reverse engineered the network protocol used by Battle.net emulation package called bnetd. With bnetd, a gamer is not required to use the official Battle.
In February 2002, lawyers retained by Blizzard threatened legal action under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) against the developers of bnetd. Blizzard games are designed to operate online exclusively with a set of Blizzard-controlled servers collectively known as "Battle. Battle.
Despite offers from the bnetd developers to integrate Blizzard's CD key checking system into bnetd, Blizzard claims that the public availability of any such software package facilitates piracy, and moved to have the bnetd project shut down under provisions of the DMCA.com: Open Source game server shut down by DMCA, February 21, 2002 As this case is one of the first major test cases for the DMCA, the Electronic Frontier Foundation became involved. For a while negotiations were ongoing to resolve the case without a trial. However, the negotiations failed and Blizzard won the case on all counts: the defendants were ruled to have breached both StarCraft's End User License Agreement (EULA) and the Terms of Use of Battle.Court document: Davison & Associates vs Internet Gateway & Associates, September 30, 2004
This decision was appealed to the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals, which also ruled in favor of Blizzard/Vivendi on September 1, 2005.org: Blizzard Entertainment, Inc. Freezes On-Line Gamers with an Eight Circuit Court Victory, September 19, 2005.

Privacy and Real ID

On July 6, 2010, Blizzard announced that they planned to change the way their forums worked to require that users identify themselves with their real name.  Shortly after revealing his real name, personal information was posted that included his phone number, picture, age, home address, and other details.
Some technology media outlets suggested the change was a good idea and would benefit both Battle.
Blizzard initially responded to some of the concerns by saying that the changes would not be retroactive to previous posts, that parents could set up the system so that minors cannot post, and that posting to the forums is optional. However due to the huge negative response, Blizzard President Michael Morhaime issued a statement rescinding the plan to use real names on Blizzard's forums for the time being.World of Warcraft – English (NA) Forums -> Regarding real names in forums

2012 hacking

On August 4, 2012, Battle.

General criticism

Public opinion of the new Battle. Lacking a classic chat interface throughout the Beta and after release, the feature was only added after large fan feedback on the official forums and attention to the topic on gaming media. To this day, StarCraft 2's custom scene—that is, custom maps and scenarios created by players and community enthusiasts—is very small (both in terms of maps available and players playing them) compared to that of its predecessor, WarCraft 3, despite a more powerful editor. Both limits imposed upon map makers (limited upload, limited rights) and the sorting of maps through a "popularity system", where only a few maps attract attention, are causes of this issue. Several prominent features of previous games, like shared watching of replays directly on Battle.

List of Battle.net games

Battle.net Classic
Restricted Chat Functionality
Disabled
Battle.0








