[[China West Normal University]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in Sichuan, Educational institutions established in 1946, 1946 establishments in China

China West Normal University (CWNU; ) is a comprehensive normal university featuring teacher education and training in Nanchong, Sichuan, China.
The university was established in 1946. It now has 30,343 students.

History

China West Normal University (CWNU) is the oldest established teacher training university in Sichuan province, which grew out of the Northern Sichuan Agricultural and Industrial College founded in 1946. Situated in the city of Nanchong, the economic & cultural center of northeastern Sichuan, on the middle reach of Jialing River, famously known as Silk City, CWNU has an excellent reputation owing to its beautiful scenery, abundant teaching resources, excellent academic atmosphere and superb research facilities.

Campus

The university consists of two campuses, a new campus with magnificent beauty and the original one with charming features, covering a total area of 2,500 mu with constructed area of 903,400 square meters. The university has many kinds of functional classrooms, with an area of 104,000 square meters.
Experimental building has an area of 110,000 square meters including respective laboratory buildings for both Arts and Science colleges, college of Fin Art, college of Music, school-owned museum and a Specimen Building. In addition, two libraries possess a total collection of 2,226,000 volumes and 7,740 varieties of magazines and newspapers. The whole university is fully equipped from the dormitories and five dining halls or cafeteria, to various teaching and training facilities for physical education, including track and field stadiums, multifunctional gymnasiums, courts and playing fields.

Faculty

With undergraduate education as the basis, teachers training as main task and our feature, as well as postgraduate education and scientific researches as forerunners, CWNU, over the past sixty years, has attached very great importance to its multidisciplinary and comprehensive development. Up to now it has become the largest-scaled university which offers the most diversified subjects in northeastern Sichuan. Thus the university has been successively honored as an important research center of education development, a key training base for qualified middle school teachers, and the provincial training center for teachers' further education.
The university has 1,820 staff members, including 1,274 full-time teachers, among whom there are 561 professors and associate professors, and 633 professional teachers have masters' degree. There are 167 graduate supervisors, and 17 experts who enjoy the special subsidy granted by the State Council. One university teacher has been chosen as the candidate for the National Million Talents Project. Another teacher is entitled as the Youth Expert of National Outstanding Contribution", and 6 teachers are honored as Distinguished Expert of Outstanding Contribution in Sichuan Province. 20 teachers are known as the academic and technological pioneers in Sichuan or potential talents. The total enrollment in CWNU has reached around 25,000, including undergraduates, graduates, international students plus adult students for continuing education.

Colleges and departments

It has 21 colleges and departments, plus 28 research institutes, offering 34 master-degree programs, 51 majors for four-year undergraduates, 16 for three-year students. The university has 4 provincial key subjects, 3 provincial key laboratories, 14 provincial key courses, 21 provincial-level Elaborate Courses and 3 famous provincial undergraduate majors. Moreover, CWNU provides 11 provincial training centers for undergraduate talents, and offers a training basis for postgraduates of education as well as postgraduates of agricultural popularization. All majors and programs here are widely open to overseas students, among which subjects like Chinese, History, Education, Fine Arts, Music, Dancing, Wushu, Chinese Calligraphy show great appeal and popularity.

Exchange

In recent years, CWNU has become actively involved in various international exchanges and co-operations, especially in cultural and academic fields. It has built partnerships through diverse ways of communication and cooperation with many universities and education organizations in America, Canada, Australia, Japan, Korea, Germany, Taiwan and Hong Kong. The university has enrolled overseas students since 1997, with the enrollment in the charge of Foreign Affairs Office of CWNU. With curriculums covering a wide range of subjects, CWNU provides admission to overseas students with different programs— long-term or short-term Chinese language trainees, potential undergraduates majoring in Chinese language, graduates majoring in Linguistics & Applied Linguistics, and undergraduates or graduates with would-be majors that they've selected here. Meanwhile, groups and organizations for Chinese culture research & study, for short-term Chinese language learning, for Mandarin study, are attracted to this dynamic university.







