[[UCSB College of Engineering]]

CATEGORIES: University of California, Santa Barbara, Engineering universities and colleges in California, Educational institutions established in 1964, University subdivisions in California

The College of Engineering is one of the three undergraduate colleges at the University of California, Santa Barbara.
As of 2011, there were 145 faculty, 1345 undergraduate students, and 753 graduate students.

Departments and Programs

The College of Engineering comprises the following departments:
The college is connected to the UCSB campus through innovative multi-disciplinary/outreach academic programs:

Research Units

One of the strengths of the College of Engineering is its ability to cross traditional academic boundaries in collaborative research. Much of this work is conducted through interdisciplinary research centers and institutes, which include:

Academics

Undergraduate programs

The college offers the B.S. degree in chemical engineering, computer engineering, computer science, electrical engineering, and mechanical engineering. The B.S. programs in chemical engineering, electrical engineering, and mechanical engineering are accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET). The computer science B.S. program is accredited by the Computing Accreditation Commission of ABET. 
Jointly with the Department of Computer Science and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, the college offers undergraduate degree in computer engineering.
The curriculum for the undergraduate programs is designed to be completed in four years.

Graduate programs

The college offers the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in chemical engineering, computer science, electrical and computer engineering, materials and mechanical engineering. 
The college also offers graduate programs in Biomolecular Science and Engineering and Media Arts and Technology.

Faculty

The college has 145 faculty members, most of whom are involved in interdisciplinary research and academic programs. Twenty-seven faculty members are in the National Academy of Engineering and nine are elected to the National Academy of Sciences.

Publications

Convergence is the magazine of Engineering and the Sciences at UC Santa Barbara. Sponsored by the College of Engineering, the Division of Mathematical, Life, and Physical Sciences in the College of Letters and Science, and the California NanoSystems Institute, Convergence was begun in early 2005 as a three-times-a-year print publication, with the goal of bringing stories of interest from engineering and the sciences to the desks and coffee tables of a wide range of alumni, friends, partners, funding agencies, corporations, donors and potential supporters. This publication is available online and in print.








