[[Fat Mike]]

CATEGORIES: NOFX members, Me First and the Gimme Gimmes members, American activists, American male singers, American rock bass guitarists, American punk rock singers, Fat Wreck Chords, Living people, Jewish American musicians, Jewish atheists, Jewish singers, Musicians from Boston, Massachusetts, San Francisco State University alumni, 1967 births

Michael John Burkett (born January 31, 1967), better known as Fat Mike is an American musician, producer, lead vocalist, and bassist for the punk rock band NOFX, as well as bassist for the punk rock supergroup cover band Me First and the Gimme Gimmes and temporary bassist of Against Me!. He was born in Newton, Massachusetts.

Musical career

While attending Beverly Hills High School, Mike began his musical career with the band False Alarm. After the band split up in 1983, he met Eric Melvin and Erik Sandin and formed the original line-up of NOFX. He has also appeared as a guest-vocalist on a number of other bands' tracks including "Peter Brady" on Screeching Weasel's 1993 album, "Anthem for a New Tomorrow." Other appearances include "Beware" by Randy, "Mr. Coffee" and "Lazy" by Lagwagon, and can be heard heckling and requesting "Free Bird" at the end of the Lunachicks song, "Missed It," off their 1996 album, "Pretty Ugly," which he also produced. He also appears as a guest vocalist on the Dropkick Murphys single  "Going Out In Style". Mike is the owner and founder of Fat Wreck Chords, one of the biggest independent labels in North America.
He was also the founder of the Rock Against Bush tour. The purpose was to encourage young Americans to vote against George W. Bush in 2004. Mike recently recorded the "Cokie the Clown" EP with NOFX, playing Cokie on both the cover of the EP and the music video for the title-track, "Cokie the Clown". In the video, Mike dresses as Cokie and puts white powder into his squirting flower, which in the song he describes as "my own special blend of ex, coke, and K". Cokie then walks around Chicago squirting powder in pedestrians' faces, as chronicled in the song itself. The video was shot during the punk music festival, Riot Fest, in October 2009. Mike appeared in the 2010 music documentary "Sounds Like A Revolution" and also features as an interviewee in the "The Other F Word," an analysis of punk rock fatherhood.

Personal life

Burkett lives in San Francisco, California.  He and his wife Erin divorced in 2010 after 18 years of marriage.  They have a daughter named Darla. He is of Jewish heritage, but is an atheist.algemeiner.americanhumanist.org/HNN/details/2011-02-humanist-anthems-for-your-ipod-playlist
Fat Mike has made several appearances as Cokie the Clown, but one of his most memorable was at Emo's, a popular nightclub in Austin on March 20, 2010 at the South by Southwest festival.

Discography




