[[John M. Zerwas]]

CATEGORIES: 1957 births, Living people, Members of the Texas House of Representatives, Bellaire High School (Bellaire, Texas) alumni, University of Houston alumni, Baylor College of Medicine alumni, Texas Republicans, American physicians

John M. Zerwas (born March 24, 1955) is a physician from Richmond, Texas, who is a Republican member of the Texas House of Representatives.  He is serving his fourth term as Representative for District 28. He is a candidate for a fifth term in the general election on November 4, 2014. One of the fastest growing regions of the state, House District 28 comprises the northwest portion of Fort Bend County in the western portion of Houston.  In addition to Houston and Richmond, municipalities (in whole or in part) in the district include Fulshear, Simonton, Weston Lakes, Orchard, Katy, Rosenberg, Cinco Ranch, Mission Bend, and Cumings.

Personal life

Dr. Zerwas and his late wife, Cindy, graduated in 1973 from Bellaire High School and married in 1978. After graduating from the University of Houston, Zerwas earned his medical degree at Baylor College of Medicine in 1980 and started a full-time practice in 1985. John and Cindy have four children, John Jr., Joseph, Brandon, daughter-in-law Monica, Sherry, son-in-law Matthew, and two grandchildren, Isabella and Matthew. The family resides in Richmond.
On March 1, 2012, John's wife Cindy was diagnosed with a Glioblastoma Multiforme. Together, Cindy and John fought the most courageous battle of their lives with honor, dignity and grace, never losing their joy. Cindy died peacefully on August 20, 2013 with John by her side.

Background

A physician for more than thirty years, Zerwas is one of three doctors in the Texas House at a time when health and human services issues are among the most pressing issues.  
Dr. Zerwas is the immediate Past President of the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA).  Zerwas has been an ASA member since 1987, and he has served as an ASA officer since 2003.  A member of the Texas Society of Anesthesiologists, Zerwas served as President of the organization from 1996-1997. Dr. Zerwas is also a member of the Texas Medical Association. 
Zerwas practices anesthesiology at Greater Houston Anesthesiology (GHA), a group practice he helped start in 1985. He served as president of that clinical practice from 1996 to 2000.  Under Zerwas' leadership, GHA became a "best practice" for successful integration of physicians.  GHA is one of the nation's largest single market, private practice groups of anesthesiologists and Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists.  GHA anesthesia providers perform approximately 250,000 cases annually in all areas of anesthesiology, including cardiovascular, neurosurgery, obstetrics, orthopedics, pediatrics, transplant and acute pain management. GHA is the primary anesthesia provider for over 40 medical facilities in the greater Houston area and recently expanded into the Austin market. GHA recently became a founding partner of US Anesthesia Partners.  
Zerwas has previously served as President of the Memorial Hermann Health Network Providers and Chief Medical Officer of the Memorial Hermann Healthcare System in Houston.memorialhermann.htm   
Zerwas helped form the First Colony Church of Christ, and was one of its first deacons where his duties included forming the children's education and children's worship programs. Zerwas worked with the Boy Scouts of America to establish a troop in the Pecan Grove area, serving as cub master and den leader for several years. He also worked with the boys during the summer camp programs. Zerwas coached his children's sports programs, was active in their booster clubs and served two terms as president of his homeowners' association. For several years, Zerwas went on medical missions to Guatemala with the group Faith in Practice where he provided anesthesiology for charity surgeries.

Texas House of Representatives

Eighty-third Texas Legislature

Eighty-second Texas Legislature

Zerwas served on the House Appropriations Committee as Chair of the Health and Human Services subcommittee, also known as Article II of the state budget. Representative Zerwas again served on the Conference Committee for Senate Bill I, the state budget for the biennium, and was also appointed by House Speaker Joe Straus to serve on the Public Health Committee and Calendars Committee. Texas Monthly magazine, which named Zerwas one of its Ten Best Legislators for the 82nd Texas Legislature, described him as someone who "never engages in ideological battles, never panics. He just argues cause and effect, as a man of science is trained to do."

Eighty-first Texas Legislature

Zerwas was appointed by House Speaker Joe Straus to chair the Appropriations Subcommittee on Health and Human Services.house.tx.htm  Also during this session, Zerwas was selected to serve on the Conference Committee for Senate Bill 1, the biennial budget for the State of Texas.

Eightieth Texas Legislature

Zerwas was appointed by House Speaker Tom Craddick to serve on the Appropriations Committee, the Administration Committee, and as Chair of Budget and Oversight of the Land and Resource Committee.  Speaker Craddick also appointed Zerwas to the Medicaid Reform Legislative Oversight Committee, which was created by Senate Bill 10 during the Eightieth Texas Legislature. During this legislature, Zerwas served as Vice Chair of the Select Committee for Services for Individuals Eligible for Intermediate Care Facility Services.






