[[Diamondback (roller coaster)]]

CATEGORIES: Roller coasters in Ohio, Roller coasters operated by Cedar Fair, Roller coasters introduced in 2009

Diamondback is a steel roller coaster designed by Bolliger & Mabillard at Kings Island in Mason, Ohio, United States. The ride is located in Rivertown just behind International Street and the Eiffel Tower. When built in 2009, it was the first hyper coaster to feature a splashdown and the first Bolliger & Mabillard roller coaster at Kings Island. It is similar to Behemoth at Canada's Wonderland in statistics, layout, and seating.

History

Construction of Diamondback began on October 11, 2007, with the removal of a tree.

First rider auction

On February 3, 2009, Kings Island announced they would hold an auction for the first riders on Diamondback. The winners of the auction would be given a commemorative first rider ticket, a special gift from the park, and an admission ticket. All proceeds from the auction would go to A Kid Again non-profit organization, formerly known as Adventures for Wish Kids.

Ride experience

Layout

After the train leaves the station, it begins its ascent up the  One cycle of the ride lasts about 3 minutes.

Splashdown

Diamondback is the first hyper coaster to feature a splashdown. Scoops positioned at the back sides of the last car on each train send water soaring at heights of  as the train passes. The riders don't actually get wet in the splashdown. Splashdowns are used for a visual effect as well to slow the train down. The splashdown is located in the former Swan Boat pond.

Trains

Diamondback operates with three open-air stadium style steel and fiberglass trains. The trains are the same prototype trains seen on Behemoth at Canada's Wonderland, Intimidator at Carowinds and Shambhala: Expedición al Himalaya at PortAventura. Diamondback was the first roller coaster in the United States to feature the new trains. Each car seats four passengers, with two front seats set near the middle of the car and two rear seats set closer to the sides of the car. The front car of each train features a yellow/orange snake head with long fangs, while the inside of the trains are black, red, and orange. Riders are restrained by a single T-shaped lap bar. There are three trains total, each train featuring a different fin color: green, red, or brown. Under the sides of the last car on each train are the scoops for the splashdown at the end.

Track

The steel track is 

Awards






