[[Zambian presidential election, 2008]]

CATEGORIES: 2008 elections in Africa, 2008 in Zambia, Elections in Zambia

A presidential election was held in Zambia on 30 October 2008 following the death of the incumbent President Levy Mwanawasa on 19 August 2008; the election had to be called within 90 days of the date of death.
The election was held to determine who should serve out the remainder of Mwanawasa's presidential term, which ends in 2011, rather than being an election for a full five-year term. The result was decided in a single round on a plurality voting system basis.
The South African Development Community (SADC), the African Union and the European Union were invited to send election observers.
Final results were announced on 2 November 2008, giving Banda the victory with 40.09% of the vote against 38.13% for Sata.

Organizing, budgeting and financing

Following Mwanawasa's death, some questioned whether it would be financially possible for the Electoral Commission of Zambia to hold an election within the designated timeframe. It was also suggested that it would be necessary to hold the election without updating the voters' roll, but using an outdated voters' roll could cause complications during an election.
At a press conference on 5 September, Sata demanded that a date for the election be announced. Acting President Rupiah Banda announced on 9 September that the election would be held on 30 October 2008.
The Electoral Commission set a budget of 240 billion kwacha (about 75 million US dollars) for the election, and the United Nations Development Programme said that it would contribute US$11.5 million. By 9 September, many provinces had received electoral materials being distributed by the Electoral Commission.
The Electoral Commission printed 600,000 more ballot papers than needed, saying that these would be used as substitute ballots in case of voter mistakes. The opposition objected to the printing of these extra ballot papers, arguing that they could facilitate vote rigging and calling for them to be destroyed. The Electoral Commission asked the four presidential candidates to attend a meeting on 15 October to discuss this issue. In response to allegations from the opposition that there were plans to rig the election in Banda's favor, Florence Mumba, the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission, said on 22 October that the Commission was committed to "a credible and acceptable" election and that any complaints regarding the election would be investigated.

Parties and candidates

On 27 September 2008, Chief Justice Ernest Sakala announced that four candidates had validly filed and would stand in the election: Banda for the MMD, Sata for the PF, Hichilema for the UPND, and Miyanda for the Heritage Party. Banda and Sata are considered the frontrunners.com, 27 October 2008. Two opinion polls conducted before the election showed Sata in the lead;"Sata stoking turmoil, says MMD", Sapa-DPA (IOL), 29 October 2008. one of them was conducted by the Steadman Group, which is based in Kenya, and it showed Sata with 40% support and Banda with 29% support."Zambia's Banda Draws Even With Sata Amid Claims of Vote Rigging", Bloomberg. The MMD released a poll on 29 October that placed Banda's support at 42–46% and Sata's support at 31–35%."Sata stoking turmoil, says MMD", Sapa-DPA (IOL), 29 October 2008.

MMD

Acting President Rupiah Banda, who succeeded Mwanawasa due to his position as Vice-President, is the MMD candidate.
There were initially disagreements in the MMD regarding the party's presidential candidate. The party's Chairman for Information and Publicity, Benny Tetamashimba, argued that Rupiah Banda should be the candidate in an interview on 24 August. He claimed wide support for this in the party and praised Banda's "high leadership qualities". On the same day, however, Northern Province Minister Lameck Chibombamilimo argued in favor of Mwanawasa's wife, Maureen Mwanawasa, becoming the MMD candidate. According to Chibombamilimo, "her developmental work scattered throughout the country and her leadership at the continental level where she has led her fellow first ladies in the fight against HIV/AIDS" demonstrated that she had the ability to serve as President."Zambian ruling party has disagreement on successor of late president", Xinhua (People's Daily Online), 25 August 2008. Banda filed his application to run as the party's candidate on 26 August. The MMD in Eastern Province issued a statement supporting his candidacy, and politicians such as Vernon Mwaanga and Mbita Chitala also stated their support; according to Chitala, Banda had the support of most members of the MMD National Executive Committee."Four File for Presidency", The Times of Zambia, Ndola (allAfrica. Finance Minister Ng'andu Magande also applied to be the MMD's candidate"Zambian Finance Minister applies for presidential candidate in by-elections", Xinhua (People's Daily Online), 26 August 2008. on 25 August, saying that he was "eminently qualified" because he had "rich experience in managing state operations both internationally and locally". Former Vice-President Enoch Kavindele and former Minister of Works and Supply Ludwig Sondashi also applied. Katele Kalumba and Michael Mabenga did not apply;"Four from ruling party apply to stand on party ticket for presidential by-election", Xinhua (People's Daily Online), 27 August 2008. Tetamashimba praised their decision, saying that it would "enhance unity in the party".
Sondashi called for the MMD candidate to be decided through secret voting, while Southern Province Minister Daniel Munkombwe called for the candidate to be decided at a party convention and not a meeting of the National Executive Committee, as a convention would allow broader participation in the process. According to Munkombwe, Mwanawasa was nearly beaten by Anderson Masoka in the 2001 presidential election because he had been essentially "handpicked" by the MMD National Executive Committee.
It was reported on 31 August that thirteen politicians had filed to run as the MMD's candidate: Maxwell Mwamba, Pastor Nyirongo, former Vice-President Enoch Kavindele, Acting President Rupiah Banda, former Vice-President Nevers Mumba, Home Affairs Minister Ronnie Shikapwasha, MMD Chairperson for Commerce and Trade Sebastian Kopulande, Finance Minister Ng'andu Magande, Charles Ngesa, Billy Phiri, Martin Chama, former Constitution Review Commission (CRC) chairperson Wila Mung'omba and former Works and Supply Minister Ludwig Sondashi."13 ruling party members apply for running in presidential by-elections", Xinhua (People's Daily Online), 31 August 2008. Ultimately there were 19 candidates.
The MMD National Executive Committee chose Banda as the party's presidential candidate in a secret ballot on 5 September 2008. He had been widely expected to win, and he received 47 votes against 11 for Magande. On this occasion, Banda promised to "unite the party and the entire nation" and to "continue implementing Mwanawasa's programs", while expressing gratitude for the support he had received. Magande's unsuccessful candidacy was said to have been favored by Maureen Mwanawasa.
Two smaller parties, the United Liberal Party and the All People's Congress, chose to support Banda's candidacy.
Banda launched his campaign on 18 September. On this occasion, he praised Mwanawasa's liberal economic policies, saying that they had "made us one of the most stable countries on the African continent", and he promised to continue those policies if he was elected."Zambia assures investors", Sapa-AFP (IOL), 18 September 2008. Shortly before the election, he announced a 75% reduction in the price of fertilizer; this was considered a populist move intended to buttress his rural support."Zambia's presidential poll results neck-and-neck", AFP, 1 November 2008.
Speaking on 24 October, Independence Day, Banda said that the country could "look to the future with hope because even when prophets of doom were predicting chaos following the death of Mwanawasa, Zambians were united in ensuring that the due process of the law is observed as we prepare for his successor". He called for a high turnout in the election."Banda calls for peace", AFP (IOL), 24 October 2008.
In reaction to Sata's statement that he would reject the results if he lost, Banda urged his opponents to accept the results on 27 October, warning that anyone who incited violence in the wake of the election could face arrest."Sata refuses to accept defeat", AFP (IOL), 27 October 2008.

PF

Michael Sata, the leader of the opposition Patriotic Front, is standing as the PF candidate in the election. He was unanimously chosen as the party's candidate at a meeting of its Central Committee on 30 August 2008. Accepting the nomination, he expressed the need "to scrub this country and wash it"; he also said that he would refrain from campaigning until after Mwanawasa's funeral. Although he suffered a heart attack in April 2008, Sata said that he was healthy and in good condition."Sata demands polling date", Lusaka Times, 5 September 2008.  He said on 8 September that he would protect Chinese investments if he was elected, abandoning the hostility towards Chinese investment that he had expressed during the 2006 presidential election campaign.
On 15 October, Sata said that, if elected, he would require foreign investors to reserve at least 25% of the shares in their companies for Zambians, with the penalty of losing their licenses if they did not do so."Candidate wants to control foreign investors", Sapa-AFP (IOL), Cape Times, 17 October 2008, page 7. Sata has also said that he would reduce taxes on government employees and improve housing, rural industries, and agriculture.
Prior to the election, Sata stated that he would not accept the results if they showed that he was defeated, believing that he could not legitimately lose. Supporters of Sata in Livingstone set up a roadblock on 28 October to halt trucks that they believed might be transporting pre-marked ballots from South Africa into the country through Zimbabwe; they were dispersed by police with tear gas. The Electoral Commission said that the trucks only contained lamps and batteries. At his last rally of the campaign, held in Lusaka on 29 October, Sata denied that he was seeking to incite unrest, but he remained unwilling to state ahead of time that he would accept the results.
There have been some concerns about Sata's health; although he has appeared vigorous in the period leading up to the election, he suffered a heart attack in April 2008 and had to be evacuated to South Africa.

UPND

The PF and United Party for National Development were reportedly in talks over an electoral pact in August. However, the UPND decided to contest the election alone, with UPND leader Hakainde Hichilema as the party's candidate. Hichilema has promised free health care for all citizens, free primary and secondary education, and improved housing. Some feel he is too young and inexperienced for the presidency, and the UPND has been criticized as a tribally-based party. Hichilema said before the election that if electoral fraud occurred, there would be "severe consequences".

UNIP

United National Independence Party (UNIP) Deputy Secretary-General Alfred Banda said that UNIP would contest the election with Tilyenji Kaunda as its candidate, according to The Post on 26 August. UNIP's Information and Publicity Secretary for Copperbelt Province, Brian Chishimba, had previously said that the party would not present a candidate due to internal disagreements, but Alfred Banda dismissed this statement."Zambia's former ruling party to go for presidential by-elections", Xinhua (People's Daily Online), 26 August 2008. The UNIP ultimately did not present a candidate in the election, however.

Election day and results

Voting began at 6:00 in the morning on 30 October"Polls open in Zambia", Sapa-AFP (IOL), 30 October 2008. and was scheduled to end 12 hours later."Zambian poll marred by rigging claim", Sapa-DPA (IOL), 30 October 2008. Sata voted in central Lusaka and "emphatically" reiterated that he would not accept a victory for Banda, saying that there was "no way MMD can win". He also alleged that the Electoral Commission and the police were working together to rig the election."'There is no way MMD can win'", Sapa-AFP (IOL), 30 October 2008. An apparent attempt at fraud was reported in Lusaka, where an election officer was arrested after he was found carrying an envelope containing ballots that were pre-marked in favor of Banda."Zambia: Banda sworn in, riots spread", Sapa-DPA (IOL), 2 November 2008.
According to early results from 19 of the 150 constituencies on 31 October, Sata had 60% of the vote and Banda had almost 31%."Votes being counted in Zambia", AFP (IOL), 31 October 2008. Later in the day, results from 43 constituencies showed Sata leading with 50.6% to Banda's 33.8%. These early results were mainly from urban constituencies, where the PF enjoyed strong support; the MMD's support was primarily based in rural areas.com, 31 October 2008."Sata extends lead", AFP (IOL), 31 October 2008. As voting continued on 31 October,  results from 60 constituencies gave Sata a smaller lead: 43.8% against Banda's 34.1%. Hichilema, meanwhile, had 13.8%, and Miyanda had 0.6%.  With results from 93 constituencies counted, Sata had 41% to Banda's 37%, with Hichilema at 20%."Margins narrow in Zambia's presidential poll", AFP, 31 October 2008. According to the Electoral Commission and African Union observers, voting went well and there were no major problems. An MMD prediction on television that Banda would defeat Sata by a 60,000 vote margin led the PF to allege that the prediction was part of an effort to manipulate the results.
Early on 1 November, results from 102 constituencies showed Sata still narrowly ahead with 40% against 38% for Banda. As votes continued to be counted, results from 108 constituencies placed Sata at 39.8%, Banda at 37.9%, Hichilema at 20.3%, and Miyanda at 0.8%.com, 1 November 2008. Results from the afternoon, with 137 constituencies counted, showed Sata leading with 39.9% to Banda's 39.1%, while Hichilema had 19% and Miyanda had 0.7%. The PF asked for vote counting to be stopped to allow for an investigation into irregularities. On the same day, the SADC observer mission endorsed the election as "credible, peaceful, well-managed and transparent". Results from the evening of 1 November, with 148 constituencies counted, showed Banda leading with 40.0% to Sata's 38.5%, Hichilema at 19.5% and Miyanda at 0.8%.elections.zm/index.Nasreen Seria, "Zambia's Banda Holds Lead With Most Votes Counted (Update1)", Bloomberg. Final results were announced on 2 November 2008, confirming Banda's victory with 40.09% of the vote against 38.13% for Sata. Banda was promptly sworn in at State House on the same day, using his speech on the occasion to call for unity. Turnout was placed at 45%; the use of the outdated voters roll reportedly reduced participation, as some people were unable to vote. 
When Banda overtook Sata in the results, Sata's supporters in parts of Lusaka began rioting on 1 November, and riots also broke out in Kitwe on the next day. The Foundation for Democratic Process, a non-governmental organization that conducted its own vote count, said that its results matched the results given by the Electoral Commission. The PF said on 3 November that it wanted a recount, subject to independent verification, to be held in 78 constituencies. Hichilema alleged fraud as well, but he said that he did not plan to present a legal challenge to the results."Zambia opposition demands vote recount", AFP, 3 November 2008. Speaking on South African radio on 4 November, Sata denied that he had been defeated and stated: "Rupiah Banda has no vision, Rupiah Banda has no platform. The only platform Rupiah Banda is on is cheating.""Sata: I have not lost this election", Sapa-DPA (IOL), 4 November 2008. On 5 November, the Electoral Commission said that only a verification exercise, not a recount, would be conducted. It said that the verification exercise was a matter of standard procedure, but that a recount would require a court order."Zambia electoral authority rejects recount demand", AFP, 5 November 2008. Within two days, the verification exercise was suspended in Lusaka after a physical altercation between members of the MMD and the PF. A member of the MMD alleged that Sata punched him during this brawl, but the PF disputed that claim."Zambian opposition leader accused of post-poll brawling", AFP, 7 November 2008.
Catholic priest Frank Bwalya was arrested on 12 November and charged with incitement of violence based on a broadcast on Radio Icengelo, which discussed matters related to the election; he was arrested after refusing to halt the broadcast. In response to the arrest, PF supporters in Kitwe protested violently; they were dispersed with tear gas and 38 people were arrested on 13 November. Bwalya was released on bail on the same day."Opposition supporters riot over priest's arrest", AFP, 13 November 2008.
In a Cabinet reshuffle on 14 November, Banda dismissed five members of the Cabinet. He appointed George Kunda as Vice President and chose Situmbeko Musokotwane to replace Finance Minister Ng'andu Magande."Zambia's new president reshuffles cabinet", AFP, 14 November 2008.




