[[Matt Kalil]]

CATEGORIES: 1989 births, Living people, American people of Lebanese descent, People from Corona, California, Sportspeople from Riverside County, California, American football offensive tackles, USC Trojans football players, Minnesota Vikings players

Matt Kalil (born July 6, 1989) is an American football offensive tackle for the Minnesota Vikings of the National Football League (NFL). Kalil played college football for the University of Southern California, and was selected fourth overall in the 2012 NFL Draft by the Minnesota Vikings.  He was chosen for the Pro Bowl following the 2012 NFL season.

High school career

Kalil attended Servite High School in Anaheim, California, where he played for the Servite Friars high school football team. Considered a five-star recruit by Rivals. 3 offensive tackle in the class of 2008. He played in the 2008 U.S. Army All-American Bowl on a West squad that featured fellow USC offensive lineman Tyron Smith.

College career

After redshirting his initial year at USC, Kalil served as backup to Tyron Smith at right tackle. He started against Boston College and performed well, and saw limited action in 11 other games (all but Arizona State) and played primarily on special teams. In his sophomore year, Kalil beat Smith to replace Charles Brown at left tackle, where he started all 13 games. He also played on the defensive line for special teams and blocked a point after touchdown against Notre Dame.
As a junior, Kalil retained his starting left tackle spot, helping the Trojans average 456.8 yards of total offense. The Trojans' offensive line only allowed an FBS-low eight sacks of quarterback Matt Barkley, none of which were allowed by Kalil. Kalil was also semifinalist for the 2011 Lombardi Award.

Professional career

2012 NFL Draft

Already after his sophomore year, Kalil was regarded as the best offensive tackle prospect for the 2012 NFL Draft. The Vikings eventually selected Kalil, but not until trading down to the No. 4 spot. They had not selected an offensive lineman in the first round since Bryant McKinnie in 2002.
Kalil was USC's fifth offensive lineman selected in the top-5 of an NFL Draft, after Ron Yary in 1968, Marvin Powell in 1977, Anthony Muñoz in 1980, and Tony Boselli in 1995. With Tyron Smith having been selected ninth overall in 2011, it also made USC the first school with consecutive top-10 selected offensive lineman since Texas' Leonard Davis (2001) and Mike Williams (2002).

Minnesota Vikings

Kalil was signed to a four-year contract by the Minnesota Vikings on July 26, 2012. He was selected to attend the Pro Bowl after Washington Redskins offensive tackle Trent Williams was injured during a night club fight.Kalil Selected To His First Pro Bowl

Personal

His father, Frank, was a center at Arkansas and Arizona, and was drafted by the Buffalo Bills in 1982, before playing for the USFL's Arizona Wranglers in 1983 and Houston Gamblers in 1984.  His brother Ryan was an  All-American at Southern California, and plays with the Carolina Panthers.






