[[Pohakuloa Training Area]]

CATEGORIES: Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces in Hawaii, United States Army posts, Buildings and structures in Hawaii County, Hawaii, Barracks in the United States, Military facilities in Hawaii

Pōhakuloa Training Area (PTA) is located on the island of Hawaii in the high plateau between Mauna Loa, Mauna Kea and the Hualālai volcanic mountains. It includes a small military airstrip known as Bradshaw Army Airfield.

Description

The area  of  is the largest United States Department of Defense installation in the state of Hawaii, or anywhere in the Pacific.
The region was used for live fire exercises in 1943 during World War II when Camp Tarawa temporarily held troops on Parker Ranch.
About  were leased from Richard Smart, owner of the ranch.
At that time it was called the Waikoloa Maneuver Area, and located northwest of current base, south of Waimea. In September 1946 the land used for the old maneuver area and camp was returned to the ranch, and a smaller Lalamilo Firing Range used until 1953. Since coastal areas were developed into tourist resorts, military areas were moved inland to more remote locations.

Location

The name of the current facility comes from pu
Pōhakuloa Training Area lies in a high plateau between lower slopes of Mauna Kea to approximately  on Mauna Loa. The training area is about midway between Hilo, on the east coast and the Army landing site at Kawaihae Harbor.Pahakuloa Training Area page at Marine Corps Base Hawaii web site
It is used by both the U.S. Army and Marine Corps.
The only road access is via the narrow Saddle Road (Hawaii Route 200), which is paralleled by a tank trail.
Heavy equipment is either flown into Hilo, or else shipped via barge to Kawaihae Harbor, about  away on the Saddle Road.
Because of this remoteness, the area is used mostly for short training sessions.

Facilities

The barracks for about 2,000 troops were constructed in April 1955 from prefabricated buildings used in World War II.
The support area includes  of logistic and administrative facilities.
In July 2006 an additional 
which means "cut-off lava" in Hawaiian, from to the 19th century lava flows through the area.
Located at 
PTA has a  impact area used for bombing and gunnery practice, refurbished in March 2009 to allow helicopter training."25th CAB improves Pōhakuloa Training Area" press release on U.S. Army web site, March 2009
There are approximately ahu.
Its remoteness allows a wide range of weapons to be used.
The 25th Infantry Division and 3rd Marine Regiment often use the base for four to six-week training periods.
Weapons such as the Davy Crockett nuclear rifle (with dummy warheads) and depleted Uranium have been used at PTA.
After initial denials, an investigation concluded the spotting rounds used in the 1960s. Measurements detected radiation, but reportedly not above life-threatening levels.

Bradshaw Army Airfield

The airstrip was constructed at the area in 1956.
The runway is only  long, which only accommodates small aircraft. 
Fog often restricts helicopters, which can also fly in from the larger bases on Oahu.

Environment

Vegetation varies from sparse grassland and low shrubs to open māmane forest. Despite the volcanic terrain, some of the areas contain protected wildlife. Within the borders of the training area, ten different endangered species can be found. These include the native Hawaiian mint honohono (Haplostachys haplostachya) and the shrub 'kio'ele (Kadua coriacea). This area has more endangered species than any other US Army installation.Org web site The northeastern portion of the site near Mauna Kea provides habitat for the endangered bird Palila (Loxioides bailleui), for example.
Several archaeological sites have been found in the training area, including the Bobcat Trail Habitation Cave, listed in the National Register of Historic Places. Dye,
March 25, 2005, on Nature Conservancy web site[/ref]
To reduce fire danger and damage from feral goats, areas were fenced.








