[[Fujitsu]]

CATEGORIES: Cloud computing providers, Companies based in Tokyo, Companies of Japan, Computer hardware companies, Electronics companies of Japan, Display technology companies, Companies established in 1935, Companies listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, Software companies of Japan, Fujitsu, Computer storage companies, Semiconductor companies, Netbook manufacturers, HVAC manufacturing companies, Telecommunications companies of Japan, 1935 establishments in Japan


Fujitsu chiefly makes computing products, but the company and its subsidiaries also offer a diversity of products and services in the areas of personal computing, telecommunications and advanced microelectronics. It has approximately 172,000 employees and its products and services are available in over 70 countries.
Fujitsu is listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange and is a constituent of the Nikkei 225 and TOPIX indices.

History

1935 to 2000

Fujitsu is the second oldest IT company after IBM, established on June 20, 1935,Official Fujitsu history under the name Fuji Tsūshinki Seizō (, Fuji Telecommunications Equipment Manufacturing), as a spinoff of the Fuji Electric Company, itself a joint venture between the Furukawa Electric Company and the German conglomerate Siemens which had been founded in 1923. Despite its connections to the Furukawa zaibatsu, Fujitsu escaped the Allied occupation of Japan after the Second World War mostly unscathed.
In 1954, Fujitsu manufactured Japan's first computer, the FACOM 100, and in 1961 launched the transistorized FACOM 222. In 1955, Fujitsu founded Kawasaki Frontale as a company football club; Kawasaki Frontale has been a J. League football club since 1999. In 1967, the company's name was officially changed to the contraction Fujitsū ().
In 1971, Fujitsu signed an OEM agreement with the Canadian company Consolidated Computers Limited (CCL) to distribute CCL's data entry product, Key-Edit. Fujitsu joined both ICL who earlier began marketing Key-Edit in the British Commonwealth of countries as well as in both western and eastern Europe; and CCL's direct marketing staff in Canada, USA, London (UK) and Frankfurt. Mers Kutt, inventor of  Key-Edit and founder of CCL, was the common thread that led to Fujitsu's later association with ICL and Gene Amdahl.
In 1986, Fujitsu and The Queen's University of Belfast business incubation unit (QUBIS Ltd) established a joint venture called Kainos, a privately held software company based in Belfast, Northern Ireland.
In 1990, Fujitsu acquired 80% of the UK-based computer company International Computers Limited (ICL) for $1.29 billion (ICL was renamed Fujitsu Services in 2002). In July 1991, Fujitsu acquired more than half of the Russian company KME-CS (Kazan Manufacturing Enterprise of Computer Systems).
In 1992, Fujitsu introduced the world's first 21-inch full-color plasma display. It was a hybrid, based upon the plasma display created at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and NHK STRL, achieving superior brightness.
In 1993, Fujitsu formed a flash memory manufacturing joint venture with AMD, Spansion. As part of the transaction, AMD contributed its flash memory group, Fab 25 in Texas, its R&D facilities and assembly plants in Thailand, Malaysia and China; Fujitsu provided its Flash memory business division and the Malaysian Fujitsu Microelectronics final assembly and test operations. "Spansion – AMD and Fujitsu brand their Flash memory." July 13, 2003.
From February 1989 until mid-1997, Fujitsu built the FM Towns PC variant. It started as a proprietary PC variant intended for multimedia applications and computer games, but later became more compatible with regular PCs. In 1993, the FM Towns Marty was released, a gaming console compatible with the FM Towns games.
Fujitsu agreed to acquire the 58 percent of Amdahl Corporation (including the Canada-based DMR consulting group) that it did not already own for around $850 million in July 1997.
In June 1999 Fujitsu's historical connection with Siemens was revived, when the two companies agreed to merge their European computer operations into a new 50:50 joint venture called Fujitsu Siemens Computers, which became the world's fifth-largest computer manufacturing company.

2000 to present

In April 2002 ICL was rebranded as Fujitsu. On March 2, 2004, Fujitsu Computer Products of America lost a class action lawsuit over hard disk drives with defective chips and firmware. In October 2004, Fujitsu acquired the Australian subsidiary of Atos Origin, a systems implementation company with around 140 employees which specialized in SAP.
In August 2007, Fujitsu signed a £500 million, 10-year deal with Reuters Group under which Reuters outsourced the majority of its internal IT department to Fujitsu.
In October 2007, Fujitsu's Australia and New Zealand subsidiary acquired Infinity Solutions Ltd, a New Zealand-based IT hardware, services and consultancy company, for an undisclosed amount.
In January 2009, Fujitsu reached an agreement to sell its HDD business to Toshiba. IT PRO (2009-10-02). Retrieved on 2013-07-26.
In March 2009, Fujitsu announced that it had decided to convert FDK Corporation, at that time an equity-method affiliate, to a consolidated subsidiary from May 1, 2009 (tentative schedule) by subscribing to a private placement to increase FDK's capital. Fujitsu Siemens Computers was subsequently renamed Fujitsu Technology Solutions.TS.com
In April 2009, Fujitsu acquired Australian software company Supply Chain Consulting for $48 million deal, just weeks after purchasing the Telstra subsidiary Kaz for $200 million.smartcompany.au/technology/information-technology/8641-20090427-fujitsu-acquires-australian-software-firm.html#
Concerning of Net loss forecast amounted 95 billion yen in the year ending March 2013, in February 2013 Fujitsu announced to cut 5,000 jobs which 3,000 jobs in Japan and the rest overseas from its 170,000 employees. Fujitsu will also merge its Large Scale Integrated chip business with Panasonic Corp.

Operations

Fujitsu Laboratories

Fujitsu Laboratories, Fujitsu's Research and Development division, has 1,300 employees and a capital of 5 Billion Yen. It is run by Tatsuo Tomita. Jp.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-26.
Recently, Fujitsu announced that it had developed new technology for non 3D camera phones. The technology will allow the camera phones to take 3D photos.

Fujitsu Semiconductor Europe GmbH

Fujitsu Semicondutor Europe GmbH (FSEU) is a wholly owned subsidiary of Fujitsu Semiconductor Limited, formally known as Fujitsu Microelectronics Europe GmbH. The name change was instituted in 2010.fujitsu.pdf  FSEU designs and supplies semiconductor devices and systems solutions to the European automotive, communications, multimedia and industrial segments.fujitsu.pdf  Its main design offices are in the UK and Germany.

Fujitsu Technology Solutions

The CEMEA&I region (Continental Europe, Middle East, Africa & India) plays an important role within the Fujitsu Group. Here, Fujitsu Technology Solutions – evolved from the former joint venture Fujitsu Siemens Computers – holds global responsibility for research, development and distribution of all x86 servers produced by Fujitsu. The company's Dynamic Infrastructures strategy, was also born here. The term Dynamic Infrastructures stands for a comprehensive range of IT products, solutions, and services – from PCs and notebooks, to data center solutions, and Infrastructure as a Service and Managed Infrastructure services that dynamically adapt and adjust to the ever changing demands of today's economy

Fujitsu Consulting

Fujitsu Consulting is the consulting and services arm of the Fujitsu group, providing information technology consulting, implementation and management services.
Fujitsu Consulting was founded in 1973 in Montreal, Canada, under its original name "DMR" (an acronym of the three founder's names: Pierre Ducros, Serge Meilleur and Alain RoyPierre Ducros: Business Man and Mentor During the next decade, the company established a presence throughout Quebec and Canada, before extending its reach to international markets. For nearly thirty years, DMR Consulting grew to become an international consulting firm, changing its name to Fujitsu Consulting in 2002 after being acquired by Fujitsu Ltd.

Fujitsu General

Fujitsu Ltd has a 72% shareholding in Fujitsu General, which manufactures and markets various air conditioning units and humidity control solutions. A similar venture is sponsored by Fujitsu in India, called General Airconditioners.

Products and services

Computing products

Fujitsu's computing product lines include:
PRIMERGY, Fujitsu's server family including Tower Servers, Rack Servers, and Blade Servers.
In May 2011, Fujitsu decided to enter the mobile phone space again, Microsoft announcing plans that Fujitsu would release Windows Phone devices.
ETERNUS, Fujitsu's storage hardware and software infrastructure as part of the company's Dynamic Infrastructures Portfolio.
The word aeternus means "eternal" in Latin. Fujitsu adopted this name for the global storage brand to match the company's concepts; of protecting customer assets forever and ensuring continuous business operation.
The ETERNUS product lineup includes Disk Storage Systems, Tape Systems, Virtual Tape Appliances, SAN Switches, and Storage Management Software.
LIFEBOOK, AMILO Fujitsu's range of notebook computers and tablet PCs.

Cloud computing

Fujitsu offers a public cloud service delivered from data centers in Japan, Australia, Singapore, the United States, the United Kingdom and Germany based on its Global Cloud Platform strategy announced in 2010. The platform delivers Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) – virtual information and communication technology (ICT) infrastructure, such as servers and storage functionality – from Fujitsu's data centers.
In Japan, the service was offered as the On-Demand Virtual System Service (OViSS) and was then launched globally as Fujitsu Global Cloud Platform/S5 (FGCP/S5). Since July 2013 the service has been called IaaS Trusted Public S5.[ref]
</ref> Globally, the service is operated from Fujitsu data centers located in Australia, Singapore, the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany and Japan.
Fujitsu has also launched a Windows Azure powered Global Cloud Platform in a partnership with Microsoft. This offering, delivering Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS), was known as FGCP/A5 in Japan but has since been renamed FUJITSU Cloud PaaS A5 for Windows Azure.[ref]
</ref> It is operated from a Fujitsu data center in Japan. It offers a set of application development frameworks, such as Microsoft . The basic service consists of compute, storage, Microsoft SQL Azure, and Windows Azure AppFabric technologies such as Service Bus and Access Control Service, with options for interoperating services covering implementation and migration of applications, system building, systems operation, and support.
Fujitsu also offers local cloud platforms, such as in Australia, that provide the ability to rely on its domestic data centers which keep sensitive financial data under local jurisdiction and compliance standards.

Microprocessors

Fujitsu produce SPARC compatible CPU (SPARClite),Multi-core multi-thread processor SPARC64™ Series the "Venus" 128 GFLOP SPARC64 VIIIfx model is included in the K computer, the world's fastest supercomputer in June 2011 with a rating of over 8 petaflops, and in November 2011, K became the first computer to top 10 petaflops in September 2011."Japan Reclaims Top Ranking on Latest TOP500 List of World's Supercomputers". TOP500. Retrieved June 20, 2011."K computer" Achieves Goal of 10 Petaflops". Fujitsu. Retrieved November 10, 2011.
The Fujitsu FR, FR-V and ARM architecture microprocessors are widely used, additionally in ASICs and Application-specific standard products (ASSP) like the Milbeaut with customer variants named Nikon Expeed. They were acquired by Spansion in 2013.

Advertising

The old slogan "The possibilities are infinite" can be found below the company's logo on major advertisements and ties in with the small logo above the letters J and I of the word Fujitsu. This smaller logo represents the symbol for infinity. As of April 2010, Fujitsu is in the process of rolling out a new slogan focused on entering into partnerships with its customers and retiring the "possibilities are infinite" tagline. The new slogan is "shaping tomorrow with you".

Environmental record

Fujitsu reports that all its notebook and tablet PCs released globally comply with the latest Energy Star standard.
Greenpeace's Cool IT Leaderboard of February 2012 "evaluates global IT companies on their leadership in the fight to stop climate change" and ranks Fujitsu 3rd out of 21 leading manufacturers, on the strength of "well-developed case study data of its solutions with transparent methodology" and "standing out in the Leaderboard for scoring high in the Future Savings Goal criterion."








