[[Qualifying Recognised Overseas Pension Scheme]]

CATEGORIES: Pensions in the United Kingdom

A Qualifying Recognised Overseas Pension Scheme, or QROPS, is an overseas pension scheme that meets certain requirements set by HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC). A QROPS can receive the transfer of UK Pension Benefits without incurring an unauthorised payment and scheme sanction charge. The QROPS program was launched on 6 April 2006 as a part of new legislation with the objective of simplifying pensions.
Typically this occurs when a UK resident leaves the UK to emigrate permanently (or to retire abroad) having built up a pension fund within a scheme approved by HMRC or when a person born abroad who has built up benefits in a HMRC approved UK Pension Scheme decides to return to their home country with an expectation of retiring there. The QROPS does not have to be established in the new country of residence, thus providing greater flexibility and stability, along with choice of scheme provider.
HMRC states that:RPSM14101030 - Technical Pages: Transfers: Recognised transfers from registered pension schemes: Overseas pension scheme
 
 Under section 150(8) a recognised overseas pension scheme is an overseas pension scheme that meets the following requirements prescribed under The Pension Schemes (Categories of Country and Requirements for Overseas Pension Schemes and Recognised Overseas Pension Schemes) Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/206). It must:
Pension rule 1 in section 165 provides that no payment of pension may be made before the day on which the member reaches normal minimum pension age, unless the ill-health condition was met immediately before the member became entitled to a pension under the scheme.

To become a QROPS, a pension scheme must apply to and be approved by HMRC.  A list of QROPS that have consented to have their names published is available on the HMRC website and is regularly updated.Qualifying Recognised Overseas Pension Schemes (QROPS) List
In April and May 2012 HMRC introduced a new host of regulations that had the effect of shifting the jurisdictions in which QROPS could be established.
A QROPS should operate broadly in line with UK pension rules. A UK pension holder who has transferred their pension to a QROPS should be in a similar position as they would have been if the transfer had not taken place. What differentiates a QROPS from a UK held pension is that it must be recognised as a pension scheme under the country's legislation where it resides On returning to the UK a QROPS will be treated the same as any other UK pension scheme which may necessitate changes to the underlying holdings. A key requirement prior to returning to the UK is to ensure all investments held within the account are UK compliant. This may involve selling some or all of the current investment holdings. The policy can then be fully endorsed.
QROPS schemes are required to report to HMRC any payments made to the member for at least ten years from the date that the transfer took place. However if the pension holder has been non-UK resident for five complete tax years they can benefit from more attractive options than those allowed under UK pension schemes.
QROPS are increasingly popular under British Expats due to the tax advantages on the pension draw downs and death benefits. Pension funds left in the UK are heavily taxed, in some cases up to 55%. Transferring a UK pension fund into a QROPS can avoid UK taxation.




