[[Cola]]

CATEGORIES: Cola brands, Cola, Chinese beverages, Soft drinks

Cola is a carbonated beverage that originally contained caffeine from the kola nut and cocaine from coca leaves, and was flavored with vanilla and other ingredients. Most colas now use other flavoring (and caffeinating) ingredients with a similar taste and no longer contain cocaine. It became popular worldwide after pharmacist John Pemberton invented Coca-Cola in 1886. His non-alcoholic recipe was inspired by the Coca wine of pharmacist Angelo Mariani, created in 1863. Coca-Cola is a major international brand. It usually contains caramel color, caffeine and sweeteners such as sugar or high fructose corn syrup.

Etymology

The word cola may have been introduced into mainstream culture by the major producer Coca-Cola, The word cola as part of the Coca-Cola trademark may have originated from the kola nuts that were originally used as the source of caffeine.

Flavorings

Despite the name, the primary modern flavoring ingredients in a cola drink are sugar, citrus oils (from oranges, limes, or lemon fruit peel), cinnamon, vanilla, and an acidic flavorant. are maintained as corporate trade secrets.
A variety of different sweeteners may be added to cola, often partly dependent on local agricultural policy. High-fructose corn syrup is predominantly used in the United States and Canada due to the lower cost of government-subsidized corn. In Europe, however, HFCS is subject to production quotas designed to encourage the production of sugar; sugar is thus typically used to sweeten sodas. In addition, stevia or an artificial sweetener may be used; "sugar-free" or "diet" colas typically contain artificial sweeteners only.
Consumers may prefer the taste of soda manufactured with sugar; as in the United States, with imported Mexican Coca-Cola.[ref]
Is Mexican Coke the real thing? By Louise Chu Associated Press November 9, 2004  The San Diego Union-Tribune
[/ref]

Clear cola

Clear cola is a colorless variety of cola, popular in the early 1990s. Brands included Crystal Pepsi, Tab Clear and 7 Up Ice Cola.

Health

A 2007 study found that consumption of colas, both those with natural sweetening and those with artificial sweetening, was associated with increased risk of chronic kidney disease. The phosphoric acid used in colas was thought to be a possible cause.

Regional brands

Asia

Europe

North America

Africa

South America

Oceania








