[[Georg Niedermeier]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 births, Living people, German footballers, Association football defenders, FC Bayern Munich II players, FC Bayern Munich players, VfB Stuttgart players, Bundesliga players, 3. Liga players

Georg Niedermeier (born 26 February 1986 in Munich) is a German footballer who plays as a defender for VfB Stuttgart.

Career

Bayern Munich

Niedermeier had played for Bayern Munich's reserve team since 2003, when he played his first match in a 0–0 draw against Augsburg on 18 October. Niedermeier previously played for SC Bogenhausen in a youth team before joining Bayern Munich at age nine. 
In 2008, Niedermeier was given a captain's armband in an opening game of the season against FC Union Berlin, with a 2–1 victory. Also in the same year, he became involved with the first team, when he made his professional debut. He was an unused substitute for Bundesliga games against Hamburger SV and Borussia Dortmund in August 2008, and later against Olympique Lyonnais in the UEFA Champions League. In January 2009, Niedermeier signed a new deal, keeping him until 2012.

VfB Stuttgart

On 30 January 2009, he was loaned to VfB Stuttgart until June 2010, in order to gain first team experience. 
The following season, Niedermeier scored his first goal of his career with a header, in a 1–1 draw against Borussia Dortmund on 28 August 2009.
The following season was becoming more important for Niedermeier, as he was able to make more playing time in the first team, thanks to newly manager Bruno Labbadia and forming a central defense partnership with Mathieu Delpierre. Niedermeier scored his first goal of the season in a 7–0 thrash win over Borussia Mönchengladbach on 18 September 2010.  During the season, Niedermeier made his Europa League debut in a 3–0 win over Young Boys. In the first round of Europa League in the first leg, Niedermeier once played in defensive midfield, after coming on as a substitute, in a 2–1 loss against Benfica. Eventually, Stuttgart would lose again, being eliminated from the Europa League.
The following season, Niedermeier continued to retain his first team status once again, having retained it in the previous season, despite suffering an injury at the start of the season.

International career

Niedermeier played for Germany U17 national team, winning fourteen caps.

Career statistics






