[[Magadan]]

CATEGORIES: Magadan, Populated places established in 1929, Populated coastal places in Russia, Port cities and towns in Russia, Sea of Okhotsk, Cities and towns built in the Soviet Union, Russian and Soviet Navy bases

Magadan (

History

Magadan was founded in 1929 on the site of an earlier settlement from the 1920s.
Magadan was temporarily transformed into a Potemkin village to mark an official visit by U.S. Vice-President Henry Wallace in May 1944. He took an instant liking to his secret policeman host, admired handiwork done by prisoners, and later glowingly called the city a combination of Tennessee Valley Authority and Hudson's Bay Company. Wallace's collaborative stance towards Russia discouraged the Democratic Party of the United States from renominating him as vice president later in the summer of 1944, helping lead to the selection of Harry Truman in his place.

Administrative and municipal status

Magadan is the administrative center of the oblast. As a municipal division, the town of oblast significance of Magadan is incorporated as Magadan Urban Okrug.Law #489-OZ

Economy

Ship building and fishing are the major industries. The town has a seaport (fully navigable from May to December) and a small international airport, Sokol Airport. There is also a small airport nearby, Magadan 13. The unpaved Kolyma Highway leads from Magadan to the rich gold-mining region of the upper Kolyma River and then on to Yakutsk.
Magadan is very isolated. The nearest major city is Yakutsk,  away via an unpaved road which is best used in the winter, especially since there is no bridge over the Lena River at Yakutsk (the choices are: ferry from Nizhny Bestyakh in the summer, when the rest of the road may not be passable due to standing water, or over the ice in the dead of winter).
The principal sources of income for the local economy are gold mining and fisheries. Recently, gold production has declined. Russian gold mine production declined four tonnes in 2006, Mineweb, 31 January 2007 Fishing production, although improving from year to year, is still well below the allocated quotas, apparently as a result of an aging fleet.Magadan Region from Kommersant, Russia's Daily Online. Retrieved 22 January 2007. Although farming is difficult owing to the harsh climate, there are many public and private farming enterprises.

Culture and religion

The town has a number of cultural institutions including the Regional Museum of Anthropology, a geological museum, a regional library and a university. The town has the enormous new Orthodox Cathedral Church of the Trinity, a recently completed Roman Catholic Church of the Nativity and the Mask of Sorrow memorial, a huge sculpture in memory of Stalin's victims, designed by Ernst Neizvestny. The Church of the Nativity is actually a part of the diocese of Anchorage, Alaska and ministers to the survivors of the labor camps.  It is staffed by several priests and nuns.
The town figures prominently in the labour camp literature of Varlam Shalamov and in the eponymous song by Mikhail Krug, and was a focal point of the Long Way Round motorcycle journey made by Ewan McGregor, Charley Boorman and their team in 2004.

Climate

The climate of Magadan is subarctic (Köppen climate classification Dfc). Winters are prolonged and very cold, with up to six months of sub-zero temperatures, so that the soil remains permanently frozen. Permafrost and tundra cover most of the region. The growing season is only one hundred days long. Average temperatures on the coast of the Sea of Okhotsk range from  in July.

 
 

Notable people

Sister cities



Notes

Sources




