[[George Blagdon Westcott]]

CATEGORIES: 1753 births, 1798 deaths, Royal Navy officers, Royal Navy personnel of the American Revolutionary War, Deaths by firearm in Egypt, People from Honiton, British military personnel killed in the French Revolutionary Wars

George Blagdon Westcott (fl. 24 April 1753 – 1 August 1798) was an officer of the Royal Navy. He served during the American Revolutionary and the French Revolutionary Wars, eventually rising to the rank of Captain. He was one of Vice-Admiral Horatio Nelson's Band of Brothers at the Battle of the Nile in 1798, in which battle he was killed.

Family and early life

Westcott's year of birth is unknown, but appears to have been between 1752 and 1753, and was likely in 1753.. Under her captain, Samuel Granston Goodall, the Valiant was present at the First Battle of Ushant on 27 July 1778, after which Westcott and the Valiant joined the fleet under Sir Charles Hardy in 1779. He was present with Vice-admiral George Darby's fleet when they relieved Gibraltar in April 1781.
In November that year Westcott moved aboard  between 1786 and 1787. The Salisbury was at that time the flagship of Commodore John Elliot.

Command

On 1 December 1787 Westcott was promoted to commander and between 1789 and 1790 had command of the sloop . He went to the West Indies, but returned with Sir John Laforey in June 1796. Majestic then joined the Channel Fleet, and was present at the Spithead Mutiny in April and May 1797. Majestic then joined John Jervis off Cadiz, where Westcott was ordered to take her to join Vice-admiral Nelson in the Mediterranean.  Nelson was searching for the French fleet under Vice-Admiral François-Paul Brueys d'Aigalliers.

Death

When Nelson located the French fleet at anchor at Aboukir Bay, he quickly ordered the British into the attack. The Majestic was towards the rear of the British line, and did not come into action until late in the battle. In the darkness and smoke she collided with the Heureux and became entangled in her rigging. Trapped for several minutes, the Majestic suffered heavy casualties. Westcott was hit by a musket ball in the throat and killed. The Majestic's first lieutenant, Robert Cuthbert took over and continued the battle. Cuthbert was confirmed as acting captain by Nelson the day after the battle.
Collingwood wrote of him:  A good officer and a worthy man; but, if it was a part of our condition to choose a day to die on, where could he have found one so memorable, so eminently distinguished among great days? 
Westcott was buried at sea. A monument to his memory was erected in St Paul's Cathedral, and another in the church in his birthplace at Honiton.  In January 1801, Nelson was passing through Honiton, on his way to take up a new command at Plymouth. Nelson invited his nearest surviving family to breakfast, and presented Mrs. Westcott with his own Nile medal, saying, "You will not value it less because Nelson has worn it." On 17 January 1801 he wrote to Lady Hamilton:  At Honiton I visited Captain Westcott's mother — poor thing, except from the bounty of government and Lloyd's, in very low circumstances. The brother is a tailor, but had they been chimney-sweepers it was my duty to show them respect. 

Notes

 
 a.  Some confusion exists.  The Oxford Dictionary of National Biography suggests he was born around 1745, but Westcott's memorial in St Paul's Cathedral describes him as 46 at the time of his death in 1798, and parish records from Honiton indicate that he was baptised on 24 April 1753.
b.  Laughton's biography implies an entry date of 1768, whilst Westcott's memorial states he had been serving in the navy for 33 years at his death.

Footnotes






