[[Douglas Coupland]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, Living people, 20th-century Canadian novelists, 21st-century Canadian novelists, 21st-century Canadian dramatists and playwrights, Canadian male novelists, Canadian screenwriters, Canadian sculptors, Gay writers, Gay artists, LGBT writers from Canada, LGBT artists from Canada, McGill University alumni, Officers of the Order of Canada, Writers from Vancouver, Wired (magazine) people, Canadian designers, Artists from British Columbia, Postmodern writers, Emily Carr University of Art and Design alumni, LGBT dramatists and playwrights, LGBT novelists

Douglas Coupland  (pronounced )Steve Lohr, "No More McJobs for Mr. X", The New York Times, May 29, 1994  (born December 30, 1961) is a Canadian novelist. His fiction is complemented by recognized  works in design and visual art arising from his early formal training.  His first novel, the 1991 international bestseller Generation X: Tales for an Accelerated Culture, popularized terms such as McJob and Generation X. He has published thirteen novels, two collections of short stories, seven non-fiction books, and a number of dramatic works and screenplays for film and television. A specific feature of Coupland's novels is their synthesis of postmodern religion, Web 2.0 technology, human sexuality, and pop culture.
Coupland lives in West Vancouver, British Columbia with his partner David Weir.

Early life

Coupland was born on December 30, 1961 at Royal Canadian Air Force base RCAF Station Baden-Soellingen (later CFB Baden-Soellingen) in Baden-Söllingen, West Germany, the second of four sons to Dr. Douglas Charles Thomas Coupland, a medical officer in the Royal Canadian Air Force, and homemaker C. Janet Coupland, a graduate in comparative religion from McGill University.  In 1965, the Coupland family relocated to West Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, where Coupland's father opened private family medical practice at the completion of his military tour.
Coupland describes his upbringing as producing a "blank slate"."Trawling for Columbine". The Times, September 12th, 2003. "My mother comes from a sour-faced family of preachers who from the 19th century to well into the 20th scoured the prairies thumping Bibles. Her parents tried to get away from that but unwittingly transmitted their values to my mother. My father's family weren't that different."
Graduating from Sentinel Secondary School in West Vancouver in 1979, Coupland went to McGill University with the intention of (like his father) studying the sciences, specifically physics. "Take a Sharp Turn at Fiorucci". The New York Times, September 30, 2007. Coupland left McGill at the year's end and returned to Vancouver to attend art school.
At the Emily Carr College of Art and Design (now the Emily Carr University of Art and Design) on Granville Island in Vancouver, in Coupland's words, "I ... had the best four years of my life. It's the one place I've felt truly, totally at home. It was a magic era between the hippies and the PC goon squads. Everyone talked to everyone and you could ask anybody anything."Jackson, Alan. "I didn't get where I am today without..." The Times, June 17, 2006. Coupland graduated from Emily Carr in 1984 with a focus on sculpture, and moved on to study at the European Design Institute in Milan, Italy and the Hokkaido College of Art and Design in Sapporo, Japan. He also completed courses in business science, fine art, and industrial design in Japan in 1986.
Established as a designer working in Tokyo, Coupland suffered a skin condition brought on by Tokyo's summer climate, and returned to Vancouver. Before leaving Japan, Coupland had sent a postcard ahead to a friend in Vancouver. The friend's husband, a magazine editor, read the postcard and offered Coupland a job writing for the magazine. Coupland began writing for magazines as a means of paying his studio bills."The week in Reviews:Talkin' about his generation". The Observer, April 26, 1998. Reflecting on his becoming a writer, Coupland has admitted that he became one "By accident. I never wanted to be a writer. Now that I do it, there's nothing else I'd rather do."
Coupland's work regimen has been characterized as anti-slacker. He works seven days a week, with no vacations. Coupland is quoted as saying: "I've never taken a holiday. To lie on a beach someplace seems almost sinful. What's the point of being around unless you're working on something?"

Novels

Generation X

From 1989 to 1990, Coupland lived in the Mojave Desert working on a handbook about the birth cohort that followed the baby boom. "Behind the Lines". The Times, October 9, 2007. He received a $22,500 advance from St. Martin's Press to write the nonfiction handbook. Instead, Coupland wrote a novel, Generation X: Tales for an Accelerated Culture. "Carving a profile from a forgotten generation". The Globe and Mail, November 9, 1991. It was rejected in Canada before being accepted by an American publishing house in 1991. "Birdman of BC". The Globe and Mail, September 28, 2006. Reflecting on the writing of his debut novel years later, Coupland said, "I remember spending my days almost dizzy with loneliness and feeling like I'd sold the family cow for three beans. I suppose it was this crippling loneliness that gave Gen X its bite. I was trying to imagine a life for myself on paper that certainly wasn't happening in reality." Terms popularized by Coupland in the novel, including Generation X and McJob, ultimately entered the vernacular. "Life after 'X'". The Boston Globe, March 16, 1994.

Shampoo Planet to Life After God

His second novel, Shampoo Planet, was published by Pocket Books in 1992. It focused on the generation after Generation X, the group called "Global Teens" in his first novel and now generally labeled Generation Y. Coupland permanently moved back to Vancouver soon after the novel was published. He had spent his "twenties scouring the globe thinking there had to be a better city out there, until it dawned on him that Vancouver is the best one going". City of Glass He wrote a collection of small books, which together were compiled, after the advice of his publisher, into the book Life After God. This collection of short stories, with its focus on spirituality, initially provoked polarized reaction before eventually revealing itself as a bellwether text for the avant-garde sensibility identified by Ferdinand Mount as "Christian post-Christian".

Microserfs to All Families are Psychotic

In 1994, Coupland was working for the newly formed magazine Wired. While there, Coupland wrote a short story about the life of the employees at Microsoft Corporation. This short work provided the inspiration for a novel, Microserfs. To research the culture that the novel depicted, Coupland had moved to Palo Alto, California and immersed himself in Silicon Valley life. "Nerds of the cyberstocracy". The Independent, November 13, 1995
Coupland followed Microserfs with his first collection of non-fiction pieces, in 1996. Polaroids from the Dead is a manifold of stories and essays on diverse topics, including: Grateful Dead concerts; Harolding; Kurt Cobain's death; the visiting of a German reporter; and a comprehensive essay on Brentwood, California, written at the time of the O. J. Simpson murder case and the anniversary of Marilyn Monroe's death.
That same year Coupland toured Europe to promote Microserfs, but the high workload brought on fatigue and mental strain. "Dictators and comas". The Globe and Mail, March 14, 1998."Dealing with the X factor". The Age, July 30, 2005. He reportedly incorporated his experience with depression during this period into his next novel, Girlfriend in a Coma. Coupland noted that this was his last novel to be "...Wheelwright, Julie. "Talking About Which Generation?" The Independent, February 12, 2000.
In 1998, Coupland contributed the short story "Fire At The Ativan Factory" to the collection Disco 2000, and in 2000, he published Miss Wyoming.
Coupland then published his photographic paean to Vancouver, City of Glass. The book incorporates sections from Life After God and Polaroids from the Dead into a visual narrative, formed from photographs of Vancouver locations and life supplemented by stock footage mined from local newspaper archives.
Coupland's next novel, All Families Are Psychotic, tells the story of a dysfunctional family from Vancouver coming together to watch their daughter Sarah, an astronaut, launch into space.
In 2004, the dormant Saarinen-designed TWA Flight Center (now Jetblue Terminal 5) at JFK Airport briefly hosted an art exhibition called Terminal 5, curated by Rachel K. Ward and featuring the work of 18 artists including Coupland.

Souvenir of Canada to Worst. Person. Ever.

The promotional rounds for All Families are Psychotic were underway when the September 11 attacks took place.  In a play called September 10 performed later at Stratford-upon-Avon by the Royal Shakespeare Company, Coupland felt that this was the last day of the 1990s, and the new century had now truly begun. "Mirror, mirror on the page". The Globe and Mail, December 30, 2004."A slacker hero hits the stage". The Globe and Mail, July 31, 2004.
The first book that Coupland published after the September 11 attacks was Souvenir of Canada, which expanded his earlier City of Glass to incorporate the whole of Canada. There are two volumes in this series, which was conceived as an explanation to non-Canadians of uniquely Canadian things.
Coupland's second book in this period, Hey Nostradamus!, describes a fictitious high school shooting similar to the Columbine High School in 1999Anthony, Andrew. "Close to the Edge". ''The Observer'', August 24, 2003. Coupland relocates the events to a school in North Vancouver, Canada.
Coupland followed Hey Nostradamus! with Eleanor Rigby. Similarly to the titular original written and sung by The Beatles, the novel examines loneliness."Dealing with the X factor". ''The Age'', July 30, 2005. The novel received some positive acclaim as a more mature work, a notable example being novelist Ali Smith's review of the book for the Guardian newspaper.
Using the format of City of Glass and Souvenir of Canada, Coupland released a book for the Terry Fox Foundation called Terry. It is a photographic look back on the life of Fox, the result of Coupland's exhaustive research through the Terry Fox archives, including thousands of emotional letters from Canadians written to Fox during his one-legged marathon across Canada on Highway 1.
The third work of fiction in this period, written concurrently with the non-fiction Terry, is another re-envisioning of a previous book. jPod, billed as Microserfs for the Google generation, is his first Web 2.0 novel. The text of jPod recreates the experience of a novel read online on a notebook computer.  jPod was a popular success, giving rise to a CBC Television series for which Coupland wrote the script. The series lasted one season before cancellation.
Coupland's next novel, The Gum Thief, followed jPod in 2007. The Gum Thief was Coupland's first foray into the standard epistolary novel format following the 'laptop diaries'/'blog' formats of Microserfs and jPod.
Coupland published his eleventh novel, Generation A, in late 2009. In terms of style, Generation A "mirrors the structure of 1991's Generation X as it champions the act of reading and storytelling as one of the few defenses we still have against the constant bombardment of the senses in a digital world".coupland.
Coupland's contribution for the 2010 Massey Lectures, as opposed to a standard long essay, was 50,000 word novel entitled Player One – What Is to Become of Us: A Novel in Five Hours. Coupland wrote the novel as five hour-long lectures aired on CBC Radio from Nov. 8–12, 2010.
The lecture/novel was published in its own right on October 7, 2010. and Coupland was denied the honour a second time, with the prize being eventually won by Johanna Skibsrud for her novel The Sentimentalists (novel).
Coupland followed Player One in November 2011 with a second short stories collection in collaboration with the artist Graham Roumieu entitled Highly Inappropriate Tales for Young People.... The stories in the collection are 'Donald, the Incredibly Hostile Juice Box'; 'Kevin, the Hobo Minivan with Extremely Low Morals'; 'Brandon, the Action Figure with Issues'; 'Sandra, the Truly Dreadful Babysitter'; 'Hans, the Weird Exchange Student'; 'Cindy, the Terrible Role Model'; and, 'Mr. Fraser, the Undead Substitute Teacher'.randomhouse.co.uk/editions/highly-inappropriate-tales-for-young-people/9780434021598
Worst. Person. Ever. was released in Canada and the UK in October 2013, and in the U.S. in April 2014.

Awards and recognition

Coupland has been described as "..."
Coupland received an honorary degree from the University of British Columbia on May 27, 2010.vancouversun.html including manuscripts, photos, visual art, fan mail, correspondence, press clippings, audio/visual material and more. One of the most notable inclusions in the collection includes the first hand-written manuscript of 'Generation X,' scrawled on loose-leaf notebook paper and strewn with margin notes. In a statement issued on the UBC website Coupland said, "I am honoured that UBC has accepted my papers. I hope that within them, people in the future will find patterns and constellations that can't be apparent to me or to anyone simply because they are there, and we are here... I'm deeply grateful for UBC's support and enthusiasm." A new consignment of materials including "... everything from doodles and fan mail to a bejeweled hornet's nest to a Styrofoam le for the archive arrived in July 2012..." arrived for sorting in July 2012. (2012-07-27) Quill & Quire » Behind the scenes at UBC's Douglas Coupland archives. Quillandquire. Retrieved on 2013-07-26. The sorting and categorisation of the new material is being regularly blogged about by the three student archivists at UBC's School of Archival and Information Studies. Blogs.ca. Retrieved on 2013-07-26.
Coupland received an honorary Doctor of Letters from Simon Fraser University in 2007.sfu.html
On June 6, 2013 Coupland received an honorary doctorate degree from OCAD University, which was presented at the University's 2013 Convocation ceremony, which was held at Roy Thompson Hall, in Toronto, Ontario. Ocadu. Retrieved on 2013-07-26.
Coupland was made a member of the Royal Canadian Academy of Arts in 2007.

Visual arts

In 2000, Coupland resumed a visual arts practice dormant since 1989. His is a post-medium practice that employs a variety of materials. A common theme in his work is a curiosity with the corrupting and seductive dimensions of pop culture and 20th century pop art, especially that of Andy Warhol. Another recurring theme is military imagery, the result of growing up in a military family at the height of the Cold War. He is represented by the Clark & Faria Gallery in Toronto. In June 2010 he announced his first efforts as a clothing designer by collaborating with Roots Canada on a collection that is a representation of classic Canadian icons. The Roots X Douglas Coupland collection was announced in The Globe and Mail and featured clothing, art installations, sculpture, custom designed art and retail spaces.
In September 2010, Coupland, working with Toronto's PLANT Architect, won the art and design contract for a new national monument in Ottawa. "The Memorial" is to be erected for the Canadian Fallen Firefighters Foundation, and will be completed in April 2012.Canadian Fallen Firefighter's Foundation's article about the contract awarding for the new national monument
Other notable works are:
In October 2012, the 60-foot tallInfinite Tires  was erected as part of Vancouver's public art program to accompany the opening of a Canadian Tire store. The construct was linked to the concept of Romanian artist Constantin Brâncuși's "Infinite Column.
In 2014, Coupland announced plans to construct in south Vancouver a gold-coloured replica of Stanley Park's Hollow Tree.

Design work

In the summer of 2010, Coupland, in collaboration with Roots Canada designed a well-received collection of summer streetwear for men and women, and a line of leather and non-leather accessories. The collection was sold in the avant garde clothing store Colette in Paris in September 2010.

Television

In 2007 Coupland worked with the CBC to write and executive produce a television series based on his novel jPod. Its 13 one-hour episodes aired in Canada in 2007. The show was cancelled despite a major viewer-initiated campaign to save it.
In February 2013, NBC announced that it was in negotiations with the actress Christina Ricci for her to star as Karen McNeil in a pilot for a television adaptation of Coupland's novel Girlfriend in a Coma put together by Nurse Jackie co-creator Liz Brixius. (2013-02-08) Christina Ricci is NBC's 'Girlfriend in a Coma' | Inside TV | EW. Insidetv.ew. Retrieved on 2013-07-26. Cinemablend. Retrieved on 2013-07-26.

Film

2005 marked the release of a documentary about Coupland called Souvenir of Canada. In it, Coupland works on a grand art project about Canada, recounts his life, and muses about various aspects of Canadian identity.
2006 brought the release of Everything's Gone Green, a comedy film starring Paulo Costanzo, directed by Paul Fox, and written by Coupland. The film was produced by Radke Films and True West Films. The distributor is THINKFilm in Canada and Shoreline Entertainment elsewhere. The film, Coupland's first screenplay, won the award for best Canadian feature film at the 2006 Vancouver International Film Festival.
Upcoming works include All Families Are Psychotic and the Extinction Event miniseries.

Charity

Coupland is involved with Canada's Terry Fox Foundation. In 2005, Douglas & McIntyre published Terry, Coupland's biographical collection of photos and text essays about the life of legendary one-legged Canadian athlete Terry Fox. All proceeds from the book are donated to the foundation for cancer research. Terrys format is similar to that of Coupland's City of Glass and Souvenir of Canada books. Its release coincided with the 25th anniversary of Terry Fox's 1980 Marathon of Hope.
Coupland codesigned Toronto Park, eight-hectare urban park called the Canoe Landing Park in downtown Toronto adjacent to the Gardiner Expressway.  The park, opened 2009, is embedded with a one-mile run called the Terry Fox Miracle Mile. The Miracle Mile contains art from Terry.
Coupland has raised money for the Vancouver Art Gallery and the Western Canada Wilderness Committee by participating in advertising campaigns.
Coupland is also a regular contributor to Wikipedia; during his appearance at the Cheltenham Literary Festival (UK) in 2013, to promote his novel Worst.Ever., Coupland said that he gives $200 a year the online encyclopaedia.

Bibliography

Novels

Short stories and story collections

Non-fiction

Drama and screenplays

Criticism and interpretation

Essays

Books








