[[Veronica Scott]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 births, American fashion businesspeople, American Christian missionaries, American fashion designers, American female models, American television actresses, Living people, People from Dallas, Texas, Actresses from Houston, Texas, Houston Baptist University alumni, University of San Diego alumni

Veronica Scott (born November 19, 1986) is an American television personality, fashion designer, and entrepreneur. Scott is best known for being featured in the Current TV reality show The Fuchsia Girls, which follows her personal and professional life as she pursues a career in the fashion industry. Scott also co-owns the fashion company and design house Fuchsia with business partner Lawren Pope.

Early life

Scott was born in 1986 in Dallas, Texas to Johnnie Lee Scott Jr. and Rebecca Scott. Scott, who is multiracial, is of Hispanic and African American descent. She has one brother, Johnnie Lee Scott III, who is eight years younger than her. Scott attended River Oaks Elementary in Houston from kindergarten to the 5th grade.
Scott began college at private Houston Baptist University as an International Business major for three quarters. She then moved from Houston, Texas to San Diego, California and enrolled at the private University of San Diego School of Business Administration. Today Scott resides in San Diego with longtime friend and Fuchsia co-owner Lawren Pope.
Scott's lack of art and design schooling has been somewhat of a controversy with a few fashion industry seniors. In a 2008 interview with fashion editor Elizabeth Stein, Scott notes that she has been somewhat "snubbed by certain members of the fashion industry, for not doing any time at a FIDM or Parsons."Sachse, Dominique

Career

Fuchsia

According to Troy Anderson staff writer of Los Angeles Daily News 
At age 14 Scott teamed up with Pope to open the fashion company Fuchsia. Scott premiered the video footage of the fashion show on the Fuchsia official site, scoring the interest of several local media journalists. Most of Fuchsia's early income and public interest can be attributed to this.
As webmaster of the Fuchsia online boutique, Scott has designed and created every released version to date, of the Fuchsia Official Site and E-shop located at www.com. Anderson, who profiled Scott for an article on E-Commerce noted that Scott actually prefers an internet store front to a physical boutique. Scott says that the online boutique works out great, "because we're still in college and we don't have to maintain a storefront 24/7."

Save The Girls

In 2007 Scott co-founded the 501(c)(3) non-profit organization Save The Girls. Save The Girls provides cash scholarships, scholarship education and college application assistance to schools, groups, and individual students in need. In 2008 Scott took on the position of Chair at the organization.
Save The Girls also sponsors The Grace House in Chisinau, Moldova. In July 2008, Scott traveled on a mission trip for the first time to Moldova with the non-profit Justice and Mercy. It was during her visit to The Grace House – a transitional home for female graduates of the Internat Orphanage- that Scott requested emergency aid funds from Save the Girls to improve the poor living conditions of the girls living in the home. Upon return to the U.S. Scott successfully motioned to keep funding The Grace House as a Save the Girls project. Scott is currently producing a new web shop for the girls of The Grace House to sell handmade jewelry and clothing.  All profits fund The Grace House project.






