[[Kate Allenby]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, Living people, British modern pentathletes, Olympic modern pentathletes of Great Britain, Modern pentathletes at the 2000 Summer Olympics, Modern pentathletes at the 2004 Summer Olympics, Olympic bronze medalists for Great Britain, Olympic medalists in modern pentathlon, People from Tavistock, Devon, British educators, Alumni of the University of Surrey

Kate Allenby MBE (born 16 March 1974), is a British modern pentathlete who competed in two Summer Olympics, taking the bronze medal at the 2000 Games and placing in 8th place in 2004. She has won medals at four World Championships, and after retiring from sport, she became a PE teacher in Bath, England.

Early life

She was born in Tavistock, Devon,

Career

She switched from tetrathon to modern pentathlon at the age of sixteen after her father suggested she tried fencing. She won the bronze medal at the 1994 Junior European Championship, going one place better during the following year taking the silver medal. Although she initially trained part-time while working as a fitness consultant, she received National Lottery funding in 1997 enabling her to take up full-time training. Whilst ranked as the world number three in her sport in 1999, she won the sporting section of the Cosmopolitan Woman of the year Awards.
Competing for the British team at the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Allenby won a bronze medal in modern pentathlon with team-mate Steph Cook taking the gold. She decided to continue competing following the Olympics in order to represent Britain once more at the 2004 Summer Olympics. 
At the 2004 Games in Athens she finished eighth in the Modern pentathlon competition.
She retired from modern pentathlon in 2004, but continued to compete in fencing, becoming British champion in 2005. She retired completely from professional sport prior to the 2008 Summer Olympics. In 2009 she was one of a number of athletes to travel to Iraq to take place in a conference in the Kurdistan Autonomous Region in the hopes of kick starting the sports policy in the area. She has continued to be involved with Modern Pentathlon.
When London became the host city for the 2012 Summer Olympics, Kate was chosen to be the Director of Fence for the Modern Pentathlon event at the Games. The Fence element of ModPen was held at the "Copper Box" at Olympic Park, before handing over to the Swim element at the Aquatics Centre, and then on to Greenwich Park for the Ride, and Combined Run and Shoot and finally Medals Ceremony.

Personal life

While competing, she studied for a Master's degree in Philosophy at the University of Surrey. After retiring from elite sport she retrained as a teacher and is currently teaching physical education at Paragon Junior School in Bath and also is on the inspiration speakers circuit. Prior to the 2012 Summer Olympics, she carried the Olympic torch through Bath as part of the torch relay.
She was awarded an MBE for services to sport in the 2008 New Years Honours List.






