[[Matt Ritchie]]

CATEGORIES: 1989 births, Living people, People from Gosport, English footballers, Portsmouth F.C. players, Dagenham & Redbridge F.C. players, Notts County F.C. players, Swindon Town F.C. players, A.F.C. Bournemouth players, Premier League players, The Football League players

Matthew Thomas "Matt" Ritchie (born 10 September 1989) is an English football player, who plays as an inverted right winger for Bournemouth.

Career

Portsmouth

Ritchie has been involved in Portsmouth's academy since he turned 13. Before-hand he was playing football locally in Gosport when he started at age six. After the match, Ritchie says scoring a hat-trick was unreal.
Ritchie was taken on trial alongside fellow academy graduate Joel Ward by Bournemouth with a view to a loan move to help give the youngsters important first-team experience in league football. Ritchie was however kept at Portsmouth following a number of injuries to first-team midfielders. He was called up to Portsmouth's UEFA Cup squad as a home-grown talent and presented with the squad number 36.
However, due his parent club Portsmouth's mounting injury list, he was recalled in March and was named on the bench for their 2–0 Premier League loss at the hands of Tottenham Hotspur after making four appearances for Swindon in his first loan. On 14 April, Ritchie made his debut for Portsmouth in the Premier League game at Wigan Athletic. He played 79 minutes but was then substituted for Frédéric Piquionne. Afrer the match, Ritchie admits making his Portsmouth debut was a dream come true.
For the 2010–11 season, Ritchie was handed the number 5 shirt and was selected in Portsmouth's starting XI for their first match of the season at Coventry City.Cotterill: Ritchie has a Blues future

Loan to Dagenham & Redbridge

Ritchie played reserve and academy football at Pompey until late September and continued to impress until he was taken on a one-month loan deal by League Two club Dagenham & Redbridge. Daggers boss John Still has been hugely impressed with Ritchie's initial impact at the club. Speaking after the match against Barnet, Still had to say: "He's got a terrific leap. He showed that with his goal. He's come in and done very well. The Nicest kid in the world. Come down from a Premier League club. No big time about him. Harry Redknapp and Paul Hart speak ever so well of him. It's a pleasure to have him. He's got a smile on his face in training and loves being here." 
Still has also made it clear he wishes to extend the loan deal of Ritchie until later on in the season.

Loan to Notts County

On 28 July 2009, it was reported that Notts County, were on talks with Portsmouth over a six-figure fee for his services, believed to be £100,000. Ritchie was recalled eventually by the club.

Loan to Swindon and permanent basis

After Danny Wilson failed to secure Ritchie's services on a permanent deal during the transfer window, it was announced on 11 February 2010 that Swindon Town signed the midfielder on loan for the remainder of the season.
After making brief appearance at Pompey and on 4 October, Ritchie was loaned again to Swindon Town, in a one month deal.Portsmouth winger Matt Ritchie extends Swindon loan Ritchie scored his first goal for Swindon against Peterborough United in a 5–4 loss which followed up scoring his second against Bournemouth in a 2–1 loss and his third goal was a 4–2 win over Charlton Athletic. Ritchie made 16 appearance and scoring three during his loan spell with Swindon twice.
On 7 January 2011, Swindon Town signed Ritchie on a two-and-a-half year deal for an undisclosed fee. Ritchie added to his tally with the goal 2010–11 season against Bournemouth again in a 3–2 loss, 4–1 loss against Southampton, 1–1 draw against Hartlepool United and 2–1 loss against Notts County. Despite Swindon Town relegation to League Two, Ritchie was named the Robins' player of the season.
Under manager Paolo Di Canio in League Two, Ritchie retain his first team place in the starting eleven and on scoring forms with ten goals this season. During the season, Ritchie was linked with clubs in League One, with the likes of Bournemouth.
In March, He won the Football League Two player of the year for 2012. At the end of the season, Swindon Town was promoted back to League One.
Ahead of a new season in League One, Swindon turned down a £900,000 offer from a League One club for Ritchie, insisting he will be sold for £2.5 million.

Bournemouth

On 30 January 2013, Ritchie signed for Bournemouth on a three-and-a-half year deal for £500,000.bbc.co. 30 January 2013. Retrieved 30 January 2013. After leaving Swindon Town, Ritchie said he was surprised of leaving the club but left the club with a "heavy heart". Ritchie made his debut, coming on as a substitute, in a 3–0 win over Milton Keynes Dons and just months after playing Portsmouth, Ritchie, played in left-back, in a 2–0 win the next game.

Career statistics

Honours






