[[Hexagon]]

CATEGORIES: Polygons, Elementary shapes

In geometry, a hexagon (from Greek ἕξ hex, "six" and  γωνία, gonía, "corner, angle") is a polygon with six edges and six vertices. A regular hexagon has Schläfli symbol {6}. The total of the internal angles of any hexagon is 720°. 

Hexagonal structures

From bees' honeycombs to the Giant's Causeway, hexagonal patterns are prevalent in nature due to their efficiency. In a hexagonal grid each line is as short as it can possibly be if a large area is to be filled with the fewest number of hexagons. This means that honeycombs require less wax to construct and gain lots of strength under compression.

Regular hexagon

A regular hexagon has all sides of the same length, and all internal angles are 120 degrees. A regular hexagon has 6 rotational symmetries (rotational symmetry of order six) and 6 reflection symmetries (six lines of symmetry), making up the dihedral group D6. The longest diagonals of a regular hexagon, connecting diametrically opposite vertices, are twice the length of one side. From this it can be seen that a triangle with a vertex at the center of the regular hexagon and sharing one side with the hexagon is equilateral, and that the regular hexagon can be partitioned into six equilateral triangles.
Like squares and equilateral triangles, regular hexagons fit together without any gaps to tile the plane (three hexagons meeting at every vertex), and so are useful for constructing tessellations. The cells of a beehive honeycomb are hexagonal for this reason and because the shape makes efficient use of space and building materials. The Voronoi diagram of a regular triangular lattice is the honeycomb tessellation of hexagons. It is not usually considered a triambus, although it is equilateral. 
The area of a regular hexagon of side length t is given by
An alternative formula for area is  where the length d is the distance between the parallel sides (also referred to as the flat-to-flat distance), or the height of the hexagon when it sits on one side as base, or the diameter of the inscribed circle.
Another alternative formula for the area if only the flat-to-flat distance, d, is known, is given by
If a regular hexagon has successive vertices A, B, C, D, E, F and if P is any point on the circumscribing circle between B and C, then .

Cyclic hexagon

A cyclic hexagon is any hexagon inscribed in a circle. If the successive sides of the cyclic hexagon are a, b, c, d, e, f, then the three main diagonals intersect in a single point if and only if .

Hexagon inscribed in a conic section

Pascal's theorem (also known as the "Hexagrammum Mysticum Theorem") states that if an arbitrary hexagon is inscribed in any conic section, and pairs of opposite sides are extended until they meet, the three intersection points will lie on a straight line, the "Pascal line" of that configuration.

Hexagon tangential to a conic section

Let ABCDEF be a hexagon formed by six tangent lines of a conic section. Then Brianchon's theorem states that the three main diagonals AD, BE, and CF intersect at a single point.
In a hexagon that is tangential to a circle and that has consecutive sides a, b, c, d, e, and f,Gutierrez, Antonio, "Hexagon, Inscribed Circle, Tangent, Semiperimeter",  Accessed 2012-04-17.

Related figures

Petrie polygons

The regular hexagon is the Petrie polygon for these regular and uniform polytopes, shown in these skew orthogonal projections:

Polyhedra with hexagons

There is no Platonic solid made of only regular hexagons, because the hexagons tessellate, not allowing the result to "fold up". The Archimedean solids with some hexagonal faces are the truncated tetrahedron, truncated octahedron, truncated icosahedron (of soccer ball and fullerene fame), truncated cuboctahedron and the truncated icosidodecahedron. These hexagons can be considered truncated triangles, with Coxeter diagrams of the form .
There are other symmetry polyhedra with stretched or flattened hexagons, like these Goldberg polyhedron G(2,0):
There are also 9 Johnson solids with regular hexagons:

Regular and uniform tilings with hexagons

Hexagons: natural and human-made

Image:Graphen.
Image:Assembled E-ELT mirror segments undergoing testing.jpg|Assembled E-ELT mirror segments
Image:Honey comb.jpg|A beehive honeycomb
Image:Carapax.svg|The scutes of a turtle's carapace
Image:Saturn hexagonal north pole feature.nasa.html 
Image:Iapetusnorth. 
Image:Snowflake 300um LTSEM, 13368.jpg|Micrograph of a snowflake
File:Benzene-aromatic-3D-balls.
Image:Hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene ChemEurJ 2000 1834 commons. Eur. J., 2000, 1834-1839.
Image:Giants causeway closeup.jpg|Naturally formed basalt columns from Giant's Causeway in Northern Ireland; large masses must cool slowly to form a polygonal fracture pattern
Image:Fort-Jefferson Dry-Tortugas.jpg|An aerial view of Fort Jefferson in Dry Tortugas National Park
Image:Jwst front view.
File:564X573-Carte France geo verte. In French, l'Hexagone refers to the European mainland of France aka the "metropole" as opposed to the overseas territories such as Guadeloupe, Martinique or French Guiana.
Image:Hanksite.JPG|Hexagonal Hanksite crystal, one of many hexagonal crystal system minerals
File:HexagonalBarnKewauneeCountyWisconsinWIS42.jpg|Hexagonal barn
Image:Reading the Hexagon Theatre.jpg|The Hexagon, a hexagonal theatre in Reading, Berkshire
Image:Hexaschach.jpg|Władysław Gliński's hexagonal chess
Image:Chinese pavilion.jpg








