[[Charlie Lynn]]

CATEGORIES: Members of the New South Wales Legislative Council, New South Wales Liberal politicians, People from Orbost, 1945 births, Living people

Charlie John Stuart Lynn (born 14 January 1945 in Orbost, Victoria) is an Australian politician and Liberal Party of Australia member of the New South Wales Legislative Council. Lynn has been an MLC since 19 October 1995.

Personal history

Lynn was born to parents Melva and Keith Lynn, and is the eldest of eight siblings. He grew up in a small timber home on the banks of the Snowy River in East Gippsland.

Military service

Leaving school, he began working in a Country Roads Board camp. In 1965 he was conscripted into the Australian Army, going on to serve his country in the Vietnam War in 1967. After the end of the war, he remained in the Army until 1986 and served in Singapore and the United States. He qualified as a HALO (High Altitude Low Opening) military parachutist with the US Army in 1978.  He is a graduate of the Officer Cadet School, Portsea, Victoria and the Army Staff College at Fort Queenscliff, Victoria.  He represented the Army in Australian Rules football, tennis, squash and marathon running.

Professional history

After his discharge from the Army, became a Special Events Organiser.  He has organised the Sydney to Melbourne Ultra Marathon, the Anzac Day Marathon, the 18,000 km Round Australia Relay for the Australian Cancer Foundation, the Great Australian Caravan Safari, the Darwin-Cairns-Melbourne Relay for the Melbourne Olympic Committee, and the international George Street Mile footrace.  He was a Consultant to Australian Rural Leadership Foundation and also a Facilitator for Adventure West Leadership and Survival Training activities.
He is a Trek Leader for Kokoda Adventure Treks and a Developer of the Kokoda Adventure Leadership Program. He held the New South Wales 24-hour Ultra Marathon record in 1985 and 1986.
Charlie has been appointed to the Board of the Kokoda Track Memorial Walkway at Concord. He was also recently elected President of the NSW Parliamentary Lions Club and is a Trustee on the Anzac Memorial building in Sydney.
He was Chairman of the Campbelltown Chamber of Commerce and Industry between 1993 and 1994.

Representative history

Lynn had been the Liberal candidate for the Werriwa by-election of January 1994 in which his ALP opponent was future Opposition Leader Mark Latham. Werriwa is a safe ALP seat and Latham was elected although Lynn succeeded in achieving a swing for the Liberal Party.
While Lynn was never expected to win Werriwa he did come close to being elected to the Federal Parliament when he was preselected as the Liberal candidate for the marginal ALP seat of Macarthur. However supporters of former NSW Liberal Premier John Fahey wanted Fahey to be in the Federal Parliament and Macarthur was the ideal seat for Fahey but Lynn refused to step aside for Fahey.
However a deal was brokered to accommodate both Fahey and Lynn when former State Liberal Minister Ted Pickering had retired from State Parliament. The deal was for Lynn to fill Pickering's Legislative Council seat in return for giving up the Macarthur preselection for Fahey. Lynn accepted the deal and was appointed to the aforementioned casual vacancy in the New South Wales Legislative Council on 19 October 1995 following the resignation of Pickering on 10 October. Fahey went on to win Macarthur at the 1996 Federal election.
Lynn as an MLC first stood for election in his own right in the 1999 New South Wales election.  He was placed fourth on the joint Liberal/Nationals election ticket.  He was re-elected after receiving the ninth highest quota of votes.
He stood for re-election in 2007 New South Wales election.  He was placed first on the joint Liberal/Nationals election ticket.

Official Parliamentary Positions Held:

Party Positions Held

Community Activity

Controversy

He was nominated for an Ernie Award for saying "I'm not happy about someone else having my credit card details, it's bad enough that my wife has them.".

Personal life

A keen fun-runner, Lynn was placed second in the Bathurst Centenary 100 kilometre ultramarathon in 1986, with a time of 8 hours 26 minutes, and held the NSW 24-Hour ultramarathon record with a distance of 213 kilometres. He completed the first Triple M Ironman Triathlon in a time of 13 hours and 12 minutes.[ref]
 
[/ref]




