[[Christopher Clayton]]

CATEGORIES: HMS Cardiff (D108), Royal Navy admirals, Royal Navy personnel of the Falklands War, Living people, Fleet Air Arm aviators, Year of birth missing (living people), Royal Navy personnel of the Iraq War, Helicopter pilots

Rear Admiral Christopher Hugh Trevor Clayton is a former Royal Navy officer who served as a Lynx helicopter pilot during the Falklands War. He went on to become a senior naval officer, commanding ships during the Hong Kong handover ceremony and 2003 invasion of Iraq and later serving high-level positions in NATO.

Early career and Falklands War

Clayton joined the Royal Navy as an aviator. He was appointed as an acting sub-lieutenant on 29 February 1972 and after flying training was then commissioned as a sub-lieutenant on 29 November 1973. transferring to the General List.
On 2 April 1982, the disputed British overseas territory of the Falkland Islands was invaded by neighbouring Argentina. The conflict ended that June with the surrender of the Argentine forces; the battles fought on land, at sea, and in the air had cost the lives of some 900 British and Argentine servicemen.
Clayton served on 
On 13 June, around midday, Clayton was performing the routine forenoon clearance search of the area south of the Falkland Sound.

Commands

Clayton was promoted to commander on 31 December 1988,
He became the first officer to hold the post of "Commodore Naval Aviation" (COMNA), he was based at Northwood Headquarters during this time.
Clayton commanded the helicopter carrier  When interviewed about the experience Clayton said; "There's  a sense of pride in a job really well done. Ocean played a major role in the operations out there. But also we have to remember that we're the lucky ones coming back. Not everyone has. There are many we have to think about, including one of our ship's company who was killed in action, Marine Chris Maddison. Our thoughts will be about him and with his family."

Later career

Clayton became a rear admiral on 30 August 2004 and took a post at NATO's headquarters in Brussels. His role was as an assistant director, in charge of the Intelligence Division of NATO's International Military Staff.
Over the course of his naval career, he attended the Advanced Command and Staff Course and the Higher Command and Staff Course.



Notes




