[[Churches Uniting in Christ]]

CATEGORIES: Christian organizations based in the United States, United and uniting churches, Christian ecumenism, Religious organizations established in 2002, Protestant denominations established in the 21st century, 2002 establishments in Tennessee

Churches Uniting in Christ (CUIC) is an ecumenical organization that brings together ten mainline American denominations (including both predominantly white and predominantly black churches), and was inaugurated on January 20, 2002 in Memphis, Tennessee on the balcony of the Lorraine Motel. It is the successor organization to the Consultation on Church Union.

History

Origins

CUIC is the successor organization to the Consultation on Church Union (COCU), which had been founded in 1962. The original task of COCU was to negotiate a consensusWhile the term "merger" is widely used to describe the set of COCU proposals, it was rejected in general because of its relation to corporate culture.  Each member communion voted to join CUIC over the next few years.

Inauguration

Heads of communion from each member of COCU (as well as the ELCA, a partner in mission and dialogue) inaugurated the group on the day before Martin Luther King, Jr. Day in 2002 at the motel where he was killed. This particular location highlighted the group's focus on racism as a major dividing factor between and among churches.

Task Forces

The Coordinating Council of CUIC created three task forces: Ministry, Racial Justice, and Local and Regional Ecumenism. Each task force represented an important part of early CUIC work.

Mutual Recognition and Mutual Reconciliation of Ministries (MRMRM)

One of the most difficult issues concerning recognition and reconciliation of ministries was that of the historic episcopate. This was one of the issues that defeated proposals for union by COCU as well. The group approached this problem through dialogue, soliciting information from each member communion on the particularities of their theology and ecclesiology in order to come to a mutually acceptable conclusion.
CUIC released the seventh and final draft of the MRMRM document in June 2005.

Moravian Church (Northern Province)

The nine churches which inaugurated CUIC in 2002 were joined by the Moravian Church, Northern Province. The Moravians had been partners in mission and dialogue since 2002, but joined as a member communion after the October 2006 consultation on Episkope.

Suspension of Activities

In 2007, the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church and the African Methodist Episcopal Church withdrew from CUIC. As of 2012, CUIC no longer has physical offices, opting instead for a virtual office and storing the archives of both CUIC and COCU at Princeton Seminary's Henry Luce III Library.ptsem.edu/library/collections/special/archives/

Reconciliation Efforts

The African Methodist Episcopal Church resumed its participation by the February 2010 plenary meeting, where CUIC moved to refocus on its eight marks of commitment and a shared concern for racial justice as a major dividing factor facing ecumenism. Although the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church has not rejoined the group, efforts have continued to bring this communion back into membership. The Rev. Staccato Powell, an AMEZ pastor, preached at the 2011 CUIC plenary in Ft. Lauderdale, Florida as a part of these reconciliation efforts.

Purpose

The purpose of CUIC has always been unity (as reflected in their current slogan, "reconciling the baptized, seeking unity with justice"). This reflects one of the core scripture passages in the ecumenical movement, Jesus' prayer in John 17:21, "That they all may be one". CUIC has approached this goal of unity in various ways throughout its history.

Racism

Racism has been a primary focus of CUIC since 2002 (and, indeed, a primary focus of COCU alongside other forms of exclusion and prejudice, such as sexism and ableism).

Marks of Commitment

According to their website, one of the reasons for transitioning from COCU to CUIC is so that member churches "stop 'consulting' and start living their unity in Christ more fully." This means that each member communion in CUIC agrees to abide by the eight Marks of Commitment, which are summarized as follows:

Membership

Full Members

Partners in mission and dialogue

Former members

Leadership

Presidents

Directors

Networking Partners








