[[Little Ashes]]

CATEGORIES: 2008 films, 2000s drama films, Biographical films about artists, Bisexuality-related films, British films, British drama films, British biographical films, British LGBT-related films, Spanish films, English-language films, Films shot in Barcelona, Independent films, Salvador Dalí, Federico García Lorca

Little Ashes is a 2008 Spanish-British drama film set against the backdrop of Spain during the 20s and 30s, as three of the era's most creative young talents meet at university and set off on a course to change their world. Luis Buñuel watches helplessly as the friendship between Salvador Dalí and the poet Federico García Lorca develops into a love affair.
The detail of the relationship between artist Salvador Dalí and poet Federico Garcia Lorca has long been the subject of speculation and debate amongst historians and biographers. In the feature film Little Ashes, Dalí and Lorca's feelings are shown deepening into a love affair that the sexually repressed painter tries and fails to consummate.
Between 1925 and 1936, during the course of their friendship, Dalí and Lorca exchanged numerous letters. The original manuscripts of Dalí's letters to Lorca are held by the Fundacion Federico Garcia Lorca in Madrid and those of Lorca to Dalí are held by Fundacion Gala-Salvador Dalí in Pubol, as well as in private collections.

Plot

In 1922, 18-year-old Salvador Dalí (Robert Pattinson) arrives at university in Madrid. The Residencia de Estudiantes, or Students' Residence, is a modern environment which encourages Spain's brightest young minds. Salvador, who is determined to become a great artist, soon catches the attention of the Resi's social elite — poet Federico García Lorca (Javier Beltrán) and aspiring filmmaker Luis Buñuel (Matthew McNulty). Together they form the nucleus of the most modern group in Madrid.
Their private lives become increasingly complex as Federico ignores the advances of devoted friend and writer Magdalena (Marina Gatell), and Salvador himself feels the pull of Federico's magnetism. Luis, becoming increasingly isolated by the duo's closeness, decides to move to Paris to fulfil his own artistic ambitions. Meanwhile, Salvador and Federico leave Madrid to spend the summer at the seaside village of Cadaques, at the home of Dalí's family. 
Federico finds himself acceptedAccording to Ian Gibson, Lorca was "utterly at home with his hosts and by now hopelessly involved with Salvador" into the Dalí family as he and Salvador grow closer until, one night, their friendship becomes romantic.ariafilms.co.pdf Even as they draw closer, their relationship appears doomed. Luis visits them at university and becomes more suspicious and appalled by their apparent closeness.
Salvador finds Federico's obsession with him more than he is prepared to handle and moves to Paris. Consumed by the high society and decadence, Salvador is soon entangled with Gala (Arly Jover), a married woman with a penchant for celebrities. When Federico visits, he finds his friend is a changed man, in his life and his politics.

Cast

Production

Title

The title is taken from Salvador Dalí's 1927–28 painting Cenicitas (Little Ashes).taipeitimes.The Shameful life of Salvador Dalí p 162 It was first displayed on 20 March 1929 in a Madrid exhibition.Salvador Dalí An Illustrated Life, Tate Publishing The painting is currently in the Dalí collection of the Queen Sofia Art Centre in Madrid.

Background

While it is widely acknowledged that Lorca was infatuated with Dalí, for years the artist denied entering into a relationship with Lorca. 
Dalí stated: 
Writer Philippa Goslett supposes:
Biographer of both Dalí and Lorca, Ian Gibson, stated: 
In the repressed Spain of the mid 1930s, Lorca's homosexuality seems to have provided an additional thrill to his murderers. Lorca's biographer Leslie Stainton has suggested that the killers made remarks about his sexual orientation, and that it played a significant role in his death.

Release

Film festivals

Little Ashes premiered at the 16th annual Raindance Film Festival in London.  The sold-out screening was scheduled on 7 October 2008 at 19:00.  A second screening was also added for the 8th of October at 14:30.raindance.co.php?id=270,2493,0,0,1,0&highlight=Li Little Ashes premiered in the U.S. at the Miami Gay & Lesbian film festival. Fans built in depth websites like The Little Ashes Promo Blitz and started grassroots efforts to get theaters to play the movie. On May 8, 2009 it premiered in only 11 US locations.robsessedpattinson.com

DVD

The UK DVD was released on 13 July 2009 and is rated 15.com/hmvweb/displayProductDetails.

Reception

Awards

Little Ashes won the GLAAD Media Award for "Outstanding Film - Limited Release" during the 21st GLAAD Media Awards.



Further reading




