[[Pride & Joy (comics)]]

"Pride & Joy" is a six-issue story arc from the comic book series Runaways (vol. 1), published in issues one through six in 2003 by Marvel Comics' imprint Tsunami, which was created to attract young readers.  It was written by Brian K. Vaughan and illustrated by Adrian Alphona. While it was initially intended to be a six-part miniseries, the popularity of "Pride & Joy" and new ideas from writer Vaughan allowed Runaways to grow into a regular monthly Marvel title. "Pride & Joy" has subsequently won several comics awards, including the 2006 Harvey Award for Best Continuing or Limited Series.
Although the Tsunami imprint was unsuccessful, "Pride & Joy" (and the series Runaways that continued it) was one of the very few Tsunami series to do well in sales and to continue being published.  The story arc has been critically acclaimed for its simple story set in the typically complex Marvel Universe.  Vaughan is known for avoiding the clichés of the superhero genre, locating the group in Los Angeles rather than New York City, where most Marvel Comics superhero titles are set. In order to create an everyday setting and tone, Vaughan included various references to current popular culture, including television series, films, events and celebrities.
The story arc's primary purpose was to introduce the main characters, six children who discover their parents are evil after seeing them murder a girl in a sacrificial ceremony. It centers upon the children's relationships with their parents as the children learn that they themselves have inherited their parents' powers. Once The Pride realizes their offspring have disappeared, they begin to use their considerable influence to track down their sons and daughters.

Production

"Pride & Joy" was launched in 2003 as a part of Marvel's Tsunami imprint, the goal of which was to attract new readers, particularly young readers and the manga audience. Marvel editorial staff agreed to it immediately,
Several of the characters went through subsequent changes as well. In Brian K. Vaughan's original pitch for the series, Karolina Dean was originally called Leslie, a name which would eventually be given to the character's mother. Her parents were originally real estate agents, as opposed to famous actors. Molly was one of the few Runaways to actually keep the name she had in Brian K. Vaughan's original proposal; she is named after Vaughan's younger sister, Molly Hayes Vaughan, and was supposed to be thirteen years old instead of eleven. However, in the original pitch for the series, Molly's parents were Hollywood actors; this would eventually become the cover story of Karolina's parents. Also, Molly's sibling-like relationship with Chase was originally supposed to be with Gert. Nico Minoru was called Rachel Messina. Her parents were still magicians, but posed as wealthy antique dealers; this cover story was ultimately used for Gert's parents. Nico's source of power was not originally going to be her mother's Staff, but Robert Minoru's spellbook. Chase was originally called John, and Gert was called Gertie. Originally, Gert was meant to give Molly the name "Bruiser."

Story

Plot

In the first issue of "Pride & Joy," a group of youths unite to fight against their parents, who they then learn are known as "The Pride," a band of villains. At the end of the issue, the youths witness the murder of a girl at the hands of their parents.
Once The Pride realizes its offspring have disappeared, it begins to use its considerable influence to track down their sons and daughters. "Pride & Joy" sets Runaways for its main concept of the series, which involves children versus their parents.

Setting

When Vaughan first pitched "Pride & Joy" to Marvel, they immediately accepted it and set Runaways in the Marvel Universe, the main string of story lines that ties Marvel's canonical series.
In order to create familiarity with a common-day setting and tone, Vaughan made this story arc include various references to current popular culture, including television series, films, and celebrities such as CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, the Matrix trilogy, and Dr. Phil. Oz, The Lord of the Flies, Grand Theft Auto: Vice City, e-Bay. Gert calls herself and her dinosaur Arsenic and Old Lace, to match the film of the same name. Karolina names herself Lucy in the Sky to match the song of the same name. Nico's name, Sister Grimm, matches Brothers Grimm. Vaughan even makes references to real-world events, such as the Menendez brothers' shootings, the Beltway sniper attacks, Saddam Hussein's hiding and the O. J. Simpson murder case.

Style

Unlike most authors, Vaughan is known for avoiding the clichés of the superhero genre, locating the group in Los Angeles and not the common New York. Also, Vaughan doesn't focus on an actual genre or tone; despite humour, horror and fantasy are common themes and genres, Vaughan mentions that while it may not be a "mature readers book," his style of writing is also dark, challenging and unpredictable.
Penciller Adrian Alphona's style of drawing consists of crisp lines and monotone shading, and as a result, all of the characters are very clear and distinct. Shannon Appelcline of RPGnet Reviews praised Alphona's style of drawing, calling it "attractive and evocative." She did, however, criticize how Alphona sometimes "muddles action sequences a little bit by not drawing important actions with appropriate importance." J. Bowers of Beatbots praised the style Brian K. Vaughan brought to this story arc, comparing it to fellow Marvel Comics series Generation X. Because of this, he gave this story arc 9 out of 10.

Characters

When the story arc was first introduced, it was frequently praised for its large cast; six children, each with two parents, and several auxiliary characters. Dave Wallace of Comics Bulletin praised author Vaughan's efforts on making sure the main characters' dynamic works well enough that "the occasional stereotypical elements do not detract from the characters too much."

Reception

Dave Brennan of "Shaking Through" has called the story arc "spectacular," and said that even though it is aimed at a younger crowd, it is still a "lighthearted and engaging story that any fan of superhero comics can enjoy." He called "Pride & Joy" a promising start for a comic series. On many cases, Alphona is also often praised for his style of drawing.
Shannon Appelcline of RPGnet Reviews praised author Brian K. Vaughan for his work on the characters' characterization. With six teens and twelve parents, she cited Vaughan as a strong storyteller for his work on characterizing eighteen crucial characters. She gave the story arc a 4 out of 5, citing that the plotting is above average. She ended her review by citing that "Pride & Joy" was a superb example of the super-hero genre at its best. The conclusion to the story arc received generally positive reviews. The issue sold an estimated 20, 035 copies, a significant improvement from the previous issue. McCoy praised the detail in the character's designs, from Chases' gloves to the costuming of the Pride.
Dave Wallace of Comics Bulletin, however, cited that "Pride & Joy" felt "pedestrian and lacking in depth." Wallace also called colouring of the early issues flat and static, which made it fairly uninteresting. Despite Molly often being considered a fan-favorite character, the character is nevertheless criticized for being portrayed "far younger than a child who is about to hit puberty," and is compared to acting more along the lines of a six- or seven-year-old as opposed to eleven.

Awards

Runaways, the series that grew out of "Pride & Joy," has been nominated for and has won several awards.

In other media

Film

As of May 2008, a film version of the comic is in the scripting stage, with Brian K. Vaughan writing and Kevin Feige, Marvel Studios President of Production, producing. Retrieved October 12, 2008. Feige has said that while it may not be a precise story line of any of his comics, it will be similar to the tone or origins of its initial run.






