[[Femi Fani-Kayode]]

CATEGORIES: People educated at Harrow School, People educated at Brighton College, People educated at Kelly College, Alumni of SOAS, University of London, 1960 births, Nigerian Christians, Nigerian writers, Nigerian poets, Federal ministers of Nigeria, Aviation ministers of Nigeria, Nigerian ministers of tourism, culture and natural orientation, Nigerian lawyers, Living people, Alumni of Pembroke College, Cambridge, National Democratic Coalition (Nigeria) politicians, People's Democratic Party (Nigeria) politicians, People from Osun State, People educated at Holmewood House School, People from Lagos, Yoruba politicians

David  Oluwafemi (meaning "the beloved of the Lord")  Adewunmi  Abdulateef Fani-Kayode is a Nigerian politician, essayist, poet and lawyer.  He was a member of the ruling Peoples Democratic Party (PDP). He is now with the opposition's All Progressive Congress (APC). He was born in Lagos, Nigeria, on 16 October 1960 to Chief Victor Babaremilekun Adetokunboh Fani-Kayode and to Chief (Mrs) Adia Adunni Fani-Kayode. He is an Ile-Ife chieftain of Yoruba descent.
Fani-Kayode was the Special Assistant (Public Affairs) to President Olusegun Obasanjo from July 2003 until June 2006. He was appointed the Minister of Culture and Tourism of the Federal Republic of Nigeria from 22 June to 7 November 2006 and as the Minister of Aviation from 7 November 2006 to 29 May 2007.com, November 2009"Chief Femi Fani Kayode at the Senate Ministerial Screening - Pt 1", Youtube, June 2006"Chief Femi Fani Kayode at the Senate Ministerial Screening - Pt 2", Youtube, June 2006"Chief Femi Fani Kayode at the Senate Ministerial Screening - Pt 3", Youtube, June 2006"Chief Femi Fani Kayode at the Senate Ministerial Screening - Pt 4", Youtube, June 2006"Chief Femi Fani Kayode at the Senate Ministerial Screening - Pt 5", Youtube, June 2006"Chief Femi Fani Kayode at the Senate Ministerial Screening - Pt 6", Youtube, June 2006"Chief Femi Fani Kayode at the Senate Ministerial Screening - Pt 7", Youtube'', June 2006

Background and education

Femi Fani-Kayode comes from a prominent political and legal family in Nigeria. His great grandfather, the Rev. Emmanuel Adedapo Kayode, was one of the earliest Nigerians to be educated in England having obtained an MA from the University of Durham, after which he became an Anglican priest.  His grandfather, Victor Adedapo Kayode, studied law at Cambridge University and later became a lawyer and a judge. His father Victor Babaremilekun Adetokunboh Fani-Kayode, who was also at Cambridge was a prominent lawyer and political figure in Nigeria in the 1950s and 1960s: he was Leader of the National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons Opposition in the Western House of Assembly from 1960 to 1963, the Hon. Minister of Local Government and Chieftaincy Affairs and Deputy Premier of the Western Region of Nigeria from 1963 until 1966 and he successfully moved the motion for Nigeria's independence in 1958 in the Nigerian Parliament. Sklar,  27 September 2010
Femi Fani-Kayode started his primary school education at the age of 8 at Brighton College, Brighton in the U.K. after which he went to Holmewood House School in Tunbridge Wells, Kent, South-East England. After prep school he gained entry into Harrow School in Harrow on the Hill, United Kingdom and later on into Kelly College in Tavistock, U.K., where he completed the rest of his public school education. In 1980 Femi Fani-Kayode proceeded to the University of London, School of Oriental and African Studies where he graduated with an LL.B law degree in 1983. Victor Adedapo Kayode, Femi's grandfather, was called to the British bar (Middle Temple) in 1922 and his father, Remi Fani-Kayode, was called to the British bar (Middle Temple) in 1945. After finishing from Cambridge Femi Fani-Kayode went to the Nigerian Law School and in 1985 was called to the Nigerian Bar. In 1993, under the tutelage of Archbishop Nicholas Duncan-Williams of Ghana, Femi Fani-Kayode became a Pentecostal Christian. He decided to go back to school to study theology at the Christian Action Faith Bible Seminary in Accra, Ghana, gaining a diploma in theology in 1995.

Political career

thumb|right| Femi Fani-Kayode, Femi Anibaba (Former Minister of Works) and Nasir Ahmad el-Rufai (Former Minister of the Federal Capital Territory) at a cabinet meeting with President Obasanjo in 2007. Femi Fani-Kayode was a member of the Nigerian National Congress (NNC) in 1989. He was elected the national youth leader of NNC that same year. In 1990, he was appointed as Chief Press Secretary to Chief Tom Ikimi, the first national chairman of the National Republican Convention (NRC) and in 1991 as Special Assistant to Alhaji Umaru Shinkafi, former head of the Nigerian Security Organisation (NSO). In 1996, disturbed by the actions of Gen. Sani Abacha's military junta, Femi Fani-Kayode left Nigeria and joined the National Democratic Coalition (NADECO) abroad where, together with the likes of the Oxford University-trained lawyer Chief Tunde Edu and others, he played a very active role in the fight against Abacha."Soyinka, Umar gave OBJ sleepless nights -Fani Kayode ", Point Blank News, 4 October 2009 He came back to Nigeria in 2001 and met President Olusegun Obasanjo. At the beginning of 2003, Femi Fani-Kayode was appointed by the President as a member of his presidential campaign team for the 2003 presidential election. After President Obasanjo won that election Femi Fani-Kayode was appointed as the first ever Special Assistant on Public Affairs to the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria. In 2006 he was appointed as the Honourable Minister of Culture and Tourism. That same year, after a minor cabinet reshuffle, he was redeployed to the Aviation Ministry as the Honourable Minister of Aviation. Since the end of the tenure of President Olusegun Obasanjo's administration on 29 May 2007, Femi Fani-Kayode has gone back to the private sector and to his legal practice.

Challenges and Allegations

thumb|left| Chief Femi Fani-Kayode (left) with President Olusegun Obasanjo at a private lunch to honor Chief Fani-Kayode's 50th birthday on 18 October 2010.5 billion naira (approx.Willy Eya, "OBJ Boys on the Cross", The Sun News, 30 November 2008Funso Muraina and Ahamefula Ogbu, "Nigeria: Borishade, Fani-Kayode Arraigned, Denied Bail", All-Africa.Tobi Soniyi, "Borishade, Iyayi in fresh trouble", The Punch, 15 Sep 2008Tobi Soniyi, "... Fani-Kayode allegedly arrived at the scene and facilitated her release."Femi Fani-Kayode's Girl Friend arrested for Money Laundering", Sahara Reporters, 28 June 2007, accessed 3 December 2008 Anasoh later denied that her arrest had ever taken place, Fani-Kayode also denied the claim that he went to the airport to facilitate the release of Chioma Anasoh and he also said that she was never caught or arrested at the airport with US$240,000 or any other amount."Soyinka, Umar gave OBJ sleepless night -Fani Kayode ", PointBlankNews, 4 October 2009
Fani-Kayode was again arrested on December 2008 by the EFCC and was charged with 47 counts of money laundering.efccnigeria.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=516&Itemid=34 Economic and Financial Crimes CommissionTony Amokeodo, "Money laundering: Fani-Kayode to spend Christmas in prison", The Punch, 24 December 2008 Yar'Adua will send Obansanjo to prison - El Rufai ", Daily Trust,  21 October 2009Seye Kehinde," Yar'Adua's plan was to destroy Obasanjo, Ex-Aviation Minister, Femi Fani-Kayode", Modern Ghana, 15 November 2010 He alleged that the investigations of the Yar'Adua government and the EFCC were politically motivated, and that he was being persecuted in the same way as other colleagues from the Obasanjo government, such as Nasir Ahmad el-Rufai and Nuhu Ribadu, for their ties to President Obasanjo."Obasanjo, Atiku and I, by Fani-Kayode", The Nation, By Our Reporter, 16 October 2009By Teamribadu1 "Nuhu Ribadu is a man of truth" by Former Minister of Aviation, Femi Fani-Kayode  ", YouTube, December 2010
thumb|right| Chief Femi Fani-Kayode with former military President, General Ibrahim Babangida (rtd) at a private dinner to honor Chief Fani-Kayode's 50th birthday organised by General Babangida in Lagos on 17 October 2010. Goodluck Jonathan. Yar'Adua's loyalists resisted this suggestion vehemently and it was reported that part of their response to that challenge was to implement yet another strategy to try to silence and intimidate President Obasanjo and his key loyalists like El-Rufai, Fani-Kayode, Ribadu, Lawal Batagarawa, Nnenadi Usman and Andy Uba by roping them into a phantom coup plot with a view to eventually charging them and trying them for treason and encouraging military insurrection. This was the same method that was adopted by General Sani Abacha who had jailed Obasanjo on similar trumped up charges when he was in power. General Obasanjo was released and pardoned a number of years later after Abacha died and after General Abdulsalami Abubakar took power."Coup Scare: Obasanjo's men on watch list .....com'', December 7th 2010
In November 2010, Fani-Kayode alleged that Yar'Adua's intention before he died was to jail and destroy the legacy of his predecessor in office and the man that single-handedly brought him to power, President Olusegun Obasanjo, together with those that were perceived as being his loyalists, including El-Rufai, Ribadu, and Fani-Kayode himself.com'', November 2010 He also alleged that Baba Gana Kingibe, the Secretary to the Federal Government during the Yar'Adua administration, was the principal enforcer of that plan and that Yar'Adua administration officials James Ibori, Tanimu Yakubu, Abba Ruma and Michael Aondoakaa were also involved.

Poems and essays

thumb|left| Christmas lunch at the Abuja home of Chief Femi Fani-Kayode with Nuhu Ribadu and Mallam Nasir El-Rufai, December 2010."I Stand and Fight", The Nigerian Voice, 17 November 2010 In this poem, he described Yar'Adua as a "sickly tyrant with an amalekite foundation" and he predicted that "his end would soon come". Fani-Kayode wrote other poems over the last few years."The Power of a Woman", The Will Nigeria, 18 April 2010"A Tribute to the Warrior", The Nigerian Voice, 9 April 2010"St. Barts and The God-Sent Child", Modern Ghana, 27 December 2011
In January 2010 and approximately two months after Yar'Adua left Nigeria and was flown to Saudi Arabia on medical grounds (during which time no Nigerian other than his wife and his chief security officer saw him or saw any pictures of him), there were strong speculations  in the country that the president was dead, was in a deep coma or was simply so sick that he could not even speak or get up from his sick bed in his Saudi Arabian hospital. This resulted in a power vacuum in Nigeria as a consequence of which a constitutional crisis began to unfold.com, January 6, 2010  The President's supporters and cabinet ministers, led by his wife Turai Yar'Adua, resisted the suggestion that the Vice President should take over power whilst the President was incapacitated even though this was what the Nigerian constitution prescribed,"Resign Now: Choose the path of honour, Obasanjo tells Yar'Adua", Sahara Reporters, 21 January 2010  Fani-Kayode added his voice to that of President Obasanjo, President Shehu Shagari, General Yakubu Gowon, Ernest Shonekan and other former heads of government, former cabinet ministers, former legislators, leading opposition figures and leading members of the ruling PDP party by publicly calling for the resignation of President Yaradua and for the transference of power to Vice President Goodluck Jonathan at that critical time.  In the article Fani-Kayode suggested that by insisting on ruling Nigeria from his sick bed in Saudi Arabia and through his acolytes and wife, the President and his supporters were not just breaching the Nigerian constitution but that they were also surreptitiously introducing an entirely new and alien system of government into Nigeria, destroying democracy and attempting to perpetuate themselves in power through that new system indefinitely.  He argued that this was being done by the authorities even where it was clear that the President was already "half dead". Fani-Kayode defined his concept of corpsology (or "corpsocracy" as he sometimes calls it) as "the rulership of the living by the dead" and the thrust and intent of his satire was to clearly convey the message that the attempt to introduce this hitherto unknown system of government into Nigeria by Yaradua, his wife and his kitchen cabinet was unacceptable and must not be allowed to stand.Femi Fani-Kayode,"Corpsology: Umaru's gift to the modern world ", Next, January 30, 2010
thumb|right| Chief Femi Fani-Kayode On August 7, 2010 Fani-Kayode wrote another article titled "Charles Taylor: A Man Betrayed" in which he described the events and circumstances leading up to the extradition of the infamous former President of Liberia Charles Taylor from Nigeria, where he had been given refuge and asylum after a bitter war and crisis in his nation Liberia. Fani-Kayode explained how Taylor ended up being handed back to Liberia and how he was then sent to the International Criminal Court at the Hague in the Netherlands to face charges of genocide and crimes against humanity."Charles Taylor: A Man Betrayed", National Daily, 7 August 2010 Fani-Kayode had been the spokesman of President Obasanjo at that time, and in his essay he gave an account of how Taylor was betrayed by a number of parties and nations and detailed what he described as the "treacherous and ignoble" roles that US President George W. Bush  and President Johnson Sirleaf of Liberia played in the saga. He accused both America and Liberia of reneging on their word and on an earlier agreement on the Taylor issue and he alleged that they "betrayed the confidence" that the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Heads of Government, Nigeria and President Obasanjo had placed in them. Finally he called for the trial of former President George W. Bush and Britain's former Prime Minister Tony Blair at the same International Criminal Court at the Hague for what he described as "similar crimes against humanity" as the ones that Taylor was being accused of. He alleged that they had committed these crimes during the illegal invasion of Iraq and the bombing of Baghdad in which he claimed that "hundreds of thousands of defenceless and innocent Iraqi women and children" were killed. The article was published the day after the sensational appearance of super-model Naomi Campbell at the famous "blood diamonds" trial of Charles Taylor at the Hague."Charles Taylor: A Man Betrayed", Next, 9 August 2010
Fani-Kayode was also involved in a debate about the mysterious circumstances under which Nigeria's first Prime Minister, Sir Tafawa Balewa, lost his life. In two essays titled "Femi Fani-Kayode: Who Killed Sir Tafawa Balewa?" and "The Death of Tafawa Balewa: the Segun Osoba angle", he opposed the view that Balewa had died of natural causes which had been suggested by Chief M.T. Mbu, Nigeria's former Foreign Minister and Chief Segun Osoba, a former state governor, and he proffered the view that the Prime Minister had actually been murdered."Femi Fani-Kayode: Who Killed Sir Tafawa Balewa?", Modern Ghana, 6 September 2010"he Death of Tafawa Balewa: the Segun Osoba angle", AllAfrica."Obasanjo, Yar'Adua, Buhari And Power Sector", All Africa, 28 March 2010"major hamza al-mustapha; a grave and grievious injustice ", Elendu Reports, 27 July 2010"Between Igbo, Yoruba and the Nigerian Women", The Wille, 7 April 2011 In 2011 he called for the "crushing" of the Islamic fundamentalist sect called Boko Haram which claimed responsibility for the deaths of hundreds of Nigerians in a campaign of terror and bombing in their quest to ban western education and set up an Islamic fundamentalist caliphate in the whole of northern Nigeria"."The Poor Husband, the Rich Wife & Boko Haram", Pointblank news, 7 July 2011

Family

Femi Fani-Kayode has been married three times. His first marriage was to Saratu "Baby" Atta in 1987 but they were divorced by 1990."THE FANI KAYODE INTERVIEW: WE WANTED EL-RUFAI FOR PRESIDENT-FANI KAYODE", Point Blank News, 16 March 2010 They have one daughter whose name is Oluwafolake. The second marriage was to Yemisi Olasunbo Adeniji in 1991 but they were divorced by 1995. They have three daughters whose names are Oluwatemitope, Oluwatobiloba and Oluwatuminu. The third marriage was to Regina Patience Amonoo. They were married in 1997 and are still married till today. They have one daughter whose name is Oluwaremilekun. His brother, Rotimi Fani-Kayode, was a renowned and influential artist and photographer who founded of the Association of Black Photographers (AUTOGRAPH) and who passed on in 1989."Fani-Kayode, Rotimi (1955-1989)", GLBTQ Arts
David Oluwafemi Adewunmi Abdulateef Fani-Kayode ( Femi Fani-kayode), ' Described the Igbos, an ethnic group in Nigeria of more than 40 million people as "collectively unlettered, uncouth, uncultured, unrestrained and crude in all their ways". He has defended his views strongly."FEMI FANI KAYODE- HAUNTED BY A NUPE ANCESTRY- FIGHTING A FOGGY YORUBA IDENTITY COMPLEX ", Codewit World News, , 24 August 2013






