[[Peter Scott]]

CATEGORIES: 1909 births, 1989 deaths, English ornithologists, British conservationists, English activists, Cryptozoologists, Zookeepers, English television presenters, Wildfowl & Wetlands Trust, English illustrators, 20th-century English painters, 20th-century English writers, Fellows of the Royal Society (Statute 12), Stamp designers, English yacht racers, Sailors at the 1936 Summer Olympics – O-Jolle, Olympic sailors of Great Britain, Olympic bronze medalists for Great Britain, America's Cup sailors, Oundle, Members of the Order of the Companions of Honour, Knights Bachelor, Anglo-Scots, Gliding in England, Chancellors of the University of Birmingham, Rectors of the University of Aberdeen, Alumni of Trinity College, Cambridge, People educated at West Downs School, People educated at Oundle School, English people of Scottish descent, English conservationists, British bird artists, Royal Navy officers of World War II, Olympic medalists in sailing, Camoufleurs

Sir Peter Markham Scott  (14 September 1909 – 29 August 1989) was a British ornithologist, conservationist, painter, naval officer and sportsman.
Scott was knighted in 1973 for his contribution to the conservation of wild animals. He had been a founder of the World Wide Fund for Nature, a founder of several wetlands bird sanctuaries in Britain, and an influence on international conservation. Sir Peter Scott: champion for the environment and founder of the World Wildlife Fund. Stevens, Milwaukee. He received the WWF Gold Medal and the J. Paul Getty Prize for his work.

Biography

Early life

Scott was born in London, the only child of Antarctic explorer Robert Falcon Scott and sculptor Kathleen Bruce. He was only two years old when his father died. Robert Scott, in a last letter to his wife, advised her to "make the boy interested in natural history if you can; it is better than games."Scott's Last Expedition, Smith, Elder & Co., London, 1913 OCLC 15522514 M. Barrie, creator of Peter Pan.
He was educated at Oundle School and Trinity College, Cambridge, initially reading Natural Sciences but graduating in the History of Art in 1931.

Art and sports

Like his mother, he displayed a strong artistic talent and had his first exhibition in London in 1933. His wealthy background allowed him to follow his interests in art, wildlife and many sports, including sailing and ice skating. He represented Great Britain and Northern Ireland at sailing in the 1936 Berlin Olympic Games, winning a bronze medal in the O-Jolle dinghy class.

Second World War

During World War II, Scott served in the Royal Navy, emulating his father. As a Sub-Lieutenant, during the failed evacuation of the 51st Highland Division he was the British Naval officer sent ashore at St Valery in the early hours of 11 June 1940 to evacuate some of the wounded. This was the last evacuation of British troops from the port area of St Valery that was not disrupted by enemy fire.Hugh Sebag-Montefiore, Dunkirk Fight to the Last Man Viking, 2006 
Then he served in destroyers in the North Atlantic but later moved to commanding the First (and only) Squadron of Steam Gun Boats against German E-boats in the English Channel.
Scott is credited with designing the "Western Approaches" ship camouflage scheme, which disguised the look of ship superstructure. In July 1940, he managed to get the destroyer HMS Broke (D83) in which he was serving experimentally camouflaged, differently on the two sides. To starboard, the ship was painted blue-grey all over, but with white in naturally shadowed areas as countershading, following the ideas of Abbott Handerson Thayer from the First World War. To port, the ship was painted in "bright pale colours" to combine some disruption of shape with the ability to fade out during the night, again with shadowed areas painted white. However, he later wrote that compromise was fatal to camouflage, and that invisibility at night (by painting ships in white or other pale colours) had to be the sole objective.
By May 1941, all ships in the "Western Approaches" (the North Atlantic) were ordered to be painted in Scott's camouflage scheme. The scheme was said to be so effective that several British ships including HMS Broke collided with each other. The effectiveness of Scott's and Thayer's ideas was demonstrated experimentally by the Leamington Camouflage Centre in 1941. Under a cloudy overcast sky, the tests showed that a white ship could approach six miles (9.6 km) closer than a black-painted ship before being seen. Dazzled and Deceived: Mimicry and Camouflage. Yale. Pages 172-173.

Post-war life

He stood as a Conservative candidate unsuccessfully in the 1945 general election in Wembley North. In 1946, he founded the organisation with which he was ever afterwards closely associated, the Severn Wildfowl Trust (now the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust) with its headquarters at Slimbridge in Gloucestershire. In the years that followed, he led ornithological expeditions worldwide, and became a television personality, popularising the study of wildfowl and wetlands. His BBC natural history series, Look, ran from 1955 to 1981 and made him a household name. It included the first BBC natural history film to be shown in colour, The Private Life of the Kingfisher (1968), which he narrated. He wrote and illustrated several books on the subject, including his autobiography, The Eye of the Wind (1961). In the 1950s, he also appeared regularly on BBC radio's Children's Hour, in the series, "Nature Parliament".
Scott took up gliding in 1956 and became a British champion in 1963. He was chairman of the British Gliding Association (BGA) for two years from 1968 and was president of the Bristol & Gloucestershire Gliding Club. He was responsible for involving Prince Philip in gliding; the Prince is still patron of the BGA.
He was the subject of This Is Your Life in 1956 when he was surprised by Eamonn Andrews at the King's Theatre, Hammersmith, London.
From 1973 to 1983, Scott was Chancellor of the University of Birmingham. In 1992, he was awarded an Honorary Degree (Doctor of Science) from the University of Bath.
He died of a heart attack on 29 August 1989 in Bristol, just 2 weeks' shy of his 80th birthday.
He was the founder President of the Society of Wildlife Artists and President of the Nature in Art Trust (a role in which Philippa succeeded him).
Scott tutored numerous artists including Paul Karslake FRSA.

=Sailing=

Scott also continued with his love of sailing, skippering the 12 metre yacht Sovereign in the 1964 challenge for the America's Cup which was held by the USA. Sovereign suffered a whitewash 4-0 defeat in a one-sided competition where the American boat had a faster design. From 1955 - 1969 he was the president of the International Sailing Federation

World Wide Fund for Nature

He was one of the founders of the World Wide Fund for Nature (formerly called the World Wildlife Fund), and designed its panda logo. His pioneering work in conservation also contributed greatly to the shift in policy of the International Whaling Commission and signing of the Antarctic Treaty, the latter inspired by his visit to his father's base on Ross Island in Antarctica.

Loch Ness Monster

He is also remembered for giving the scientific name of Nessiteras rhombopteryx (based on a blurred underwater photograph of a supposed fin) to the Loch Ness Monster so that it could be registered as an endangered species. Nessie researcher Robert H. Rines, who took 2 supposed pictures of the monster in the 1970s, responded to this by pointing out that the letters could also be read as an anagram for, "Yes, both pix are monsters, R.".
In 1962, he co-founded the Loch Ness Phenomena Investigation Bureau with the then Conservative MP David James, who had previously been Polar Adviser on the 1948 movie based on his late father's polar expedition Scott of the Antarctic. Bauer, The Enigma of Loch Ness: Making Sense of a Mystery, page 163 (University of Illinois Press, 1986). ISBN 0-252-01284-4

British Naturalists' Association

Scott was a long-time Vice-President of the British Naturalists' Association, whose Peter Scott Memorial Award was instituted after his death, to commemorate his achievements.

Television documentaries

In June 2004, Scott and Sir David Attenborough were jointly profiled in the second of a three part BBC Two series, The Way We Went Wild, about television wildlife presenters and were described as being largely responsible for the way that the British and much of the world views wildlife. Scott's life was also the subject of a BBC Four documentary called "Peter Scott - A Passion for Nature" produced in 2006 by Available Light Productions (Bristol). 

Cultural references

Scott appears as a minor character in the novel The Plague Dogs by Richard Adams. The fictional Scott assists in rescuing the protagonists from their final peril, ably assisted by Ronald Lockley.
Scott is cited as a member of the eclectic (and fictional) "orchestra" in the Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band's recording, The Intro and the Outro, where he is credited—appropriately—with playing a duck call.

Personal life

Scott married the novelist Elizabeth Jane Howard in 1942 and had a daughter, Nicola, born a year later. Slipstream, Macmillan, 2002, page 134 Howard left Scott in 1946 and they were divorced in 1951. Slipstream, Macmillan, 2002, page 219
In 1951, he married his assistant, Philippa Talbot-Ponsonby, while on an expedition to Iceland in search of the breeding grounds of the Pink-footed Goose. A daughter, Dafila, was born later in the same year (dafila is the old scientific name for a pintail). She, too, became an artist, painting birds. A son, Falcon, was born in 1954.Philippa Scott obituary, The Guardian, Sunday 10 January 2010

Honours and decorations

On 8 July 1941, it was announced that Scott had been Mentioned in Dispatches (MID) "for good services in rescuing survivors from a burning Vessel" while serving on HMS Broke.
He was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in the 1942 King's Birthday Honours.

Bibliography

Forewords

Illustrations

| publisher = Newnes,
| pages = 240 p. : illus ; 23 cm.
| last = Christian
| first = Garth
| title = Down the Long Wind - a study of bird migration.
| location = London
| year = 1961
}}

Films






