[[MTA Regional Bus Operations]]

CATEGORIES: MTA Regional Bus Operations, Metropolitan Transportation Authority of New York, Surface transportation in Greater New York, Transit authorities with hybrid buses, Transit authorities with natural gas buses, Government agencies established in 2008

MTA Regional Bus Operations (RBO) is the surface transit division of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA), created in 2008 to consolidate all bus operations operated by the MTA.

History

The history of the MTA's bus operations generally follows the history of the New York City Transit Authority, which was created in 1953 by the State of New York to take over operations then operated by the New York City Board of Transportation. The current system came into being in the mid-2000s following the MTA's assumption of services previously operated by private carriers under franchise agreements with the New York City Department of Transportation, the successor to the Board of Transportation. This brought almost all bus transportation in New York City under its control. the MTA then moved to streamline its operations through consolidation of management function. To that effect, RBO was officially created in May 2008, with the president of what was then New York City Transit's Department of Buses, Joseph J. Smith, named to lead the consolidated bus operations. MTA Regional Bus also included the MTA Long Island Bus division until January 2012, when its services were transferred to a private operator by Nassau County (see below for more information).
Currently, many RBO's operational changes have been at the management level, with the creation of a unified command center and consolidation of management for all bus operations, with the aim of reducing redundancies in the agency. Other changes have included eliminating the MTA Bus call center, folding it into that of New York City Transit, and the unification of the fare policy for all of the MTA's services.

Brands and service area

Regional Bus Operations is currently only used in official documentation, and not publicly as a brand. The current public brands are listed below:
The current scheme (except for #2185, with a special 9/11 memorial scheme) is a straight blue stripe across the sides of the bus against a white base, with no colors on the front or back, and black window trim. From 1977 until late 2007, (and still present on much of the fleet), the livery was a full all-around stripe with a black rear, and until late 2010 (and still present on buses repainted during this time), the scheme was a stripe with a blank rear. Buses operated in Select Bus Service bus rapid transit service are wrapped with a light blue-and-white wrap below the windows.
Access-A-Ride paratransit services are provided by various independent contractors, using vehicles owned by the MTA.
In addition, MTA Regional Bus Operations operated bus and paratransit service in Nassau County under the name Long Island Bus until December 31, 2011. This service was operated by the MTA under an agreement with Nassau County, who owned its facilities and equipment. In 2011, the MTA asked Nassau County to provide more funding for Long Island Bus than they were at the time. The county refused to provide additional funding, and the MTA voted to end operation of the system at the end of 2011. The county then decided to hire Veolia Transportation, a private transportation company, to operate the system in place of the MTA beginning in 2012.

History of MTA New York City Bus

thumb|200px|An early livery for the NYC Transit Authority.|leftCity involvement with surface transit in the city began in September 1919, when Mayor John Francis Hylan, through the New York City Department of Plant and Structures, organized private entrepreneurs to operate "emergency" buses to replace four abandoned storage battery streetcar lines: the Madison Street Line, Spring and Delancey Streets Line, Avenue C Line, and Sixth Avenue Ferry Line.New York Times, Says City Cleared $4,359 on Car Line, July 18, 1921, page 14Zachary M. Schrag, 
Another city acquisition was the Bridge Operating Company, which ran the Williamsburg Bridge Local trolley, acquired in 1921 by the DP&S.Bridge Cars of '04 Yielding to Buses, December 2, 1948, page 58
On February 23, 1947, the Board of Transportation took over the Staten Island bus network of the Isle Transportation Company. Further acquisitions were made on March 30, 1947, with the North Shore Bus Company in Queens, and September 24, 1948, with the East Side Omnibus Corporation and Comprehensive Omnibus Corporation in Manhattan. With the city takeover of the Brooklyn-Manhattan Transit Corporation's surface subsidiary, the Brooklyn and Queens Transit Corporation, on June 2, 1940,New York Times, B.M.T. Lines Pass to City Ownership, June 2, 1940, page 1 the city gained a large network of trolley and bus lines, covering all of Brooklyn and portions of Queens.New York Times, End Soon of Two Brooklyn Trolley Lines Will Leave City With but One Short Route, December 30, 1955, page 15New York Times, Queensboro Bridge Trolley Line, Last One Here, Appears Doomed, March 20, 1957New York Times, City's Last Trolley at End of Line, April 7, 1957, page 1
Thus, in the late 1950s, the city operated all local service in Staten Island and Brooklyn, about half the local service in Queens, and several routes in Manhattan. Several private companies operated buses in Queens, and the Avenue B and East Broadway Transit Company operated a small Manhattan system, but by far the largest system was the Fifth Avenue Coach Company and Surface Transit, which operated almost all Manhattan routes and all Bronx routes, plus two into Queens (15 Fifth Avenue - Jackson Heights and TB Triborough Bridge) and one within Queens (16 Elmhurst Crosstown). After a strike in 1962, the city took over operations. To avoid legal issues, a new agency, the Manhattan and Bronx Surface Transit Operating Authority (MaBSTOA) was formed to operate the former Fifth Avenue Coach Lines and Surface Transit, Inc. routes. The final acquisition was in 1980, when MaBSTOA took over the Avenue B and East Broadway's routes, using MaBSTOA equipment with Avenue B red route roll signs (NYCTA acquired the 13 Grumman Flxibles that had been assigned to Avenue B and placed them in NYCTA service). Public takeover of the remaining Queens buses, as well as most express routes, was implemented in 2005 and 2006 by the new MTA Bus Company. Sander In 2008, the bus operations of New York City Transit and MTA Bus Company (as well as the now former Long Island Bus division) were merged into a new regional operation, MTA Regional Bus Operations. The New York City Bus brand continues to be used.

History of MTA Bus

MTA Bus Company was established in late 2004 to take over privately operated bus routes operated under contract to the NYCDOT. in February 2006.
MTA Bus started to operate the former Liberty Lines Express bus routes on January 3, 2005,  Queens Surface Corporation bus routes on February 27, 2005, New York Bus Service bus routes on July 1, 2005,  Command Bus Company bus routes on  December 5, 2005, Green Bus Lines bus routes on January 9, 2006, and Jamaica Buses bus routes on January 30, 2006. Triboro Coach Corporation, the final remaining company, ceased operating and its routes have been operated by MTA Bus since February 20, 2006.MTA Newsroom
Currently, the only NYCDOT subsidized lines not consolidated into MTA Bus are those run by Atlantic Express and were formerly run by Academy Bus (Commuter Coach) until 2001.atlanticexpress.htm EMERGENCY INTERIM COMMUTER SERVICE For the South Shore Community of Staten Island Although the X23, and X24 routes were absorbed by Atlantic Express, the X17J, X21, X22, and X30 routes were absorbed by the New York City Transit Authority. NYCT discontinued service on the X21 months after the takeover. Recently, NYS Assemblyman Lou Tobacco and NYS Senator Andrew Lanza, along with U.S. Congressman Michael E. McMahon and NYC Councilmen Vincent Ignizio and James Oddo have asked the MTA to look into the possible consolidation of the remainder of the NYCDOT routes.state.ny. Atlantic Express also ran the AE7 express route from Travis, Staten Island and Tottenville, Staten Island in the same manner as the Private Transportation B110 local route. Citing low ridership and increased costs, Atlantic Express canceled the AE7 service on December 31, 2010. Councilmen Ignizio and Oddo as well as Congressman Michael G. Grimm have called on the MTA to revamp that route also.
In 2008, the bus operations of MTA Bus Company and New York City Transit (as well as the now former Long Island Bus division) were merged into a new regional operation, MTA Regional Bus Operations. The MTA Bus brand continues to be used.

Operations

MTA Regional Bus routes are spread out across New York City. However, some bus routes may also operate to areas beyond city limits. The Q5 and Q85 routes cross the Nassau County border to go to the Green Acres Mall in Valley Stream. The Q2 and Q110 routes leave Queens as they run along Hempstead Turnpike and onto the Cross Island Parkway, and Belmont Racetrack in Elmont, where they re-enter the city. The Q46 route runs along Lakeville Road in Lake Success, Nassau County upon entering Long Island Jewish Medical Center. During peak hours, select Q111 buses run to Cedarhurst in Nassau County. The Bx16 route runs into Westchester County for two blocks in Mount Vernon.  The Bx7 and Bx10 buses both make their last stops at the Bronx-Westchester border. BxM3 express buses leave the city as they operate to Getty Square in Yonkers. The S89 is the only route to have a stop outside state borders, terminating at the 34th Street Hudson-Bergen Light Rail station in Bayonne, New Jersey. Some Staten Island express routes run via New Jersey, but do not stop in the state.
New York City Transit bus routes are labeled with a number and a prefix identifying the primary borough (B for Brooklyn, Bx for the Bronx, M for Manhattan, Q for Queens, and S for Staten Island). Express buses use the letter X rather than a borough label. Lettered suffixes can be used to designate branches or variants. MTA Bus Company bus routes follow this scheme as well, but combines prefixes for inter-borough express routes (e.g. a route traveling between Manhattan and the Bronx is labeled BxM# and a route traveling between Manhattan and Queens is labeled QM#).

Local and limited-stop service

Local and limited-stop buses provide service within a borough, or in some cases across two. While local buses make all stops along a route, limited-stop buses only make stops at busy transfer points, points of interest, and heavily used roadways. Limited stop service was first attempted with the M4 bus during rush hours in 1973, then expanded to other routes from there. The usual setup is that limited stop service runs the full route, while local services run only in the limited stop area, and the limited stop buses run local at the tail ends of the route not served by locals, similar to the operation of some subway services and the Staten Island Railway.
The following MTA Regional Bus routes run limited stop service (for non-Staten Island routes, where there is a route numbering system, bold indicates no corresponding local service on the limited-stop route):
Limited-Stop buses flash LIMITED on the destination sign and a few have a Limited sign in the windshield.

=Select Bus Service=

Select Bus Service or +SBS, the brand name for MTA bus rapid transit service, is a variant of Limited-Stop bus service that requires fare payment to be made before boarding the bus, at fare payment machines in shelters at designated "stations" (such a shelter is shown to the left). Receipts given for payment of fare are "proof-of-payment" that must be shown to fare enforcement upon request. In the event of the fare machine failing to issue a receipt, the bus operator must be notified of the problem. The implementation of this new service is paired with new lane markings and traffic signs that reserve a lane for buses only between 7AM and 7PM.Riders Will Pay Before Boarding, and Save Time, on Revamped Bus Route, New York Times, June 29, 2008
SBS service began on the Bx12 207th Street Crosstown/Fordham Road/Pelham Parkway line in the Bronx on June 28, 2008. The M15 First/Second Avenues line saw SBS implementation in Manhattan on October 10, 2010. The M34 / M34A routes began service on November 13, 2011, after replacing the identical local service along 34th Street.
Buses used in this service are identifiable with "stations" be similar to those pictured to the right and also have a "+selectbusservice" wrap identifying them as such buses. Locations of stops (and in some cases, the local bus stops) were shifted or eliminated where possible to prevent mixing of local bus customers. SBS is offered in conjunction with the New York City and New York State Department of Transportation.

Express service

Express bus service is generally geared towards peak hour commuters from the outer boroughs and neighboring suburbs that lacks rail or subway services to and from Midtown Manhattan or Lower Manhattan. Some routes also provide significant off-peak service from early morning to late evening, every day (notably the X10, X17, X27, BxM1/2, BxM3, BxM4, BxM6, BxM7, BxM8, BxM9, BxM10, BxM11, QM2, QM4 and QM5/6; the X1 runs 24 hours a day). 45-foot MCI and Prevost over-the-road coaches are used for express service.
Service originally began in 1968, on a route traveling from the South Shore of Staten Island, up Hylan Blvd, and into Manhattan.

Demand response

thumb|rightthumb|right|An MV-1 Access-A-Ride cabIn addition to a 100% accessible bus fleet, New York City Transit also provides paratransit services under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 under the Access-A-Ride brand, for customers who cannot use regular bus or subway service servicing all five boroughs of New York City at all times.

Bus stop signage

The color coded bus stop signs were first installed on November 1996 in Jamaica, Queens.nytimes.html "Color-Coded Bus Stop Signs Replacing Old, Cryptic Ones" NY Times November 20, 1996 It was designed by W.S. Sign Design Corporation.wssign-design.shtml W.S. Sign Design Corporation webpage The signs were created in response to complaints from bus riders that the past metal signs lacks of basic information about bus routes and schedules, and are too often missing signs. 
The bus stop features a large circle shape on the top and color-coded bus route information on the bottom. The bus stop circle has the bus  and wheelchair accessible logo in blue and white colors. It is also indicated where there is no standing zone in the bus stop area in red. The bus route signs are color-coded by the type of service run with the route number sign and the final destination sign located on the bus stop pole. On the bottom of bus route destination sign, a location where the bus stop is at in white and black colors. The signs are made in recyclable plastic that last up to ten years and more maintainable then the old metal signs for three years. The green plastic pole is 12 feet high versus the old six to nine feet high metal signs. It also carries Guide-A-Ride that is attach to the green pole, providing a route map, schedule and other information. All bus stop signs are maintained by New York City Department of Transportation.org/bus/ NYU Rudin Center for Transportation "The Mobility Factbook - Public Bus"
Within the service area, bus stops signs are normally located every two to three city blocks apart in most cases. Buses marked Limited-Stop, Select Bus Service and Express routes make fewer schedule stops.mta.htm "How to Ride the Bus" mta.info
All bus stops are in effect at all times unless otherwise indicated by signage.
 
 
Late night Request-A-Stop

Between 10:00 PM (22:00) and 5:00 AM (05:00), "Request-a-Stop" service is available. The bus operator may discharge passengers at a location along the route that is not a bus stop, as long as it is considered safe. If the location is not "safe", the bus operator will discharge passengers at the nearest safe location. Request-A-Stop is not available on Select Bus Service, Limited-Stop routes, or overnight bus shuttles.

Fleet

The fleet consists of over 5,900 buses of various types and models for fixed-route service, and over 2,000 vans and cabs for ADA paratransit service, providing service in New York City, southwestern Nassau County, and the city of Yonkers. All vehicles (except for paratransit cabs) are fully accessible to persons with disabilities.NYCT data from the National Transit DatabaseMTA Bus Company data from the National Transit Database
Within the current fleet are over 1,600 diesel-electric buses and over 900 buses powered by compressed natural gas. Fixed-route buses are dispatched from 28 garages (20 New York City Bus and 8 MTA Bus) and one annex in New York City.
By fleet size, the MTA Regional Bus (New York City Bus and MTA Bus) fleet is the fourth largest in the United States and Canada (and the largest public transit fleet), behind three school bus operators: First Student, Durham School Services, and Student Transportation, Incorporated.

Fares

Dollar bills and half-dollar coins are not accepted on fixed-route buses or Select Bus Service payment stations, nor are they accepted on buses of the Bee-Line Bus System (Bee-Line) in Westchester County or the Nassau Inter-County Express (NICE) in Nassau County. All fares are in US dollars, and the following fare policy applies to all New York City Transit, MTA Bus, NICE, and Bee-Line (except for the BxM4C) buses.
 
 
