[[Shlomo Sand]]

CATEGORIES: Israeli historians, Jewish historians, Historians of Jews and Judaism, Historians of France, Intellectual historians, Post-Zionists, Film theorists, Jewish anti-Zionism, Tel Aviv University faculty, Tel Aviv University alumni, Israeli Jews, Israeli people of Austrian-Jewish descent, Israeli people of Polish-Jewish descent, Austrian people of Polish descent, 1946 births, Living people, People from Linz



Shlomo Sand (pronounced Zand; ) (born 10 September 1946 in Linz, Austria) is an Israeli professor of history at Tel Aviv University. He is an expert in the history of nationalism, film as history, and French intellectual history.CV on the Tel Aviv University website

Biography

Sand was born in Linz, Austria, to Polish Jewish survivors of the Holocaust. His parents had Communist and anti-imperialist views and refused to accept compensation from Germany for their suffering during the Second World War. Sand spent his first two years in a displaced-persons camp near Munich, and moved with the family to Jaffa in 1948. He was expelled from high school at the age of sixteen."  Quitting the Union of Israeli Communist Youth (Banki), he joined the more radical, and anti-Zionist, Matzpen in 1968. He resigned from Matzpen in 1970 due to his disillusionment with the organisation.Matzpen siteConversation with Shlomo Sand, by Asaf Shor, Me'asef, 10 December 2004 (in Hebrew)
Declining an offer by the Israeli Communist Party Rakah to be sent to do cinema studies in Poland, Sand graduated with a BA in History from Tel Aviv University in 1975.  Determined to "abandon everything" Israeli, he moved to France, where, from 1975 to 1985, after winning a scholarship, he studied and taught in Paris, receiving an MA in French History and a PhD for his thesis on "Georges Sorel and Marxism."PhD Thesis : Georges Sorel et le marxisme. Rencontre et crise 1893-1902. (Georges Sorel and Marxism. Encounter and crisis 1893-1902), École des hautes études en sciences sociales, Paris, France, 1982. Since 1982, Sand has taught at Tel Aviv University as well as at the University of California, Berkeley, and the École des hautes études en sciences sociales in Paris.
In 1983, according to one source, Sand "took part in a heated exchange over Zeev Sternhell's Ni droite, ni gauche: l'idéologie fasciste en France, and later drew the ire of Claude Lanzmann with his 2002 book in Hebrew, Film as History, in which he not only passed scathing judgement on Lanzmann's Shoah, but also revealed that the film had been secretly funded by the Israeli government."

Views

While acknowledging "the affinity between Jews and the holy land," Sand has said that "I don't think the religious affinity to the land gives you historical right." Still, he supports Israel's existence "not because of historical right, but because of the fact that it exist today and any effort to destroy it will bring new tragedies." He explained that he doesn't call himself a Zionist, but "a post-Zionist and non-Zionist because the justification of this land is not historical right."
Comparing the Palestinians to children of rape, Sand has said that Israel "raped a population. And not only a population – we destroyed this society, in constituting the Israeli state." He opposes the law of return an the right of return. Still, "Israel has to be the state of Israelis. That is the only way we can continue to live in the middle east." He argues that before Hitler, Jews were overwhelmingly against Zionism, and the concept of "Eretz Israel" was not about an earthly homeland but about something more spiritual. He also opposes the one-state solution because, while "very very popular in leftist circles," it is "not serious" because Israelis, being "one of the most racist societies in the western world," will never accept it. Thus he supports a "two state solution on the borders of '67, taking out most of the settlers. I don't think it will be a big problem."

Criticism of gene studies

In 2010, when Harry Ostrer, a Jewish professor of genetics at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, announced the results of a DNA study showing "powerful genetic markers of Jewish ancestry," Sand told Science Magazine that "Hitler would certainly have been very pleased." Writing in the Chronicle of Higher Education, Josh Fischman noted that Sand's argument in The Invention of the Jews "that Jews arose from converting many local communities in Europe and elsewhere..." Ostrer was offended by Sand's attack: "Bringing up Hitler was overheated and misconstrues my work," he said. But Sand reiterated his criticism, writing in an email to Fischman that "It is a shame for somebody who defines himself as a Jew to look for a Jewish gene."
Genetic support for Shlomo Sand has come from Johns Hopkins University geneticist Dr. Eran Elhaik  who published the genetic study "The Missing Link of Jewish European Ancestry: Contrasting the Rhineland and the Khazarian Hypotheses" in December 2012.oxfordjournals. Elhaik's work.salem-news.php And the journal Genome Biology and Evolution also ran a news piece mentioning Sand, in relation to Elhaik's research; "For Shlomo Sand, history professor at Tel Aviv University and author of the controversial book The Invention of the Jewish People, Elhaik's paper was a vindication of his long-held ideas."

The Invention of the Jewish People

Sand's best-known book in English is The Invention of the Jewish People, originally published in Hebrew (Resling, 2008) as Matai ve'eich humtsa ha'am hayehudi? (When and How Was the Jewish People Invented?) and translated into English the following year (Verso, 2009).
The book was in the best-seller list in Israel for nineteen weeks.11.09 | Haaretz.haaretz.3247 It was reprinted three times when published in French (Comment le peuple juif fut inventé, Fayard, Paris, 2008). In France, it received the "Prix Aujourd'hui", a journalists' award given to a non-fiction political or historical work.  An English translation of the book was published by Verso Books in October 2009. The Invention of the Jewish People has now been translated into more languages than any other Israeli history book.

The Invention of the Land of Israel

In April 2012, a sequel, The Invention of the Land of Israel, was published in Hebrew by Kinneret Zmora-Bitan Dvir. It was published in English in 2013.amazon.com/The-Invention-Land-Israel-Homeland/dp/1844679462/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1386449711&sr=8-1&keywords=the+invention+of+the+land+of+israel

How I Ceased to Be a Jew

In 2013, Sand published a book entitled How I Ceased to Be a Jew. The book examines the question of Jewish identity and the distinction between being a Jew and being Israeli. It also examines the identity of Israel, with a focus on the country's relationship, as a "Jewish state," to Jews around the world and to its non-Jewish citizens.co.php?item_id=966934

Publications



Notes




