[[London Evening Standard]]

CATEGORIES: 1827 establishments in England, Daily Mail and General Trust, English-language newspapers, Evening newspapers, Free daily newspapers, London Evening Standard, London newspapers, Publications established in 1827

The London Evening Standard (simply the Evening Standard before May 2009), is a local, free daily newspaper, published Monday to Friday in tabloid format in London. 
It is the dominant regional evening paper for London and the surrounding area, with coverage of national and international news and City of London finance. In October 2009, the paper ended a 180-year history of paid circulation and became a free newspaper, doubling its circulation as part of a change in its business plan.

History

The newspaper was founded by barrister Stanley Lees Giffard on 21 May 1827, as the Standard."Concise History of the British Newspaper in the Nineteenth Century". British Library. 2000. Retrieved 15 January 2010. The early owner of the paper was Charles Baldwin. Under the ownership of James Johnstone The Standard became a morning paper from 29 June 1857, The Evening Standard being published from 11 June 1859. The Standard gained eminence for its detailed foreign news, notably its reporting of events of the American Civil War (1861–1865), the Austro-Prussian War of 1866, and the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, all contributing to a rise in circulation. XIX, Mun to Oddfellows; Article on Newspapers, pp.544–581.
The newspaper has sponsored the annual Evening Standard Theatre Awards since the 1950s.

Lebedev takeover

On 21 January 2009, Russian businessman and former KGB agent Alexander Lebedev and son Evgeny Lebedev, now the newspaper's chairman, agreed to purchase 75.1% of the newspaper for £1. The paper was formerly published by Associated Newspapers Ltd., a division of Daily Mail and General Trust, which also publishes the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday, and Metro, a free morning paper distributed from Monday to Friday at London stations. 
In November 2009, it was announced that the London Evening Standard would drop its midday "News Extra" edition from 4 January 2010 with the first edition being the West End Final, available from 2pm. One edition of 600,000 copies would be printed starting at 12:30pm, ending 3am starts for journalists and the previous deadline of 9am for the first edition; twenty people were expected to lose their jobs as a result.
Previously there were three editions each weekday, excluding Bank holidays. The first, "News Extra", went to print at 10:00am and was available around 11am in central London,

May 2009 relaunch

In May 2009, the newspaper launched a series of poster ads, each of which prominently featured the word "Sorry" in the paper's then-masthead font. These ads offered various apologies for past editorial approaches, such as "Sorry for losing touch".  "Evening Standard Launches Ad Campaign To Say Sorry to Londoners".  Greenslade Blog (blog of The Guardian).  Retrieved 4 August 2012. None of the posters mentioned the Evening Standard by name, although they featured the paper's Eros logo. Ex-editor Veronica Wadley criticised the "Pravda-style" campaign saying it humiliated the paper's staff and insulted its readers."Ex-Editor Wadley Criticises Standard's 'Pravda-Style' Relaunch".  Brand Republic. 11 May 2009. The campaign was designed by McCann Erickson. Also in May 2009 the paper relaunched as the London Evening Standard with a new layout and masthead, marking the occasion by giving away 650,000 free copies on the day,

October 2009: freesheet

After a long history of paid circulation, on 12 October 2009 the Standard became a free newspaper,

Editorial style

The newspaper's editor is Sarah Sands who replaced Geordie Greig following his departure to the Mail on Sunday in March 2012. Max Hastings was editor from 1996 until he retired in 2002.
Although, under Associated Newspaper's ownership, the Standard shared the same Editor in Chief, Paul Dacre, as the Daily Mail, it maintained a quite different style from the latter's "middle England" outlook, in order to appeal to its local, more cosmopolitan readership.
The Evening Standard, although a regional newspaper for London, also covers national and international news, though with an emphasis on London-centred news (especially in its features pages), covering building developments, property prices, traffic schemes, politics, the congestion charge and, in the Londoner's Diary page, gossip on the social scene. It also occasionally runs campaigns centred around local issues that national newspapers do not cover in detail.
It has a tradition of providing quality arts coverage, and is noted for its visual art critic, Brian Sewell, more recently also a television personality, who is renowned for his outspoken dismissal of Britart and the Turner Prize. but was so unpopular with leading figures in the art world that they signed a letter demanding his dismissal, but he is still there. "The Megan Tresidder Interview", The Guardian, 19 November 1994; retrieved from News UK (pay site), 11 August 2010.
Its headline writers have been accused of having a "doom-and-gloom" agenda.

2008 London mayoral election

During the 2008 London mayoral election the newspaper

2010 general election

On 5 May 2010, the newspaper stated in an editorial that having supported Labour under Tony Blair, the newspaper would be supporting David Cameron and the Conservatives in the General Election, saying that "the Conservatives are ready for power: they look like a government in waiting."

Freesheet and supplements

On 14 December 2004, Associated Newspapers launched a freesheet edition of the Evening Standard called Standard Lite to help boost circulation. This had 48 pages, compared with about 80 in the main paper, which also had a supplement on most days.
In August 2006, the freesheet was relaunched as London Lite. It was designed to be especially attractive to younger female readers, and featured a wide range of lifestyle articles, but less news and business news than the main paper. It was initially only available between 11.30 a.m. and 2.30 p.m. at Evening Standard vendors and in the central area, but later became available in the evening from its street distributors. With the sale of the Evening Standard, but not the London Lite, to Alexander Lebedev on 21 January 2009, the ownership links between the Standard and the Lite were broken.
On Fridays, the newspaper includes a free glossy lifestyle magazine, ES. This has moved from more general articles to concentrate on glamour, with features on the rich, powerful and famous. On Wednesdays, readers can pick up a free copy of the Homes & Property supplement, edited by Janice Morley, which includes London property listings as well as articles from lifestyle journalists including Barbara Chandler, Katie Law and Alison Cork.
An entertainment guide supplement Metro Life (previously called Hot Tickets) was launched in September 2002. This was a what's-on guide with listings of cinemas and theatres in and around London, and was given away on Thursdays. It was discontinued on 1 September 2005.
The paper also supplies occasional CDs and DVDs for promotions. It also give Londoners a chance to win exclusive tickets to film premieres and sports tournament tickets, such as the Wimbledon Ladies Singles Final.
The Evening Standard Black Book is a list of London's 1000 most influential people in 2008.

In popular culture

Websites

The newspaper's This Is London website carries some of the stories from the Evening Standard and promotions, reviews and competitions. It also includes a number of blogs by Evening Standard writers, such as restaurant critic Charles Campion, theatre critic Kieron Quirke and music critic David Smyth. A separate website contains images of each page of the print edition (two versions) and supplements.

Editors






