[[Guy Harvey]]

CATEGORIES: 1955 births, Living people, People from Bad Lippspringe, Wildlife artists, Fishers, Jamaican artists, Jamaican people of English descent, Grand Officers of the Order of Vasco Núñez de Balboa

Guy Harvey (born September 16, 1955) is a marine wildlife artist and conservationist. His depictions of sealife, especially of sportfish such as marlin, are very popular with sportfishermen and have been reproduced in prints, posters, t-shirts, jewelry, clothing, and other consumer items. Harvey is also a very vocal and active advocate for marine conservation, having established the Guy Harvey Research Institute (GHRI) at Nova Southeastern University in Fort Lauderdale, Florida as well as the Guy Harvey Ocean Foundation, an organization that funds scientific research and educational initiatives.

Biography

Guy Harvey was born in Bad Lippspringe, North Rhine-Westphalia, West Germany on September 16, 1955 while his father was serving as a Gunnery Officer in the British Army. He grew up in Jamaica, West Indies. Harvey is a 10th generation Jamaican of English heritage as his family immigrated to Jamaica in 1664. Harvey attended Aberdeen University in Scotland, graduating with highest honors in Marine Biology in 1977. He then obtained a PhD degree in Fisheries Management from the University of the West Indies in 1982.
In 1985, he depicted Ernest Hemingway's famous fishing story "The Old Man and the Sea" in a series of 44 original pen-and-ink drawings and displayed them at an exhibition in Jamaica. Based on the positive response he received at this show, Guy began painting full time and, by 1988, was providing custom artwork for use on a variety of products.

Artwork and merchandise

Harvey's artistic style is mostly to realistically depict warm water marine sport fish in dynamic poses in their natural settings. His media include water color, oil, and acrylic. His original paintings have been composed on water color paper, canvas, and wall murals. His art is routinely reproduced on canvas, fine art prints, posters, magazines, and books, as well as being licensed for use in merchandising such as T-shirts, aloha-style shirts, belts, hats etc.
Guy Harvey's Portraits from the Deep is a syndicated television series that combines the showcasing of sport fishing destinations with educational information from marine scientists in an entertainment format.
Harvey has two books currently in print. The first, Guy Harvey Portraits From The Deep is a large-format coffee-table book. Harvey's second book, Santiago's Finest Hour, is an illustrated depiction of the protagonist Santiago's fight with a fish in the Ernest Hemingway novella "The Old Man and the Sea".
In 2014, he was chosen to paint the hull art of Norwegian Escape.

Conservation

Harvey has donated portions of his proceeds from the sale of his artwork and merchandise to various causes dedicated to the protection of the marine environment. He is also an advocate for responsible and sustainable commercial and recreational fishing.
In 1999, Harvey founded the Guy Harvey Research Institute at Nova's Oceanographic Center in cooperation with Nova Southeastern University in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. The institute, which is funded in part by contributions from the Guy Harvey Ocean Foundation, conducts research on the ecology, genetics, behavior, physiology, and evolution of fishes. Research areas include shark ecology and conservation, stingray ecology and conservation, and artificial reef design and monitoring. Harvey continues to speak on ocean conservation and other topics at universities, symposia, and other venues.
In 1997, Harvey partnered with the Pompano Beach Fishing Rodeo part of the Broward County Artificial Reef Program. Harvey sponsored the preparation and sinking of a 

Guy Harvey Research Institute

In 1999, Harvey partnered with the Oceanographic Center at Nova Southeastern University to create the Guy Harvey Research Institute (GHRI) for the purpose of providing "the scientific information necessary to understand, conserve and effectively manage the world's marine fishes and their ecosystems." The GHRI provides global-level leadership in the generation of the scientific data necessary to conserve the world's fish resources. 

Guy Harvey Ocean Foundation

The Guy Harvey Ocean Foundation was founded by Harvey in 2008 to "help ensure that future generations will enjoy and benefit from a naturally balanced ocean ecosystem where fish and other marine wildlife flourish."

Awards and Honors






