[[Real Academia Española]]

CATEGORIES: Learned societies, Language regulators, National academies of arts and humanities, Organisations based in Madrid, 1713 establishments in Spain, Spanish language academies, Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage, Bien de Interés Cultural landmarks in the Community of Madrid, Organizations established in 1713

The Real Academia Española (English: Royal Spanish Academy), generally abbreviated as RAE, is the official royal institution responsible for overseeing the Spanish language. It is based in Madrid, Spain, but is affiliated with national language academies in twenty-one other hispanophone (Spanish-speaking) nations through the Association of Spanish Language Academies. The RAE's emblem is a fiery crucible, and its motto is "" ("it cleans, sets, and casts splendour").
The RAE dedicates itself to language planning by applying linguistic prescription aimed at promoting linguistic unity within and between the various territories, to ensure a common standard in accordance with Article 1 of its founding charter: "... to ensure the changes that the Spanish language undergoes ... do not break the essential unity it enjoys throughout the Spanish-speaking world."
The proposed language guidelines are shown in a number of works. The priorities are the dictionary  (Dictionary of the Spanish Language of the Royal Spanish Academy or DRAE), edited periodically twenty-two times since 1780, and its grammar, last edited in December 2009. The Academy has a formal procedure for admitting words to its publications.
The headquarters, opened in 1894, is located at Calle Felipe IV, 4, in the ward of Jerónimos, next to the Museo del Prado. The Center for the Studies of the Royal Spanish Academy, opened in 2007, is located at Calle Serano 187–189.

History

The  (1635), with the purpose "to fix the voices and vocabularies of the Castilian language with propriety, elegance, and purity". King Philip V approved its constitution on 3 October 1714, placing it under the Crown's protection.
Its aristocratic founder, , Marquis of Villena and Duke of Escalona, described its aims as "to assure that Spanish speakers will always be able to read Cervantes" – by exercising a progressive up-to-date maintenance of the formal language.
The RAE began establishing rules for the orthography of Spanish beginning in 1741 with the first edition of the  from the second edition onwards). The proposals of the Academy became the official norm in Spain by royal decree in 1844, and they were also gradually adopted by the Spanish-speaking countries of America.
Several reforms were introduced in the 
In 1994, the RAE ruled that the Spanish consonants "CH" (.

Criticisms of the Academy

The Royal Academy has .
Moreover, the dictionary has been criticised ("dinosaur") only covers Sauropodomorpha, just one of the many groups of dinosaurs that existed.
Supporters.
Critics the RAE to update and adapt to the current information-technology era, offering a free on-line version of its Diccionario, which may be consulted free of charge at its website.

Composition

Members of the Academy are known as  counterparts. The Números are elected for life by the other academicians. Each academician holds a seat labeled with a letter from the Spanish alphabet; upper- and lower-case letters are separate seats.

Current members

Notable past academicians

Publications

Joint publications of the RAE and the Association of Spanish Language Academies

| author =
| title = El diccionario de americanismos incluye setenta mil entradas
| year = 2010
| periodical = Diario ABC
| volume =
| number = 27 de febrero de 2010
| id =
| url = 
}}[/ref] The Gramática básica (Basic Grammar) is a 250-page pocket reference intended for school use, to be published in late 2010.








