[[Riverdales (album)]]

CATEGORIES: 1995 debut albums, Lookout! Records albums, Asian Man Records albums, English-language albums

Riverdales is the eponymously titled debut studio album by the American punk rock band the Riverdales. It was released on June 7, 1995, through Lookout! Records with the catalog LK 120. The album was re-released on October 10, 2006, by Asian Man Records with new cover art and 12 bonus tracks, including 4 studio songs and live recordings from their tour with Green Day in 1995. It is scheduled for another re-release by Fat Wreck Chords, which is due sometime in 2013. Shortly after the release of Riverdales, Foster got into a dispute with Lookout! Records owner Larry Livermore and the Riverdales left the label and signed to Fat Mike's Honest Don's Records.

Background and production

Shortly after the recording of Screeching Weasel's sixth studio album How to Make Enemies and Irritate People in June 1994, all of the members—with the exception of guitarist John Jughead—decided to form a more Ramones-influenced group and disband Screeching Weasel. They named the group the Riverdales, after the fictional town in the Archie comics. Riverdales' line-up at the time consisted of Ben Foster (lead vocals/guitar), Dan Schafer (bass/lead vocals) and Dan Sullivan (drums/backing vocals). The members of the Riverdales decided to credit themselves under their birth names, as oppose to the theme of using pseudonyms in Screeching Weasel. Riverdales was recorded in January and February 1995 at Sonic Iguana Studios in Lafayette, Indiana with producer and engineer Mass Giorgini. Foster later called Billie Joe Armstrong, vocalist/guitarist for the punk rock band Green Day, in February and asked him to mix and co-produce the album. Retrieved 2012-06-15 Though Armstrong could not go to Indiana because his wife Adrienne was about to give birth to their son Joey. So Schafer went to Berkeley, California and Armstrong co-produced and mixed the album at The Catbox Studios. The album was mastered by Stephen Marcussen in April 1995 at Precision Mastering in Hollywood, California.

Release and reception

The album was released on June 7, 1995, through Lookout! Records with the catalog number LK 120. It received mostly positive reviews from Screeching Weasel's fanbase and other punk rock fans. Foster has stated that the band was "really happy with it" and that he thought the album "turned out great", saying that it had "nice, loud guitar". The success of the Riverdales on their tour with Green Day resulted in the album becoming the group's best-selling release. Retrieved 2012-06-15 Though despite positive reception, critics such as Mike DaRonco of Allmusic gave Riverdales a mostly negative review, rating the album 2 out of 5 stars and calling the record "boring". DaRonco stated that the structures were "so simple that a three-year-old could learn them in a day" and that "one is better off just buying any other Screeching Weasel record." Though he also complimented the album, saying that it featured "some catchy standouts like 'I Think About You During the Commercials' and 'Back to You'".

Tour

Riverdales promoted the album by opening for Green Day on their tour in support of its fourth studio album Insomniac (1995), which began on August 27, 1995, at the Lowlands Festival in the Netherlands and ended on March 21, 1996, at Palaeur in Rome, Italy. The group had previously opened for The Mr. T Experience at a few shows in June 1995. Riverdales achieved substantial success on the tour, resulting in the album becoming the band's best-selling release to date. According to Foster, the band achieved huge success in South Florida and got "booed a couple times" in towns such as Philadelphia. After the performance at Palaeur, the Riverdales decided to cease opening for Green Day, citing exhaustion. The Mr. T Experience opened for Green Day for the remaining concerts of the tour. Green Day later cancelled most of the European leg.

Re-releases

On October 10, 2006, Asian Man Records—whom had re-issued most of Screeching Weasel's material—re-released Riverdales with new cover art and an additional 12 tracks. The bonus tracks include the previously unreleased "Two-Headed Girl" and "I Won't Forget You", the b-sides "I'm a Vegetable" (from the "Fun Tonight" single) and "No Sense" (from the "Blood on the Ice" single), and 8 live tracks recorded at the Lowlands Festival in the Netherlands on August 27, 1995, opening for Green Day. Riverdales' new cover art featured a grainy photograph of the Chicago skyline.

Track listing

Personnel

Additional performers
Production




