[[Charles Ferdinand, Prince of Capua]]

CATEGORIES: Princes of Bourbon-Two Sicilies, House of Bourbon-Two Sicilies, 1811 births, 1862 deaths, People from Palermo, Neapolitan princes, Sicilian princes, Princes of Capua, Italian Roman Catholics, Knights of the Order of Saint Januarius, Knights of the Golden Fleece, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of Saint Ferdinand and of Merit, 19th-century Roman Catholics

Charles of the Two Sicilies, Prince of Capua (Full Italian name: Carlo Ferdinando, Principe di Borbone delle Due Sicilie, Principe di Capua) (10 November 1811 – 22 April 1862 in Turin, Kingdom of Italy) was the second son of Francis I of the Two Sicilies and his second wife Maria Isabella of Spain. He contracted a morganatic marriage in 1836 and had to live for the rest of his life in exile.

Early life

Charles was second-eldest son of Francis I of the Two Sicilies and his second wife Maria Isabella of Spain. Frivolous and more outgoing than his eldest brother King Ferdinand II, he was his parents favorite. Ferdinand II resented this fact and relationship between the two brothers were strained. At age nineteen he was named Vice-Admiral. 90 Between March and June 1829, the Neapolitan government put forward his candidature to the Greek throne, which fell through due to Metternich's opposition. In 1831 he was a candidate to become King of Belgium. In his youth, the Prince of Capua displayed a restless behavior and a weakness for pretty women. As his brother had yet to produce children, Carlo held a high position at court as heir presumptive to the crown until 1836. 90
During the winter of 1835 the Prince of Capua fell in love with Penelope Smyth, daughter of Grice Smyth of Ballynatray, Co. Waterford, Ireland, a beautiful Irish woman visiting Naples. Ferdinand II forbade their union as it would be a morganatic marriage. 90 On 12 January 1836 the couple eloped. Ferdinand II forfeit his brother income, denounced Charles departure as illegal and tried to prevent the marriage. 91
On 12 March 1836 King Ferdinand II of the Two Sicilies, issued a decree upholding the 1829 decision of the brothers' late father King Francis I of the Two Sicilies that members of the blood-royal of the kingdom, whatever their age, were required to obtain the consent of the sovereign to marry and that marriages made without this consent should be deemed to be null and void

Exile

Defying his brother's will, Charles married morganatically Penelope Smyth on 5 April 1836 in Gretna Green. Gretna Green was the first stagecoach stop in Scotland after the border city of Carlisle. It was a popular place for young lovers to marry. There it was sufficed for couples to declare their wish to marry before witnesses. A residence requirement or parental consent was not needed.
Later, Charles applied for a Special marriage licence from the Archbishop of Canterbury in order to marry (or re-marry) Miss Smyth at St George's, Hanover Square. In the court order they are described as a bachelor and a spinster respectively. The Master of the Faculties, Dr John Nicholl, refused to grant the licence on the grounds that the royal succession might be affected by the non-recognition of the marriage in Naples.The Times, 11 May 1836
The Prince of Capua and Penelope had two children:
Ferdinand II never forgave his runaway brother. The Prince of Capua was forced to live for the rest of his life in exile. He remained loyal to his wife, but all his estates were confiscated except the county of Mascali in Sicily which he had inherited from his father. 93 As Mascali was not run efficiently it provided just a small revenue and the Prince had to live modestly. 94 For years the Prince of Capua tried to obtained a pardon from his brother and be allowed to return to Naples, but to no avail. He had to settled in London at the expense of his wife and her relatives accumulating debts. 117 The government of Lord Palmerston tried to intervene in his favor as counterbalance of Ferdinand II's despotism. 340 In 1848, the Prince of Capua aspired in vain to the crown of Sicily. When Palmerston got tired of him, the Prince of Capua moved to Turin. 340 Pursued by his creditors the Prince moved constantly. 341
A contemporary who met him in the Tuileries Palace in 1853 described him as follows: "The Prince is stout, vulgar, and usually rigged up like a rustic charlatan. He is adorned with a long and dirty grey beard, and his hair is also long, dirty and grey "Acton,  The Last Bourbons of Naples, p. 341
At his brother Ferdinand II death on 22 May 1859, the prince of Capua hopes were raise. Ferdinand II bequested him a small amount of money and the new King Francis II, his nephew, ordered the restoration of all his income and property. However, the Prince of Capua who lived moving between Geneva, Spa and Aix les Bains with his morganatic wife and their two adolescent children did not see any of that. The following year the Bourbons were overthrown. With the Piedmontese invasion
everything was confiscated by Giuseppe Garibaldi. 468
The Prince of Capua was offered an allowance by King Victor Emanuel II, but he rejected it fearing that it would affect further claims. Acton,  The Last Bourbons of Naples, p. 468He died two years later on 21 April 1862 at Turin, aged 50. His son Francesco, who suffered from mental illness died few months later. His widow received a pension and a villa near Lucca. 469

Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles and styles

Honours

Ancestry

Notes






