[[Binghamton, New York]]

CATEGORIES: Binghamton, New York, Binghamton metropolitan area, Cities in New York, County seats in New York, Populated places established in 1802, Cities in Broome County, New York, Populated places on the Susquehanna River, 1802 establishments in New York, Ukrainian communities in the United States

Binghamton 
From the days of the railroad, Binghamton was a transportation crossroads and a manufacturing center, and has been known at different times for the production of cigars, shoes, and computers.
Today, while there is a continued concentration of high-tech firms, Binghamton is emerging as a healthcare- and education-focused city, with the presence of Binghamton University acting as much of the driving force behind this revitalization.

History

Early settlement

The first known people of European descent to come to the area were the troops of the Sullivan Expedition in 1779, during the American Revolutionary War, who destroyed local villages of the Onondaga and Oneida tribes. The city was named after William Bingham, a wealthy Philadelphian who bought the 10,000 acre patent for the land in 1786, then consisting of portions of the towns of Union and Chenango.  Significant agricultural growth led to the incorporation of the village of Binghamton in 1834.
The Chenango Canal, completed in 1837, connected Binghamton to the Erie Canal, and was the impetus for the initial industrial development of the area.

Valley of Opportunity: Growth as a manufacturing hub

Binghamton incorporated as a city in 1867, and due to the presence of several stately homes, was nicknamed the Parlor City.  In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, many immigrants moved to the area, finding an abundance of jobs.  During the 1880s, Binghamton grew to become the second-largest manufacturer of cigars in the United States.  However, by the early 1920s, the major employer of the region became Endicott Johnson, a shoe manufacturer whose development of welfare capitalism resulted in many amenities for local residents.  An even larger influx of Europeans immigrated to Binghamton, and the working class prosperity resulted in the area being called the Valley of Opportunity.
In 1913, 31 people perished in the Binghamton Clothing Company fire, which resulted in numerous reforms to the New York fire code.
During the Second World War, growth and corporate generosity continued as IBM, which was founded in Greater Binghamton, emerged as a global technology leader.

Decline and recovery

Post-war suburban development led to a decline in the city population, as the towns of Vestal and Union experienced rapid growth.  As seen in many other Rust Belt cities, traditional manufacturers saw steep declines, though Binghamton's technology industry limited this impact.  In an effort to reverse these trends, urban renewal dominated much of the construction during the 1960s and early 1970s, with many ornate city buildings torn down during this period.  The construction included the creation of Government Plaza, the Broome County Veterans Memorial Arena, and North Shore Dr. (NY 363).  As was typical of urban renewal, these projects ultimately failed to stem most of the losses, though they did establish Binghamton as the government and cultural center of the region.
As the Cold War came to a close in 1991 with the collapse of the Soviet Union, the defense-related industries in Greater Binghamton began to falter, resulting in several closures and widespread layoffs 
The April 3, 2009 shootings, which left 14 dead, took place at the American Civic Association.
In the 21st century, the city has attempted to diversify its economic base in order to spur revitalization.  The local economy has slowly transitioned towards a focus on services and healthcare.  Major emphasis has been placed on Binghamton University, which built a downtown campus in 2007,

Geography

Cityscape

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 
Binghamton is located at the confluence of two rivers, in the middle of a long but relatively narrow valley.  The north branch of the Susquehanna River passes south of downtown. This branch rises in eastern New York and receives a number of tributaries above Binghamton.  In the center of the city, the Chenango River feeds into the Susquehanna from the north. As a result, eleven bridges span the rivers inside city limits.  Major floods have occurred in 1865, 1935, 1936, 2006, and 2011.
The incorporation of Binghamton united various communities located on both shores of the two rivers. The majority of the city's population and development lies along the rolling terrain nearest the riverbanks with sparse development in the hills that define the city limits.  The old city was laid out on a grid system by Joshua Whitney, Jr., but as development spread to the outer regions of the city and merged with other settlements, several grids were eventually juxtaposed against each other.  In the Southside, the grid breaks down, as more curvilinear roads make up the predominantly residential areas along the hills.
The city was the traditional economic center of the region, and contains several historic districts.  The Railroad Terminal Historic District consists of several factories and buildings along the railroad line in the northern limits of downtown.  Away from downtown, the majority of the buildings are single- and multi-family dwellings, along with low-rise business buildings lining commercial arteries.  Along the railroad corridors, a number of factories, mostly abandoned, rise above the otherwise-uniform landscape.
Main Street runs through the West Side, and continues west to serve as Main Street in the villages of Johnson City and Endicott.  On the east side of the Chenango River, the road becomes Court Street, the major east-west artery in downtown and the East Side.

Neighborhoods

Binghamton is divided into seven neighborhoods.  The North Side is a light commercial and working-class residential section of the city, with Chenango Street serving as its major artery.   The East Side lies east of the Brandywine Highway, along the north bank of the Susquehanna River. The neighborhood is largely residential with commercial corridors along both Robinson and Court streets, and contains pockets of industrial development along its borders.
Across the Chenango River lies the West Side, a primarily residential neighborhood along the banks of the Susquehanna, containing a combination of family homes, student housing, and stately mansions. Main Street forms the West Side's commercial corridor, made up of several large supermarkets, pharmacies, bank branches, pubs, restaurants, auto shops, and a few strip malls.  It lies on portions of Prospect Mountain and other hills north of the First Ward.
The Southside lies along the south bank of the Susquehanna River, connected to downtown by several bridges. At the base of the historic South Washington Street Bridge is the Southbridge commercial district.  The neighborhood is partitioned into two separate neighborhood assemblies, divided by Pennsylvania Avenue and Southbridge, due to their distinct character.  Southside East contains working-class residences and some public housing projects, while Southside West is primarily made up of larger middle-class residences.

Climate

Binghamton has a humid continental climate (Köppen Dfb), with cold, snowy winters and warm, wet summers. on January 15, 1957.  As with most cities in upstate New York, precipitation in Binghamton is spread evenly throughout the year, and as such there is no dry season.
Binghamton is the 10th rainiest city in the United States, with 162 rainy days a year.
Snowfall is significant, with an annual total of  However, persistent snow bands from both the Great Lakes and the Finger Lakes do occasionally result in moderate snows. Binghamton receives occasional major snowfall from nor'easter storms as well (such as the 1993 Storm of the Century), and competes for the Golden Snowball Award with other upstate cities.

Demographics

As of the census of 2010, there were 47,376 people, 21,150 households, and 9,986 families residing in the city.  The population density was 4,516.8 per square mile (1,743.9/km²).  There were 23,842 housing units at an average density of 2,273.1 per square mile (877.6/km²).  Of all households, 20.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 26.9% were married couples living together, 15.6% had a female householder with no husband present, 4.7% had a male householder with no wife present, and 52.8% were non-families. 40.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 25.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.18 and the average family size was 2.94.
Binghamton is home to a large ethnic population.  During its industrial heyday, thousands of European immigrants moved to the city as they found an abundance of jobs and working-class prosperity.  A large number of Italians, Irish, and Eastern Europeans settled in the area, and the American Civic Association was created to help their transition to life and assimilation in the United States. This inrush led to a temporary rise in the local Ku Klux Klan during the 1920s, with Binghamton serving as state headquarters.  Area residents, who primarily embraced the different cultural heritages, quelled such anti-immigrant sentiment by founding several ethnic organizations and holding ethnic celebrations, at the encouragement of Endicott-Johnson. This has had a lasting effect on the city, which sports a large number of churches and contemporary ethnic festivals, along with a population that is still predominantly white (though steadily decreasing in proportion).  As of 2010, the racial makeup of Binghamton was 77.6% White, 11.4% Black or African American, 0.3% Native American, 4.2% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 2.0% from other races, and 4.4% from two or more races.  6.4% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Due to its ethnic diversity, there are a large number of religious affiliations within the region.  The First Ward was historically home to much of the Eastern European population, and houses several gold dome Orthodox churches.  As a result of its strong Italian and Irish heritage, the largest religious body in Broome County is the Catholic Church. Binghamton falls under the Roman Catholic Diocese of Syracuse.  Throughout the county, 105,064 people, or 52.4% of the total population, are listed as congregational adherents.
Until the mid-1950s, Binghamton saw its population grow rapidly due to its industrial boom, and was one of the largest 100 cities in the United States between 1890 and 1910. In the city, the population was spread out with 19.9% under the age of 18, 15.0% from 18 to 24, 24.7% from 25 to 44, 25.0% from 45 to 64, and 15.3% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 33.2 years. For every 100 females, there were 96.1 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.8 males.
The Binghamton metropolitan area is home to 251,725 people. The MSA is composed of all of Broome County and neighboring Tioga County.  The urban area, which includes portions of Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania, has a population of 158,054.  This count includes Broome County and portions of Tioga, Cortland, Delaware, Chenango, and Tompkins Counties in New York, and parts of Susquehanna, Bradford, and Wayne Counties in Pennsylvania.
The median income for a household in the city was $30,267, and the median income for a family was $40,012. Males had a median full-time income of $39,137 versus $32,712 for females. The per capita income for the city was $20,951. About 21.4% of families and 30.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 41.9% of those under age 18 and 13.0% of those age 65 or over.

Economy

After the boom of the cigar industry in the 1880s, the Binghamton area became increasingly reliant on large manufactures, with both Endicott Johnson, a shoe manufacturer, and IBM employing 15,000 to 20,000 local workers at their peak.  Other companies with a significant historical presence included Link Aviation Devices, Ansco, and General Electric.  Several other notable businesses started in Binghamton, such as Valvoline,
Much of Binghamton's current employment base is still oriented towards technology and defense manufacturing, though the sector has been diminishing since 1990.  Areas of specialization include systems integration, flight simulation, and printed circuit board manufacturing. The largest such companies in the area are Lockheed Martin, BAE Systems, IBM, Sanmina-SCI, and Universal Instruments. Despite the sustained job losses, 13% of New York State's computer and electronics manufacturing jobs are in the Binghamton MSA as of 2010.
Education and health care are also becoming significant sectors in the regional economy. In particular, Binghamton University and Broome Community College employ a large number of researchers and educators.  Binghamton University contains a New York State Center of Excellence for small-scale systems integration, and has also provided the major impetus behind the $22 million Southern Tier High Technology Incubator, which is being built in downtown Binghamton to encourage local growth of startups.  Major companies in the private healthcare industry include United Health Services and Lourdes Hospital.
There is also a large presence of food services and distribution companies in Binghamton.  Both Maines Paper & Food Service and Willow Run Foods are headquartered in the region, and are two of the largest food distributors in the country, servicing a large region of restaurants and chains throughout the United States. and Frito-Lay has a large plant in the region.
Other notable local employers include New York State Electric & Gas and Johnson Outdoors.  Two insurance companies, Security Mutual Life and Comumbian Financial Group, maintain headquarters in the area.
Several large shopping areas exist within the region.  Downtown Binghamton is home to a Boscov's department store,  Significant commercial development has also taken place in the town of Dickinson, with numerous shopping centers just north of the city.  In the First Ward, Clinton Street is home to Antique Row, a collection of antique shops.

Education

Primary and secondary education

The public Binghamton City School District has 5,668 students enrolled, and is the largest school district in the metropolitan area.

Higher education

The city of Binghamton is home to four satellite campuses:
The suburb of Vestal is home to the main campus Binghamton University. The university is one of four university centers in the SUNY system, and is home to approximately 15,000 students.S. News & World Report, accessed August 8, 2006 and is considered to be a Public Ivy.  The university also has a significant research presence, including a New York State Center of Excellence for small-scale systems integration.  While the campus is in Vestal, many students living off-campus find housing in the West Side.  There has also been a recent push for student housing downtown, intended to be a major driver in the revitalization of the business district.
SUNY Broome (formerly Broome Community College) is located just north of the city in Dickinson.  A two-year SUNY college, the school is attended by 6,000 commuter students.  Formerly specializing in technical education, SUNY Broome started in downtown Binghamton, and was housed at the Washington Street Armory until a fire in 1951.On-Campus Housing  SUNY Broome also offers courses at several off-campus locations, including in the city of Binghamton at the Binghamton University Downtown Center.BCC President Briefs Senator On Exciting PlansGreater Binghamton's most innovative economy; Location, technology, and quality of life
Davis College (formerly Practical Bible College), a Bible college, in also nearby, in the village of Johnson City.  The Elmira Business Institute also has a Vestal campus.

Arts and culture

The region has, in the last several years, developed a growing and pervasive arts scene. These include a large cluster of art galleriesCity of Binghamton Around Town and shops centered around downtown Binghamton.  These galleries have given rise to the First Friday Art Walk, through the efforts an association of local artists and merchants in Downtown Binghamton. Artists of local prominence that display or have galleries include photorealist painter Anthony Brunelli, Orazio Salati, and Marla Olmstead, a local child who achieved fame in the art world for her abstract art.
The Binghamton Philharmonic is the region's premiere professional orchestra.Binghamton Philharmonic Orchestra Concerts are performed throughout the year, with a variety of classical, pops and chamber music.2013-2014 Season  The Tri-Cities Opera stages full-scale operas at the Broome County Forum.  The professional company has performed since 1949, and is famed for its actor training program.
The Roberson Museum and Science Center, at the heart of Binghamton, is home to the Binghamton Visitor's Center, the Link Planetarium, and a number of exhibits detailing the culture and history of Greater Binghamton and the Southern Tier.Attractions  The Binghamton Zoo at Ross Park, in the Southside, opened in 1875, and is the fifth oldest zoo in the nation.Ross Park Zoo is one of the oldest zoos in the country
Binghamton is known as the Carousel Capital of the World, as it houses six of the remaining antique carousels.  Two of these are within city limits, one at Recreation Park and another at the Binghamton Zoo at Ross Park.  The Center for Technology & Innovation, a museum dedicated to local industry, is currently under construction.New Museum of InnovationCenter for Technology & Innovation
The area is the home of the regional dish known as the spiedie.  It is very popular locally, and numerous restaurants in the area serve spiedies, but they have only experienced limited penetration beyond the Southern Tier and Central New York.Spiedie Fest draws more than 100,000 people
Other annual events held in the city include the St. Patrick's Day parade in March, 
Residents of Binghamton typically speak the Inland Northern dialect of American English, and are part of a distinct isogloss that also contains Buffalo, Rochester, and Syracuse.

Sports

Baseball

The area is home to the Eastern League's Binghamton Mets (AA affiliate of the New York Mets). The B-Mets have sent stars like José Reyes, David Wright, Preston Wilson, Ike Davis, Zack Wheeler, Edgardo Alfonzo, Jon Niese, and Jay Payton to the majors.
Binghamton has a long history in professional Organized Baseball dating back to 1877. Teams nicknamed the Crickets, the Bingoes, and for many years the Triplets represented Binghamton in the New York State League (now defunct), the New York-Pennsylvania League, the International League and the Eastern League (1892–94, 1938–1963, 1967–1968, 1992–present).
The 1887 Binghamton Bingoes of the International League attracted national attention for employing 2 black players, an outstanding infielder named Frank Grant and a pitcher whose name has only come down through history as "Renfroe". The reaction around the league forced Binghamton to release the players, and the team itself folded shortly thereafter.
The Binghamton Triplets of the Eastern League became a farm club of the New York Yankees in the 1940s and sent many players to New York up to 1968, most notably the Hall of Fame pitcher Whitey Ford, who starred for Binghamton in 1949.
The best player in the history of Binghamton was the pitcher William "Wild Bill" Hallahan. Born in Binghamton in 1902, he debuted in the major leagues with the St. Louis Cardinals in 1925 and had a 12 year career. (He was known as "Wild Bill" because of the many batters he walked, leading the league in that category twice). Hallahan led the Cardinals to the World Series title in 1931 over the Detroit Tigers with two complete game victories in which he only allowed a total of one run. When his career was over, he worked as a supervisor at Ansco for many years and passed away in Binghamton in 1981.

Football

Binghamton is also home to two semi-pro football teams, the Broome County Dragons (members of the Empire Football League) and the Southern Tier Green Machine (members of the North American Football League).  In addition, two women's football teams call Binghamton home; the Binghamton Tiger Cats (members of the Independent Women's Football League) and the Southern Tier Spitfire (members of the Women's Football Alliance). Of the 4 teams only the Binghamton Tiger Cats still survive for 2012.

Golf

The B.C. Open was an official PGA Tour event that was held annually from 1971 to 2005 at  Endicott's En-Joie Golf Course. (Note that the 2006 B.C. Open had to be played in Verona, N.Y. due to extensive damage during the June 2006 Flooding of the Susquehanna River.) Beginning in 2007, the area hosted a PGA Champion's Tour event, the Dick's Sporting Goods Open. The event replaced the B.C. Open and continues to be played at En-Joie Golf Course in Endicott.

Hockey

Professional hockey arrived in Binghamton in 1973 with the founding of the Broome Dusters of the North American Hockey League. The Dusters were popular from the start with a wide open style of play which was unusual in professional hockey at the time. When the league folded in 1977, the Providence team of the American Hockey League moved to Binghamton and became the Binghamton Dusters. The team became the Binghamton Whalers from 1980 to 1990 and the Binghamton Rangers from 1990 to 1997 as a result of affiliations with the NHL Hartford Whalers and New York Rangers. The team is now the Binghamton Senators who currently serve as the AHL affiliate of the Ottawa Senators. The B-Sens won division titles on 2003 and 2005, reaching the AHL conference finals in 2003 and winning the Calder Cup in 2011. They play their home games at Broome County Veterans Memorial Arena.  The B-Sens have sent stars like Jason Spezza, Robin Lehner, Chris Kelly, Jakob Silfverberg and Jean-Gabriel Pageau to the NHL.

Tennis

The area is also home to an annual Professional Tennis Challenger, the Levene Gouldin & Thompson Tennis Challenger, part of the USTA pro circuit (Known as the Frito-Lay Tennis Challenger in years past). Tennis greats such as Lleyton Hewitt, James Blake and more recently Andy Murray found their start with this tournament, using it as a spring board to the U.S. Open (tennis).stny.asp

NCAA Sports

Binghamton University plays Division I college sports as a member of the America East Conference. Division III College Sports are played at Broome Community College. Bobby Gonzalez, former head coach of Seton Hall's men's basketball team was born here, and still has family in the area. King Rice, head basketball coach at Monmouth University, attended Binghamton High School.gomuhawks.dbml?SPSID=62258&SPID=6806&DB_LANG=C&DB_OEM_ID=14300&ATCLID=205125543&Q_SEASON=2011

Youth Sports

Two world famous amateur sports tournaments are held in Binghamton. The Stop DWI Holiday Classic – a nationally recognized high school basketball tournament – calls the city home during the Christmas season, amassing about 16 of the nations best teams from places such as Orlando, NYC, Philadelphia, Kentucky, Cincinnati, and other large metropolitan areas. The World Youth Classic is an American Legion youth baseball tournament featuring world-class Legion baseball teams. Held in July, it features teams from Florida, Kentucky, Ohio, New York, Georgia, and New England. As many as 32 teams may play per year.

Motor Sports

Since 1978 a round of the American Motorcyclist Association's Motocross Championship has been held at the nearby Broome-Tioga Sports Center.  This round of the series has recently been moved to Texas and is no longer hosted by the Broome-Tioga Sports Center.  They also host the New York State Motocross Championships each fall and many other semi-pro events throughout the season.

Parks and recreation

Binghamton is known for its bicycling and walking clubs, facilities, and trails. The Binghamton River Trail is an urban trail starting at Confluence Park, where the rivers intersect, and traveling alongside the Chenango River, past the Martin Luther King, Jr. Promenade and Noyes Island, up to Cheri A. Lindsey Park in the North Side.  In 2007, Binghamton was named the ninth-greenest city in the U.S. by Country Home magazine.Best Green Cities

Government

Since its incorporation as a city in 1867, Binghamton has been a municipality with a "strong" mayor-council form of government. The city government, originally housed in the old Municipal Building on Collier Street (now the Grand Royale Hotel), is now based at the Binghamton City Hall which occupies the west-wing of Government Plaza on the corner of State and Hawley streets. The mayor and councilors are elected to four-year terms and are limited to serving only two. The Binghamton City Council is a unicameral body consisting of seven Council members whose districts are defined by geographic population boundaries.

Executive

The current mayor of Binghamton is Richard C. David (R).
The mayor oversees the following city departments:Departments

Legislative

The current 7-member City Council comprises:
The Binghamton City Council meets for Work Sessions on the first and third Monday of the month at 6:00 PM in the Council Work Room. Council holds Business Meetings every first and third Wednesday after the first Monday of the month at 6:30 PM in Council Chambers.City Council

Neighborhood Assemblies Program

The Binghamton Neighborhood Assemblies Program created nine public forum assemblies in which city residents play a lead role in "restoring the pride" in Binghamton by sharing their concerns, hopes and needs and then working in conjunction with city government and community partners to implement positive change.
Though a promising idea, multiple factors, including lack of interest caused most meetings to die out after mid-2006 though some held out longer.  Currently, meetings do not take place and the main page on the cities website concerning neighborhood assemblies has been removed.

Safety

Public safety in Binghamton is the primary responsibility of the 124-officer Binghamton Police DepartmentPolice and the 132-officer Binghamton Fire Department.

Binghamton Human Rights Law and Commission

In 2008, the City of Binghamton enacted Local Law 08-1, the Binghamton Human Rights Law, which expands protections offered at the state and federal government to include prohibitions against discrimination based on gender identity or expression, height and weight in employment, housing, education and public accommodation. In 2011, under the authority of N.Y. General Municipal Law 239-O and by City of Binghamton Local Law 11-3, the City of Binghamton established the Binghamton Human Rights Commission whose mission is to condemn discrimination in all its forms, to educate the public, and to work to eliminate discrimination against people based on age, race, color, creed, religion, national origin, ancestry, disability, marital status, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, weight or height, veteran status, or criminal conviction.  Intake forms for claims of discrimination can be found at the Commission's website: www.org.binghamtonhrc.cityofbinghamton.asp?zone=dept-city-clerk&pid=155&pm=page

Media

The Press & Sun-Bulletin is the only major daily paper in Binghamton.  As of 2013, the region makes up the 157th largest television market in the United States,

Infrastructure

Transportation

Binghamton is a major junction in the Interstate Highway System, much as it was during the days of the railroad.  Interstate 81, a major north-south route, connects the city to Syracuse and Ontario, as well as to Pennsylvania and Appalachia.  Binghamton also serves as the western terminus of Interstate 88, which gives a direct route to Albany.  New York State Route 17, the Southern Tier Expressway, is in the process of being upgraded to Interstate 86, and spans the southern border of New York, providing access to New York City, as well as to the western Southern Tier and Erie, Pennsylvania.  Between 1953 and 1966, the state constructed an arterial system to alleviate traffic, which includes the Brandywine Highway (New York State Route 7), North Shore Drive (New York State Route 363), and the portion of the Vestal Parkway (New York State Route 434) within city limits. Other major thoroughfares in the city include Chenango Street, Main Street (New York State Route 17C), and Court/Front Streets (U.S. Route 11).
Public transportation in Binghamton and outlying areas is served by B.C. Transit, a daily bus service provided by Broome County. Binghamton University students are also served by Off-Campus College Transport.  Intercity buses originate from the Greater Binghamton Transportation Center, which was opened in 2010 and also serves as the B.C. Transit hub.   Greyhound Lines provides direct routes to Buffalo, Syracuse, Rochester, Scranton, Toronto, and New York City.  Short Line Buses offer service to Olean, Ithaca, Utica, Albany, New York City, and Long Island.  Adirondack Trailways also has direct service to Albany.
The Greater Binghamton Airport (IATA code BGM, ICAO code KBGM) is a medium-size regional airport, and the only area airport that offers scheduled airline service.  Located  to the west.
Binghamton is served by four freight railroads. Norfolk Southern Railway serves Binghamton with its Southern Tier Main Line (the former Erie Lackawanna mainline.  The Canadian Pacific Railway main line between Montreal and Harrisburg, Pennsylvania (formerly the Delaware and Hudson Railway) goes through Binghamton.  The New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway maintains lines from Binghamton to Syracuse and Utica, and the Central New York Railroad offers freight service to Port Jervis.  Binghamton currently has no railroad passenger service. The last scheduled service, the Lake Cities train from Hoboken, New Jersey to Chicago, ended on January 6, 1970.   New York Senator Chuck Schumer is currently pushing for passenger rail service between Binghamton and New York City via Scranton and the Lackawanna Cut-Off. Schumer, accessed October 29, 2010

Utilities

Electricity and natural gas service are supplied and distributed by New York State Electric and Gas.  The only cable provider in the city is Time Warner Cable, which also offers high-speed internet and digital phone.  Verizon provides local telephone and internet service.  The city Department of Public works handles garbage and recycling, and maintains city street lights. 
Water and sewer services are maintained by the city government.  The primary source of potable water in Binghamton is the Susquehanna River, which is fed through a water treatment facility.

Health care

United Health Services (UHS) operates Binghamton General Hospital in the Southside, while Lourdes Hospital is sponsored by the Daughters of Charity of Saint Vincent de Paul.  The Dr. Garabed A. Fattal Community Free Clinic is run by Upstate Medical University, and offers services in conjunction with the Broome County Health Department and United Health Services. A third major area hospital, UHS Wilson Medical Center, is in Johnson City.
The New York State Office of Mental Health operates the Greater Binghamton Health Center, which will become a regional center of excellence for children's behavior.

Sister cities

 
Binghamton also has a local sister city project:








