[[Hurricane Norbert (2008)]]

CATEGORIES: 2008 Pacific hurricane season, Category 4 Pacific hurricanes, Pacific hurricanes in Mexico, Hurricanes and tropical depressions of the Gulf of California

Hurricane Norbert is tied with Hurricane Jimena as the strongest tropical cyclone strike the west coast of Baja California Sur in recorded history. The fifteenth named storm, seventh hurricane, and second major hurricane of the annual hurricane season, Norbert originated as a tropical depression from a tropical wave south of Acapulco on October 3. Strong wind shear initially prevented much development, but the cyclone encountered a more favorable environment as it moved westward. On October 5, the National Hurricane Center (NHC) upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Norbert, and the system intensified further to attain hurricane intensity by October 6. After undergoing a period of rapid deepening, Norbert reached its peak intensity as a Category 4 on the Saffir–Simpson hurricane wind scale, with maximum sustained winds of 135 mph (215 km/h) and a minimum barometric pressure of 945 mbar (hPa; 27.91 inHg). As the cyclone rounded the western periphery of a subtropical ridge over Mexico, it began an eyewall replacement cycle which led to steady weakening. Completing this cycle and briefly reintensifying into a major hurricane, a Category 3 or higher on the Saffir–Simpson hurricane wind scale, Norbert moved ashore Baja California Sur as a Category 2 hurricane late on October 11. After a second landfall at a weaker intensity the following day, the system quickly weakened over land and dissipated that afternoon.
In preparation for the cyclone, the NHC issued hurricane warnings for coastal regions of the Baja California Peninsula. Residents living in low-lying areas and flood-prone regions were advised to evacuate, and beach-goers were warned to stay out of the water. Upon landfall, the hurricane produced waves in excess of . Though the strongest winds observed were less than hurricane intensity, heavy rainfall as a result of Norbert lead to substantial damage. In Baja California Sur, roughly 5,000 homes sustained major damage; the heaviest-impacted municipality, Comondú, reported 16,000 homes affected. Thousands of people were forced into shelters, and many trees were blown down by strong winds. A total of 25 fatalities occurred in Sonora, 5 of which occurred in Álamos, where excessive rainfall caused a majority of the town to become flooded; homes were submerged to their roofs and many trees were downed. The hurricane severely impacted the fishing industry in Sinaloa, while thousands of residents were left homeless. In the United States, Norbert produced minimal rainfall. In the aftermath of the storm, many towns and municipalities were declared disaster areas. Overall, Norbert inflicted $98.5 million (2008 USD) in damage.

Meteorological history

The origins of Norbert were from a tropical wave that crossed Central America on September 26 and September 27. An area of disturbed weather formed near the Gulf of Tehuantepec on September 28, which at that time was mentioned on the Tropical Weather Outlook (an outlook issued every six hours during hurricane season by the NHC that notes the possibility of tropical cyclogenesis during the next 48 hours). Drifting westward off the coast of Mexico, the system initially consisted of a broad low pressure area and an area of disorganized convection.
About six hours after forming, the circulation of the depression became exposed from the deep convection, due to the wind shear. At the same time, two tropical cyclone forecast models predicted the tropical cyclone formation of a larger disturbance to the southeast of the depression.
On October 7, Hurricane Norbert reached Category 2 intensity on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale while Norbert developed well-defined and closed eyewall as seen in microwave imagery. The eye began to erode and as such Norbert underwent an eyewall replacement cycle, where one eye is replaced by another. As a result, when Hurricane Hunters investigated the storm later that day, they found that Norbert had weakened considerably. At that time, it was downgraded into a weak Category 1 hurricane on October 9.
On October 10, Norbert turned towards the north while slowing down as it reached the western edge of a subtropical ridge. In an area of light wind shear, Norbert began to re-intensify as the eyewall replacement cycle completed. The cyclone turned to the north-northeast due to a mid to upper level trough that was moving over the Southwest United States. Norbert managed to restrengthen into a Category 3 hurricane on 0600 UTC October 11, and made landfall  as a Category 2 hurricane near Puerto Charley. The next day, Norbert struck southern Sonora at Category 1 intensity. Norbert rapidly dissipated by October 12 while inland over Mexico. Norbert was a Category 2 hurricane at landfall

Preparations

A hurricane warning was issued on October 10 for parts of the central Baja California Peninsula from Puerto San Andresito southward to Agua Blanca, and they extended around the peninsula from La Paz to Loreto. The warnings were put in place on the mainland west coast from Topolobampo to Guaymas. Hurricane watches were issued from Agua Blanca to Cabo San Lucas, and were extended around the Baja California peninsula to La Paz; these same areas were also under tropical storm warnings as well. Tropical storm warnings  also extended from Loreto northward to Mulegé on the eastern side of the peninsula.
On October 10, officials in Baja California declared the municipalities of Loreto, Comondú and La Paz disaster areas in anticipation of severe damage from the hurricane.
The mayor of Los Cobos, Oscar Nunez, strongly advised residents living in sub-par housing and in low-lying areas to prepare to evacuate. The local civil protection official stated bridges are ready to begin evacuating  In Ciudad Obregon, Sonora, farmers rushed to fertilize the fields prior to the passage of Norbert.

Impact

Baja California Sur

The storm was responsible for  in Ciudad Constitucion.
Throughout Baja California Sur, officials estimated that damages from the hurricane was equivalent to 292.2 million MXN (25 million USD). Local residents south shelter by school buses and army trucks as floodwaters entered their homes. High winds uprooted palm trees and the water was knee-deep in many areas of Puerto San Carlos.
The storm also affected cruise ships. While Carnival Pride and 

Sonora

After crossing the Gulf of California, Norbert made landfall in Sonora as a strong Category 1 hurricane.

Sinaloa

The fishing industry in Sinaloa sustained severe losses, with 200 shrimp boats being destroyed leaving MXN 8 million (2008, $600,000 USD ) in damages.

United States

The remnants of the storm dropped moderate precipitation across western Texas, but there were no immediate issues.

Aftermath

On October 14, Governor Eduardo Bours Castelo of Sonora announced a two year reconstruction plan for Álamos with an initial budget of MXN 100 million ($7.3 million). The municipalities of Ahome, El Fuerte, Choix, Guasave and the city of Sinaloa de Leyva were declared disaster areas following the storm, allowing federal funding and supplies to be sent to the regions.  The government in Sonora provided at least MXN 400 million ($29.5 million) in relief funds following the hurricane. Most of northern Sinaloa was also declared a disaster area.






