[[Raquel Calderón Argandoña]]

CATEGORIES: 1991 births, Living people, People from Santiago, Chilean television actresses, Chilean female models, Chilean female singers, Chilean people of Basque descent, University of Chile alumni

Raquel Calderón Argandoña (born February 14, 1991) is a Chilean actress and singer. Raquel began her acting career in 2006, in the television series Karkú. The band Six Pack, created by the series, gave start to her musical career. She went solo in 2008, releasing 3 singles and an album under the stage name Kel. Also, in February 2008, Raquel Calderón was crowned Miss Teen Chile 2008.

Professional career

Television

Calderón, the year 2006 began her career as actress in the infantile miniseries of TVN called Karkú. The series was released on February 5, 2007, and lasted some months.
As almost all the infantile and pre-teen series on the Chilean television, Karkú also created a musical group, with the series' actors as members. The group was called Six Pack. Finally, they recorded a disc, that was released in 2007. In spite of the fact that the group did not have a main vocalist, Calderón made herself the main member attracting most attention, probably because she was relatively better known than the others. Six Pack, that debuted on stage on July 21, 2007, received mixed reviews.
Due to the group's success, Kel's recording company started preparing a solo career for her. She began taking singing and guitar classes with the Uruguayan singer and musician Gonzalo Yáñez.
At the end of the year, her producing company My Friend obtained a contract with the television channel Canal 13 for a new juvenile teleseries called Antonia. The contract with a rival network displeased TVN.
On January 2, 2008, conflicts between Raquel, her father Hernán Calderón, and the My Friend Entertainment producing company resulted in an abrupt termination of her contract. Her participation in Karkú, Six Pack and Antonia was cancelled.

Music

But a little later, Calderón announced that she would begin a solo career as a singer under the stage name Kel, with Gonzalo Yáñez as her producer. On January 14, Kel filmed her first solo music video for her first solo single, "Tenerte Cerca", in a Santiago mall. The video was directed by Esteban Vidal. Radio stations started to rotate the song a few days prior.
In February 2008, Raquel was crowned Miss Teen Chile 2008.
On March 16, 2008, Kel was an opening act for Belinda at her Movistar Arena (then Arena Santiago) concert. She sang 6 tracks from her album.
On July 3, 2008 Kel released her first solo album, No Molestar!.

Punks incident

At the release of her first disc No Molestar!, Chilean punks gathered outside the record shop in Santiago where Kel was going to release the album. The punks gathered to protest and express their disapproval of Kel's song "Me Creo Punky" ("I believe I'm a punk"), a pop song whose music video features Kel and other people dressed and behaving like punk stereotypes. The punks throwed objects from the street into the music store and police had to be called to the place. Despite the police action, the release event had to be cancelled. Kel later declared she was not scared by the punks.

University

Currently, Kel is a law student. She entered the Faculty of Law of the University of Chile in 2010.

Controversy

Raquel Calderón (Kel) does not compose her own songs, they are composed by the singer-songwriter Gonzalo Yáñez. The autograph session dedicated to the releases of her first album and the single "Me Creo Punky" on July 3, 2008, was cancelled due to the large gathering of punks who came to protest against the song "Me Creo Punky".

Discography

Singles

Studio albums

Awards

|-
|rowspan=2| 2007
| Raquel Calderón
| BKN Awards 2007, Actriz joven más BKN
| 
|-
| Six Pack (group)
| Los Premios MTV Latinoamérica, Mejor artista nuevo centro
| 






