[[Melodica]]

CATEGORIES: Free reed aerophones, Keyboard instruments

The melodica, also known as the pianica, blow-organ or key-flute, is a free-reed instrument similar to the melodion and harmonica. It has a musical keyboard on top, and is played by blowing air through a mouthpiece that fits into a hole in the side of the instrument. Pressing a key opens a hole, allowing air to flow through a reed. The keyboard is usually two or three octaves long. Melodicas are small, light, and portable. They are popular in music education, especially in Asia.
The modern form of the instrument was invented by Hohner in the 1950s, 
The melodica was first used as a serious musical instrument in the 1960s by composers such as Steve Reich, in his piece titled Melodica (1966) It was featured on the 1972 No. 1 Billboard Hot 100 hit single, "Oh Girl" by the Chi-Lites.  In the 1980s, electronic rock band New Order featured the melodica prominently, in songs such as "Truth," "Your Silent Face," "Love Vigilantes,", "Hurt" and "In A Lonely Place". Also the melodica provided the base melody line in the song "And We Danced" by The Hooters. The "virtual band" Gorillaz have used them heavily throughout their career, most notably on their first full length studio album. Melodicas have also been used in indie folk music by artists such as Rabbit of Steam Powered Giraffe and Paul Duncan of Warm Ghost, and Emmanuel Del Real of Café Tacvba. Additionally, the melodica is used by pop, alternative and electronica multi-instrumental and vocal artists such as Happy Tom.

Types

Melodicas are classified primarily by the range of the instrument. Melodicas with different ranges have slightly different shapes.

Wooden melodicas

Although the majority of melodicas are made of plastic, some are made primarily of wood. The Sound Electra corporation makes the MyLodica, a wooden melodica designed "..." The Victoria Accordion company in Castelfidardo, Italy, produces a range of wooden melodicas and accordinas that they market under the name Vibrandoneon.

Alternative names

The melodica is known by various names, often at the whim of the manufacturer. Melodion (Suzuki), Melodika (Apollo), Melodia (Diana), Pianica (Yamaha), Melodihorn (Samick) and Clavietta are just some of the variants. This can lead to some confusion, as many people

Comparison with traditional woodwind instruments

Melodicas are unusual because unlike most conventional woodwind instruments, they make use of a piano keyboard rather than a specialized fingering system using holes and/or buttons. This allows the player to use a single finger to play any one note of the instrument's range, rather than requiring several fingers to play individual notes, as is the case with most other woodwinds. The player can then play chords by using their remaining fingers to press additional keys, and thus, sound additional notes. In other words, whereas most woodwind instruments such as saxophones or clarinets are monophonic when played by trained musicians, the melodica is polyphonic.
Additionally, for a beginner, a melodica can play accidentals more easily than a woodwind, which may require extra keys or cross-fingering to reach any notes outside of its key.
These two factors give the melodica an unusual degree of flexibility and contribute to its wide usage in music education.

Gallery

Image:Suzuki melodion.jpg|A Suzuki melodion
File:Melodica with tube.jpg|Melodica being played horizontally with an air tube
File:Melodica without tube.jpg|Melodica being played vertically without air tube
File:Accordina_drawing_from_US_Patent_2461806.png|Patent drawing for accordina
File:Аккордина.JPG|Accordina being played 








