[[Yozakura Quartet]]

CATEGORIES: 2006 manga, 2008 anime television series, 2010 anime OVAs, 2013 anime OVAs, 2013 anime television series, Action anime and manga, Comedy anime and manga, Del Rey Manga, Nomad (company), Sentai Filmworks, Shōnen manga, Supernatural anime and manga, Tatsunoko Production

 is a Japanese manga created by Suzuhito Yasuda that began publishing by Kodansha in 2006, and was then published in the US by Del Rey in 2008. The series was animated in Japan and aired from October 2 to December 18, 2008; it comprises 12 episodes, all of which have aired. The anime was produced by Nomad and aired on TBS on Thursdays. Three anime OVAs (original-video-animation) were released alongside volume 9-11 of the manga, between October 10, 2010 to November 9, 2011. A new anime adaptation of the series aired in 2013, with the cast returning from the first anime and OVAs, it was produced at Tatsunoko Production, another set of OVAs, adapting the Tsuki ni Naku arc (volume 11 of the manga), they are being released with the special editions of volumes 14-16.
Yozakura Quartet is Suzuhito Yasuda's first manga. Before the creation of Yozakura Quartet, he was an illustrator. He drew the original character designs for Yoshikazu Kuwashima's series  and Ryohgo Narita's Durarara!!.

Story

The story revolves around four teenagers; Akina, Hime, Ao, and Kotoha; each of them having their own unique abilities. They run an office called Hiizumi Life Counseling Office, where their job is to help and protect the townspeople of Sakurashin, a town where humans and youkai co-exist. The town is protected by a barrier created by the spiritual sakura known as The Seven Pillars. The Seven Pillars exist in both the human world and the youkai world and is the only thing that keeps both worlds connected to each other. However, recent bizarre incidents have occurred in their town and someone has threatened its safety. It is up to the four of them to protect the town they love.

Characters

Media

Manga

In July 2004, Suzuhito Yasuda was supposed to illustrate a demon manga series with someone else scripting the story, but his editor suggested that he should create an original series. In January 2005, Yasuda came up with a series called Glorious Life, a prototype for Yozakura Quartet. It was set in Sakurashin just like Yozakura Quartet, however the editor-in-chief shot it down. His editor suggested three girls and a boy as the main characters and that they could be demon hunters for hire. His editor commented that he wanted to make something similar to Charlie's Angels, which in August 2005 turned out as Yozakura Falsetto. However this too was shot down by his editor. He was told that he had a last chance to fix the series and in October 2005, his story was finally accepted. His editor told him he should change the title of his series though because it was too hard for their readers to understand, and suggested Yozakura Quartet instead of Yozakura Falsetto. The series finally began serialization in January 2006. The manga was published in the United States and Canada by Del Rey Manga.

Anime

An anime adaption of the manga had aired on TBS in October 2008. The anime was produced by Nomad. The anime has been licensed in North America by Sentai Filmworks and 
is distributed by Section23 Films. The complete collection was released March 2, 2010.
On March 23, 2010, manga creator Suzuhito Yasuda announced that a new anime adaption that will start in October coinciding with the ninth volume of the manga.
On April 4, 2013, it was announced that a manga-only OAD, Yozakura Quartet ~Tsuki ni Naku~, is in the works and will be released on September 9, 2013. On the same day, it was announced that Yozakura Quartet will get a new TV anime adaptation as well, animated by Tatsunoko Production.　On April 9, 2013, the title was confirmed as Yozakura Quartet ~Hana no Uta~. On April 11, 2013, it was confirmed that Yozakura Quartet ~Hana no Uta~ will feature the same cast as the first series, and will not be a continuation from the first series, but rather, a complete new series on its own.






