[[Lou Reed]]

CATEGORIES: 1942 births, 2013 deaths, 20th-century American singers, 21st-century American singers, American baritones, American buskers, American experimental guitarists, American male singer-songwriters, American rock guitarists, American rock singer-songwriters, Art rock musicians, Bisexual artists, Bisexual men, Bisexual musicians, Bisexual writers, Deaths from liver disease, Disease-related deaths in New York, Ivor Novello Award winners, American people of Russian-Jewish descent, Jewish American composers and songwriters, Jewish American musicians, Jewish singers, LGBT Jews, LGBT musicians from the United States, LGBT people from New York, LGBT singers, Matador Records artists, MGM Records artists, Noise musicians, Organ transplant recipients, People from Brooklyn, People from Freeport, New York, Photographers from New York, Protopunk musicians, RCA Records artists, Reprise Records artists, Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees, Singers from New York City, Sire Records artists, Songwriters from New York, Syracuse University alumni, The Velvet Underground members, Warner Bros. Records artists

Lewis Allan "Lou" Reed (March 2, 1942 – October 27, 2013) was an American musician, singer and songwriter.
The Velvet Underground was a commercial failure in the late 1960s, but the group gained a considerable cult following in the years since its demise and has gone on to become one of the most widely cited and influential bands of the era
After his departure from the group, Reed began a solo career in 1972. He had a hit the following year with "Walk on the Wild Side", but subsequently lacked the mainstream commercial success its chart status seemed to indicate.
In 2003, Rolling Stone magazine's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time included two albums by Reed as a solo artist, Transformer and Berlin.

Biography

1942–64: Early life

Reed was born at Beth El Hospital (now Brookdale) in Brooklyn and grew up in Freeport, Long Island. Contrary to some sources, his birth name was Lewis Allan Reed, not Louis Firbanks, a name that was coined as a joke by Lester Bangs in Creem magazine. and although he said that he was Jewish, he added, "My God is rock'n'roll. It's an obscure power that can change your life. The most important part of my religion is to play guitar.""The Gospel According to Lou: Interview with Lou Reed," by Gabriella,  (November 1998). Retrieved October 27, 2013."Lou Reed's paradoxical Jewishness", Times of Israel, October 27, 2013
Having learned to play the guitar from the radio, he developed an early interest in rock and roll and rhythm and blues, and during high school played in several bands.[ref]
