[[Beth Ditto]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 births, American dance musicians, American female models, American female singers, American feminists, American rock singers, American atheists, Atheist feminists, Female post-grunge singers, Female rock singers, Feminist musicians, Kill Rock Stars, Lesbian feminists, Lesbian musicians, LGBT musicians from the United States, LGBT singers, Living people, Musicians from Arkansas, People from Searcy, Arkansas, Synthpop musicians, Musicians from Portland, Oregon



Mary Beth Patterson, known by her stage name Beth Ditto (born February 19, 1981, in Searcy, Arkansas),

Personal life

At 13, she moved out of her mother's house and went to live with her aunt.
A resident of Portland, Oregon, she is a close friend of Scissor Sisters lead singer Ana Matronic, and considers her favorite song to be "Oh Bondage, Up Yours" by X-Ray Spex. She courted mild  controversy in 2006 when, during an interview for NME magazine, she claimed to have eaten squirrels as a child, saying that "people in Arkansas just do – they'd think you were a freak if you ate squid there!"
Ditto is known for her noticeable stage dances and her unique and revealing image. She classes herself as a punk, and thus does not wear deodorant or shave under her armpits, having once remarked that "I think punks usually smell".
In February 2009, she was featured in London as the cover model for the premiere of Love magazine with prominent public advertising.
On July 9, 2009, Beth's fashion collection for the UK retailer Evans was released for sale, both online, and in selected stores across the UK.wweek.html
Ditto, who is a lesbian, is well known for her outspoken support of both LGBT and feminist causes.
Her most recent modeling work consisted of opening the Jean Paul Gaultier spring 2011 fashion show during Paris Fashion Week on October 2, 2010. Ditto released a memoir called Coal to Diamonds, which she co-wrote with Michelle Tea, in 2012.lambdaliterary.org/reviews/12/15/coal-to-diamonds-by-beth-ditto-and-michelle-tea/ Lambda Literary 
'Coal to Diamonds' by Beth Ditto and Michelle Tea[/ref]
On March 15, 2013. she was arrested for second-degree disorderly conduct in Portland, Oregon outside the Bungaloo Bar (which had cut her off  because she appeared to be inebriated) after throwing her shoes and purse away in the middle of the street and shouting "Obama!  Obama!" She was fined $435 after pleading no contest to the charge.
In July 2013, Ditto married girlfriend Kristin Ogata in Maui, Hawaii. Ditto wore a gown by Jean Paul Gaultier; Ogata wore a jacket, shirt and shorts.

Discography

"Beth Ditto EP" (2011)

=Track listing=

Singles

Awards and nominations






