[[Berlin International Film Festival]]

CATEGORIES: Berlin International Film Festival, Recurring events established in 1951, February events, Annual events in Germany, 1951 establishments in Germany

The Berlin International Film Festival (, 18 February 2008Speed Interview with Dieter Kosslick Berlinale Chief, filmfestivalstv.com, 18 February 2008
The European Film Market (EFM), a film trade fair held simultaneously to the Berlinale, is a major industry meeting for the international film circuit once a year. February 2008 The trade fair serves distributors, film buyers, producers, financiers and co-production agents. The Berlinale Talent Campus, a week long series of lectures and workshops, gathers young filmmakers from around the globe. It partners with the festival itself and is considered to be a forum for upcoming artists.com
The festival, the EFM and other satellite events are attended by around 20,000 professionals from over 130 countries.2009 Berlinale Press release, berlinale. February 2008 More than 4200 journalists are responsible for the media exposure in over 110 countries.com At high-profile feature film premieres, movie stars and celebrities are present at the red carpet., 19. February 2008 The Berlinale has established
a cosmopolitan character integrating art, glamour, commerce and a global media attention.de
The most recent Berlinale, the 63rd Annual Berlin International Film Festival, took place from 7 to 17 February 2013. The 64th edition started on 6 February 2014.

Festival programme

The festival is composed of seven different film sections. Films are chosen in each category by a section director with the advice of a committee of film experts. Categories include:
Competition – comprises feature-length films yet to be released outside their country of origin. Films in the Competition section compete for several prizes, including the top Golden Bear for the best film and a series of Silver Bears for acting, writing and production.
Panorama – comprises new independent and arthouse films that deal with "controversial subjects or unconventional aesthetic styles". Films in the category are intended to provoke discussion, and have historically involved themes such as gay, lesbian and transgendered issues.
Forum – comprises experimental and documentary films from around the world with a particular emphasis on screening works by younger filmmakers. There are no format or genre restrictions, and films in the Forum do not compete for awards.
Generation – comprises a mixture of short and feature-length films aimed at children and youths. Films in the Generation section compete in two sub-categories: Generation Kplus (aimed at those aged four and above) and Generation 14plus (aimed at those aged fourteen and above). Awards in the section are determined by three separate juries – the Children's Jury, the Youth Jury and an international jury of experts – whose decisions are made independent of one another.
Perspektive Deutsches Kino – comprises a wide variety of German films, with an emphasis on highlighting current trends in German cinema. There are few entry requirements, enabling emerging filmmakers to display their work to domestic and international audiences.
Berlinale Shorts – comprises domestic and international short films, especially those that demonstrate innovative approaches to filmmaking. Films in the category compete for the Golden Bear for the best short film, as well as a jury-nominated Silver Bear.
Retrospective – comprises classic films previously shown at the Berlinale, with films collated from the Competition, Forum, Panorama and Generation categories. Each year, the Retrospective section is dedicated to important themes or filmmakers. The special Homage series similarly examines past cinema, with a focus on honouring the life work of directors and actors.
In addition to the seven sections, the Berlinale also contains several linked "curated special series", including the Berlinale Special, Gala Special, Forum Expanded, Culinary Cinema and the Homage. Since 2002 a 50-second trailer opens the performances in all sections of the festival with the exception of the Retrospective.

Awards

The Golden Bear (German: Goldener Bär) is the highest prize awarded for the best film at the Berlin International Film Festival.
Golden Bear (Goldener Bär)
Silver Bear (Silberner Bär)
The Silver Bear was introduced in 1956 as an award for individual achievements in direction and acting, and for best short film.
In 1965 a special film award for the runner-up to the Golden Bear was introduced. Although its official name was the Special Jury Price from 1965 to 1999, and has been the Jury Grand Prix since 2000, it is commonly known as the Silver Bear (just like the awards for individual achievements) as it is regarded as a second place award after the Golden Bear.
In 1978, a Silver Bear for special recognitions was introduced, in 2002 a Silver Bear for best film music, and in 2008 an award for best screenplay.
Other awards at the Berlin International Film Festival
 

European Film Market

The European Film Market (EFM) is one of three largest movie markets in the world.kodak. The EFM is the major venue for film producers, buyers, financiers, sales agents and distributors. It is a professional trade event and is open to registered industry insiders. In 2011, 400 companies registered and 6,982 market badges were issued. 1,532 buyers have registered. November 2011
The trade fair provides exhibition space for companies presenting their current line up. It organizes over 1000 screenings of new films, which take place at movie theatres around Potsdamer Platz. In 2007 the CinemaxX and CineStar  were used to showcase new productions. In 2010 the Astor Film Lounge is showing market screenings in 3D using digital RealD technology.
The Berlinale Co-Production Market is a 3-day networking platform for producers, financiers as well as broadcasting and funding representatives who are participating in international co-productions.
 

Talent Campus

Commencing in 2003, the Berlinale has partnered with the Berlinale Talent Campus, which is a winter school for "up and coming filmmakers" that takes place at the same time as the festival itself. The Talent Campus accepts about 350 applicants each year; the attendees come from around the world, and represent all of the filmmaking professions.Berlinale Talent Campus, berlinale-talentcampus
The event runs 6 days during the Berlinale and features lectures and panel discussions with well-known professionals addressing issues in filmmaking today. Workshops, excursions, personal tutoring, coaching and training of participants from different fields of work are part of the programme.
The proceedings include presentations by distinguished experts,Talent Campus adds to lineup, Variety who have included Park Chan-wook, Frances McDormand, Stephen Frears, Dennis Hopper, Jia Zhangke, Walter Murch, Shah Rukh Khan, Anthony Minghella, Charlotte Rampling, Walter Salles, Ridley Scott, Raoul Peck, Tom Tykwer, Mike Leigh, Tilda Swinton and Wim Wenders. Many of these presentations and lectures are archived, both as videorecordings and transcripts, on the Talent Campus' website.
 

Gallery

Image:Christopher Lee at the Berlin International Film Festival 2013.jpg|Christopher Lee at the festival, 2013
Image:Jeremy Irons - Berlin International Film Festival (Berlinale) - 2013.jpg|Jeremy Irons at the festival, 2013
Image:Berlin-Sony Center-1.jpg|Potsdamer Platz houses two large multiplex cinemas
Image:Journalists during the Berlin Film Festival in 2008.jpg|Around 20,000 professionals from over 130 countries attend the festival every year
Image:SharonStoneBerlinale.jpg|Sharon Stone at the Premiere of "When a man falls in the forest"
Image:Internationalkma.jpg|Kino International is one of three ticketing centers
Image:Cubix2008.jpg|Cubix Kino at Alexanderplatz
Image:Berlinalediscussion.jpg|The audience has the opportunity to discuss the film with producers & directors after the presentation
Image:Berlinalepress.jpg|Conference after a screenings
Image:Berlin Friedrichstadtpalast 2006.jpg|In 2009, the Friedrichstadtpalast became a cinema location
Image:Roland Emmerich.5239.jpg|Jury president 2005, Roland Emmerich 
Image:delphiberlin.jpg|Delphi Filmpalast
Image:ClintEastwood Berlinale.jpg|Clint Eastwood, 2007
Image:Werner Herzog Bruxelles 01 cropped.jpg|Jury president 2010, Werner Herzog
File:Berlinale 2005 Street Poster.jpg|Street poster, 2005
File:Berlinale 2005 Kino International.jpg|Kino International, 2005
File:Berlinale 2005 Poster and Sign from Red Carpet.jpg|Sign and poster from red carpet, 2005
File:Berlinale 2005 Zoo Palast Red Carpet.jpg|Zoo Palast red carpet, 2005
File:Berlinale 2005 Zoo Palast.jpg|Zoo Palast, 2005
File:Berlinale 2005 Red Carpet.jpg|Red carpet, 2005








