[[Chesapeake Bay]]

CATEGORIES: Chesapeake Bay, Bays of Maryland, Bays of Virginia, Chesapeake Bay watershed, Environment of the Mid-Atlantic, Estuaries of Maryland, Estuaries of Virginia, Intracoastal Waterway, Marine ecoregions, Ramsar sites in the United States

The Chesapeake Bay ( drainage basin, which covers parts of six states (New York, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and West Virginia) and the District of Columbia.
The bay is approximately 200 miles (300 km) long from its northern headwaters in the Susquehanna River to its outlet in the Atlantic Ocean. It is 2.8 miles (4.5 km) wide at its narrowest (between Kent County's Plum Point near Newtown and the Harford County shore near Romney Creek) and 30 miles (50 km) at its widest (just south of the mouth of the Potomac River). Total shoreline including tributaries is 11,684 miles (18,804 km), representing a surface area of .
The bay is spanned twice, in Maryland by the Chesapeake Bay Bridge  from Sandy Point (near Annapolis) to Kent Island, and in Virginia by the Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel connecting Virginia Beach to Cape Charles.
Known for both its beauty and bounty, the bay is becoming "emptier", with fewer crabs, oysters, and watermen in recent years.

Etymology

The word Chesepiooc is an Algonquian word referring to a village "at a big river."  It is the seventh oldest surviving English place-name in the U.S., first applied as "Chesepiook" by explorers heading north from the Roanoke Colony into a Chesapeake tributary in 1585 or 1586.  "Sepi" is also found in another placename of Algonquian origin, Mississippi.  The name was soon transferred by the English from the big river at that site to the big bay.  In 2005, Algonquian linguist Blair Rudes "helped to dispel one of the area's most widely held beliefs: that 'Chesapeake' means something like 'Great Shellfish Bay.' It does not, Rudes said. The name might actually mean something like 'Great Water,' or it might have been just a village at the bay's mouth."

Physical geography

Geology and formation

The Chesapeake Bay is the ria, or drowned valley, of the Susquehanna, meaning that it was where the river flowed when the sea level was lower. It is not a fjord, because the Laurentide Ice Sheet never reached as far south as the northernmost point on the bay.  North of Baltimore, the western shore borders the hilly Piedmont region of Maryland; south of the city the Bay lies within the state's low-lying coastal plain, with sedimentary cliffs to the west, and flat islands, winding creeks and marshes to the east.  The large rivers entering the bay from the west have broad mouths and are extensions of the main ria for miles up the course of each river.
The bay's geology, its present form, and its very location were created by a bolide impact event at the end of the Eocene (about 35.5 million years ago), forming the Chesapeake Bay impact crater and the Susquehanna River valley much later.  The bay was formed starting about 10,000 years ago when rising sea levels at the end of the last ice age flooded the Susquehanna River valley.  Parts of the bay, especially the Calvert County, Maryland, coastline, are lined by cliffs composed of deposits from receding waters millions of years ago.  These cliffs, generally known as Calvert Cliffs, are famous for their fossils, especially fossilized shark teeth which are commonly found washed up on the beaches next to the cliffs.  Scientists' Cliffs is a beach community in Calvert County named for the desire to create a retreat for scientists when the community was founded in 1935.[ref]
 [/ref]

Hydrology

Much of the bay is shallow. At the point where the Susquehanna River flows into the bay, the average depth is , to just north of Annapolis. On average, the depth of the bay is 21 feet (7 m), including tributaries;[ref]
  Other sources give values of 25 feet (e.g. 
) or 30 feet deep (
)[/ref] over 24% of the bay is less than 
Because the bay is an estuary, it has fresh water, salt water and brackish water. Brackish water has three salinity zones: oligohaline, mesohaline, and polyhaline.  The freshwater zone runs from the mouth of the Susquehanna River to north Baltimore. The oligohaline zone has very little salt. Salinity varies from 0.5 ppt to 10 ppt, and freshwater species can survive there. The north end of the oligohaline zone is north Baltimore and the south end is the Chesapeake Bay Bridge. The mesohaline zone has a medium amount of salt and runs from the Bay Bridge to the mouth of the Rappahannock River. Salinity there ranges from 10.7 ppt to 18 ppt. The polyhaline zone is the saltiest zone, and some of the water can be as salty as sea water. It runs from the mouth of the Rappahannock River to the mouth of the bay.  The salinity ranges from 18.7 ppt to 36 ppt. (36 ppt is as salty as the ocean.)
The climate of the area surrounding the bay is primarily humid subtropical, with hot, very humid summers and cold to mild winters.  Only the area around the mouth of the Susquehanna River is continental in nature, and the mouth of the Susquehanna River and the Susquehanna flats often freeze in winter. It is rare for the surface of the bay to freeze in winter, something which happened most recently in the winter of 1976–77.[ref]
</ref>
The largest rivers flowing directly into the bay, from north to south, are:
Another river flowing into Chesapeake Bay is the Wicomico River, not to be confused with the tributary of the Potomac River.

Flora and fauna

The Chesapeake Bay is home to numerous fauna that either migrate to the bay at some point during the year or live there year round.  There are over 300 species of fish and numerous shellfish and crab species. Some of these include the Atlantic menhaden, Striped bass, American eel, Eastern oyster, and the Blue crab.
Birds include Osprey, Great Blue Heron, Bald Eagle and Peregrine Falcon, the last two of which were threatened by DDT; their numbers plummeted but have risen in recent years.
The Piping Plover is a near threatened species which inhabits the wetlands.
Numerous flora also make the Chesapeake Bay their home both on land and underwater. Common submerged aquatic vegetation includes eelgrass and widgeon grass. A report in 2011 suggested that information on underwater grasses would be released, because "submerged grasses provide food and habitat for a number of species, adding oxygen to the water and improving water clarity."[ref]
[/ref] Other vegetation that makes its home in other parts of the bay are wild rice, various trees like the red maple and bald cypress, and spartina grass and phragmites., Lewis M., Moran R., Nyman D.. "Chesapeake Bay Wetlands". Emporia State University. May 2009. Retrieved 2010-03-14.

History

European exploration and settlement

In 1524, Italian explorer Giovanni da Verrazzano, in service of the French crown, sailed past the Chesapeake, but did not enter the bay. In 1573, governor of Spanish Florida, Pedro Menéndez de Márquez conducted further exploration of the Chesapeake.
With the arrival of English colonists at Cape Henry in 1607, Europeans again entered the bay. Captain John Smith of England explored and mapped the bay between 1607 and 1609, resulting in the publication in 1612 of A Map of Virginia.
There was a mass migration of southern English Cavaliers and their servants to the Chesapeake Bay region between 1640 and 1675.

American Revolution to the present

The Chesapeake Bay was the site of the Battle of the Chesapeake in 1781, during which the French fleet defeated the Royal Navy in the decisive naval battle of the American Revolutionary War.
It would again see conflict during War of 1812; in 1814, British warships attacked Fort McHenry in Baltimore. In response, the Chesapeake Bay Flotilla, under the command of privateer captain Joshua Barney, was assembled to stall British attacks. In a separate attack, British troops sailed up the Chesapeake, landed on the west side near Washington D.C., and trekked overland to burn the capital.
There were so-called Oyster Wars in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. During the Great Depression in the 1930s, catching and eating oysters continued to be popular.
Today, the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant uses water from the bay to cool its reactor.

Navigation

The Chesapeake Bay forms a link in the Intracoastal Waterway, connecting the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal (linking the bay to the Delaware River) with the Albemarle and Chesapeake Canal (linking the bay, via the Elizabeth River, to the Albemarle Sound in North Carolina). A busy shipping channel runs the length of the bay, an important transit route for large container vessels entering or leaving the Port of Baltimore.
During the later half of the 19th century and first half of the 20th century, the bay was plied by passenger steamships and packet boat lines connecting the various cities on it, notably the Baltimore Steam Packet Company.
In the later twentieth century, a series of road crossings were built. One, The Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel, connecting Virginia's eastern shore with its mainland, is approximately 

Tides

Tides in the Chesapeake Bay exhibit an interesting and very unique behavior due to the nature of the topography (both horizontal and vertical shape), wind driven circulation, and how the Bay interacts with oceanic tides.  Studies into the peculiar behavior of tides both at the northern and southern extents of the Bay have been made as far back as the late 1970s.  Wang and Elliot 1979 noted sea level fluctuations at periods of 5 days, driven by sea level changes at the Bay's mouth on the Atlantic coast and local lateral winds, and 2.5 days, caused by resonant oscillations driven by local longitudinal winds.-P.  1979.  Subtidal Sea Level Variations in the Chesapeake Bay and Relations to Atmospheric Forcing.  Journal of Physical Oceanography.  Vol. 9.  pp. 413–421. Wang 1979 later found that the geometry of the Bay permits for a resonant period of 1.46 days using quarter wavelength theory. and A.J. Elliott.  Non-Tidal Variability in the Chesapeake Bay and Potomac River: Evidence for Non-Local Forcing.  Journal of Physical Oceanography.  Vol. 8.  pp. 225–232.
More recently, Zhong, Li, and Foreman 2008 investigated the sea level variability and resonance of the Chesapeake Bay., M. Li, M.G.G. Foreman.  2008.  Resonance and sea level variability in Chesapeake Bay.  Continental Shelf Research.  Vol. 28.  pp. 2565–2573.  They found that the disparity in sea level variability exhibited at sites in the northern versus southern Bay are due to strong frictional dissipation from shallowing water depth in the northern Bay.  This can be seen in the energy spectra from various sites in the Bay (at left).  Part B shows that Baltimore and Chesapeake Bay Bridge Tunnel (CBBT) exhibit strong power at the 0.5 day period, with CBBT showing a larger response to this period, corresponding to normal semi-diurnal tides.  In contrast, at a period larger than 1 day, Baltimore and CBBT both exhibit an oscillatory period of ~1.3 days, but the location feeling the larger influence is Baltimore.
A good example of how the different Chesapeake Bay sites experience different tides can be can be seen in the tidal predictions put out by NOAA (see figure at right).  thumb|Example Chesapeake Bay tides from Baltimore and CBBT for quarter and full moons during June 2013.  Examples will be shown for Baltimore and CBBT sites for June 16–17, 2013 (first quarter moon) and for June 23–24, 2013 (full moon); these sun-earth-moon geometries hold through the lunar month as well as year.
Two interesting points of comparison that arises from using these two sites at opposite ends of the bay is in their tidal characteristics: semi-diurnal tide for CBBT and mixed tide for Baltimore (due to resonance in the Bay) and the differences in amplitude (due to dissipation in the Bay), points which have been expounded upon earlier.
left|thumb|Left: Contours of locations in the Bay which experience the same range (corange) between high and low tide.  To understand the Chesapeake Bay tides structure further than just the CBBT and Baltimore sites, two additional plots show the cotidal ranges and time of occurrence are included (at left; adapted from Fisher 1986).    They qualitatively show locations in the bay that experience similar magnitude tidal ranges as well as how the tidal signal progresses through the Bay.  For example, using the mouth of the Bay (near CBBT) as a reference, the plot on the left shows that Upper Bay sites (Baltimore for example) should experience a lag in their tidal signals close to 12 hours.  This is confirmed in the tidal gauge plots above, with the evening high tide at CBBT on June 23 occurring 12 hours prior to the morning high tide at Baltimore on June 24.
It is important to note that due to its estuarine nature, the Chesapeake Bay experiences not only barotropic flows driven by tidal induction but also experiences baroclinic flows driven by density differences, both of which have tidal characteristics et al., 1998. et al.  1998.  Separating baroclinic flow from tidally induced flow in estuaries.  Journal of Geophysical Research.  Vol. 103.  pp. 10405–10417.  In the north part of the Bay, where the Bay is both shallow and quasi-vertically homogeneous with respect to density, the main component of the Bay's tides are the barotropic component (the Lunar and Solar components).  However, as you travel south in the bay, density in the vertical begins to vary and stratification occurs due to the relatively fresher water flowing out of the Bay with relatively more saline water flowing into the Bay at depth. and M. Li.  2006.  Tidal energy fluxes and dissipation in the  Chesapeake Bay.  Continental Shelf Research.  Vol. 26.  pp. 752–770. The most significant density gradients in the vertical are near the center channel of the Bay, where it is deepest, and at the mouth, where the inflow of oceanic waters are most saline.  Due to this vertical stratification, baroclinic waves can set up along the density interface and can have a non-negligible impact on the tidal flow, and both the barotropic and baroclinic parts of the ultimate tidal flow are also dependent on the depth of the water et al., 1998.

Economy

Fishing industry

The bay is mostly known for its seafood production, especially blue crabs, clams and oysters. In the middle of the twentieth century, the bay supported 9,000 full-time watermen, according to one account. Today, the body of water is less productive than it used to be because of runoff from urban areas (mostly on the Western Shore) and farms (especially on the Eastern Shore and in the Susquehanna River watershed), over-harvesting, and invasion of foreign species.
The plentiful oyster harvests led to the development of the skipjack, the state boat of Maryland, which is the only remaining working boat type in the United States still under sail power. Other characteristic bay-area workboats include sail-powered boats such as the log canoe, the pungy, the bugeye, and the motorized Chesapeake Bay deadrise, the state boat of Virginia.
In contrast to harvesting wild oysters, oyster farming is a growing industry for the bay to help maintain the estuary's productivity as well as a natural effort for filtering impurities such as excess nutrients from the water in an effort to reduce the effects of man-made pollution. The Chesapeake Bay Program is using oysters to reduce the amount of nitrogen compounds entering the Chesapeake Bay.
Oysters are hermaphroditic and will change gender at least once during their lifetime, often starting as male and ending as female; there are numerous ways to cook and eat them, as well as recipes and sauces to accompany oyster dishes. One account:
The bay is famous for its rockfish, a regional name for striped bass. Once on the verge of extinction, rockfish have made a significant comeback because of legislative action that put a moratorium on rockfishing, which allowed the species to re-populate. Rockfish are now able to be fished in strictly controlled and limited quantities.

Tourism and recreation

The Chesapeake Bay is a main feature for tourists who visit Maryland and Virginia each year. Fishing, crabbing, swimming, boating, kayaking, and sailing are extremely popular activities enjoyed on the waters of the Chesapeake Bay. As a result, tourism has a notable impact on Maryland's economy One report suggested that Annapolis was an appealing spot for families, water sports and boating. Commentator Terry Smith spoke about the bay's beauty:
One account suggested how the Chesapeake attracts people:

Environmental problems

Pollution and runoff

In the 1970s, the Chesapeake Bay was discovered to contain one of the planet's first identified marine dead zones, where hypoxic waters were so depleted of oxygen that they were unable to support life, resulting in massive fish kills. Today the bay's dead zones are estimated to kill 75,000 tons of bottom-dwelling clams and worms each year, weakening the base of the estuary's food chain and robbing the blue crab in particular of a primary food source. Crabs are sometimes observed to amass on shore to escape pockets of oxygen-poor water, a behavior known as a "crab jubilee". Hypoxia results in part from large algal blooms, which are nourished by the runoff of residential, farm and industrial waste throughout the watershed. One report in 2010 criticized Amish farmers for having cows which "generate heaps of manure that easily washes into streams and flows onward into the Chesapeake Bay."
The runoff and pollution have many components that help contribute to the algal blooms which is mainly fed by phosphorus and nitrogen. (2009-10-30). "Is it time we put the ailing Bay on diet?". The Free Lance Star. Retrieved 2010-02-17  This algae prevents sunlight from reaching the bottom of the bay while alive and deoxygenates the bay's water when it dies and rots.  The erosion and runoff of sediment into the bay, exacerbated by devegetation, construction and the prevalence of pavement in urban and suburban areas, also blocks vital sunlight. 
