[[Weltklang]]

CATEGORIES: German musical groups

Weltklang is a German electronic music project that was formed in 1980.
Current members are Thomas Voburka and René Steuns.

Background

Weltklang was formed in the East-German town of Schwerin, German Democratic Republic in 1980. 
The mastermind behind Weltklang is Thomas Voburka, who also founded the Berlin based electronic music label Exil-System in 1979. 
Weltklang is particularly noted for the innovatively sparse and yet classic Minimal wave track "VEB Heimat", which was originally released in 1980.

"VEB Heimat"

Weltklang's first release, the 7" single "VEB Heimat/Hoffnung / Sehnsucht ??" was brought out in 1980.
Inspired by the fast rise of Neue Deutsche Welle and by the Punk subculture's DIY attitude Voburka's main principle was to remove all dispensable ornamentation and polish from his music, and to use the simplest and most minimalist structures. On "VEB Heimat" for instance he made sole use of a simple Roland SH09 Synthesizer line  - a very stripped down monophonic analogue synthesizer from Roland Corporation's classic SH-series. 
The song itself was based upon a very minimalist, radically filtered bass sequence and a yet destructive, (un)musical arrangement. In addition to this sparse backing, the track featured a furious and repetitive vocal line by Voburka, reiteratively quoting an excerpt from the national anthem of Austria, Land der Berge, Land am Strome.
Whereas the first half of the song title "VEB Heimat" refers to the socialist-tinted expression "Volkseigener Betrieb" (a state owned workplace or establishment in the German Democratic Republic) the second word "Heimat" is a thoroughly and hard to translate German term, comparable to "homeland" in English.

Response

Not hugely successful at first,
Today Voburka's Weltklang project is seen as one of the true classics in electronic music and for many DJs and Musicians "VEB Heimat" has grown to an all time favourite.
Weltklang has since then often been referred to by artists such as DJ Hell or Optimo (Espacio). 
Ever since its original release in 1980 "Veb Heimat" has been re-released on numerous occasions, primarily for compilation albums. Apart from its integration in compilation albums such as 80's Minimal Electronics (Volume 1), Return Of Flexi-Pop 3 (Tribute To Flexi-Pop 13) compilation which was released on International DeeJay Gigolo Records.

2004 - Present

On the occasion of Weltklang's 25th anniversary, in 2004 Voburka decided to reform the project, together with London based programmer, producer and engineer René Steuns.
Since then Weltklang have produced various remixes for artists such as Aeronautica, Alter Ego, Asmodeus X, Fall Of Saigon, Kinder Aus Asbest, Mono 45UPM, P1/e, Plastic Japanese Toys, Soldout and Sonnenbrandt as well as the somewhat obscure "Liebesgrüsse aus Ost-Berlin" compilation album. Not only for their original Material but also for their remixes Weltklang remain true to their minimalist and deconstructive DIY approach.

On Stage

Furthermore from 2005 on Weltklang have played various, sporadic live shows throughout Europe, with critically acclaimed gigs in Belgium, Germany, Sweden and most recently Ukraine.

Discography

Releases:
Remixes:
Tracks Appear On:
Unofficial Releases:






