[[Sacred Scriptures Bethel Edition]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 books, Bible translations into English, 1981 in religion

'The Sacred Scriptures Bethel Edition (SSBE) is a Sacred Name Bible which uses the names Yahweh and Yahshua in both the Old and New Testaments (Chamberlin p. 51-3). It was produced by Jacob O. Meyer, based on the American Standard Version of 1901 and it contains over 977 pages. The Assemblies of Yahweh printed 5,500 copies of the first edition in 1981. Meyer" in English Language Bible Translators, pp162,163. McFarland, NC: Jefferson & Co. It is also used by some members of the SNM.

Sacred names

Sacred Name supporters often cite from passages such as . ) is found. The Name is found approximately 7,000 times in the Hebrew Scriptures. Some claim that the pronunciation was lost, or unknown. However, most prominent, authoritative reference works today do not support this view.J.D Douglas. New Bible Dictionary, (Wm. B Eerdman's Pub. Co(c) 1962) p.9.)"Yahweh" Encyclopædia Britannica, 15th Edition The Encyclopedia Judaica makes the following statement:
 
Prominent religious leaders have agreed that Yahweh cannot be translated into any word exactly (Herbert Armstrong, pp. 128 – 129), while other Bible translators point out that the reason for not pronouncing Yahweh and producing the form Jehovah, was down to a misunderstanding of Jewish tradition (Anchor Bible, page XIV). Bible translations such as the Rotherham's Emphasized Bible, the Anchor Bible, and the Jerusalem Bible have retained the name Yahweh in the Old Testament. The Sacred Scriptures Bethel Edition is one of the few English Bible translations that uses Yahweh in both the Old Testament and the New Testament.

Notability

thumb|right|100px|With every translation of the Bible, translators must choose how they render the Tetragrammaton. The Name is often substituted with various forms, but the SSBE Bible uses the Name throughout Old and New Testament consistently. Notable aspects of the Bible include its use of the name of God (Yahweh) and the Semitic name of the Messiah – commonly referred to as Jesus – Yahshua. Instead of the Greek word "Christ", it uses the Hebrew word "Messiah", instead of "church" it uses "assembly". Also, this translation does not use the terms "cross" and "crucify", but rather "torture stake" and "impale". Therefore, the translation of the Sacred Scriptures Bethel Edition uses words that the translator claimed have the more accurate meanings, rather than the usual words employed by translators. It is also distinguishable by its preface section, which describes the setting, language and name of the Bible. The Sacred Scriptures Bethel Edition concludes with a "Pure Religious Vocabulary" section, which gives the explanation of words which should be avoided for those seeking "to purify their personal worship". This glossary of terms briefly traces and presents the etymology of words used frequently by Christian theologians which the translator claimed are pagan in origin. It also includes additional information for scholarly research.



Restoring the truth

The Assemblies of Yahweh elder Jacob O. Meyer felt that damage had been done to the texts by translators who failed to bring over the appropriate words from the Hebrew or Greek into the English language. At the back of the Sacred Scriptures Bethel Edition Bible, four pages point out these discrepancies. By using the words that appeared in the original texts, Meyer hoped to aid the True Worshipper .

Editions

The Assemblies of Yahweh continue to use the Sacred Scriptures Bethel Edition as their preferred text. It has currently undergone seven printings: 1981, 1986, 1989, 1993, 1997, 2001, 2008. The Sacred Scriptures Bethel Edition is a publication by the Assemblies of Yahweh and its editor, Jacob O. Meyer. The Sacred Scriptures Bethel Edition is available at some libraries in England and the United States and is used at the Dalet School and the Obadiah School of the Bible, both in Bethel, Pennsylvania.


Quotations






Bibliography




