[[HMS Bonne Citoyenne (1796)]]

CATEGORIES: Sloops of the Royal Navy, Post ships of the Royal Navy, 1794 ships, Bonne Citoyenne-class corvettes, War of 1812 ships of the United Kingdom

Bonne Citoyenne was the name ship of a four-vessel class of 20-gun corvettes of the French Navy. The Royal Navy captured her and commissioned her as the sloop-of-war HMS ''Bonne Citoyenne. Her most famous action was her capture of the French frigate Furieuse on 6 July 1809, for which her crew would earn the Naval General Service Medal. Her lines were used as the basis for the Hermes''-class post ships. She was sold in 1819.

French service and capture

Bonne Citoyenne was built and launched in 1794, put into service in 1795 and served in the English Channel and the Bay of Biscay. 
On 4 March she left Rochfort under the command of capitaine de vaisseau Mahé-La Bourdonnais. She was in the company of the French frigates Forte, Seine, and Regenerée, and the brig Mutine. They were sailing for the Île de France with troops and Bonne Citoyenne also had a great deal of soldiers' clothing on board.
Bonne Citoyenne had the misfortune to be damaged in a storm and to become separated from the rest of the French squadron. On 10 March she had the further misfortune to encounter the fifth-rate frigate , under the command of Robert Stopford, and his squadron. The squadron captured her 58 leagues off Cape Finisterre.
Stopford then took her back to England as his prize. She was commissioned into the Royal Navy as HMS Bonne Citoyenne. 
Two men from Bonne Citoyenne, Sélis, who had been chief helmsman, and Thierry, a pilot, made an unsuccessful attempt to escape from Petersfield Prison after seven months captivity. Consequently, they were put on board the Lady Shore, which was to carry them, another six French prisoners, and some convicts to Botany Bay. On the way they fomented a mutiny, seized the vessel, and took her into Rio de Janeiro, where a French frigate squadron under Captain Landolphe, comprising Médée, Franchise and Concorde, rescued them.

British service

Mediterranean

Bonne Citoyenne
Lindsay sailed for the Mediterranean in January 1797 where she joined a squadron under Lord Viscount Garlies, off Cadiz. The squadron also included 
Bonne Citoyenne was in company with the other vessels of Garlies' squadron when they captured the Spanish brigs San Juan Baptista on 6 February and the Virgine de Monserrate three days later. At about the same time they also captured the Spanish ship San Francisco, which they sent into Lisbon. 
Bonne Citoyenne was at the Battle of Cape St Vincent on 14 February, when she signaled Admiral John Jervis that she had sighted the French fleet. In 1847 the Admiralty authorized the issuance of the Naval General Service Medal with clasp "St. Vincent" to all surviving claimants from the battle.
The British anchored in Lagos Bay with their prizes. Jervis then sent a squadron, that included Bonne Citoyenne, under Captain Velters Cornwall Berkeley in  
In March Captain Lord Mark Kerr took command, only to be replaced in May by Commander Richard Retalick. Bonne Citoyenne then had a productive summer capturing two privateers and numerous other vessels: 
Commander Josiah Nisbet replaced Retalick in May 1798. On 28 October, Bonne Citoyenne and 
Bonne Cityonne joined Admiral Horatio Nelson's squadron and went out with it to the Mediterranean,Naval Chronicle, Vol. 1, p.44 but did not arrive at Abu Qir Bay until ten days after the Battle of the Nile. He was, in fact, the son of Nelson's wife, Fanny Nisbet, by her first husband. Nisbet was promoted to post captain in  December. 
In January 1799 Nelson ordered Bonne Citoyenne to convey the Turkish Ambassador to Constantinople.229. Nisbet returned to Palermo with dispatches from Constantinople for Nelson. She then sailed to Malta to join the fleet blockading the French garrison there, arriving in early April.
Commander Thomas Malling took over in August. His successor, in September, was Lieutenant Archibald Duff (acting), who left after the Admiralty refused to confirm the appointment. The next month Commander Robert Jackson assumed command. 
Bonne Citoyenne was among the many vessels of the Malta blockade sharing in the prize money accruing from the capture on 18 February of the French warship Genereux. The first distribution of the proceeds of the hull, provisions and stores totaled ₤24,000. Although the British captured Dianne, Justice was able to slip away in the dark.
On 5 September 1800, the British took Malta after two years of blockade. Bonne Citoyenne was among the vessels and regiments that shared in the prize money.
On 31 December 1800 Jackson and the Bonne Citoyenne captured the Spanish privateer settee  Vives about 20 leagues off Cape Mola, outside Port Mahon. Vives was armed with ten 9-pounders and had a crew of 80 men. She was ten days out of Palma and had previously captured a merchant vessel carrying wine from Port Mahon to Citadella. Jackson recaptured this ship too. 
Bonne Citoyenne then returned to Gibraltar. There she was among the vessels that shared in the capture of the Eurydice on 9 February 1801.
Next, she sailed for Egypt with Lord Keith's fleet. The force attacked the French at Alexandria. On 9 June, Bonne Citoyenne, and the brig-sloops  
In 1850 the Admiralty awarded the Naval general Service Medal with clasp "Egypt" to the crews of any vessel that had served in the campaign between 8 March and 2 September 1801. Bonne Cityonne is listed among the vessels whose crews qualified.  
Jackson was promoted to Post Captain in April 1802; his replacement, in May, was Captain Philip Carteret. 
Bonne Citoyenne was paid off in 1803. By 1805 she was moored at Chatham, where she underwent repairs in 1808. She was recommissioned under John Thompson in May 1808, and served off the north coast of Spain. William Mounsey replaced Thompson on 18 April 1809. He then took despatches to Earl St Vincent.23. While Mounsey was in command of Bonne Citoyenne, she ran down and sank a merchant vessel, the Doris. Lieutenant Symes, first lieutenant of Bonne Citoyenne was the officer of the watch and was on deck at the time. The owners of Doris sued Mounsey, but the case was dismissed on the grounds that Mounsey had not appointed Symes. Vol. 8, 1848, pp.57-9. (London:V.R. Stevens & G.S. Norton).

Bonne Citoyenne captures Furieuse

Bonne Citoyenne  returned to England after delivering the despatches, and on 18 June sailed from Spithead in company with . The two were acting as escorts for a convoy bound for Quebec. Whilst she escorted the convoy, on 2 July, lookouts spotted a suspicious sail astern, and Mounsey dropped back to investigate. In doing so he lost sight of the convoy.
As he sailed to rejoin the convoy, on 5 July he came across a French frigate that was in the process of capturing an English merchant. Despite the frigate's substantially larger size, Mounsey immediately gave chase, at which the French ship fled northwards. After a chase lasting 18 hours the Bonne Citoyenne caught up with the French ship on the morning of 6 July and brought her to battle. 
The subsequent engagement lasted seven hours, with Bonne Citoyenne at a disadvantage early on, when three of her guns were dismounted. She nevertheless fired 129 broadsides to the enemy's 70. By the end of the battle Bonne Citoyenne had lost her top masts, her lower masts were badly damaged, and her rigging, sails and boats had been shot to pieces. Running out of powder Mounsey decided to force the issue and ordered his men to be prepared to board the French ship. Before he could do so, the French surrendered and Mounsey took possession.
The enemy ship was discovered to be the Furieuse, which had sailed from the Îles des Saintes on 1 April, carrying sugar and coffee to France. She was capable of carrying 48 guns, but she was armed en flute, only carrying 20 at the time. Even so, the weight of her broadside was considerable as she carried twelve 42-pounder carronades, two long 24-pounder guns, and six other guns of smaller caliber. She also had a much larger crew, with 200 sailors, 40 soldiers, and a detachment of troops from the 60th Regiment of the Line. Furieuse had suffered heavy damage; she had lost her masts, had five feet of water in the hold, and her casualties numbered 35 killed and 37 wounded. By contrast, Bonne Citoyenne had lost just one man killed and five wounded. Mounsey attributed the smallness of his losses to "the Lowness of the Bonne Citoyenne's Hull, and being so close under the Enemy's Guns." 
Furieuse was patched up, with a great deal of effort, to the point where Bonne Citoyenne could tow her into Halifax, where both underwent repairs. The Royal Navy took  into service under her existing name. Bonne Citoyenne returned to England in September. 
A round of promotions followed the victory. Bonne Citoyennes first lieutenant received a promotion to commander and Mounsey one to Post captain, effective 6 July, i.e., the date of the battle. Mounsey was promised command of Furieuse once she was repaired. Captain John Simpson commissioned Furieuse in Halifax and sailed her to Britain, arriving in Portsmouth on 20 June 1810. She then underwent repairs. Mounsey then commissioned her in November 1811.
Inflexible sued in Vice-Admiralty Court in Halifax to share in the prize money from the capture. However, the Court ruled that Bonne Citoyenne was the sole captor.177-185
The Admiralty issued Mounsey with a gold medal for the action, one of only 18 that they so honoured. In 1847 the Admiralty issued the Naval General Service Medal with clasp "Bonne Citoyenne Wh. Furieuse" to all surviving claimants from Bonne Cityonne.

Greene and the Americans

When Mounsey left Bonne Citoyenne in 1810, his successor was Commander Richard James O'Connor. On 21 June 1810, Bonne Citoyenne captured the French privateer
Maitre de Danse in the Channel. She was pierced for 14 guns but only mounted four, and had a crew of 30 men. O'Connor sailed Bonne Citoyenne on a convoy to Madeira on 11 July 1810. 
In November Pitt Burnaby Greene took command. Greene was promoted to Post captain on 7 March 1811, after which Bonne Citoyenne was re-classed as a Post-ship. Greene sailed her to the South American Station on 12 March. Bonne Citoyenne was based at the River Plate, and Greene was the senior officer of the station from December 1811 to September 1812 when Captain Peter Heywood arrived.335-8. 
With the outbreak of the War of 1812 Greene took on a cargo of specie, worth some half a million pounds, and sailed from Rio de Janeiro. Unfortunately, a grounding damaged Bonne Citoyenne and he was forced to put into Salvador for repairs. Whilst she was in port, two American warships, the  arrived. James Lawrence of the Hornet sent a challenge to Greene, offering a single ship combat, with Commodore William Bainbridge of Constitution pledging not to intervene in any way.
Bonne Citoyenne and Hornet were evenly matched in terms of the number of guns, weight of their broadsides, and sizes of their crews. In his reply, Greene stated that he expected that he would emerge the victor in such a contest, but that he could not expect Bainbridge and Constitution to forsake their duty to intervene should Bonne Citoyenne emerge the victor. Consequently he declined the challenge at this time and place, but stated that he stood ready to accept the opportunity should the circumstances be different.
Constitution left on 6 January 1813, but Bonne Citoyenne did not sortie even though Hornet was now apparently alone. The arrival of the third rate , which subsequently sank. Greene sailed for Portsmouth on 26 January, arriving there in April. Bonne Citoyenne then returned to Jamaica, before again returning to Britain.

Fate

In August 1814 or so Captain Augustus Clifford took command of Bonne Citoyenne.232-3. She was laid up in ordinary in January 1815. The Navy put her up for sale on 3 February 1819, and sold her on that day to Joshua Crystall for ₤1,550.

Notes






