[[Jon-Marc McDonald]]

CATEGORIES: LGBT businesspeople from the United States, People from Fort Worth, Texas, American campaign managers, American bakers, 1976 births, Living people, American bloggers

Jon-Marc McDonald (born September 20, 1976) is an American born blogger, publicist, political activist and baker. McDonald gained national attention when, at the age of 21, he simultaneously came out of the closet as a gay man and resigned as campaign manager from the 1998 United States congressional campaign of conservative Republican candidate Brian Babin.  McDonald went on to work in communications for Barnes & Noble and then as the Corporate Communications and Marketing Officer of the Hong Kong Trade Development Council. Currently McDonald owns and maintains a website devoted to baking  that has received widespread media attention. He also writes a political blog that was transformed in late 2008 into an online diary of McDonald's daily journey since learning that his partner of eight years, to whom McDonald was joined in a Civil Union, was thought to be in the final stages of AIDS. Spotting Love, a play based upon the diary, premiered as part of New York University's 2010 Creating Original Work season and is currently being adapted into a screenplay. McDonald currently serves as the publicist for the estate of Rue McClanahan.

Early life

McDonald was born in Fort Worth, Texas to Lyn and John McDonald. He has one younger brother, Grant.  McDonald is the grandson of the late James E. Coggin, an influential Southern Baptist minister.
McDonald attended Baylor University in Waco, Texas, where he majored in history.
McDonald writes of his college years "Baylor is a really conservative school in a really conservative town in a really conservative state. And I was doing my best at pretending to be a really conservative student with a really conservative girlfriend studying really conservative things. But I had a secret".

Political controversy

At the age of 21, McDonald  resigned from the 1998 United States congressional campaign of Brian Babin, Republican candidate of Texas's 2nd district.
After working on the campaign for three months, McDonald, who is openly gay,
McDonald generated further press coverage when he stated in an interview after his resignation that Babin thought "homosexuals should be shot", a claim Babin adamantly denied. In some press reports, Babin claimed that McDonald was not the campaign manager, but instead a "volunteer coordinator", also a paid position. One article suggested that McDonald was forced to resign by the local media threatening to "out" him.[ref]
</ref>
The resignation received widespread national media attention due to the sensationalistic way it transpired.
McDonald's account of the resignation varies somewhat from the reported accounts. On his political website, Screaming from the Rooftop, McDonald recalls the resignation by cryptically writing in his blog "... Later in the same post McDonald claims that he was "...

Post political career

After his resignation McDonald returned to Washington, D.C., where he lived prior to the campaign. In 2001, McDonald moved to New York City where he worked in communications for the book retailer Barnes & Noble before being hired as the Corporate Communications and Marketing Director for the Hong Kong Trade Development Council (HKTDC).
In 2006, McDonald began Bake It Til You Make It (BITYMI), a culinary multimedia website that, according to the site's "About" page, is "a journey through the culinary world with some political and social commentary along the way".

Personal life

On November 12, 2008 McDonald served as a marshal for the large New York City protest march against California's Proposition 8.
On December 3, 2009 McDonald attended the Rally for Marriage in New York City, holding a sign that read "If I'm found guilty of stabbing my girlfriend I can marry her but if I love my boyfriend, I can't marry him? Is that right, Senator Monserrate?", a reference to convicted then-New York State Senator, Hiram Monserrate, who voted against same-sex marriage legislation on December 2, 2009.
McDonald occasionally serves as publicist for his good friend, Michael-Leon Wooley. On August 12, 2008, McDonald announced on his baking website that Wooley performed We Have To Change at a fundraiser for the then Democratic presidential nominee, Barack Obama, in New York City. The song was written specifically for the fundraiser by Henry Krieger and Bill Russell  
In late December 2008 McDonald began a series entitled Angels I Don't See on his blog, Screaming From the Rooftop. The series chronicled McDonald's personal journey after learning that his civil-unioned partner of eight years had AIDS. McDonald learned of his partners status on Christmas Eve, 2008 while at his partner's bedside at the hospital, a revelation that his partner kept from McDonald for many months.
McDonald writes of the sudden and rapid deterioration of his partner that he was "watching the love of his life waste away from the plague in the supposed non-plague years".[ref]
</ref>
[ref]
</ref>
On January 7, 2011 McDonald posted that he would lead the publicity and marketing efforts on behalf of friend Michael J. La Rue and the estate of Rue McClanahan for ten auctions to be held throughout the United States to sell McClanahan's belongings as, according to McDonald, was McClanahan's wish. In addition McDonald will assist with the publicity for a documentary about the actress, release date unknown.




