[[Paris Commune]]

CATEGORIES: Paris Commune, 1871 establishments in France, 1871 disestablishments, 1871 in France, 1871 riots, 19th-century revolutions, Anarchism in France, Communism, Communist revolutions, History of anarchism, History of socialism, Riots and civil disorder in France, Sieges, Sieges involving France, States and territories established in 1871, 19th century in Paris, Anarchist revolutions

The Paris Commune () was a revolutionary and socialist government that briefly ruled Paris from 18 March until 28 May 1871. 405 The killing of two French army generals by soldiers of the Commune's National Guard and the refusal of the Commune to accept the authority of the French government led to its harsh suppression by the regular French Army in "La Semaine sanglante" ("The Bloody Week") beginning on 21 May 1871.". Debates over the policies and outcome of the Commune had significant influence on the ideas of Karl Marx. p. 264-270.

Prelude to the Paris Commune

On 2 September 1870, after his unexpected defeat at the Battle of Sedan in the Franco-Prussian War, Emperor Louis Napoleon III surrendered to the Prussian Chancellor, Otto von Bismarck. When the news reached Paris on 3 September, shocked and angry crowds came out into the streets, the Empress Eugenie, the regent of the Emperor, fled the city, and the Government of the Second Empire swiftly collapsed. Republican and radical deputies of the French National Assembly went to the Hotel de Ville and proclaimed the new French Republic, and formed a Government of National Defense. Though the Emperor and the French Army had been defeated at Sedan, the war continued. The German army marched swiftly toward Paris.

The population of Paris on the eve of Commune

In 1871 France was deeply divided between the large rural, Catholic, and conservative population of the French countryside and the more republican and radical population of Paris, Marseille, Lyon, and the few other large cities. In the first tour of the parliamentary elections held under the French Empire on 24 May 1869, 4,438,000 had voted for the Bonapartiste candidates supporting Louis Napoleon III, while 3,350,000 had voted for the republican opposition. In Paris, however, the republican candidates dominated, winning 234,000 votes against 77,000 for the Bonapartistes. 65.
Of the two million people in Paris in 1869, according to the official census, there were about 500,000 industrial workers, or fifteen percent of all the industrial workers in France, plus another three to four hundred thousand workers in other enterprises. Only about 40,000 were employed in factories and large enterprises; most were employed in small workshops and businesses making clothing and textiles, furniture, and in construction. There were also 115,000 servants and 45,000 concierges.  In addition to the native French population, there were about one hundred thousand immigrant workers and political refugees, the largest number being from Italy and Poland.
During the war and the siege of Paris, a large part of the middle class and upper class Parisians departed the city, and at the same time there was an influx of refugees from parts of France occupied by the Germans. The working class and immigrants were the sections of the population that suffered the most from the lack of industrial activity caused by the war and the long siege of Paris, and they were the basis of the popular support for the Commune.

The radicalization of the Paris workers

The Commune resulted in part from growing discontent among the Paris workers. 74-75 This discontent can be traced to the first worker uprisings, the Canut Revolts, in Lyon and Paris in the 1830sEdwards 1971, pg. 1 (a Canut was a Lyonnais silk worker, often working on Jacquard looms).
Many Parisians, especially workers and the lower-middle classes, supported a democratic republic. A specific demand was that Paris should be self-governing with its own elected council, something enjoyed by smaller French towns but denied to Paris by a national government wary of the capital's unruly populace. They also wanted a more "just", if not necessarily socialist, way of managing the economy, summed up in the popular appeal for "la république démocratique et sociale!" ("the democratic and social republic!").
Socialist movements, such as the First International, had been growing in influence. Hundreds of societies affiliated to it across France. In early 1867, Parisian employers of bronze-workers attempted to de-unionize their workers. This was defeated by a strike organised by the International. 
Later in 1867, an illegal public demonstration in Paris was answered by the legal dissolution of its executive committee and fines to the leadership. Tensions escalated; Internationalists elected a new committee and put forth a more radical programme, the authorities imprisoned their leaders, and a more revolutionary perspective was taken to the International's 1868 Brussels Congress. The International had considerable influence even among unaffiliated French workers, particularly in Paris and the big towns.
The killing of Victor Noir incensed Parisians and the arrests of journalists critical of the Emperor did nothing to quiet the city. A coup was attempted in early 1870, but tensions eased significantly after the plebiscite in May of that year. The war with Prussia, initiated by Napoleon III in July 1870, was initially met with patriotic fervour.

Radicals and revolutionaries

