[[Meliá Hotels International]]

CATEGORIES: Hotel chains, Hospitality companies of Spain

Meliá Hotels International, S.A. (formerly Sol Meliá) is a Spanish hotel chain which was founded by Don Gabriel Escarrer Juliá in 1956 in Palma de Mallorca. It is also known as and referred to by its former name of Sol Meliá. The company is one of Spain's largest domestic operators of holiday resorts Currently the hotel chain operates  350 hotels in 35 countries on 4 continents under the brands Meliá, Gran Meliá, ME by Meliá, Paradisus, Innside by Meliá, TRYP by Wyndham, Sol Hotels and Club Meliá.

History

The origins of the company reach back to 1956, when the then-21-year-old Gabriel Escarrer Juliá leased the Altair Hotel in Palma, Majorca. Over the subsequent years Escarrer took advantage of the island's increasing popularity as a tourist destination for package holidaymakers, adding further properties to the portfolio of his company, Hoteles Mallorquines. The company expanded geographically in the 1960s and 70s, acquiring hotels in the Canaries as well as the other Balearic Islands. After the decline of General Franco's dictatorship, tourism in Spain developed more rapidly and Hoteles Mallorquines aggressively moved onto the Spanish mainland, establishing a presence in much of the country by the early 1980s.
In 1984 the company renamed itself Hoteles Sol (), before establishing itself as the largest hotel chain in the country with the acquisition of the 32 location-strong Hotasa group. Another merger followed three years later as the company combined with the upmarket Meliá chain to form Sol Meliá. The deal increased the geographical scope of the company into the Caribbean, Americas and other parts of Europe.
A 1996 split of the company into two separate businesses, one for hotel ownership (Inmotel) and another for management (Sol Meliá, which listed on the Bolsa de Madrid), was reversed three years later amid major consolidation in the industry. Gabriel Escarrer Sr. subsequently stepped down from the chief executive role, replaced by his sons Gabriel Jr. and Sebastian, who became deputy CEO.
On 3 June 2011 the company changed its name to Meliá Hotels International.
The company has recently sought to forge partnerships with other companies in the leisure industry, opening hotels based on the Hard Rock Cafe concept in conjunction with then-parent The Rank Group, and Flintstones-themed hotels with Warner Bros.
Although publicly traded since 1996, the Escarrer family continues to control Meliá Hotels, holding a combined stake of over 63% at the end of 2010.

Operations

The company employs various commercial brands to offer their product, including Gran Meliá, Meliá Hotels & Resorts, ME by Meliá, Innside, Sol Hotels, Paradisus Resorts and Club Meliá (formerly known as Sol Meliá Vacation Club). In 2010, they divested themselves of their Tryp Hotels brand when it was sold to Wyndham Hotels.
The firm operates more than 300 hotels as of April 2013, of which over 150 are in Spain. Of the other 230 countries in which Meliá Hotels International operates, the largest numbers of hotels are located in Cuba, Germany, Croatia, Brazil and Portugal.

Trademark dispute

In late 2008, Hotel Meliá Inc. (HMI), a century-old family-owned hotel in Ponce, Puerto Rico, filed a complaint against Sol Meliá in the Court of First Instance after Sol Meliá attempted to register the name "Meliá" with the Puerto Rico Department of State aserting that Hotel Meliá Inc. "had the sole right to use the Meliá mark in connection with hotel and restaurant services throughout Puerto Rico."Civil No. 09-1188, Docket No. 1-1. Superior Court of Puerto Rico. Court of First Instance. Ponce, Puerto Rico. As a result Sol Meliá withdrew its application. But S.L. Dorpan, a wholly owned subsidiary of Sol Meliá, subsequently filed a complaint against HMI in the United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico, "seeking a declaration that under the Lanham Act, Dorpan had the right to use the mark Meliá throughout Puerto Rico" and that HMI had the right to use the name Meliá only in the city of Ponce. The District Court issued an opinion on 31 March 2012 ruling in favor of Sol Meliá.L. v. Hotel Melia, Inc. Civil Nos. 09-1138 (GAG), 09-1188(GAG). 851 F.2d 398 (2012). Dorpan, S.L., Plaintiff, v. Hotel Melia, Inc. et al., Defendants. United States District Court, District of Puerto Rico. 31 March 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2013. HMI then appealed the decision of the US District Court for the District of Puerto Rico to the First Circuit Court of Appeals in Boston. On 28 August 2013, the Court of Appeals issued its opinion vacating the lower district court's decision and ruling in favor of Ponce's local Hotel Meliá. 12-1679): Dorpan, S.L. v. Hotel Melia, Inc. Retrieved 9 September 2013.
In 2013 Melia acquired the Sheraton Hotel in Nassau, The Bahamas.






