[[Fiona Apple]]

CATEGORIES: Fiona Apple, 1977 births, 20th-century American singers, 20th-century American writers, 20th-century pianists, 20th-century women writers, 21st-century American singers, 21st-century American writers, 21st-century pianists, 21st-century women writers, Alternative rock singers, American alternative rock musicians, American contraltos, American female jazz singers, American female pop singer-songwriters, American female rock singers, American feminists, American jazz pianists, American jazz singers, American jazz songwriters, American pop pianists, American rock pianists, American rock singer-songwriters, Columbia Records artists, Epic Records artists, Feminist musicians, Grammy Award-winning artists, Living people, People from Manhattan, Singers from Los Angeles, California, Singers from New York City, Songwriters from California, Songwriters from New York, Vocal jazz musicians, American women writers, Writers from Los Angeles, California, Writers from New York City

Fiona Apple McAfee Maggart (born September 13, 1977) is an American singer-songwriter and pianist.  Her debut album, Tidal, was released in 1996 and received a Grammy Award for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance (with an additional six nominations) for the single "Criminal".  Subsequent albums include: When the Pawn... (1999), Extraordinary Machine (2005), and The Idler Wheel... (2012).
Apple's vocal range is alto. Her musical style contains elements of jazz and alternative rock.

Early life and family

Born in New York, Apple is the daughter of singer Diane McAfee and actor Brandon Maggart. Her maternal grandparents were dancer Millicent Green and big band vocalist Johnny McAfee. Her sister sings cabaret under the stage name Maude Maggart, and actor Garett Maggart is her half brother.
At age 12 she was raped outside her apartment.'FIONA - The Caged Bird Sings, Rolling Stone Jan '98 by Chris Heath  She then developed an eating disorder, purposely slimming her developing body which she saw as "bait".archive.rollingstone.com/news/story/9598050/cover_story_the_caged_bird_sings/7

Career

1994–1998: Career beginnings and Tidal

Apple was introduced to the music industry in 1994, when she gave a demo tape containing the songs "Never Is a Promise", "Not One of Those Times", and "He Takes a Taxi" to her friend who was the babysitter of music publicist Kathryn Schenker. "Fiona Apple Suffers for Her Sins (and So Do We)". NY Rock. November 1997. Retrieved September 23, 2005. Schenker then passed the tape along to Sony Music executive Andy Slater. Apple's abilities captured his attention, and Slater signed her to a record deal.
In 1996, Apple's debut album, Tidal, was released by Work Records and Columbia Records. The album sold 2.7 million copies and was certified three times platinum in the U.S."Gold and Platinum Searchable Database"
During this period, Apple also made recordings of The Beatles' "Across the Universe" and Percy Mayfield's "Please Send Me Someone to Love" for the soundtrack of the film Pleasantville. She later canceled the last twenty-one dates on a tour in support of her album due to "personal family problems".

1999–2002: When the Pawn... and hiatus

Apple's second album, When the Pawn..., was released in 1999. Its full title is a poem Apple wrote after reading letters that appeared in Spin regarding an article that had cast her in a negative light in an earlier issue. However, as of October 2007, it no longer has the longest album title, as Soulwax released Most of the Remixes, a remix album whose title surpasses When the Pawn's length by 100 characters. When the Pawn was cultivated during Apple's relationship with film director Paul Thomas Anderson. When the Pawn, which was produced by Jon Brion, used more expressive lyrics, experimented more with drum loops, and incorporated both the Chamberlin and drummer Matt Chamberlain. The album received a positive reception from publications such as The New York Times and Rolling Stone. It did not fare as well commercially as her debut, though it was an RIAA-certified platinum album and sold one million copies in the U.S. The album's lead single, "Fast as You Can", reached the top twenty on Billboard's Modern Rock Tracks chart and became Apple's first Top 40 hit in the UK. The videos for two follow-up singles, "Paper Bag" and "Limp" (directed by then-boyfriend Anderson), received very little play.
After performing for forty minutes in a set hampered by equipment issues to 3,000 audience members at the New York City Roseland Ballroom, a frustrated Apple left the stage without returning. Her performance saw Apple appearing distraught at the sound quality, apologizing numerous times for the sound and crying. After completing a concert tour in support of her second album in 2000, Apple relocated to Los Angeles. During her hiatus, Apple contemplated retiring from her recording career. Apple sang with Johnny Cash on a cover of Simon & Garfunkel's "Bridge over Troubled Water" that ended up on his album American IV: The Man Comes Around and was nominated for a Grammy Award for "Best Country Collaboration with Vocals". She also collaborated with Cash on Cat Stevens's "Father and Son", which was included in his 2003 collection Unearthed.

2002–2010: Extraordinary Machine

Apple's third album, Extraordinary Machine, was originally produced by Jon Brion. In spring 2002, Apple and Jon Brion, her longtime friend and producer on When the Pawn, met for their weekly lunch meeting. Brion reportedly "begged" Apple to make another album. Apple agreed, and Brion went to Apple's label, Epic Records, with strict stipulations (including no deadline), which the label eventually agreed to. Recording sessions began in 2002, at Ocean Way studios in Nashville, Tennessee, but later moved to the Paramour Mansion in Los Angeles. Work on the album continued until 2003, and in May of that year it was submitted to Sony executives. In 2004 and 2005, tracks were leaked on the Internet in MP3 format and played on U.S. and international radio. Subsequently, MP3s of the entire album went online. Although a Web site distributing the album was quickly shutdown, it soon reached P2P networks and was downloaded by fans. Retrieved August 25, 2010 A fan-led campaign supported the album's official release.
Mike Elizondo, who had previously played bass on Pawn, was brought back as co-producer to complete the tracks he had begun with Brion and Apple. Spin later reported the following: "Fans erroneously thought that Apple's record label, Epic, had rejected the first version of Extraordinary Machine... in reality, according to Elizondo, Apple was unhappy with the results, and it was her decision to redo the record, not her label's."Fiona Apple's Machine Finally Turned On Spin. August 15, 2005. Retrieved March 5, 2009 In August 2005, the album was given an October release date."Fiona Apple's Machine Finally Turned On". Spin. August 15, 2005. Production had been largely redone "from scratch" by Elizondo and was co-produced by Brian Kehew. Two of the eleven previous leaked tracks were relatively unchanged, and one new song was also included. Retrieved August 15, 2005. Despite suggestions that the album had caused a rift between Brion and Apple, they regularly perform together at Largo, a club in Los Angeles, including a joint appearance with Elizondo on bass just before the news broke of an official release. Retrieved August 25, 2010 Extraordinary Machine debuted at number seven and was nominated for a Grammy Award for "Best Pop Vocal Album". It was eventually certified gold and sold 600,000 copies in the U.S., though its singles ("Parting Gift", "O' Sailor", "Not About Love" and "Get Him Back") failed to enter any Billboard charts. "Fiona Taps Rice, Garza For Summer Trek". Billboard. April 19, 2006. Apple went on a live tour to promote the album in late 2005.
In June 2006, Apple appeared on the joke track "Come Over and Get It (Up in 'Dem Guts)" by comedian Zach Galifianakis. Galifianakis previously appeared in the music video for Apple's "Not About Love".com Retrieved on 06-08-11 Apple recorded a cover of "Sally's Song" for the 2006 special edition release of the soundtrack for the Tim Burton film The Nightmare Before Christmas. In May 2006, Apple paid tribute to Elvis Costello on VH1's concert series Decades Rock Live, by performing Costello's hit "I Want You". Her version was subsequently released as a digital single.

2011–present: The Idler Wheel...

In late 2010, Billboard published an article stating that Apple was planning on releasing a new album in spring 2011, with musician Michelle Branch claiming to have heard some of the new tracks. Another song recorded for the film that wasn't included in the soundtrack has yet to be released. The video, which follows a scarecrow as he discovers the truth about factory farming and processed food, was described as "haunted," "dystopian," "bizarre," and "beautiful."Watch: Fiona Apple And Chipotle Partner For Bizarre And Beautiful Pure Imagination CoverWatch: Fiona Apple Covers "Pure Imagination" From Willy Wonka for Chipotle Ad on Factory Farming | News | Pitchfork

Personal life

In the mid-1990s Apple dated magician David Blaine,
In a June 2012 interview, it was revealed that Apple had briefly married a French photographer several years ago, "for complicated reasons."Dan P. Lee, 'I Just Want to Feel Everything': Hiding Out With Fiona Apple, Musical Hermit, Vulture, 6/17/12
Apple appeared on Marc Maron's WTF podcast in July 2012 and discussed the "changes in her life and career over the past 15-plus years". "Fiona Apple on Marc Maron's WTF Podcast", "Consequence of Sound" , July 16, 2012.
On September 19, 2012 Apple was arrested Authorities detained Apple at the Hudspeth County Jail.
In November 2012, Apple wrote a letter to her fans — a scan of which was posted to her website and her Facebook page — postponing the South American leg of her tour due to the ill-health of her pet dog, Janet. According to the letter, the dog has Addison's disease, and further has had a tumor "idling in her chest" for two years.

Discography

Awards and nominations






