[[Margrethe II of Denmark]]

CATEGORIES: 1940 births, Aarhus University alumni, Alumni of Girton College, Cambridge, Alumni of the London School of Economics, Danish Lutherans, Danish monarchs, Danish translators, English–Danish translators, Extra Ladies of the Order of the Garter, Fellows of Girton College, Cambridge, House of Glücksburg (Denmark), House of Monpezat, Living people, People educated at North Foreland Lodge, People from Copenhagen, Danish people of Swedish descent, Danish people of Russian descent, Protestant monarchs, Queens regnant, Tolkien artists, Translators to Danish, Collars of the Order of Abdulaziz al Saud, Collars of the Order of the Aztec Eagle, Collars of the Order of the Chrysanthemum, Collars of the Order of Merit (Chile), Commanders Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the White Rose of Finland, Members with Collar of the Royal Order of the Seraphim, Recipients of the Collar of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana, Recipients of the Order of the Three Stars, 1st Class with Chain, Dames of the Order of the Rajamitrabhorn, Dames of the Order of the Royal House of Chakri, Grand Collars of the Order of Prince Henry, Grand Collars of the Order of Saint James of the Sword, Grand Collars of the Order of the Southern Cross, Grand Commanders of the Order of the Dannebrog, Recipients of the Grand Star of the Decoration for Services to the Republic of Austria, Grand Cordons of the Order of Leopold (Belgium), Grand Cordons of the Order of Merit of the Republic of Poland, Grand Cordons of the Order of the Precious Crown, Grand Cordons of the Order of the Nile, Grand Cordons of the Order of the Star of Jordan, Grand Croix of the Légion d'honneur, Grand Crosses of the Order of Good Hope, Grand Crosses of the Order of the Liberator General San Martin, Grand Crosses of the Order of Ouissam Alaouite (Morocco), Grand Crosses of the Order of the Redeemer, Grand Crosses of the Order of Vytautas the Great, Grand Crosses of the Order of the White Double Cross, Grand Crosses with Collar of the Order of Charles III, Grand Crosses with Collar of the Order of the Falcon, Honorary Dames Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Netherlands Lion, Knights Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic, Knights Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of St. Olav, Cordons of the Order of Stara Planina, Second Classes of the Order of the Pleiades (Iran), Knights of the Elephant, Knights of the Golden Fleece, Knights of the Order of the Gold Lion of the House of Nassau, Members of Nepal Pratap Bhaskara, Recipients of the Order of Freedom of the Republic of Slovenia, Recipients of the Order of the White Eagle (Poland), Recipients of the Order of the Yugoslav Star, Recipients of the Royal Victorian Chain, Sashes of the Order of the Star of Romania, Recipients of Nersornaat, Recipients of the Grand Order of Mugunghwa (South Korea)

Margrethe II (, full name: Margrethe Alexandrine Þórhildur Ingrid; born 16 April 1940) is the queen regnant of Denmark.  As the eldest child of King Frederik IX and Ingrid of Sweden, she succeeded her father upon his death on 14 January 1972. On her accession, she became the first female monarch of Denmark since Margrethe I, ruler of the Scandinavian countries in 1375–1412 during the Kalmar Union.
Margrethe was born in 1940, but did not become heiress presumptive until 1953, when a constitutional amendment allowed women to inherit the throne (after it became clear that King Frederick was unlikely to have any male issue). In 1967, she married Henri de Laborde de Monpezat, with whom she has two sons: Crown Prince Frederik (born 1968) and Prince Joachim (born 1969).

Early life

Princess Margrethe was born on 16 April 1940 at Amalienborg Palace in Copenhagen as the first child of The Crown Prince and his Swedish-born wife Princess Ingrid of Sweden. Her father was the eldest son of The King and his German-born consort, Duchess Alexandrine of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, and her mother was the only daughter of The Crown Prince of Sweden and his British-born wife Princess Margaret of Connaught. Her birth took place just one week after Nazi Germany's invasion of Denmark on 9 April 1940.
She was baptised on 14 May 1940 in the Church of Holmen in Copenhagen. The princess's godparents were: her paternal grandfather, The King of Denmark; her paternal uncle, Prince Knud of Denmark; her cousin, Prince Axel of Denmark; her maternal great-grandfather, The King of Sweden: her maternal grandfather, The Crown Prince of Sweden; her maternal uncle, The Duke of Västerbötten; and her maternal great-grandfather, The Duke of Connaught and Strathearn.
She was named Margrethe after her maternal grandmother Princess Margaret of Connaught, Alexandrine after her paternal grandmother, The Queen, and Ingrid after her mother. Since her paternal grandfather, the then-reigning King Christian X, was also the King of Iceland, and Margrethe until 1944 was an Icelandic princess, the Princess was as a tribute to the people of Iceland given an Icelandic name, Þórhildur (Thorhildur)."Those Apprentice Kings and Queens Who May – One Day – Ascend a Throne," New York Times.  14 November 1971.
When Margrethe was four years old, in 1944, her first sister Princess Benedikte was born. Princess Benedikte later married Prince Richard of Sayn-Wittgenstein-Berleburg and lives some of the time in Germany. Her second sister Princess Anne Marie was born in 1946. Anne-Marie later married Constantine II of Greece and now lives in London.
On 20 April 1947, King Christian X died and Margrethe's father ascended the throne as King Frederik IX.

Heiress presumptive

At the time of her birth, only males could ascend the throne of Denmark, owing to the changes in succession laws enacted in the 1850s when the Glücksburg branch was chosen to succeed. As she had no brothers, it was assumed that her uncle Prince Knud would one day assume the throne.
The process of changing the constitution started in 1947, not long after her father ascended the throne and it became clear that Queen Ingrid would have no more children. The popularity of Frederik and his daughters and the more prominent role of women in Danish life started the complicated process of altering the constitution. That proposal had to be passed by two Parliaments in succession and then by a referendum, which was held on 27 March 1953. The new Act of Succession permitted female succession to the throne of Denmark, according to male-preference cognatic primogeniture, where a female can ascend to the throne only if she does not have a brother. Princess Margrethe therefore became heiress presumptive.
On her eighteenth birthday, 16 April 1958, Margrethe was given a seat in the Council of State. She subsequently chaired the meetings of the Council in the absence of the King.
In mid-1960, together with the princesses of Sweden and Norway, she travelled to the United States, which included a visit to Los Angeles, California, and to the Paramount Studios, where they were met by several celebrities, including Dean Martin, Jerry Lewis and Elvis Presley.

Education

Margrethe spent a year at North Foreland Lodge, a boarding school for girls in  Hampshire, England,The Illustrated London News, vol. 227, Issue 2 (1955), p. 552 and later studied prehistoric archaeology at Girton College, Cambridge, during 1960–1961, political science at Aarhus University between 1961 and 1962, attended the Sorbonne in 1963, and was at the London School of Economics in 1965. She is a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London.
Queen Margrethe is fluent in Danish, French, English, Swedish and German.

Marriage

On 10 June 1967, Princess Margrethe married a French diplomat, Count Henri de Laborde de Monpezat, at the Church of Holmen in Copenhagen. Laborde de Monpezat received the style and title of "His Royal Highness Prince Henrik of Denmark" because of his new position as the spouse of the heiress presumptive to the Danish throne.
Margrethe gave birth to her first child on 26 May 1968. By tradition, the Danish king was alternately named either Frederik or Christian. She chose to maintain this by assuming the position of a Christian, and thus named her eldest son Frederik. A second child, named Joachim, was born on 7 June 1969.

Reign

Succession

Shortly after King Frederik IX had delivered his New Year's Address to the Nation at the 1971/72 turn of the year, he fell ill. At his death 14 days later on 14 January 1972, Margrethe succeeded to the throne, becoming the first female Danish sovereign under the new Act of Succession. She was proclaimed queen from the balcony of Christiansborg Palace by Prime Minister Jens Otto Krag on 15 January 1972. Queen Margrethe II relinquished all the monarch's former titles except the title to Denmark, hence her style By the Grace of God, Queen of Denmark (Danish:Margrethe den Anden, af Guds Nåde Danmarks Dronning).  The Queen chose the motto: God's help, the love of The People, Denmark's strength.
In her first address to the people, Queen Margrethe II said: 

Constitutional role

The Queen's main tasks are to represent the Kingdom abroad and to be a unifying figurehead at home. She receives foreign ambassadors and awards honours and medals. The queen performs the latter task by accepting invitations to open exhibitions, attending anniversaries, inaugurating bridges, etc.
As an unelected public official, the Queen takes no part in party politics and does not express any political opinions.  Although she has the right to vote, she opts not to do so to avoid even the appearance of partisanship.
After an election where the incumbent Prime Minister does not have a majority behind him or her, the Queen holds a "Dronningerunde" (Queen's meeting) in which she meets the chairmen of each of the Danish political parties.
Each party has the choice of selecting a Royal Investigator to lead these negotiations or alternatively, give the incumbent Prime Minister the mandate to continue his government as is. In theory each party could choose its own leader as Royal Investigator, the social liberal Det Radikale Venstre did so in 2006, but often only one Royal Investigator is chosen plus the Prime Minister, before each election. The leader who, at that meeting succeeds in securing a majority of the seats in the Folketing, is by royal decree charged with the task of forming a new government. (It has never happened in more modern history that any party has held a majority on its own.)
Once the government has been formed, it is formally appointed by the Queen. Officially, it is the Queen who is the head of government, and she therefore presides over the Council of State, where the acts of legislation which have been passed by the  parliament are signed into law.  In practice, however, nearly all of the Queen's formal powers are exercised by the Council of State, and she is required by convention to act on its advice.
In addition to her roles in her own country, the queen is also the Colonel-in-Chief of the Princess of Wales's Royal Regiment (Queen's and Royal Hampshires), an infantry regiment of the British Army, following a tradition in her family.

Ruby Jubilee

On 14 January 2012, Queen Margrethe II celebrated her Ruby Jubilee, the 40th year on the throne. This was marked by a carriage procession, and numerous TV interviews.

Personal life and interests

The official residences of the Queen and the Prince Consort are Amalienborg Palace in Copenhagen and Fredensborg Palace. Their summer residence is Gråsten Palace near Sønderborg, the former home of the Queen's mother, Queen Ingrid, who died in 2000.
Margrethe is an accomplished painter, and has held many art shows over the years. 
Margrethe is a chain smoker, and she is famous for her tobacco habit.
A statement in a 2005 authorized biography about the Queen (entitled Margrethe) focused on her views of Islam: "We are being challenged by Islam these years. Globally as well as locally. There is something impressive about people for whom religion imbues their existence, from dusk to dawn, from cradle to grave. There are also Christians who feel this way. There is something endearing about people who give themselves up completely to their faith. But there is likewise something frightening about such a totality, which also is a feature of Islam. A counterbalance has to be found, and one has to, at times, run the risk of having unflattering labels placed on you. For there are some things for which one should display no tolerance. And when we are tolerant, we must know whether it is because of convenience or conviction."

Family

The Queen and The Prince Consort have two children and eight grandchildren:
In 2008 the Queen announced that her male-line descendants would bear the additional title of Count of Monpezat, in recognition of her husband's claim to the comital title.

Honours and decorations

See also : List of honours of the Danish Royal Family by country
She is the 1,188th Dame of the Order of the Golden Fleece in Spain, and the 961st Knight/Lady of the Order of the Garter and Colonel-in-Chief of the The Princess of Wales's Royal Regiment (Queen's and Royal Hampshires) in United Kingdom.

Danish decorations

Greenlandic decorations

Foreign decorations

Albert II & Margrethe II, Group photo[/ref]

Symbols of Margrethe II

File:Royal_coat_of_arms_of_Denmark.svg|Royal Coat of Arms

File:Royal Standard of Denmark.svg|Royal Standard
File:Royal Monogram of Queen Margrethe II of Denmark.svg|Royal Monogram of Margrethe II
File:Private Monogram of Queen Margrethe of Denmark.svg|Personal Monogram of Margrethe II
File:Dual Cypher of Margrethe and Henrik of Denmark.svg|Dual Monogram of Margrethe II and husband Henrik, Prince Consort of Denmark

Ancestry

Patrilineal descent

 
 







|-


