[[Spanair Flight 5022]]

CATEGORIES: Aviation accidents and incidents in 2008, Aviation accidents and incidents in Spain, 2008 in Spain, History of Madrid, Transport in Madrid, Accidents and incidents involving the McDonnell Douglas MD-82, Airliner accidents and incidents caused by pilot error, Filmed accidental deaths, Madrid–Barajas Airport

Spanair Flight 5022 (JK5022) was a scheduled domestic passenger flight from Madrid-Barajas Airport to Gran Canaria Airport, Spain that crashed just after take off from runway 36L of Barajas Airport at 14:24 CEST (12:24 UTC) on 20 August 2008.  The aircraft was a McDonnell Douglas MD-82, registration EC-HFP. 154 people died; six died en route to the hospital, one died overnight and one died in the hospital three days later.  Only 18 people survived.
It was the first and only fatal accident for Spanair (part of the SAS Group) in the 22-year history of the company, and the 14th fatal accident and 24th hull loss involving MD-80 series aircraft. The accident was the first fatal accident of any aeroplane featuring a full airline alliance special aircraft livery.  It was the world's deadliest aviation accident in 2008 and Spain's deadliest since the 1983 crash of Avianca Flight 011.
The accident weakened Spanair's image, which at the time was already negative among the public. "Spanair Shuts Down; Future Uncertain." Aviation Week. 30 January 2012. Retrieved on 31 January 2012. The crash exacerbated financial difficulties at Spanair, which ceased operations on 27 January 2012."Spanish airline Spanair ceases operations after running out of funds." Associated Press at the Washington Post. 27 January 2012. Retrieved on 27 January 2012.

Crash

The aircraft, named Sunbreeze (registration EC-HFP; manufacturer's serial number 53148; Douglas line number 2142) had been delivered to Korean Air on 18 November 1993 and was acquired by Spanair in July 1999.
The flight was a Star Alliance codeshare operated on behalf of Lufthansa as LH 2554.
The accident occurred as the aircraft attempted to take off, at 14:24 local time, and crashed in the vicinity of the runway. The wings separated from the aircraft and the fuselage broke into two main parts. The wings and the rearward two-thirds of the fuselage were engulfed by fire.12
The pilots had previously attempted and aborted a departure due to a sensor reporting excessive temperature in an air intake, and that the temperature sensor was de-activated on the ground (reportedly an established procedure since that sensor is redundant), delaying departure by over an hour.

Casualties

Of the 172 people on board, 146, including all crew members, perished in the crash or immediately after in the fire;
135 of the deceased and 16 of the survivors were Spanish nationals, 19 of the deceased and 2 survivors were of other nationalities. The deceased included German, French, Mauritanian, Turkish, Bulgarian, Gambian, Italian, Indonesian and Brazilian citizens.
Ervigio Corral, the head of the emergency services rescue team, said that the crash flung some of the survivors into a creek, lessening the severity of their burns.

Nationalities of the passengers and crew

Investigation

Summary

The accident was investigated by the Civil Aviation Accident and Incident Investigation Commission (CIAIAC). Representatives from the US National Transportation Safety Board, the aircraft manufacturer Boeing (as successor to McDonnell Douglas, the original aircraft manufacturer), and the engine manufacturer Pratt and Whitney supported the investigation.CIAIAC final report, Synopsis, (page xvii, PDF page 19 of 284)
A preliminary report on the accident was released by CIAIAC on 6 October 2008. (Spanish version) Flight data recorders showed that the aircraft had taken off with flaps at 0°, and that the alarm for that abnormal takeoff configuration had not sounded. The report hinted at no other cause of the accident. Both the engines and thrust reversers were excluded as causes of the accident.
On 17 August 2009, CIAIAC released an interim report on the incident.
CIAIAC published a further progress note in August 2010, (Spanish version) and its final report in July  2011.

Theories

=Fire or explosion=

Some early eye-witness accounts suggested that the aircraft suffered an engine fire or explosion before crashing, but the Spanish airport authority AENA released a video showing that the engines neither exploded nor caught fire during take-off.

=Temperature sensor=

There has been considerable interest in the faulty air temperature probe (the total air temperature sensor,The aircraft's computer uses total air temperature to help calculate the ambient air temperature, which in turn is needed to calculate the aircraft's true airspeed. True airspeed is needed for high altitude navigation, but is not so important for maintaining stable flight. Ground Speed is calculated directly from GPS position change (or Inertial navigation position change on earlier models). When TAS (true airspeed) is compared with Groundspeed, however, the actual wind direction and speed at that altitude can be calculated and presented to the pilot. Indicated airspeed, a measure of the relative wind over the aircraft's surfaces, is a more important measure for ensuring stable, safe flight. The aircraft's stall speed closely relates to indicated airspeed, for example. located on the front of the aircraft near the cockpit) that initially caused the pilot to turn the plane back for maintenance before its catastrophic takeoff attempt.
On 11 May 2010, details from the cockpit voice recorder were leaked to the public and released by Spanish media. The recording showed that both pilots were concerned about a repair job performed earlier the day of the crash, in which mechanics used an ice pack to cool an overheating temperature sensor and removed a fuse.

=Thrust reverser=

One theory was that the thrust reverser of the No. 2 (right side) engine activated during the climb 

=Flaps and slats=

El Mundo, citing a source in the investigation team, but did not actually test them. The warning signal that the flaps were not set failed to sound for unknown reasons.
The maintenance logbook of the airplane has comments, 2 days before the crash, for an "autoslats failure" visual alarm occurring on slats extension; however autoslats are not used on takeoff, and it can not be inferred that the slats system had a defect.

=Flight mode=

In an article published on 7 September, El Mundo stated that during the flight preparation and takeoff attempts, the aircraft had some of its systems in flight mode rather than ground mode. If true, this might explain why de-icing of the Total Air Temperature probe activated on the ground, causing overheat, since in flight the heater would activate only when there was no air flow in the probe, a sign of icing. This might also explain why the flaps and slats alarm had not sounded, since this alarm is disabled in flight mode.
James W. Hudspeth, an investigator of a previous near accident (an MD-83, starting from Lanzarote) that was astonishingly similar in its details, pointed out that the fuse of the so-called "left ground control relay" at position K-33 of the control panel might have been the actual culprit of the erroneous flight mode: Hudspeth found out during a 2 week investigation at Lanzarote, that it is customary in normal maintenance routine to temporarily remove this fuse to engage flight mode - however the fuse is afterwards sometimes not replaced correctly. Because of the frequent handling of this fuse, it is also not easy to visually check that the fuse is properly functioning (as is customary for the pilots to do when they enter the cockpit). Hudspeth speculates that this may both have happened with JK 5022 and Northwest Airlines Flight 255.

=Malware=

Spanish daily El Pais reports that malware which had infected the airline's central computer system resulted in a failure to raise an alarm over multiple problems with the plane. An internal report issued by the airline revealed that their central computer system used to monitor technical problems with the aircraft was infected with malware and may have prevented the detection of technical problems with the aircraft. A judge has ordered Spanair to provide all of the computer's logs from the days before and after the crash. 



Final report

The CIAIAC published its final report into the accident on 26 July 2011.
It determined that the cause of the accident was:
The CIAIAC determined the following contributory factors:

Similar accidents

CIAIAC's interim report specifically mentioned three other fatal accidents caused by the failure to deploy flaps and slats prior to take-off: Northwest Airlines Flight 255, Delta Air Lines Flight 1141, and Mandala Airlines Flight 091.
In the case of Northwest Airlines Flight 255, also an MD-82, the crew had similarly been disrupted from routine operation before the fatal takeoff, and the alarm similarly had not sounded. In that accident, the reason for the lack of TOWS alarm was a tripped (or pulled) circuit breaker. However, examination of the alarm and its circuit breaker in Spanair 5022 had not revealed any fault.

In fiction

A loose dramatization of the crash and subsequent investigation was shown in a 2010 Spanish TV-miniseries/film Vuelo IL8714 (Flight IL8714), starring Joaquim de Almeida and Fernando Cayo.



Similar events

Notes





Spanair
El País
Guardia Civil

