[[Heartless (Kanye West song)]]

CATEGORIES: 2008 singles, 2009 singles, Kanye West songs, The Fray songs, Kris Allen songs, Billboard Rhythmic Airplay number-one singles, Billboard Rap Songs number-one singles, Singles certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America, Song recordings produced by Kanye West, Song recordings produced by No ID, Music videos directed by Hype Williams, Songs written by Kanye West, Songs written by Kid Cudi, Roc-A-Fella Records singles, The Word Alive songs

"Heartless" is a song by American hip hop artist Kanye West, released on November 4, 2008 digitally as the second single for his fourth studio album, 808s & Heartbreak. It debuted at the number four spot on the Billboard Hot 100 where it eventually peaked at number two and reached number-one on the Billboard Hot Rap Tracks and U.S. Hot 100 Airplay chart. The song came to be covered by numerous artists, most notably by Denver-based piano rock band The Fray, American Idol season 8 winner Kris Allen, & singer-songwriter Dia Frampton (runner-up of season 1 of The Voice), with all three versions managing to enter charts in the absence of a physical single release. "Heartless" is one of the best selling singles of all time, selling 5.5 million digital copies in 2009.

Background

On his fourth studio album 808's & Heartbreak and in the song "Heartless" Kanye West utilized the voice audio processor device known as Auto-Tune. West had previously experimented with the technology on his debut album The College Dropout for the background vocals of "Jesus Walks and "Never Let Me Down." The voice altering device created a unique sound helping West express his then feelings of his break up with fiancée Alexis Phifer months after the timeless passing of his mother.
The song was performed for the first time in Denver, Colorado.I. concert at Key Club in Los Angeles. A snippet of the unmastered version of the song was leaked onto the Internet on October 12, 2008.  This was followed by a full unmastered version of the song being posted on West's official blog on October 15. On November 8, 2008, Kanye posted a new mastered version of the song on his official blog.  A free link to download the song was posted there as well.Mastered Version

Chart performance

In the U.S. on the week of November 13, "Heartless" made a "Hot Shot Debut" at #4 on the Billboard Hot 100, selling 201,000 downloads in the United States alone and making it his second highest debut on the chart.
In Canada it also made a "Hot Shot Debut" at #8 on the Canadian Hot 100, also based on huge amount of downloads in the country. On 1 December 2008, the song debuted at #63 on the Australian ARIA Singles Chart. It reached #6 on the New Zealand RIANZ chart. On the UK Singles Chart, the song debuted at number #45 and  reached  #10 due to album download sales. The official digital release date for the single was 12 January 2009. On the Irish Singles Chart the song has peaked at #10.

Music video

Directed by Hype Williams, It features use of rotoscoped animation, in which actual people were filmed and visual effects studio Opticflavor  drew over their every movement, and references various scenes and backgrounds from the film. The video portrays West wandering through a city alone at night, with scenes of various women shown throughout the video. The video also takes place in West's actual apartment den, where The Jetsons portraits are located. West stands by the Astro portrait in five scenes of the video. It was the first animated video directed by Williams.

Track listings

Personnel

Information taken from 808s & Heartbreak liner notes.

Release history

Chart positions

End of year charts

The Fray version

American rock band, The Fray performed a cover of "Heartless" for their Live Lounge performance on February 16, 2009. Following the premiere of their rendition on BBC Radio 1, it began to receive an unprecedented amount of radio airplay. The track was later included on their Live from SoHo album released onto iTunes on April 7, 2009.

Music video

A music video of The Fray's version of "Heartless" was released on September. The video showed a classroom full of elementary-level students with the video centering around one boy. He keeps glancing at a girl, as drawings appear on a piece of notebook paper in front of him. The band members as well as Kanye West are seen as simple drawn figures performing on the paper. Eventually, the artwork expands out to the classroom, forming a design around the girl. The video implies that the girl was the 'heartless' one who hurt the boy.

Chart positions

Kris Allen version

An acoustic interpretation of the song was performed by American Idol season 8 winner Kris Allen as his personal pick for the Top 3 night of the show's eighth season. His performance was praised all across the judge's panel and by other critics, who called it "inventive". Allen re-recorded the song for his self-titled debut album. Allen also released the album version of the song as his second single in New Zealand. During tour, Allen also did a mash up of this song and Gangsta's Paradise by Coolio.

Chart positions

Other versions






