[[Jeffery Amherst, 1st Baron Amherst]]

CATEGORIES: 1717 births, 1797 deaths, People from Sevenoaks, Barons in the Peerage of Great Britain, British Field Marshals, British Life Guards officers, Governors of British North America, Colonial governors of Virginia, Governors of the Province of Quebec (1763–91), Knights Companion of the Order of the Bath, Biological warfare, British Army personnel of the War of the Austrian Succession, British military personnel of the French and Indian War, British military personnel of the American Revolutionary War, Buffs (Royal East Kent Regiment) officers, East Yorkshire Regiment officers, British people of Pontiac's War, British Army personnel of the Seven Years' War

Field Marshal Jeffery Amherst, 1st Baron Amherst KCB (sometimes spelled Geoffrey, or Jeffrey, he himself spelled his name as Jeffery) (29 January 1717 – 3 August 1797) served as an officer in the British Army and as Commander-in-Chief of the Forces.
Amherst is best known as the architect of Britain's successful campaign to conquer the territory of New France during the French and Indian War. Under his command British forces captured the cities of Louisbourg, Quebec City and Montreal, as well as several major fortresses. He was also the first British Governor General in the territories that eventually became Canada. Numerous places and streets are named for him, both in Canada and the United States. He was a known advocate of the extermination of Native Americans, and approved the distribution of smallpox infested blankets to native towns in New England.

Early life

Born the son of Jeffrey Amherst (d. 1750), a Kentish lawyer,Chartrand p.24 and Elizabeth Amherst (née Kerrill), At an early age he became a page to the Duke of Dorset. Amherst became an ensign in the Grenadier Guards in 1735.8
Amherst served in the War of the Austrian Succession becoming an aide to General John Ligonier and participating in the Battle of Dettingen in June 1743 and the Battle of Fontenoy in May 1745.11-15 Promoted to lieutenant colonel on 25 December 1745, he also saw action at the Battle of Rocoux in October 1746.24 He then became an aide to the Duke of Cumberland, the commander of the British forces, and saw further action at the Battle of Lauffeld in July 1747.

Seven Years' War

Germany

In February 1756 Amherst was appointed commissar to the Hessian forces that had been assembled to defend Hanover as part of the Army of Observation: as it appeared likely a French invasion attempt against Britain itself was imminent, Amherst was ordered in April to arrange the transportation of thousands of the Germans to southern England to bolster Britain's defences.34-37 He was made colonel of the 15th Regiment of Foot on 12 June 1756. By 1757 as the immediate danger to Britain had passed the troops were moved back to Hanover to join a growing army under the Duke of Cumberland and Amherst fought with the Hessians under Cumberland's command at the Battle of Hastenbeck in July 1757: the Allied defeat there forced the army into a steady retreat northwards to Stade on the North Sea coast.37-38
Amherst was left dispirited by the retreat and by the Convention of Klosterzeven by which Hanover agreed to withdraw from the war: he began to prepare to disband the Hessian troops under his command, only to receive word that the Convention had been repudiated and the Allied force was being reformed.40-42

Louisbourg

Amherst gained fame during the Seven Years' War, particularly in the North American campaign known in the United States as the French and Indian War when he led the British attack on Louisbourg on Cape Breton Island in June 1758.
In the wake of this he was appointed commander-in-chief of the British army in North America and colonel-in-chief of the 60th (Royal American) Regiment in September 1758. Amherst then led an army against French troops on Lake Champlain, where he captured Fort Ticonderoga in July 1759, while another army under Sir William Johnson took Niagara also in July 1759 and James Wolfe besieged and eventually captured Quebec with a third army in September 1759. Amherst served as the nominal Crown Governor of Virginia from 12 September 1759.

Montreal

On 8 September 1760, Amherst led an army down the Saint Lawrence River from Lake Ontario, and captured Montreal, ending French rule in North America. He infuriated the French commanders by refusing them the "honours of war" (the ceremonial right of a defeated garrison to retain their flags); the Knight of Lévis burned the colours rather than surrendering them.77
In recognition of this victory, Amherst was appointed Governor-General of British North America in September 1760 and promoted to major-general on 29 November 1760.
From his base at New York, Amherst oversaw the dispatch of troops to take part in British expeditions in the West Indies that led to the British capturing Dominica in 1761 and Martinique and Cuba in 1762.

Pontiac's Rebellion

The hostility between the British and Native Americans after the French and Indian War suggests there was an attempt at biological warfare.
Amherst was summoned home, ostensibly so he could be consulted on future military plans in North America, and expected to be praised for his conquest of Canada but instead, once in London, was asked to account for the recent rebellion.552-553 He was forced to defend his conduct, and faced complaints made by Sir William Johnson and George Croghan who successfully lobbied the Board of Trade leading to Amherst's removal.O'Toole p.249 Nevertheless he was promoted to lieutenant-general on 26 March 1765 and became colonel of the 3rd Regiment of Foot in November 1768.25
On 22 October 1772 Amherst was appointed Lieutenant-General of the Ordnance

American War of Independence

Amherst was raised to the peerage on 14 May 1776, as Baron Amherst of Holmesdale. and, in April 1778, he became Commander-in-Chief of the Forces, which gave him a seat in the Cabinet.
In 1778 when the British commander in North America, William Howe, requested to be relieved, Amherst was considered as a replacement by the government: however, his insistence that it would require 75,000 troops to fully defeat the rebellion was not acceptable to the government, and Henry Clinton was instead chosen to take over from Howe in America. Redcoats and Rebels p.211 Following the British setback at Saratoga, Amherst successfully argued for a limited war in North America, keeping footholds along the coast, defending Canada, East and West Florida, and the West Indies while putting more effort into the war at sea. Redcoats and Rebels. p209 On 7 November 1778 the King and Queen visited Amherst at his home, Montreal Park, in Kent

Invasion scare

A long-standing plan of the French had been the concept of an invasion of Great Britain which they hoped would lead to a swift end to the war if it was successful: in 1779 Spain entered the war on the side of France, and the increasingly depleted state of British home forces made an invasion more appealing and Amherst organised Britain's land defences in anticipation of the invasion which never materialised.

Gordon Riots

In June 1780 Amherst oversaw the British army as they suppressed the anti-Catholic Gordon Riots in London: after the outbreak of rioting Amherst deployed the small London garrison of Horse and Foot Guards as best as he could but was hindered by the reluctance of the civil magistrates to authorise decisive action against the rioters.Hibbert King Mob. p.102 In the wake of the Gordon Riots, Amherst was forced to resign as Commander-in-Chief in February 1782 and was replaced by Henry Conway. On 23 March 1782 he became captain and colonel of the 2nd Troop of Horse Guards.

French Revolutionary Wars

On 8 July 1788 he became colonel of the 2nd Regiment of Life Guards and died on 3 August 1797.

Family

In 1753 he married Jane Dalison; following the death of his first wife he married Elizabeth Cary in 1767. There were no children by either marriage.

Legacy

Several places are named for him: Amherstburg, Ontario (location of General Amherst High School),Jacobson p.17 Amherst, Massachusetts (location of the University of Massachusetts-Amherst and Amherst College),Tucker p.14 Amherst, New Hampshire,Farmer p.70 Amherst, Nova Scotia,Heim p.343 Amherst, New York, and Amherst County, Virginia.182
"The Un-Canadians", an 2007 article in Beaver Magazine, includes Jeffery Amherst, 1st Baron Amherst, Ezekiel Stone Wiggins, and Robert Monckton in a list of people in the history of Canada who were considered contemptible: "British North America Governor General Jeffrey Amherst supported plans of distributing smallpox-infested blankets to First Nations people."





Sources






