[[Tuticorin Port Trust]]

CATEGORIES: Container terminals, Ports in Tamil Nadu, Port authorities, Thoothukudi

V.O. The Hindu (28 January 2011). is one of the 12 major ports in India. It was declared to be a major port on 11 July 1974. It is second-largest port in Tamil Nadu and fourth-largest container terminal in India.O.C Port will be India's premier port and one of the major ports of Asia equal to Port of Singapore. V.O.Tuticorin Port Webpage This is the third international port in Tamil Nadu and its second all-weather port. All V.O.08 per cent, surpassing the corresponding previous year handling of 8.96 million tons.The Station Commander, Coast Guard Station Tuticorin is located at Tuticorin Port,Tamil Nadu under the operational and administrative control of the Commander, Coast Guard Region (East), Chennai. The Station Commander is responsible for Coast Guard operations in this area of jurisdiction in Gulf of Mannar. The Coast Guard Station Tuticorin Port was commissioned on 25 April 1991 by Vice Admiral SW Lakhar, NM, VSM the then Director General Coast Guard. The Station Commander is responsible for Coast Guard operations in this area of jurisdiction in Gulf of Mannar

History

Tuticorin has been a centre for maritime trade and pearl fishery for more than a century. The natural harbour with a rich hinterland, activated the development of the Port, initially with wooden piers and iron screw pile pier and connections to the railways. Tuticorin was declared as a minor anchorage port in 1868. Since then there have been various developments over the years.
To cope with the increasing trade through Tuticorin, the Government of India sanctioned the construction of an all-weather port at Tuticorin, which brings the second largest revenue to India. On 11 July 1974, the newly constructed Tuticorin Port was declared as the 10th major port. On 1 April 1979, the erstwhile Tuticorin minor Port and the newly constructed Tuticorin major port were merged and the Tuticorin Port Trust was constituted under the Major Port Trusts Act of 1963.

Operations

Tuticorin Port is an artificial deep-sea harbour formed with rubble mound-type parallel breakwaters projecting into the sea for about 4 km. (The north breakwater is 4098.66 metres long; the south breakwater is 3873.37 metres long and the distance between the breakwaters is 1275 metres). The port was designed and executed entirely through indigenous efforts. The harbour basin extends to about 400 hectares of protected water area and is served by an approach channel of 2400 metres length and 183 metres width.
The port handles both containers and cruise ships. It is currently managed by PSA Sical. Due to its strategic location in the southern peninsula and assured round-the-clock operations, the port has been the nerve centre of economic activity in south Tamil Nadu. The port currently handles seven per cent of the total container traffic in India and is an important reason for investment in the southern districts of Tamil Nadu. The port is badly in need of expansion to handle the increase in traffic. Tuticorin port is becoming a gateway for South India to the US, Europe and the Mediterranean following direct sailings to these regions. Of the total exports from the port, 25 per cent were to Europe, 20 per cent to the US, 20 per cent to East Asia including China, 15 per cent to Colombo, 10 per cent to West Asia and the remainder to the Mediterranean.
With this expansion in place, the capacity of the port would double from the existing 20.55 million tonnes to 40.60 million tonnes of cargo. Once dredging is completed, the port will be able to handle fourth-generation container vessels with a capacity of 3,000 twenty equivalent units (TEUs) to 4,000 TEUs. Currently, the port can handle container vessels up to 2,000 TEUs capacity.
A naval base is to be set up under the ambit of Eastern Naval Command to strengthen the surveillance in the Gulf of Mannar and to safeguard any possible aggression in the region. Tuticorin Port Trust officials expressed their willingness to allot a  plot on the 'port estate' area for the establishment of the Naval Base. The Hindu. (5 July 2008).
The port is also helping increase the tourism in the region. A new ferry has been commenced between Tuticorin and Colombo.

International service




