[[Australia women's national softball team]]

CATEGORIES: Women's national sports teams of Australia, Women's national softball teams, Softball in Australia


The Australia women's national softball team is the national softball team of Australia. It is governed by Softball Australia and takes part in international softball competitions. 

Funding

The national team has not secured as much funding as male dominated sports in Australia despite having performed better than some and having won major international competitions.

History

Australian women competed in their first international competition in 1949 when they played a series against New Zealand in St Kilda at the St Kilda Cricket Ground.  Between 1949 and 1967, Australia's senior women's side was undefeated in international play.

Women's World Championship

Australia's women have won the World Championships. Australia was one of five nations to compete at the inaugural  ISF Women's World Championship held in Melbourne, Victoria in 1965.

Olympics

Australia competed at all four Olympic Games where the sport was played.  At them, they won three bronze medals and a silver.

1996 Olympic Team

Going into the 1996 Summer Olympics, Australia were considered one of the favourites to possibly win gold.

2000 Olympic Team

The 2000 Games were played in Sydney. They had to beat the Americans to qualify for the gold medal, but lost 1-0 in a shut out. The Australians beat the Americans during the early part of the competition during pool play.

2004 Olympic Team

Australia won a silver medal at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens.

2008 Olympic Team

Australia earned a bronze medal at the 2008 Summer Games.

Other competitions

Majorie Nelson was a Victorian softball player. She was the first softball player to represent any country at four World Series of Softball. She was the Australian captain in 1974 and 1978 and the World Series. 
Australia earned a bronze medal at the 2005 World Cup.
Australia earned a gold medal at the 2005 Canada Cup.  They earned a silver in 2008.
Australia earned a silver medal at the 2005 Pacific Rim tournament.

Test series

In 1962, Australia played a test series against New Zealand in New Zealand. Australia won two out of three games in the test.
In March 2012, the team played a test series against the Japan women's national softball team in Canberra.

Indigenous representation

Stacey Porter was the team's first aboriginal teammate to represent Australia in softball the Olympics.  Other aboriginal members of the national team include Vanessa Stokes.




