[[Dustin Johnson]]

CATEGORIES: American male golfers, PGA Tour golfers, Ryder Cup competitors for the United States, Golfers from South Carolina, Golfers from Florida, Coastal Carolina University alumni, Sportspeople from Columbia, South Carolina, People from Jupiter, Florida, People from Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, 1984 births, Living people

Dustin Hunter Johnson (born June 22, 1984) is an American professional golfer who currently plays on the PGA Tour. He is one of the longest drivers on the PGA Tour, having been third in the driving distance stats for three consecutive years (2009–11) and has ranked inside the top five in each of his five years on the PGA Tour. He has been featured in the top 5 of the Official World Golf Ranking.

Early career

Johnson was born in Columbia, South Carolina, and played collegiate golf at Coastal Carolina University. As an amateur, he won the Monroe Invitational and the Northeast Amateur in 2007 and played on the winning 2007 Walker Cup and Palmer Cup teams. Johnson is the first player since Tiger Woods to win at least once in each of his first seven seasons coming out of college.

Professional career

Johnson turned professional in late 2007 and earned his 2008 PGA Tour card by finishing in a tie for 14th place at the 2007 qualifying school in December.
Toward the end of his rookie season in October 2008, Johnson won his first PGA Tour event, the Turning Stone Resort Championship in upstate New York. Four months later, he won his second event at the AT&T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am, which was shortened to 54 holes when the final round was canceled due to strong winds and heavy rain. Johnson won by four strokes over Mike Weir and five strokes over second round leader Retief Goosen, who shot a third round 74. Johnson finished the 2009 season ranked 15th on the PGA Tour money list.

2010

In February 2010, Johnson birdied the final hole to defeat former world number one David Duval and two-time PGA Tour winner J. B. Holmes to successfully defend his AT&T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am title.
He continued his Pebble Beach success by shooting 71-70-66 to take a three-shot lead over Graeme McDowell at the 2010 U.S. Open. In the last pairing on Sunday, Johnson had trouble early and never recovered; he shot a disappointing 82 and finished tied for eighth (McDowell won the championship).
In the final round of the 2010 PGA Championship, Johnson held a one-shot lead entering the final hole. He appeared to have bogeyed the hole, which would have tied him for first and entered him into a three-hole playoff with Bubba Watson and Martin Kaymer. However, he received a two-stroke penalty for grounding his club in a bunker, thereby dropping him to a tie for fifth place. Kaymer eventually won the playoff. 
Johnson broke his streak of bad luck at the third FedEx Cup playoff event of the season, the BMW Championship at Cog Hill in September. It was Johnson's fourth career PGA Tour victory, and his first in any FedEx Cup playoff event. He finished the 2010 season ranked 4th on the PGA Tour money list.

2011

Johnson took part in the Long Drive Contest for charity at the Hyundai Tournament of Champions in January, alongside Bubba Watson and Robert Garrigus.
In March 2011, Johnson entered the final round of the WGC-Cadillac Championship with a two stroke lead over the rest of the field. However he could only manage a final round one-under-par 71 to finish as runner-up behind Nick Watney.
Johnson earned his best finish in a major championship in July at the 2011 Open Championship in England. He finished in a tie for second place at Royal St George's, alongside fellow American Phil Mickelson, three strokes behind champion Darren Clarke. Johnson's first three rounds of 70-68-68 left him one stroke behind Clarke and for most of Sunday's round Johnson managed to keep up with him, at one stage being just one back. His final round charge was derailed at the par five 14th, when his second shot went out of bounds and led to a double bogey. This took Johnson out of contention as he slipped to four strokes behind Clarke with only four holes to play. One highlight of Johnson's week at Royal St George's came in the first round when he recorded a hole in one on the par three 16th hole. This result marked the third time that Johnson had been part of the final group on Sunday at a major championship and also occurring in three out of the four majors, the 2010 U.S. Open, the 2010 PGA Championship and the 2011 Open Championship. As a result of this second place finish, Johnson moved to his highest spot in the Official World Golf Ranking at the time, seventh, and became the third-ranked American behind Steve Stricker and Mickelson.
Johnson won his fifth PGA Tour title at The Barclays in 2011. He beat Matt Kuchar by two strokes. This was his second 54-hole tournament victory of his career, after the 2009 AT&T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am. The tournament was shortened due to the threat of Hurricane Irene. Johnson shot rounds of 66-63-65 to win at -19. This was Johnson's first victory of 2011 and it moved him from 19th to first in the FedEx Cup standings.

2012

Johnson incurred a back injury at home in March and missed over two months of the 2012 season, including the first major at The Masters. He returned to competition in late May at the Memorial Tournament in Ohio, made the cut and finished tied for 19th. The following week he won his sixth tour event, the FedEx St. Jude Classic in Memphis, Tennessee at TPC Southwind. He missed the cut at the U.S.

2013

Johnson began his 2013 season with a win at the season opening Hyundai Tournament of Champions, an event reserved for winners from the past season. Johnson won by four strokes over defending champion Steve Stricker in an event that was shortened to 54 holes due the bad weather, mainly very strong wind that meant conditions were unplayable. The first three days of the tournament were wiped out, with the field having to complete 36 holes on the Monday and a final 18 on Tuesday. The event was Johnson's seventh PGA Tour win and his third in a 54-hole event; a 54-hole event is still considered an official win with full OWGR ranking points. The same week Johnson also was seen with Paulina Gretzky, daughter of Wayne Gretzky. The two announced their engagement on August 18.

Amateur wins (2)

Professional wins (10)

PGA Tour wins (8)

 Shortened to 54 holes due to poor weather conditions.

Other wins (2)

Results in major championships

DNP = Did not play 
CUT = missed the half-way cut 
"T" = tied 
Yellow background for top-10.

Summary

World Golf Championships

Wins (1)

Results timeline

DNP = Did not play 
QF, R16, R32, R64 = Round in which player lost in match play 
"T" = tied 
Green background for wins. Yellow background for top-10.

U.S. national team appearances

Amateur
Professional

Equipment

As of November 3, 2013








