[[Kunming–Hai Phong Railway]]

CATEGORIES: Railway lines in China, Metre gauge railways in China, Metre gauge railways in Vietnam, French Indochina, Transport in Yunnan, Railway lines in Vietnam, Military history of Vietnam during World War II, Military history of China during World War II, South-East Asian theatre of World War II, China–Vietnam relations, Railway lines opened in 1910

The Yunnan–Vietnam Railway ( gauge due to the mountainous terrain along the route. Currently it is the only main line in China using metre gauge.

History

Prior to the construction of the railway, the standard travel time from Haiphong (the closest sea port to most of Yunnan) to Kunming was reckoned by the Western authorities to be 28 days: 16 days by steamer and then a small boat up the Red River to Manhao (425 miles), and then 12 days overland (194 miles).
The railway was opened in 1910. The  metre gauge section was originally administered in more or less the same way as the Indochinese networks, and if not for a "missing link" through Cambodia (between Saigon and Phnom Penh), it would have been physically possible for through trains to run from Kunming to Singapore, as metre gauge was used in Malaya as well.
Under pressure from Japan, France closed the line on 16 July 1940 to cut supplies to China during the Second Sino-Japanese War. During the Japanese occupation Japanese National Railways Class 9600 2-8-0 locomotives were shipped to aid their invasion, and after the completion of the "death railway" it was possible for a time to send through traffic to Burma and hence to the Indian metre gauge network.
During the Sino-Vietnamese War of 1979, the railway bridge at the two countries' border was destroyed, and the trade between China and Vietnam came to a halt for a period of some years.

Gebishi Railway

The  part was closed in 1990.

Present state

Twice-a-week cross-border passenger service (involving the passengers having to transfer from a Chinese train to a Vietnamese train at the border station) operated as late as 2000, but landslides caused frequent delays."This Train Beats Walking (Sometimes)" New York Times, 2000-12-03
Eventually, in 2005滇越铁路徒步第一程（昆明——宜良） (A walk along the Kunming-Vietnam Railway. Part 1: Kunming-Chenggong)
the passenger service on the Chinese section of the railway (the Kunming–Hekou Railway) was terminated,The rail runs through it. Straits Times, August 23, 2008
Li Liang, A Hundred Years on the Platform: Notes on Yunnan-Vietnam Railway. (Based on a trip report in the late 2006).
and most of the passenger coaches were donated to Myanmar.
In 2008, passenger service on a small part (37 km long) of the Chinese section of the railway was resumed, but on a very limited scale. As of 2012,
two daily trains run from Kunming North Railway Station on the meter-gauge tracks  to Shizui (石咀) Station on the western outskirts of Kunming, 
and to Wangjiaying (王家营) east of the city.
Freight service still continues to operate throughout the Kunming–Hekou Railway.
On the Vietnamese side, passenger trains continue to run from Hanoi to the border town of Lào Cai.

The new Kunming–Hekou railway line

A new standard-gauge railway line from Kunming toward the Vietnamese border is under construction. Its first section, a railway branch from Kunming to Yuxi, was opened in 1993. The new  Yuxi–Mengzi section opened for freight service in February 2013; in April 2013, passenger trains started running daily as far as Mengzi North, 258 km south of Kunming and approximately 150 km north of Hekou; the second daily train was added by July.
The work is under way to complete the Mengzi-Hekou section. The completion date is indeterminate, although one claim has it being complete in 2014.chinadailyasia.html

In fiction








