[[Brass Eye]]

CATEGORIES: 1997 British television programme debuts, 2001 British television programme endings, 1990s British television series, 2000s British television series, Channel 4 comedy, Satirical television programmes, Parodies, News parodies, Mockumentary television series, Television series about television, British satire

Brass Eye is a UK television series of satirical news magazines. A series of six episodes aired on Channel 4 in 1997, and a further episode in 2001.
The series was created by Chris Morris, and written by Morris, David Quantick, Peter Baynham, Jane Bussmann, Arthur Mathews, and Graham Linehan. The series was directed by Michael Cumming. It was a sequel to Morris's earlier spoof news programmes On the Hour and The Day Today. It satirised media portrayal of social ills, in particular sensationalism and creation of moral panics. The series starred Morris's The Day Today colleague Doon Mackichan, along with Gina McKee, Mark Heap, Amelia Bullmore, Simon Pegg, Julia Davis, and Kevin Eldon.

Original series (1997)

Brass Eye aroused controversy because public figures were fooled into supporting charities and causes that were fictitious and often absurd.
The second episode was called "Drugs" and is one of the most successful. A voice tells viewers there are so many drugs on the streets that "not even the dealers know them all". An undercover reporter (Morris) asks a purportedly real-life drug dealer in London for fictitious drugs, including Triple-sod, Yellow Bentines and Clarky Cat, leaving the dealer puzzled and irritated. He also asks the dealer if he is the "Boz-Boz" and says he doesn't want his arm to feel "like a couple of fortnights in a bad balloon". Later, Morris is shown to be dressed as a baby, wearing a nappy and a red balloon-like hat, and he again asks for Triple-sod and then says "last time I came here a friend of mine just got triple-jacked over a steeplehammer and jessop jessop jessop jessop jessop". He satirically explained that possession of drugs without physical contact and the exchange of drugs through a mandrill were legal.
David Amess, the Conservative Member of Parliament for Basildon, was fooled into filming an elaborate video warning against the dangers of a fictional Eastern European drug called Cake, and he also asked a question about it in Parliament.
Sir Bernard Ingham, Noel Edmonds, and Rolf Harris held the yellow cake-sized pill as they talked, with Bernard Manning telling viewers that "One young kiddie on Cake cried all the water out of his body. Just imagine how his mother felt. It's a fucking disgrace" and that "..... What a fucking disgrace". Manning, with other participants, told the public that Cake was known on the street as "loonytoad quack", "Joss Ackland's spunky backpack", "ponce on the heath", "rustledust", or "Hattie Jacques pretentious cheese wog", and told anyone offered it to "chuck it back in their face and tell them to fuck off".
Other episodes dealt with science, animals, and sex. Morris posed as a talk-show host in favour of those with "good" AIDS from a contaminated blood transfusion against those with "bad AIDS" caught through sexual activity or drugs.
The 1997 series was postponed by nearly six months because it made reference to murderer Myra Hindley, who was in the news after her portrait was vandalised in the Royal Academy exhibition Sensation.

Repeats and DVD release

The series was repeated in 2001 to tie in with the paedophilia special (see below), and released on DVD in a revised form. This new version reinstated most of the material cut from the original, although a few items were removed, most notably a subliminal message reading "Grade is a cunt", and an interview with Graham Bright MP in the "Drugs" episode. A disclaimer was also added to the "Drugs" episode at the request of David Amess.

Paedophilia special (2001)

In 2001, a special was released. It tackled paedophilia and the moral panic in parts of the British media following the murder of Sarah Payne, focusing on the name-and-shame campaign conducted by the News of the World in its wake. This included an incident in 2000 in which a paediatrician in Newport had the word "PAEDO" daubed in yellow paint on her home.Paediatrician attacks 'ignorant' vandals, BBC News, 30 August 2000
To illustrate the media's knee-jerk reaction to the subject, various celebrities were duped into presenting fatuous and often ridiculous pieces to camera in the name of a campaign against paedophiles. Gary Lineker and Phil Collins endorsed a spoof charity, Nonce Sense, (pronounced "nonsense"—"nonce" being British slang for people convicted or suspected of molestation or sexual crimes), with Collins saying, "I'm talking Nonce Sense!" Tomorrow's World presenter Philippa Forrester and ITN reporter Nicholas Owen were shown explaining the details of HOECS (pronounced "hoax") computer games, which online paedophiles were using to abuse children via the internet. Capital Radio DJ Neil "Doctor" Fox told viewers that "paedophiles have more genes in common with crabs than they do with you and me", adding "Now that is scientific fact—there's no real evidence for it—but it is scientific fact".
Lineker described paedophile text slang, stating that "BALTIMORA" translates to "literally, I'm running at them now with my trousers down". Labour MP Syd Rapson related that paedophiles were using "an area of internet the size of Ireland". Richard Blackwood stated that internet paedophiles could make computer keyboards emit noxious fumes to subdue children, subsequently sniffing a keyboard and claiming that he could smell the fumes, which made him feel "suggestible". Blackwood also warned watching parents that exposure to the fumes would make their children "smell like hammers".  Other notable figures appearing as themselves were Sebastian Coe, Michael Hames, Andy McNab, Kate Thornton, Barbara Follett MP and Gerald Howarth MP.
The studio was "invaded" by a fictional militant pro-paedophile activism organisation called "Milit-pede", and the programme appeared to suffer a short technical disturbance. When it returned, presenter Chris Morris confronted a spokesman, Gerard Chote (played by Simon Pegg), who had been placed in a pillory, asking if he wanted sex with Morris's six-year-old son. Hesitantly, the spokesman refused, apologetically explaining "I don't fancy him". When explaining how the sequence had been filmed, Morris said the child was not present but added digitally. The scene led to a media backlash.

Response

Around 3,000 complaints were received and politicians spoke out against Morris. There was also a tabloid campaign against Morris, who refused to discuss the issue.
The Daily Star decried Morris and the show, and the Daily Mail ran a headline describing Brass Eye as "Unspeakably Sick". The Observer noted that the Star Defenders of the show argued that media reaction to the show reinforced its satire of the media's hysteria and hypocrisy on the subject of paedophilia.
The episode won a Broadcast magazine award in 2002.

Episodes

Series

Special

Celebrities appearing






