[[Entrepreneurship]]

CATEGORIES: Business and financial operations occupations, Entrepreneurship, Management occupations

In political economics, entrepreneurship is the process of identifying and starting a new business venture, sourcing and organizing the required resources, while taking both the risks and rewards associated with the venture.

Background

"Entrepreneurship" may result in new organizations or revitalize mature organizations in response to a perceived business opportunity. A new business started by an entrepreneur is referred to as a startup company. In recent years, the term has been extended to include social and political forms of entrepreneurial activity.
Entrepreneurship within a firm or large organization has been referred to as intra-preneurship and may include corporate ventures where large entities spin off subsidiary organizations.
According to Paul Reynolds, an entrepreneurship scholar
Mainstream economist view entrepreneur to be someone who organizes different factor of production but the surprising thing to know is that it is considered unimportant one. On the other hand conventional economic theory defines that entrepreneur can be noticeable simply by its absence. It is also said that entrepreneur unites along with other specialists who qualifies to conduct production but other than that the entrepreneur doesn't have any special part. Mainstream economics also had difficulty in fitting entrepreneurship in theory, which led to entrepreneurless theoretical firm for a period of time. This also led to perfect market assumptions by neoclassical economics Deakins and Freel, 2012.
According to management scholars' perspective entrepreneur is the one that takes up the responsibility of managing firms. Deakins and Freel, 2012 adds stating an entrepreneur is a leader who is willing to take risk and exercises initiative to take advantage of the opportunity in the market by planning, organising and executing resources. Dr. P. Johnson says that an entrepreneur tries to detect opportunity gap by innovating new product or improve existing product to earn profit Johnson, 2005.
Entrepreneurial activities differ substantially depending on the type of organization and creativity involved. Entrepreneurship ranges in scale from solo projects, and even just part-time projects, to major undertakings that create many job opportunities. Many "high value" entrepreneurial ventures seek venture capital or angel funding (seed money) in order to raise capital for building the business. Angel investors generally seek annualized returns of 20–30% and more, as well as extensive involvement in the business. Many organizations exist to support would-be entrepreneurs including specialized government agencies, business incubators, science parks, and some NGOs. More recently, the term entrepreneurship has been extended to include conceptualizations of entrepreneurship as a specific mindset (see also entrepreneurial mindset) resulting in entrepreneurial initiatives e.g. in the form of social entrepreneurship, political entrepreneurship, or knowledge entrepreneurship.
Since 2008, an annual "Global Entrepreneurship Week" has been announced, with the aim of "exposing people to the benefits of entrepreneurship" and getting them to "participate in entrepreneurial-related activities".

History

Etymology and historical usage

First used in 1723, today the term entrepreneur implies qualities of leadership, initiative and innovation in manufacturing, delivery, and/or services. Economist Robert Reich has called team-building, leadership and management ability essential qualities for the entrepreneur.
The entrepreneur is a factor in microeconomics, and the study of entrepreneurship reaches back to the work in the late 17th and early 18th centuries of Richard Cantillon and Adam Smith, which was foundational to classical economics.
In the 20th century, entrepreneurship was studied by Joseph Schumpeter in the 1930s and other Austrian economists such as Carl Menger, Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich von Hayek. The term "entrepreneurship" was coined around the 1920s, while the loan from French of the word entrepreneur itself dates to the 1850s. It became something of a buzzword beginning about 2010, in the context of disputes which have erupted surrounding the wake of the Great Recession.
Initially, economists made the first attempt to study the entrepreneurship concept in depth (Landström, 2005)•	Landström, H. & SpringerLink 2005, Pioneers in entrepreneurship and small business research, Springer Science+Business Media, New York, N.Y. Richard Cantillon (1680-1734) considered the entrepreneur as a risk taker who deliberately allocates resources to exploit opportunities in order to maximise the financial return (Stevenson and Jarillo 2007, referring to Cantillon 1840).•	Cantillon, R., 1755/1931, Essai sur la nature du commerce en général, London: MacMillan.•	Stevenson H. and Jarillo J., 2007, A Paradigm of Entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurial Management, in Cuervo García, A., Ribeiro, D., Roig, S. & SpringerLink, Entrepreneurship, Springer, Berlin; New York. Cantillon emphasizes the willingness of the entrepreneur to assume risk, and to deal with uncertainty, thus, he draws attention to the function of the entrepreneur, and distinguishes clearly between the function of the entrepreneur and the owner who provides the money (Landström 2005, referring to Cantillon 1840).•	Cantillon, R., 1755/1931, Essai sur la nature du commerce en général, London: MacMillan.•	Landström, H. & SpringerLink 2005, Pioneers in entrepreneurship and small business research, Springer Science+Business Media, New York, N.Y.  Alfred Marshall (1961) viewed the entrepreneur as multitasks capitalist; and he realised that in the equilibrium of a completely competitive market, there was no spot for "entrepreneurs" as an economic activity creator.•	Marshall, A., Guillebaud, C.W. & Royal Economic Society 1961, Principles of economics, 9th (variorum) , edn, Macmillan for the Royal Economic Society, London; New York. 

What is an entrepreneur

Entrepreneur ( Say and Cantillon used the term differently, however. Cantillon biographer Anthony Breer notes that Cantillon saw the entrepreneur as a risk-taker while Say considered the entrepreneur a "planner".
Cantillon defined the term as a person who pays a certain price for a product and resells it at an uncertain price: "making decisions about obtaining and using the resources while consequently admitting the risk of enterprise." The word first appeared in the French dictionary entitled "Dictionnaire Universel de Commerce" compiled by Jacques des Bruslons and published in 1723.
As an entrepreneur he/she should have the ability and personality to lead its business in a right direction by proper planning in every single step, able to adapt with the changing environment, understands ones own strengths and weakness, Driessen and Zwart, 2010.
[/ref]
The appellation today implies a bootstrap operation and some degree of both innovation and financial risk.

Entrepreneur types

Differences in entrepreneurial organizations and the heterogeneity in their founders' behaviors can be traced back to the founder's identity. Fauchart and Gruber have utilized social identity theory to illustrate that individual entrepreneurs can be identified as one of three main types: Darwinians, Communitarians and Missionaries. These types of entrepreneurs not only diverge in fundamental ways in terms of their self-views and their social motivations in entrepreneurship, but also engage fairly differently in new firm creation.

Influences and entrepreneurial behavior

The entrepreneur is commonly seen as an innovator — a generator of new ideas and business processes.com; access date.  Management skill and strong team building abilities are often perceived as essential leadership attributes for successful entrepreneurs. attributes the coining and defining of "entrepreneur" to Jean-Baptiste Say in his A Treatise on Political Economy; (1834).

Schumpeter

According to Schumpeter, an entrepreneur is willing and able to convert a new idea or invention into a successful innovation. and as such is hotly debated in academic economics. An alternate description posited by Israel Kirzner suggests that the majority of innovations may be much more incremental improvements such as the replacement of paper with plastic in the construction of a drinking straw.
For Schumpeter, entrepreneurship resulted in new industries but also in new combinations of currently existing inputs. Schumpeter's initial example of this was the combination of a steam engine and then current wagon making technologies to produce the horseless carriage. In this case the innovation, the car, was transformational but did not require the development of a new technology, merely the application of existing technologies in a novel manner. It did not immediately replace the horsedrawn carriage, but in time, incremental improvements which reduced the cost and improved the technology led to the complete practical replacement of beast drawn vehicles in modern transportation. Despite Schumpeter's early 20th-century contributions, traditional microeconomic theory did not formally consider the entrepreneur in its theoretical frameworks (instead assuming that resources would find each other through a price system). In this treatment the entrepreneur was an implied but unspecified actor, but it is consistent with the concept of the entrepreneur being the agent of x-efficiency.
Different scholars have described entrepreneurs as, among other things, bearing risk. For Schumpeter, the entrepreneur did not bear risk: the capitalist did.
Joseph A. Schumpeter (1934) believed that the equilibrium ideal was imperfect•	Schumpeter, J.A., 1934, The Theory of Economic Development, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.A., 1934, The Theory of Economic Development, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Presssome individuals acquire the new information before others, recombine the resources to gain an entrepreneurial profit (Schumpeter, 1934)•	Schumpeter, J.A., 1934, The Theory of Economic Development, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.A., 1934, The Theory of Economic Development, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Knight and Drucker

For Frank H. Knight (1921) and Peter Drucker (1970), entrepreneurship is about taking risk. The behavior of the entrepreneur reflects a kind of person willing to put his or her career and financial security on the line and take risks in the name of an idea, spending much time as well as capital on an uncertain venture.  
Knight classified three types of uncertainty.
The acts of entrepreneurship are often associated with true uncertainty, particularly when it involves bringing something really novel to the world, whose market never exists. However, even if a market already exists, there is no guarantee that a market exists for a particular new player in the cola category.
The place of the disharmony-creating and idiosyncratic entrepreneur in traditional economic theory (which describes many efficiency-based ratios assuming uniform outputs) presents theoretic quandaries. William Baumol has added greatly to this area of economic theory and was recently honored for it at the 2006 annual meeting of the American Economic Association.[ref]
[/ref]

The individuals-opportunities nexus

The contemporary study of entrepreneurship is significantly defined by the agenda-setting article of Shane and Venkataraman in 2000 named The Promise of Entrepreneurship as a Field of Research. According to Shane and Venkataraman, entrepreneurship comprises two phenomena "enterprising individuals" and "entrepreneurial opportunities", and researchers should study the nature of the individuals who respond to these opportunities when others do not, the opportunities themselves and the nexus between individuals and opportunities.

Psychological make-up of the entrepreneur

Studies show that the psychological propensities for male and female entrepreneurs are more similar than different. Empirical studies suggest that male entrepreneurs possess strong negotiating skills and consensus-forming abilities.
Jesper Sørensen,
Innovative entrepreneurs may be more likely to experience what psychologist, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi calls flow. Flow occurs when the outside world disappears in the face of a vibrant inner motivation to do something. Csikszentmihalyi suggests that breakthrough innovations occur at the hands of individuals experiencing flow. They become so enthralled with the ideas in their heads that they cannot help but follow them. Thus quality and type of early education may have some influence on entrepreneurial capability.

Innate ability vs. public perception

Individuals use what is described as "an innate ability" or quasi-statistical sense to gauge public opinion.
The ability of entrepreneurs to innovate relates to innate traits, including extroversion and a proclivity for risk-taking.
It has, however, been argued that entrepreneurs are not that distinctive; and that it is essentially poor conceptualizations of "non-entrepreneurs" that maintain laudatory portraits of "entrepreneurs." 

Linking to economic development

Most of the scholars agree that entrepreneurs in small firms employ employees and generate employment and income places a vital link between entrepreneurship and economic development Deakins and Freel, 2012.  As earlier mentioned most of the small firms are very innovative and develop new technology, product, services which also benefits the economy.
On the contrary some of the academic researchers, politicians and economists argue that it is just the opposite. According to them entrepreneurs come up because of economic growth as there was a survey conducted and the results showed that there was high rate entrepreneur in developed countries than in underdeveloped countries. Instead countries with unbalanced economy had more demand for jobs than being an entrepreneur Deakins and Freel, 2012.

Financial bootstrapping

Financial bootstrapping is a term used to cover different methods for avoiding using the financial resources of external investors. Bootstrapping can be defined as "a collection of methods used to minimize the amount of outside debt and equity financing needed from banks and investors". The use of private credit card debt is the most known form of bootstrapping, but a wide variety of methods are available for entrepreneurs. While bootstrapping involves a risk for the founders, the absence of any other stakeholder gives the founders more freedom to develop the company. Many successful companies including Dell Computers and Facebook were founded this way.
There are different types of bootstrapping:

External financing

Many businesses need more capital than can be provided by the owners themselves, and in this case, a range of options is available including:
Some of these sources provide not only funds, but also financial oversight, accountability for carrying out tasks and meeting milestones, and in some cases business contacts and experience – in many cases in return for an equity stake.





Further reading


