[[Gulf of Aden]]

CATEGORIES: Gulf of Aden, Bodies of water of Somalia, Bodies of water of Yemen, Great Rift Valley, Arabian Sea, Piracy, Gulfs of the Indian Ocean, Red Sea, Bodies of water of Djibouti

The Gulf of Aden ( However as the city of Aden grew during the colonial era, the name of "Gulf of Aden" was popularised.
The waterway is part of the important Suez canal shipping route between the Mediterranean Sea and the Arabian Sea in the Indian Ocean with 21,000 ships crossing the gulf annually.

Geography

Limits

The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Gulf of Aden as follows:

Hydrography

The temperature of the Gulf of Aden varies between  while the oxygen content in the Gulf of Aden at the same depth is typically between 4.0 and 5.0 mg/L.

Commerce and trade

The Gulf of Aden is a vital waterway for shipping, especially for Persian Gulf oil, making it an integral waterway in the world economy. The main ports along the gulf are Aden in Yemen, Djibouti City in Djibouti, and Zeila, Berbera and Bosaso in Somalia.
In earlier history, the city of Crater, located just south of the modern city of Aden, was an important port in regional trade. Crater was the principal harbor of the pre-Islamic kingdom of Awsan, and after its annexation by the kingdom of Saba at the end of the 5th century, played a significant role in connecting Africa with Arabia.
India receives USD 50 billion in imports and sends USD 60 billion in exports through this area annually. Because of this and for the sake of protecting the trade of other countries, India keeps a warship escort in this area.
In the late 2000s, the gulf evolved into a hub of pirate activity. By 2013, attacks in the waters had steadily declined due to active private security and international navy patrols.

Ecology

A geologically young body of water, the Gulf of Aden has a unique biodiversity that contains many varieties of fish, coral, seabirds and invertebrates. This rich ecological diversity has benefited from a relative lack of pollution during the history of human habitation around the gulf. However, environmental groups fear that the lack of a coordinated effort to control pollution may jeopardize the gulf's ecosphere.

Bordering countries

Towns and cities

Towns and cities on the Gulf of Aden coast:



Notes




