[[Papaya]]

CATEGORIES: Papaya, Caricaceae, Flora of Argentina, Flora of the Bahamas, Flora of Belize, Flora of Bolivia, Flora of Brazil, Flora of Colombia, Flora of Costa Rica, Flora of Cuba, Flora of the Dominican Republic, Flora of El Salvador, Flora of Ecuador, Flora of Florida, Flora of French Guiana, Flora of Grenada, Flora of Guadeloupe, Flora of Guatemala, Flora of Guyana, Flora of Haiti, Flora of Honduras, Flora of Jamaica, Flora of Malawi, Flora of Martinique, Flora of Mexico, Flora of Nicaragua, Flora of Panama, Flora of Paraguay, Flora of Peru, Flora of Puerto Rico, Flora of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Flora of Suriname, Flora of Tanzania, Flora of Trinidad and Tobago, Flora of the United States Virgin Islands, Flora of Venezuela, Garden plants of Central America, Garden plants of North America, Crops originating from the Americas, Crops originating from Mexico, Abortifacients, Medicinal plants, Medicinal plants of Central America, Medicinal plants of North America, Plants described in 1753, Plants with sequenced genomes, Tropical agriculture

The papaya  several centuries before the emergence of the Mesoamerican classical civilizations.
The papaya is a large, tree-like plant, with a single stem growing from  in diameter. The fruit is ripe when it feels soft (as soft as a ripe avocado or a bit softer) and its skin has attained an amber to orange hue.
Carica papaya was the first transgenic fruit tree to have its genome deciphered.ugr.es/life-sciences/item/6354-scientists-decipher-fruit-tree-genome-for-the-first-time

Common names

Carica papaya plants and their fruits are known by different names around the English-speaking world:

Distribution

Carica papaya is native to the New World in Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, French Guiana, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Venezuela, and northern Argentina. C. papaya has become naturalized in the Bahamas, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Grenada, Guadeloupe, Haiti, Jamaica, Martinique, Puerto Rico, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago, the U.S. Virgin Islands, the U.S. state of Florida, and Malawi and Tanzania in Africa. Additional crops of C. papaya are grown in Australia, the Philippines, and the U.S. state of Hawaii.

Cultivation

Gaining in popularity among tropical fruits worldwide, papaya is now ranked third with 11.22 Mt, or 15.36 percent of the total tropical fruit production,Except bananas and citrus fruits. behind mango with 38.6 Mt (52.86%) and pineapple with 19.41 Mt (26.58%). Global papaya production has grown significantly over the last few years, mainly as a result of increased production in India. Papaya has become an important agricultural export for developing countries, where export revenues of the fruit provide a livelihood for thousands of people, especially in Asia and Latin America. Papaya exports contribute to the growing supply of healthy food products on international markets. The top three exporting countries accounted for 63.28 percent of the total global exports of papaya between 2007 and 2009, with more than half of those exports going to the United States.
Global papaya production is highly concentrated, with the top ten countries averaging 86.32 percent of the total production for the period 2008–2010. India is the leading papaya producer, with a 38.61 percent share of the world production during 2008–2010, followed by Brazil (17.5%) and Indonesia (6.89%). Other important papaya producing countries and their share of global production include Nigeria (6.79%), Mexico (6.18%), Ethiopia (2.34%), Democratic Republic of the Congo (2.12%), Colombia (2.08%), Thailand (1.95%), and Guatemala (1.85%).
Originally from southern Mexico (particularly Chiapas and Veracruz), Central America, and northern South America, the papaya is now cultivated in most tropical countries.  In cultivation, it grows rapidly, fruiting within three years.  It is, however, highly frost-sensitive, limiting its production to tropical climates. Temperatures below  

Pests and diseases

Papayas are susceptible to the papaya ringspot virus (PRV), which causes premature molting and malformation of the leaves.mhhe.html In the 1990s, the virus threatened to wipe out Hawaii's papaya industry completely.
The papaya is also susceptible to fruit flies, which lay eggs in the fruit.
 Cultivars === 
Two kinds of papayas are commonly grown. One has sweet, red or orange flesh, and the other has yellow flesh;  in Australia, these are called "red papaya" and "yellow papaw", respectively.  Either kind, picked green, is called a "green papaya."
The large-fruited, red-fleshed 'Maradol', 'Sunrise', and 'Caribbean Red' papayas often sold in US markets are commonly grown in Mexico and Belize.
In 2011 Philippine researchers reported that by hybridizing papaya with Vasconcellea quercifolia they had developed conventionally bred, nongenetically engineered papaya resistant to PRV.

=Genetically engineered cultivars=

In response to the papaya ringspot virus (PRV) outbreak in Hawaii, genetically altered papaya were generated and brought to market (including 'SunUp' and 'Rainbow') that have some PRV DNA incorporated into the DNA of the plant are resistant to PRVs. This was so successful that by 2010, 80% of Hawaiian papaya plants were genetically modified.harc-hspa.pdf

Uses

Papayas can be used as a food, a cooking aid and in traditional medicine. The stem and bark may be used in rope production.

Meat tenderizing

Both green papaya fruit and the tree's latex are rich in papain, a protease used for tenderizing meat and other proteins. Its ability to break down tough meat fibers was used for thousands of years by indigenous Americans. It is now included as a component in powdered meat tenderizers.

Nutrients, phytochemicals and culinary practices

Papaya fruit is a source of nutrients such as provitamin A carotenoids, vitamin C, folate and dietary fiber. Papaya skin, pulp and seeds also contain a variety of phytochemicals, including lycopene and polyphenols. In preliminary research, danielone, a phytoalexin found in papaya fruit, showed antifungal activity against Colletotrichum gloesporioides, a pathogenic fungus of papaya. Echeverri F., Torres F., Quinones W., Cardona G., Archbold R., Roldan J., Brito I., Luis J.G., and LahlouU E.-H., Phytochemistry, 1997, vol. 44, no2, pp. 255-256, 
The ripe fruit of the papaya is usually eaten raw, without skin or seeds. The unripe green fruit can be eaten cooked, usually in curries, salads, and stews. Green papaya is used in Southeast Asian cooking, both raw and cooked. In Thai cuisine, papaya is used to make Thai salads such as som tam and Thai curries such as kaeng som when still not fully ripe. In Indonesian cuisine, the unripe green fruits and young leaves are boiled for use as part of lalab salad, while the flower buds are sautéed and stir-fried with chillies and green tomatoes as Minahasan papaya flower vegetable dish. Papayas have a relatively high amount of pectin, which can be used to make jellies. The smell of ripe, fresh papaya flesh can strike some people as unpleasant.
The black seeds of the papaya are edible and have a sharp, spicy taste. They are sometimes ground and used as a substitute for black pepper.
In some parts of Asia, the young leaves of the papaya are steamed and eaten like spinach.

Traditional medicine

In some parts of the world, papaya leaves are made into tea as a treatment for malaria. Antimalarial and antiplasmodial activity has been noted in some preparations of the plant, but the mechanism is not understood and no treatment method based on these results has been scientifically proven.
In belief that it can raise platelet levels in blood, papaya may be used as a medicine for dengue fever.
Papain is also applied topically for the treatment of cuts, rashes, stings and burns. Papain ointment is commonly made from fermented papaya flesh, and is applied as a gel-like paste. Harrison Ford was treated for a ruptured disc incurred during filming of Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom by papain injections.
Women in India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and other countries have long used green papaya as an herbal medicine for contraception and abortion.

Preliminary research

Preliminary research in animals has provided evidence for the potential contraceptive and abortifacient capability of papaya. Laboratory studies have also shown that papaya seeds have contraceptive effects in adult male langur monkeys, and possibly in adult male humans.
Other preliminary research indicates alternate possible effects which remain to be further studied. Papaya juice has an in vitro antiproliferative effect on liver cancer cells, possibly due to lycopene[ref]
</ref> or immune system stimulation.<ref name=sd>
</ref>
Papaya seeds might contain antibacterial properties against Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus or Salmonella typhi.[ref]
</ref> Papaya seed extract may have effects in toxicity-induced kidney failure.<ref name=abcd>
</ref>

Allergies and side effects

Papaya is frequently used as a hair conditioner, but should be used in small amounts. Papaya releases a latex fluid when not quite ripe, which can cause irritation and provoke allergic reaction in some people.
The latex concentration of unripe papayas is speculated to cause uterine contractions, which may lead to a miscarriage. Papaya seed extracts in large doses have a contraceptive effect on rats and monkeys, but in small doses have no effect on the unborn animals.
Excessive consumption of papaya can cause carotenemia, the yellowing of soles and palms, which is otherwise harmless. However, a very large dose would need to be consumed; papaya contains about 6% of the level of beta carotene found in carrots (the most common cause of carotenemia).

Gallery

File:Carica papaya 004.JPG|Female flowers
File:Carica papaya1.jpg|Male flowers
File:Carica papaya leaf 14 07 2012.jpg|Leaf
File:Fruit of papaya.jpg|Unripe fruit
File:Carica papaya 005.JPG|Ripe fruit
File:"Carica papaya of Salem".jpg|Unripe fruit
File:Papaya in kerala India.jpg|Yellow Papaya
Image:MochepapayaLMC.Berrin, Katherine & Larco Museum. The Spirit of Ancient Peru:Treasures from the Museo Arqueológico Rafael Larco Herrera. New York: Thames and Hudson, 1997.



Notes






