[[Sam Richter]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, American business writers, American marketing people, Business speakers, Living people, Writers from Minneapolis, Minnesota, University of Minnesota alumni, Minnesota Golden Gophers football players

Sam Richter is author of the best-selling book Take the Cold Out of Cold Calling about Sales Intelligence and finding information online and using it for business and sales success. The book, along with its corresponding "Know More! Center" and "Know More! Toolbar," has been featured in internationally syndicated columns and best-selling books by Harvey Mackay,Minneapolis Star Tribune, Harvey Mackay 2008-09-28 on CNN,CNN/Money 2008-08-26 in BusinessWeek,BusinessWeek 2008-07-18 and in other publications.Sales Book of the Year Awards 
Richter is creator/founder of the Know More! sales training and business improvement programSam Richter Sales Training Seminars and he delivers motivational keynote and workshop presentations on a variety of technology, sales, and marketing topics. He is most known for his innovative and breakthrough uses of social media including LinkedIn, Twitter, Facebook, and others combined with search engines like Google and Web-based resources as intelligence gathering and reputation management tools. He is a co-founder of the Social Selling Institute,The Social Selling Institute an organization that performs in-person and online training and social sales certification; a partner/co-creator of AlertMix,AlertMix an online people, industry, and company tracking/monitoring tool; creator of YouGotTheNews,YouGotTheNews one of the world's largest newspaper search engines; and he is a Senior Vice President at ActiFi,ActiFi a coaching/consulting/software firm specializing in financial services practice management.
In 2013,2013 Top 25 Most Influential People in Sales Award 2012,2012 Top 25 Most Influential People in Sales Award and 2011,2011 Top 25 Most Influential People in Sales Award he was named by Inside View as one of the Top 25 Most Influential People in Sales and in September 2011, as Sales Insider of the Month.comTracky Social Collaboration Platform  (a Twitter-based project management system), BrandpointBrandpoint (an online content creation/distribution company), and Argos RiskArgos Risk (a business financial risk insight company).

History

Richter holds an advanced degree Certification in Executive Leadership from the University of St. Thomas and Boards of Director Certification from the University of St. Mary's/Caux Roundtable. He graduated from the University of Minnesota with a degree in journalism. He was a two-time Scholastic All-American while also a four-year player and letter winner on the University of Minnesota varsity football team.U of M Alumni Article 2008-05/06
As an advertising writer and creative director, Richter worked at numerous Twin Cities advertising agencies and eventually started his own firm which was later bought by a larger agency. Richter then spent a number of years as a Group Director at Weber Shandwick, one of the world's largest public relations firms. At Shandwick, Richter managed national marketing programs for Microsoft,Microsoft Press 1998-02-26 Coca-Cola, Northwest Airlines (now Delta airlines), Polaris, and other large and small companies. Following Shandwick, Richter worked at Digital River where he helped develop and market a Codie-Award Winning2000 Codie Award Winners software download program called eBot,Digital River Press 1999-11-11 and where he helped build the company's e-marketing agency serving clients including National Geographic, Major League Baseball, Nabisco, Brunswick, and other national brands.U of M Journalism Alumni Magazine Winter 2002 Richter's marketing work has been recognized with numerous awards including Webby awards, Telly Awards, Public Relations Society of America awards, a Gold Award at the International Film Festival, and numerous other marketing/advertising awards.
Following Digital River, for seven years, Richter was president of the James J. Hill Reference Library in St. Paul, Minnesota.   
Richter is a graduate of St. Louis Park High School in Minnesota. He is a founding and current judge of the Minnesota Cup Business Plan Competition.Minnesota Trade Delegation to China  He was honored by the Business Journal as a top business leader under the age of 40Business Journal 40 Under 40 Honorees 2003-05-16 and he is a past finalist for Inc. Magazine Entrepreneur of the Year. Finalists 2007-12-26

Books






