[[Tropical Storm Julio (2002)]]

CATEGORIES: 2002 in Mexico, 2002 Pacific hurricane season, Pacific hurricanes in Mexico

Tropical Storm Julio  in 2002 was a weak and short-lived tropical storm that made landfall along the southern Mexican coast. An area of convection organized into a tropical depression on September 25. Initially forecast to stay offshore, the depression headed northward and strengthened into a tropical storm that same day. Julio turned to the northwest and peaked as a minimal tropical storm just before landfall near Lázaro Cárdenas, on September 26. The storm soon weakened into a tropical depression and later on September 26, it rapidly dissipated over Mexico.
Prior to making landfall, tropical cyclone warnings and watches were issued for a portion of the Pacific coast of Mexico. After making landfall, three fatalities and 18 injuries were reported from Julio when a bus flipped over. Around 100 houses in Acapulco and Zihuatanejo were damaged or washed away by flash flooding. In the latter city, many trees were brought down and numerous streets were flooded. The highest rainfall reported was  at Zihuatanejo and La Unión, resulting in devastation. In all, about 2,000 homes were flooded while 100 families were evacuated. About a month after Julio, Hurricane Kenna affected some of the same locations as Julio.

Meteorological history

The origins of Tropical Storm Julio were from a persistent monsoon-like area of convection (possibly related to Hurricane Isidore) that was situated off the west coast of Central America on September 21. Convective activity generally increased over the next two days, and it is estimated that a poorly defined surface circulation developed late on September 23. The low gradually became better organized and at 0000 UTC on September 25, the National Hurricane Center (NHC) reported that the disturbance had developed into Tropical Depression Thirteen-E about 
Initially, the storm was expected to pass very close to the Mexican coast and attain a peak intensity of  Julio dissipated near Manzanillo later that day instead.

Preparations, impact, and aftermath

Upon becoming a tropical cyclone, tropical cyclone warnings and watches were issued for portions of the Pacific coast of Mexico; a tropical storm warning was issued from Zihuatanejo to Punta San Telma while a tropical storm watch was in effect from Punta San Telma to Manzanillo.
Tropical Storm Julio was responsible for heavy rains to Zihuatanejo, where 100 homes were damaged or destroyed. Across the city, numerous roofs were damaged and many trees fell. Many houses and streets were flooded as well.
In addition, many small shacks lost their roof due to the storm's high winds. On the outskirts of the Taxco, situated 






