[[Laurentia]]

CATEGORIES: Historical continents, Cratons, Geology of North America, Natural history of North America

Laurentia (North American Craton) is a large continental craton, which forms the ancient geological core of the North American continent. Many times in its past, Laurentia has been a separate continent as it is now in the form of North America, although originally it also included the cratonic areas of Greenland and also the northwestern part of Scotland, known as the Hebridean Terrane. During other times in its past, Laurentia has been part of larger continents and supercontinents and itself consists of many smaller terranes assembled on a network of Early Proterozoic orogenic belts.  Small microcontinents and oceanic islands collided with and sutured onto  the ever-growing Laurentia, and together formed the stable Precambrian craton we see today.
The craton is named after the Laurentian Shield, which in turn is named after the Laurentian Mountains.

Interior platform

In eastern and central Canada, much of the stable craton is exposed at the surface as the Canadian Shield; when sub-surface extensions are considered, the wider term Laurentian Shield is more common, not least because large parts of the structure extend outside Canada.  In the United States, the craton bedrock is covered with sedimentary rocks of the interior platform in the Midwest and Great Plains regions. Only in northern Minnesota, Wisconsin, the Adirondacks of New York and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan is the craton bedrock exposed.

Tectonic setting

The metamorphic and igneous rocks of the "basement complex" were formed 1.5 to 1.0 billion years ago in a tectonically active setting.

Volcanism

The southwestern portion of Laurentia consists of Precambrian basement rocks deformed by continental collisions (violet area of the image above). This area has been subjected to considerable rifting as the Basin and Range Province and has been stretched up to 100% of its original width. The area contains numerous large volcanic eruptions.

Geological history








