[[Michael Tritter]]

CATEGORIES: House (TV series) characters, Fictional police detectives

Detective Michael Tritter is a recurring fictional character in the medical drama series House, portrayed by David Morse.  He is the main antagonist of the third season, which ran between 2006 and 2007.  Tritter is a police detective, who tries to get Dr. Gregory House (Hugh Laurie) to apologize for leaving him in an examination room with a thermometer in his rectum.  After House refuses to apologize, Tritter researches House's background and discovers the doctor's Vicodin addiction.  Tritter turns people close to House against him and forces House to go to rehab.  When the case ultimately comes to court, the judge sentences House to one night in jail, for contempt of court, and finishing his rehabilitation, telling Tritter that she believes House is not the drug addict he tried to make him out to be.
The character was created as somebody who could go "toe-to-toe" with House.  Morse, who had never seen the show before, was unsure if he could portray the character and was not impressed after familiarizing himself with the show.  The excited reaction of his friends to the acting opportunity finally convinced him to take the role.  Initial critical responses to the character were mostly positive, but critics later felt that the seven-episode Tritter story arc became "boring"; however, Morse was praised for his portrayal and gained an Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series Emmy Award nomination for his appearance in the episode "Finding Judas".  Morse stated in a 2006 TV Guide interview that, although he had discussed it with writers of the show, bringing the character back on the show would be "practically impossible".

Storyline

Tritter first appears in the episode "Fools for Love".  His character is a police detective who suffers from a severe irritation in the area of his groin, which he believes to be caused by a sexually transmitted disease, and who becomes a patient of the walk-in clinic.  Although House diagnoses Tritter with dry skin, a common side effect of the nicotine gum that Tritter is chewing, Tritter requests that a sample be tested.  House declines on the grounds that he has already met this month's quota for indulging "stubborn idiots".  After Tritter causes House to trip, the doctor feigns acquiescence, but insists he has to take Tritter's temperature rectally.  After inserting the thermometer, House leaves the room, with no intention of returning.  Tritter later complains about his treatment to House's boss, Lisa Cuddy (Lisa Edelstein), saying that he would rather "beat the crap out of" House than sue him; however, House refuses to apologize.  Later that night, Tritter pulls House over for a traffic violation and arrests him after finding unprescribed Vicodin pills in his pocket.  Other charges brought up against House include resisting arrest and driving under the influence (DUI).
In the next episode, "Que Será Será", Tritter searches House's apartment and finds a large quantity of Vicodin pills and two apparently forged prescriptions that bear the name of House's friend James Wilson (Robert Sean Leonard). Television Without Pity Recap
In "Merry Little Christmas", Tritter and Wilson work out a deal to allow House to continue practicing medicine if he pleads guilty and spends two months in rehab. Meanwhile, House uses a dead patient's name to obtain Oxycodone pills as a Vicodin replacement drug. When he visits Tritter early the next morning to agree to the deal, Tritter says the deal is off, after going through the pharmacy's log and reading that House signed for a dead man's drugs. Television Without Pity Recap
In the final days leading up to House's court case, House realizes the severity of the situation and finally apologizes to Tritter (episode "Words and Deeds"). When Tritter refuses to accept the apology, House goes into rehab, putting on a show for Tritter and the judge, but Tritter cites his experiences with addicts as evidence House has not changed. The judge tells Tritter that she does not believe House to be the drug dealer that Tritter tried to show him to be and orders Tritter to move on. Just before the bailiff escorts House out of the courtroom, Tritter tells him: "Good luck. I hope I'm wrong about you." Television Without Pity Recap

Personality


The main antagonist of the third season, Tritter is a "stubborn", "vengeful", and extremely determined police detective.

Creation and casting

The Tritter character was created as someone to go "toe-to-toe" with House. The producers envisioned a character with an inner strength, intelligence, and single-mindedness to match that of House.
Morse was unfamiliar with the show. After watching several House episodes, he was surprised that the show had a strong audience with "such a total jerk" as the lead character. It was not until Morse told a few long-time friends about the job offer that their enthusiastic reaction convinced him to take the role. Katie Jacobs, executive producer of House, was impressed by Morse's performance. In a 2006 TV Guide interview, Morse said that, although he discussed the possibility with House writers, it would be "practically impossible" to get the character to return in any later seasons.

Reception

Initial responses to the character were mostly positive. Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune declared Tritter the best male villain of the fall of 2006.

However, the continued character arc increasingly bored critics. Staci Krause of IGN found the first few episodes of Season 3, in which House recovers from being shot, more interesting. In a review of "Que Sera Sera", Entertainment Weekly
The show's fans had shown dislike for other antagonists with multi-episode guest-starring arcs, and critics suspected that Tritter's character would receive similar disdain.
Morse, however, gained mainly positive responses to his portrayal of Tritter. The Star-Ledger






