[[List of Yu-Gi-Oh! 5D's characters]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of anime and manga characters, Yu-Gi-Oh! characters

The following is a list of characters from the Yu-Gi-Oh! 5D's anime series. Where appropriate, names from the original Japanese media are on the left while the English names are on the right. Character descriptions pertain to the original Japanese version of the series.

Signers

Signers are people who bear the Mark of the Crimson Dragon, a deity worshiped by a pre-Incan civilization that defended the world from the Red Nova and the Earthbound Immortals with the help of the Signer Dragons, powerful dragons that have been turned into Duel Monsters cards that the current Signers now possess. Signers are chosen by the Crimson Dragon to protect the world from evil.

Allies

Antagonists

Dark Signers

Dark Signers are the antagonists of the second arc of the show, who fight against the Crimson Dragon and the Signers. Dark Signers are born when someone who has died (usually someone wanting revenge on a Signer) is resurrected by an Earthbound Immortal (Earthbound God in the Japanese version), evil entities imprisoned in the Nazca Lines by the Crimson Dragon. Infused with dark powers and possessing dark cards, the Dark Signers are able to form a barrier around their opponents, initiating a Shadow Duel where attacks from monsters cause real damage. Sometimes, if the Dark Signer is showing weakness or resistance, the Earthbound Immortal itself can take over the Dark Signer's body. Dark Signers have special cards called Dark Tuner Monsters that can summon Dark Synchro Monsters with a negative level. They also have an Earthbound Immortal, represented by their birthmarks. When summoned, these monsters sacrifice the souls of anyone caught within the Dark Signer's geoglyph (with the exception of the duelists, Signers, and anyone protected by a barrier emitted by a Signer's birthmark). Their common attribute is the ability to attack directly and not be chosen as a target, although some circumstances allow them to attack monsters and be attacked themselves. In the anime, they are unaffected by Spell and Trap cards.
There are also Dark Signer-like figures (called Shadow Drones in the dub) who are recruited and controlled by Roman's spiders. They only have access to Dark Tuner and Dark Synchro Monsters. When these Shadow Drones are defeated, their Mark of the Shadows and Deck disappear, and they lose their memories of being possessed. According to Goodwin, a true Dark Signer cannot be returned to normal, because they have already died. In addition, their duels end with the losing duelist being killed (in the dub, the loser is sent to the Netherworld). When a true Dark Signer is defeated, all the souls that were used for summoning their Earthbound Immortal are freed (this also seems to apply to non-Dark Signers who were defeated in Shadow Duels). After Goodwin and the King of the Netherworld are defeated, Goodwin and Roman pass on to the afterlife while Carly, Misty, and Devack are revived with no memory of their time as Dark Signers. Kalin is later shown to still remember his time as a Dark Signer, as well as Greiger. It is speculated that they kept their memories because, unlike the others, they willingly became Dark Signers.

Yliaster

Originally led by Goodwin,  was an organization of Star Guardians, who are said to bring peace to the world and worship the Crimson Dragon. Their true purpose, however, is to steer the world to change the future, which was destroyed by Dr Fudo's creation of Ener-D (Momentum in Japanese). In the third season, the founding Yliaster members come from the future with the purpose of setting things right. They hope to accomplish this by harnessing energy from Turbo Duels during the WRGP to power the Ark Cradle, which will be used to destroy Ener-D, and ultimately New Domino City and Satellite, and thus undo the calamity Ener-D had caused.

Others

Duelists

Fortune Cup

The Fortune Cup is a tournament organized by Rex Goodwin with the purpose of awakening the powers of the Signers. The winner will be able to challenge Jack Atlas for the title of King. Along with Yusei, Akiza and Leo (disguised as Luna), there are other duelists whose jobs are to put pressure on their opponents in order to awaken their abilities (the exception is Hunter Pace, who replaced one of the combatants in order to beat Yusei).

World Racing Grand Prix

The following are the competitors in the World Racing Grand Prix (World Riding Duel Grand Prix in Japanese version, WRGP for short) alongside Team 5D's and Yliaster's Team New World. Players battle in teams of up to three players, each with 4000 points per player. When one player's life points reach zero, the next player takes over until all players are eliminated.

Others

Other characters

Manga Characters

D1 Grand Prix

Others

Video Game Characters

Terminology

Synchro Monsters

A prominent new feature of the Yu-Gi-Oh 5D's series is the use of "Tuner Monsters" and normal monsters to summon "Synchro Monsters". These new cards also update the rules of the Trading Card Game, renaming the Fusion Deck as the Extra Deck.
A Synchro Monster is somewhat like a Fusion Monster with Ritual Monster summoning properties combined. It needs material monsters just like Fusion Monsters, and they have the summoning properties of a Ritual Monster of having the same amount of stars required to summon the Synchro Monster, only Ritual Monsters can have of equal star value or more in their case.
A "Synchro Summon" is activated when a player summons a Tuner Monster and tunes it with one or more non-tuner monsters on the field. Based on the sum of the levels of each monster, a Synchro Monster of that level can be Special Summoned from the Extra Deck. For example, when a Level 3 Junk Synchron tunes itself with a Level 2 Speed Warrior, the Level 5 Junk Warrior can be summoned. These monsters can also be tuned once again in order to summon higher level Synchro Monsters such as the Level 8 Stardust Dragon. These monsters may also contain additional attributes, based on the monsters that were used as materials for the summon.
In "Earthbound Immortals" (Season 2), there are "Dark Synchro Monsters" that can only be Synchro Summoned, by subtracting the level of a non-tuner monster with a "Dark Tuner Monster", thus creating a negative Level. For example, a Level 8 Dark Tuner Monster can be tuned with a Level 3 Monster, to summon a Level -5 Dark Synchro Monster. Dark Synchro and Dark Tuner cards are exclusive to the anime, though can be used in Yu-Gi-Oh! 5D's Tag Force 4 and Yu-Gi-Oh! 5D's Tag Force 5. Dark Synchro Monsters featured in the anime were later released as regular Synchro Monsters.
The third season introduces two variations of Synchro Summoning: "Accel Synchro", in which a Synchro Tuner monster can be tuned with another Synchro monster, even during an opponent's turn; and "Double Tuning", in which certain Synchro Monsters require two Tuner monsters to Synchro Summon instead of one. There is also "Delta Accel Synchro", which uses three Synchro monsters instead of just two, and Yusei manages to push it further to attain a "Limit Over Accel Synchro", using five Synchro monsters in the process.

Duel Runners

As well as the normal standing duels, this Yu-Gi-Oh! series features the "Turbo Duels" ("Riding Duels" in the Japanese version), an all-new style of duel in which the players ride a "Duel Runner" ("D-Wheel" in the Japanese version), motorcycles with Duel equipment. Compared to the previous series, dueling with them contain some special rules. First, the duel is entirely played using the field spell "Speed World", which is activated by both players when the duel begins; it is possible to force a duel with someone on a Duel Runner by playing the card (a tactic generally used by Security when pursuing someone). Second, only spell cards designed to work into this field, known as Speed Spells, are allowed in the duel. Each spell needs a number of "Speed Counters" to be activated. Each duelist starts with zero Speed Counters and its number increase by one in each standby phase (there are two of these in one turn), up to a maximum of 12. The number of speed counters also affects the actual speed of the Duel Runner. A player's Speed Counters are reduced by one for every 1000 points of damage done to their Life Points. In the third season, Turbo Duels use an upgraded version of Speed World, called Speed World 2. On top of using Speed Spells, Speed Counters can be traded in for effects such as damaging the opponent or drawing an extra card. Also, counters are no longer lost when taking damage. New Domino City has built specific lanes dedicated to Turbo Duels, that separate themselves from the regular traffic when a duel is activated. The duel is called off if the lanes become damaged. When a winner is decided, the Duel Runner of the defeated duelist shuts down automatically. In the manga, Speed World and Speed Spells are not used.
The Duel Runner features the card platform, sitting in front of the duelist, a stand for the cards in hand, which allows the duelist to ride with one hand while using the cards with the other, and a compartment for the deck located in the player's wrist. It also includes a screen for a look at the current field for both duelists. Cards sent to graveyard are inserted in a slot also located in front of the duelist. In some Duel Runner models (called hybrid models), the card platform can be detached from the bike and function as a standard Duel Disk for old-fashioned duels. An example of a hybrid model is Yusei's red Duel Runner. Other models such as Crow's Blackbird have been modified to include different formations such as a flight mode. Normally, Turbo Duels are played with the Duel Runners on auto-pilot, though more recent instances, such as Shadow Duels and tournaments, have players drive manually allowing for bumps and stylish driving. Manual drive is commonly used to turn around and drive in reverse to get a better look at their opponent's field. In the third season, Leo and Luna use Duel Boards, Energy powered skate-boards that connect to their Duel Disks and allow them to engage in Turbo Duels. Unlike normal Duel Runners which automatically have Speed World and Speed World 2 integrated, they must insert the raw card into their Field Spell Card Zone. Because of how the Duel Board is designed, it is significantly slower than the motorcycle based Duel Runner.
In the Japanese version, previews for an episode where a Turbo Duel would take place would often end with the phrase, "Riding Duel, Acceleration!" This phrase was also often used at the beginning of a Turbo Duel in the third season onward.




