[[Arnold Mathew]]

CATEGORIES: 1852 births, 1919 deaths, Bishops of Old Catholicism, English Catholics

Arnold Harris Mathew, self-styled  of Thomastown,
 (7 August 1852 – 19 December 1919) was the founder and first bishop of the Old Catholic Church in the United Kingdom and a noted author on ecclesiastical subjects.
Mathew had been both a Roman Catholic and an Anglican before becoming a bishop in the Union of Utrecht (UU). His early life is the subject of some interest from researchers as a result of his aristocratic connections and his father's connection with colonial India.

Biography

Mathew was a relative of Theobald Mathew the noted "Apostle of Temperance". Born in France in 1852 and baptised in the Roman Catholic Church (RCC); due to his mother's scruples he was rebaptised in the Church of England (CoE). He studied for the ministry in the Scottish Episcopal Church, but sought reconciliation and confirmation in the Church of Rome.
As a Roman Catholic, Mathew was ordained a priest in 1877 in St Andrew's Cathedral, Glasgow, Scotland, by Archbishop Charles Eyre, apostolic administrator of the Vicariate Apostolic of the Western District. Mathew received a Doctor of Divinity degree from Pope Pius IX. He became a Dominican in 1878 but only persevered a year, moving around a number of dioceses: Newcastle, Plymouth, Nottingham and Clifton. He had met Hyacinthe Loyson in France, He lost faith in the inspiration of Scripture and in the divinity of Christ. After leaving Bath, he went to Paris to consult with people there. Later in 1891 he was persuaded to "trial" the Anglican ministry and went to assist the rector of Holy Trinity, Sloane Street, London.  He was never officially received into the Church of England, neither did he formally leave the Roman Catholic Church.
In October 1890, he changed his name, by deed poll, from Arnold Jerome Matthews to Arnoldo Girolamo Povoleri.
Mathew, under the name Povoleri, married Margaret Florence Duncan at St Marylebone Parish Church, London, on 22 February 1892. He was "described as a clerk in holy orders."
In 1892, when he had reconciled with the 
He stopped using the name Povoleri in 1894.
he stopped using the title of Count in 1894.
In 1897, Mathew had met Father Richard O'Halloran[ref]
[/ref] and became curious about the suggestion of an Old Catholic Church in Great Britain.
In 1897, Richard O'Halloran was suspended in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Westminster for "reasons of canonical discipline". O'Halloran condemned the censure and created the "Ealing schism". O'Halloran was, according to The Tablet, also suspected of heresy.

Election


O'Halloran believed that such a movement would interest a large number of disaffected Roman Catholics and Anglo-Catholics.
In June 1906 the Royal Commission appointed in 1904 to inquire into "ecclesiastical disorders", afterwards known as the Ritual Commission, The king issued Letters of Business after the report. It was expected that the Catholic-minded Anglican clergy, with their congregations, might, by Act of Parliament, be forced out of the Anglican Communion. Persuaded by O'Halloran, Mathew decided to join the movement and was elected the first Regionary Old Catholic Bishop for Great Britain and in 1908 the Old Catholic Church of the Netherlands (OKKN) was petitioned to consecrate him to this charge.
Mathew's election was to some extent a precautionary endeavour by those
Added to the natural differences
In 1898 Willibald Beyschlag wrote, in The American Journal of Theology, that Old Catholic churches sought "federation with other churches having an" episcopal polity. They sought "recognition that they all belong to the one ecumenical church which rests upon the dogmatic and episcopal foundation of the early church, and can, therefore, practice communion with each other." Those negotiations had "no tangible result" in 1898, according to Beyschlag, who did not "think that such a result would be of any great value," because some Anglicans "emphatically desire to be 'catholic', and are at the same time wholly out of sympathy with the Old Catholics." Beyschlag distinguished that the Ritualist Anglican Catholics "are on the way to Rome; the Old Catholics on the way from Rome."

Consecration

Mathew was consecrated in St. Gertrude's Cathedral, Utrecht, on 28 April 1908, by the 
Soon after the consecration, Mathew and O'Halloran were estranged and O'Halloran, under a pseudonym,
The 1908 Lambeth Conference "deprecated the setting up of a new organised body" and requested that Randall Davidson, Archbishop of Canterbury, notify the 

Mission in England 1908–1919

Mathew published The Old Catholic Missal & Ritual in 1909, for Old Catholics using the English language.[ref]
 Note that Mathew provided his own nihil obstat with Gul's imprimatur.[/ref]
In September 1909, he attended the Old Catholic Congress in Vienna, where he sympathized with the Dutch Old Catholics conservative position which opposed the innovations being introduced among the German and Swiss Old Catholics to renounce the Sacrament of Penance (auricular confession), the intercession of saints and alterations to the liturgy, including the omission of the Pope's name from the Canon of the Mass. He proposed the acceptance of the 1673 Synod of Jerusalem's doctrines.
Mathew expressed fears that the trend of Continental Old Catholicism was towards Modernism, perhaps because of the growing association with Anglicans and Lutherans, and hoped for a return to the traditional principles of the Church of Utrecht.
Moss wrote that Mathew thought they were becoming "steadily more Protestant".
 Mathew also rejected Herford's applications several times.
Brandreth wrote that for two years Mathew, "with the status of a missionary bishop", remained in full communion with the 
In June 1910, he secretly consecrated, without agreement of the 
In August, van Thiel declared that Old Catholics "could not be considered responsible for ... Mathew's eventual particular attitude or opinions, because he only represents his own clergy and himself in England." Mathew was "in no sense a representative of the Church of Holland in England."
In October, Mathew defended the consecrations in The Church Times against a critical article in 
In December 1910, 

Autonomy and Independence

Within weeks of the De Oud-Katholiek article, on 29 December 1910, Mathew issued A Declaration of Autonomy And Independence from the 
This necessitated then the continuation of the apostolic succession for the survival of the "old" Roman Catholic faith and so, on 7 January 1911, Mathew consecrated Archdeacon Francis Herbert Bacon, Canon Cuthbert Francis Hinton, Fr William Edmond Scott-Hall and Fr Frederick Clement Christie Egerton to the episcopate.
An episcopal synod then followed and Mathew was unanimously elected Old Roman Catholic Archbishop of Great Britain and Ireland.
Although the Holy See usually did not respond to notifications about episcopal consecrations, in this case, on 11 February 1911, Pope Pius X excommunicated Beale, Howarth, and Mathew. The Times reported on their excommunication and included an English language translation of the Latin language document which described Mathew as a "pseudo-bishop".
[/ref]
A noted author and historian, Mathew had an excellent knowledge of the Eastern Orthodox Church and  Now an archbishop, Mathew had been in contact with people interested in extending the presence of the Eastern Orthodox Church to Western Europe. 
Olga Novikov,
On 5 August 1911, Messara, Legate of the Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Antioch, Mathew and others.
After a long and full discussion the 
Moss wrote that Messara "had no power to do this without the consent of" Gregory IV, in Damascus, "which was never given".
According to Herzog, Gregory IV retracted Messara's statement.
"It is hard to believe that an Orthodox Patriarch of Antioch would have been prepared to accept a married prelate into communion with his Church," Anson wrote. Mathew's wife "did not take part in the conference, and it is probable that her existence behind the scenes was again kept dark, as at the time of her husband's consecration in 1908."
On 26 February 1912, 
As  of the ancient undivided church.
The trial, Mathew v. "The Times" Publishing Co., Ltd., "was tense with laughter over the elaborate and convoluted ecclesiastical definitions." Mathew lost the case.
A "material part of the case" about whether Mathew was truthful was the 1889 printed announcement sent to his congregation in Bath. The trial revealed that in 1897 Mathew restated that he had apostatized in 1889 and had circulated the printed announcement but by 1897 had concluded that his change in belief was a mistake; he therefore recanted the 1889 document, in 1897, which during the trial he said that he never wrote. He testified that he was hypnotized in Bath and so the announcement was written without his knowledge.
The jury considered whether the consecrations of Beale and Howarth "would not be rightfully described as a sacrilegious crime of which all those holding Christian views would be ashamed."
Mathew's attorney argued that publication of the excommunication by The Times in English was high treason under a 1571 law re-enacted in 1846.
Either Novikov or Uxkull-Gyllenband, according to Anson, introduced Mathew to Rudolph de Landas Berghes.
By 1914 all six bishops which Mathew consecrated had separated from him, so he consecrated Berghes to continue his succession and initially to establish the ministry of the Old Roman Catholic Church in Scotland and then later in the United States. Shortly thereafter, Father Carmel Henry Carfora, an Italian Franciscan friar who had left the Roman Catholic Church, was elected to succeed Berghes as Archbishop of the Old Roman Catholic Diocese of America. After Berghes moved to the U.S., Mathew consecrated Bernard Mary Williams, in 1916 and on 25 March 1917, Mathew appointed Williams as his successor.

Death

Like five of his bishops and several of his priests, in December 1915, Mathew sought to reconcile with the 
But because the Holy See insisted that he would only be reconciled as a layman and would be obliged to accept the doctrine of papal infallibility and primacy of the Roman Pontiff, Mathew then sought union with the .
Mathew retired to South Mimms, a village in the English countryside in Hertfordshire, and contented himself with assisting at services in a  parish church.
He died suddenly, on 20 December 1919, at South Mimms and was buried in the churchyard at South Mimms.

Contemporary significance

There are many independent churches, "rites" and ecclesiastic bodies in the English speaking world, particularly in North America and some in Continental Europe which trace their Holy Orders to Mathew's apostolic succession. This makes Mathew a significant figure in the Independent Sacramental Movement. However, genuine Old Roman Catholic jurisdictions directly descended from the missionary endeavours of the first generation of Mathew's bishops are very few.
Mathew's activities as a bishop gave birth to the Liberal Catholic Church and the more conservative Old Roman Catholic churches, which are autocephalous churches holding to a traditional Roman Catholic worship style, most rejecting the dogmas of the First Vatican Council (1869–1870) but some offering nominal acceptance.

Old Roman Catholic Church

 the only global Old Roman Catholic jurisdiction with provinces in North America, South America, Asia and Africa and the Old Roman Catholic Church in Great Britain (ORCC/GB) headed by Archbishop Douglas Lewins, the lineal descendant of Mathew's original church.
In the United States, as well as the Old Roman Catholic Church Latin Rite (ORCC/LR), the following are  the only churches descended directly from the Old Roman Catholic Church of North America founded by Landas Berghes succeeded by Carfora, namely the Old Roman Catholic Church: See of Caer-Glow (ORCC/SoG) headed by Archbishop John Humphreys; the Old Roman Catholic Church in North America (ORCCNA) headed by Archbishop Francis P. Facione; the North American Old Roman Catholic Church (NAORCC) headed by Archbishop Edward J. Ford; the North American Old Roman Catholic Church (NAORCC) headed by Archbishop Theodore Rematt.   
There are other churches using the name "Old Roman Catholic" that have no direct connection to the above jurisdictions and are not directly descended from the original Old Roman Catholic missions. Such churches' claims to being Old Roman Catholic are usually by virtue of having attained Mathew's succession from various episcopi vagantes or by adopting the polity of Old Roman Catholicism.

Liberal Catholic Church

Mathew was a traditional Ultrajectine and Roman Catholic in his religious beliefs and believed the bishops he consecrated were orthodox in their theology as well, preaching doctrines common to the Roman Catholic and Anglican churches.
Anson wrote that, for at least two years, Mathew was "in close touch with leading Theosophists, apparently without investigating the orthodoxy of their beliefs," and believed that Mathew "had no excuse" for not understanding the cult of Maitreya beliefs held by the majority of his clergy.
The 
In Western Esotericism and Rituals of Initiation, Henrik Bogdan compared the network containing the Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica (EGC) to the network containing the 

Validity


Concerning the validity of the Holy Orders conferred by Mathew in the period following his departure from the .

Utrecht denial

After Mathew died in 1919, the 
The suggestion was that the petition for his consecration and its 150 signatories collated by O'Halloran was false in its premise for the consecration and thus the consecration was invalid.
However, Mathew had disclosed the matter fully to the Dutch bishops days after the consecration when it transpired that the Anglicans who had participated in his election withdrew from the petition due to the changed situation regarding the Ritual Commission (see above).

The  bishops inquired into the circumstances and Mathew was publicly exonerated from all suggestion of misrepresentation in a letter to The Guardian of 3 June 1908, the bishops also refused Mathew's request to retire.
Also, on 5 October 1909, Mathew assisted Gul together with Thiel, Demmel, and Spit at Kowalski's consecration, so clearly there was no suggestion of mala fides or "invalidity" then by the Old Catholic bishops.
Smit explained that in 1913, "ties of the 
Though the ).
Herzog's discourse was published in 
In 1908, Lambeth had expressed regret over the consecration of Mathew.
Lambeth also indicated a desire for a closer relationship with Utrecht.

 Randall Davidson, Archbishop of Canterbury, and William Maclagan, Archbishop of York, replied to the Holy See in Saepius Officio giving a defence of Anglican orders.
Discussions about union with Utrecht had been taking place since the end of the 19th century,
such as the conferences of reunion in Bonn in 1874 and 1875 convoked by Johann von Döllinger.
Though the Dutch bishops in a report of 1894 still could not decide on the recognition of Anglican orders.
It would appear that a desire for closer cooperation on the part of Utrecht with an Anglican desire for the recognition of their orders, conspired to impugn the reputation of Mathew.
By June 1925, Davidson stated that the  and the Anglican Communion.

As the ceremony took place and no-one questioned the intentions of the bishops involved,
according to sacramental theology and canonical principles,



Rite

Old Roman Catholic jurisdictions have consistently employed the Tridentine Ordinal and Roman Pontifical for the conferral of ordinations and the consecration of bishops.
This was the case with the See of Utrecht right up to and some years beyond the consecration of Mathew himself, without any alterations to the ceremonies.
Mathew's Old Catholic Missal & Ritual contains his English translation of the Roman Pontifical; and, either this or the original Latin is used in all Old Roman Catholic ceremonies still to this day, even by those jurisdictions who permit modern liturgies for the Mass.
"A priest or bishop who confers a sacrament doesn't have to 'prove' that he intends to do what the Church does. He is automatically presumed to intend what the rite means. This is certain theological doctrine, taught by the Church. And to deny it is 'theologically rash'," according to Cekada.

"Schismatic" or "excommunicate" ordinations

According to Cekada, Traditionalist Catholics sometimes assert that "without a papal dispensation, an episcopal consecration performed without two priest-assistants is doubtful".
Using the 1917 Code of Canon Law but not the current 1983 Code of Canon Law which replaced it, he argued against this assertion and stated that "no law or canonist supports this" and reasoned that "teachings of the canonists directly contradict it too".
Cekada quoted Marie Dominique Bouix, who wrote: "Even if there should be a consecration without any assistants and without obtaining a pontifical dispensation, it would still be valid."
Cekada wrote that Eduardo Regatillo's writing "goes even further. He Regatillo says that a consecration performed without a dispensation would be valid even if the bishop 'is the only one who is present at the consecration';"[ref]Quote translated by Cekada from  
[/ref] and that, "Pope Alexander VII, Pope Clement XI and Pope Benedict XIV declared that consecrations performed without such a dispensation are valid."Quote translated by Cekada from 

Sometimes, it is asserted that, because Mathew was excommunicated by Pius X, anyone ordained or consecrated by him thereafter incurs the same penalty.
"Penalties aren't 'contagious'", according to Cekada, even if a bishop "had personally incurred excommunication, it would not be incurred by clergy who derive their orders from him"; he wrote that the 
"Receiving orders from an excommunicate incurs only suspension", wrote Cekada, which prohibits "licitly exercising orders".
Thus, based on the , Mathew's excommunication is not "contagious" and would not pass to clergy deriving their orders from him.
Furthermore, the 
No Old Roman Catholic bishops have been declared 
Thus as his excommunication is not contagious, this scenario does not apply.

Licit or illicit

It is also suggested that such orders are "illicit", i.e. non-canonical.

Gul consecrated and commissioned Mathew as a bishop in accordance with the norms of universal ecclesiastical law, nominating and electing him to a title.
Mathew declared autonomy from the  on 29 December 1910 and asserted of canonical rights and prerogatives for the continuation and perpetuation of the Old Roman Catholic Church from Utrecht.
 in all its duly constituted and canonically governed ecclesial communities around the world, nor particularly its bishops.

Affirmations of validity

There are various incidences where Old Roman Catholic orders have been affirmed by theologians, canonists and even representatives of the Holy See.
The Old Catholic Church of British Columbia (OCCBC) was, 
[/ref]
In 1915, Berghes participated in the Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States of America (PECUSA) consecration of Hiram Richard Hulse.


Archbishop Frederick Linale of the Old Roman Catholic Church Great Britain, sought and obtained a declaration from Rome confirming the validity of his Orders, firstly in 1962.
Then on 9 January 1982, Archbishop Romolo Carboni, Apostolic Nuncio to Italy, wrote to the Cardinal Prefect of the Council for the Public Affairs of the Church, 1490/82, asking him to look into the apostolic succession of Linale. This task was given to Monsignor Annibale Ilari, who had access to the Vatican Archives. In his report to the Cardinal Prefect, dated 8/2/83, Ilari concluded:
The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Quebec, in a public statement, which included an apology made for miscategorizing Father Claude Lacroix, acknowledged the validity of Lacroix's holy orders and stated that 
In 2002, Cardinal Édouard Gagnon investigated the documentation of Bishop André Letellier's episcopal orders and consecration.
Letellier was consecrated on 23 May 1968 by Archbishop André Leon Zotique Barbeau of the Catholic Charismatic Church of Canada.
Despite critics,, has been consistently considered "valid" by Vatican officials and Roman Catholic canon lawyers and theologians.

In 1913, Fleming testified in Mathew v. "The Times" Publishing Co., Ltd. about the  that, "The Holy See or the Pontiff has never condemned these orders as invalid; but he has never explicitly recognized them."
But 
In all above cases too, only the Roman Pontifical was used for the Rite of Consecration, other liturgies are not therefore affirmed.
It certainly cannot be assumed that the arguments and affirmations detailed here are in any way applicable across the board to other groups outside the Old Roman Catholic tradition, most especially those whose teachings are not consistent with orthodox and conservative Catholic doctrine.
Similarly, though the canonical principles above may be applied to other scenarios, the conclusions rely inherently on orthodox Catholic praxis and would not apply to those demonstrably apostate or heretical by comparison to traditional Catholic doctrine.
It is generally suggested
 The  teaches in Dominus Iesus that,
 The  further teaches that,
 



Publications

Further reading

|last=Küry|first=Urs|editor-last=Oeyen|editor-first=Christian|title=Die Altkatholische Kirche: ihre geschichte, ihre lehre, ihr anliegen|language=German|year=1978|edition=2nd|isbn=3-7715-0190-3}}

Notes and references

Notes

References


