[[Matt Wingard]]

CATEGORIES: Members of the Oregon House of Representatives, Living people, People from Wilsonville, Oregon, Oregon Republicans, Year of birth missing (living people), Place of birth missing (living people)

Matt Wingard is an American politician in the state of Oregon. He was appointed to fill a vacancy in the Oregon House of Representatives in 2008, and was elected to the seat in 2008 and re-elected in 2010. He represented District 26, which encompasses southeastern Washington County, including Sherwood; and southwestern Clackamas County, including Wilsonville. He did not seek re-election to a third term.

Early life

Wingard received a BA in Broadcast Journalism at the University of Southern California.

Political career

Wingard was appointed by Washington and Clackamas county commissioners to fill a vacancy in the Oregon House following the resignation of Jerry Krummel in August 2008, and announced his plans to seek election to a full term. During the campaign, it was revealed he was convicted in 2001 for misdemeanor assault for hitting his son on the head with a screwdriver. He won the November general election with 50% of the vote, defeating Democrat Jessica Adamson (45%) and Libertarian Marc Delphine (5%).
During the Seventy-fifth Oregon Legislative Assembly Wingard accomplishments include authoring HB 2476 which toughens sentences against athletic coaches who sexually abuse their young athletes, the Bill was Signed into law August 4, 2009.
In February 2010 Wingard ignited a minor controversy when he extensively quoted an article during a speech on the floor of the Oregon House.  Some claimed it was plagiarism but Wingard says he simply didn't have time to cite his source.
In early June 2012, Wingard resigned from his post as the Deputy Republican Leader of the Oregon House of Representatives following allegations that he pressured a young woman who worked in his office at the capitol into a sexual relationship,
Wingard's alleged wrongdoing, and his ensuing interactions with Cameron, became the subject of international press coverage amid speculation about a visit several Republican lawmakers made to a topless bar in California.

Personal

He has served on the Clackamas County Economic Development Commission and the Portfolio Options Committee of the Oregon Public Utility Commission.








