[[Thomas Bilson]]

CATEGORIES: 1547 births, 1616 deaths, Bishops of Worcester, Bishops of Winchester, Translators of the King James Version, People from Winchester, 16th-century English people, Tudor bishops, 17th-century English people, People educated at Winchester College, Alumni of New College, Oxford


Thomas Bilson (1547 – 18 June 1616) was an  Anglican Bishop of Worcester and Bishop of Winchester. With Miles Smith, he oversaw the final edit and printing of the King James Bible. He is buried in Westminster Abbey in plot 232 between the tombs of Richard the Second and Edward the Third. On top of his gravestone there is a small rectangular  blank brass plate — the original plate was removed in order to preserve it and is on display on the floor against the wall between the tombs of Richard ll and Edward lll  and says the following:—
MEORIAE SACRVM / HIC IACET THOMAS BILSON WINTONIENSIS  NVPER EPISCOPVS / ET SERENISSIMO PRINCIPI IACOBO MAGNAE BRITTANIAE REGI /POTENTISSIMO A SANCTIORIBVS CONSILIJS QVI QVVM DEO ET / ECCLESIAE AD ANNOS VNDE VIGINTI FIDELITER IN EPISCO / PATV DESERVISSET MORTALITATE SUB CERTA SPE RESVRRECTI: /ONIS EXVIT DECIMO OCTAVO DIE MENSIS IVNIJ ANO DOMINI /M. AETATIS SVAE LXIX.
Translation:—  Here lies Thomas Bilson formerly bishop of Winchester and counsellor in sacred matters of his serene highness King James of Great Britain who when he had served God and the church for nineteen years in the bishopric laid aside mortality in certain hope of resurrection 18 June 1616 aged 69.

Life

Years under the Tudors (1547–1603)

According to the original  'Dictionary of the National Biography' (founded in 1882 by George Smith  and edited by both  Sir Leslie Stephen who was Virginia Woolf's father, and Sir Sidney Lee)  Thomas Bilson  was the eldest son of Herman Bilson, grandson of Arnold Bilson, whose wife is said to have been a daughter of the Duke of Bavaria. Later editions highlight that  William Twisse was a nephew. His pupils there included John Owen, and Thomas James, whom he influenced in the direction of patristics. 23. In 1596, he was made Bishop of Worcester, where he found Warwick uncomfortably full of recusant Roman Catholics. 441. 73. For appointment in 1597 to the wealthy see of Winchester, he paid a £400 annuity to Elizabeth I. 11.
As the Bishop of Winchester, Thomas Bilson would have resided at Winchester Palace, where today in Clink Street, Southwark, London SE1 — there is only one remaining wall of the palace —  with a magnificent rose window measuring thirteen feet across. However, back in the sixteenth century, Winchester Palace was a splendorous site and would have looked very similar to the waterfront house of 'Sir Robert De Lesseps' depicted in the film 'Shakespeare in Love'. The  700 acre Bishoprick 'see' and jurisdiction of the Bishop of Winchester included an area known as — 'The Liberty of Clink' Southwark, Bankside — which in addition to having a prison ('The Clink') also provided the site of many of the major theatres of the day, namely:
— 'The Rose' built in 1587 in Rose Lane where Philip Henslowe was the lessee;
— 'The Swan'  built in 1596 by Francis Langley in Paris Garden;
— 'The Globe' re-built in 1598 by James Burbage and William Shakespeare; (a year after Thomas Bilson became the Bishop of Winchester)   and — 'The Hope'  built in 1613  by  Philip Henslowe in Bear Garden.
Southwark on the south bank of the river Thames in London was very much a cash generator in those days. (Back in the  sixteenth century, Southwark  was in many ways  like a prototype  Las Vegas.)   In addition to the theatres, Southwark, Bankside was also a 'red light' district renowned for its brothels and contained an unconsecrated graveyard for the corpses of women who had worked in them. Far from condemning the brothels, the respective bishops of Winchester, Thomas Bilson included, drew up a set of rules for their regulation and opening hours. In addition to prostitution and pick pockets, the area was also renowned for its gambling dens, skittle alleys and bear/bull baiting, most of which were run by Philip Henslowe (1550–1616) who  married a wealthy widow by the name of Agnes Woodward in 1579 and it is thought that with her money Henslowe had managed to acquire interests in numerous brothels, inns, lodging houses and was also involved in dyeing, starch making  and wood selling as well as pawnbroking, money lending and theatrical enterprises. With regard to his relationship with actors and playwrights Henslowe wrote in his diary:—"Should these fellowes come out of my debt I should have no rule over them." Although Philip Henslowe was undoubtedly the main operational manager and entrepreneur behind many of Southwark's and the 'see of Winchester's' cash generating entertainment enterprises — all taxes from these activities had to be paid to Thomas Bilson the Bishop of Winchester. Indeed in the London Public Record Office is an entry relating to William Shakespeare's unpaid tax, and carrying the annotation 'Ep (iscop)o Winton (ensi)' (to the Bishop of Winchester) — (*The Public Record Office, Exchequer, Lord Treasurers Remembrancer, Pipe Rolls, E.372/444, m. Dated 6 October 1600.) — which has led historians such as Ian Wilson in his 1993 book 'Shakespeare the Evidence' to surmise that perhaps William Shakespeare was living within the bishopric 'see' of Thomas Bilson the Bishop of Winchester at this time. However somewhat curiously, William Shakespeare's name does not appear in the church wardens' annual lists of those residents registered as having attended compulsory Easter Communion. The church wardens annual lists of residents and the compulsory attendance of Easter Communion — in effect the commencement of the new year within the Julian Calendar — provided the paranoid bureaucratic authorities — fearful of Jesuit and Catholic uprisings  with a detailed census as to the political status of its citizens and as a means to assess their military and tax obligations. William Shakespeare's omission from this list and the reference to Thomas Bilson the Bishop of Winchester implies 'a relationship' between these two men which has hitherto been unexplained. — Indeed, the commonality of both men being to a large extent historical enigmas is curious in itself.
Thomas engaged in most of the polemical contests of his day, as a stiff partisan of the Church of England. In 1585, he published his The True Difference Betweene Christian Subjection and Unchristian Rebellion. This work took  aim at the Jesuits and replied to Cardinal William Allen's Defence of the English Catholics (Ingoldstadt, 1584).ccel.html?term=Bilson,%20Thomas It was also a theoretical work on the "Christian commonwealth" and it enjoyed publishing success. Some historians have stated that the immediate purpose of True Difference was as much to justify Dutch Protestants resisting Philip II of Spain, as to counter the Jesuits' attacks on Elizabeth I. 141, in Royal and Republican Sovereignty in Early Modern Europe: Essays in Memory of Ragnhild Hatton (1997). Glenn Burgess considers that in True Difference Bilson shows a sense of the diversity of "legitimate" political systems. 104-5. He conceded nothing to popular sovereignty, but said that there were occasions when a king might forfeit his powers. 132-3. According to James Shapiro,James Shapiro, 1599: A Year in the Life of William Shakespeare (2005), p. 177. he "does his best to walk a fine line", in discussing 'political icons', i.e. pictures of the monarch.

Theological controversy

A theological argument over the Harrowing of Hell led to several attacks on Bilson personally in what is now called the Descensus controversy. Bilson's literal views on the descent of Christ into Hell were orthodox for "conformist" Anglicans of the time, while the Puritan wing of the church preferred a metaphorical or spiritual reading. 118-9. He maintained that Christ went to hell, not to suffer, but to wrest the keys of hell out of the Devil's hands. For this doctrine he was severely handled by Henry Jacob and also by other Puritans. Hugh Broughton, a noted Hebraist, was excluded from the translators of the King James Bible, and became a vehement early critic. The origin of Broughton's published attack on Bilson as a scholar and theologian, from 1604,Declaration of general corruption, of religion, Scripture, and all learninge: wrought by D. Bilson. is thought to lie in a sermon Bilson gave in 1597, which Broughton, at first and wrongly, thought supported his own view that hell and paradise coincided in place. From another direction the Roman Catholic controversialist Richard Broughton also attacked Anglican conformists through Bilson's views, writing in 1607. 1532 – 1613): Dutch Calvinist, First Reformed Defender of the English Episcopal Church Order on the Basis of the Ius Divinum (1980), p. 182. A. Prior, Defining the Jacobean Church: The Politics of Religious Controversy, 1603–1625 (2005), pp.49-50 and note. Much feeling was excited by the controversy, and Queen Elizabeth, in her ire, commanded Bilson, "neither to desert the doctrine, nor let the calling which he bore in the Church of God, be trampled under foot, by such unquiet refusers of truth and authority."
Bilson's most famous work was entitled The Perpetual Government of Christ's Church and was published in 1593. It was a systematic attack on Presbyterian polity and an able defence of Episcopal polity. the work is still regarded as one of the strongest books ever written in behalf of episcopacy.

Courtier to James I (1603–1616)

