[[Bracket]]

CATEGORIES: Punctuation, Mathematical notation

Brackets are tall punctuation marks used in matched pairs within text, to set apart or interject other text. Used unqualified, brackets refer to different types of brackets in different parts of the world and in different  contexts.

History

The chevron was the earliest type of bracket to appear in written English. Desiderius Erasmus coined the term lunula to refer to the rounded parentheses (), recalling the shape of the crescent moon. Eats, Shoots & Leaves, 2003. .

Terminology and names for various symbols

Characters ‹ › and « », known as guillemets or angular quote brackets, are actually quotation mark glyphs used in several European languages. At Google Books.
In addition to referring to the class of all types of brackets, the unqualified word bracket is most commonly used to refer to a specific type of bracket. In modern American usage this is usually the square bracket and in modern British usage this is usually the parenthesis.
In American usage, parentheses are usually considered separate from other brackets, and calling them "brackets" is unusual.
In more formal usage, "parenthesis" may refer to the entire bracketed text, not just to the punctuation marks used (so all the text in this set of round brackets may be said to be "a parenthesis", "a parenthetical", or "a parenthetical phrase").
Typographers generally prefer to not set brackets in italics, even when the enclosed text is italic.3.2.

Types and uses

Parentheses ( ) 

Parentheses  A milder effect may be obtained by using a pair of commas as the delimiter, though if the sentence contains commas for other purposes, visual confusion may result.
Parentheses may be used in formal writing to add supplementary information, such as "Sen. John McCain (R., Arizona) spoke at length." They can also indicate shorthand for "either singular or plural" for nouns – e.g., "the claim(s)" – or for "either masculine or feminine" in some languages with grammatical gender.Slash (punctuation)#Gender-neutrality in Spanish and Portuguese
Parenthetical phrases have been used extensively in informal writing and stream of consciousness literature. Examples include the southern American author William Faulkner (see Absalom, Absalom! and the Quentin section of The Sound and the Fury) as well as poet E. E. Cummings.
Parentheses have historically been used where the dash is currently used—that is, in order to depict alternatives, such as "parenthesis)(parentheses". Examples of this usage can be seen in editions of Fowler's.
Parentheses may be nested (generally with one set (such as this) inside another set). This is not commonly used in formal writing (though sometimes other brackets square brackets will be used for one or more inner set of parentheses, other words, secondary {or even tertiary} phrases can be found within the main parenthetical sentence).
Any punctuation inside parentheses or other brackets is independent of the rest of the text: "Mrs. Pennyfarthing (What? Yes, that was her name!) was my landlady." In this usage, the explanatory text in the parentheses is a parenthesis. (Parenthesized text is usually short and within a single sentence. Where several sentences of supplemental material are used in parentheses the final full stop would be within the parentheses. Again, the parenthesis implies that the meaning and flow of the text is supplemental to the rest of the text and the whole would be unchanged were the parenthesized sentences removed.)
Parentheses are included in the syntaxes of many computer programming languages. Typically needed to denote an argument; to tell the compiler what data type the Method/Function needs to look for first in order to initialise.
Parentheses in mathematics signify a different precedence of operators. For example:  equals 20, because the parentheses override normal precedence, causing the addition to be done first. Some authors follow the convention in mathematical equations that, when parentheses have one level of nesting, the inner pair are parentheses and the outer pair are square brackets. Example:
A related convention is that when parentheses have two levels of nesting, curly brackets (braces) are the outermost pair. Following this convention, when more than three levels of nesting are needed, often a cycle of parentheses, square brackets, and curly brackets will continue. This helps to distinguish between one such level and the next.
Parentheses are also used to set apart the arguments in mathematical functions. For example, , for example, is the interval between 0 and 5, not including 0 or 5.
Parentheses may also be used to represent a binomial coefficient, and in chemistry to denote a polyatomic ion.
In Chinese and Japanese, 【 】, a combination of brackets and parentheses called 方頭括號 and sumitsuki, are used for inference in Chinese and used in titles and headings in Japanese.
Lowercase latin letters used as indexes, rather than bullets or numbers, followed by unpaired parenthesis, are used in ordered lists especially in: 

Square brackets 

Square brackets – also called crotchets or simply brackets (US)  – are mainly used to insert explanatory material or to mark where a passage was omitted from an original material by someone other than the original author, or to mark modifications in quotations., The University of Chicago Press, 2003, §6.104
A bracketed ellipsis … is often used to indicate omitted material: "I'd like to thank unimportant people''' for their tolerance..."The Columbia Guide to Standard American English
Bracketed comments inserted into a quote indicate when the original has been modified for clarity: "I appreciate it honor, but I must refuse", and "the future of psionics definition is in doubt". Or one can quote the original statement "I hate to do laundry" with a modification inserted in the middle of it: He "hates'' to do laundry".
Additionally, a small letter can be replaced by a capital one, when the beginning of the original text is omitted for succinctness, for example, when referring to a verbose original: "To the extent that policymakers and elite opinion in general have made use of economic analysis at all, they have, as the saying goes, done so the way a drunkard uses a lamppost: for support, not illumination", it can be quoted succinctly as: "Policymakers (…) made use of economic analysis (…) the way a drunkard uses a lamppost: for support, not illumination." When nested parentheses are needed, brackets are used as a substitute for the inner pair of parentheses within the outer pair., The University of Chicago Press, 2003, §6.102 and §6.106 When deeper levels of nesting are needed, convention is to alternate between parentheses and brackets at each level.
Alternatively, empty square brackets can also indicate omitted material, usually single letter only. The original "Reading is also a process and it also changes you." can be rewritten in a quote as: It has been suggested that reading can "also change'' you".
The bracketed expression "sic" is used after a quote or reprinted text to indicate the passage appears exactly as in the original source, where it may otherwise appear that a mistake has been made in reproduction.
In translated works, brackets are used to signify the same word or phrase in the original language to avoid ambiguity., The University of Chicago Press, 2003, §6.105
For example: He is trained in the way of the open hand karate.
In linguistics, phonetic transcriptions are generally enclosed within brackets,The Chicago Manual of Style, 15th ed., The University of Chicago Press, 2003, §6.107 often using the International Phonetic Alphabet, whereas phonemic transcriptions typically use paired slashes. Pipes (| |) are often used to indicate a morphophonemic rather than phonemic representation. Other conventions are double slashes (// //), double pipes (|| ||) and curly brackets ({ }).
Brackets (called move-left symbols or move right symbols) are added to the sides of text in proofreading to indicate changes in indentation:

Brackets are used to denote parts of the text that need to be checked when preparing drafts prior to finalizing a document. They often denote points that have not yet been agreed to in legal drafts and the year in which a report was made for certain case law decisions.
Brackets are used in mathematics in a variety of notations, including standard notations for intervals, commutators, the floor function, the Lie bracket, the Iverson bracket, and matrices.
Brackets can also be used in chemistry to represent the concentration of a chemical substance or to denote distributed charge in a complex ion.
Brackets are used in many computer programming languages, especially those derived or inspired by the C language, to indicate array indexing operators. In this context, the opening bracket is often pronounced as "sub", indicating a subscript.

 Curly brackets or braces 

These are used immediately before or after, and span, a list of items where there precedes, or follows, respectively, one or more other items that are common to that list. This usage, however, is precluded in text-editing software that has no provision for such column- or row-spanning characters.
Curly brackets – also called braces or squiggly brackets in the US – are used in specialized ways in poetry and music (to mark repeats or joined lines). The musical terms for this mark joining staves are accolade and "brace", and connect two or more lines of music that are played simultaneously.org > U+007B LEFT CURLY BRACKET Retrieved on May 3, 2009 In mathematics they delimit sets, and in writing, they may be used similarly, "Select your animal {goat, sheep, cow, horse} and follow me". In many programming languages, they enclose groups of statements. Such languages (C being one of the best-known examples) are therefore called curly bracket languages. Some people use a brace to signify movement in a particular direction.
Presumably due to the similarity of the words brace and bracket (although they do not share an etymology), many people mistakenly treat brace as a synonym for bracket. Therefore, when it is necessary to avoid any possibility of confusion, such as in computer programming, it may be best to use the term curly bracket rather than brace. However, general usage in North American English favours the latter form. Indian programmers often use the name "flower bracket".K R Venugopa, Rajkumar Buyya, T Ravishankar. Mastering C++, 1999. .
In classical mechanics, curly brackets are often also used to denote the Poisson bracket between two quantities.



Chevrons ;Some fonts don't display these characters correctly. Please refer to the image on the right instead. are often used to enclose highlighted material.
In physical sciences, chevrons are used to denote an average over time or over another continuous parameter. For example,
In set theory, chevrons or parentheses are used to denote ordered pairs and other tuples, whereas curly brackets are used for unordered sets.
In linguistics, chevrons indicate graphemes (i.e., written letters) or orthography, as in "The English word ." In epigraphy, they may be used for mechanical transliterations of a text into the Latin script.
In textual criticism, and hence in many editions of pre-modern works, chevrons denote sections of the text which are illegible or otherwise lost; the editor will often insert his own reconstruction where possible within them.
Chevrons are infrequently used to denote words that are thought instead of spoken, such as:
The mathematical or logical symbols for greater-than (>) and less-than (<) are inequality symbols, and are not punctuation marks when so used. Nevertheless, true chevrons are not available on a typical computer keyboard, but the less-than and greater-than symbols are, so they are often substituted. They are loosely referred to as angled brackets or chevrons in this case.
Single and double pairs of comparison operators (<<, >>) (meaning much smaller than and much greater than) are sometimes used instead of guillemets () (used as quotation marks in many languages) when the proper characters are not available.
In comic books, chevrons are often used to mark dialogue that has been translated notionally from another language; in other words, if a character is speaking another language, instead of writing in the other language and providing a translation, one writes the translated text within chevrons. Of course, since no foreign language is actually written, this is only notionally translated.
Chevron-like symbols are part of standard Chinese, and Korean punctuation, where they generally enclose the titles of books:  for horizontal printing. See also non-English usage of quotation marks.
In continuum mechanics, chevrons may be used as Macauley Brackets.

Angles ｢｣

In East Asian punctuation, angle brackets are used as quotation marks.

Floor and ceiling corners ⌊ ⌋, ⌈ ⌉

The floor corner brackets ⌊ and ⌋, the ceiling corner brackets ⌈ and ⌉ are  used to denote the integer floor and ceiling functions.

Quine corners ⌞⌟, ⌜⌝, and half brackets ⸤⸥, ⸢⸣

The Quine corners ⌜ and ⌝ have at least two uses in mathematical logic: either as quasi-quotation, a generalization of quotation marks, or to denote the Gödel number of the enclosed expression.
Half brackets are used in English to mark added text, such as in translations: "Bill saw ⸤her⸥".
In editions of papyrological texts, half brackets, ⸤ and ⸥ or ⸢ and ⸣, enclose text which is lacking in the papyrus due to damage, but can be restored by virtue of another source, such as an ancient quotation of the text transmitted by the papyrus.M.L. West (1973) Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique (Stuttgart) 81. For example, Callimachus Iambus 1.2 reads: ἐκ τῶν ὅκου βοῦν κολλύ⸤βου π⸥ιπρήσκουσιν. A hole in the papyrus has obliterated βου π, but these letters are supplied by an ancient commentary on the poem. Second intermittent sources can be between ⸢ and ⸣.  Quine corners are sometimes used instead of half brackets.

Double brackets ⟦ ⟧ 

In formal semantics, double brackets, ⟦ ⟧, also called Strachey brackets, are used to indicate the semantic evaluation function.

Brackets with quills ⁅ ⁆

Known as "mouse parentheses" (Swedish: piggparenteser) ⁅ and ⁆ are used in Swedish dictionaries.See :sv:Parentes

Specific uses

Computing

These various bracket characters are frequently used in many computer languages as operators or for other syntax markup. The more common uses follow.

=Uses of "(" and ")"=

=Uses of "and ""=

=Uses of "{" and "}"=

=Uses of "<" and ">"=

These symbols are used in pairs as if they are brackets.
When the signs are not used in pairs to delimit text (not acting as brackets):

=Layout styles=

In normal writing (prose) an opening bracket is rarely left hanging at the end of a line of text nor is a closing bracket permitted to start one. However, in computer code this is often done intentionally to aid readability. For example, a bracketed list of items separated by semicolons may be written with the brackets on separate lines, and the items, followed by the semicolon, each on one line.
A common error in programming is mismatching braces; accordingly, many IDEs have braces matching to highlight matching pairs.

Mathematics

