[[Royal New Zealand Fencible Corps]]

CATEGORIES: Military history of New Zealand, Military units and formations of New Zealand

The Royal New Zealand Fencible Corps was formed in 1846, following the conclusion of the Northern War against Hone Heke. The Governor, George Grey, had requested military forces for the defence of the early settlers in New Zealand, instead of supplying regular military forces the British Parliament approved the creation of the Corps.

History

The term 'fencible is derived from defensible, and regiments had been raised during the 1770s (for the Seven Years' War and the American War of Independence) and the 1790s (for the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars) — see list of British fencible regiments. Unlike regular British line regiments which could be posted anywhere, fencible regiments were raised for local defence and garrison duties and usually under their conditions for enlistment the men of a fencible corps could not be posted to other theatres.
The conditions for enlistment in the New Zealand Fencible were that soldiers of good character must have had 15 years of military service and have been under 48 years of age. Nearly all those recruited had extensive military action in India and Afghanistan. Most were married with several children. The conditions were posted at regiments throughout the British Isles.
Pay was 6 pence to 1 shilling and 3 pence a day in addition to their pension. The Commandant (Major Kenny) was paid £300; each officer was given a house and 
Ten ships brought 721 pensioner soldiers and their families, totalling over 2,500 people, between the years 1847 and 1852. The ships were Ann, Berhampore, Berwick Castle, Clifton, Inchannan, Minerva, Sir George Seymour and Sir Robert Sale..
They were first called to action in 1851 when a large party of about 350–450 Ngati Paoa from the Thames and Waikehe Island areas arrived at Mechanics Bay Auckland in about 20 waka to attack the city. A British regiment at Albert Park Barracks was called out to the hill overlooking the bay. It was reinforced by fencibles who had come from Onehunga, the closest fencible town. Fencibles at Howick and Panmure were stood to in case of further trouble. The frigate HMS Fly trained its guns on the Maori war party from offshore. The cause of the aggression was the arrest of a Ngati Paoa Chief who had stolen a shift from a shop in Shortland St. The situation was defused when the attackers were given tobacco and blankets. Later Ngati Paoa sent a greenstone mere (club) to the governor..
A group of 121 Ngati Mahuta under the great Waikato chief Te Wherowhero were also bought to South Auckland to defend the capital. They were given land at Mangere in 1849. They supplied their own arms but had British officers..
During the 1863 war about 75  military pensioners and their sons served in the Auckland Militia to defend Auckland..



Notes




