[[SMS Kaiserin Augusta]]

CATEGORIES: Cruisers of the Imperial German Navy, Ships built in Kiel, 1892 ships, World War I cruisers of Germany

SMS ''Kaiserin Augusta was  a unique protected cruiser, built for the German Kaiserliche Marine (Imperial Navy) in the early 1890s. She was laid down in 1890, launched in January 1892, and completed in November of that year. Owing to budgetary restrictions, Kaiserin Augusta'' was designed to fill both fleet scout and colonial cruiser roles. The ship was initially armed with a main battery of four  guns, which by 1896 was replaced with twelve new model 15 cm guns. She was the first ship in the German Navy to feature a three-shaft propeller arrangement.
Kaiserin Augusta served abroad between 1897 and 1902, primarily in the East Asia Squadron under the command of Admiral Otto von Diederichs. During this time, the ship's crew assisted in the suppression of the Boxer Rebellion in 1900. In 1902, she returned to Germany for an extensive overhaul that lasted until 1907, after which she went into reserve. Following the outbreak of World War I in 1914, Kaiserin Augusta was mobilized to serve as a gunnery training ship. She served in this role throughout the war; the ship was ultimately sold for scrapping in October 1919 and broken up the following year.

Design

Design work on Kaiserin Augusta began in 1887;Gardiner, p. 254 budgetary restrictions forced the German Navy to design a ship that could serve in both colonial and fleet scout roles. 142 During the design process, it was determined a three-shaft arrangement of the machinery would be necessary to attain the high speed requirement. This resulted in the first warship of the German Navy to use three screws. 62 This was a relatively novel development; at the time of Kaiserin Augustas construction, only a handful of French and American ships had experimented with the arrangement, and had not yet been to sea for a thorough evaluation of the design. 113 Kaiserin Augusta was laid down at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel in 1890. She was launched on 15 January 1892 and commissioned into the fleet less than a year later on 17 November 1892.

General characteristics and machinery

Kaiserin Augusta was  thick roof. 46
Kaiserin Augusta.
The ship was powered by three 3-cylinder triple expansion engines built by AG Germania; each drove a screw that was . This rendered her one of the fastest cruisers in the world at the time. 17 Kaiserin Augusta was equipped with four electrical generators providing 48 kilowatts at 67 volts. Steering was controlled by a single rudder.

Armament

As built, Kaiserin Augusta was armed with four . The guns were supplied with a total of 1,064 shells. After 1907, the swivel-mounted torpedo tubes were removed, leaving only the tube in the bow with three torpedoes.

Service history

In early 1893, Kaiserin Augusta and  to secure an indemnity demanded in the aftermath of the murder of two Germans. The operation was heavily criticized, especially in Britain, where anti-German sentiment was beginning to rise. 200
In February 1897, an international naval demonstration took place off Crete, to protest Greece's annexation of the island. Kaiserin Augusta was the sole German contribution to the force, until she was ordered to the Far East, at which point she was replaced by the old ironclad . 165 As Kaiserin Augusta had been stationed in the Mediterranean, she arrived first, on 30 December. 173
Following the outbreak of the Spanish–American War in 1898, Diederichs was ordered to proceed to the Philippines, where Commodore George Dewey had defeated a Spanish squadron commanded by Rear Admiral Patricio Montojo. Diederichs was instructed to protect local German interests, and if possible, seize another colonial concession in the Philippines. His ships dispersed on various colonial missions or under repair, Diederichs initially concentrated his forces slowly; he recalled Kaiserin Augusta to serve as his flagship while the rest of the force assembled. 184–185 After the end of the Battle of Manila, Kaiserin Augusta steamed to Hong Kong where the ship notified Berlin of the defeat of the Spanish garrison. She also carried the former Governor General of the Philippines, Basilio Augustín, out of Manila. The ship left Filipino waters on 13 August and arrived two days later. 214
Kaiserin Augusta remained stationed in Asia and participated in the international effort to suppress the Boxer Rebellion in 1900. She contributed landing parties to Admiral Edward Seymour's relief force, based in Tientsin. 29–30 In 1902, the ship returned to Germany for an extensive overhaul, which began in 1903, and lasted until 1907. During the refit, the ship's generators were replaced with more powerful units that more than doubled electrical output, at 124 kW at 110 V. Her bridge was significantly expanded, with a second deck and extended aft of the foremast. The three funnels were lengthened by  and one searchlight was installed on each of the mast tops. The four swivel-mounted torpedo tubes were also removed during this period. After emerging from the modernization, the ship was placed in reserve.
Following the outbreak of World War I in 1914, Kaiserin Augusta was reactivated for use as a gunnery training ship, to replace more modern ships that joined the High Seas Fleet. SK L/45 guns, four 8.8 cm SK L/35 guns, five 8.8 cm SK L/30 guns, and one 8.8 cm SK L/30 gun in a U-boat mounting. She served in this capacity for the duration of the war, until she was decommissioned 14 December 1918. The ship was formally stricken from the naval register on 1 October 1919 and sold to Norddeutsche Tiefbauges in Berlin, and broken up the next year in Kiel-Nordmole.

Notes




