[[Mikhael Jaimez-Ruiz]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 births, Living people, Venezuelan footballers, Venezuela international footballers, Association football goalkeepers, Graceland University alumni, St. Gregory's University alumni, FC CFR Cluj players, Barnet F.C. players, Northwood F.C. players, Aldershot Town F.C. players, Hemel Hempstead Town F.C. players, Dover Athletic F.C. players, AFC Wimbledon players, Hayes & Yeading United F.C. players, The Football League players, Football Conference players, Venezuelan expatriate footballers, Venezuelan expatriates in Romania, Expatriate footballers in Romania, Expatriate footballers in England

Mikhael Aimar Jaimez-Ruiz (born 12 July 1984) is a Venezuelan professional footballer who plays as a goalkeeper for Conference South side Hayes and Yeading United.
He started his senior career at Olimpia Gherla in 2003, and had spells at CFR Cluj, FC Arieşul Turda and Barnet before joining Northwood in 2007. He made eleven appearances at Northwood, but soon moved to Aldershot Town in 2007. During his three-year spell at Aldershot, he made 49 league appearances, before returning to his native Venezuela, when he joined Yaracuyanos FC in 2010, where he made 9 league appearances. He rejoined Aldershot Town in February 2011, but did not make a single appearance, and, after a one-off game for Hemel Hempstead Town, he joined Conference South side Dover Athletic on a free transfer in August 2011. He made 38 league appearances for the club, before switching to AFC Wimbledon in August 2012. However, he made just two appearances for AFC Wimbledon, and left the club in June 2013.

Career

Jaimez-Ruiz finished his education in Venezuela and moved to the United States. He played university soccer for Graceland University and St. Gregory's University. In 2004, Jamiez-Ruiz moved to Romania and played for Olimpia Gherla, CFR Cluj and Arieşul Turda.
Jamiez-Ruiz moved to England and signed for Barnet on non-contract terms in 2006. He never played for Barnet and joined Northwood in early 2007.
He then joined Aldershot Town on non-contract terms in April 2007 and was an unused substitute goalkeeper in the last two Conference National league games of that season. In July 2007, Jaimez-Ruiz signed a full contract at Aldershot. He made three league appearances near the end of a season. He also played in the Conference League Cup Final, when Aldershot beat Rushden & Diamonds. He saved a penalty in extra time and again in the penalty shootout.
He was released at the end of the 2009–10 season and joined Venezuelan club Yaracuyanos FC. In February 2011, Jaimez-Ruiz returned to Aldershot Town, but was released at the end of the season without making an appearance.

Dover Athletic

Jaimez-Ruiz signed for Conference South side Dover Athletic in August 2011.

AFC Wimbledon

Jaimez-Ruiz signed for AFC Wimbledon in League Two on 8 August 2012.

Hayes & Yeading United

On 17 August 2013, Jaimez-Ruiz signed for Conference South side Hayes & Yeading United, having played in a pre-season friendly for Phil Babb's side.






