[[BT (musician)]]

CATEGORIES: Technicians, 1971 births, Living people, Berklee College of Music alumni, American electro musicians, American film score composers, American trance musicians, People from Rockville, Maryland, Musicians from Maryland, Trance singers

Brian Wayne Transeau (born October 4, 1971), better known by his stage name, BT, is an American music producer, composer, audio technician, multi-instrumentalist, singer, and songwriter. He is an artist in the electronica genre – most often considered a composer of trance music, but known to work within several other styles. BT has also produced and written for artists such as Paul van Dyk, Peter Gabriel, 'N Sync, Sting, Blake Lewis, Tori Amos, and Tiësto. As a film composer, he has worked on films such as The Fast and the Furious and Monster. 10
BT is known for pioneering a production technique he calls the stutter edit. This technique consists of taking a small fragment (or fragments) of sound and then repeating it rhythmically. BT was entered into the Guinness Book of World Records for his song "Somnambulist (Simply Being Loved)". This song was recognized as using the largest number of vocal edits in a song (6,178 edits). The company also released a music remix app for the iPhone called Sonifi.
In 2010, BT was nominated for a Grammy Award for his studio album These Hopeful Machines under the category "Best Electronic/Dance Album".

Early life and education

BT was born in Rockville, Maryland on October 4, 1971. At an early age, he studied music and the Suzuki method at the Washington Conservatory of Music."BT Wears His Lab Coat for These Hopeful Machines", Keyboard Magazine, Feb 2010

Career

In the early 1990s, BT moved back to Maryland and began collaborating with friends Ali "Dubfire" and Sharam of Deep Dish. BT's songs "A Moment of Truth" and "Relativity" became hits in the UK, and it was during this time in which BT met Tori Amos.
In the early years of BT's career (roughly 1995–2000), he became a pioneering artist in the trance genre, despite the fact that he is not truly a DJ, and does not claim to be one. BT has said of his musical background, "I'm not the traditional type of dance music artist. I'm not a DJ. I come from a classical music background. I attended the Berklee College of Music, and I played in punk bands."
In February 2014, BT partnered with EDM lifestyle brand Electric Family to produce a collaboration bracelet for which 100% of the proceeds are donated to the Shark Trust.

Ima

BT's 1995 debut album Ima was a progressive house effort featuring collaborations with Vincent Covello & Tori Amos, as well as the opening track, "Nocturnal Transmission", being featured in The Fast and the Furious. The title, "Ima (今)", is the Japanese word for "now". However, BT also stated that it means many other things and that the intention of the album is to have a different effect for everyone.

ESCM

BT's second album ESCM (Electric Sky Church Music) released in 1997, features more complex melodies and more traditional harmonies along with a heavier use of vocals.
The biggest hit from ESCM was "Flaming June," a collaboration with German trance meister Paul van Dyk. Van Dyk and BT would collaborate on a number of works including "Namistai" (found on the later album Movement in Still Life) as well as van Dyk's remix of BT's "Blue Skies" and "Remember". "Remember" featured Jan Johnston on vocals. BT and van Dyk also remixed the van Dyk classic "Forbidden Fruit" as well as Dina Carroll's "Run to You".

Movement in Still Life

BT released his third album in the UK in 1999 (US Version 2000) Movement in Still Life and continued his previous experimentation outside of the trance genre. The album features a strong element of nu skool breaks, a genre he helped define with the popular "Hip-Hop Phenomenon," The album hits a spectrum of genre-work. "Smartbomb" is a mix of funky, heavy riffs from both synthesizers and guitars woven over a hip-hop break and includes a lyric sample from "Love on Haight Street". "Shame" and "Satellite" lean toward an alt-rock sound, while "Godspeed" and "Dreaming" fall into classic trance ranks. "Running Down the Way Up", a collaboration with fellow electronic act Hybrid, features sultry vocals and acoustic guitars heavily edited into a progressive breakbeat track.

Emotional Technology

BT's fourth studio album, released on August 5, 2003, featured more vocal tracks than BT's previous fare, including six with vocals by BT himself. Emotional Technology was BT's least experimental album to date, and many consider it the "poppiest" of all of his work. The biggest single from the album, "Somnambulist", draws heavily from the breakbeats and new wave dance of New Order and Depeche Mode, whom BT has cited as major influences. The rest of the album fairly escapes genre labeling, from the dark guitar work of "Circles", to "The Only Constant is Change" which is reminiscent of "Satellite", the album blends genres and changes genres in mid-track. The single "Somnambulist" holds the Guinness World Record for most vocal edits in a single track, with 6,178 in the album version.Somnambulist

This Binary Universe

BT's fifth studio album, This Binary Universe, released on August 29, 2006, is his second album released in 5.1 surround sound, the first being the soundtrack to the 2003 film Monster.
The album features a mix of many genres, including jazz, breakbeats, and classical music. Three songs feature a full 110-piece orchestra. Animated videos were created to accompany each song. The videos are included in a DVD packaged along with the CD.
Keyboard Magazine declared of the album, "In a hundred years, it could well be studied as the first major electronic work of the new millennium."Stephen Fortner, "The Mind Of BT", Keyboard Magazine, Dec 2005
Unlike his previous two albums, which featured vocals on almost every track, this album contains none. The tracks also change genres constantly throughout. A good example is "The Antikythera Mechanism", which starts off almost lullaby-like, complete with a piano, acoustic guitars and reversed beats. Halfway through the track, the song explodes with a 110-piece orchestra, followed by a section of breakbeats and ending with the de-construction of the orchestra.
During November and December 2006, BT toured the album with Thomas Dolby opening. The concert featured a live slideshow of images from the online website DeviantArt as a backdrop. dAPresents on deviantART

These Hopeful Machines

BT's sixth studio album, These Hopeful Machines, was released on February 2, 2010. The album featured guest vocalists/collaborators
Kirsty Hawkshaw, JES, Rob Dickinson of Catherine Wheel and Christian Burns. The album also features collaborations with Andrew Bayer ("The Emergency") and Ulrich Schnauss ("A Million Stars"). To date, this album contains the most singles released from any BT album, with 8 of the 12 tracks released as singles. Early official remixes were made by Armin van Buuren and Chicane. These Hopeful Machines was nominated for a 2011 Grammy Award in the Best Electronic/Dance Album genre. A remix album, titled These Re-Imagined Machines was released in 2011. These Humble Machines, an un-mixed album featuring shorter "radio edit" versions of the tracks (similar to the U.S. version of Movement in Still Life) was also released in 2011.

If the Stars are Eternal So are You and I and Morceau Subrosa

BT announced plans to release two solo albums, If the Stars are Eternal So are You and I,  his seventh album, and Morceau Subrosa, his eighth album.
If the Stars are Eternal So are You and I, like This Binary Universe before it, is an about-face from BT's previous album These Hopeful Machines, utilizing minimal beats, ambient soundscapes, and glitch music, as opposed to the electronic music style of These Hopeful Machines. Morceau Subrosa is very different in style compared to most of BT's previous works, favoring ambient soundscapes and minimal beats.

A Song Across Wires

It has been announced that BT's ninth studio album, an electronic music album entitled A Song Across Wires,
During this time, he released his Laptop Symphony radio episodes, and after the 100th episode, he started a new radio program, entitled Skylarking.

"All Hail the Silence" and Other Future Projects

On March 7, 2012, it was announced that BT and Christian Burns have collaborated to form a band called "All Hail the Silence", with help from Vince Clarke. The band is expected to release their debut album in 2014, and have already released their first single "Looking Glass" online.

Collaborations

Personal life

BT has a daughter, Kaia Nui Transeau. On January 11, 2008, |url= |month=January |year=2008}}[/ref]
BT is also an avid scuba diver, and supports the preservation of sharks.

Software

During the production of This Binary Universe, Transeau wanted to program drums in surround sound, and found that software tools to accomplish this weren't readily available. He decided to develop his own, and formed his own software company, Sonik Architects, and his own drum surround software called BreakTweaker. BreakTweaker was originally intended for release in 2007, with later plans to release additional tools and plugins specifically aimed at musicians and DJs, including his signature stutter edit.
In 2009, he launched his software company Sonik Architects with Sonifi, the company's first product for iPhone and iPod Touch.BT's Sonifi For The iPhone
In December 2010, Sonik Architects was acquired by software and music production company iZotope,
Transeau is also a user of FL Studio and he was included in the Power Users section on Image-Line's site in 2013.
While hosting the  NAMM Foundation's 29th Annual TEC Awards with Jes Brieden on January 24, 2014, 
On March 15, 2014, BT collaborated with Boulanger Labs in creating the Leap Motion app Muse, a device that allows users to compose their own ambient sounds.

Scores

BT began scoring films in 1999 with Go. Since then he has scored a dozen films, including Stealth and The Fast and the Furious. In addition, he produced the score for the 2001 film Zoolander, but had his name removed from the project. His tracks for the film were finished by composer David Arnold. He also produced the score for the 2003 film Monster, earning him particular acclaim.
Transeau has scored the video games Die Hard Trilogy 2: Viva Las Vegas (2000), Wreckless: The Yakuza Missions (2002) and Tiger Woods PGA Tour 2005 (2004).
BT has ventured into television for Tommy Lee Goes To College for NBC in 2005. He executive-produced the Tommy Lee series, the idea for which he developed and sold to NBC.
BT also composed music for the Pixar animated short film Partysaurus Rex, released on September 14, 2012 alongside the 3D release of Finding Nemo.
BT is also scoring the upcoming film Solace.

Film and television scores

Songs appearing in films and television

Video game appearances and scores

Discography

Albums

Singles and EPs

Compilations

Remixes

Sample CDs

Aliases and pseudonyms

Awards and nominations








