[[School shooting]]

CATEGORIES: Crimes against children, Spree shootings, Terrorism by method, Education issues

}}
A school shooting is an occurrence in which gun violence takes place at an educational institution. A school shooting involves a firearm being discharged at a school infrastructure, and may refer to incidents of shootings on a school bus or near school property while school is in session. A school shooting can happen anywhere in the world where there is an access to firearms. These shootings have sparked a political debate over whether firearms should be allowed in the classroom and if there should be stricter gun control.
There are notable school shootings in the United States, Canada, Mexico, Europe, South America, Asia, the Oceanic region, and Africa, with the United States bringing the highest number of school-related shootings.

Profiling

School shootings are a topic of intense interest in the United States. warned against the belief that a certain "type" of student would be a perpetrator. Any profile would fit too many students to be useful and may not apply to a potential perpetrator. Some lived with both parents in "an ideal, All-American family." Some were children of divorce, or lived in foster homes. A few were loners, but most had close friends. Some experts such as Alan Lipman have warned against the dearth of empirical validity of profiling methods.
While it may be simplistic to assume a straightforward "profile", the study did find certain similarities among the perpetrators. "The researchers found that killers do not 'snap'. They plan. They acquire weapons. These children take a long, considered, public path toward violence." Princeton's Katherine Newman has found that, far from being "loners", the perpetrators are "joiners" whose attempts at social integration fail, and that they let their thinking and even their plans be known, sometimes frequently over long periods of time.
Perpetrators who "run amok" in schools and other public settings do also share in common a severe lapse or more pervasive deficit in their capacity for empathy coupled with their inability to contain their aggression—this may be due to significant psychopathy, psychotic symptoms (i.e. loss of a sense of reality), and/or to a consequence of significant violent traumatization—such as that of early physical abuse, that contributes to the development of dissociative states of mind (i.e. disavowal of reality, derealization, depersonalization).  In short, as clinical psychiatrist Daniel Schechter has written, for a baby to develop into a troubled adolescent who then turns lethally violent, a convergence of multiple interacting factors must occur, that is "every bit as complicated..."Schechter DS (February 16, 2011). Forecasting Aggression: What Makes Some Troubled Youth Turn Violent? Cerebrum. 
Many of the shooters told Secret Service investigators that alienation or persecution drove them to violence. According to the United States Secret Service, instead of looking for traits, the Secret Service urges adults to ask about behavior:
One "trait" that has not yet attracted as much attention is the gender difference: nearly all school shootings are perpetrated by young males, and in some instances the violence has clearly been gender-specific.  Bob Herbert addressed this in an October 2006 New York Times editorial. including Laurie Dann of Winnetka, Illinois.
According to Keith Darling-Brekhus, "Since 1982 almost all school shootings have been perpetrated by white males." These shootings have happened in "suburban and rural school districts" and many seem to be random with random targets. Most of these shooters tend to come from two-parent households and have been found to appear on the honor roll at their school. "What FBI Profiles Tell Us About School Shooters and How to Prevent the Next One?" The Examiner. 15 Dec. 2012.
School shootings receive extensive media coverage and are frequent in the US (see list below). They have sometimes resulted in nationwide changes of schools' policies concerning discipline and security. Some experts have described fears about school shootings as a type of moral panic.
Such incidents may also lead to nationwide discussion on gun laws.

School bullying

"Bullying is common in schools and seemed to play a role in the lives of many of the school shooters" Once humiliated,  victims never want to be a victim again and try to regain their image by joining groups. Often, they are rejected by their peers and follow through by restoring justice in what they see as an unjust situation. Their plan for restoration many times results in violence as shown by the school shooters. 87% of school shooters claimed or left behind evidence of them being victims of bullying, including Nathan Ferris, Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, Edmar Aparecido Freitas, Brian Head, Seung-Hui Cho, Wellington Menezes Oliveira, Jeff Weise, and Adam Lanza.makebeatsnotbeatdowns.html Bullying in Schools

Psychiatric drugs

Despite twenty two international drug regulatory warnings on psychiatric drugs citing effects of mania, hostility, violence and even homicidal ideation, and dozens of high profile school shootings/killings tied to psychiatric drug use, there has yet to be a federal investigation in the United States on the link between psychiatric drugs and acts of violence.
At least 31 school shootings and/or school-related acts of violence have been committed by those taking or withdrawing from psychiatric drugs resulting in 162 wounded and 72 killed (in other school shootings, information about their drug use was never made public—neither confirming or refuting if they were under the influence of prescribed drugs).  The most important fact about this list, is that these are only cases where the information about their psychiatric drug use was made public.

However, there is no direct causal relationship that has been proven between school shootings and psychiatric drugs. According to Al Knight, "what has been said is that the drugs may have either masked a deeper problem or reacted with other factors to produce resulting violence." In short, the school shootings have not been found to be as a direct result of these drugs and the role they may have played if involved is currently unknown. "Psychiatric Drug Culture Examined." Denver Post.11 Nov. 1999. LexisNexis Academic.

Notable school shootings

North America

The following is a list of incidents of shootings that occurred at North American schools.

=United States=

=Canada=

The following is a list of incidents of shootings that occurred at Canadian schools.

Mexico

The following is a list of incidents of shootings that occurred at schools in Mexico.

Europe

The following is a list of incidents of shootings that occurred at schools in the continent of Europe.

South America

The following is a list of incidents of shootings that occurred in South American schools.

Asia

The following is a list of incidents of shootings that occurred in schools in the continent of Asia.

Oceania

The following is a list of incidents of shootings that occurred in Oceanic region.

Africa

The following is a list of incidents of shootings that occurred in schools in the continent of Africa.

Political impact

School shootings and other mass killings have had a major political impact. Governments have discussed gun-control laws, to increase time for background checks. Also, bulletproof school supplies have been created, including backpacks, desks, bullet-resistant door panels, and classroom whiteboards (or bulletin boards) which reinforce walls or slide across doors to deflect bullets. Another organization that has proposed possible solutions to school shootings is the National Rifle Association (NRA), to allow teachers to carry weapons on school grounds as a means of protecting themselves and others.  So far, ten states have already introduced legislation to allow weapons on school property with eighteen states already allowing guns to be carried on school grounds, but not without constraints.  Most states also require the gun carriers to receive advance permission from the districts' superintendents or trustees.  "In New York State, written permission from the school is required in order to carry a firearm on school grounds.".
Due to the political impact, this has spurred some to press for more stringent gun control laws. In the United States, the National Rifle Association is opposed to such laws, and some groups have called for fewer gun control laws, citing cases of armed students ending shootings and halting further loss of life, and claiming that the prohibitions against carrying a gun in schools do not deter the gunmen.bmsg.  At a Virginia law school, there is a disputed claim that three students retrieved pistols from their cars and stopped the attacker without firing a shot. "3 Slain at Law School; Student Is Held." New York Times. 17 Jan. 2002. Also, at a Mississippi high school, the Vice Principal retrieved a firearm from his vehicle and then eventually stopped the attacker as he was driving away from the school. "Do Armed Citizens Stop Mass Shootings?" Slate. 18 Dec. 2012. In other cases, such as shootings at Columbine and Red Lake High Schools, the presence of an armed police officer did little to nothing to prevent the killings. "Columbine High School Had Armed Guard During Massacre In 1999." Huffington Post. 5 Dec. 2013.
A ban on the ownership of handguns was introduced in the United Kingdom (with the exception of Northern Ireland) following the Dunblane massacre.
The Gun-Free Schools Act was passed in 1994 in response to gun related violence in schools, as a result to that a lot of school system started adopting the Zero-Tolerance Law. The Gun-Free school act required people to be expelled from the school for a year. By the year of 1997 the Zero-Tolerance for any type of weapon was implemented by more than 90 percent of U.S public schools.cqpress.ezproxy.edu/cqresearcher/document.UnxPbvmshcY

Police response and countermeasures

Analysis of the Columbine school shooting and other incidents where first responders waited for backup has resulted in changed recommendations regarding what bystanders and first responders should do. An analysis of 84 mass shooting cases in the US from 2000 to 2010 found that the average response time by police was 3 minutes. In most instances that exceeds the time the shooter is engaged in killing. While immediate action may be extremely dangerous, it may save lives which would be lost if people involved in the situation remain passive, or a police response is delayed until overwhelming force can be deployed. It is recommended that civilians involved in the incident take active steps to flee, hide, or fight the shooter and that individual law enforcement officers present or first arriving at the scene attempt immediately to engage the shooter. In many instances immediate action by civilians or law enforcement has saved lives.

Armed classrooms

Due to various school shootings, there has been considerable policy discussion about how to help prevent school and other types of mass shootings. One suggestion that has come up is the idea to allow firearms in the classroom. "Since the issue of arming teachers is a relatively new topic, it has received little empirical study. Therefore, most of the literature does not come from peer reviewed sources but rather published news reports. In addition, most of these reports are not objective and clearly appear to support a specific side of the debate."  So far, data has been inconclusive as to whether or not arming teachers would have any sort of benefit for schools.  For years, some areas in the US have allowed "armed classrooms" to deter (or truncate) future attacks by changing helpless victims into armed defenders.  Advocates of arming teachers claim that it will reduce fatalities in school shootings, but many others disagree.
Many teachers have had their concerns with the idea of armed classrooms.  "One teacher stated that although she is pro-gun, she does not feel as though she could maintain gun safety on school grounds (Reuters, 2012). Teachers expressed the fear that bigger students could overpower them, take the weapon, and then use it against the teacher or other students."  Some members of the armed forces have also had concerns with armed classrooms.  Police forces in Texas brought up the potential for teachers to leave a gun where a student could retrieve and use it. "They are further concerned that if every teacher had a gun, there would be an unnecessarily large number of guns in schools (even including elementary schools). This large number of guns could lead to accidental shootings, especially those involving younger children who do not understand what guns do."
In a 2013 research report published by the Center for Homicide Research, they find that many also reject the idea of having armed classrooms due to what is termed the "weapons effect," which is the phenomenon in which simply being in the presence of a weapon can increase feelings of aggression. "In Berkowitz & LaPage's (1967) examination of this effect, students who were in the presence of a gun reported higher levels of aggressive feelings towards other students and gave more violent evaluations of other students' performance on a simple task in the form of electric shocks. This finding points to possible negative outcomes for students exposed to guns in the classroom (Simons & Turner, 1974; Turner & Simons, 1976)." Teachers with Guns: Firearms Discharges by School teachers, 1980–2012 |url=  |p.3 |2013.
In 2008, Harrold Independent School District in Texas became the first public school district in the U.S. to allow teachers with state-issued firearm-carry permits to carry their arms in the classroom; special additional training and ricochet-resistant ammunition were required for participating teachers.
A commentary in the conservative National Review Online argues that the armed school approach for preventing school attacks, while new in the US, has been used successfully for many years in Israel and Thailand. Teachers and school officials in Israel are allowed and encouraged to carry firearms if they have former military experience in the IDF, which almost all do. Statistics on what percentage of teachers are actually armed are unavailable and in Israel, for example, the intent is to counter politically motivated terrorist attacks on high value, soft targets, not personal defense against, or protection from, unbalanced individual students.
The National Rifle Association has explicitly called for placing armed guards in all American schools.

Preventative Measures

A preventative measure proposed for stopping school shooting has been focused on securing firearms in the home. A shooting in Sparks, Nevada on October 21, 2013 left a teacher and the shooter, a twelve year old student, dead with two seriously injured. The handgun being used had been taken from the boy's home. Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Red Lake High School in Red Lake, Minnesota in 2005, and Heath High School in West Paducah, Kentucky in 1997 also involved legal guns taken from the home.
A 2000 study of firearm storage in the United States found that "from the homes with children and firearms, 55% reported to have one or more firearms in an unlocked place." 43% reported keeping guns without a trigger lock in an unlocked place. In 2005 a study was done on adult firearm storage practices in the United States found that over 1.69 million youth under age 18 are living in homes with loaded and unlocked firearms. Also, 73% of children under age 10 living in homes with guns reported knowing the location of their parents' firearms."Preventing school shootings starts with gun safety at home." Christian Science Monitor 31 October 2013: 1. Print.

Mental illness

There is a social stigma that school shootings are directly associated with mental illness; however, this is the exception rather than the norm. Only about 4% of all gun violence crimes are committed by the mentally ill. It is more so that the media has exploited when a shooter has mental illness, as if this is the sole cause of their actions. It can indeed be a cause, and does occasionally have a great deal to do with why these people committed such heinous crimes, but it is rarely the standalone reason. There is no illness that is common among all the perpetrators of these crimes; therefore, it cannot be generalized that mental illness leads to mass shootings. The exploitation in the media leads to a negative connotation of mental illness, which can cause people to not want to seek treatment. This furthers the stigma against people with mental illness. People have a tendency to attribute the cause of school shootings on the behavior of the person rather than the environment, which is known as the fundamental attribution error.wiley.1111/j.1540-6237.2012.00894.x/asset/ssqu894. It also has to do with the accessibility of guns or violent culture, however this would require change on an entire nation's part rather than just blaming it on a person's mental illness, so people often tend to lean towards the latter.
McGinty and colleagues conducted a study to show that people tend to associate the violence of these shootings with mental illness, while ignoring the fact that there are usually other factors that are more pressing.psychiatryonline.aspx?articleID=1669752 Nearly 2,000 participants read a news piece on a shooting in which the shooter is diagnosed as having a mental illness and who used high capacity magazines. One group read an article that presented only the facts of the case. A different group read an article about the same shooting, but in it the author advocated for gun restrictions for people with mental illness. Another group read about the shooting in an article that suggested the proposal to ban large-capacity magazines, which acted to advocate that shootings could stem from a societal problem rather than an individual problem.people-press. Participants were then all asked to fill out a questionnaire asking about their views on gun control and whether they thought there should be restrictions on high capacity magazines. 71% of the control group thought that gun restrictions should be applied to people with mental illness, and nearly 80% of participants who read the articles agreed. Despite the fact that the article exposed the readers to both the mental illness of the shooter, and the fact that the shooter used high-capacity magazines, participants advocated more for gun restrictions on people with mental illness rather than bans on high-capacity magazines.wiley.1111/j.1540-6237.2012.00894.x/asset/ssqu894. This causes people to associate mental illness with violence, which is not only a false generalization, but it also does nothing to solve the problem at hand. It was shown that people who have a mental illness are six times more likely to be the victim of a homicide than a person without a mental illness, but this is not typically broadcast in the media.ebscohost.pdf?T=P&P=AN&K=5738710&S=R&D=a9h&EbscoContent=dGJyMMvl7ESeqLM4zOX0OLCmr0uep7JSr6e4SbeWxWXS&ContentCustomer=dGJyMPGut0yyrbRLuePfgeyx44Dt6fIA





Literature




