[[Japanese minelayer Okinoshima]]

CATEGORIES: Minelayers of the Imperial Japanese Navy, World War II mine warfare vessels of Japan, Ships built in Japan, 1936 ships, Maritime incidents in 1942, Shipwrecks in the Bismarck Sea, Ships sunk by American submarines

. She was the largest purpose-built minelayer of the Imperial Japanese Navy and the first Japanese minelayer to be equipped with a reconnaissance seaplane.

Building

Following the ratification of the London Naval Treaty, the Imperial Japanese Navy decided to retire its existing obsolete minelayers, the former cruisers , and also was equipped with an aircraft catapult, and a Kawanishi E7K reconnaissance seaplane.
Okinoshima was launched by the Harima shipyards of Ishikawajima-Harima in Hyōgo Prefecture, Japan on November 14, 1935, and was commissioned into service on September 30, 1936.

Operational history

During the late 1930s, Okinoshima was assigned as flagship of a destroyer squadron, and made numerous survey missions to the Marshall Islands, Caroline Islands and Marianas in the Japanese South Seas Mandate, seeking potential sites for seaplane bases, and transporting naval mines for future use.
At the time of the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, Okinoshima was serving as flagship for Admiral Kiyohide Shima in "Operation Gi" (the invasion of the Gilbert Islands) and had deployed from Jaluit with a Special Naval Landing Force (SNLF) embarked. From 9–10 December, Okinoshima supported the Japanese landings on Makin and on Tarawa, and on 24 December, the seizure of Abaiang. Okinoshima was at Truk on 1 January 1942.
In January 1942, under the overall command of Admiral Sadamichi Kajioka, Okinoshima  participated in "Operation R" (the invasion of Rabaul) landing Japanese troops at Blanche Bay, Rabaul on the night of 22/23 January 1942. On 1 February, Okinoshima was officially re-assigned to the South Seas Force.
On 5 March, Okinoshima, under the overall command of Admiral Kuninori Marumo, was assigned to "Operation SR" (the invasion of Lae and Salamaua in New Guinea). On 10 March, the invasion force was attacked by United States Navy aircraft from , with Okinoshima suffering light damage.
After repairs at Truk, on 28 April Okinoshima was appointed flagship for Admiral Shima's Tulagi invasion force, which was part of "Operation Mo" (the invasion of Tulagi and Port Moresby in New Guinea). The Tulagi assault force began their landings on Tulagi on 3 May, with Okinoshima successfully landing troops of the Kure 3rd SNLF. However, the invasion force was attacked on 4 May by aircraft from the USS Yorktown. Several transports and the destroyer , were sunk and Okinoshima suffered from a near miss, which resulted in her being towed to Rabaul for repairs.

Fate

On 10 May, Okinoshima departed Rabaul as part of "Operation RY", the invasion of Nauru and Ocean Island. On 12 May 1942, off New Ireland, she was hit by two or three torpedoes Okinoshima was taken under tow by escorting destroyer 
[/ref] Most of the crew survived.  
Okinoshima was removed from the navy list on 25 May 1942.



Notes

Books



| title=  Japanese 5.5"/50 (14 cm) 3rd Year Type 14 cm/50 (5.5") 3rd Year Type | last= DiGiulian | first=  Tony | year= 2007 |month= | work= Naval Weapons of the World | publisher= Navweaps.com}}

