[[Bob Krause (athletic director)]]

CATEGORIES: 1945 births, Living people, Kansas State Wildcats athletic directors, Western Illinois University alumni, Michigan State University alumni

Bob Krause (born September 12, 1945) was the athletic director at Kansas State University from 2008 to 2009.  He announced his resignation on March 31, 2009.  He was replaced by John Currie.

Education

Krause received a bachelor's degree in art education and art from Western Illinois University in 1967, and his master's in college student personnel work from Michigan State University in 1968.

Minnesota

From 1975 to 1983, Krause served as vice president for student affairs at Southwest State University in Minnesota. He then became director of student affairs in the Minnesota State Colleges and Universities System from 1983 to 1986. While there, he coordinated policy and program development for seven state universities enrolling more than 51,000 students.

Kansas State

Krause was hired as co-athletic director (with Jim Epps) on June 6, 2008 to replace Tim Weiser, who left to become the deputy director of the Big 12 Conference.  Krause was the 14th athletic director at Kansas State. "K-State sticks with Krause, Epps". The Topeka Capital-Journal.  In his 11 months at the helm of the athletic department, his most notable act as athletic director was offering a contract extension and larger buyout for football coach Ron Prince, who was fired four months later.
Krause resigned from his position on January 27, 2009,
Krause became director of development for the K-State Olathe Innovation Campus.  However, due to an alleged secret negoiation of a deferred compensation agreement with former head coach Ron Prince, Kansas State President Jon Wefald requested, and received, Krause's resignation."K-State will fight Krause-Prince secret agreement".

Prince buyout

On May 20, 2009, Kansas State University and its athletic corporation filed suit to have a secret agreement between Prince and former Athletic Director Bob Krause declared invalid.  Krause had earlier entered into the agreement with Prince's attorney, Ohio sports agent Neil Cornrich, to pay a total of $3.2 million in three deferred payments to a corporation set up for Prince, In Pursuit of Perfection, LLC.  The payments are scheduled to be made in 2015, 2016 and 2020.
Prince had signed a five-year contract extension in August 2008, and the "secret" agreement called for the additional payout if he was terminated before Dec. 31, 2008.
K-State President Jon Wefald denied any knowledge of this secret transaction and immediately called for Krause to resign as director of economic development for the K-State Olathe Innovation Campus, which he did, effective on May 20, 2009.
The secret deal was "discovered" on May 11, 2009 as the university responded to "routine informational requests" for a lawsuit involving a former defensive coordinator Tim Tibesar.
K-State's interim Athletic Director Jim Epps stated:
"On May 11, 2009, I learned of a secret deferred compensation agreement that Bob Krause apparently negotiated with Ron Prince's attorney. This alleged deal was made without the knowledge of anyone else in the athletics department, including its attorney. This deal was apparently constructed as a further supplement to the buyout provision contained in Prince's employment contract. I do not know why any additional supplement was justified, or why Bob Krause concealed this agreement from everyone until it was inadvertently discovered last week."  He added, "I do not believe that this agreement is valid, and the athletics department will vigorously fight any attempt to enforce it."
On August 10, 2009 attorneys for Prince filed a counterclaim against Kansas State Athletics seeking $3 million in punitive damages. The filings claim that Wefald and other high-ranking members of the athletic department were aware of the buyout. The claim also contended that Krause directed the department's attorney to reword the public contract to allow for the confidential buyout.
Kansas State University announced on May 6, 2011 that an agreement for settlement between Prince and K-State Athletics, Inc. and the University had been reached.  K-State Athletics, Inc. will pay one lump sum of $1.65 million to Prince.  K-State President Kirk Schulz stated:  "We are pleased to have this matter resolved.  We appreciate the work that our University counsel has provided during this process and can now maintain focus on moving forward as a University community."  K-State Athletics, Inc. reported paying $395,000 in external legal fees during the dispute.  The University made the agreement public as a news release and was bound to provide this statement:  "Neither the University nor K-State Athletics contends or believes that in negotiating his employment agreement or the MOU, Coach Prince engaged in any wrongful or unethical conduct. Discovery has demonstrated that this situation was not of Coach Prince's making."

Family

Krause is married to Martha Ann Vanier, a member of the Vanier family based in Salina, Kansas, one of the state's wealthiest families.  Krause has three daughters from a previous marriage.




